@@@@@


doc= 116


George Adams senior (bap. 1709, d. 1772), who was baptized on 17 April 1709 in the parish of St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, the eldest surviving son of Morris Adams (died 1725) and his wife, Mary (died 1732). His father was a liveryman of the Loriners' Company, but was a cook by trade, with his own business in Shoe Lane. In 1724 George was apprenticed in the Grocers' Company to James Parker, mathematical instrument maker, on whose death in 1726 he was turned over to Thomas Heath for the remainder of his term. By the time he became free of the Grocers' Company in 1733, both his parents were dead. In 1734 he started his own business as a maker of mathematical instruments in Fleet Street, 'near the Castle Tavern', a few doors from Shoe Lane, adopting the sign of Tycho Brahe's Head. The business continued at various addresses in Fleet Street for eighty-three years. 
Adams's early products included navigational quadrants and orreries (astronomical models). In 1738 he moved to larger premises on the corner of Racquet Court, taking his shop sign with him. His first major publication from there, 'Micrographia illustrata' (1746), was attacked by Henry Baker FRS, who accused him of plagiarism, but it served to publicize his entry into the field with a new form of portable microscope, several examples of which survive. In 1748 he succeeded William Deane as mathematical instrument maker to the Office of Ordnance, a post which he held until his death in 1772. He also succeeded Deane as instrument maker to the Royal Mathematical School at Christ's Hospital. The former appointment brought many government orders, for drawing, gunnery, and surveying instruments, for the use of the artillery and engineers, and for demonstrational equipment for the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. 
During his residence in St Bride's parish Adams served his turn in most of the parish offices, becoming senior churchwarden in 1748. However, in February 1757 a fire in adjoining premises obliged him to move, and his subsequent address near Water Lane, on the other side of the street, was in the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West. This became no. 60 when Fleet Street was numbered in July 1766. The Adams business remained there until its demise in 1817. 
About Christmas 1756, just before the fire, Adams was appointed mathematical instrument maker to the prince of Wales (the future George III). New forms of instrument dating from this period include a trunnion-mounted microscope and an architectonic sector. Following the death of George II in 1760, Adams became mathematical instrument maker to George III, which, although unsalaried, was the most prestigious appointment available in this field. Many of the extant instruments in the King George III collection at the London Science Museum are from his workshop. In mid-1766 he launched new 18 in. and 12 in. globes, with a 'Treatise' describing their construction and use. The dedication to the king was contributed by Dr Samuel Johnson. The unusual form of mounting and relatively high price of Adams's globes drew scathing comments from Benjamin Martin, proprietor of the long-established Senex's globes, but they proved popular and many examples survive. 
George Adams was a liveryman of the Grocers' Company and served twice as a warden. He was twice married and had at least thirteen children, but many died in infancy. Two daughters survived from his first marriage to Ann (died 1747), whose surname is unknown. The elder, Sarah (1738-1812), married Robert Blunt of Charing Cross, linen draper, in 1759, and had a large family. Adams's second marriage, to Ann Dudley (1721/2-1809?), took place at St Martin-in-the-Fields in 1748. It produced six daughters and three sons, two of whom survived to maturity -- George and Dudley. As well as his London property, George Adams senior owned an estate at Langley Marish, Buckinghamshire. He died suddenly on 17 October 1772, aged sixty-three, and was buried in St Bride's churchyard. 
After Adams's death the Fleet Street business was continued in all its aspects, initially by his widow, Ann, and 


@@@@@


doc= 117


George Adams junior (1750-1795). The latter, who had been apprenticed to his father in 1765, became free of the Grocers' Company in November 1772 and a liveryman in 1773. In July 1774 he married Hannah Marsham, at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street. The ordnance appointment was lost to Jeremiah Sisson on George Adams senior's death, but the appointment to the king continued, and in 1787 George junior became optician to the prince of Wales (the future George IV) as well. Before then, about 1780, he began to receive ordnance orders as a result of Jeremiah Sisson's bankruptcy. A substantial ordnance trade developed in the build-up to the Napoleonic wars but, unlike his father, George junior did not have a monopoly in this area. Between 1785 and 1792 he supplied numerous instruments to Martinus van Marum for Teyler's Foundation at Haarlem in the Netherlands, most of which survive, and other continental institutions including the University of Coimbra, in Portugal. 
In the 1780s George junior began to write and publish a number of illustrated textbooks dealing with the physical sciences, in particular 'Essay on Electricity' (1784), 'Essays on the Microscope' (1787), 'Astronomical and Geographical Essays' (1789), 'Geometrical and Graphical Essays' (1791), and 'Lectures on Natural and Experimental Philosophy' (5 vols., 1794). The last work had a strong religious theme, and was undertaken, Adams said, specifically to counter the atheistic approach to the subject then prevalent on the continent. Failing health caused him to move to Southampton, where he died on 14 August 1795, aged forty-five. He and Hannah had no children. 
George Adams senior's widow, Ann, was still alive when her son George died, leading to uncertainty about the ownership of the business. At first Hannah Adams tried to carry it on in both its bookselling and instrument-making aspects, and a barometer signed by her is known. She managed to secure the appointment of mathematical instrument maker to his majesty for herself, but she lost the important ordnance trade to her brother-in-law Dudley and after less than a year was obliged to give up. The stocks and copyrights of George junior's books were sold to W. and S. Jones of Holborn, who continued to publish edited and updated editions until 1813. The stock-in-trade at 60 Fleet Street was sold by auction in June 1796. Hannah retired to Clapham, Surrey, where she died in 1810 leaving an estate of about $20,000, almost all of which went to her own blood relations. 



@@@@@


doc= 203


AEsc (d. 512?), and successful battles against the British are recorded at 'Creacanford' in 456, at 'Wippedesfleot' in 465, and in an unrecorded location in 473. In 488 AEsc became king in his own right -- presumably Hengist is supposed to have died -- and is said to have reigned for twenty-four years. Bede believed that Hengist's son was in fact called Oeric, but that his cognomen was Oisc (cognate with AEsc) and that the kings of Kent were known from him as the Oiscingas. The name AEsc or Oisc seems to mean 'god' and the possibility must therefore be allowed that he too is a thinly disguised deity. Possibly Oeric is a genuine progenitor with whom the name of Oisc (AEsc) came to be associated, but in view of the dubious company he keeps it becomes very difficult to accept the battles cited for him and his equally problematical 'father' in the chronicle as reliable accounts of the early history of the kingdom of Kent. Oeric's son is said by Bede to be 


@@@@@


doc= 437


Princess Amelia (1783-1810), the youngest daughter and last child, made her appearance on 7 August 1783, between the deaths of her two youngest brothers, Alfred (1780-1782) and Octavius (1779-1783). 


@@@@@


doc= 482


John Anderson (1775-1808?), wood-engraver, was born at Foveran, Aberdeenshire, the son of James Anderson (1739-1808), farmer, and his wife, Margaret Seton (died 1788). James Anderson had written a number of papers on agricultural and other topics, and took a degree of LLD at Aberdeen before moving to Edinburgh where in 1790 he began publishing a periodical, 'The Bee'. Its need for illustration led him to apply to Bewick, and from this connection his son John was taken on as an apprentice on 10 September 1792. Three years later he proved an unruly pupil and the partners were preparing to sue him for neglecting his work, insolence, provocation, wilfully bad work, and for totally absenting himself from their service (Weekley, 144). In May 1795, after settling part of an arbitrator's fee, Anderson's name disappears from the books, and he may have moved south with his father in 1797. That he had talent there is no doubt, and he was taken up in particular by the printer Thomas Bensley and the booksellers Vernor and Hood. His first acknowledged work, sixteen large vignettes after George Samuel, appears in Maurice's 'Grove-Hill' printed by Bensley in 1799, followed by the first edition of Bloomfield's 'The Farmer's Boy' in 1800, a work often falsely credited to Bewick. Although no signature has been observed on his work, his handling of tree foliage is very distinctive in its repetitive groupings and horizontal bias; he made full use of 'white line' and rich contrast. In 1799 his hand can be seen in an edition of 'The Letters of Junius', in title cuts for Zimmerman's 'Solitude', and in a few vignettes and figures in his father's periodical 'Recreations in Agriculture, Natural History, Arts &c', first published in London in that year. His career was short-lived. Henry Hole wrote tantalizingly to Bewick (5 July 1805) 'Mr John Anderson is certainly gone to Botany Bay, but more of this hereafter'. The obituary of his father, who died in 1808, notes that John had 'lately' predeceased him ('GM', Dec 1808). A 'speculation' has been referred to (Redgrave, 'Artists'), and it could be that he was involved in some enterprise which either led to or forced his departure overseas. He should not be confused with his contemporary in America, Alexander Anderson, who copied Bewick's 'Quadrupeds' and several of the works of John Bewick. 


@@@@@


doc= 657


Armstrong, James (1780-1839), non-subscribing Presbyterian minister, was born at Ballynahinch, co. Down. He was the son of John Armstrong, Presbyterian minister of Ballynahinch (1744-80), and his wife, who was a daughter of the Revd John Strong. He was descended from John Livingstone, of Killinchy, one of the founders of Irish Presbyterianism. 
Armstrong was first trained at the Rademon Academy, under Moses Neilson DD, and then became classical assistant to William Bruce DD at Belfast Academy, where he taught a special class in sacred history. After graduating from Trinity College, Dublin, he studied philosophy at the University of Edinburgh under Dugald Stewart. He was licensed to preach on 11 May 1806 by Antrim presbytery (non-subscribing). In the same year he was offered Clonmel and Strand Street, Dublin; choosing the latter, he was ordained on 25 December 1806 by Dublin presbytery (non-subscribing), where he first worked with John Moody (1742-1813) and then, from 25 December 1815, with William Hamilton Drummond (1778-1865). He married, on 26 September 1811, Mary, daughter of George Allman, of Bandon, co. Cork. They had four daughters and two sons, John Armstrong, president of the Dublin Historical Society, and the Revd George Allman Armstrong, originally a barrister, who succeeded him in 1841 at Strand Street. 
In 1829 Armstrong published 'A Discourse on Presbyterian Ordination' and 'An Appendix, Containing some Account of the Presbyterian Churches in Dublin', which consisted of short biographies of Irish Presbyterians; both publications were included as an appendix to 'The Ordination Service... of the Rev. James Martineau'. In 1830 he helped to found the Irish Unitarian Society and in 1835 the Association of Irish Nonsubscribing Presbyterians, which he also represented at the tercentenary of the Reformation celebrations held in Geneva in August 1835. In 1834 he had received the degree of DD from the University of Geneva and had been admitted as a member of the Royal Irish Academy. His published works include several sermons, as well as the 'Appendix', for which he is best known. He died very suddenly, probably of a heart attack, at Stonehouse, Stillorgan Road, Dublin, on Wednesday, 4 December 1839, having preached on the previous Sunday, and married a couple that very morning. He was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. A petition from his widow is printed in the parliamentary debates on the 'Dissenters' Chapels Bill'. 


@@@@@


doc= 658


Armstrong, John, of Gilnockie (d. 1530), gang leader, is recorded as brother to Thomas Armstrong, laird of Mangerton, and so was presumably a younger son of this branch of the Armstrongs. He lived in Canonbie parish, which was then within the notorious 'debatable land' of the western Anglo-Scottish frontier and is now in Dumfriesshire. Two tower houses are associated with him -- Hollows and Gilnockie. Although his landed status in the ballad which relates his death comes from the latter stronghold (now demolished), his principal residence was probably Hollows Tower near Canonbie. He was also known as Armstrong of Staplegordon, which is situated north-west of Langholm. 
In 1525 Armstrong bound himself in manrent to Robert, fifth Lord Maxwell. This bond gave Armstrong a substantial lease of lands in Eskdale in return for pledging that he, his heirs, kin, friends, and servants would be obliged to Maxwell in perpetuity. Bonds of manrent defined social superiority, yet their terms usually invoked mutual defence and maintenance. This doubtless explains why Armstrong's escheat was freely gifted to Lord Maxwell shortly after his execution in 1530. Maxwell may well have been a caretaker of these estates for Armstrong's young heir, Christopher. Armstrong signed the bond 'with my hand at the pen', indicating that he could not write (W. Fraser, 2.462-63). There is no indication of his having a formal education, but this was no disadvantage to his later criminal career. 
There is much inconsistency between Johnnie Armstrong the notorious reiver and the folk hero of the famous 'Armstrang' ballad. According to contemporary accounts Armstrong terrorized much of the English borderland during the 1520s. He frequently extorted blackmail, stole goods, burned houses, and kept a well-armed company of thieves to assist him in these nefarious activities. He was contemptuous of border laws and English border officials, sometimes escaping their clutches by sheer bravado. Lord Maxwell, as warden of the Scottish west march, refused to arrest any of his Armstrong clientele. This incensed the opposite English wardens, who tried to oust the Armstrongs from the debatable land in 1527. The Armstrongs retaliated by burning Netherby in the English west march. When no redress was forthcoming Lord Dacre took matters into his own hands and burned Armstrong's 'Hole House at Cannonby' in March 1528 ('LP Henry VIII', 4, no. 1782). This served only to inflame an already volatile situation. English complaints to the earl of Angus, as head of the Scottish administration, made him attempt a 'road' (expedition) against the Armstrongs in April 1528. Although this came to nothing, having failed to muster sufficient local support, Angus none the less declared the Armstrongs to be rebels. This probably led to their excommunication by the archbishop of Glasgow, which made any form of contact with the Armstrongs illegal. However, the chronicler Pitscottie noted Johnnie as a good Christian before his downfall. 
When James V ousted Angus and assumed his personal rule of Scotland, there was no change of policy concerning outlaws. The king was impatient with Lord Maxwell for not apprehending the Armstrongs and demonstrated his new authority by warding many border chiefs, including Maxwell himself, in the spring of 1530. In July he then mustered many lowland and border Scots to lead another expedition to the frontier. James was determined to rid the borders of the Armstrong problem when he reached Caerlanrig in Teviotdale on 5 July 1530. It was at this fateful place that Johnnie Armstrong and his band of followers met their end after answering the king's summons. Later historians, notably Pitscottie, have left vivid descriptions of the famous encounter, at which Armstrong and his men presented themselves in fine attire before the king, only to be greeted with the question: 'What wants that knave that a king suld have?' Ordered to the gallows forthwith, his pleas for mercy disregarded, Armstrong retorted contemptuously, 'I have asked grace at a graceless face' (Scott). Many still debate the circumstances surrounding what amounted to a mass execution of terrorists. James had the right to apprehend undischarged rebels who were coincidentally seriously undermining Anglo-Scottish relations. Armstrong was specifically 'deid for thrift committit be him' (Fleming, 87). The men hanged with him numbered either twenty-four (Pitscottie) or forty-eight (Leslie), though they are noted only as his 'gallant companie' near the end of the ballad. Leslie records that Armstrong's brother Geordie was spared to warn others of the fate awaiting persistent thieves. Royal authority had triumphed and the executed men were allegedly buried in a deserted churchyard. 
Johnnie Armstrong's posthumous reputation as a hero, rather than a villain, owes much to the romanticism of Sir Walter Scott's 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border' (1802). Sir Herbert Maxwell's 'History of Dumfries and Galloway' (1896) also shifts the blame to James V's Machiavellian tactics, alleging that Armstrong never molested any Scots, preferring to attack and terrorize only the English. In the later twentieth century, however, James V's determination to enforce law and order has been praised rather than derided by historians. Nevertheless, the enduring image of Johnnie Armstrong is of Scott's roguish gentleman who, according to the ballad 'Johnie Armstrang', '
wore a girdle about his middle, 

imbroider'd ower wi' burning gold. 
(Scott)' He supposedly pleaded for his life with the king by offering that 'all between heir and Newcastle town sall pay their yeirly rent to thee', but to no avail: he was 'murdered at Carlinrigg'. The ballad of 'Johnie Armstrang' remains a well-composed elegy that still captivates readers regardless of its historical inaccuracies. 


@@@@@


doc= 659


Armstrong, John (1674-1742), military engineer, was born on 31 March 1674 the eldest son of Robert Armstrong ('c'.1651-1716) of Ballyan, King's county (co. Offaly), Ireland and Lydia ('c'.1649-1715), daughter of Michael Howard of Ballyard, King's county. Armstrong entered young into a military life, serving as a volunteer in the Williamite army in Ireland in 1691 when he was taken prisoner and sent to Limerick. In 1695 he went to Flanders and entered himself in his kinsman Philip Armstrong's troop in Wood's regiment of horse. After the regiment returned to England in 1697 Armstrong came to the attention of the duke of Ormond who chose him to join the second troop of Horse Guards under his command. Ormond employed Major Wybault, a French engineer, to instruct his young officers in mathematics and engineering and under his tutelage Armstrong applied himself assiduously. In 1702 he served as a volunteer on the Vigo expedition with Ormond when the Spanish treasure fleet was destroyed. In 1703 he returned to the army in Flanders with a recommendation from Ormond to Brigadier Holcroft Blood who was colonel of artillery and chief engineer. Armstrong again applied himself and so impressed Blood with his diligence that Blood presented him to the duke of Marlborough. Ever short of capable engineers Marlborough was quick to appreciate young Armstrong's talents and he and Thomas Lascelles were given the pay of an engineer ($100 p.a.) to share between them, Armstrong being appointed sub-engineer on 17 March 1704. In that year he served as an engineer at Hochstadt and behaved so well that Marlborough appointed him a lieutenant of grenadiers in How's regiment of foot. In 1707 he was advanced to be an engineer on the new establishment and in 1709 was appointed lieutenant quartermaster-general of the army with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. At the siege of Bouchain in August 1711 Armstrong threw up overnight a substantial battery with which the enemy works were bombarded at daylight. This feat won him Marlborough's undying gratitude: the duke later commissioned a portrait of himself with Armstrong (now in Blenheim Palace), the latter holding a plan of Bouchain. At one time thought to be by Kneller, it is now attributed to Enoch Seeman. 
Armstrong was promoted in 1712 to quartermaster-general of the army with the rank of colonel and after the conclusion of the treaty of Utrecht he was appointed one of the commissioners for overseeing the demolition of the harbour and fortifications of Dunkirk. With Colonel Lascelles, who had also been appointed, Armstrong spent most of 1713 and 1714 at Dunkirk wrestling with the reluctant French. However, on 20 September 1714 he married Anna Priscilla Burroughs (1688/9-1725), daughter of Major Burroughs and sister of Colonel William Burroughs. They had five daughters; Anna Armstrong died giving birth to the fifth daughter on 27 March 1725. 
After the accession of George I, Armstrong was confirmed in all his appointments and was additionally appointed, on 2 December 1714, chief engineer of England with provision for him to sit and act at the Board of Ordnance. Armstrong's assumption of a senior post with the board coincided with significant changes in the relationship between the engineers and the artillery and in the way in which the engineers were organized. Brigadier Michael Richards, who had been appointed surveyor-general of the ordnance at the same time that Armstrong had stepped into his shoes as chief engineer, was the prime mover in the reforms, but there is no doubt he was ably seconded by Armstrong. From May 1716 the engineers and the artillery became separate corps within the ordnance service, thus ending the subordinate status the artillery had chafed under until that time. The engineers, for whom Armstrong now had direct responsibility, felt a wind of change that included more rigorous requirements for entry to its ranks, a more structured progression for those already employed, and opportunities for the younger officers to move stations more frequently and improve their knowledge of military engineering. 
Armstrong was present at the royal foundry, near Moorfields, on 10 May 1716 when, owing to dampness in the moulds, an explosion occurred that killed seventeen people. Stories to the effect that he received early warning of the impending disaster via Andrew Schalch and then absented himself before the firing appear to be without substance. 
Demolition of the defensive works and sluices at Dunkirk was one of the provisions of the triple alliance signed in January 1717, the work having not been carried out to Britain's satisfaction in the period 1713-16. Armstrong, Jacob Acworth, and Thomas Lascelles were appointed commissaries to inspect and monitor progress in June 1717 at which time Armstrong was petitioning the king for the sum of $730 unpaid for earlier duties at Dunkirk. He claims the French attempted to bribe him during his residence there 'with a promise of a great sum of money' should he remain silent about 'the new Channell' and so on (memorial of Colonel John Armstrong to the king, 13 June 1717, TNA: PRO, SP 76/2). 
At this time Armstrong still held the posts of quartermaster-general and chief engineer and in July 1717 was made colonel of the regiment of foot previously commanded by Brigadier-General Stanwix. James Craggs, writing to inform him of his new command, congratulated him 'upon the justice is done you now, in which I can assure you, you are entirely obliged to the King himself' (Craggs to Armstrong, 20 July 1717, TNA: PRO, SP 76/2). The regiment was disbanded the following year and Armstrong was to remain without regimental command for many years thereafter. In 1719 he went as quartermaster-general on the Vigo expedition under Lord Cobham. 
In 1722 Armstrong was made surveyor-general of the ordnance in succession to Brigadier Michael Richards, deceased. In this capacity he was deputy to the lieutenant-general of the ordnance. He was admitted a fellow of the Royal Society on 23 May 1723. In 1725 Armstrong's report on the state of the fens and the port of Lynn and his proposals for draining the fens and amending the harbour appeared as an appendix to 'The history of the ancient and present state of the navigation of the port of King's Lyn, and of Cambridge', by Thomas Badeslade. His engineering skills were called upon by the duchess of Marlborough, who needed a water feature to add interest to the parkland before Blenheim. His design of a canal and circular basin was constructed in the mid-1720s only to be covered later by a Capability Brown lake. 
In April 1727 the duke of Newcastle sent Armstrong to Paris to participate as adviser on military matters in the negotiations then proceeding with the French and the Dutch. He accompanied Britain's envoy, Horace Walpole, in discussions with Cardinal Fleury and is referred to by Newcastle as the 'author' of a plan to station an army of observation, composed of French troops, at Nijmegen to protect Holland and encourage the Rhine principalities to maintain their neutrality. Armstrong remained at Paris until shortly before the preliminaries were signed on 31 May 1727. His part in the negotiations, highly thought of by his associates and by the king, was characterized as 'procuring the Emperor's signing articles for peace, by negotiating a plan for war' (Charles Delafaye to Stephen Poyntz, 6 Feb 1730, BL, Althorp papers, E5). 
The squabbling over Dunkirk rumbled on with Armstrong, for long the acknowledged expert on the subject, frequently consulted. George I had instructed Newcastle to send all papers concerning Dunkirk to Armstrong as a matter of course. In July 1728 Armstrong was for a third time appointed to inspect Dunkirk, which, it was feared, the French had been secretly repairing. He experienced a serious bout of illness while there in October and when his health was sufficiently recovered he made his way home. 
In February 1730 Armstrong was again in Paris as adviser on military matters in negotiations with the French, Dutch, and Spanish and was specifically asked to work on the 'mutual military defence plan'. Within a fortnight he had been recalled to London to give evidence before the House of Commons in support of the ministry over allegations by the opposition concerning French reconstruction at Dunkirk. His presence at Paris could only with difficulty be dispensed with for his standing with the representatives of the allies, particularly the Spaniards, was high, and Newcastle directed Armstrong to assure them that 'nothing but an absolute necessity would have induced His Majesty to have sent for you at this time...' (Newcastle to Armstrong, 12 Feb 1730, BL, Add. MS 32765, fol. 366). Armstrong's presence at Paris was pressed for and he returned there after a short period and remained until April 1731. 
In May 1735 Armstrong was given the colonelcy of the Royal regiment of Ireland (18th foot) and in December was advanced to brigadier-general. He was made major-general in July 1739. 
On 10 March 1741 the principal officers of the Board of Ordnance, including Major-General Armstrong, wrote to the master-general, the second duke of Montagu, recommending the setting up of an academy or school at Woolwich. This led to the establishment of the Royal Military Academy in 1741, an event that Armstrong barely lived to see. He died at the Tower of a paralytic complaint on 15 April 1742 and was buried in the chapel there. 
Major-General Armstrong was over 6 feet in height and well proportioned. 'He had a large steady eye well set in and a countenance that rather excited respect than encouraged familiarity' (Armstrong). He was diligent in his application to the business of his profession and was said never to have bought an employment nor sold one. Armstrong was highly thought of by the duke of Ormond and the duke of Marlborough and was well known to George I and George II. He had a less happy relationship with the duke of Argyll, under whom he served many years while Argyll was master-general of the ordnance. As a protege of Marlborough Armstrong was anathema to Argyll. The animus between the two men extended, in the case of Argyll, beyond Armstrong himself to those in the ordnance service who were dependent on him. As for Armstrong his deep-seated mistrust of the duke prompted him, on the succession of George II in 1727, to obtain letters patent for his reappointment to the office of chief engineer of England privately from the king shortly before Argyll's appointment as master-general. This procedure must have enraged Argyll whose prerogative it was to appoint officers of the ordnance. The duke of Montagu opined that Armstrong's motivation was 'a greater security to himself lest the Master General should not have thought proper to have reappointed him by his Warrant, and also to be the more independent of the Master General' (Montagu to Newcastle, 8 June 1742, TNA: PRO, SP41/36). 




@@@@@


doc= 660


Armstrong, John (1708/9-1779), physician and poet, was born in late 1708 or early 1709 at Castleton, Roxburghshire, the eldest son and third child of Robert Armstrong (1661-1732), Presbyterian minister, and his second wife, Christian, 'nee' Mowatt (1675-1753). John matriculated at the College of Edinburgh on 29 March 1721 and took his MD degree on 4 February 1732. Among his college friends were James Thomson (1700-1748) and Patrick Murdoch (died 1774). 
Armstrong dedicated and dispatched his graduation dissertation, 'De tabe purulenta' (1732) to Sir Hans Sloane, president of the College of Physicians, and had begun practising medicine in London before 1735, though unlicensed by the College of Physicians. He published a second medical paper in Edinburgh (1734) and read another before the Royal Society on 30 January 1735. His next production, 'An Essay for Abridging the Study of Physick' (1735), was a satire on Joshua Ward (died 1761) and other quack doctors, but was followed by Armstrong's serious and far more substantial 'Synopsis of the History and Cure of Venereal Diseases' (1737), an abridged, copiously annotated translation of an Italian compilation. Another compilation from various sources, 'A Full View of All the Diseases Incident to Children' (1742), has been attributed to John Armstrong. 
Meanwhile Armstrong's 'Oeconomy of Love', a glowingly explicit sex manual in blank verse, was published anonymously in 1736. It was said that his medical practice suffered when his authorship became known, but, judging by his wealth at death, he was not permanently disadvantaged. 'The Oeconomy of Love' was his most frequently reprinted work in the eighteenth century, though its lubricity was eventually toned down in the seventeenth edition (1768) and Armstrong excluded it from his collected works. An Italian translation appeared in 1744, the year in which Armstrong's far more respectable blank-verse georgic 'The Art of Preserving Health' was published. In four books, on air, diet, exercise, and the passions, this poem treats a subject of universal appeal with a pleasing variety of style, tone, and feeling. David Hume said this poem was 'truly classical; the most Augustan thing we have in English' ('Papers of Boswell', 1.127). Frequently reprinted well into the nineteenth century, it is the work by which Armstrong is best known. 
Armstrong's closest literary associates in London were fellow Scots, notably Tobias Smollett and James Thomson. Thomson and Armstrong were admitted freemasons together at a London lodge on 9 September 1737. Armstrong contributed four stanzas to Thomson's 'Castle of Indolence' (1748) and is portrayed as a solitary melancholic in canto I, stanza lx, of that poem. He attended Thomson on his deathbed in August 1748 and deeply mourned his friend. 
In June 1741 Armstrong unsuccessfully sought appointment as physician to the troops going to the West Indies, but in February 1746 he was nominated as a physician to the hospital for lame, maimed, and sick soldiers behind Buckingham House ('London Evening-Post', 6 Feb 1746). His brother George Armstrong (1719/20-1789), also a physician, joined him in 1748; they lived together, first in Cursitor Street, Holborn, until 1752, then at the house of a Mr Reid (perhaps Armstrong's friend Andrew Reid, the writer on science) in Arundel Street, off the Strand. George moved to Hampstead when he married in 1755, but John apparently remained in Arundel Street until he went to Germany in 1760. His practice grew, though he was still unlicensed and in danger of being fined or sued if a patient died. From about 1751 he cultivated a close friendship with John Wilkes, the rake and future politician, nearly twenty years his junior. 
At the same time Armstrong tried his hand at various literary forms. His 'Muncher's and Guzler's Diary' (1749), by Noureddin Alraschin, formerly of Damascus, now of Datchet Bridge, is a mock almanac with absurd observations, prognostications, and advice on husbandry month by month. Armstrong thought it was the best thing he ever wrote. His next two publications were verse epistles in heroic couplets: 'Of Benevolence' (1751) is addressed to an unidentified Eumenes in gratitude for that gentleman's endeavours to do the author some (unspecified) service; 'Taste' (1753) is ironically addressed to 'a Young Critic' and argues that literary taste is as much an individual, internal sense as are tastes in food and wine. In 1754 Armstrong wrote a tragedy, 'The Forced Marriage', which was never acted. When he published it in his 'Miscellanies' (1770) he declared in typically splenetic style that his play had failed to reach the stage because he had not 'dangled after Managers' or 'used the access he had been offered to the prostituted patronage of two or three 'great' Men, to whose taste he did not chuse to appeal' (J. Armstrong, 'Miscellanies', 1770, preface); but he had in fact offered it to Garrick, pretending it was the work of a young man, and Garrick had refused it. Armstrong helped Smollett launch the 'Critical Review' in March 1756 and probably contributed to its early numbers. His 'Sketches, or, Essays on Various Subjects', consisting of short pieces, some no more than jottings, on language, literature, and aesthetics, was published in 1758 under the pen-name Launcelot Temple, esq. 
On 18 April 1760 Armstrong sailed from Harwich as physician to the English army in Germany, a post he perhaps owed to Wilkes's patronage; it seems that Wilkes also lent or gave him money at this time. His only literary work during his two and a half years' campaigning with the army in north-west Germany was, it seems, the verse epistle 'A Day', written at Kassel and sent on 31 August 1760 to Wilkes with an invitation for him to revise and publish it. A mutilated version of the poem, in which passages cancelled by Wilkes were indicated by rows of asterisks, was published in January 1761, but not seen by Armstrong until his return to London early in 1763. This affair, together with Armstrong's resentment of Wilkes's disparagement of Scotsmen in his 'North Briton', led to a quarrel. Armstrong was always sensitive to slights upon his nation: James Boswell, meeting him in 1769, said 'He is a violent Scotsman' and 'as splenetick as ever' ('Journal of Boswell', 8.127). Furthermore, he believed that Charles Churchill, prompted by Wilkes, had accused him of pederasty in a newspaper (BL, Add. MS 36593, fols. 54-62). 
The College of Physicians summoned Armstrong in April 1765 for practising without a licence, so effectively ending his medical career, but he was financially comfortable because, thanks to his service in Germany, he enjoyed a pension of half a guinea a day for life, that is, $191 p.a. He lodged (for $12 p.a.) in Russell Street, Covent Garden, where his elder unmarried sister Margaret tended him. He told Fanny Burney, a patient of his, that 'he had never been happy till he was able to live Independant of his Business, for that the pain & the anxiety attendant upon it were inconceivable' ('Early Journals and Letters', 2.39). He abandoned even literary work for some years, though he basked in the character of a literary doyen among younger acquaintances, one of whom, the banker Thomas Coutts, commissioned Joshua Reynolds to paint Armstrong's portrait in 1767. 
Armstrong had time and money for travelling. He toured Scotland for about a year in 1764-5, he made an excursion in 1765 with the marquess of Granby, his former commanding officer in Germany, and he travelled into south Wales in 1769 with two old friends and fellow denizens of Thomson's 'Castle of Indolence', Patrick Murdoch and John Forbes. In 1770 he spent four months in Italy for the sake of his health. He was accompanied by the young artist Henry Fuseli on the outward voyage to Genoa; he spent a fortnight in July with Smollett and his family in their villa near Leghorn; and, on the return journey through Paris in September, he called on his cousin Andrew Lumisden, formerly secretary to both Old and Young Pretender. Armstrong's 'Short Ramble through some Parts of France and Italy', by Lancelot Temple (1771), describes the journey with a few passing hits against the English: for instance, he praises the natural good sense and politeness of common people in Italy and France: they are not like the ill-bred boobies in England who stare at a stranger as if he were a show. 
Armstrong's 'Miscellanies' (two vols., 1770) contained reprints of published literary essays and verse, excluding 'The Oeconomy of Love' and 'A Day', together with previously unpublished essays, a revised text of his Spenserian stanzas in Thomson's 'Castle of Indolence', and blank verse 'Imitations of Shakespeare', written, he said, when he was very young. One of these last, a description of winter, is prefaced by a note explaining that, though it was written about the same time as Thomson's 'Winter' (1726), neither poet had plagiarized the other. 
The quarrel with Wilkes flared up again in 1773 with letters in the 'Public Advertiser' about the publication of 'A Day' and an angry verbal exchange on 7 April, Wilkes's version of which was reported in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (62, 1792, 33-5). Armstrong's 'Medical Essays', which also appeared in 1773, are more notable for ill nature than for medicine. For instance, he declares that his medical practice was small because other physicians slandered him and he would not tell impudent lies in his own praise or intrigue with nurses; also that the public would not take him seriously as a physician because he wrote a medical treatise in verse. 
Armstrong had a reputation for drinking, swearing, and indolence; he was habitually querulous and sarcastic, but discerning friends, including Thomson, Smollett, and Hume, found his melancholy pleasing. In his last decade he mellowed: Fanny Burney, in 1772, thought him 'very droll', 'an amazing old man' ('Early Journals and Letters', 1.199). His death at his house in Russell Street on 7 September 1779 resulted from a contusion in his thigh, sustained four days earlier when he stumbled on stepping into his chaise. He made his will on the day after this accident, leaving a $30 p.a. annuity to his sister Margaret and the residue to his brother George, with reversion to his daughters. His estate was reportedly worth $3000. 


@@@@@


doc= 661


Armstrong, John (1771-1797), journalist and poet, was born in Leith on 7 June 1771, the son of James Armstrong, a barber of that town, and his wife, Mary Lautie. After attending Leith grammar school and the high school in Edinburgh, he entered Edinburgh University, where he graduated MA on 3 September 1792. In 1789 he published 'Juvenile poems, with remarks on poetry, and a dissertation on the best means of punishing and preventing crimes'. These poems, if stilted in style and hackneyed in sentiment, are characterized by general good taste and some artistic finish. Although the 'New Catalogue of Living English Authors' (1799) later lamented their publication, it obtained for him the honour of being invited to compose the lyrics used in connection with the ceremony of laying the foundation-stone of the Edinburgh University buildings. 
While tutor in a family in Edinburgh, Armstrong pursued the theological studies necessary to qualify him to become a preacher in the Church of Scotland, but in 1790 he moved to London, where he obtained employment on one of the daily papers at a small weekly salary. In 1790 he published, under the pseudonym Albert, 'Confidential Letters from the Sorrows of Werter'; and again as Albert in 1791 he published a collection of poems under the title 'Sonnets from Shakespeare'. His literary prospects continued gradually to improve, and he was in receipt of a considerable income, when his health began suddenly to give way. He retired to Leith, where he died on 21 July 1797. 


@@@@@


doc= 662


Armstrong, John (1784-1829), physician, was born on 8 May 1784 near Bishopwearmouth, co. Durham, the only surviving child of seven born to George Armstrong (died 1815), superintendent of a glassworks at Ayres Quay, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Robson (died 1812). Armstrong was educated at a small private school in Queen Street kept by the Revd Mason, and at sixteen was apprenticed briefly to one Watson, apothecary and surgeon at Monkwearmouth, a situation which he found uncongenial. For two or three years he remained at home until he went to study medicine at the University of Edinburgh where he graduated MD in 1807 with a dissertation on dropsy, 'De causis morborum hydropicorum'. Armstrong practised at Bishopwearmouth and in the adjoining town of Sunderland where he was physician to Sunderland Infirmary. 
In 1811 Armstrong married Sarah (died 1837), daughter of Charles Spearman. Among the six sons and three daughters who survived him was John Armstrong (1813-1856), later bishop of Grahamstown, Cape Colony. Armstrong's various small medical publications helped to build his reputation, and in 1818 he left his wife and family at Durham and set off for London, where he hoped to establish himself. He was at first rejected by the Royal College of Physicians, who accepted him as a licentiate only in 1820, but in 1819 he was elected physician to the St Pancras Fever Hospital (which post he resigned in 1824), and this employment enabled his family to rejoin him. 
Armstrong built up a large practice and became a popular teacher of medicine. In 1821 he joined Edward Grainger, founder of an anatomy school at Webb Street, Southwark, as lecturer on medicine. In 1826 Armstrong, James Risdon Bennett, and the American Francis Boott founded another school in Little Dean Street, Soho, and for some time Armstrong lectured in both institutions. Armstrong was never connected with any of the greater medical schools and this, according to Boott, caused his career to be watched with surprise and some jealousy. His works on fevers, founded on his own observations, were popular in Britain and America, but were overtaken by later discoveries; indeed Armstrong himself changed his opinion of typhus, which he at first considered to be contagious but later attributed to a malarial origin. In treatment he was an ardent advocate of the antiphlogistic system and favoured the use of bleeding. 
A controversy with the Royal College of Surgeons, published by Armstrong as 'An address to the members of the Royal College of Surgeons on the injurious conduct and defective state of that corporation with reference to professional rights, medical science, and the public health' (1825) arose from that body's attempt to discourage private medical teaching by refusing to accept certificates from other than medical schools of the recognized hospitals. 
In 1828 failing health compelled Armstrong to give up teaching. A book, 'On the Morbid Anatomy of the Stomach, Bowels and Liver' was left unfinished; this, and his 'Lectures on the Morbid Anatomy, Nature and Treatment of Acute and Chronic Diseases', were published after his death, of consumption on 12 December 1829 at Russell Square, Bloomsbury, London. He was buried on 19 December at St George's, Bloomsbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 663


Armstrong, John (1813-1856), bishop of Grahamstown, was born on 22 August 1813 at Bishopwearmouth, the second child and eldest son of Dr John Armstrong (1784-1829), physician, and his wife, Sarah (died 1837), daughter of Charles Spearman of Thornley in co. Durham. He was educated at a preparatory school in Hanwell under Dr Bond. In 1827 he was sent to Charterhouse School, and in 1832 obtained a Crewe exhibition at Lincoln College, Oxford. He graduated in 1836 with a third-class honours degree in classics, and was ordained in the Church of England in 1837. 
Armstrong's first curacy, at Alford, in Somerset, lasted just four months owing to his physical frailty (he had suffered greatly from rheumatism in childhood); a curacy at Wootton-Fitzpaine, in Dorset, was similarly short-lived, and after declining a chaplaincy with the East India Company he accepted a curacy at Clifton, staying until 1841. In that year he became a priest-vicar of Exeter Cathedral, and in 1843 he became, in plurality, rector of St Paul's, Exeter, which lay in the patronage of the dean and chapter. Also in 1843, on 22 February, he married Frances Whitmore (died 1908), daughter of Edward Whitmore, and they lived in St Paul's parish. Among their children was Edward Armstrong, historian and college administrator. Armstrong was a quiet, retiring man who avoided society, but was a gifted preacher: 'the best all round country congregation preacher I ever knew', according to a clerical contemporary ('DNB'). He pursued his pastoral ministry conscientiously: perhaps because of his own poor health, he had a particular sensitivity towards the sick, frail, and vulnerable. During this time Armstrong's personal faith and spirituality were strengthened by the 'Tracts for the Times', the influence of the Oxford Movement and other high-church elements having reached Exeter. But not everyone approved of this, and elsewhere in the city the wearing of the surplice provoked rioting. Armstrong began the practice at St Paul's with minimal controversy. 
In 1845 Armstrong exchanged livings with the vicar of Tidenham, in Gloucestershire. There he began each day with morning prayer in the parish church, followed by teaching in the school and receiving parishioners; parish visiting occupied the afternoons, often continuing until after dark. His predecessor had provoked controversy by attempting to introduce changes in the church services, namely daily morning prayer, holy communion each Sunday and festival, and the introduction of the offertory, but Armstrong, while not yielding to the opposing faction, gradually won people over to these new religious usages by a combination of gentleness, firm perseverance, and careful instruction. From 1845 to 1854 he published a number of volumes of sermons and collections of religious tracts arranged thematically for the Christian year, of which the most notable were: 'The Pastor in his Closet' (1847), 'Sermons on the Festivals' (1845), 'Tracts for the Christian Seasons' (1848-9, 1849-50), 'Sermons for the Christian Seasons' (1852-3), 'Tracts for Parochial Use' (1852-3), and 'Parochial Sermons' (1854). These proved very popular, and he used the revenue to build and maintain several schools in the parish of Tidenham. A devoted family man, Armstrong loved to have his children around him even when writing his sermons. It was therefore a great loss to both himself and his wife when one of their children, an eighteen-day-old baby, died in August 1848. 
While at Tidenham Armstrong began his pioneering work in the church penitentiary movement. Just as the evangelical revival had awakened a strong social conscience among its adherents a generation earlier, so too the Tractarians were similarly stirred as the new revival reached beyond the university into the parishes. The plight of the poor, both spiritual and material, was perceived as a priority. But there was one category for whom, in the 1840s, the church made no provision -- women and girls from abused backgrounds; those from broken families; unmarried mothers; and prostitutes. These were classed by Victorian society as 'fallen women', a term which both reflected contemporary attitudes towards sex, and also summed up the plight of women caught in a downward spiral whereby their place in society, however lowly, was irretrievably lost. But in time, this second meaning was forgotten, and 'fallen woman' became a term of derision. 
Through a series of articles in journals such as the 'Quarterly Review' (September 1848), 'Christian Remembrancer' (January 1849), 'English Review' (March 1849), and a lengthy tract entitled 'An Appeal for the Formation of a Church Penitentiary' (February 1849), John Armstrong became the champion of the church penitentiary cause. In the larger cities there were a number of secular penitentiaries, but (except for the Magdalen Hospital, founded in 1758, which was now largely in secular hands) there was nothing run by the church. He believed the work should be run on religious principles, by ladies organized into sisterhoods, and directed by clergymen. The rescued women would be rehabilitated, trained as servants so they would have a livelihood, and would receive religious instruction leading to confirmation. Armstrong envisaged a two-tier system -- houses of refuge in the cities where women would be received first of all; and larger houses of mercy in the country where they would go for training. Armstrong was also mindful of the role of men and wrote forthrightly of the need for 'restitution'. Such a scheme as he envisaged required money; Armstrong forced his male readers to recall their misspent youth and to support his plan in a pecuniary manner as an act of penitence. Many men in public life responded, including more than one bishop. Besides his major writings on the subject, Armstrong also wrote letters to the newspapers and had lengthy correspondence with clergymen such as his close friend and biographer Thomas Thellusson Carter, rector of Clewer, near Windsor. In this way public interest was aroused and a number of houses of mercy were established, run by ladies organized into sisterhoods. Armstrong was closely associated with founding the house of mercy at Bussage, Gloucestershire, and his philosophy of rescue work influenced all the pioneering efforts, notably that of Carter and his associates at Clewer. Armstrong was also closely involved with the establishment of the Church Penitentiary Association in 1852. 
In 1853 Armstrong accepted the appointment, partly secured through the influence of Bishop Robert Gray of Cape Town, as first bishop of Grahamstown, in South Africa. He was consecrated at Lambeth on St Andrew's day (30 November). Although his diocese was as large as England, he was determined to be a missionary bishop and not merely an administrator. His arrival and welcome at Cape Town on St Michael's day (29 September) 1854 was soon overshadowed by the death of Ruth, his youngest child, on the journey from Port Elizabeth to Grahamstown on 13 December 1854. At Port Elizabeth he had found considerable strife regarding ritual, reminiscent of his earlier experiences at Exeter and Tidenham. The opposing faction had split away from the main congregation and appealed to Gray for support; neither he nor Armstrong was willing to concede, because all was being performed in accordance with the rubrics of the prayer book. 
These early troubles, and the fact that Armstrong was already a sick man on arrival in South Africa, did not deter him from visiting all parts of his diocese. His 'Notes in South Africa' graphically describes these journeys, which he found both taxing physically and spiritually uplifting. Thus he was able to visit the first mission to the Xhosa people near the kraal of Chief Umhalla; also to repay a courtesy visit from Chief Kama, who had been converted by the Wesleyan missionaries; and he preached and confirmed in many places. Armstrong was usually accompanied by his wife and children, who shared the hardships of travelling over rough terrain by wagon, sleeping in or under it at night, and being deprived of fresh food and water. 
Missionary endeavour in South Africa was inevitably caught up with England's imperial ambitions, and has to a large extent been discredited in a post-imperial culture. Many of Armstrong's confirmations were held in English forts, established as garrisons against both African and Boer, and there are references in the bishop's writings to mounted police guarding the borders and military escorts for his entourage. A bloody campaign against the Xhosa had been waged by the British from 1850 to 1853, the latest in a number which aimed to disinherit the Xhosa from their own land. Inevitably, Armstrong was caught up in the imperial ideal, but at that juncture it was still possible for a missionary to be detached from political intrigue. The sense of loneliness and remoteness of those missionaries under Armstrong's pastoral care is clearly conveyed in his written account, together with the genuine trust and rapport which he built up with the indigenous Africans. 
By the end of 1855, after much extensive travelling, Armstrong's health was almost at breaking point. At Uitenhage he attempted to resolve a clerical dispute, but was met with severe resistance and was forced to withdraw a clergyman's licence; this action was subject to misunderstanding and was still unresolved when Armstrong died. He also founded a non-denominational literary institute and reading-room for artisans in Grahamstown, amid widespread disapproval, and was responsible for the building of Bishopsbourne as the episcopal residence. Despite severe influenza, Armstrong set out early in 1856 on another visitation tour which further taxed his strength. Sweltering heat, heavy rain, nausea from travelling by cart, and stressful pastoral encounters all contributed to his final breakdown of health and strength. He died at Grahamstown on 16 May 1856 in the presence of his wife, children, and close friends, after collapsing a fortnight previously. He was buried four days later in the cemetery at Grahamstown in the rochet made for him by the inmates of the Bussage house of mercy. A memorial chapel commemorating both Armstrong and his daughter Ruth was later built over his grave. 
John Armstrong was a gentle, pastoral man, whose deep convictions were never imposed on those in his care, but who won people over by example. His lack of academic expertise was compensated by his strong spirituality, which informed his preaching and made his thought widely accessible. His episcopacy was short, but he brought to it the qualities which had marked out his ministry as a parish priest -- a deep concern for social justice and a commitment to education. This latter was especially apparent in Grahamstown, with his championing of the artisans' institute, and in the founding of St Andrew's College, Grahamstown (1855), and St Matthew's College, Keiskama Hoek. J. H. Overton, Armstrong's biographer in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', concluded that 'few men, without possessing any commanding genius or incurring any unpopularity, have done more thoroughly useful work for the church and for society at large'. 


@@@@@


doc= 664


Armstrong, Robert Archibald (1788-1867), lexicographer, was born at Kenmore, Perthshire, and was baptized on 16 February 1788 at Dull, Perthshire, the eldest son of Robert Armstrong and his wife, Mary McKercher. He was educated initially at home, and then in Edinburgh and at St Andrews University. After graduating with good results in Latin and Greek, he moved to London, where he ran schools located in succession in various parts of the city. In 1842 he married Emma, the daughter of Stephen Dungate, and they had three daughters. 
Armstrong wrote a number of articles and scientific papers, but his principal work was his dictionary: 'A Gaelic dictionary in two parts, I. Gaelic and English, II. English and Gaelic, in which the words, in their different acceptations, are illustrated by quotations from the best Gaelic writers', published in two quarto volumes in London, Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Dublin in 1825. This work, running to nearly 1100 pages, was the first Gaelic dictionary to attempt to provide etymological information. It also improved on previous works by incorporating a grammar of Gaelic and by indicating the word-class of entries. However, Armstrong can be seen in hindsight as overcredulous in accepting the authenticity of 'Ossian' -- devoting an appendix to characters from his poems -- and overenthusiastic in offering not just (frequently accurate) Indo-European cognates for the words whose etymologies he provides, but also parallels from other language families which later developments in linguistic sciences have discredited. He makes it plain in his preface that he believes all languages have a single origin, which is highly debatable, and that Scottish Gaelic is the ancestor of Irish, Manx, and even Welsh, which is definitely wrong. The amount of space devoted to etymologies and other notes actually led to the total vocabulary in the English-Gaelic section being smaller than that in William Shaw's earlier and more limited 'Galick and English Dictionary' of 1780. 
Armstrong's dictionary also was unfortunate in appearing barely three years before the 'Dictionarium Scoto-Celticum' produced in 1828 by a team of compilers working for the Highland Society of Scotland. This work, apart from the prestige of its source, benefited from a greater number of entries, more distinction of senses within them, and slightly less wild etymologizing, while retaining a grammatical sketch of a nature similar to Armstrong's. As a consequence Armstrong lost money on his 3 guinea dictionary, though he was granted in 1826 the honorary status of Gaelic lexicographer-in-ordinary to the king. 
For some two decades Armstrong supported his family on income from the South Lambeth grammar school, which he had established. He retired from the headship in 1852, and moved to Richmond. He was awarded a civil-list pension of $60 a year, thanks to Lord Palmerston; a small grant from the Royal Literary Fund; and later the sum of $100 from the Royal Bounty Fund, on the advice of Lord Derby. However, he had to continue tutoring until shortly before his death, which occurred on 25 May 1867 at Hanover House, Choumert Road, Peckham Rye, London. In 1869 Queen Victoria, on the recommendation of W. E. Gladstone, awarded a pension of $50 a year to his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 665


Armstrong, Sir Thomas (bap. 1633, d. 1684), army officer and conspirator, was baptized on 27 December 1633 at St Stephen's protestant church, Nijmegen, the son of Thomas Armstrong (died 1662), army officer, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Anderson. A coronet of horse at Nijmegen in 1633, the elder Armstrong was appointed quartermaster-general of horse in Ireland in 1640. He served under Ormond in the wars in Ireland, was knighted by March 1643, received an estate at Corbellis, co. Dublin (1643), and sat for Dublin in the Irish parliament in 1647. He surrendered Trim, co. Meath (1650), and Castle Rushen, Isle of Man (1651), to the forces of the English parliament. Incarcerated from April 1655 to June 1659 he supported the Restoration, received a patent to make farthings in Ireland (1660), and was reappointed quartermaster-general of horse in April 1662. He died on 19 November 1662. 
The younger Armstrong imbibed his father's royalism, participated in the plot to seize Chester Castle in 1655, carried funds from the earl of Oxford to the exiled court, and may have been imprisoned for a year after he returned. He married Catherine Pollexfen (settlement dated 10 February 1657), niece of the earl of Clarendon; they had three daughters, Catherine, Jane, and Mary. Commissioned captain-lieutenant of Oxford's regiment of Horse Guards in February 1661, he was knighted in late 1667 or 1668 and would later serve as major of the king's Life Guards (1673-8), lieutenant-colonel of the Queen's Horse (1678-9), and lieutenant-colonel of the King's horse guards (1679). Following the death of the king's sister, Henriette-Anne, in June 1670, Armstrong conveyed the news to a distraught Charles II. Armstrong created a minor stir in August 1675 when he killed the son of one of the queen's ladies-in-waiting at a London theatre, but the man had provoked the dispute and drawn first and Armstrong was pardoned. He was naturalized by act of parliament in 1677. Associating himself with Charles's natural son, the duke of Monmouth, Armstrong served with him in France from 1672, fighting at the siege of Maastricht (1673). He served with Monmouth, this time alongside the Dutch, in 1678, and was wounded at St Denis. In 1679 he joined the duke in his suppression of the covenanter rising, culminating in the battle at Bothwell Bridge. 
It was through Monmouth's influence that Armstrong was elected to the first Exclusion Parliament as MP for Stafford in March 1679. Here he served on two minor committees, to investigate abuses in the Post Office and, ironically, given his reputation for profligacy, to examine the laws against profanity. Although Shaftesbury listed Armstrong among the courtiers, he reputedly opposed Danby and certainly voted for the first of the bills to exclude James, duke of York, from the throne. Pressured by an irate James, Charles banished Armstrong from court in August because of 'his too pregnant zeal against the Duke of York' ('Ormonde MSS', 4.535), yet he permitted Armstrong to sell his post in the guards and renewed the coinage patent formerly held by his father, though now shared with George Legge. About the same time Armstrong met with Buckingham, probably as Monmouth's agent, to discuss a plan for a common council in London that comprised men who had not taken the corporation oath and, according to Longford, he was also now intriguing with Shaftesbury. In the poisoned climate of subornation and alleged sedition following disclosures of the supposed Popish Plot, Elizabeth Cellier and her associates purportedly hoped to implicate Armstrong, Monmouth, Sir William Waller, and Charles Gerard, Viscount Brandon, in treason. As he waited for the second Exclusion Parliament to meet, Armstrong assisted Monmouth in his efforts to prove that Charles had secretly married Monmouth's mother, Lucy Walters. When parliament convened, Armstrong again sat for Stafford, serving on committees to investigate judicial proceedings and to arrange the trial of the Catholic peer Viscount Stafford. As a member of the 1681 Oxford Parliament, still for Stafford, he was appointed to the committee to prepare another exclusion bill. Following Shaftesbury's death an anonymous tory mocked both men's reputed dissoluteness, ascribing to the earl's imaginary will the line 'To thee [Armstrong] I do bequeath my brace of whores' ('Last Will and Testament of Anthony, King of Poland', 1683). 
Before the Oxford Parliament, Armstrong, Monmouth, and Lord William Russell had met at Shaftesbury's house, possibly to discuss an insurrection to compel Charles to ban James from the succession. When Charles became ill in May 1682 the three conferred again, and similar meetings ensued. Armstrong accompanied Monmouth on his progress through Staffordshire and Cheshire in September, and when the duke was arrested he dispatched Armstrong to obtain a writ of 'habeas corpus'. Later that month Armstrong, Monmouth, Ford Lord Grey of Warke, Robert Ferguson, and Colonel John Rumsey discussed plans at Thomas Shepherd's house for an uprising. As the conspiring continued Armstrong and Ferguson were in contact with the cabal headed by the attorney Robert West, but Lord Howard of Escrick's later accusation that Sir Thomas planned to lead a party of assassins was baseless. With Grey and Monmouth, Armstrong examined the state of the royal guards and London's defences. Armstrong, Monmouth, and Grey also had discussions with Brandon and Sir Gilbert Gerard about a simultaneous rebellion in Cheshire. As the conspirators prepared to draft a revolutionary manifesto in the spring of 1683, Armstrong, Monmouth, Grey, Ferguson, and Rumsey favoured a monarchical settlement, not a republic. Although Armstrong insisted after his capture in 1684 that he knew nothing of assassination plans, the evidence indicates otherwise. Following disclosure of the Rye House assassination plot the government issued a proclamation on 28 June 1683 for Armstrong's apprehension, promising a reward of $500 ['see also 'Rye House plotters]. 
Although he eluded capture Armstrong was indicted for high treason at the Old Bailey on 12 July; the state had two witnesses, Rumsey and Shepherd. A sentence of outlawry was pronounced against him in Michaelmas term. By August he was in Cleves with Grey and Ferguson, moving thereafter to Rotterdam. In exile, where he sometimes used the alias Henry Lawrence, he was reportedly planning to kill John Row, a possible witness against him, but Grey dissuaded him. However, Armstrong and Grey discussed the possibility of hiring an assassin to murder Rumsey and Shepherd. 'En route' for Amsterdam in June 1684 Armstrong was captured by agents of Thomas Chudleigh with letters from Monmouth in his possession. Armstrong's efforts to stab himself or fling himself from the royal yacht were unsuccessful, and Charles's agents returned him to England under heavy guard. Detesting Armstrong to the end, James wrote sarcastically to William of Orange about the capture of 'that worthy assassinating knight' (Prinsterer, 588). At the king's bench on 14 June 1684 the court rejected Armstrong's request for a trial. His appeal to an Edwardian statute (5 & 6 Edw. VI c. 11) permitting a trial for an outlaw who surrendered within a year was deemed irrelevant because he had been captured. When George Jeffreys sentenced him to die, his daughter protested that the court intended to murder him, and for this she was briefly confined. Professing himself a sincere member of the Church of England and innocent of any plot to assassinate Charles or alter the government, Armstrong was executed in London on 20 June. His head was affixed to Westminster Hall, three of his quarters displayed in London, and the fourth at Stafford. Although his marriage settlement had provided his widow with an Irish estate worth $150 p.a., the government granted it to Sir Edward Scott. Armstrong also left bonds worth $12,700. In 1689 his widow petitioned the convention for reversal of his attainder, which was finally granted in November 1694. 


@@@@@


doc= 666


Armstrong, William, of Kinmont (fl. 1569-1603), border reiver, was made famous by the poem 'Kinmont Willie', which recounts his dramatic rescue from Carlisle Castle in 1596, as found in Sir Walter Scott's 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border'. In 1593 Sir Thomas Musgrave of Bewcastle cited 'Will of Kinmont' as one of the most infamous 'ryders and ill-doers upon the borders' (NL Scot., Armstrong MS 6112) and traced his descent from 'Ill Will' Sandy Armstrong, a notorious reiver of the early sixteenth century, though his immediate parentage is unknown. Will's own connections with other prominent border surnames were consolidated by his marriage in or before 1583 to the daughter of Hutchin Graham. William Fraser claimed that seven sons came from this union, though only five -- Jock, Geordie, Francis, Thom, and Sandy -- are mentioned in the state papers. He also secured a crucial link with the English border administration by marrying his daughter to Thomas Carleton, constable to Lord Warden Henry Scrope. 
On 23 October 1569 Armstrong (listed by his alternative toponym, 'of Morton Tower') pledged to obey the king and wardens, with Lord Maxwell standing as surety. He seems to have kept his word until 25 May 1579, at which time he appeared before the privy council to submit himself for his feud with Thomas Turnbull of Bedrule. In midsummer that year he and 400 Armstrong associates were said to have murdered Uswald Dod and seized 800 cattle and 1000 sheep in a foray. Armstrong's reputation as a reiver was established by July 1583, when Scrope unsuccessfully demanded his delivery by the laird of Johnstone, the Scottish warden. The English warden later reported that Armstrong and 300 adherents had committed six murders and stolen 400 cattle, 400 sheep, and 30 horses on 30 August. 
Will Armstrong's reputation may have inspired the laird of Buccleuch and the earl of Angus to take him to Stirling on a military expedition against the earl of Arran in 1585. He and his sons effectively ransacked the town, even removing 'the iron gratings from the windows' (Fraser, 1.169). Despite his disorderly tendencies Will appears in the privy council's list of border landowners (14 August 1590) permitted to rent property within the Scottish 'debateable land' 'and also the lands of Cannabye, adjacent thereto' ('Reg. PCS', 4.799). His apparent reformation is further hinted at in February 1591, when Lord Maxwell again pledged to guarantee his tenant's good behaviour. On 4 December 1594 he effected a similar -- but ultimately non-binding -- arrangement with Thomas, Lord Scrope, whereby Armstrong would assume responsibility for 300 men. 
Armstrong remained active as a freebooter, earning Scrope's enmity for his continual raids and 'the many outrages done by his followers' in Cumberland (Bain, 2.114). As the Scottish wardens were unwilling to surrender him Scrope ordered his deputy, Thomas Salkeld, to cross the Liddell River and seize Armstrong after a truce day in March 1596. This violation of march law -- which stipulated that fugitives could not be apprehended on a day of truce -- led to complaints from Buccleuch, keeper of Liddesdale. When these were ignored, Buccleuch personally organized a rescue expedition of 80 men, many of whom were English agents with insider's knowledge of Carlisle Castle, where Armstrong was incarcerated. With minimal damage the company infiltrated the castle in the early morning of 13 April and successfully retrieved him while both Scrope and Salkeld were in residence. This action heightened tensions between the two kingdoms, with Queen Elizabeth angrily demanding that King James surrender Buccleuch. 
Armstrong continued to court controversy by abducting and ransoming the English captain, Sir Thomas Musgrave of Bewcastle, on 3 July 1596, which led to his own imprisonment by the king. He was free by 10 July 1600, when he sparked off another international incident by his purchase of a mare that had been stolen in England by Scottish thieves; this transaction drew a full-scale English raid of 200 horse and 80 foot, culminating in a skirmish at Kinmont Tower. The last mention of Armstrong is in a letter from Scrope to Robert Cecil (4 January 1603), in which the warden complains that, 'since his release, [Armstrong] has spoiled the 2 towns of Heskettes [High and Low Hesket in Cumberland]' (Bain, 2.816). His notoriety was such that the king was rumoured to have considered employing him in a retributory attack on the citizens of Edinburgh following the December riot of 1596. 


@@@@@


doc= 667


Armstrong, William (fl. 1636), border reiver, was the son of Christopher Armstrong of Gilnockie, Dumfriesshire, and the lineal descendant of Johnnie Armstrong of Gilnockie, subject of the eponymous ballad. The tower of Gilnockie stood in the parish of Canonbie, in Annandale. He was possibly born in 1601 or 1602. 
Almost all of William's activities are known from Sir Walter Scott's commentary in 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border', which also contains the ballad 'Christie's Will'. Virtually nothing is known of his early life, though it is conceivable that he was the William Armstrong of Sark who complained to the Scottish privy council of being wrongfully detained by English border commissioners on 20 December 1636. He seems to have established a close working relationship with John Stewart, earl of Traquair, who used his influence to free Armstrong from the tolbooth of Jedburgh, where he had been imprisoned for stealing two colts. This incident, undated in Scott's account, may have occurred between Traquair's appointment as a border commissioner in December 1635 and December 1636, when English border authorities accused him of granting special indemnities to his Armstrong and Johnstone tenants. 
According to subsequent legend Armstrong later returned the favour by agreeing to abduct Sir Alexander Gibson, Lord Durie, who was then presiding over the court of session in a lawsuit involving Traquair, and whose dislike of the earl was well known. Upon intercepting Durie on Leith Sands, Armstrong apparently blindfolded the judge and carried him to a tower in Annandale; the suit was supposedly concluded three months later in Traquair's favour, with Armstrong promptly freeing Durie from his confinement in the tower vault before returning him to the exact site of his original abduction. This incident, thought by T. F. Henderson to have occurred during Durie's tenure as session president (1642-3), is in reality a mythical account based on the abduction of Alexander Gibson over forty years earlier when he was serving as a clerk to the council and session. In October 1601 George Meldrum of Dumbrek kidnapped Gibson before imprisoning him in various locations including Couper in Fife, Kinghorn, Leith, and, ultimately, England; his motives for kidnapping the clerk are not made clear, but in any case he had detained Gibson for no longer than eight days, and not for the hyperbolic three-month period of the Armstrong legend. At least seven decades after this event Lord Fountainhall noted that Meldrum was supposed to have abducted Gibson 'by the Earle of Roxbrughis hounding out who had a peek [grudge] agt him for owning some depending process agt him' (Fountainhall's notes and reports, 1584-1655, NL Scot., Adv. MS 25.4.8, p. 78), though no such case is listed in court of session records; the theory of Roxburghe's involvement continued to hold currency throughout the eighteenth century. It would thus appear that Meldrum's actions somehow became popularly associated with Armstrong between the former's trial and execution in 1604 and T. F. Henderson's 'Dictionary of National Biography' article of 1885. 
According to tradition Will Armstrong also served Traquair as a messenger to Charles I during the civil war, and at one point was involved in a daring escape from parliamentarian troops at Carlisle. Returning with a letter from the king he eluded the soldiers by launching his horse off the parapet of the Eden Bridge while the river was in full flood and swimming to safety. 
Christie's Will is possibly the William Armstrong whose tombstone in the churchyard of Sark, Dumfriesshire, put up by his widow Jenot (Janet) Johnstone, records his death on 10 June 1658 aged fifty-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 668


William Armstrong (1778-1857), corn merchant and local politician, of Tyneside, and his wife, Ann, daughter of William Potter, a minor coal owner of Walbottle House, about 4 miles west of Newcastle. 


@@@@@


doc= 669


Armstrong, William George, Baron Armstrong (1810-1900), armaments manufacturer and industrialist, was born on 26 November 1810 at 9 Pleasant Row, Shieldfield, Newcastle upon Tyne, the second child and only son of 
William Armstrong, the son probably of a shoemaker, was born at the village of Wreay, 4 miles south-east of Carlisle in Cumberland. Nothing is known of his early education, but he moved to Newcastle in the 1790s to join the quayside firm of Losh, Lubbren & Co., corn merchants, as clerk. George Losh (1766-1846), the senior partner in the firm, was also born in Cumberland, the family seat at Woodside lying adjacent to Wreay. The Losh and Armstrong families must have been known to each other and George Losh was a useful contact for Armstrong, being also a ship- and insurance broker and a proprietor of the Newcastle Fire Office and Water Company. Losh's brothers William and James -- the latter a lawyer -- were also to become influential members of Tyneside's industrial and cultural elite. 
Armstrong married Ann Potter probably in 1801 and eventually succeeded to ownership of the firm, possibly in 1803 when Losh had become financially embarrassed by the collapse of the local Surtees and Burdon Bank and the firm subsequently traded as Armstrong & Co., corn merchants, of Cowgate, Newcastle. With his financial position reasonably assured, Armstrong was able to satisfy some of his other interests, particularly in mathematics, in the Newcastle Literary and Philosophical Society which he had joined in 1798, in the creation of a chamber of commerce on whose committee he served, and in the founding of the Natural History Society. 
In 1824 Armstrong entered the debate on the respective merits of a horse-drawn railway or ship-canal link between Newcastle and Carlisle, noting that 'We can bring corn from the Cape of Good Hope to Newcastle cheaper than we can convey it between Newcastle and Carlisle' (Mackenzie, 129). He sided most with those who supported the canal proposal and referred to the railway plan as a 'spiritless' proposition. His argument was to no avail, and in the following year a provisional committee determined on railway communication. It has been suggested that his support for a ship canal demonstrated an innate caution, yet it could be argued, given the then largely untried experiment of the railway over such a long distance, that his response represented the valid preference of a corn merchant. 
In 1831 Armstrong attended a Northumberland county reform meeting with James Losh and Armorer Donkin -- the latter a prosperous Newcastle solicitor and family friend -- to support a resolution opposing the rejection of the 'Reform Bill' by the House of Lords. Soon after the passing of the 'Municipal Reform Act' of 1835 Armstrong secured a substantial victory as a reformist candidate for the Newcastle town council. He was heavily defeated at the election of 1839, only to be returned in 1842 without opposition. In 1845 he spoke out in council against the repeal of the corn laws, no doubt fearing that his business would suffer as a result of lower grain prices. He was unanimously elected alderman in 1849 and became mayor in 1850. (Addison Potter, his brother-in-law, had been mayor five years earlier.) 
Armstrong's primary concern in local politics centred on the management of the River Tyne. During his first spell as a town councillor he published a pamphlet of observations on the improvement of navigation. This was a topical and contentious subject, for the unreformed corporation had long and justifiably been charged with wilful neglect of the river. Many hoped that the reformed council would attend to the manifest problems of the river, upon which the very prosperity of Tyneside depended; and when the council established a River Tyne committee, some hopes of improvement were raised. Armstrong was chairman of the River Committee from 1843, but neither he nor the council's appointed engineer had the skills needed to enable a programme of improvement to be pursued with any degree of confidence. Moreover, the reformed council proved as reluctant as its predecessor to make sufficient funds available for river improvement, and the widespread recognition of this fact, plus the belief expressed by some that river funds were being misappropriated, led to vigorous agitation directed against the council, especially by the estuarial interests of North and South Shields. Armstrong remained as a sometimes abrasive chairman of the committee until, after strenuous opposition by the town council to the demands for reform, the conservatorship of the Tyne was wrested from them under the 'Tyne Improvement Act' of 1850 which placed control of the river under commissioners; Armstrong was appointed a commissioner. 
Armstrong died on 2 June 1857, only a few weeks after giving up his various offices, and in the following year his son, William George Armstrong, respected his wish that the Literary and Philosophical Society should have the benefit of any scientific books and local tracts from his personal library which were deemed useful. Thus it was that 1284 works were added to the society's library, making its collection of mathematical books unrivalled by that of any other provincial institution. 
William George Armstrong's childhood fascination with mechanical contrivances survived his early schooling in Newcastle upon Tyne and Whickham-on-Tyne and was enhanced while at Bishop Auckland grammar school in co. Durham between 1826 and 1828, when he was a regular visitor to the works of William Ramshaw, builder and engineer. The attraction which the works had for him may have been partly due to Margaret Ramshaw (1807-1893), the proprietor's daughter, whom he married in 1835. On leaving school his father persuaded him to take articles under his friend (and soon fellow town councillor), Armorer Donkin, a bachelor with an amateur interest in science who had long treated the younger Armstrong as an adoptive son. With a house in Jesmond, Newcastle, and a country retreat at Rothbury, Northumberland, Donkin was to have considerable influence on Armstrong and his then unanticipated career. Soon Armstrong was furthering his law studies in London under the tutelage of his brother-in-law, William Henry Watson, later Baron Watson (1796-1860), then a special pleader at Lincoln's Inn, but he rejoined Donkin in 1833 after five years with Watson and was made a partner in the firm in 1835, then styled Messrs Donkin, Stable, and Armstrong. Donkin, perhaps rather more than Armstrong's father, introduced him to many people whose support would soon become invaluable. 
Donkin did not stifle Armstrong's continued interest in scientific and mechanical matters, nor in the possible practical realities of some of his ideas. While on a fishing holiday in Dentdale, Yorkshire, in 1835, his attention was turned to the relatively inefficient use of a head of water in turning an overshot water-wheel. From that time, his family claimed, 'William had water on the brain' (Cochrane, 24), and it is certain the ideas which flowed from his deliberations at this time laid the foundations of his engineering works and his personal fortune. 
Armstrong's first serious attempt to better utilize the potential energy in a head of water was the design of a 'rotatory' engine in 1838, a working model of the design being constructed in Henry Watson's High Bridge engineering works in central Newcastle. In spite of Armstrong's advocacy of the device, it failed to arouse any interest, and remains a by-water of engineering history. 
An interesting diversion came Armstrong's way in 1840, when he began to investigate the creation of an electric charge generated by the escape of high-pressure steam from a boiler at the Cramlington colliery -- a phenomenon which was to be called the 'Armstrong effect'. This was to lead him away from hydraulics for a while, and into experimental electrostatic generation. He published papers on the theme, gave dramatic demonstrations of spark-generating devices in Newcastle and London, corresponded with Michael Faraday on the subject, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 7 May 1846 in recognition of his study of the phenomenon. There was to be no significant industrial application of his work in electrostatics, but he was now becoming known to the scientific establishment. 
It was as a lawyer that Armstrong, with others, in 1844-5 promoted the Whittle Dene Water Company, whose aim was to acquire the existing supplies to Newcastle in the short term, and to construct impounding reservoirs some 10 miles west of Newcastle; the company would thereby soon relieve the town of its dependence on water from an increasingly polluted River Tyne. The proposed company was discussed in the town council, receiving tacit support from Donkin and Armstrong's father. Donkin, Stable, and Armstrong were appointed solicitors to the company, and Armstrong was appointed secretary. His uncle, Addison Potter, a notable coal owner, became the first chairman, while George W. Cruddas, a shipowner and railway director, and Richard Lambert, a lawyer and wine merchant, acted as joint managing directors. These men were to become crucial to Armstrong in his subsequent ventures, one of which may have already been in his mind as he promoted the water company. He resigned his position as company secretary in 1847, while retaining his pecuniary investment, because, quite simply, he had by then embarked upon a new venture where there was the possibility of a conflict of interest. (He was to return to the company as director and chairman from 1853 to 1864.) 
After his rotatory engine failed to gain any acceptance, Armstrong designed a hydraulically powered crane based on the much simpler hydraulic reciprocating ram. A working model fed with town water was sufficiently successful to encourage him to proceed along this line of development, but again without generating any public interest. The idea was kept on ice for about five years until November 1845, when he invited the town council to accept an offer, from himself and a few of his friends, to modify an existing crane on the quayside to utilize town water as a source of power. This, he argued, would reduce the turnaround time of ships at the quay and thereby increase port revenues to the council. In return, he asked that should the experiment prove successful, he and his friends would be permitted to similarly modify and lease all the quayside cranes for a period of ten years and have the exclusive right to erect new hydraulic cranes at the same location. 
These friends of Armstrong were his colleagues in the water company, Cruddas, Lambert, Donkin, and Potter, and with Potter as mayor and Armstrong's father as chairman of the River Committee, it is perhaps not surprising that the offer was accepted. Once again Armstrong had exploited his connections, sometimes familial, in the intertwined business and political communities of Newcastle, which were the sources of economic and social power. To expedite the business arrangement, he and his friends formed the Newcastle Cranage Company in 1846, and this company commissioned Henry Watson to construct new cranes at his Newcastle works. But early in the following year the same men formed Messrs W. G. Armstrong & Co., with a capital of $19,500 plus Armstrong's patents valued at $3000, to manufacture new hydraulic devices. Armstrong had now severed his connections with the law and was determined on a life in industry. It is clear that he could not have predicted the size to which the enterprise would ultimately grow, for the company's first buildings were erected on a narrow strip of land, between the Newcastle and Carlisle Railway and the Tyne, at Elswick, just over a mile to the west of the town, upriver of a low-level, multi-arched, eighteenth-century stone bridge over the Tyne beneath which seagoing ships could not pass. Production commenced in the autumn of 1847, some twenty or thirty men being employed. 
The north-east of England had witnessed the birth of what was to become known as hydraulic engineering, first through the invention in 1765 of William Westgarth's 'statical pumping engine' at the Coalcleugh lead mine in upper West Allendale, and second by the development of a superior form of hydraulic engine by a Mr Deans of Hexham, Northumberland, installed at the Derwent lead mines in co. Durham in 1831. Deans' engines were said to be similar to those developed at Elswick, but Armstrong was to take hydraulic engineering on to an altogether different plane. 
Already by 1847 Armstrong had seen other avenues for the employment of hydraulic power, and among the early orders placed with the works were cranes and warehouse lifts for Jesse Hartley's Albert Dock in Liverpool, but, perhaps more importantly, two rotative engines for underground use at the South Hetton colliery in co. Durham, and seven similar for a variety of purposes at the lead mine and dressing-floors at Allenheads, Northumberland; the latter engines were ordered by Armstrong's friend and colleague Thomas Sopwith (1803-1879). The significance of these rotative engines, designed on a totally different and more efficient principle than his earlier rotatory device, was that they could substitute for stationary steam engines but without the need for coal, for they only needed a head of water which could be supplied by town water or a purpose-built reservoir. Armstrong's invention of the hydraulic accumulator in 1850-51 at once bypassed the need for reservoirs, enabled higher pressures to be generated and utilized, and introduced a flexible power system through the ability to transmit stored hydraulic power to widely spaced hydraulic devices. This was particularly important for railway and dock purposes where machinery might be required to operate only intermittently; such tasks could not be performed efficiently by stationary steam engines. By March 1852 some 352 workers were employed at the Elswick works. 
Hydraulic devices were to continue to be made at Elswick for the rest of Armstrong's life and after, but the Crimean War provided the impetus for the second important product type from the works. In 1854 the War Office asked Armstrong to design and build submarine mines for blowing up Russian ships sunk in the harbour at Sevastopol. His design, consisting of a wrought-iron cylinder filled with gun cotton, was first tested in a field near his home in Jesmond. Witnessed by the principal employees of the company, the mines exploded 'in a most exhilarating manner' but they were never used in anger. However, a discussion concerning the battle of Inkerman with his close friend James Meadows Rendel (1799-1856), the prolific dock engineer, proved a decisive moment in the future direction of the Elswick works. Their discussion, in November 1854, centred on the existing use of 18-pounder guns, which at 3 tons weight, including carriage and limber, had been almost impossible to advance, and they concluded that light field guns, patterned on the ordinary military rifle and using elongated projectiles of lead instead of cast-iron cannon, would be far superior in range, accuracy, and portability. In December 1854 Armstrong produced a report on the 'Construction of wrought-iron rifled guns adapted for elongated projectiles' which so impressed the duke of Newcastle, then secretary for war, that he asked for six such guns to be built immediately. Armstrong's report outlined what would become the essential features of projectiles for the next hundred years. The gun was to be quite different, both in material and construction, from any other field gun then in use, and Armstrong wisely decided to build one experimental gun in the first instance. It was a breech-loader, weighing just 5 cwt, that would fire elongated 3 lb lead shot. The barrel design, and its materials, most exercised Armstrong's mind in producing this first gun, and he eventually determined upon coil-welded, wrought-iron cylinders, shrunk one above the other upon a steel cylinder which was rifled with eight spiral grooves to give the projectile spin and therefore greater accuracy. The rifling was difficult to achieve, but the workforce included men of considerable ingenuity, and reputedly the rifling was carried out at night, with Armstrong in attendance, by John Bradley, only seven years out of his apprenticeship. (It had long been Armstrong's practice to sleep in a factory office to deal with any problems which might arise on the night shift.) 
It took just over six months to produce and prove the gun to Armstrong's satisfaction, but the ordnance committee, to whom it was submitted in July 1855, objected that it was unable to fire common or shrapnel shell. Only slightly daunted, Armstrong bored out the gun to take 5 lb cast-iron shells coated in lead, and after some difficulties produced a concussion fuse. A demonstration on the Northumberland coast, in December 1856, enthused the local press but not Colonel Wilmot, chief officer of the gun department at Woolwich. But Armstrong was encouraged by the ordnance committee to produce still larger guns. His 18-pounder, tested at Shoeburyness, Essex, in February 1858, proved to be more accurate over 2 miles than a smooth bore over 1 mile, and the ordnance committee was now largely satisfied of the merits of the Armstrong rifled gun. However, General Peel, now secretary for war, appointed a rifled gun committee, charged with deciding on the best form of rifled gun for both garrison and field service. Of all the guns submitted to the committee, Armstrong's were awarded the palm. 
On 23 February 1859 Armstrong was knighted for his services to the state and simultaneously appointed government engineer for rifled ordnance and superintendent of the royal gun factory at Woolwich, to replace Wilmot. He had declined to patent his inventions in ordnance and projectiles, but the government took them out on his behalf and in his name, and, by act of parliament, withheld their publication. He was no particular admirer of patents, and all those taken out by himself had been at the expense and on behalf of the firm to ensure that the firm could not be denied the use of his inventions. 
The factory at Woolwich was quite incapable of producing Armstrong guns, being essentially a gun foundry with boring machines, and while Armstrong set about its reconstruction, the Elswick ordnance factory was established alongside the engine works in January 1859, exclusively to supply the government with Armstrong guns -- at least until Woolwich was ready. The government supplied capital of $50,000 for the new concern, which was later increased to $85,000. The partners were Cruddas, Lambert, and George Wightwick Rendel, the 25-year-old son of James Meadows Rendel, who was also appointed manager of the works. Armstrong was not to be directly concerned in the new company while he continued to hold his government positions, but, to ensure access to military technical information, he persuaded Captain Andrew Noble (1831-1915), an artillery officer who had been secretary to the rifled ordnance committee, to become joint manager of the works in 1860. This was to be an inspired decision, and Rendel and Noble were to manage the affairs of the company for more than twenty years. 
More than 3000 guns were supplied to the government by 1863, orders worth some $1,063,000 having been placed. But this success, and Armstrong's personal reputation, were soon to be undermined by public controversy over the government monopoly enjoyed by the Elswick ordnance factory, and by rival claims of other inventors and manufacturers, of whom Joseph Whitworth (1803-1887) and his advocates were the most forceful. Indeed, Whitworth took up residence near Westminster, the easier to press his case for a gun barrel of homogeneous cast steel, with a hexagonal-sectioned tapered bore. Moreover, while Armstrong was developing a full-scale gun-making facility at Woolwich, conservative elements within the military still preferred muzzle-loaded guns and cannon-balls, and soon after the completion of Armstrong's reconstruction of Woolwich the government withdrew its unconditional support for the Elswick ordnance factory. The public controversy was distasteful to Armstrong and he resigned his government positions, without any open hostility towards the government, in 1863; the Elswick factory only received about $65,000 of government orders between then and 1878 -- mainly modifications to existing guns. Meanwhile, the army decided to abandon the construction of Armstrong-type guns and reverted to muzzle loading with simple three-groove rifling. There was a certain justification for the abandonment of Armstrong's breech-loading system, especially for the larger guns where it proved, as Armstrong was to agree, rather cumbersome to use. 
Returning to concentrate on the works at Elswick, Armstrong could now legitimately enter partnership in the Elswick ordnance factory, and he immediately secured the merger of the two works as Sir W. G. Armstrong & Co., with the intention of expanding both sides of the operation in the face of the decline in government orders. Additional land was bought adjacent to the works, enabling more than a doubling of the land available for extension, and after an initial reluctance on Armstrong's part -- for this might have meant the arming of future enemies -- a concerted effort was made to find export orders for armaments. Stuart (later Lord) Rendel, George Wightwick Rendel's younger brother, was entrusted with this task, for it was he who had suggested it, arguing that the supply of guns to foreign powers was far from an unpatriotic act since it made such powers dependent upon Britain for their munitions of war. Soon orders were achieved for guns for both sides in the American Civil War, as well as for Italy, Egypt, and Turkey; then from Russia, Austria, Denmark, the Netherlands, Chile, and Peru -- all by the late 1860s. 
Armaments manufacture had not been pursued to the detriment of hydraulic engineering; indeed, the spread of the railway system and the development of docks and harbours brought considerable business to the strictly commercial side of the enterprise. Every principal railway company became a customer, and there was hardly a port in the United Kingdom that did not purchase Armstrong hydraulic equipment. Semi-domestic applications were not overlooked, and hydraulic lifts were supplied to hotels and clubs such as the Junior Carlton Club. In particular the firm became the predominant supplier of swing-bridges, an example of which is the Goole railway bridge (1869) over the River Ouse in Yorkshire -- a design which pleased Armstrong considerably. 
For some time Armstrong had been interested in naval guns, and from 1868 the Elswick firm had entered into co-operation with the warship builders Charles Mitchell & Co., whose yards lay at Walker-on-Tyne, some 5 miles downriver from Elswick. Naval guns built at Elswick were barged down the Tyne, passing under the arches of the low-level bridge at Newcastle before meeting wider and deeper water at Walker. Armstrong could not have played a significant role in the arguments which his father had to endure concerning the state of the Tyne and the town council's poor performance as conservators, but the formation of the Tyne improvement commission was to lead to improvements which had never before been envisaged. Extensive improvements below bridge were at last providing part of Tyneside with a navigable river more suited to its needs, but above-bridge firms such as Armstrong's gained little advantage. It was to be expected, therefore, that Armstrong became an advocate for above-bridge improvements, and it was no surprise that his firm should be entrusted with the design and construction of a hydraulic swing-bridge to replace the multi-arched eighteenth-century stone bridge. The new bridge, which opened in 1876, was inaugurated in true Armstrong fashion. The Italian vessel 'Europa' was the first ship to pass under the new bridge, the largest of its kind in the world. With the 'Europa' berthed at Elswick, the largest gun ever built in the world was loaded onto it by the largest hydraulic shear legs in the world, both of which were Elswick-built. The gun was later unloaded at Spezia, Italy, by the largest hydraulic crane in the world, which was also designed and built at Elswick. 
By 1882 some twenty warships were built in co-operation with Mitchell at the Walker yard. In that year the two companies agreed to merge their interests in Sir W. G. Armstrong Mitchell & Co. Ltd, with a capital of $2 million and the intention -- made feasible by the presence of the swing-bridge -- of creating an integrated warship-building capacity at Elswick; Mitchell's yard would then concentrate on merchant ships. The new facilities were available by 1884, and from that year the Elswick naval yard, under the charge of Sir William White (1845-1913), formerly chief constructor to the Royal Navy, maintained a healthy order-book for several decades. Warships were supplied to the British navy, but also to those of Italy, Chile, China, Japan, and other countries. The Japanese connection was to become very important to Elswick and a source of considerable pride to Armstrong. In 1872 a delegation of the Iwakura mission, aimed at increasing Japan's knowledge of western industries and culture, had been shown around Tyneside by Armstrong, and a beneficial and lasting impression was left on both parties. The mission's impact on Elswick was not immediate, but, from the 1880s, numerous Japanese warship orders were placed at the Elswick yard. As a measure of the nation's esteem, Japan awarded Armstrong the order of the Sacred Treasure of the Rising Sun in 1895. Meanwhile, Armstrong had come to believe that high-speed cruisers would be essential adjuncts to the increasingly heavy battleships, and when the cruiser 'Esmeralda' was launched for the Chilean navy in 1884, a new type of warship -- soon to be adopted by all the navies of the world -- was inaugurated. 
Armstrong had by now largely left the fortunes of his Elswick works under the careful management of hand-picked men. The extent of his direct involvement after 1863 is uncertain, though he remained the titular head of the company until his death in 1900. George Wightwick Rendel left the firm in 1881, but Noble remained as its effective head, formally becoming chairman on Armstrong's death; he was to resign his active management of the firm in 1912 but remained chairman of the board of directors until his death in 1915. 
In 1863 the British Association held its annual meeting under Armstrong's presidency, a recognition of his outstanding contribution to science and engineering. In his presidential address he argued strongly for the adoption of the French metric system and, believing that this system would sooner or later become universal, suggested that the British Association should immediately show leadership in this matter. He also predicted that England would cease to be a coal-producing nation on an extensive scale within two hundred years -- an argument developed in his evidence in 1866 to the royal commission on coal (of which he was also a member) and in his presidential addresses to the North of England Institute of Mining (1873) and the British Association (1883). Towards the end of 1863 Armstrong took a short holiday at Rothbury in the Coquet valley, Northumberland, returning to scenes of his childhood, for the Donkin family had a country retreat there and, as he was later to claim, his troublesome cough was quickly removed by a visit to Rothbury. The busy years after the initial formation of his company had made such holidays difficult, and he had not visited his favourite valley at all in the fifteen years prior to 1863. But now, a man of considerable wealth and confident in his management team at Elswick, he was to embark upon the creation of Cragside -- still, however, mindful of the firm's need for a longer-term strategy. 
The Debdon burn ran down from barren moors and across rough agricultural land to join the River Coquet at Rothbury, and, apparently on impulse, Armstrong decided to purchase part of the Debdon valley with the intention of building a modest holiday home there, suitable for small shooting and fishing parties. The new house, which Armstrong named Cragside -- a relatively modest two-storey picturesque lodge designed by an unknown builder-architect -- appears to have been completed by 1864. Characteristically, Armstrong soon began to utilize hydraulic machinery to make life more comfortable at his house, damming the Debdon burn to create Tumbledown Lake as a head of water to power a hydraulic ram which would pump water to Cragside and to some conservatories. He had moved with typical speed but was soon to extend his plans and seek to create a country mansion, set among ornamental gardens, landscaped grounds, and woodlands, which would become his home, his laboratory, and occasionally a place to impress and entertain potential customers for the products of his works. 
It was the proposed Northumberland Central Railway, intended to pass through Rothbury and thereby provide direct rail communication with Newcastle, which persuaded Armstrong that Cragside, suitably altered and extended, could become his permanent home. In 1869 he entrusted the relatively unknown architect R. Norman Shaw (1831-1912) to create a home appropriate to the stature and interests of its owner. The result was not entirely to Shaw's satisfaction, for Armstrong kept close control of the project, but it did enhance Shaw's reputation as a designer of the picturesque. Shaw's principal works were carried out in the periods from 1870 to 1877 and from 1883 to 1885, and the end result was the most dramatic Victorian mansion built in the north of England. The 1700 acres of former barren land were planted with 7 million trees, and the project eventually employed seventy gardeners. 
Armstrong's wish to spend as much time as possible at Cragside was sharpened by a sorry interlude which was to mark his last major direct involvement with the firm that he created. In May 1871 some 2700 men from the Elswick works joined about 4700 engineers at other Tyneside works in a strike aimed at securing a reduction in the working week from fifty-seven hours to fifty-four hours for the same weekly wage; Armstrong set the tone of management's response by locking out even those of his engineers who did not support strike action. As head of the largest works in the area, he took the lead in co-ordinating the employers' resistance, and acted provocatively in importing labour from the south of England and the continent. Throughout the four and a half month strike the employers remained stubborn and inflexible, refusing until the end to concede what others elsewhere had long conceded -- the nine-hour day, to commence in 1872. It is generally believed that Armstrong's faulty leadership unnecessarily prolonged the strike, enraged local public opinion, and lowered his personal reputation. His attitudes during the strike must have altered his workers' perceptions of him, and therefore of the firm. Here, after all, was an employer who had embraced the education movements of the 1850s and 1860s by supporting the Elswick Mechanics' Institute from about 1852, as well as a school for the technical education of his workers' children in 1866; now the school was closed down to house imported strike-breaking labour. The firm had encouraged family traditions, with sons following fathers in jobs where apprenticeships were much sought after. Yet, in the strike, Armstrong, the former paternalist, appeared in a guise approaching that of a tyrant, prepared to ditch his workforce for imported labour. 
There can be little doubt that Armstrong was chastened by the course and outcome of the 1871 strike and of public criticism of his role in it. Elswick had been the one overwhelming passion of his life, but now that this had become somewhat soured, Cragside offered the perfect diversion for risk-free work, experiments, and pleasure. He would never again chance his hard-and well-earned reputation in such a high-profile manner; the works could safely be left in the hands of his capable lieutenants. 
In 1872 Armstrong journeyed to Egypt, on his first excursion outside of Europe. Ostensibly he went, with other eminent engineers, to advise on possible methods of securing traffic on the Nile from the difficulties posed by its cataracts -- not a field in which he had any experience -- but he appears to have been more interested in the archaeological sites which he visited. From about 1875 he lived almost permanently at Cragside, introducing water-turbine-powered arc lamps for lighting the house in 1878 (the first house to be thus lit), converting to incandescent lamps in 1880 with the help of Joseph Swan of Newcastle, his friend and inventor of such lamps. 
In 1878 Armstrong presented the 93 acre Armstrong Park, followed in 1884 by Jesmond Dene and its banqueting hall, for the benefit of the inhabitants of Newcastle. He and his wife had lived in the newly built Jesmond Dene House from the year of their marriage in 1835, and the banqueting hall had been used to entertain the foreign dignitaries who were now the chief customers for Elswick's guns and ships; but with the railway having opened to Rothbury in 1872, and Cragside approaching completion in 1884, the opportunity for much grander scenes of hospitality was presented. The visit of the prince of Wales to Cragside in 1884, and the royal approval thereby gained, marked the beginning of an influential stream of visitors to Rothbury. 
From 1854, while still living at Jesmond Dene, Armstrong had been a collector of items relating to natural history and of works of art, but he considerably expanded his picture and sculpture collection between 1869 and 1876, during which period Shaw provided a gallery to house them at Cragside. Benefactions to his native city continued in a manner which would have pleased his father: to the Royal Victoria Infirmary, to the Hancock Museum of Natural History, and to the Literary and Philosophical Society. In 1878 Armstrong became a founder member of the council of the Durham College of Science in Newcastle -- an extension of the University of Durham -- which was the forerunner of Armstrong College, named after him. (It later became King's College, and later still the University of Newcastle.) He did not, however, favour higher education for all, believing that education for most people should be restricted to their school years in order that the supply of men to the necessary humbler positions in life should be maintained. 
At the annual meeting of the British Association in 1883, held at York, Armstrong -- who was again president -- suggested in his presidential address that some form of thermoelectric engine might supersede the steam engine, that there was a future for solar-derived heat, and that hydroelectric power generation and the transmission of electric power would become of great importance. 
Though Armstrong felt himself to be 'too advanced' for the tories and insufficiently advanced for the Liberals, he none the less contested Newcastle upon Tyne as a Liberal Unionist (opposed to home rule for Ireland) at the general election of 1886. He and the Conservative candidate were defeated by John Morley and another Liberal in the two-member constituency. But when he was raised to the peerage as Baron Armstrong of Cragside in June 1887, he remarked that 'The calmer atmosphere of the upper house will suit me much better' (Fairbairn). He attended every debate on the 'Irish Question' in the House of Lords and made several speeches on the subject, but seems to have had little enthusiasm for other topics of the day. 
In 1892 Armstrong made his last appearance at the Elswick works, now employing about 13,000 men, during a visit by the king of Siam. His wife, Margaret, Lady Armstrong, died in 1893; she remains a shadowy figure. Her short local obituary mentions her unfailing support of her husband, her love of botany, and her involvement with the planting of the grounds at Jesmond Dene and Cragside ('Newcastle Daily Journal', 4 Sept 1893). Soon after her death Armstrong embarked upon the last of his great ventures; he bought Bamburgh Castle and estate in 1893-4 and began a series of restorations and alterations to the fabric of the castle, intending it to become a convalescent home in his wife's memory. This project was not completed in his lifetime. He was an invalid in his last years and, according to oral tradition, exhibited a degree of paranoia. However, he remained mentally active, contributing a preface to an article in 1899 on electric movements in air and water. He died at Cragside on 27 December 1900, leaving almost $1.5 million, and was buried on 31 December alongside his wife in the extension of Rothbury churchyard overlooking the River Coquet. As they had no children, Armstrong's great-nephew, William Henry Armstrong Fitzpatrick Watson (1863-1941), inherited the Northumberland estates. 
Many honours had been bestowed upon Armstrong, and he held presidencies of several institutions and organizations. In addition to those already noted he was a Telford medallist of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1850, Society of Arts Albert medallist in 1878, and Bessemer medallist of the Iron and Steel Institute in 1891. He was awarded an honorary LLD by the University of Cambridge in 1862 and DCLs from Oxford University in 1870 and Durham University in 1882. Among his presidencies were those of the Newcastle Literary and Philosophical Society from 1860 to 1900, the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1861-2 and 1869, the North of England Institute of Mining and Mechanical Engineers in 1872, 1873, and 1875, the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1882, and the Natural History Society of Northumberland and Durham in 1890. At a more personal level he was described as a charming man of mild demeanour, whose innate reserve could make him seem formidable to strangers (Conte-Helm, 15; 'PICE'). He bestrode much of the nineteenth century as a singular figure in science, industrial development, philanthropy, and liberalism, and, while he greatly profited from his life financially, he retained a love of the country and a personal simplicity. 


@@@@@


doc= 670


Arnald, Richard (1698/1700-1756), Church of England clergyman and biblical scholar, was born in 1698 (Venn, 'Alum. Cant.') or 1700 (Nichols). He was educated at Bishop Stortford School, whereafter in 1714 he was admitted to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and matriculated the next year. Having graduated BA he moved in 1718 to Emmanuel College, of which he was elected fellow on 24 June 1720; he proceeded MA in 1721 and BD in 1728. He was ordained deacon by Thomas Greene, bishop of Ely, on 23 September 1723 and priest on 20 September 1724. While resident at Emmanuel he printed two copies of Sapphics on the death of George I, and a sermon (on 'Colossians' 2: 8) preached at Bishop Stortford School feast on 3 August 1726. 
In 1733 Arnald was presented by his college to the living of Thurcaston, in Leicestershire, and later, in 1754, was made prebendary of Lincoln. In 1737 he published a sermon (on 'Deuteronomy' 33: 8) that he had preached for the archdeacon's visitation at Leicester, and in 1746 a sermon on '2 Kings' 14: 8, 'The Parable of the Cedar and the Thistle Exemplified in the Great Victory at Culloden'. The work by which he is remembered is his verse-by-verse commentary on the 'Apocrypha', which was published as a continuation of the commentaries of Simon Patrick and William Lowth. It embraces commentaries on the 'Wisdom of Solomon' (1744), 'Ecclesiasticus' (1748), 'Tobit', 'Judith', 'Baruch', the 'History of Susanna', and 'Bel and the Dragon', with dissertations on the books of 'Maccabees' and 'Esdras' (1752), to which was added a translation of the treatise on the daemon Asmodeus by the Benedictine Augustin Calmet. These volumes were collected together in 1753 and reissued, with a second edition of the commentary on the 'Wisdom of Solomon', in 1760. They were widely used in later collections of biblical commentary and printed in a new edition by John Rogers Pitman in 1822. Arnald's treatment of the 'Wisdom of Solomon', in which he sought to correct errors in the Authorized Version's translation from the Greek text, was particularly successful. In general, however, his commentary was often dependent on Calmet's work, despite an assertion that Catholic critics had perverted the true meaning of the apocryphal texts. Nevertheless Arnald's work did assist in the gradual rehabilitation of the 'Apocrypha' among English readers. 
Arnald married Catharine, daughter of the Revd John Woods, rector of Wilford, near Nottingham. They had six children, of whom three predeceased their mother. Arnald died at Thurcaston on 4 September 1756 and was buried in the parish church. His widow died, aged sixty-five, on 11 April 1782. 
Their sole surviving son, 
From 1775 Arnald was chaplain to Bishop Richard Hurd, and from 1778 precentor of Lichfield Cathedral. By Hurd's influence he served from 1776 to 1781 as sub-preceptor to the prince of Wales (later George IV) and Prince Frederick, and was made canon of Windsor in 1779. In January 1782 his mind failed; he remained insane and under restraint until his death, at Leicester, on 5 August 1802. He was said to have been deluded by ambition and to have regained his composure when allowed to wear a mitre. He was buried in Thurcaston church. It was indeed an unfortunate family. One of his brothers, according to William Cole, 'was drowned, and his sisters ill married or worse'. By the directions in his will a sermon, 'The Important Station of an English University', that he had preached before the university at the commencement in 1781 was published in the year after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 671


Arnall, William (d. 1736), political writer, is of unknown parentage and upbringing. He trained as a lawyer before, in 1728, he took up writing for the government at Sir Robert Walpole's personal request, having 'vouchsafed' the prime minister's protection before '[his] twentieth year' (Downie, 179). For the next eight years Arnall worked as a government employee in the production of newspapers and pamphlets during an intense period of political journalism which saw pro-Walpolean publications pitted against the 'Craftsman' of the opposition or 'country' whigs. After a brief time at the 'British Journal' or 'Censor' (1728), where he appeared as 'Roger Manly of Lincoln's Inn', Arnall wrote extensively for the 'Daily Gazeteer' and the 'Free Briton' under the pseudonym Francis Walsingham. The government invested considerable sums of public money for a school of journalists, in which Arnall, together with James Pitt and Ralph Courteville, became a leading player. Figures from the committee of inquiry into Walpole's expenditure indicate that the prime minister provided over $50,000 for his writing circle between 1731 and 1734, with over $10,997 allocated to Arnall for distribution to other journalists or to meet printing costs. Arnall himself received an annual pension of about $400, making him the best paid government journalist in London. 
In return Arnall provided a series of papers which challenged country whig allegations of a supposedly corrupt, immoral, and tyrannous ministry. By contrast Arnall exposed the anachronism of a country party unaware of the benefits of modern levels of commercial enterprise dependent on private expressions of self-interest. It was, Arnall believed, the government's obligation (and present achievement) to stimulate this passion to ensure the self-preservation of the greatest number of the populace. This new responsibility demanded an end to the traditional equation of politics and morality and, indeed, as Arnall suggested in one of his more controversial pieces ('Free Briton', 28 June 1732), the promotion of corruption by ministers to channel individual self-interest towards nationally productive ends. Though well rewarded and respected, the provocative nature of Arnall's essays meant that he was closely monitored by Walpole throughout his career. 'On extraordinary occasions', wrote the earl of Egmont, the prime minister even dictated Arnall's column for the 'British Journal' ('Egmont Diary', 3.324). At other times, such as during the bank contract controversy (1735), Walpole scrutinized Arnall's work before publication, aware of the journalist's talent for intemperate comments in defence of the ministry. 
Arnall's outspoken style and his close relationship with Walpole inevitably made him a popular target for the opposition 'Craftsman' and 'Fog's Journal', as well as in verse satires such as Pope's 'Dunciad' (1735, bk 2.315), where he was: '
No crab more active in the dirty dance, 

Downward to climb or backward to advance 

' or 'Verres and his Scribblers', where the 'trifler' Arnall was said to 'chatter, / A flow of words, froth misinformed with matter' (Hanson, 113). In addition to his work for the Walpole press Arnall also published a number of pamphlets on political and ecclesiastical themes, including 'Clodius and Cicero' (1727), 'A Letter to the Revd Dr Codex' [Edmund Gibson] (1733), 'Opposition No Proof of Patriotism' (1735), 'The Complaint of the Children of Israel' (1736, under the name Solomon Abrabanel), and 'Animadversions on Bishop Sherlock's Remarks on the Tythe Bill', reprinted in 'The Pillars of Priestcraft and Orthodoxy Shaken' (2nd edn, 1768). Arnall's death in May 1736 was reported in the 'London Evening-Post' for 3 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 672


Cecilia Young (1712-1789), singer, daughter of the elder Charles Young and his wife, Elizabeth, was baptized at St Andrew's Church, Holborn, on 7 February 1712. At a concert for her benefit at Drury Lane Theatre on 4 March 1730 she was advertised as 'a Scholar of Signor GEMINIANI, who never yet sung in publick' ('Daily Post', 4 March 1730). That October she appeared in concerts at Bath, where John, first Viscount Perceval, recorded in his diary that her voice was better than any Italian's he had heard 'in clearness, loudness and high compass' ('Egmont Diary', 1.105). Her operatic debut was in the title role of John Frederick Lampe's 'Britannia' at the Haymarket Theatre in November 1732, and she sang the heroines in his 'Amelia' on 18 December 1732 and 'Dione' on 23 February 1733. She was engaged for the title role in Willem De Fesch's oratorio 'Judith' at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 9 February 1733, but was replaced by Miss Chambers in a delayed premiere; the furious composer blamed the postponement on the 'Mis-Conduct and pretended Sickness of Cecilia Young' ('Daily Journal', 16 Feb 1733). Handel chose her for the first performance of his 'Deborah' (17 March 1733) and she later sang in the premieres of his 'Ariodante' and 'Alcina' (both 1735), 'Alexander's Feast' (1736), and 'Saul' (1739). 
Against her father's wishes Cecilia married the Roman Catholic Thomas Augustine Arne (1710-1778) on 15 March 1737 and converted to Catholicism. Arne wrote delightful music for her in his 'Comus' (first performed 4 March 1738), including the perennially popular 'Sweet Echo', in 'Alfred', performed before Frederick, prince of Wales, at Cliveden in 1740, and in 'The Judgment of Paris' (1742), in which she was Venus. The Arnes went to Dublin in June 1742 and joined Arne's sister, the actress and singer Susanna Cibber, in benefit concerts. They were in Dublin for the 1742-4 theatre seasons; Cecilia appeared in her husband's stage works and in concerts, although she was ill in October 1742 and again in May 1743, when her physician forbade her to perform 'at the Hazard of her Life' (Greene and Clark, 352). By this time their marriage was under strain: Arne was unfaithful (an illegitimate son, Michael, was born about 1740) and James Pilkington, Arne's apprentice in Dublin, claimed that Mrs Arne was 'prodigiously fond of Gin' and that he had seen her 'toying on the Bed' with the tenor Thomas Lowe (Pilkington, 2.256-9). In his draft will of 1770 Arne denied that Cecilia had ever been unfaithful to him, but stated that her 'violent and raging passions' rendered her of no use to him or herself as a public singer. Charles Burney, Arne's apprentice from 1744 to 1746, always remembered Mrs Arne's goodness of heart and parental attention to his welfare and believed he had helped to preserve domestic harmony while he lived with them. Although Cecilia sang at Drury Lane and Vauxhall during those two years, she made very few appearances thereafter. In 1748 she went to Dublin without Arne for a season there with her sister and brother-in-law Isabella and John Frederick Lampe. 
In autumn 1755 the Arnes returned to Dublin accompanied by Cecilia's young nieces Elizabeth and Mary (Polly) and Arne's pupil Charlotte Brent. Cecilia was ill at first, but then sang in several of Arne's pieces before the marriage broke down completely. Arne went back to London in 1756 with Charlotte Brent (by then almost certainly his mistress) and Elizabeth, abandoning Cecilia in Dublin with the six-year-old Mary. In 1758 Mrs Delany encountered her, 'an object of compassion', teaching singing in the household of a charitable family ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 3.502). Cecilia was heard in a few concerts in Dublin, but did not resume her singing career after returning to London with Mary in 1762. The Mrs Arne who sang in London between 1766 and 1769 was Michael Arne's wife, Elizabeth. Cecilia lived with Mary and her husband, Francois Hippolyte Barthelemon, and performed at their benefit concert in 1774, advertised as 'the 1st Time of her singing in public these 20 Years' ('Public Advertiser', 16 May 1774). She received an annual allowance of $40 from Arne, rather grudgingly paid. Mrs Barthelemon collected the allowance, taking her daughter Cecilia Maria with her, and it was Arne's fondness for the child which reunited him with his wife for a few months before his death in March 1778. Cecilia remained a pious Catholic until her death at the Barthelemons' home on 6 October 1789. 
Cecilia's sister 


@@@@@


doc= 673


Michael Arne (1740/41-1786), musical performer and composer, was the illegitimate son, according to Burney, of Thomas Augustine Arne. His mother is unknown. He was brought up by his aunt Susannah Cibber. It has been suggested that he may have been the 'Master Cornel' who performed the page in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan' at Drury Lane on 12 April 1746 (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). If not, he made his debut, as a singer, in Manfredini's concert on 20 February 1750. Billed as 'Master Arne' from his benefit performance at the Haymarket on 5 February 1751, while still a child he excelled at the harpsichord, played his father's concerto on the organ, and sang the role of Paris to Mrs Arne's Juno in his father's setting of William Congreve's play 'The Judgment of Paris'. Like his father's, however, his fame rested on his composition of popular songs and music for the theatre. Over eighty publications of these works are listed in the 'Catalogue of Printed Music Published between 1487 and 1800'. He wrote a 'New Sheep-Shearing Song' which his aunt Mrs Cibber sang on 21 January 1756 in 'The Winter's Tale' at Drury Lane, where, like his father, he was engaged as composer. He was elected to the Madrigal Society on 20 March 1765. He married Elizabeth Wright (1751/2-1769), a Drury Lane singer, on 5 November 1766 at St Mary's, Lambeth, being entered as a widower in the register there; however, nothing is known of his previous wife. Although prized by Garrick, he temporarily left the theatre to study alchemy at a laboratory he built in Chelsea. Ruined by this, he returned to composing for the theatre. In 1770 he published several volumes of songs which he had written for his wife. He was in Germany in 1771 and 1772, and in Hamburg on 15 April 1772 conducted the first performance in Germany of Handel's 'Messiah'. On 1 May 1773 he married the soprano from this performance, Ann Venables, at St Giles-in-the-Fields. In December 1776 he accepted an invitation from Thomas Ryder to present and compose for David Garrick's 'Cymon' at the Smock Alley theatre, Dublin. The production, featuring his wife, Ann, was successful, but despite this revival of his musical career he returned to alchemy and established a laboratory at Clontarf, co. Dublin, although the expense probably did not lead to him spending summer 1777 confined for debt in Dublin as sometimes reported. He had probably returned to London by 31 January 1778, when he was paid $21 by Drury Lane for composing additional music for 'Cymon'. Apart from a further Dublin engagement in 1779, he continued to compose for the London stage for several years, including two seasons at Covent Garden from 1781 to 1783. In April 1781 he composed the music for Philippe de Loutherbourg's picture show 'The Eidophusikon'. Despite having been granted co-administration of his father's will on 21 March 1778 and half of the profits from future productions of his father's works, he was, according to Burney, 'always in debt, and often in prison' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). He died on 14 January 1786 at South Lambeth, London, leaving his third wife, Ann, and a daughter (by which marriage is not known), Sarah. Sarah, who may have been the granddaughter Jemima to whom Thomas Augustine Arne left 10 guineas in his will, continued the Arne family's connection with music and the theatre into the nineteenth century, singing first as Miss Arne and then as Mrs Gardiner. She died in 1808. 


@@@@@


doc= 674


Arne, Thomas Augustine (1710-1778), composer and musical performer, was born in King Street, Covent Garden, London, on 12 March 1710, the son of Thomas Arne (bap. 1682, d. 1736) ['see under 'Arne family], upholsterer and undertaker, and his second wife, Anne, 'nee' Wheeler (died 1757). Thomas the younger was baptized at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 28 May 1710. The middle name Augustine was adopted in childhood, apparently as a sign of allegiance to his mother's Roman Catholic faith. 
Arne attended Eton College in the early 1720s, although his name does not appear in any manuscript list. There, he is said to have displayed a great love of music, playing the recorder at all hours to the annoyance of his fellow pupils, secretly practising the spinet at night with muffled strings while at home during the holidays (although the same story has been told of Handel), and trying his hand at composition. He became a violin pupil of Michael Festing (who had been a pupil of Francesco Geminiani) some time about 1725 and attended the opera free of charge by borrowing the livery of servants for use as a disguise. Arne was however directed by his father towards a career as a lawyer, and in 1726, after leaving Eton, he was apprenticed to Arthur Kynaston, a London attorney, for three years. But music retained its hold over Arne, at the expense of a probably far more secure and, at the time, high-ranking legal career. His father, like many others in his position and despite evident musical interests, may not have relished the thought of his son playing the violin in public, but Arne was headstrong and had found his true vocation: opposition was futile. 
Arne gave singing lessons to his younger sister Susannah Maria (1714-1766) ['see 'Cibber, Susannah Maria] and his brother Richard Arne ['see under 'Arne family], and his father was involved with the financing of the English operas performed initially at the Little Theatre, Haymarket, from March 1732. Arne was therefore able to enter into the theatrical world with relative ease and enjoyed early success as a composer for the stage. His opportunity came when the company split in autumn 1732. Arne moved to Lincoln's Inn Fields, where he staged 'Teraminta', by Henry Carey and John Stanley, in November, with his sister in the title role, and followed this with his own opera 'Rosamond' on 7 March 1733. The latter involved both of Arne's siblings and achieved a respectable number of performances. After returning to the Little Theatre in the Haymarket, Arne then produced during the next season his setting of Henry Fielding's afterpiece 'Tom Thumb: a Tragedy', as 'The Opera of Operas, or, Tom Thumb the Great'. Despite competing against Lampe's setting of the mainpiece version at Drury Lane, Arne's version enjoyed a fifteen-night run, beginning on 29 October 1733; this achievement was surpassed by his own masque 'Dido and Aeneas', which had seventeen performances from 12 January 1734. 
Arne was now successful in his own right and had become a catalyst for the revival of English opera, but was still able to benefit enormously from new alliances. In April 1734 his sister Susannah married Theophilus Cibber (1703-1758), an actor and playwright whose company was based at Drury Lane and whose father was Colley Cibber, at that time poet laureate and one of the shareholders of the patent which allowed theatrical performances at Drury Lane. This opened the door for Arne to become house composer at the theatre, writing music for various plays and pantomimes and involving both his brother and his sister. He lived in Great Queen Street and Lincoln's Inn Fields about this time. Charles Arne, probably the 'natural son' of Arne referred to by Charles Burney in 'A General History of Music', was baptized on 9 January 1734, although Arne himself was not married until 15 March 1737, when, at Lincoln's Inn chapel, Cecilia Young (1712-1789) ['see under 'Young family] became his wife. Her father, Charles Young (bap. 1686, d. 1758) ['see under 'Young, William], organist of All Hallows Barking, objected to Arne's Catholicism and his daughter's subsequent conversion. His sister and new wife were both great assets to Arne, as tragedienne and singer respectively, and were used to great effect in his setting of 'Comus' (John Milton's masque as adapted by John Dalton), which ran at Drury Lane from 4 March 1738. This work remained in the repertory into the following century. The combination of talent from the Arne and Cibber families, a resurgence of interest in Milton, and the simple melodic charm of Arne's score ensured its great success. Arne's music was imitated by Handel in his 'L'Allegro, il Penseroso ed il Moderato', an oratorio that like 'Comus' was adapted from Milton. 
The rise in Arne's stature within the London musical scene continued during the late 1730s. In 1738 he joined Handel, Boyce, and John Christopher Pepusch as a founder member of the Society of Musicians (later the Royal Society of Musicians) and set the masque 'Alfred', by David Mallet and James Thomson, to form part of an event initiated by Frederick, prince of Wales, in 1740. Set in the gardens of the prince's seat, Cliveden (then usually spelt Cliefden) House, near Taplow, Buckinghamshire, it honoured the third birthday of the prince's daughter Augusta. 'Rule, Britannia' was among the original musical numbers. The masque itself was subsequently adapted and was transformed into both an oratorio, performed at Drury Lane on 20 March 1745, and an opera under the title 'Alfred the Great', given at Covent Garden on 12 May 1753. The 'plaintive poignancy' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA') of Arne's contributions to various Shakespeare plays revived at Drury Lane in the 1740-41 season also ensured their enduring success. The songs included 'Under the Greenwood Tree' for 'As You Like It', first heard on 20 December 1740, and 'Where the bee sucks' for John Dryden's and Thomas Shadwell's version of 'The Tempest', revived with Arne's songs on 28 November 1740, although 'Where the bee sucks' may not have been introduced until 31 January 1746. Arne's second son, Michael Arne (1740/41-1786) ['see under 'Arne family], was born about this time but was not the son of Cecilia Arne. By November 1741 Arne was living at 17 Craven Buildings, near Drury Lane, and at this time made a successful setting of William Congreve's masque of 1700 'The Judgment of Paris', performed at Drury Lane on 12 March 1742. 
Arne sought to retain as much financial interest as was possible in his works after they were first performed, and was reputedly a difficult negotiator over contracts, a trait attributed to his legal training. He published some of his early compositions himself, without selling the copyrights to a bookseller, with the intention that he would retain any profits from their sale, and on 29 January 1741 had been granted royal privilege to protect his works from being printed without his permission for fourteen years. The privilege did not deter two booksellers, Henry Roberts and John Johnson, from continuing to print and sell songs from 'Comus' and 'As You Like It'. Arne responded by bringing a bill of complaint in the court of chancery on 12 November 1741. The case did not proceed beyond its initial pleadings, suggesting that an out-of-court settlement was made. The agreement must have favoured Arne's claim to copyright, as booksellers seem subsequently to have respected his copyright, printing the words to his songs in collections only, without the music. Arne's interest in the copyright issue continued to influence his career, and even after the expiry of his royal privilege in 1755 he continued to publish warnings that his compositions could not be printed without his consent, citing the 'Copyright Act' of 1710 and the argument supported by some lawyers that there existed a perpetual copyright in common law. 
Arne's sister's flight to Dublin in December 1741, following the failure of her marriage to Cibber, provided the impetus for him to tear himself away from London and attempt to emulate Handel's success in the Irish capital. Susannah had sung in the first performance of 'Messiah' on 13 April 1742, and Arne arrived in Dublin on 30 June, accompanied by his wife and Thomas Lowe, the tenor who had given the first performance of 'Rule, Britannia'. During Arne's two seasons in Dublin the works he performed included Handel oratorios (in collaboration with Matthew Dubourg) and one of his own contributions to the genre, 'The Death of Abel', performed at the Smock Alley Theatre on 18 February 1744. Soon afterwards he travelled back to London, visiting Chester 'en route', where he met the young Charles Burney. Arne took on Burney as his apprentice without demanding the usual fee, and the two travelled together to London. Burney's later writings as a music historian remain a valuable source of information on Arne's life. 
Back in London, Arne resided next door to The Crown in Great Queen Street and continued to compose music for Drury Lane, including a burlesque opera to a libretto by Colley Cibber, 'The Temple of Dullness', first performed on 17 January 1745. This all-sung work in the Italian style was not well received. Arne's setting of 'God Bless our Noble King' better captured the public mood, appearing in September 1745 as London began to realize that the Jacobite rising in Scotland presented a serious threat. About the same time he composed popular vocal music for Jonathan Tyers's musical entertainments at Vauxhall Gardens. Arne's association with the pleasure gardens was long and fruitful, resulting in over 200 songs (many of which were performed by his wife), and contributed to the restoration of the health of English popular song. Collections of Arne's songs, including those published as part of the series 'Vocal Melody' (1749-64), contain numerous examples. 
Arne was however falling out of favour as a composer for the theatre. Work for Drury Lane began to dry up as David Garrick, manager from 1747, turned to other composers. Arne eventually followed his sister to Covent Garden for the 1750-51 season. Some of his compositions at this time brought disappointments: 'Henry and Emma', a play with songs for Thomas Lowe's benefit at Covent Garden on 31 March 1749, adapted from a poem by Matthew Prior, was received badly by audiences. Its librettist, Thomas Holt, would sue Arne and Lowe for allegedly breaking an unprecedented agreement that gave Holt a continuing interest in the printing and performance of the songs; the case, filed in the court of exchequer in 1752, reveals that in 1749 Arne expected a fee of 30 guineas for composing the music for a play, more than the annual salary for a non-leading actor. Arne naturally resisted Holt's claims and defended his right to publish his compositions after their first performance. 'Don Saverio', for which Arne wrote both the words and the music, was first performed at Drury Lane on 15 February 1750. It was another attempt at an all-sung comic opera, but was hissed by the audience and closed after three performances. About this time Arne occupied houses in Great Queen Street, the Strand, Lincoln's Inn Fields, and Covent Garden. 
In the 1750-51 season the two theatres at Covent Garden and Drury Lane, with Arne and Boyce as their house composers, embarked on a period of fierce rivalry, epitomized by competing productions of 'Romeo and Juliet' on 28 September, that was to the long-term advantage of neither the theatres nor the composers. Arne was forced to turn to the Little Theatre, Haymarket, for the extremely short-lived opera 'Eliza' (29 May 1754), featuring Cecilia Arne; it was ordered to close after one performance, perhaps because the Little Theatre was not licensed for opera. His setting of David Mallet's patriotic masque 'Britannia' was performed at Drury Lane on 9 May 1755, but for a sustained residency at a theatre he had to return to the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin, in October of the same year. On this occasion he was joined by one of his numerous pupils, Charlotte Brent (1734-1802), and by his wife's niece Mary (Polly; Maria) Young (1749-1799) ['see under 'Young family] (later wife of the French violinist and composer Francois Hippolyte Barthelemon), as well as his wife, although their marriage was by this point clearly unstable. Cecilia's poor physical and perhaps mental health and Thomas's incessant philandering contributed to its fragility. In 1756, when the season came to a close, Arne returned to London with Charlotte Brent, who had become his mistress, and set up home in the Covent Garden area. Cecilia remained in Dublin with Polly Young until 1762 and, despite some financial assistance from Arne ($40 a year), was forced to teach singing and rely on the assistance of others in order to survive. 
Arne on the other hand was gaining income from collections of his (predominantly theatrical) music, both instrumental and vocal, published by John Walsh. He received an Oxford doctorate of music on 7 July 1759, and his relationship with Charlotte Brent proved as fruitful in professional and musical terms as earlier alliances had been. With John Beard as manager they were a successful partnership at Covent Garden, staging Arne's revision of John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' (10 October 1759) and from 28 November 1760 the influential 'Thomas and Sally', to a libretto by Isaac Bickerstaff. With this piece Arne at last fulfilled his ambition of pleasing a London audience with an all-sung comic opera in the Italian style. It also included perhaps the first use of the clarinet by an English composer. The opera 'Artaxerxes', first performed on 2 February 1762, was a pioneering Italianate 'opera seria' in English with an especially challenging part for Charlotte Brent. In it Arne moved away from the Handelian baroque style of vocal composition, and although Burney criticized him for this, Arne was followed by subsequent British composers. 'Artaxerxes' remained part of the operatic repertory in Britain well into the nineteenth century. He also contributed the music for 'Love in a Village', again by Isaac Bickerstaff, first performed on 8 December 1762, which set a fashion for pastiche opera, and which was captured in a painting by Johan Zoffany. His musical and commercial triumphs away from Covent Garden about this time included the acclaimed oratorio 'Judith', first performed at Drury Lane on 27 February 1761. It foreshadowed the un-Handelian style of 'Artaxerxes' and has been described as 'arguably the finest oratorio by an Englishman before [Edward Elgar's] 'The Dream of Gerontius'' (Holman and Gilman). A repeat performance at Covent Garden (26 February 1773) was the first occasion on which female sopranos were used in place of boys in oratorio choruses. 
Arne's fortunes took a turn for the worse during the mid-1760s. In addition to musical failures (including the lost opera in Italian 'L'olimpiade') and little demand from either Covent Garden or Drury Lane, in 1766 his sister Susannah died and on 16 October the same year Charlotte Brent married the violinist Thomas Pinto. He staged concerts of catches and glees (he was a professional member of the Noblemen and Gentlemen's Catch Club and the Madrigal Society) but struggled to afford his wife's meagre support payments; she threatened him with legal action in 1770. 
Arne continued to live around Covent Garden, moving from the Little Piazza to West Street to Bow Street, and produced works of great musical merit towards the end of his life. Despite their cool relationship, Garrick appointed Arne musical director for the Shakespeare festival at Stratford upon Avon in September 1769, for which Arne composed several pieces including 'An Ode upon Dedicating a Building to Shakespeare'. The success of the ode led Arne to renew his relationship with the theatres. He remained attached to the masque form, despite his own development of the opera having helped render it outdated: he contributed music to Garrick's version of John Dryden's 'King Arthur' (at Drury Lane, 13 December 1770), and received over $120 from Covent Garden for the masque 'The Fairy Prince' (1771) to a text by George Colman the elder. Music (now lost) for William Mason's 'Caractacus', performed at Covent Garden on 6 December 1776, received particular critical acclaim from contemporaries as prominent as Samuel Arnold. The theatrical version of 'Caractacus' was published with a preface and introduction by Arne in which he presented his ideas on the relationship between poetry and music and on the constitution of the orchestra. Even at this stage of his life he remained anxious to protect his copyrights, and in 1772 deposed for John Pyle, John Walsh's executor, when Pyle brought a case against the bookseller Robert Pyle for printing music on which Walsh held the copyright, including some of Arne's work. 
Arne was reconciled with his wife, Cecilia, in October 1777, but he was taken ill soon afterwards (his will is dated 6 December) and died of a 'spasmodic complaint' while conversing 'on some musical matter' ('DNB') on 5 March 1778 at a house in Bow Street, Covent Garden. He was buried, despite his Roman Catholicism, in the churchyard of St Paul's, Covent Garden. The will, proved on 16 March 1778, granted administration to his wife and 'only son' Michael. Among the effects disposed of on 8 April were a fine harpsichord and a variety of other musical instruments. The Covent Garden Theatre fire of 1808 destroyed many of his manuscripts, but several are held by the British Library. 
Arne inevitably found himself in Handel's shadow for much of his career, particularly with respect to the oratorio, but although influenced in some respects by Handel he was a versatile and prolific theatre specialist and an important innovator in dramatic genres. He in fact influenced and developed his style beyond Handel's output in terms of both musical language and orchestration. 
In his setting of 'God Save our Noble King' and especially in 'Rule, Britannia' Arne established two musical epitomes of British nationhood. However, he contributed a great deal to the legacy of English song and the development of English music in general far beyond his most famous composition. His Catholicism probably hindered his recognition in his own day, as unlike William Boyce or John Stanley he was never associated with the royal court; 'Alfred' was an isolated work, commissioned for a prince in opposition. 
The well-known Francesco Bartolozzi caricature of the composer wearing a sword while playing a chamber organ shows Arne to have had a slender physique with pointed features. He was evidently not of an easy temperament and may even be judged to have been cruel on occasion. Even if his 'probity' was not 'equal to his talents' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA') and his output was not consistently accomplished and well judged (particularly the texts he set), the 'ease and variety' (ibid.) of his style allowed him, at his best, effectively to blend simplicity of expression with technical mastery at an exceptionally high level. 


@@@@@


doc= 675


Arnold, Benedict (1741-1801), army officer, was born on 14 January 1741 in the river town of Norwich, Connecticut, the elder of two surviving children of six born to Benedict Arnold (died 1761), a cooper and merchant, and Hannah Waterman King, 'nee' Hannah Waterman (1706-1759), widow of Absalom King, a merchant. Much of the frequently cited evidence for Arnold's childhood is suspect, having been created after his notorious treason in 1780. His great-great-grandfather Benedict Arnold had succeeded Roger Williams as governor of the Rhode Island colony, but the Arnold family had struggled economically in the eighteenth century. By marrying the widow of a successful Norwich merchant his father had done fairly well until, following the deaths of two young daughters within a few weeks in 1753, he succumbed to alcoholism, and the family fortunes declined rapidly. From 1752 to 1755 Arnold attended grammar school at nearby Canterbury. After the deaths of his mother in 1759 and his father in 1761, the young Benedict was dependent on charitable cousins, who accepted him as an apprentice in the apothecary trade and aided him in establishing a business in the coastal town of New Haven in 1762. He was not tall, but strongly built. 
In New Haven, Arnold succeeded as a merchant sea captain, trading mainly in horses and other livestock with Canada and the West Indies. In 1766 he emerged in local politics when he led the New Haven Sons of Liberty against a former crewman who had informed against him for smuggling. At least twice during voyages he fought duels, and at home he earned a reputation as a free-spending roughneck. On 27 February 1767 he married Margaret Mansfield (1745-1775), daughter of the New Haven sheriff; they had three sons. Soon after his marriage he moved his sister Hannah from Norwich to look after his new family. Peggy Arnold, about whom little is known, was ensconced in a handsome waterfront house but seems to have been dominated by her resident sister-in-law. Soon her husband, who was away trading in the West Indies, was being denounced for whoring as well as smuggling. 
In 1774, as the imperial crisis peaked, Arnold was elected captain of an elite company of New Haven militia. At the news of war in Massachusetts, he seized powder and shot from the town magazine and marched his men without orders to Boston. In his travels to Canada, Arnold had seen the weakness of the British forts on Lake Champlain at Ticonderoga and Crown Point, and he soon persuaded the Massachusetts committee of safety to order him, with the rank of colonel, to capture the forts and bring their badly needed cannon to Boston. Although empowered to lead 400 men, Arnold had no troops when he met two rival parties. One was from Connecticut, and another was a large contingent of 'Green Mountain boys' led by Ethan Allen; they had similar plans. 
Arnold and Allen managed to co-operate in capturing the weakly defended Ticonderoga and its sister fort at Crown Point, but Arnold was soon embroiled in disputes with agents of both the Massachusetts and Connecticut colonies. After learning that his wife had died aged thirty, he returned to Boston. The new commander of American forces, George Washington, accepted his offer to command a force in the proposed attack on Canada. In eleven weeks Arnold led more than a thousand men from Boston up the Kennebec River, through the Maine wilderness, and down the fast-flowing Chaudiere to the St Lawrence, opposite the city of Quebec. Arriving exhausted, famished, and in rags, they had lost a third of their number on the march and had covered more than 500 miles. Help from sympathetic Canadians restored them, and they joined the main force under a former British officer, Richard Montgomery, who had advanced down Lake Champlain and taken Montreal. With a combined force barely larger than the garrison of Quebec under the British governor Guy Carleton, who declined their summons to surrender, Montgomery and Arnold attacked the city at night in a snowstorm at the end of December. The attack failed, Montgomery was killed, and Arnold was wounded in the left leg. From that point the American invasion disintegrated until melting ice in the river allowed a British fleet with reinforcements to arrive in early May 1776. Meanwhile, the American congress in Philadelphia had promoted Arnold brigadier-general, though he was no longer in command of the American army in Canada. As British troops, Canadian militia, and their Indian allies, aided by an epidemic of smallpox, swept the American remnants southwards, Arnold resumed an active role. Determined to stop Carleton's advance up the Champlain corridor, he worked furiously through the summer to build a small fleet of vessels at Ticonderoga. Early in October, Arnold's fleet met the much larger and more heavily armed British flotilla at Valcour Island, at the northern end of the lake. Defeated, Arnold managed to slip away with several American vessels after nightfall and in a running fight to reach shelter at Crown Point. 
Arnold's first two campaigns were military failures, but they may well have delayed a British attempt to attack the rebellion from Canada until 1777, buying a vital year to avert total defeat to the south, where the war under Washington for the most part had gone badly. But Arnold's aggressive, contentious behaviour had made enemies, whose accusations, mostly false or exaggerated, had reached congress. In Connecticut on his way to Philadelphia to answer various charges, he led a militia force against a damaging British raid on the American base at Danbury. His horse shot from under him, Arnold barely escaped with his life. Informed of his latest heroism, congress promoted him major-general and brushed aside the charges, but Arnold, with Washington's support, still pressed for a restoration of the seniority he had lost by belated promotion. 
The American congress, sensitive to its authority over the army, rebuffed Arnold's clumsy attempts to lobby the delegates, and ordered him back to the field. Disgusted, Arnold submitted his resignation just as Washington was asking that he be sent to the northern army, which faced a major British attack from Canada. Arnold's exact role in the Saratoga campaign of 1777, which ended with the capitulation of a British field army and a Franco-American alliance, is disputed among historians, but ample evidence shows that it was important, perhaps vital, to American victory. In August, soon after his arrival at Albany, Arnold led a large detachment in driving off a secondary force of British regulars, loyalists, and Indians attacking from the west, down the Mohawk valley. Returned to the main army, he goaded its commander, Horatio Gates, into a more active defence by leading attacks on advancing British forces, under Lieutenant-General John Burgoyne, near Saratoga. In the last of these he suffered a severe wound in the left leg, shattered under his fallen horse. While Gates claimed all credit for the British defeat, Arnold languished in an Albany hospital, often in great pain and rebuffing medical advice to amputate his wounded leg; he acquired a permanent limp. Burgoyne himself blamed his defeat on Arnold, and many military historians have agreed. 
Arnold's next posting led directly to personal disaster. As military governor of Philadelphia, recently under British occupation, Arnold faced many temptations and succumbed to most. In a city sharply divided by politics, where most of the leading families had collaborated with the British occupation, Arnold led an active social life, courting and on 8 April 1779 marrying the beautiful young Margaret (Peggy) Shippen (1760-1804), from one of these families: they had four sons and one daughter. He used his position to make money, and was infuriated when his enemies accused him of corruption. Support from Washington seemed to be wavering, and in May 1779 Arnold secretly sent a message to the British commander, Henry Clinton, in New York, offering his services under the codename Monk to end the war. 
In fact a majority in congress had protected Arnold from the vindictive Pennsylvania government by referring the charges against him to Washington for trial by court martial. But Arnold, embittered by his crippling and still painful wound, and by what he regarded as mistreatment at the hands of politicians, could see only his many grievances. For more than a year he supplied information to Clinton and negotiated for a large reward should he find some way to give vital help to the British cause. His chance came in late summer 1780 when Washington agreed to his request to command at West Point, where the Hudson River, 50 miles north of Manhattan, cuts through the mountainous highlands. The fortifications at and below West Point anchored Washington's position, shadowing the British base in New York city and restricting naval movement up the Hudson. Arnold, once in command, proposed to deliver West Point and its garrison to a British attack. His price, accepted by Clinton, was $20,000 for success, and half that amount in case of failure. In 1780, shortly after joining the British, Arnold published an apologia claiming that he had never supported independence, only the redress of colonial grievances, and that he could not continue to support the American cause after the alliance with France, the enemy of the protestant faith. The evidence did not support his claims. 
Major John Andre, a popular young officer on Clinton's staff, had been Arnold's contact from the outset, and it was Andre, thinly disguised as Mr John Anderson, who travelled to meet Arnold in late September 1780. Returning to New York, Andre was captured by American militia, who sent papers found on him to local commanders; the commanders, unsuspecting, informed Arnold, giving him time to flee on board a British warship in the Hudson. Andre, captured in civilian clothes, was tried by American court martial as a spy and hanged. Arnold was awarded $6315 and a pension of $360 per annum and was made a British brigadier-general. 
Arnold's treason, along with military defeats in the South, shocked supporters of the faltering American cause. Later in 1780 Arnold led a British raid into the Chesapeake, where he routed the Virginia militia and burnt ships, tobacco, and munitions as well as forcing Governor Thomas Jefferson to flee his capital. In the next year he raided eastern Connecticut, near his birthplace, sacking and burning the port town of New London and letting his men massacre the garrison of its fort in one of the ugliest incidents of the war. Mrs Arnold, who feigned innocence of his plot, had soon joined him within British lines, but the Arnolds were generally shunned by both British and loyalist society. After the British surrender at Yorktown in October 1781, they sailed for England at the end of the year. 
The last twenty years of Arnold's life saw frantic activity and constant frustration. Although paid more than $6000 for his defection, with small pensions for his wife and children and commissions for his sons, he pressed frequently for increased compensation from the crown. Responding to his pleas, Sir Henry Clinton approached the younger Pitt on Arnold's behalf, but without result. Arnold plunged most of his capital into a commercial venture in Saint John, New Brunswick, Canada, but this ended in loss by fire in July 1788 -- the insurers, suspecting he had caused the fire, refused to pay -- and numerous lawsuits dragging on into 1790. In 1791 he returned to England. In July 1792 he fought a duel with the earl of Lauderdale, who in the House of Lords, criticizing the duke of Richmond, had referred to Arnold's 'apostasy'. With the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars, Arnold sailed directly into the West Indian danger zone, arriving in Guadeloupe in 1794 just as Sir Charles Grey was fighting off a French republican attempt to regain control of the island. Captured by the French and threatened with execution, Arnold escaped in a boat to Grey, whose staff he joined as a volunteer, though Grey declined his offer to serve as senior brigadier-general. Arnold returned to England ill and financially hard-pressed. His final venture, in privateering, failed like all the others. His family impoverished, his reputation ruined, depressed, and his once powerful physique shattered by asthma, gout, and dropsy, he died at his residence in Gloucester Place, Portman Square, London, on 14 June 1801, and was buried on 21 June in the crypt of St Mary's, Battersea. He left two sons by his first marriage (a third, Benedict, had died in 1796), four sons and a daughter by his second, an illegitimate son (John Sage) in Canada, and to his widow an estate consisting mainly of debts. 
Vain, arrogant, and tactless, Arnold was also a brave and inspiring military leader. He was one of many who changed sides during the war, but to Americans, his name has since 1780 been synonymous with treason. Yet had he died at Saratoga in 1777, Arnold might stand next to Washington in the pantheon of American heroes of the war of independence. 


@@@@@


doc= 676


Arnold, Cornelius (b. 1714, d. in or after 1758?), poet, was born on 13 March 1714 and educated in London at Merchant Taylors' School from 1724 to 1728. Nothing is known of his parentage, and little of his later career. The one fact alleged by Baker in 'Biographia dramatica' (1782 edn, 2.7), that Arnold had been an usher at his old school, is untrue. In his later years he served as beadle to the Worshipful Company of Distillers. The list of over 250 subscribers to the collected edition of his works, 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1757), includes the lord mayor of London and more than a dozen aldermen, suggesting that Arnold's milieu was the City and its livery companies. The names of Francis Hayman, David Garrick, and others indicate acquaintance with the theatre. One fifth of all subscribers were clergymen. 
The earliest datable item in this collection of 'trifling Productions... of my leisure Hours', a short piece on the battle of Fontenoy (1745), suggests that Arnold came relatively late to poetry. It also gives expression to a recurring theme in Arnold's verse: strong patriotism manifested in hostility towards France. Shortly after the earthquake which struck London on 8 February 1750 he composed a poem in blank verse on the sufferings of the poor, 'Distress: a Poetical Essay' ([1750?]; second edn, published by the author, 1751). The 'Monthly Review', however, found it 'but an indifferent performance' (6, 1752, 156). His next publication, 'Commerce: a Poem' (1751), is replete with fulsome compliments to Frederick, prince of Wales; a footnote in 'Poems on Several Occasions' explains that the prince approved the poem, but died on the day its author was to have been introduced to him. Arnold's next poem, 'The Mirror: a Poetical Essay, in the Manner of Spenser', was dedicated to Garrick, again with unfortunate timing, for it was published on 15 November 1755, in the middle of riots provoked by the appearance of 'French' dancers at Drury Lane. Imitating the stanza and the archaisms of Spenser's 'Faerie Queene', it describes how Death invades a lord mayor's feast, and carries off a number of well-known figures, including Garrick and William Murray, soon to become Lord Mansfield. There is much satire on contemporary (that is, French) fashions in female dress. Arnold's oriental tragedy, 'Osman', was never performed, but occupies the first half of 'Poems on Several Occasions'. The entire volume is dedicated to Lord Blakeney, patron of the Laudable Order of Antigallicans, recently returned from his heroic defence of Minorca. The second edition of this collection, promised for the ensuing winter (sig. a2), never appeared, and it has been assumed that Arnold died about this time. However, the 26-line poem 'On the asylum for orphans and deserted girls. By Mr. Arnold', which appeared in the 'London Magazine' in June 1758 (27.307), shows compassion towards distress and promotes anti-Gallic patriotism in a manner which suggests that it came from Arnold's pen and, therefore, that he died not earlier than 1758. 


@@@@@


doc= 677


Arnold, John (1735/6-1799), watch and chronometer maker, was the son of John Arnold (1702-1776), clockmaker, of Bodmin, Cornwall. He was apprenticed to his father and probably worked briefly for his uncle William Arnold, a gunsmith, before going to the Netherlands about 1755. There he improved his knowledge of clockmaking and learned German, a language which later proved useful to him in the Hanoverian court. He returned to England about 1757 and apparently earned his living as an itinerant mechanic until he repaired a repeating watch for William McGuire of St Albans, who was so impressed by his skill that he lent Arnold the money to set himself up in business in Westminster. He opened his first shop at Devereux Court, Strand, in May 1762, moving in 1769 to St James's Street, and in 1771 to 2 Adam Street, Adelphi. Arnold and his wife, Margaret (1743/4-1789), had a son, John Roger Arnold, born on 13 February 1769; he was apprenticed to his father and succeeded him in business. 
In 1764 Arnold was introduced at court and presented George III with a miniature watch set in a ring, for which he received $500, the first of several payments for royal services. In 1767 Arnold took up the manufacture of marine timekeepers, as recently developed by John Harrison. Three which he supplied for James Cook's second voyage of 1772 did not perform well, but his later improvements bore fruit and by simplifying their design he considerably reduced their price. He also made several fine regulator clocks for observatory use, besides other domestic clocks and watches. Arnold took a shop at 102 Cornhill, in the City of London, in 1783, and became a member of the Clockmakers' Company the same year, being admitted to the livery in 1796. 
Arnold is generally credited with having originated the helical spring and terminal curves for which he obtained patents in 1775 and 1782 respectively. The specification of 1775 included the first patent in any country for a compensation balance. His celebrated watch no. 36 was his first to incorporate such a balance and astonished the astronomers at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, with its fine timekeeping. Arnold and his supporter the hydrographer Alexander Dalrymple noted in a published account of the watch's trial that they had coined a new term, 'chronometer', especially for it, the first use of that term in its modern sense. The patent of 1782 includes a form of spring detent escapement, though it seems likely that this design was taken by Arnold from an earlier version by Thomas Earnshaw, described to Arnold the previous year. Nevertheless, Arnold's reputation as one of Britain's most significant chronometer makers rests on the originality of his designs. His timekeepers were sold to discriminating private customers, as well as to the British Admiralty and the East India Company. Mercer's description of Arnold as 'shy and perhaps a little nervous' (p. 145) is contradicted by contemporary accounts. Thomas Mouat, a Shetlander who met Arnold when he was travelling to London in 1775 with a minister, reported 'Our companion happened to be the famous Arnold, who made a watch in the stone of the King's ring: his conversation was animated, blustering and much adorned with oaths, which were too frequent for Mr Stewart's ease' (Bamford, 108). In a letter to a client in 1786 the instrument dealer and agent J. H. Magellan referred to Arnold as the great talker -- 'le grand bavard' (Leopold, 500) -- and William Ludlam, Lucasian professor of mathematics at Trinity College, Cambridge, remarked in 1784, 'from accounts I had, I once thought he was one of those people who talk much and do little, but since I have seen what he has actually done I have far different thoughts' ('Report', 96-7). 
From about 1783 Arnold took his son as an apprentice and into partnership, trading as John Arnold & Son, and in 1792 sent him to Paris to work with the esteemed clockmaker Abraham Louis Breguet until the revolution obliged him to return to London. From 1779 Arnold ran his workshops and resided at Well Hall, Eltham, and after his retirement in 1796 his son continued the business at the Cornhill shop. Arnold died at Well Hall on 25 August 1799 and was buried in the parish churchyard at Chislehurst, Kent, with his wife, who predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 678


Arnold, Joseph (1782-1818), naturalist and surgeon, was born on 28 December 1782 at Beccles, Suffolk, the fourth son of Edward Arnold, a tanner, and his wife, Hannah. He was apprenticed there to Dr Willing Crowfoot, surgeon and apothecary, and attended Edinburgh University from 1803, graduating MD in 1807. His interest in natural history led to communications to the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. He served as a Royal Navy surgeon from 1808 to 1816. In January 1815 he sailed as surgeon on the 'Northampton', bound with female convicts to Botany Bay. He set off to return by way of Batavia in the 'Indefatigable', of Boston, but lost many of his journals and his collections of insects from South America, Australia, and the Strait of Sunda when the ship caught fire on 22 October 1815. Stranded in Java, he was befriended by Stamford Raffles, who assisted his return home in 1816 and provided him with an introduction to Sir Joseph Banks, president of the Royal Society. His scientific interests and lack of independent means led Arnold to accept Banks's offer of an appointment, already declined by William Jackson Hooker as too dangerous, as naturalist to Raffles, then governor of Sumatra. 
After extensive preparatory study in London, Arnold arrived at Bencoolen on 22 March 1818. His second excursion to Passumah produced the discovery of the remarkable plant without stem or leaves named, after the governor and himself, 'Rafflesia arnoldii', which is parasitic upon a species of wild vine and has a huge flower 3 feet in diameter, and 15 pounds in weight. Arnold made a rich collection of shells and fossils, but was struck down by fever (probably malaria) at Padang, Sumatra, and died on 26 July 1818. Raffles, recording his death, described him as 'devoted to science and the acquisition of knowledge, and aiming only at usefulness'. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1815, and bequeathed his collection of shells and fossils to the society. 


@@@@@


doc= 679


Arnold, Matthew (1822-1888), poet, writer, and inspector of schools, was born at Laleham-on-Thames, Middlesex, on 24 December 1822, the eldest son and second of the nine surviving children of the Revd Thomas Arnold (1795-1842) and Mary Penrose Arnold (1791-1873). Thomas Arnold had been a fellow of Oriel College, Oxford, and then a schoolmaster before being appointed headmaster of Rugby School in 1828; he became regius professor of modern history at Oxford in 1841, a year before he died of a heart attack, as his eldest son was to do forty-six years later. In 1820 Thomas Arnold had married Mary Penrose, whose family came from Cornwall; she remained a constant correspondent and close confidante of her son until her death. 
Family ties always formed the core of Arnold's emotional life. He enjoyed a happy childhood at Laleham and Rugby and thereafter remained particularly devoted to his elder sister, Jane Martha (1821-1899), known as K, who later married the liberal politician William Edward Forster (1818-1886). From 1834 the family spent much time at Fox How, their holiday house in the Lake District, where William Wordsworth was a neighbour (and later a strong literary influence on Arnold). After a brief spell at Winchester College, Arnold entered Rugby School in September 1837. A fanciful and relatively idle boy, he seems to have survived the experience of being a pupil at his father's school without ever really conforming to its strenuous ethos. In 1840 he gained his first poetical honours with a prize poem entitled 'Alaric at Rome', and in 1841 he won a scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford, a college then just entering its great period of intellectual and worldly distinction. He formed several lasting friendships while an undergraduate, above all that with his fellow poet Arthur Hugh Clough, and in 1843 he won the Newdigate prize for poetry with his ode 'Cromwell'. But he idled away much of his time in pleasant pursuits rather than applying himself to his studies. As his brother later observed, 'he read a little with the reading men, hunted a little with the fast men, and dressed a little with the dressy men' (Murray, 52). At the end of 1844 he achieved only a second-class degree in 'literae humaniores'. Friends of the family tut-tutted and observed that it was fortunate that his father had not lived to see this, but in 1845, after a brief spell as a master at Rugby, Arnold characteristically recovered by winning a fellowship at Oriel, the college where both his father and John Henry Newman had been fellows and where Clough was already in residence. In the first part of the nineteenth century, such fellowships were as much prizes as the initial steps in a scholarly career, and Arnold was now able to indulge his passion for poetry and his taste for travel. 
Already a keen Francophile, Arnold took himself to Paris, largely, it seems, to follow the career of the French tragedienne Rachel, all of whose performances of the French classics in the winter of 1846-7 he attended; he also made a pilgrimage to visit the author George Sand. He thereafter retained a close familiarity with French life, and its culture and politics were frequently invoked as models in his later literary and social criticism. In the course of the early 1840s he seems to have lost his faith in the conventional Anglican Christianity in which he had been reared, though he is unusual among early- and mid-Victorian figures in appearing not to have suffered any great emotional turmoil in breaking from religious orthodoxy. He remained deeply responsive to certain forms of religious emotion, and he became increasingly concerned to salvage what was of value in Christianity in general and in the cultural inheritance of Anglicanism in particular from the general decline of belief in biblical literalism and supernatural theology. 
In 1847 Arnold became personal secretary to a leading whig politician, Lord Lansdowne, an undemanding post that brought him into the world of high society and allowed him ample time to cultivate the gifts he was discovering in himself as a poet. In 1849 he brought out his first slim volume, ''The Strayed Reveller' and other Poems'; it was published under the pseudonym A, for fear, it was said, of bringing his father's name into disrepute. In fact, his family was surprised at the evidence of seriousness, yearning, and grief the book displayed. His poems, of which there were further volumes in 1852 and 1853, spoke of unhappy searchings for a calm place within himself, for the years 1847 to 1851 were Arnold's 'Sturm und Drang' period, vividly recorded in his moody, playful, confessional letters to Clough. Falling in love is notoriously a source of both pain and poetry, and Arnold would seem to have fallen in love twice in these years. The Marguerite of his love poems would appear to be art's tribute to the object of the first of these passions: he writes intriguingly to Clough from Switzerland in 1848 that he intends to 'linger one day at the Hotel Bellevue for the sake of the blue eyes of one of its inmates' ('Letters, 1829-1859', 119). She may have been a young Swiss or French woman, or she may never have existed; the fragmentary evidence has teased and titillated biographers ever since. Then, in 1850, he met and fell in love with Frances Lucy (Flu) Wightman (1825-1901), daughter of a prominent judge. Her father objected to her marrying the dandyish man about town who had only a small stipend and a slim volume to his name. Arnold needed to obtain a substantial income and prospects. Through the good offices of Lord Lansdowne he was appointed an inspector of schools in April 1851, and on 10 June he and Flu were married. It appears to have been a close, companionable marriage, and he and his wife had six children: Thomas (1852-1868), Trevenen William 
(Budge; 1853-1872)
, Richard (1855-1908), Lucy (1858-1934), Eleanor (1861-1936), and Basil (1866-1868). Arnold proved to be an exceptionally affectionate and expressive father, whose spirits were permanently darkened by the early deaths of three of his sons. After taking a series of rented houses, the couple settled at Chester Square in Belgravia, London, in 1858; they lived at Byron House, Harrow on the Hill, Middlesex, from 1868 until 1873, when they moved to Pains Hill Cottage at Cobham in Surrey where they remained until Arnold's death. 
Almost all of the poetry for which Arnold is best remembered was largely written (if not in all cases published) by the time he was thirty. In addition to the title-poems, his first three volumes included 'The Forsaken Merman', 'Tristram and Iseult', 'The Buried Life', the 'Switzerland' sequence of love lyrics, 'Stanzas in memory of the author of 'Obermann'', 'Sohrab and Rustum', and 'The Scholar-Gipsy'. Even his two most celebrated verses which were published later, 'Dover Beach' and 'Stanzas from the Grande Chartreuse', were almost certainly written in the early 1850s. Of his later (often longer) poems, only 'Thyrsis', his elegy for Clough, written in the early 1860s, has found much favour with critics. Arnold in fact wrote very little poetry in the last thirty-five years of his life: part of the poignancy of his biography comes from the fact that he never ceased to have the sensibilities and yearnings of a poet, though he largely ceased to write poetry. He lived the greater part of his adult life knowing that, as the prefatory poem to his 1867 collection put it, 'the Muse be gone away' (Arnold, 'Persistency of poetry', 'Poems', 578). The first collected edition of his poems appeared in two volumes in 1869 and was reprinted several times, with only very minor additions to his corpus being made in the last two decades of his life. 
A special place in Arnold's poetic 'oeuvre' is occupied by his most accomplished long poem, 'Empedocles on Etna', not only because it is a brilliant dramatization of his own internal conflicts but also because he thrust additional significance on the poem by withdrawing it almost immediately after its first publication in 1852, only permitting its republication in 1867 at the public request of Robert Browning. In form, 'Empedocles on Etna', subtitled 'A Dramatic Poem', consists of long discursive monologues by its three 'characters'. These 'exchanges' are dominated by the moody, despairing Empedocles himself, who attempts, with only intermittent conviction, to represent in an attractive light the stoicism necessary to confront the increasing burden of joyless life which comes with maturity. But he is racked by a 'secret and unfollowed vein of woe' as he contemplates his dwindling capacity to live for the moment and take unalloyed aesthetic pleasure from life. As the claims of the rival philosophies of life reach an impasse, Empedocles shakes himself free from the confining toils of reflection long enough to commit one last, intense existential act, and throws himself into the crater of the volcano. While critics have continued to disagree about the significance of Empedocles' suicide for the interpretation of the poem as a whole, it is hard to resist seeing it as further, oblique, evidence of Arnold's own inner struggles and his ambivalence about resolving to shoulder as best he could the only partially rewarding burdens of mundane existence. 
In the course of the 1850s Arnold tried various poetic experiments which, it now seems clear, were forced against the grain of his essentially lyric and elegiac poetical inclinations. In an attempt to escape the crippling introspection of modern thought, he took his subjects from Norse sagas and Greek history. The first issued in his rather leaden epic 'Balder Dead' (damned forever by one wag as 'Balder dash'), the second in his attempt to reproduce the grandeur of ancient tragedy in his verse-drama 'Merope' (1858). The latter has some of the smooth coolness and clear lines of an alabaster statue, but, as with most things in alabaster, one is constantly aware that one is looking at a reproduction. 
Although the 1867 volume 'New Poems' is generally thought to include some pieces that fell below the standards of his earlier volumes, it did contain a few poems which have since become among his best-known pieces, notably 'Dover Beach' (probably written as early as 1851, though the evidence is inconclusive) and the thematically linked but poetically more discursive 'Stanzas from the Grande Chartreuse' (largely composed in 1852). The organizing trope of 'Dover Beach' is the way in which the retreat of the tide-driven sea suggests the withdrawing of 'the Sea of Faith', a favoured Arnoldian metaphor. The poem broods on the predicament of human life in a godless world: '
And we are here as on a darkling plain 

Swept with confused alarms of struggle and flight, 

Where ignorant armies clash by night. 
('Poems', 257)' 'Stanzas from the Grande Chartreuse' similarly meditates on the impossibility of ever again inhabiting an animating faith in the way the imagined occupants of the monastery did, leaving the poet '
Wandering between two worlds, one dead, 

The other powerless to be born. 
(ibid., 305)' It is a nice question just how far the poem's strenuously undeceived stoicism involves a certain condescension to the credulity of that 'age of faith' whose passing it ostensibly laments. One of the most perceptive among Arnold's contemporary critics, R. H. Hutton, unfavourably contrasted 'the true humility of the yearning for faith' with Arnold's 'grand air of tearful Virgilian regret' (Collini, 41). In much of Arnold's poetry one sees the disconsolate Romantic trying to turn himself into the resolute Stoic: his partial success has a pathos of its own, though we may wonder whether it is the small element of failure or the larger degree of success which is the sadder sight. Yet there is a kind of self-indulgence here, too: perhaps genuine stoicism does not need to keep calling attention to its achievement in this way. 
Looking back in 1869, Arnold concluded that 'my poems represent, on the whole, the main movement of mind of the last quarter of a century' ('Letters, 1866-1870', 347); certainly, they have been seen as striking testimony to the corrosion of 'Faith' by 'Doubt'. But this theme is, in reality, only part of a wider poetic preoccupation and tone. The dominant note of his best poetry is reflection on loss, frustration, sadness. It is important to emphasize 'reflection' because his poems nearly always are, even if not explicitly, second-order reflections on the nature or meaning of certain kinds of experience rather than expressions or records of that experience itself. When he spoke, famously, of modern poetry as 'the dialogue of the mind with itself' ('Preface' to 'Poems', 1853; 'Prose Works', 1.1), he coined a phrase which irresistibly asks to be applied to his own verse. At the same time, and in a spirit with which later generations have become more rather than less familiar, the poetry frequently expresses a desperate, eternally self-defeating desire to escape from this unending round of intellection, from being 'prisoners of our consciousness' (Arnold, 'Empedocles on Etna', 'Poems', 200). Correspondingly, those who have found Arnold's poetry unsympathetic have been inclined to note that its chief defect lies precisely in the way that it arises too exclusively from a 'movement of 'mind''. 
Arnold worked as a school inspector for thirty-five years. At the beginning of this period there were, strictly speaking, no state schools at any level. The limit of public involvement with education was a small annual grant made to various elementary schools, usually denominational in origin and character, which conformed to certain minimal standards. A small number of well-educated gentlemen, often with scholarly or literary inclinations which they continued to pursue, were employed to inspect and report on these schools. Initially, Arnold was responsible for inspecting nonconformist schools across a broad swathe of central England. He spent many dreary hours during the 1850s in railway waiting-rooms and small-town hotels, and longer hours still in listening to children reciting their lessons and parents reciting their grievances. But this also meant that he, among the first generation of the railway age, travelled across more of England than any man of letters had ever done. Although his duties were later confined to smaller areas around London, he knew the society of provincial England better than most of the metropolitan authors and politicians of the day. 
However, the work involved, as Arnold frequently complained, much drudgery ('I am now at the work I dislike most in the world', he wrote to his mother in 1863, 'looking over and marking examination papers'; 'Letters, 1860-1865', 176). Not only was the work itself demanding and only intermittently rewarding, but he also found himself frequently at odds with his political masters. In particular he protested, publicly and courageously, at the system of 'payment by results' introduced by the liberal politician Robert Lowe in 1862 in order to curb public expenditure. Although two of Arnold's reports on foreign schools proved to be of such weight as to warrant republication in book form, his official career was, perhaps partly as a result of incurring official displeasure, undistinguished, with promotions coming late and seldom: he was granted the title of senior inspector in 1870 and that of chief inspector only in 1884, two years before his retirement. A collection of his annual reports, 'Reports on Elementary Schools, 1852-1882', was published in the year after his death. 
The monotony of school-inspecting was interrupted by several extended tours of Europe to report on educational arrangements there. A five-month visit to France in 1859 on behalf of the Newcastle commission was particularly formative for Arnold's later social criticism, as well as enabling him to meet Charles-Augustin Sainte-Beuve, the living critic he most admired. His report was published in 1861 as 'The Popular Education of France' (the introduction to which was later reprinted separately under the title 'Democracy'). He made another such tour on behalf of the Taunton commission in 1865 (leading to the publication in 1868 of his 'Schools and Universities on the Continent'), and in 1885-6 he went at the behest of the education department to report on elementary education in Germany, Switzerland, and France. 
In February 1856 Arnold was elected a member of the Athenaeum; thereafter several of his most enduring works (as well as a great many of his letters) were composed in its library, where he sought refuge from his job and his growing family. His inspecting duties were also no barrier to his being elected in May 1857 to the (largely honorary) professorship of poetry at Oxford, an office which he held for ten years and which obliged him to deliver three lectures a year. Arnold was the first unordained holder of the post and the first to deliver his lectures in English rather than Latin. Several of the essays with which he was to make his mark as a literary and social critic were first delivered as his professorial lectures. 
Arnold's first published prose took the form of the preface to his 'Poems' of 1853, in which he attempted to rationalize his withdrawal of 'Empedocles on Etna' on the grounds of its (and most modern poetry's) morbid preoccupation with self. He called, instead, for a return to the impersonality and 'grand style' of the ancients. He pursued a similar theme in his inaugural lecture as professor of poetry at Oxford in 1857 which also asserted 'the absolute, the enduring interest of Greek literature, and, above all, of Greek poetry' (Arnold, 'On the modern element in literature', 'Prose Works', 1.37). The classical authors were the constant companions of Arnold's mind, and just how far he was from taking a merely scholarly attitude towards them was revealed by his first extended venture into criticism in his three lectures published in 1861 under the title 'On Translating Homer'. Here, taking the translation of the 'Iliad' by F. W. Newman, brother of the theologian, as his main target, Arnold pilloried the tendency of learning to degenerate into antiquarianism and pedantry. What was needed in its place, he insisted, was a responsiveness to the literary properties of the poetry and what he called a form of critical 'tact': 'to handle these matters [of poetical criticism] properly there is needed a poise so perfect that the least overweight in any direction tends to destroy the balance. Temper destroys it, a crotchet destroys it, even erudition may destroy it' ('On Translating Homer', ibid., 1.174). 
Arnold was almost forty years old before he published his first essay in one of the great Victorian periodicals of general culture, then in their heyday. It was a genre which was to prove well suited to his conversable mind, and all but one of his later books began life as essays in these journals. In the first half of the 1860s he wrote several substantial essays on European writers and on the place of literature in modern society; they were collected as 'Essays in Criticism' in 1865, a work which has remained one of the bench-marks of the tradition of English literary criticism. Its opening essay, 'The function of criticism at the present time', was a manifesto for a conception of criticism that is more than purely literary -- for criticism as 'the disinterested endeavour to learn and propagate the best that is known and thought in the world' ('Prose Works', 3.270). Its companion essay, 'The literary influence of academies', elaborated an ideal of how critical standards could, if given a kind of cultural centrality, operate beneficially on all the writing and thinking of a society. Here, he was not really arguing (as has subsequently often been assumed) that English intellectual life exhibited such a low level and a lack of standards because it did not have an academy on the model of the Academie Francaise, but rather that, because of the qualities manifested in its already low level and lack of standards, it could never understand the virtues of having an academy in the first place. 
These essays constitute Arnold's earliest performances in what has been described as 'the unpopular office of detector-general of the intellectual failings of his own nation' ('DNB'). In order to show up and correct the eccentricity of English taste, he constantly invokes the wider frame of judgement provided by comparison, whether with the landmarks of other European literatures or, above all, with the towering presences of the classics. This tactic, especially when combined with certain Gallic affectations, did not always win the hearts of his English readers. (Some of these reservations resurfaced in later descriptions of him as 'England's foremost French writer'.) But Arnold thrived on controversy, and throughout the 1860s he waged a kind of playful guerrilla warfare on behalf of the conception of criticism he felt to be lacking in England. Some readers took offence at his raillery, but although he several times had occasion to make mock apologies for what he called his 'vivacities', it was essential to his purpose that his writing should, by turns, provoke, tease, and charm. 
Arnold looked to another source to leaven the stolidity of English sensibilities in the little book he published in 1867 entitled 'On the Study of Celtic Literature'. He was drawn to the lushly imaginative and sentimental strains of Irish literary tradition (he was also more sympathetic than most of his English contemporaries to the economic and ecclesiastical grievances of Catholic Ireland), and his work encouraged the founding of the first chair of Celtic at Oxford in 1877. In considering his accomplishments as a literary critic, however, one is bound to be struck by the fact that, though living through one of the most abundantly creative periods of the English novel, he never wrote any critical essays on this genre, apart from a late essay on Lev Tolstoy (which was chiefly an assessment of his moral teaching). In this, as in other respects, his work as a critic remained curiously backward-looking, always more alert to the ways in which the great heritage of European literature might animate and discipline contemporary sensibilities than it was to the innovations and expressive possibilities of the present. 
It was Arnold's professional involvement with the question of the weakness of educational provision in England by contrast to that of her leading continental neighbours that first drew him into the arena of social criticism, but this soon broadened into a consideration of the distinctive features of modern societies more generally. He focused in particular on the question of how increasingly democratic societies were to sustain those cultural and political activities which had in the past depended on the existence of a wealthy and leisured aristocracy. 'The difficulty for democracy', as he put it in the introduction to his 1861 report that was later reprinted as a separate essay, 'is how to find and keep high ideals' (Arnold, 'The popular education of France', 'Prose Works', 2.17). His criticisms of official educational policy in the early 1860s were founded on his conviction that education was too important to this task of propagating 'high ideals' to be left to private provision, though at times he could seem less concerned with the merits of a state system in its own right, and more with the way it instantiated an expansive conception of the state as the embodiment of the national life more generally. 
Literary and social criticism were never far apart in Arnold, and his classic essay, 'The function of criticism at the present time', was as much addressed to the dominance in English public life of complacent notions of 'muddling through' and of the superiority of 'the practical man' as it was to more purely literary topics. In response, James Fitzjames Stephen, most pugnacious of Victorian controversialists, attacked what he saw as Arnold's airs of superiority and fastidiousness, provoking Arnold to reply in 1867 in the earliest of the essays which were to make up 'Culture and Anarchy', which was published as a book in 1869. It is for this work, more than any other, that Arnold is widely known today. 
The book, subtitled 'An Essay in Political and Social Criticism', is a sustained attempt to demonstrate how the consideration of a wide range of topical issues could be refocused and enriched by scrutinizing them from the perspective of what Arnold called 'culture' or, as he famously put it, 'the best that has been thought and said'. By this, he did not mean some passive body of art and learning whose natural home is the museum and the library, nor simply a set of high-status activities encased in an aura of snobbery and pretentiousness. He was talking, rather, about an ideal of human life, a standard of excellence and fullness for the development of our capacities -- aesthetic, intellectual, and moral. Such standards, he claimed, had all too little currency in public debate in England, and much of the book is devoted to an analysis of what he saw as some of the enduring characteristics of English life -- its complacency, its moralism, its overvaluing of the practical. As part of this analysis he elaborated his account of the three main social classes under the labels 'Barbarians' (the aristocracy), 'Philistines' (the middle class), and 'Populace' (the working class). The first and last of these terms are in effect classical allusions, while the middle one is, of course, biblical; these two sources always remained the chief reference-points of his thought and sensibility. Arnold also memorably sketched what he saw as the two elements needing to be combined for full human flourishing, namely Hellenism and Hebraism. 'The governing idea of Hellenism is 'spontaneity of consciousness'; that of Hebraism, 'strictness of conscience'' (Arnold, 'Culture and Anarchy', 1869, 'Prose Works', 5.165). He proposed that many of the defects of what he called 'the bad civilisation of the English middle class' could be traced to an overdevelopment of the qualities embodied in Hebraism at the expense of those represented by Hellenism. 
In these ways, 'Culture and Anarchy' was an attack on English parochialism and -- in a term, borrowed from Heinrich Heine, which Arnold did much to make familiar -- philistinism. But it also constituted a critique of the individualism which dominated Victorian social and political thinking, and thus of the devotion to what Arnold mocked as the creed of 'doing as one likes'. The popular liberalism founded on such values was, he argued, incapable of rising to 'the notion, so familiar on the Continent and to antiquity, of the 'State' -- the nation in its collective and corporate character' (Arnold, 'Culture and Anarchy', 'Prose Works', 5.117). His high regard for the ideal of the state as the expression of the 'best self' of the national community has led him to be attacked as a conservative and even authoritarian thinker, though this characterization requires the neglect of many of his other, no less fundamental allegiances. Politically, his leanings were always towards an enlarged liberalism, and he liked to describe himself as 'a Liberal of the future' ('The future of liberalism', 1880, ibid., 9.138), which did not prevent him from being a more or less constant critic of liberal measures in the present. Certainly, no writer who was as severe as Arnold was on the deforming power of inequality and who referred to the French Revolution as 'the greatest, the most animating event in history' ('The function of criticism at the present time', 1864, ibid., 3.265) could easily be accommodated in the ranks of conservatism. 
Arnold's polemic against English narrowness was pursued on several fronts through the 1860s, and it included a series of playful and at times exuberantly farcical satirical pieces, which he collected in book form in 1871 under the title 'Friendship's Garland', in which the Voltairean theme of the observing foreign 'ingenu' is handled with an almost Dickensian extravagance. At the same time, he became increasingly preoccupied with what he saw as the truculence and defensive obstructiveness of the nonconformist sects, then so powerful in English middle-class society. As he observed in a letter of 1869: 'The feeling of the harm [the dissenters'] isolation from the main current of thought and culture does in the nation, a feeling that has been developed in me by going about among them for years, is the source of all that I have written on religious, political and social subjects. ('Letters, 1866-1870', 382)' The preface to 'Culture and Anarchy' contained a long meditation on the value of belonging to an established church, and in the next phase of his career Arnold went on to address religious topics in a more direct and, ultimately, even more provocative manner. 
In his lifetime Arnold commanded a wider readership, and attracted more severe criticism, for his works on religion than for all the rest of his writings put together. This topic was his dominant preoccupation in the years 1869 to 1877, and he antagonized orthodox opinion by repeatedly attacking what he saw as the two pillars of an obstructive and outmoded dogmatism: first, the literalist interpretation of the 'Bible'; and second, the whole superstructure of systematic theology which had been reared upon the shifting sands of historically variable beliefs and 'ad hoc' pronouncements. In addressing the distinctive convictions of the dissenters in 'St Paul and Protestantism' (1870), he in effect accused them of being inadequate literary critics. With respect to their central doctrines of predestination and salvation by faith, they had taken their stand on the writings of St Paul, but, alleged Arnold, they had misinterpreted their texts: 'What in St Paul is figure and belongs to the sphere of feeling, Puritanism has transported into the sphere of intellect and made thesis and formula' (Arnold, 'St Paul and Protestantism', 'Prose Works', 6.8). He generalized this case in his major work of religious criticism, 'Literature and Dogma: an Essay towards the Better Apprehension of the Bible' (1873), which was the only one of his books which had not first appeared in the form of periodical essays. One could even say that this book is his most extended single work of literary criticism; certainly no single text engaged his critical energies to anything like the same extent as did the 'Bible'. Arnold argued that the 'Bible' was a historical and literary text which would yield its full riches only if read 'with the tact which letters, surely, alone can give' ('Literature and Dogma'; ibid., 6.196). An example of this approach was his discussion of the very notion of 'God' as found in the 'Old Testament': 'the word 'God' is used in most cases as by no means a term of science or exact knowledge, but a term of poetry and eloquence, a term 'thrown out', so to speak, at a not fully grasped object of the speaker's consciousness, a 'literary' term, in short; and mankind mean different things by it as their consciousness differs. (ibid., 6.171)' This led him to his famous formulation of the 'real germ' of the idea of God as 'a consciousness of the not ourselves that makes for righteousness' (ibid., 6.196). Arnold puzzled many of his contemporary readers, for although he protested that he was trying to save 'the natural truth of Christianity' (ibid.), he seemed to be setting aside all its distinctive doctrines. 'God and the Bible', published two years later, was largely an attempt to reply to his critics; the work displayed a surprising mastery of the technicalities of biblical history and textual criticism but did little to appease the hostility of those who felt that matters of salvation were being reduced to the level of 'belles-lettres'. 
Whatever the precise nature of Arnold's theological beliefs, if any, he remained convinced of the cultural value of the Anglican church which, like Bishop Joseph Butler (1692-1752), whom he so much admired, he found to be 'a 'reasonable' Establishment'. From the preface to 'Culture and Anarchy' through to the pieces collected in 'Last Essays on Church and Religion' (1877), he urged that the dissenters were handicapped by their exclusion from, and antagonism to, the church of Thomas Cranmer and the Authorized Version. As these allusions suggest, his case rested on literary and aesthetic rather than eschatological grounds, and to the end he remained true to his broad-church, and hence ultimately Coleridgean, lineage in being convinced of the need for an established church as 'a beneficial social and civilising agent' (Arnold, 'A French Eton', 'Prose Works', 2.321). 
In the course of the 1860s Arnold acquired a reputation as a critic and controversialist of note; during the 1870s he became a public figure, constantly invited to write essays and make speeches. In the last decade of his life he continued to be a prolific contributor to the major cultural periodicals, selections of his essays appearing in 'Mixed Essays' in 1879 and in 'Irish Essays' in 1882. Some of his most enduring pieces from this final period were collected in 'Essays in Criticism, Second Series', which he had been arranging at the time of his death in 1888 and which appeared later in that year. The volume is notable for, above all, his attempt to come to terms with the legacy of English Romanticism and thus to do for his generation what Dr Johnson had done a century earlier in his 'Lives of the English Poets'; it contained essays on Wordsworth, Byron, and Keats, as well as his frequently anthologized essay 'The study of poetry', first published in 1880 as the introduction to a selection of English poetry aimed at the newly literate readership created by late nineteenth-century educational reforms (most notably the act of 1870, sponsored by his brother-in-law William Edward Forster, which initiated compulsory elementary schooling). It is in this essay that he announced his belief, later to be travestied as the claim that poetry would supplant religion, that 'The future of poetry is immense, because in poetry, where it is worthy of its high destinies, our race, as time goes on, will find an ever surer and surer stay' ('Prose Works', 9.161). This piece also contained his sketch of the critical usefulness of 'touchstones', those lines of indisputably great poetry (whether from Homer or Dante, Shakespeare or Milton) which we should bring to the task of helping us discriminate between good and bad poetry -- indeed, between great and merely good poetry. As in so much of his writing of this last decade, Arnold was less concerned with refining sophisticated critical techniques and more with helping a new wide readership to acquaint itself with the riches of the literary culture which he believed would come to provide one of its most potent sources of moral inspiration and spiritual consolation. 
Arnold had been awarded the honorary degree of DCL by his beloved Oxford in 1870. (His famous paean to the university city with its 'dreaming spires', the 'home of lost causes', had appeared in the preface to the first series of 'Essays in Criticism' in 1865.) In 1883 he was offered by Gladstone a civil-list pension of $250 'in public recognition of service to the poetry and literature of England' which, after much hesitation, he accepted. Later that year he embarked on his first lecture tour to the United States. (The second was in 1886.) This earned him a substantial sum (of which he was always more or less urgently in need, especially to pay off the debts of his scapegrace son, Richard) but few fresh admirers: he was not a good lecturer, and Americans found him mannered. It did not help his popularity that his assessment of American civilization had always been frankly unflattering, lamenting as he did its philistinism and its hostility to 'high ideals'. He published his 'Discourses in America' in 1885 (including 'Literature and science', which he had first given as the Rede lecture at Cambridge in 1882), and a companion piece, 'Civilisation in the United States', appeared three years later. 
As part of his campaign against the assumptions behind English puritanism, Arnold remarked at one point that 'the wealth of the human spirit is shown in its enjoyments', and his own tastes did not lean towards austerity. He was tall, accounted good-looking, with thick, youthfully brown hair parted in the middle. He was noted for his good humour and a charm that owed as much to listening as to talking. Even after he had outgrown his dandy phase, he still inclined to high dressing and ran a good deal to fancy waistcoats. He was very responsive to the charms of beautiful women (albeit in his later writings increasingly censorious of sexual misconduct, especially among the 'lubricious' French), and he particularly liked champagne. In characterizing him, some found that the term 'fop' came to mind very easily, and some took his wit as a sign of a lack of seriousness, as some always will. Charlotte Bronte had perhaps been more perceptive in finding 'a real modesty... under the assumed conceit' (Murray, 112). Those who knew him well concurred in emphasizing his warmth and gaiety, as well as a sentimentality which, while it could be a blemish in the poet, was lovable in the man. 
Arnold's manner, which was at once both literary and personal, contained elements which the diverse proponents of late nineteenth-century 'aestheticism' were to find congenial, but the more general reaction against all things Victorian in the early decades of the twentieth century conspired with literary modernism's hostility to the spoilt Romanticism of Victorian verse to propel his reputation to its nadir by the 1920s. However, his conception of the social role of the literary critic ensured him the ambivalent respect of those twentieth-century critics who scorned a merely academic definition of their craft, such as T. S. Eliot or F. R. Leavis in Britain or, most enthusiastically, Lionel Trilling in the USA. His writings on religion, the most widely read during his lifetime, passed into near oblivion in the half-century following his death, though they adumbrated several ideas which have become commonplace in late twentieth-century theology and biblical criticism. His poetry has always retained its discriminating admirers, especially among scholars, though in the pantheon of Victorian verse he now clearly ranks below such popular and copious poets as Tennyson and Browning. 
It is his work as a critic, more than anything else, which has earned Arnold his pedestal among the immortals, though the fate of his reputation has been particularly closely bound up with developments within higher education. As part of the immense expansion of the academic study and teaching of English literature that took place in Britain and the USA from the middle of the twentieth century, Arnold became retrospectively canonized as one of the presiding spirits of the new discipline, and when, from the late 1960s onward, the traditional conception of this activity came in for hostile treatment from those committed to a more theoretical or more political form of criticism, he was frequently singled out for abuse for his part in inscribing an 'elitist' and socially conservative notion of culture at the heart of the academic study of English. This posthumous career threw up more than the usual crop of ironies, beginning with the fact that, despite his sentimental attachment to an idealized Oxford, he himself was the least academic of writers. Moreover, he was sceptical about some of the proposals for the introduction of literature into the university syllabus which were advanced towards the end of his life, urging, for example, that English literature should certainly not be taught in isolation from its classical and European sources. But, despite the fact that he never confined his notion of 'criticism' exclusively to 'literary' criticism, just as the literature he recommended was not primarily 'English' literature, Arnold has been identified, by both friend and foe, with a particular understanding of the nature and social importance of the subject known as 'English'. More broadly, he has also remained a constant reference-point in discussions about the nature and value of 'culture' which have been such a prominent feature of public debate in Britain in the second half of the twentieth century. 
In April 1888 Matthew Arnold went to Liverpool to meet his favourite daughter, Lucy, on her return from the United States; he died of a sudden heart attack on 15 April on his way down to the docks, and he was buried alongside his three children in the churchyard of All Saints', Laleham-on-Thames, four days later. A special train brought an impressive body of mourners from London, including Robert Browning, Henry James, and Benjamin Jowett, the last of whom, though hardly given to fulsomeness, recorded one of the most apposite tributes: 'No-one ever united so much kindness and light-heartedness with so much strength. He was the most sensible man of genius I have ever known' (Collini, 24). 


@@@@@


doc= 680


Arnold, Sir Nicholas (c.1509-1580), lord justice of Ireland, was the second but eldest surviving son of John Arnold (died 1545), administrator, of Churcham, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Isabel Hawkins. His younger brother Richard Arnold ('b'. in or before 1526, died 1587), was a landowner and MP. John Arnold was protonotary and clerk of the crown in Wales, and in 1542 was granted the manors of Highnam and Over, Gloucestershire. 
Nicholas Arnold was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 14 February 1524 and became one of Henry VIII's gentleman pensioners in 1526. On 19 June 1529 a marriage settlement was made between Arnold and Margaret, daughter of Sir William Denys of Dyrham, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Anne; they had two sons, one of whom was Roland Arnold, who married Mary, daughter of John Brydges, first Baron Chandos, and his wife, Elizabeth, and a daughter. After 1530 Thomas Cromwell employed Nicholas Arnold in connection with the dissolution of the monasteries. Arnold was rewarded with the priory of Llanthony in Monmouthshire, where he settled, before moving back to Gloucestershire. He was recommended for promotion into the royal household in 1538, becoming a member of the bodyguard of spears in 1539 and a gentleman pensioner in 1540. On 10 January 1545 Arnold was returned as one of the knights of the shire for Gloucestershire. In the same year he was in command of the garrison at Queenborough Castle and the Isle of Sheppey, Kent. His local consequence grew during the 1540s; he was JP for Monmouthshire in 1543, 1545, and 1579, for Gloucestershire from 1547 to 1554, 'custos rotulorum' for Gloucestershire from 1558 or 1559 to 1580, and sat on various local commissions. He was also a member of the council in the marches of Wales from about 1551 to 1554 and from 1560 to 1580. Arnold succeeded his father on 12 September 1545. 
In July 1546 Arnold was sent to take charge of Boulogneberg, a fort above Boulogne. He reported that the fort could not be defended but Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset and lord protector, did something to improve the situation in 1547, and when on 1 May 1549, four months before declaring war, the French attacked Boulogneberg, they were completely defeated. Arnold had only 400 men against the French force of 3000. He was wounded, but the French are said to have filled fifteen wagons with their dead. A fresh attack was launched in August, when Arnold, recognizing that defence was hopeless, removed all the ordnance and stores into Boulogne, and dismantled the fort. Until Boulogne was returned to France in 1550 he remained there as a member of the town council. Arnold's knighthood probably dates from 1550. About this time he received an annuity of $80 for his good service, and travelled to Italy during the latter part of Edward VI's reign. He returned to England in time to sit for Gloucestershire in Edward's last parliament (February-March 1553). 
Arnold did not openly oppose Mary's accession, despite his protestantism, but came under suspicion at the time of Sir Thomas Wyatt the younger's rebellion. He attended the meeting of the conspirators in London on 26 November 1553 but opposed William Thomas's suggestion that Mary I be assassinated and was careful not to implicate Princess Elizabeth. On 21 February 1554 he was committed to the Fleet prison, and was sent to the Tower of London three days later. He was released on sureties for $2000 on 18 January 1555. On 23 September he was even returned as knight of the shire for Gloucestershire, but he still maintained relations with various conspirators against Mary, and in January 1556 was implicated in Sir Henry Dudley's and Richard Uvedale's plot. On 19 April he was again sent to the Tower and his deposition was taken on 6 May. Arnold was sent to the Fleet again on 23 September, where he was allowed 'liberty of the house'. Soon afterwards he was released on condition of not going within 10 miles of Gloucestershire, and even this restriction was relaxed on 3 February 1557. 
On Elizabeth I's accession Arnold was restored to favour. He was sheriff of Gloucestershire from 1559 to 1560 and was one of the visitors who administered the oath of supremacy to the Welsh clergy. In 1562 he was chosen to go to Ireland to report on complaints against the administration of the lord lieutenant, Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex. James Anthony Froude regarded Arnold as 'a hard, iron, pitiless man' ('DNB') and implacable in the face of blandishments. Richard Bagwell took a more moderate view; for him, Arnold was 'a man of resolution and industry, who cared little for popularity, and might be trusted to carry out his orders' (Bagwell, 2.50). Sussex resented Arnold's inquiry, especially into military mismanagement, and placed obstacles in his way. However, Arnold made too strong a case to be ignored by the English government, and in 1564 he was sent back to Ireland with Sir Thomas Wroth (1518-1573) and a new commission. 
Elizabeth accepted Sussex's resignation in April 1563, and on 24 May 1564 Arnold was appointed lord justice. It is unclear whether or not the decision to deny Arnold the post of lord deputy was motivated by his lack of sufficient distinction, or was a deliberate policy to downgrade the office of governor and to elevate the standing of the queen's loyal subjects in Ireland. He investigated military abuses energetically, but Sir William Fitzwilliam (1526-1599), the vice-treasurer, and the most senior officers in the army refused to render accounts, as did other military captains. Arnold resorted to taking depositions from ordinary soldiers, which increased the resentment felt by the senior officers. In July, Wroth described him as 'not so friendly as he used to be' and Fitzwilliam wrote several angry letters, accusing him of making an unwarranted attack on his character, using unseemly words towards Adam Loftus, archbishop of Armagh, and being extremely rude towards his colleagues on the Irish privy council (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 1.350). The loss of support of the army was a serious threat to Arnold's regime. 
Arnold's response to his critics was to concentrate on the defence of the pale, relying on the general hosting to do so, to ignore the raids carried out by the midland septs or clans, and to give Shane O'Neill a free hand in Ulster. He believed that so long as the Irish fought each other they were little threat to English government. He wrote to Sir William Cecil, principal secretary, in January 1565, telling him that he regarded 'the wild Irish' as like 'bears and banddogs when I see them fight, so that they fight earnestly indeed and tug each other well, I care not who have the worse' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/12/20). In February, Cecil cautioned him 'to stir no sleeping dogs in Ireland until a staff be provided to chasten them if they will bite', but Arnold did not heed his advice (TNA: PRO, SP 63/12/50). Gerald Fitzgerald, eleventh earl of Kildare, proved an ally, but the midland Irish saw their opportunity and attempted to overthrow the Leix-Offaly plantation. At Affane, co. Waterford, in early February 1565 the feud between Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, and Thomas Butler, eleventh earl of Ormond, erupted into pitched battle. Disturbingly, supporters on both sides included Old English lords and Gaelic chiefs. The queen was particularly affronted by the display of personal banners, an act of 'lese-majeste' that implied the participants had ceased to recognize royal authority. The dogs had not been asleep. Arnold encouraged Shane's attack on the Scots in Ulster, but trusted him too readily. It might have been sensible had Shane been content to confine his activities to that part of the country, but he reneged on the treaty negotiated by Arnold's envoy Sir Thomas Cusack and joined the O'Mores and the O'Connors in their attack on the Leix-Offaly plantation. In one year Sussex's achievements had been swept away and it seemed that the government might lose its last foothold in Ireland. Arnold's request to be appointed lord deputy was refused and on 22 June 1565 he was recalled and Sir Henry Sidney was selected to succeed Sussex. 
On Arnold's return to England a series of articles was presented against him by Sussex but, apart from calling on him to reply, the privy council took no further steps against him. Thereafter he confined himself to local affairs. He was an active member of the four parliaments to which he was returned during Elizabeth's reign (Gloucester in 1559 and 1563, Cricklade, Wiltshire, in 1571, and Gloucestershire in 1572). He returned to England at least once during his Irish sojourn, since in February and March 1563 he took charge of four bills in the House of Commons and was named to a committee to consider a case of privilege (25 March). On 19 October 1566 the bill for Gloucester Hospital was committed to him and on 31 October he was named to the joint committee with the House of Lords on Elizabeth's marriage and the succession. Arnold owed his return for Cricklade to the Brydges family. He spoke on numerous subjects, was involved in a bill for the city of Bristol on 11 April 1571 and on a committee dealing with Bristol (12 April). It seems odd that he should have represented a constituency outside Gloucestershire on this occasion, but there were certainly factional disputes in the city and even the recorder, Richard Pate, was refused election. On 8 May 1572 Arnold was returned for Gloucestershire. He maintained his wide interests, speaking on the navy, Wales, the Storey privilege case, the vagabonds' bill, and the water supply of the city of Worcester. There is no reference to his speaking in the 1576 session but he served on nineteen committees, covering a wide range of subjects, including the fate of Mary, queen of Scots (12 May), fraudulent conveyances and recoveries, the poor law, and again on vagabonds. Arnold also devoted much time to improving the breed of English horses. As early as 1546 he was engaged in importing horses from Flanders, and in his 'Description of England', prefixed to Raphael Holinshed's 'Chronicles' (1577), William Harrison wrote that, 'Sir Nicholas Arnold of late hath bred the best horses in England, and written of the manner of their production'. The whereabouts of these writings are unknown. 
Arnold made his will on 10 April 1580 and it was proved on 13 May. He granted generous legacies, especially to family and servants, and his most notable bequests were horses. He was buried in Churcham parish church, 'withowte any greate funerall/pompe and common dole to beggers', and an inquisition post mortem was conducted on 19 June 1581 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/62, sig. 17). His second wife was Margaret (died in or after 1580), daughter of John Isham of Braunston, Northamptonshire. They had one son, John Arnold (died 1606), who was himself an MP and settled at Llanthony. Arnold also had at least one illegitimate son and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 681


Arnold, Richard (d. c.1521), merchant and chronicler, was a citizen of London, resident in the parish of St Magnus the Martyr, who seems to have made his living primarily by trading with Flanders. Nothing is known of his parentage. In 1473 he was an executor of the will of John Arnell the elder, a London cutler, and is there described as a haberdasher, meaning an importer and vendor of small pieces of merchandise. In 1488 he was imprisoned in Flanders on suspicion of being a spy, and he includes in his chronicle an undated pardon from Henry VII or Henry VIII clearing him of 'all manner of treasons' as well as rape. Many of the other documents that Arnold reproduces, such as 'The form of an award' given by arbitration and 'Another letter of exchange', are taken from his evidently turbulent commercial life. He married a woman whose first name was Alice, and had a son, Nicholas. No record exists of his death, although he must have been at least twenty-one in 1473. Arnold's nineteenth-century editor, Francis Douce, therefore postulates that Arnold died about 1521, after the last impression of his book, when he would have been approximately seventy years of age. 
Arnold is remembered principally for the text known today as Arnold's chronicle, a compilation that begins with a short London chronicle, a genre that records history from the standpoint of the London merchant and organized according to the mayoral rather than the regnal year. Although many of the London chronicles record events with little commentary or narrative, they were evidently very important to their authors and to London's mercantile community generally, being often continued by several generations of merchants and copied by professional scribes. 
Arnold's work has not been treated very kindly by present-day scholars, who dismiss it as a mere hotchpotch. Such contempt, however, contrasts with the work's reception by contemporaries like Holinshed, Bale, and John Stow, the last of whom, in his description of the authors he consulted for his 'Summary of English Chronicles', praises Arnold as: 'a citizen of London, who, being inflamed with the fervent love of good learning, travailed very studiously therein, and principally in observing matters worthy to be remembered of the posterity; he noted the charters, liberties, laws, constitutions and customs of the city of London. (Arnold, 2)' Furthermore Arnold's chronicle formed the basis of two other London chronicles, the one an anonymous work in MS Tanner 2 in the Bodleian Library, the other the chronicle of Charles Wriothesley, whose early pages are taken verbatim from Arnold. 
Arnold's text can certainly seem unprepossessing, an intermingling of such material as documents on civic land tenure, forms for the 'making of indebtors', instructions for making vinegar or soap, and the earliest extant version of the very popular 'Ballad of the Nut-Brown Maid'. But it can be argued that modern scholars have unrealistic expectations of a text that is more appropriately regarded as a commonplace book which includes a short chronicle and a collection of important documents, altogether providing valuable evidence for London's awareness of itself as an almost autonomous political entity. While most of the text appears to be randomly compiled, it is significant that he begins with a list of London's mayors and continues with 'The articles of the charter of London' and 'The whole charter of London, with cxii articles'. These texts contain such provisions as 'That the city of London have all her liberties and free usages as well written as not written as they had in the times of Saint Edward King and Confessor and of William Conqueror and of other their progenitors', and 'That no summons, attachment, or execution be made by any ministers of our lord the King within the liberty by writ or without writ, but by the ministers of the same city.' The contemporary popularity of Arnold's chronicle may thus have arisen less from its narrative merits than from its value in providing easily accessible evidence for both the legal status and constitutional history of London. 
Arnold's book was first published probably in 1503 by A. van Berghen of Antwerp, although the title-page gives no indication of date, place, or printer, under the descriptive title 'In this book is contained the names of the bailiffs, custose '[custodians]', mayors and sheriffs of the city of London from the time of King Richard the First...'; it was reprinted probably in 1525 by Peter Treveris of London, whose edition extends the list of mayors to Henry VIII's eleventh regnal year (1519-20), but is otherwise identical with the first. The most recent edition, published in 1811, was that of Francis Douce, who changed the title to 'The Customs of London, otherwise called Arnold's Chronicle'. 


@@@@@


doc= 682


Arnold, Samuel (1740-1802), composer, was born in London on 10 August 1740, the son of Thomas Arnold; he may have been the Samuel Arnull, son of Thomas and Mary Arnull, baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 21 August that year. During his time as a choirboy in the Chapel Royal, Arnold received his first musical training under Bernard Gates and James Nares. In the autumn of 1764, succeeding Jonathan Battishill, he was engaged by John Beard as harpsichordist at Covent Garden. He also acted as house composer there, producing and compiling pasticcio operas and other music. One of his major successes during his Covent Garden appointment was 'The Maid of the Mill' (1765), with a libretto by Isaac Bickerstaff, based on Samuel Richardson's 'Pamela'. Arnold compiled the music for this pasticcio opera from works by about twenty composers, also adding some numbers of his own. Away from the theatres, Arnold pursued a career as an organist, and he is known to have held such an appointment at the Asylum for Female Orphans in 1767. 
At about the same time, Arnold took a keen interest in oratorios, and in 1768 he ran his first Lenten oratorio season at the Little Theatre in the Haymarket. He moved this series to Covent Garden Theatre in 1770, and continued the venture until 1777. For part of that time he shared the burden of management with Edward Toms (died 1775), trumpeter-in-ordinary in the royal music, who also helped Arnold with the compilation of his pasticcio oratorios. One of their joint efforts, the pasticcio 'Omnipotence' (1774), proved an astounding success, and was performed no fewer than eight times during its first season. Apart from oratorio pasticcios, Arnold composed no fewer than six new oratorios, 'The Cure of Saul' (1767), 'Abimelech' (1768), 'The Resurrection' (1770), and 'The Prodigal Son' (1773), followed after a period of nearly thirty years by 'Elisha, or, The Woman of Shunem' (1801) and 'The Hymn of Adam and Eve' (1802). 
Arnold's manifold activities extended not only towards the theatres but also to London's pleasure gardens, which were open during the summer months. In 1769 he took over the lease of Marylebone Gardens. Like Vauxhall Gardens and Ranelagh, Marylebone offered ambitious and substantial musical entertainments alongside refreshments and all manner of spectacles, including fireworks. Daily concerts lasted from six to ten, providing summer employment for the singers and musicians engaged at the capital's theatres during the winter. In his capacity as proprietor of Marylebone Gardens, Arnold specialized in arranging and composing short burlettas. These miniature all-sung comic operas were ideal for the purposes of the gardens, as acting space was limited and spoken dialogue was not permitted outside the licensed playhouses. Among the popular pieces performed during Arnold's time at Marylebone Gardens were Pergolesi's 'La serva padrona', for which he wrote additional music in 1770, and a new work entirely from Arnold's pen, 'The Magnet', first performed in 1771. 
In 1771 Arnold married Mary Ann Napier, the daughter of Dr Archibald Napier. The couple had four children, the eldest of whom, Samuel James Arnold (1774-1852), later became known as a dramatist and manager of several London theatres. As far as the other children are concerned, only the dates of birth and death of the daughter Caroline Mary (1778-1795) are known, but there was also an elder daughter, whose name remains unknown, as well as a younger daughter, Marianne. 
The year 1774 saw the first performance of Arnold's last burletta for Marylebone, 'Don Quixote', as he had to give up the lease following the criminal activities of one of his employees and the resultant loss of a considerable sum of money. A severe financial blow, this set-back did not, however, harm his career as a musician. Indeed, one year earlier, on the strength of his best-known oratorio, 'The Prodigal Son', performed at the installation ceremony for Lord North as chancellor of the University of Oxford, Arnold had been offered the honorary degree of doctor of music. He declined this honour, however, and preferred to obtain it in the accustomed way. As the obligatory exercise he proffered the ode 'The Power of Music', set to a text by John Hughes, and on 5 July 1773 he was duly awarded his doctorate. 
After having supplied some music for productions at Covent Garden in the intermediate years, in 1777 Arnold was engaged by George Colman the elder as composer and music director of the Little Theatre in the Haymarket. Arnold's connection with this theatre, which from 1789 was run by the younger George Colman, proved to be exceptionally long-lived; he worked there for a quarter of a century up to his death in 1802. During this time he provided the Colmans with almost 100 operas, musical afterpieces, and pantomimes. For the most part these were arrangements and compilations of works by other composers, with some pieces by Arnold himself thrown in. However, as the Little Theatre was open only during the summer months, this still left some room for other activities and by the 1780s Arnold was already casting round for new opportunities. 
In 1783 Arnold succeeded his former teacher James Nares as organist and composer to the Chapel Royal. He was a governor of the Royal Society of Musicians, and in 1784 he also joined its concert committee, which was responsible for the organization of the massive Handel commemoration festivities in Westminster Abbey. 
In 1786 Arnold once again resumed his interest in oratorio management. Following the death of his long-term oratorio co-manager John Stanley (1712-1786), the elder Thomas Linley was left to run the Drury Lane oratorios on his own and Arnold immediately stepped into the breach, continuing with Linley until 1793. Not surprisingly, the oratorio programmes were dominated by Handel's works and by large-scale selections from them, modelled on the programmes of the Handel commemoration festivities of the 1780s and 1790s. Arnold's oratorio activities may well have inspired him to embark on yet another project, a complete edition of Handel's works, which he first advertised in 1786. Even though this gargantuan project never reached fruition, it none the less secured Arnold lasting fame. Between 1787 and 1797 180 numbers of this edition were published in forty volumes. Another major music edition of his was a four-volume revision and continuation of William Boyce's 'Cathedral Music', which he published in 1790. 
In the late 1780s and early 1790s Arnold, by now one of the leading figures in London's musical life, was appointed in breathtakingly quick succession to several of the most prestigious posts available: in 1789 he became official conductor of the Academy of Ancient Music, a position which he held until 1794, and he was appointed director of the Anacreontic Society in 1791. In 1793 he succeeded Benjamin Cooke as organist of Westminster Abbey. From 1793 he additionally directed the annual concerts for the benefit of female orphans and children of distressed freemasons. He also gave occasional oratorio performances, and applied for, and was granted, a licence for two full-length oratorio series at the Little Theatre in the Haymarket in 1801 and 1802. Arnold's astonishing industry is clear from the fact that throughout this period he also attended various musical clubs and charities and fulfilled his duties as a theatre composer, providing, as before, small-scale operas and other entertainments for the Little Theatre. 
In the autumn of 1798 Arnold fell off the steps in his library, severing a tendon in his leg and sustaining internal injuries that were to lead to his death four years later. Arnold died on 22 October 1802 at his home, 22 Duke Street, Westminster, and was buried in the north aisle of Westminster Abbey on 29 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 683


Arnold, Samuel James (1774-1852), playwright and theatre manager, was born at Rathbone Place, London, on 5 December 1774, the son of Samuel Arnold (1740-1802), composer, and his wife, Mary Ann Napier. After attending King's School, Canterbury, from 1782 to 1785 Arnold was trained as an artist. In his early career he concentrated on portraits, but became more widely recognized as a painter of panoramas. He showed a series of pictures at the Royal Academy between 1800 and 1808. 
Arnold's main love, however, was theatre. In 1794 he produced 'Auld Robin Gray', a musical play in two acts, and in 1795 'Who Pays the Reckoning?', which was condemned by critics and not published. Both works were performed at the Haymarket, whose musical pieces for the past thirty years had been written and arranged by Arnold's father. His first piece for Drury Lane, the 'Shipwreck' (1796), was written in collaboration with his father, who in fact wrote the music for most of his works. That year, too, Arnold published his only novel, 'The Creole, or, Haunted Island'. 
In 1803 Arnold married Matilda Catherine Pye (died 1851), a daughter of the poet laureate Henry James Pye. Among their children was barrister and literary translator Thomas James Arnold. Arnold collaborated with his father-in-law to write 'A Prior Claim' (Drury Lane, 1805). His 'Man and Wife, or, More Secrets than One', a comedy (Drury Lane, 1809), lasted for thirty shows. 
That year, Arnold obtained a licence to change the Lyceum in the Strand into an English opera house: the building had been used previously for subscription concerts, shows, and exhibitions. Drury Lane Theatre burned down at about that time, and the company moved to the new English Opera House for three seasons. Shortly afterwards, Arnold was invited to become joint manager with J. G. Raymond of the new Drury Lane Theatre, which was opened with great ceremony on 10 October 1812. His management was troubled by internal arguments. He himself was strongly criticized for having his own works performed, and he resigned after the founder, S. Whitbread, committed suicide in 1815. By 1818, the company was ruined. Arnold moved back to the English Opera House, and had it entirely rebuilt and enlarged by Samuel Beazley, at a cost of $80,000. It reopened on 15 June 1816. In 1824 Arnold was the first in England to stage Weber's 'Der Freischutz', and he went on to give a number of other foreign works their first English showing. However, in 1830, that theatre, too, burned down. 
Arnold never recovered from the blow, although the theatre was rebuilt by the same architect, to reopen on 14 July 1834 as the Lyceum. However, it ran at a loss. It was decided to make it a commonwealth, but it lasted only one acrimonious season under this arrangement. The shareholders having lost a lot of money, it became a normal theatre. 
Arnold was a magistrate and a fellow of the Royal Society, although his name does not appear in the society's 'Record'. He died at Walton upon Thames on 16 August 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 684


Arnold, Thomas (1679-1737), naval officer, was born in Lowestoft, the second of five sons of Matthew Arnold and his wife ('nee' Coe). After gaining his commission on 23 October 1708 he served on the 'Captain', 'Ormond', and 'Dragon' under the patronage of Sir George Byng and was, in 1718, first lieutenant of the French-built 'Superbe' (64 guns), in which he distinguished himself during the battle off Cape Passaro, Sicily, on 11 August 1718 by heading the boarders and carrying the Spanish flagship, the 'Real Felipe'. He was severely wounded in the battle, and lost the use of one arm. 
Arnold's gallantry was rewarded by his appointment as master and commander of the 'Spy' sloop in the West Indies on 18 October 1726. On 17 September 1727 he was made a captain, and on 14 November appointed to the 'Fox' frigate, and sent to the coast of Carolina, where he was for some time under the orders of Captain Anson (in whose squadron Arnold's son, also Thomas, was to circumnavigate the globe in 1740-44). 
On his return to England Arnold retired from active service and settled at Lowestoft; he died there on 31 August 1737, and was buried in Lowestoft church. According to his monument in the church, he was married and had children apart from his son Thomas. 


@@@@@


doc= 685


Arnold, Thomas (c.1742-1816), physician and mad-doctor, was born about 1742 in Leicester, the second son of William Arnold ('c'.1695- 'c'.1770), a baker, who was also an eminent local Anabaptist and mad-house proprietor, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Freer (died before 1760). Thomas probably worked under Richard Pulteney before preceding him to Edinburgh University, in 1762, where he studied under William Cullen and Alexander Monro, gaining his MD in 1766. On 20 July 1766 he married Elizabeth Graham (died 1802) in Edinburgh. She was the sister of fellow student James Graham and sister-in-law of Catharine Macaulay. The couple had seven children, including Thomas Graham Arnold MD, father of Thomas Kerchever Arnold; William Withering Arnold MD; Henry Hamilton Arnold, theologian and writer; and Elizabeth Henshaw Arnold. 
Arnold returned to Leicester in 1766 and took over his father's mad-house, which he later moved to larger premises at Belle Grove. In 1771 Arnold was appointed physician to the Leicester Infirmary. He resigned five years later following an inquiry which discovered mismanagement of the hospital's accounts. He nevertheless went on to become senior physician to the infirmary and its asylum in 1784. At the height of his power Arnold held a monopoly not only on the lunacy trade in Leicestershire, but also, together with his sons, of the post of physician at Leicester Infirmary. A supporter of radical causes, Arnold's career in Leicester was marked by his involvement in struggles for social status and political influence. Professionally many of these were with his main rival, James Vaughan, a high-church tory. Arnold was the first president of the Leicester Literacy Society, founded by the radical newspaper editor Richard Phillips, and in 1790 he chaired a public meeting of dissenters which resolved to campaign for the repeal of the 'Test Acts'. Arnold was also noted for his cultural interests: he was a local patron of the arts, collected books, and enjoyed musical evenings. He married for the second time at St Mary's, Nottingham, on 28 March 1803; his second wife was Mary Davison (died 1843), sister-in-law of Admiral Sandford Tatham. 
Arnold's principal medical work is the two-volume 'Observations on the Nature, Kinds, Causes, and Prevention of Insanity, Lunacy, or Madness' (1782, 1786), which ran to two editions and a German translation. In it he abandoned the traditional humoral theories, basing his classification on the ideas of Locke and separating disordered sensations from disordered reasoning. He helped to pioneer a new approach to insanity based on observed symptoms, but his classification was too detailed to be practical and it never became popular. Arnold is representative of a shift towards the 'moral' treatment of the insane. Along with Samuel Tuke, he thought that patients should be treated as children rather than as brutes, and advocated that physical restraints should be used only on violent patients. Along with William Battie, he advised that the insane should be segregated from the outside world and recommended amusements and a simple diet for them. Arnold's other writings are: 'A Case of Hydrophobia Successfully Treated' (1793) and 'Observations on the Management of the Insane' (1809). A letter of his was published by Thomas Fowler among his 'Medical Reports of the Effects of Arsenic' (1786). Arnold died in Leicester on 2 September 1816 and was buried there at St Margaret's Church on the 6th. 


@@@@@


doc= 686


Arnold, Thomas (1795-1842), headmaster and historian, was born on 13 June 1795 at West Cowes, Isle of Wight, the seventh of the seven children of William Arnold (1745-1801), collector of customs and postmaster for the Isle of Wight, and his wife, Martha (1751-1829), daughter of John Delafield. She became postmaster after her husband's death. Thomas had two brothers and four sisters. 
A bright, lively boy, Arnold spent a happy childhood on the island during the exciting times of the Napoleonic wars; the daily sight of ships and their flags, sailors, and soldiers, and all the bustle of a port in wartime fostered in Arnold a keen interest in historical and contemporary events and gave him 'an instinctive acquaintance with geography' (Whitridge, 5). He was very fond of reading, particularly history books, and his early education was entrusted to his aunt, Susan Delafield, until 1803, when he followed his brother Matthew to Warminster School in Wiltshire, a flourishing establishment with high academic standards, where he remained for four years. Arnold thrived at Warminster: he was popular with his fellows and thoroughly enjoyed cricket, fives, and mock battles on the downs. His literary sense continued to develop. He liked books of every type; historical works, in particular, figured largely in his private reading, though he relished novels and light fiction as well. He had an extremely retentive memory and had made steady, but not spectacular, progress in reading the classics by the time of his removal to Winchester College in 1807, a move largely necessitated by the family's difficult financial circumstances and the fact that Warminster possessed no scholarships to the universities. 
Sound early training, combined with Arnold's own hard work and determination to succeed academically, produced a swift rise at Winchester, where his knowledge and love of classical literature deepened. Homer, Thucydides, Livy, and Tacitus were his especial favourites. Three of the most intimate friends of his life were with him at the school: J. Tucker, F. C. Blackstone, and T. T. Penrose. Though studious, the young Arnold was certainly not of a shy and retiring disposition; in most respects he was a typical boy whose exuberance and youthful high spirits frequently broke out in all manner of pursuits and escapades. Physically he was a little above average height: lean, healthy, and active, though not robust, with dark hair, prominent eyebrows, and a slightly projecting lower lip. His voice was rather flat and his usual expression somewhat severe -- his features visibly clouded when he became angry. 
As well as continuing to enjoy history and poetry, Arnold began to develop an interest in politics, though his opinions were in constant flux and his views rapidly fluctuated from toryism to radicalism and back again. He took both his work and his play seriously, and he left the school in possession of characteristics which were to become features of the mature man: resolution, tenacity, vigour, boisterousness, and a streak of impatience. 
In 1811 Arnold won a scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where the system of teaching was thorough and the tone high. There he became acquainted with John Keble and met perhaps his greatest friend, J. T. Coleridge. Though he disliked early rising, Arnold worked hard, particularly on his favourite Greek and Roman historians and Aristotle. He also learned French. Equally, he led a very full social life and was a frequent speaker in the Attic Debating Society, the forerunner of the Oxford Union. He swam and rowed regularly and developed a fondness for 'skirmishes' -- long, cross-country expeditions. Although the cast of his mind always tended to the concrete rather than the abstract, he became a fervent admirer of the Lake poets and was an unsuccessful competitor for the university Latin and English verse prizes in 1812 and 1813 respectively. There was nothing distinctive about his religious opinions at this time and his political views continued to fluctuate. Fun-loving, good-natured, keen to develop his intellect, and with an abundance of friends, he obtained a first class in 'literae humaniores' in May 1814, and was elected to a fellowship at Oriel College in 1815, a landmark in his life. For the next five years he read widely and experienced the stimulating company of some of the keenest intellects in the university, the Oriel Noetics: Edward Copleston, Richard Whately, Renn Dickson Hampden, Edward Hawkins, and John Keble. In 1815 Arnold won the chancellor's prize for the English essay, and in 1817, when he graduated MA, also won the Latin essay prize. During these years he supplemented his income by extensive private tuition of undergraduates, which he thoroughly enjoyed. 
Arnold underwent a severe crisis of religious doubt at this time. He had been ordained deacon in 1818 while privately disbelieving the damnatory clauses of the Athanasian creed, and further study led him into doubts about the nature of the persons of the Trinity. These doubts had been only partially resolved in 1826, by which time he held other objections to points in the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. For nine years these kept him from a curacy and priest's orders and caused much disquiet to those around him; as he later admitted, 'I know... it was said in Oxford that I did not preach the gospel' (Stanley, 75). Since his conscience would not allow him to take priest's orders, and since he wished to marry, an income derived from teaching was the natural consequence of his historical interests. In 1819 he therefore went into partnership with his brother-in-law John Buckland in a private school at Laleham, a village beside the Thames in Middlesex. 
Arnold lived at Laleham with his mother, aunt, invalid sister, and his wife, Mary Penrose (1791-1873) (the sister of his boyhood friend, T. T. Penrose), whom he married on 11 August 1820. In 1824 he and Buckland amicably dissolved their partnership, with Arnold taking charge of the older boys, whom he had been teaching exclusively since 1821. The partners had decided that a distinct division between the older and younger boys was in the school's best interests, and Arnold certainly found the company of the older pupils more congenial. As well as being their teacher, Arnold endeavoured to get to know the boys in his house as individuals, and to make them part of his family. He exercised with them and derived genuine pleasure from the youthful society of boys 'all alive in limbs and spirits' (Stanley, 27). During this period he also continued to read extensively and learned German for the purpose of studying the historian Niebuhr, whose work on Roman history profoundly influenced him. With a growing family and a large establishment to maintain he was financially hard-pressed throughout these years and he embarked on several literary schemes to generate income. The most significant of these was a series of articles on Roman history written during 1823-7 for the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana'; the articles were reprinted in two volumes with a 'Life of Trajan' in 1845. 
Financial considerations also played a very large part in Arnold's decision to leave Laleham. In 1826 he had reluctantly declined the vice-principalship of St Alban Hall, Oxford, and in 1827 withdrew his strong candidacy for the professorship of modern history at London University only when he learned of his appointment as headmaster of Rugby School. Although not insensible to visions of extended influence, he chose the Rugby position because it provided more money. He was appointed without interview, and it is known that the Rugby trustees placed great emphasis on the testimonial from Edward Hawkins predicting that Arnold had the power to 'change the face of education all through the public schools of England' (Stanley, 42). Arnold had at first hesitated to apply for the headmastership for two reasons: first, he doubted whether the trustees would allow him a completely free hand -- for he meant to make frequent use of expulsion; and, second, his refusal to proceed to priest's orders because of his misgivings over the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' meant that he could not administer communion in the school chapel, which he wished to do. However, he received private assurances on the former point and, on the bishop of London's advice, he subscribed the articles as 'only articles of peace' (Whitridge, 50). He was ordained priest and proceeded BD and DD in 1828. 
When Arnold took over the headmastership Rugby School was suffering from a general decline which was widespread in public schools at the beginning of the nineteenth century. Low moral standards, harsh discipline, and ossified teaching methods had shaken public confidence in them. Arnold proved himself a natural leader and, by the force of his ideals and personality, reinvigorated the school's systems. He quickly replaced the boarding-houses for pupils run by women in Rugby (known as 'dames' houses') with boarding facilities run by tutors from the school, and thereby emphasized the role of the housemaster. By raising the status of his assistant masters, who he insisted should relinquish any church livings they held so that they could devote themselves entirely to the school, and by taking them into partnership with him -- salaries were increased, and regular staff meetings held at which frank speech was encouraged -- he won their loyalty. He required his staff to be gentlemen, in holy orders, of first-rate ability, with enquiring minds, and to be constantly increasing their own knowledge. He implemented no major curriculum reforms but ensured that modern languages and mathematics were properly and regularly taught; moreover he instituted termly examinations and regular pupil reports to the parents. Games, other than for the purpose of recreation, held little interest for him; he did not promote organized sport, but simply watched the boys' matches from time to time. The headmaster's independence in the daily running of the school he regarded as supremely important; the governors recognized this and his relations with them were usually harmonious. 
The classics remained at the centre of the curriculum, as Arnold regarded the Greek and Latin languages as 'given for the very purpose of forming the human mind in youth' (Stanley, 105). As a purely verbal scholar he was not first class, though his translations into English were clear and vigorous. Rather than asking his pupils for a mere literal 'construe', he insisted that the boys try to reproduce the nuances of meaning and the style of an author in good idiomatic English, for 'every lesson in Greek and Latin may and ought to be made a lesson in English' (Whitridge, 103). His method of teaching was Socratic, designed to stimulate a boy's intellect by asking questions which would lead to a solution rather than simply require an answer. Because he believed in the relevance of the classics and history to contemporary life -- 'if history has no truths to teach, its facts are little worth' (Stanley, 577) -- he interpreted them widely, constantly drawing parallels between subjects and eras and raising general questions of literary, historical, and moral import. His evident enthusiasm and freshness revitalized traditional subjects and he possessed the ability to inspire boys to take an interest in them. Arnold's inclination was always towards 'things rather than words'; content rather than form. His constant aim was to give pupils the power to obtain knowledge and think for themselves, rather than to supply them with mere facts, and he was humble enough to admit his own ignorance on certain points. 
At the heart of all Arnold did was an unswerving faith in the divinity of Christ and a personal devotion to him as his saviour, which influenced all his conduct. For Arnold every aspect of life was a battleground between good and evil and, since he regarded Christianity as indispensable to all forms of human endeavour, his chief educational aim was to make Rugby a Christian school producing Christian gentlemen. The cultivation of the intellect was not his prime concern, rather the creation of a Christian character. He looked for '1st, religious and moral principles; 2ndly, gentlemanly conduct; 3rdly, intellectual ability' (Stanley, 95). Theodore Walrond, in his 'Dictionary of National Biography' article, captured this aspect of Arnold graphically: 'the central truth of life to him, not as a dogma accepted from without, but as the satisfaction of a craving within, was the union of the divine and the human in the person of Jesus Christ; to speak of a Christian's body as the temple of the Holy Spirit was hardly a metaphor; the church and the state were one; the natural and the supernatural, things secular and religious, were inextricably blended; every act of a Christian's life was at once secular as done on this earth, and religious as done in the presence of God; and every act was of importance, as affecting the great struggle everywhere and at all times going on between good and evil.' Arnold's religious hopes for the school centred on its chapel (he became chaplain in 1831) and found expression in his weekly Sunday sermons. Speaking solemnly and earnestly in plain language on practical matters to which the boys could relate, he made clear his expectations of them and the moral and religious lessons he wished to teach. The general effect was striking, and many were genuinely moved by his deep and sincere faith and the impression he created there. 
Central to Arnold's plans for the school was the great confidence he placed in the sixth form, his prefects, whom he regarded as partners in his quest to raise the school's moral tone. The deep trust he placed in them as symbols of moral and academic integrity, and the power he gave them over their fellows in everyday matters of discipline were things new in the public school world. As intermediaries between the staff and pupils he hoped that they would curb the worst excesses of the boys and lead by example. He maintained his confidence and optimism in their ability to carry out this role despite disappointments, and many of them became devoted to him. Equally important was his regular practice of removing boys he felt were not benefiting the school or themselves. By public expulsion for the worst behaviour, or the quiet removal of boys lacking intellectual curiosity, he sought to keep the pupil body 'healthy'. Though frank and gentlemanly in his dealings with the pupils and expecting honesty in return, the dominance of his personality, his naturally stern and reserved manner, his quickness to anger, and his desire to speed 'the change from childhood to manhood' left most boys in awe of 'Black Arnold'. His difficulty in empathizing with adolescent boys who were not thoughtful and dutiful exacerbated his instinct to see sin and evil in their midst, while the strain of the moral responsibility he imposed on his prefects proved too much for some of them, who were forced into premature maturity. Most of his sixth formers, however, greatly respected and praised him, and after leaving school the best Rugby boys were acknowledged to be thoughtful, mature, and conscious of duty and obligation. Although he never eradicated such things as drunkenness and bullying from the school -- even from School House itself -- and although the daily social life of the average boy probably changed little, nevertheless Arnold's untiring and restless energy, hatred of evil, devotion to duty, and ability to inspire enthusiasm helped substantially to improve the school's tone. 
The beneficial effects of Arnold's personality on the school were not instantaneous; it took time for boys and masters to embrace his initiatives; moreover, the governors were uneasy about his outspoken political and religious writings on topics of the day. His views polarized opinion, and numbers at the school fell for most of the 1830s until the tide turned in his favour. In Arnold a psychological necessity to write -- 'I must write or I shall burst' (Whitridge, 182) -- was combined with a keen interest in national affairs and indignation at unjust conditions. His views were grounded in his Christian beliefs, which would allow him neither to tolerate social injustice nor to separate religion from politics. Reform became his watchword, with the union of church and state as his ideal. Because he wrote from a heart filled with moral certainty, his language was forthright and often intemperate. In 1829 he argued for Catholic emancipation in his pamphlet 'On the Christian Duty of Conceding the Roman Catholic Claims'. He thereby offended the political sensibilities of the liberals and, by asserting that most of the clergy were incompetent judges of history, scandalized both them and the tories. In 1831, alarmed at the growing divide between the educated and working classes and fearing violence, he co-edited with his nephew John Ward a newspaper, the 'Englishman's Register', rather to 'relieve my conscience' than from any expectation of success. Arguing for the 'Reform Bill', he endeavoured to Christianize liberals and tories alike in the hope of engendering mutual respect and sympathy between them in the cause of social justice. After nine issues and a (predetermined) $200 loss, the paper closed, though he continued to analyse the country's social and economic problems during 1831-2 in thirteen letters on 'the social condition of the operative classes' written to the 'Sheffield Courant' newspaper. His pamphlet 'Principles of Church Reform' in 1833 strongly advocated wider religious inclusion to counter the dangers of disestablishment. For the 'Edinburgh Review' in April 1836 he wrote 'The Oxford malignants', a scathing denunciation of the methods of the Tractarians in opposing the appointment of Hampden as regius professor of divinity. 
The tory press nationally and locally vilified Arnold for such writings: he was accused of teaching revolution, neglecting the school, and being unfit to govern boys. His friends disapproved of his engaging publicly in controversy, and the school governors were concerned about the effect his writings might have on the school. Following Arnold's refusal to acknowledge a governor's right to question him on the authorship of the Hampden article, the governors divided equally on a motion of censure moved by Earl Howe. Had it passed, Arnold might well have resigned. Behind all the disquiet was the feeling that a headmaster should not be so engaged. Arnold's position was unequivocal: he insisted that it was his inalienable right as a private citizen to express himself freely on such matters: 'I claim a full right to use my own discretion in writing upon any subject I choose' (Stanley, 196). 
Very often lonely and embattled during these years -- in 1838 Arnold had regretfully resigned his fellowship at London University because its senate would not include a compulsory divinity examination for the BA degree -- he found solace in his family, holidays, and writings. Of simple tastes and habits, his industry was untiring. He showed little interest in art, science, and music (he was tone deaf), but was an indefatigable writer of numerous neat and lengthy letters to a wide range of correspondents. Though not witty, he had an eye for the absurd. In character essentially boisterous, intense in all he did, and ever conscious of the reality of sin, his moral certitude and earnestness made compromise impossible as he daily strained to do what was right. 
Arnold's marriage was ideally happy, and his devoted wife was a constant support and help in all he did. Their daily recreational walk together, she on a pony, was a feature of their routine, as was her careful recording of the family's activities (even conversations) in a series of notebooks. They had eleven children (two daughters died shortly after birth): Jane (who married W. E. Forster), Matthew Arnold (the poet), Thomas Arnold (literary scholar), Mary, Edward (school inspector), William Arnold (director of public education in the Punjab), Susanna, Frances, and Walter. Arnold was never happier than with his children and, though stern and serious when necessary and ever mindful of the true purpose of life, he participated enthusiastically in all their activities both at Rugby and at Fox How, the house he had built in 1833 near Grasmere in the Lake District. There the mountains and beautiful countryside refreshed him physically and spiritually. All aspects of nature delighted him and his diaries contain many pressed flowers collected in the long rambles he regularly undertook with his family. Fox How he regarded as his true home; the Warwickshire countryside was flat and dull in comparison with the Lakes, where another attraction was the firm friendship he developed with the poet William Wordsworth. Regular touring at home and abroad was another feature of his life. Between 1815 and 1842 he travelled to the continent on twelve occasions, minutely detailing a country's topography and its associations in his journals. While visiting Rome in 1827 he made one of his greatest friendships, with Baron von Bunsen, Prussian ambassador to the papal court, with whom he found almost perfect moral and intellectual sympathy. From these tours he returned refreshed and mentally stimulated; as he said, 'a man is only fit to teach so long as he is himself learning daily' (Stanley, 473). 
Intellectual stimulus and distraction from his worries were also provided by Arnold's historical studies. In 1838 the first volume of his 'History of Rome' was published (vol. 2, 1840; vol. 3, 1843, posthumously). The work was incomplete at his death and covers the early history of Rome to the end of the second Punic War. Written in a clear and vigorous style and enlivened by his personal topographical knowledge, his account of the early period, particularly, was influenced by Niebuhr's critical methodology. Arnold's aim was a history that 'by its high morals and its general tone [would] be of use to the cause' (that is, Christianity) (Stanley, 162). Essentially a school text, the book was popular and sold well. His three-volume edition of Thucydides (1830-35) also went through several editions, and was chiefly significant for its emphasis on historical and geographical interpretation and its comparisons between ancient and modern events. 
From the end of the 1830s Arnold's situation was improved through a combination of circumstances: the good reception given to his historical works; the fact that he had not written to the newspapers in the years 1832-7; the increase in numbers at the school from 1838 and the scholarships won at the universities; and the events following the publication of Newman's 'Tract 90' in 1841, which tended to vindicate Arnold's view of the Romanizing tendency of the Tractarian movement. Finally, in 1841 he was appointed regius professor of modern history at Oxford, where both he and his lectures were received with great acclaim; his inaugural lecture was a notable statement of the concept of national biographical history. In the midst of this success, however, Arnold died suddenly at Rugby, from angina pectoris (the cause also of his father's death), on 12 June 1842. He was buried in the school chapel. 
Arnold's main published works, in addition to those mentioned above, are: 'Sermons' in five volumes (1829-42; revised and reprinted in six volumes, 1878); 'Introductory Lectures on Modern History' (1842); and 'Miscellaneous Works' (1845), collected by A. P. Stanley, who wrote the highly influential 'Life and Correspondence of Thomas Arnold' (2 vols., 1844). 
The intellectual basis for Arnold's writings was his composite theory of universal history, derived essentially from a synthesis of the views of Aristotle, Thucydides, Giovanni Battista Vico, and Niebuhr, which could be applied practically to society and its problems. This science and philosophy of history, combined with an unshakeable belief in divine revelation, furnished him with principles which influenced his religious, political, and social theories and, indeed, informed his life. For Arnold history was a divine process, and the stages of a nation's life were cyclically determined, following laws of natural historical development. History, therefore, was ruled by law. It could thus be used analogically, and viewed philosophically rather than chronologically; it also taught moral lessons. Impartiality was impossible for a Christian historian. 
The consequences of this theory are reflected in Arnold's political, social, and theological writings, and reveal why he found 'no party to own him'. Because he regarded the law as sacrosanct, revolution was anathema to him. While he understood unbridled toryism as simply a passing phase in a nation's development, radical socialism, with its emphasis on materialism, was not part of the traditional historical cycle. He believed that the natural destiny of a nation was democratic government, and the hallmark of a citizen the practice of Christianity. Because the 'Bible' was rooted in history, it had to be examined in the light of history; moral and intellectual enlightenment were therefore necessary in order to learn right behaviour. Moreover, history showed that church and state were linked and should not be separated. It also revealed that the priesthood, apostolical succession, and the growth of religious sects were distinctly unhistorical and non-scriptural phenomena. 
Arnold, so often branded by his critics as a 'liberal', actually accepted no one political party. His views -- embracing respect for the establishment, anti-sacerdotalism, and a belief in religious comprehensiveness much in advance of his time -- not surprisingly provoked a strong reaction. The lasting influence of his writings was not great owing to three aspects of his work. First, his philosophy of history, on which they were based, was intellectually in advance of the ideas of most of his contemporaries. Second, as the nineteenth century advanced, ever-increasing material progress and the spread of utilitarianism appeared to contradict his historical interpretation of the cyclical nature of society. Third, his ideal of church unity was shattered by the growth of sectarianism. 
Following his death Arnold was seen as the headmaster who had brought Rugby School from brutality and intellectual decline to civilization and academic excellence, and he swiftly acquired the reputation of being not only the great reformer of the public schools but also the founder of the modern public-school system. This legend grew for a number of reasons: the drama of his sudden death and the impact of his personality on an admiring staff, many of whom, along with former pupils, themselves became headmasters motivated by his principles; the testimonies to his character and abilities paid at the universities by his former pupils; the general public interest in him that resulted from A. P. Stanley's biography, which did so much to perpetuate his memory and establish his reputation; and the immense popularity of Thomas Hughes's novel 'Tom Brown's Schooldays' (1857). Even the emergence of rugby football kept the school's name, and therefore Arnold's, in the public mind. In addition to this general reputation as a school reformer, he became particularly identified with the role of the prefect and the growth of organized games in schools. However, twentieth-century reappraisals of his life, particularly after the 1950s, put this legend into perspective. They pointed out that he did not single-handedly change the face of education in the public schools and that, in his own day, he was best known for his writings on non-educational matters. They also revealed that the poor moral condition of the school he inherited has often been exaggerated and that examples of indiscipline continued throughout his time there, that he was essentially conservative in his approach to change at the school, and that his few curriculum reforms had been anticipated elsewhere. There is no doubt that the later widening of the curriculum and the growth of the games cult were not due to his influence; even the prefect system he developed was derived from Winchester College. Certainly there were teachers elsewhere endeavouring to make Christianity a reality in the everyday life of a school. Finally they pointed out that his ideas on theological and social change were soon forgotten. 
Equally, these reappraisals established Arnold's lasting educational achievements. He established the principle of headmagisterial independence, restored confidence in the public school system generally, and confirmed Rugby's position as one of the leading schools. His ideas were spread by his pupils and assistants, and he was undoubtedly a source of inspiration to others in the field of education. The enduring verdict of posterity confirms the magnitude of his personality, vision, intellectual ability, and Christian idealism. 


@@@@@


doc= 687


Arnold, Thomas (1823-1900), literary scholar and teacher, was born on 30 November 1823 at Laleham, Middlesex, the third of the nine surviving children of Dr Thomas Arnold (1795-1842), schoolmaster and clergyman, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Penrose (1791-1873), youngest daughter of the Revd John Penrose, rector of Fledborough, Nottinghamshire. Tom Arnold, as he was usually known, and his elder brother Matthew Arnold (1822-1888) spent a year at Winchester College, their father's old school, and continued their education at Rugby School, where Dr Arnold had been a reforming headmaster since 1828. Tom Arnold found many reminders of Rugby when in October 1842 he went up to Oxford as a scholar of University College. Matthew was in his second year as an undergraduate at Balliol, their friend Arthur Hugh Clough was a junior fellow of Oriel, and Tom's tutor was Arthur Stanley, one of Dr Arnold's favourite pupils; he was already at work on his life of the great headmaster. At Oxford, Tom, like Matthew and Clough, lapsed from Dr Arnold's Anglican orthodoxy, though throughout his life he remained preoccupied with religion. He adopted radical and republican ideals in politics, and Clough was said to have reproduced aspects of his character in the radical poet Philip in 'The Bothie of Tober-na-Vuolich'. Tom was milder than Matthew, and better looking; his dark, sensitive features, derived from his mother's Cornish family, made him known as 'the handsomest undergraduate in Oxford' (W. T. Arnold, 118). In 1845 Arnold graduated with a first in classics (a better degree than either his brother or Clough attained). He could have stayed on with a fellowship, but he had had enough of Oxford. 
In London, Arnold briefly studied law at Lincoln's Inn, then worked in the Colonial Office. But he was restless and in November 1847 he set sail for New Zealand, where his father had bought some land. He spent two years in that country, farming and teaching, and in 1850 moved on to Tasmania (then Van Diemen's Land) to become inspector of schools. A few months later on 13 June 1850 he married Julia Sorrell (1826-1888), the beautiful daughter of the registrar of the colony's supreme court. Their first child, Mary, born in 1851, became famous as the novelist Mrs Humphry Ward. They had eight more children, including the journalist and author William Thomas Arnold, Ethel Margaret Arnold, also a journalist, and one child who died in infancy. Tom Arnold was committed to his work, but after a few years he was unexpectedly converted to Roman Catholicism, a move which horrified his wife and alienated public opinion in the colony. He gave up his post in 1856 and sailed for England with his wife and young family. 
Arnold had been corresponding with Newman, then rector of the recently founded Catholic University in Dublin, who offered him the position of professor of English literature. Arnold accepted, and worked in Dublin for five years. The institution did not prosper: Newman wanted a centre of international scholarship, while the Irish bishops were concerned with local needs. Tom Arnold was a dedicated teacher but found life there increasingly difficult, especially after Newman left Ireland in 1858. He could barely support his family, and early in 1862 he left to become senior classics master at the Oratory School, which Newman had started in Edgbaston, Birmingham. During these years Arnold was active in periodical journalism, particularly for 'The Rambler' and its successor the 'Home and Foreign Review', the liberal Catholic journals edited by Sir John (later Lord) Acton. In 1862 Arnold published 'A Manual of English Literature, Historical and Critical', a useful and well-researched book which went into several revised editions during the rest of the century. He also edited medieval manuscripts from the 'Rolls Series' and collections of historical and literary material. 
Roman hostility to Acton's kind of liberal Catholicism provoked another religious crisis; in 1865 Arnold resigned from the Oratory School, and let it be known that he could no longer accept the authority of the Catholic church. Greatly to the satisfaction of his wife and other members of the family, he returned to Anglican practice. He and his family moved to Oxford and he set up as a tutor, renewing his old university acquaintances such as Benjamin Jowett, and doing well enough to build a large house in the Banbury Road, now part of Wycliffe Hall. 
After a few years, though, Arnold's Catholic tendencies reappeared; Newman had perceptively described him as having become a non-practising Catholic rather than a protestant. In 1876 Arnold told his family that he intended to return to the Roman Catholic church; his wife was once again horrified. In that year, also, Arnold was a candidate for the Rawlinson chair of Anglo-Saxon. His edition and translation of 'Beowulf' (1876) made him a strong contender, but he thought it necessary to inform the electors of his return to Rome. This move cost him the support of the high-church faction and he was not elected. It has been generally assumed that Arnold wantonly threw away a prestigious and well-paid appointment; his wife thought so, but the outcome of the election was never certain; the successful candidate, John Earle, was an accomplished Anglo-Saxon scholar, and some had regarded him as the favourite from the outset. But Arnold's statement hardly helped his cause. 
After this crisis Julia could no longer bear to live with Arnold, and he retreated to London. The marriage became semi-detached; he supported his family as best he could and regularly visited them in Oxford, where Julia had moved to a smaller house and took in boarders. In London Arnold scraped a living by journalism, editing, and examining for the civil service commission. But in 1882, following an initiative by Newman, he returned to Dublin as professor of English at University College, as the Catholic University had become. He was also a fellow of the Royal University of Ireland, though that was no more than an examining body. His wife refused to lived in Dublin, so he still had the expense of maintaining two homes. One of his new colleagues was Gerard Manley Hopkins SJ, professor of classics, whom few people then knew to be a great poet. In 1884 Arnold published 'A Catholic Dictionary', which he had written with W. E. Addis; like his 'Manual of English Literature' it ran into many editions and was reprinted up to the 1920s. 
In 1888 Julia Arnold died of cancer; despite their conflicts, the Arnolds had remained in love, and her husband was with her when she died. On 8 January 1890 he married Josephine Benison (1831-1919), an Irishwoman and an old family friend. The couple made a home in Dublin, where Arnold's final years were spent serenely. He continued teaching until his death, and once marked an undergraduate essay by the young James Joyce. In 1900 he published 'Passages in a Wandering Life', a pleasant, bland autobiography. Arnold linked, at some cost to himself, the dominant English culture represented by Oxford and his distinguished family, and the small, growing, and quarrelsome subculture of Victorian Catholicism. According to the writer of the 'Times' obituary, 'his steadfast pursuit of high aims, his gentle nature and his exquisite old-fashioned courtesy made him greatly beloved'. 
On 12 November 1900 Thomas Arnold died at his home at 16 Adelaide Road, Dublin, of congestion of the lungs and heart failure. He was buried in Glasnevin cemetery on 15 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 688


Arnold, Thomas James (1803-1877), barrister and literary translator, was born on 6 July 1803 in Downing Street, Westminster, London, the eldest son of Samuel James Arnold (1774-1852), dramatist, and Matilda Catherine Pye (died 1851), younger daughter of Henry James Pye, MP and poet laureate. He was educated at St Paul's School and the University of Gottingen, and was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 13 November 1824 and called to the bar on 24 November 1829. His first wife was Emily Frances, only daughter of Francis Coust, chairman of the Middlesex quarter sessions. He married again on 12 September 1867, this time to Prudentia Sarah Jefferson, the only child of the barrister Thomas Jefferson Hogg. 
As a lawyer, Arnold chose the northern circuit and became a commissioner of bankruptcy at Liverpool. He then worked in London and in 1847 he was appointed magistrate at the Worship Street police court; he transferred to the Westminster court in 1851. He still held his appointment and was senior London police magistrate at the time of his death. He died on 20 May 1877 at his home, 1 Greville Place, Kilburn Priory, London, survived by his second wife; he was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Arnold wrote legal manuals on the law of municipal corporations and on labour laws. However, he also had broad cultural interests and was fluent in Greek, Latin, and several modern languages. He became known for his translations of Goethe's 'Reineke Fuchs' (1860) and 'Faust' (1877), and his versions of poems by Anacreon (1869). In addition he translated various works by Euripides, Aristophanes, Xenophon, and Ovid. He became a member of the Numismatic Society in 1862, and he contributed regularly to the 'Numismatic Chronicle'. In 1869 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He was also a close friend of the novelist and poet Thomas Love Peacock. His father-in-law Thomas Hogg was the biographer of Shelley. 


@@@@@


doc= 689


Arnold, Thomas Kerchever (bap. 1800, d. 1853), educational writer and theologian, was born at Stamford, Lincolnshire, where he was baptized on 6 March 1800, the son of Thomas Graham Arnold (1769/70-1855), a doctor of medicine, and his wife, Elizabeth. He was the grandson of Thomas Arnold MD. He was educated at Uppingham School and Dr Heathcote's school, Hackney, before matriculating at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1817. He was seventh junior optime in the mathematical tripos of 1821, and was elected fellow of his college in 1823. He graduated BA in 1821 and MA in 1824. Ordained deacon in 1826 and priest in 1827, he was presented in 1830 to the living of Lyndon, in Rutland, where his parishioners numbered only 100. He at first devoted his ample free time to theology, and showed himself a relentless opponent of the Oxford Movement. He also took pupils at Lyndon and from 1834 until his death he wrote school books, drawing on his experience as a teacher, which gave him a very wide reputation. On 27 March 1828 he married Elizabeth Heathcote, with whom he had at least one daughter. He died at Lyndon rectory of bronchitis after a few days' illness on 9 March 1853. His wife survived him. 

'A Latin Syntax and First Reading Book' (1836) was one of Arnold's first publications as an educational writer. His 'Essentials of Greek Accidence' appeared in 1838. This work was followed almost immediately by his 'Practical Introduction to Greek Prose Composition', which had an unprecedented success, and was 'the keystone of his literary fortunes'. The book reached a fourth edition in 1841, and a seventh in 1849, when its sale had exceeded 20,000 copies. It was at once adopted as a textbook in the leading English public schools. Its chief merit consisted in its author's judicious use of the system and researches of recent German scholars. In 1839 Arnold issued a 'Latin Prose Composition' on a similar plan, and in the succeeding years he prepared a whole library of classical school books, which included translations and adaptations of many German and American works. His primer, 'Henry's First Latin Book' (1839; 26th edn, 1883) was widely used by beginners in the language. In association with the Revd J. E. Riddle he published in 1847 an 'English-Latin Lexicon', based on a German work by Dr C. E. Georges, which cost him, he wrote in the preface, 'many years of labour'. His first known published work was an edition of 'Eclogae Ovidianae' (1834), with notes abridged from the German edition. Between 1848 and 1853 he edited, in twenty-five volumes, portions of all the chief Latin and Greek authors, and published handbooks of classical antiquities, an 'Anticleptic gradus', and similar works. 
Arnold oversaw the publication of English, French, German, Italian, and Hebrew grammars, and helped to produce a 'Handbook of Hebrew Antiquities' and a 'Boy's Arithmetic'. Almost all his educational writings drew upon German scholarship. In his classical work he depended largely on Madvig, Kruger, Zumpt, and other, lesser-known, scholars; his treatment of modern languages was also based on German models, and he was generally ready to acknowledge his obligations to foreign writers. 
As a theological writer Arnold was almost equally voluminous. His earliest published work was a sermon on the faith of Abel, which appeared in the third volume of a collection of 'Family Sermons' in 1833, and four years later he projected and edited a periodical under the title of the 'Churchman's Quarterly Magazine', which soon perished. In January 1844 he published the first number of the 'Churchman's Monthly Companion', which succumbed to popular indifference eight months later, and in 1851 he started another monthly magazine, entitled the 'Theological Critic', which lived on until his death in 1853. Arnold's contributions to theological literature also included five pamphlets on ecclesiastical questions raised by the Oxford Movement; an abridgement of an American version of Hengstenberg's 'Christology'; two volumes of sermons, one published in 1845, and the other posthumously in 1858; and 'Short Helps to Daily Devotion' (1847). He likewise issued controversial treatises criticizing well-known theological works like Taylor's 'Interpretations of the Fathers', Elliott's 'Horae apocalypticae', and Dean Close's sermons, in all of which, 'his critical eye discerned unsoundness... that, if not exposed, was likely to do extensive mischief' ('The Guardian', 16 March 1853). 
Arnold's literary work was of very uneven quality, and only a very small part of the classical portion of it stood the test of time. An article in 'Fraser's Magazine' for February 1853, later published in pamphlet form and attributed to Dr J. W. Donaldson, sought in very forcible language to discredit all of Arnold's classical school books. But the unmeasured vituperation of the criticism, which attracted considerable attention at the time, was only very partially justified. In a temperate reply, written a few weeks before his death, Arnold successfully rebutted some of the more sinister imputations on his character made in the article; and he remarked, in reference to the multiplicity of his works, that 'regular industry... with a careful division of times and employments, carried on with hardly any exception for six days in every week, will accomplish a great deal in fifteen years' ('A Few Words', 15). The popularity of a few of the books that Donaldson specially denounced survived his fierce attack, and they continued to be valued by eminent teachers. Later editions of Arnold's Latin and Greek 'Prose Compositions', revised by G. G. Bradley and Evelyn Abbott, appeared in 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 690


Arnold, William Delafield (1828-1859), army officer and novelist, was born at Laleham, Middlesex, on 7 April 1828, the fourth son of Thomas Arnold (1795-1842), headmaster of Rugby School, and his wife, Mary (1791-1873), daughter of the Revd John Penrose. He was educated at Rugby School and spent a year at Christ Church, Oxford, before proceeding to India in February 1848 as an ensign in the 39th Bengal native infantry. In December 1848 he was transferred to the 58th native infantry and served with its reserve division at Jagraon during the Second Anglo-Sikh War. Like his father he was an earnest liberal churchman but, unlike his father, beset by doubts. He thought only two professions untainted by worldliness -- holy orders and teaching -- but feared that he was fitted for neither. He languished in the army, homesick and lonely, until his marriage on 3 April 1850 to Frances Anne 
(Fanny; 1824-1858)
, daughter of Major-General John Anthony Hodgson of the Bengal army. In 1851, having finally overcome his scruples about worldly success, Arnold accepted a desirable civilian appointment as assistant commissioner at Amritsar in the Punjab. He threw himself into the job, only to collapse from overwork, and at the end of 1852 he and Fanny returned home on three years' leave. Back in England he published 'Oakfield, or, Fellowship in the East' (1853) under the pseudonym Punjabee. Largely autobiographical, the novel describes a young man's quest for duty and truth in a world of distractions and includes a solemn, laboured attack on the vulgarity of Arnold's former military companions in India. In spite of the book's setting, India features in it only as an exotic background against which to view the flaws of European society. 
In the summer of 1855 Arnold was contemplating the editorship of 'The Economist' when John Lawrence approached him to become the first director of public instruction in the Punjab. He returned to India with a new energy. Eschewing abstractions, over the next eighteen months he toiled assiduously to create a workable system of vernacular schools which would teach solid, uncontroversial learning. In 1857-8 he published several articles in 'Fraser's Magazine' on the causes of the uprising. On 24 March 1858 Fanny died, having never fully recovered from the birth of their fourth child. Distraught, Arnold immersed himself in writing a 'Memorandum on the Admission of the Bible as a Classbook into Government Schools', a mature but impassioned argument against government-aided proselytization. He had never questioned that it was the duty of a Christian to seek the truth, but he could not be convinced that Christianity encompassed the whole truth of the world to the exclusion of other faiths. In February 1859, suffering from intermittent dysentery, he took a year's furlough and sailed for England. He died on 9 April 1859 at San Roque, Gibraltar, and was buried there. His two sons and two daughters were brought up by his eldest sister, Jane, and her husband W. E. Forster; in 1879 they took the name Arnold-Forster. Among them were Florence Arnold-Forster, Frances Egerton Arnold-Forster, and Hugh Oakeley Arnold-Forster. Arnold's eldest brother, Matthew Arnold, composed the poem 'A Southern Night' in his memory; he also alluded to him in 'Stanzas from Carnac'. 


@@@@@


doc= 691


Arnot, Hugo (1749-1786), author, was born Hugo Pollock on 8 December 1749 at Leith, near Edinburgh, the son of Duncan Pollock (died 1765), merchant, and his wife, Christian Arnot (died 1773). He changed his name to Arnot on succeeding to his mother's property of Balcormo, Fife. On 8 July 1770 he married Margaret, daughter of William Bennet, excise officer; the couple had five sons and four daughters, three of whom died in infancy. His daughter Christian (1771/2-1852) married Peter Reid with whom she had a son, David Boswell Reid, chemist. He became an advocate on 5 December 1772, but his legal career faltered on account of his reputation for irritability, sarcasm, and caustic language. In 1776 he published the satirical 'Essay on Nothing', first delivered as a paper to the Edinburgh Speculative Society. His 'History of Edinburgh' appeared in 1779 -- a second edition was printed in 1816 -- and his 'Collection of Celebrated Criminal Trials in Scotland' was published in 1785; both works were pirated in Ireland. Arnot published the 'Collection' at his own expense in defiance of the Edinburgh booksellers, and the gross proceeds were $600. In addition he wrote numerous papers on local politics, and in 'A Letter to the Heritors' (1775) he opposed plans to raise local taxes. His efforts are also said to have prevented the building of the South Bridge in Edinburgh for ten years. Prematurely aged by asthma, Arnot died on 20 November 1786 at his home on St Andrew's Meuse, Edinburgh, and was buried in South Leith cemetery on 25 November. He was a favourite subject with the Edinburgh caricaturist John Kay, who took full advantage of the extreme slimness of Arnot's figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 692


Arnot, William (1808-1875), Free Church of Scotland minister, was born at Scone on 6 November 1808, the seventh and youngest child of Robert Arnot ('b'. 1763), a tenant farmer, and his wife, Margaret Fisher; his mother died shortly after his birth. As a boy Arnot attended parish schools, while working in summer as a herder for his father; at the age of fourteen he was sent to a private academy in Perth. In November 1824 he was apprenticed to the gardener of James, sixth Baron Ruthven, at Freeland. The love of flowers and natural beauty which this experience provided remained throughout his life. However, influenced by the death of a religiously minded brother, he decided to train for the ministry; while still working as a gardener Arnot taught himself Latin and saved $20 from his wages. After a year's tutoring in Latin and Greek from 1827 to 1828 he became a student at Glasgow University. His contemporaries included James Halley (died 1842) and James Hamilton (1814-1867), later minister in the National Scotch Church in Regent Square, London: both men became close friends, and later the subjects of memoirs by Arnot. 
Arnot was licensed in October 1837 by the Glasgow presbytery, and served briefly as an assistant to the Revd John Bonar of the Larbert and Dunipace parishes. In 1838 he was called to be minister of St Peter's, Glasgow, one of the new churches erected by the Church Building Society under Chalmers's extension scheme. Arnot married Jane Fleming, daughter of John Fleming of Clairmont, on 30 July 1844. This happy marriage produced four daughters (of whom two died young) and two sons. Arnot would have preferred a country parish (at the Disruption he proved his commitment to the non-intrusionist position by refusing a presentation to the country parish of Ratho on the grounds of insufficient congregational support for the call). But he became a successful and committed city minister, continuing as the Free Church minister of St Peter's after the Disruption and declining moves to such varied destinations as Lerwick, Shetland, and the chair of theology at the Presbyterian college in London. During his ministry he oversaw the building of a new church and schools, started a Young Men's Society, supported local temperance associations, held social evenings, and regularly visited his parishioners. 
A staunch evangelical (and a keen critic of Roman Catholicism and episcopacy), Arnot became associated with several nationwide evangelical causes. In his autobiography he vividly recalled his first hangover; this unpleasant event no doubt prompted his almost fanatical commitment to temperance, which resulting in him being viewed by other ministers as 'a kind of out-of-the-way enthusiast' ('Autobiography', 305). A keen writer of tracts, he published 'The drunkard's progress: being a panorama of the overland route from the station of Drouth to the general terminus in the Dead Sea', a work which reflected his early fascination with 'The Pilgrim's Progress'. Arnot was also interested in missions to young men: he was often invited to give lectures by young men's associations (he spoke frequently at Exeter Hall in London at the request of the YMCA), and was concerned about the many temptations to which young men in lodgings -- removed from their family environment -- were exposed. Many of his tracts -- including 'The Race for Riches, and some of the Pits into which the Runners Fall' (1870) -- were intended for this audience. In addition to these interests Arnot was a keen member of the Evangelical Alliance, travelling as far afield as Germany, France, and Switzerland to attend meetings. He visited America three times: in 1845, as a supply minister for the new Free Church of Montreal; in 1870, as a delegate from the Free Church of Scotland; and in 1873, as a member of the Evangelical Alliance, to attend meetings in New York. In 1847 he was sent to Ireland by the general assembly to preach and to report on the condition of the people. 
Arnot's appearance was striking: one contemporary picturesquely described him as a 'Scotch minister of buirdly make, shaggy, unkempt hair, and rugged but mirthful countenance' (M'Crie, 97). Unconventional, affectionate, and cheerful, his personality was an appealing one: he once wrote to his father that 'I love, in a greater or less degree, every person whom I know, and also all that I do not know; and this is the one great source of my happiness' ('Autobiography', 101-2). Characteristically he twice refused honorary doctorates (offered by the University of Glasgow in 1860 and the University of New York in 1873), preferring 'my own simple designation' (ibid., 370). 
In 1863 Arnot reluctantly accepted a call to the Free High Church in Edinburgh, where he spent the last twelve years of his life; from 1867 he edited a monthly magazine, the 'Family Treasury'. He died on 3 June 1875 in Edinburgh and was buried in Grange cemetery. He left a lively autobiographical sketch of his early life, which was subsequently published with his letters by his daughter in 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 693


Arnott, George Arnott Walker (1799-1868), botanist, was born at Edinburgh on 6 February 1799, the son of David Walker Arnott. He spent his early years at Edenshead and Arlary, on the borders of Fife and Kinross. In 1807 he went to Edinburgh high school, then entered the university in 1813. He took his AM degree in 1818, and while still a teenager published learned articles on mathematics. He studied for the law and was admitted to the faculty of advocates in 1821, but found the profession uninteresting and soon abandoned it. He turned his attention to botany, and in 1821 went to France, where he worked in the Paris herbaria, and published two influential papers on mosses. Before the age of thirty, he was famous for his work on cryptogams, for which he was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1825. In 1828 the genus 'Arnottia' was named after him by Achille Richard. He visited Spain and Russia in 1828-9, and, on his return to Scotland, married in 1831 Miss Mary Hay Barclay, of Paris, Perthshire. 
From 1830 to 1840 Arnott worked with Sir William Jackson Hooker on a study of the plants collected in Captain Beechey's voyage to the Pacific and the Bering Strait, published in 1841. During these ten years his reputation was established as a meticulous taxonomist, and he began the vast international correspondence which at his death would fill over twenty volumes and boxes. His descriptions of new plants from South America, India, and Senegambia were published in various periodicals, and he co-operated with Robert Wight in his 'Illustrations of Indian Botany', and especially in the notable 'Prodromus florae peninsulae Indiae orientalis' (1834). In 1837 the University of Aberdeen awarded him its LLD. In 1839 he temporarily took Hooker's place as botanical lecturer at Glasgow, and in 1845 was elected regius professor of botany in that university. 
Arnott left Arlary in 1846, and took up his residence in Glasgow. In 1850 he collaborated with Hooker on the sixth edition of 'British Flora'. About this time he took up the study of diatoms, of which he formed a large and valuable collection which was later housed in the Natuurwettenschaplijk Museum, Antwerp. He was an enthusiast of curling and an adherent of freemasonry, rising to the rank of deputy grand master of the Scottish order. In 1868 his health gave way and his university work had to be abandoned. Jaundice set in, and he died on 17 June 1868, and was buried three days later in the Sighthill cemetery, Glasgow. He left three sons and five daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 694


Arnott, Neil (1788-1874), physician and public health reformer, the son of William Arnott, a manufacturer and farmer, and his wife, Ann Maclean, was born at Arbroath in Forfarshire, Scotland, on 15 May 1788. A Roman Catholic by upbringing, he was educated by his mother, at the parish school of Lunan, and at Aberdeen grammar school, which he went to in November 1798. In 1801 he went to Marischal College, Aberdeen, where he graduated MA in 1805, and began to study medicine. He supported himself partly by working as a shop assistant to a chemist. After moving to St George's Hospital, London, in September 1806, Arnott obtained an appointment as surgeon in the East India Company and undertook two trips to China. On his return to London in 1811 he established himself in lucrative private practice in Hunter Street, Brunswick Square. He was awarded his MD by Marischal College in 1814, and had obtained the diploma of the Royal College of Surgeons the previous year. Arnott's facility with languages gained him many foreign patients and he was also sometime physician to the French and Spanish embassies. 
Attaching himself to progressive Benthamite circles in London, Arnott quickly matured into a versatile lecturer, author, and inventor. In 1827 he published his 'Elements of Physics', which had gone through six editions by 1865 and which was translated into every major European language. In 1832 he produced the prototype of a waterbed, intended to reduce the pain experienced by elderly, non-ambulant patients. Six years later he completed his essay 'Warming and Ventilating' (1838), which described the principles underlying the Arnott stove, for which he subsequently received the Royal Society's Rumford medal in 1854. Arnott was one of the founders of the University of London in 1836 and an original member of the senate. He was appointed physician-extraordinary to Queen Victoria in 1837 and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1838. Arnott retired from private practice in 1855. A year later he married Marianne Knight (died 1876), a widow, and daughter of G. H. Holley of Blickling, Norfolk; there were no children. 
Between the 1820s and the mid-1850s Arnott was intimately involved in the technical and ideological reconstruction of the theory and practice of public health. He played an important role in bringing the youthful Edwin Chadwick into contact with Jeremy Bentham; six years later he successfully pressed the claims of William Farr as the only suitably qualified candidate for the position of compiler of abstracts at the newly established office of the registrar-general. Arnott introduced Chadwick to the complexities and political deployment of social and medical statistics. In 1838 Chadwick chose Arnott, together with Thomas Southwood Smith and James Kay, to undertake a series of investigations for the poor-law commission into the prevalence of fever in London. These co-authored reports proved seminal, not least since they marked the 'first occasion on which the government had formally employed fully-qualified medical men to gather factual information as a prelude to possible parliamentary action' (Flinn, 44). They also paved the way for Chadwick's conversion of important sections of medical and professional opinion to the view that filth and odour were inextricably associated with and prime causal factors in the generation of disease and death. Arnott's views on the deleterious impact of dust whipped up from the surface of non-macadamized roads and the alleged weakness of W. P. Alison's insistence that fever was more likely to be precipitated by low wages than miasmatic factors were fully incorporated into Chadwick's seminal text. 
In the early 1840s Arnott drew on his experience of Asian conditions to canvass a malarial variant of the filth-based theory of infection. Playing down the primacy of regular work and adequate food and heating to the prevention of fever, he emphasized the centrality of environmental intervention. Convinced that it was necessary to stimulate a moral, temperate, and thrift-based regeneration among the urban working class, Arnott travelled to Edinburgh and Glasgow to report on a savage epidemic of typhus. He concluded that living conditions rather than economic distress had been predominantly responsible for the severity of the outbreak. Observations of slum life in the same cities encouraged Chadwick and Arnott to formulate a blueprint for the profitable sale of liquid manure to local farmers. According to this plan, town waste would boost agricultural productivity, thereby reducing the price of food for the ever-expanding urban proportion of the national population. In 1844 Arnott once again bolstered the Chadwickian account of disease transmission by providing the health of towns commission with a persuasive synopsis of interactions between inadequate ventilation and miasmatically determined infection. 
Arnott also became a provisional director of Chadwick's ill-fated Towns Improvement Company, which sought to supply nothing less than an 'increased and well-distributed supply of pure water, a complete system of house and street drainage, the removal of middens, cesspools, and the accumulations of decomposing filth and other organic matter, and the purification of rivers' (Finer, 241). When this Utopian project failed to survive the company's financial collapse in 1846, Arnott continued to support the sanitarian cause as a member of the recently reconstituted metropolitan commission of sewers. 
In 1852 Chadwick proposed his friend's name as governmental co-investigator of the origins of a serious epidemic of typhoid in Croydon, a town which had made extensive use of the controversial and undertested pipe-drain and sewer system. Refusing to do what was expected of him, Arnott informed Chadwick that he must 'speak of faults and failures in works that you had hoped to be deemed perfect' (Lewis, 316). In the aftermath of the Croydon fiasco, Chadwick repeatedly and unsuccessfully sought to revise or rewrite Arnott's critique. But the rancour appears to have been short-lived, and, as Arnott gradually reduced his commitment to the sanitary cause, Chadwick took every opportunity to praise his friend's work in the field of ventilation theory. For his part Arnott refused to acknowledge that research by John Snow and William Budd had in any way undermined the filth-based theory of infection. Appointed to the committee of scientific inquiries, which reported on the traumatic cholera epidemic of 1853-4, Arnott rejected statistical evidence which appeared to point to the specificity of disease, and reiterated a belief in the causal role of environmental and meteorological precipitants. 
During the 1860s Arnott, weakened by ill health, returned to themes originally raised in his 'Elements of Physics'. Depicting the 'human race as one great intellectual being' (Arnott, 126), he nevertheless approached social and economic development from an exclusively Anglo-centric, if not quasi-racist, perspective. Idealizing self-made men who had profited from unprecedentedly rapid upward social mobility during the peak period of industrialization, Arnott chauvinistically commended large and impersonal systems of free trade and imperialism. North American and Chinese agriculturalists, he argued, had been created explicitly in order to provide Britons with cotton and tea, though even in the 'highest civilization yet attained' social perfection had proven elusive. Good health and happiness were unevenly distributed between the upper, middle, and lower classes; unrepentantly Benthamite, Arnott contended that it was only through 'yet further refinement of reason, within an inclusive system of national education', that there could be a maximization of psychological well-being. At an extreme he believed that 'individuals who learn little and badly are left to act chiefly from the low propensities of the mere animal, and so continue to resemble the animal' (Arnott, 9). 
After the completion of a pamphlet on educational reform in 1869, Arnott suffered a fall which irreparably damaged his physical and mental health. He died at his home, 2 Cumberland Terrace, Regent's Park, London, on 2 March 1874, and was buried in Dean cemetery, Edinburgh. His wife survived him by two years. During his lifetime Arnott had been widely admired as an accessible and reliable popularizer and synthesizer of scientific knowledge. It is now clear that his most significant contribution was as part-shaper and highly effective disseminator of the Chadwickian or miasmatic theory of disease. The Neil Arnott prize in natural philosophy was later instituted at the University of Aberdeen, and a Neil Arnott studentship for postgraduate studies was established at the University of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 695


Arnould, Sir Joseph (1813-1886), judge in India and writer, was born at Camberwell, Surrey, on 12 November 1813, the eldest son of Joseph Arnould MD (1786/7-1859) and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Baily. Joseph Arnould senior owned White Cross, near Wallingford in Berkshire, and was a deputy lieutenant for that county. On his death in June 1859 the property passed to his eldest son. 
Arnould was educated at Charterhouse School (1826-1828/9) and was admitted to Wadham College, Oxford, on 4 October 1831, so beginning a glittering academic career. He was Goodridge exhibitioner from 1833 to 1835, Hody (Greek) exhibitioner from 1833 to 1836, and in 1834 his 'Hospice of St Bernard' won the Newdigate prize for English verse. On 10 June 1834 he recited it at the Sheldonian Theatre when the duke of Wellington was installed as chancellor of the university and in doing so he refashioned two lines so as to read that he whom '... a world could not subdue / Bent to thy prowess, chief of Waterloo' (J. Pycroft, 'Oxford Memories', 2 vols., 1886, 2.4). This caused a sensation: John Wilson Croker reported that, on hearing the word Waterloo, the whole assembly started up and 'some people appeared to me to go out of their senses -- literally to go mad' (Croker, 2.228). 
Arnould graduated BA on 13 May 1836, with first-class honours in 'literae humaniores', and was elected a probationer fellow of Wadham in June 1838 and moderator of philosophy in 1840. He ceased to be a fellow in January 1841, on his marriage to Maria (1818/19-1859), eldest daughter of H. G. Ridgeway. 
On 10 November 1836 Arnould was admitted to the Middle Temple, and, having been called to the bar on 19 November 1841, he practised as a special pleader and joined the home circuit. For a time he shared chambers with Alfred Domett (1811-1887), the intimate friend of Robert Browning; the poet composed 'Waring' in lamentation at Domett's emigration to New Zealand in 1842. Arnould himself wrote verse; published work included 'Memorial Lines on Sir Robert Peel' (1850). Some of his poems touching on social questions were published in Douglas Jerrold's 'Weekly Newspaper', and he also wrote leaders for the 'Daily News'. In 1848 he published a two-volume 'Treatise on the Law of Marine Insurance and Average'. Its wide-ranging reference to American cases saw it republished in Boston in 1850, and in England it remains the standard work on marine insurance law, having appeared in a sixteenth edition in 1997. 
In 1859 Arnould was appointed by Lord Stanley, secretary of state for India, a puisne judge of the supreme court of Bombay and was knighted on 2 February 1859. He took office on 28 April 1859 and retained his position when, in 1862, the supreme court was converted into the high court. Soon after their arrival in Bombay, on 23 July 1859, Arnould's wife Maria died of fever and dysentery. On 28 May 1860 Arnould married his second wife, Ann (Annie) Pitcairn ('b'. 1839), daughter of the late Major John William Carnegie CB of the 15th Bengal native infantry, and they had at least two children: Marie ('b'. 1861) and Ethel ('b'. 1862). None of his new family appears to have died in India, nevertheless an air of loss hung about him, perhaps from the tragic death of his first wife. A contemporary recalled that Arnould had suffered a 'domestic misfortune' in Bombay, after which he 'shunned all society' (Wacha, 253). 
As a judge, Arnould was valued for the breadth of his scholarship, his literariness, and an openness to social reform. A Parsi lawyer who was frequently before him, recalled him looking 'every inch... a judge' -- 'a stout-looking gentleman, with an aldermanic paunch, a beaming and beneficient countenance' (Wacha, 252). In spite of his undoubted legal and personal success in Bombay, however, Arnould turned down the opportunity to become chief justice when Sir Matthew Sausse retired in 1866. He himself retired in 1869, whereupon leading Indian inhabitants of the city founded the Arnould scholarship at Bombay University in commemoration of his efforts to promote the study of Islamic and Hindu law. 
In retirement, Arnould settled in Italy, residing at Naples from 1872 until 1880. In 1873 he published, in two volumes, a 'Memoir of Thomas, First Lord Denman', and in 1876 two continuation volumes to the first four volumes of Baron Campbell's 'Lives of the Chief Justices of England'. He died at the Hotel Montebello, via Courtatone, Florence, on 16 February 1886; he was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 696


Montgomery, Arnulf de (c.1066-1118x22), magnate, was the sixth and youngest son of Roger de Montgomery, vicomte of the Hiemois in Normandy and earl of Shrewsbury, and Mabel, daughter and heir of Guillaume Talvas of Alencon. His career illustrates the opportunities which were available to younger sons of the Norman aristocracy as the Norman settlement of England was consolidated. In the 1090s during the first Norman penetration of west Wales he was established at Pembroke. Here he built a castle whose chapel of St Nicholas he gave to his family foundation of St Martin-de-Sees in southern Normandy, to which he had also granted a tithe of his property around Argentan in Normandy. He was closely associated with his elder brother Hugh de Montgomery, earl of Shrewsbury, but on his death in 1098 William II granted Hugh's lands and title to their eldest brother, Robert de Belleme, with whom the king had worked closely in Normandy. None the less Arnulf received the title of 'comes' (earl or count) and lands in Holderness in the late 1090s, and had achieved a considerable position by 1101, when he acted as a surety for the new king, Henry I, in the treaty of Dover, but his career in royal service was cut short when he joined his brother Robert's rebellion against the king in 1102. Arnulf approached the Irish king, Muirchertach O Briain, from whom he sought help for the rebels and whose daughter Lafracoth he married in the same year. When the rebellion failed Arnulf joined his brother in his conflict with the duke of Normandy, Robert Curthose, but then seized the family stronghold of Almeneches and handed it over to the duke. 
Arnulf then began a peripatetic career of some twenty years. In 1103 his Irish father-in-law asked for his help against the Norseman Magnus Bareleg, and Arnulf led the first Norman campaigns in Ireland which defeated the Norse raids. He was reconciled with King Henry by Archbishop Anselm, to whom Arnulf was particularly attached, and in the 1110s he attested several acts of Foulques, count of Anjou. In 1114 he was in the south of France where he witnessed an act involving his great-niece, Philippa, duchess of Aquitaine, and it is quite possible that his constant travelling may have been the result of diplomatic initiatives, for he was described as a man of great probity and the highest reputation. His influence at the court of Count Foulques is indicated by the fact that in 1118 the townsfolk of Alencon, the former centre of his family's power in Normandy, asked him to approach the count for help in their rebellion against Stephen, count of Mortain, King Henry's nephew. He died before 1122, leaving no verifiable descendants. 


@@@@@


doc= 697


Arneway, John (1599/1600-c.1653), polemicist, was the third surviving son of John Arneway (died 1622), yeoman of Peplow, Hodnet, Shropshire, and Dorothy ('fl'. 1599-1621), probably 'nee' Hinstocke. He had one elder sister who survived until adulthood. In 1618, aged eighteen, he matriculated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford. The profits of his father's lands at Wixhall were left in his father's will to maintain him at Oxford for five years, and by this means he graduated BA in 1622 and proceeded MA in 1624, and possibly studied theology thereafter. 
Perhaps through the influence of John Rawlinson, principal of St Edmund Hall, who was on close terms with bishops William Laud and William Juxon, Arneway obtained influential patronage, and in May 1633 he became prebendary of Wolvey at Lichfield Cathedral. By 1634 he had obtained the interest of secretary of state Sir Francis Windebank, whose request to Bishop Robert Wright of Lichfield led the earl of Arundel to present him to Ightfield rectory, Shropshire. A power struggle delaying the institution, Sir Robert Vernon meanwhile presented him to the much richer Hodnet rectory nearby, worth $300 a year. Wishing to hold both livings Arneway successfully appealed to Windebank to obtain temporary letters of qualification for him until he had been examined for a further degree at Oxford, and settled at Hodnet. In or after June 1642 he became archdeacon of Coventry. 
On the outbreak of the civil war Arneway signed the loyal address of the Shropshire clergy and, according to John Walker, supplied eight horsemen to serve under Sir Vincent Corbett. On 12 December 1642 he was made an Oxford DD by royal letters. About 1643 he was driven from Hodnet by the parliamentary garrison at Wem, who plundered all his books and papers, and he lost wealth which may have included land. He apparently remained based in Shropshire, perhaps at Ightfield, though his anonymous 'No Peace 'till the King Prospers', written after the Uxbridge peace negotiations broke down in February 1645, was published by the Oxford University printer. This pamphlet argues passionately that all suffer by the continuation of war except the parliamentary leaders, and predicts that parliamentary victory will not end it, since it will necessitate a new constitution imposed by force, and army factions will start internecine war. The king can make no more concessions. Thus his opponents, and those indifferent, are enemies to peace, and Arneway appeals to all who fear God and honour the king to give him their support, to bring peace and prosperity. 
When the parliamentarians captured Shrewsbury in February 1645 Arneway was among the prisoners. He claims he was not allowed 'a 'Bible' of my library to comfort me, nor a sheaf of my means to nourish me, nor a suit of my clothes to cover me, nor use of common air to refresh me' (Walker, 2.40). He was pressurized to take the covenant, and was offered restitution of $400 to do so, but refused and was later interrogated as a suspect Roman Catholic. Ultimately he was banished and went to The Hague. 
There Arneway wrote 'The Tablet' and 'An Alarum to the People of England', eventually published together in 1650. The former was a reply to John Milton's 'Eikonoklastes', and idealized Charles I as perfect, even in intellect, so that his enemies' only recourse was violence, against which he had to defend both church and monarchy. He is compared to Christ, and seen as a conqueror of carnal lusts who is numbered with the saints. The 'Alarum', portraying government and religion in England as in a woeful state, argues that current natural disasters are punishments from God on the nation, which will see terrible judgment. Passionately Arneway exhorts repentance, and predicts that God will restore the monarchy, and the 'second in the kingdom' will end at Tyburn. The works are dedicated to Charles II 'as an earnest of my resolution rather to starve in exile, then change my Allegiance' ('Tablet', 6). 
At the end of 1649 Arneway was perhaps one of those royalists who sailed on 'The Virginia merchant' to take refuge in the colony, which he describes in 'The Tablet' as desert. He settled on the south bank of the James River estuary, and died somewhere between Lyn Haven and 'Nausunum' (probably the Nansemond River) about 1653. Whether he married is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 698


Arrowsmith, Aaron, the elder (1750-1823), cartographer and map publisher, was born on 14 July 1750 at Winston, co. Durham, the son of John and Mary Arrowsmith. His father died when Aaron was young and his mother then married a wastrel who reduced the family fortune. Aaron may have been taught mathematics by William Emerson, then also living in co. Durham, who was interested in applied mathematics. From 1770 onwards Arrowsmith lived in London, and on 26 March 1780 married Catherine Sophia Palmer (died 1801), with whom he had at least seven daughters, and one son who did not survive to adulthood. 
In 1782 Arrowsmith surveyed the great post roads between London and Falmouth; the results of his work were engraved and published by John Cary and it seems likely that he trained with Cary from the time of his arrival in London. By 1786 he had set up on his own at Castle Street, Long Acre, and he established his reputation in 1790 with his eleven-sheet world map on Mercator's projection, the first of several multiple-sheet maps for which he was to become famous. This was followed in 1795 by his great map of Canada, which typified his high standards. All doubtful information was excluded and instead information from the Hudson's Bay Company, the Admiralty, and private individuals was combined for the first time to give the most accurate map possible. As more data became available the Canadian map plates were changed numerous times by Arrowsmith himself and each of his three successors, who all prided themselves on using only the most up-to-date information. Arrowsmith was soon recognized in Britain and abroad as a cartographer of outstanding accuracy and skill and was accorded the title of hydrographer to the prince regent about 1810 and that of hydrographer to the king in 1820. His maps were in great demand by official bodies such as the Admiralty and, more surprisingly given their great size and hence cost, with the public as well. In 1807 he published his map of Scotland, based on the military survey of Scotland of 1745-55 and of particular interest for the accompanying 'Memoir' (1809) in which he described how he constructed the map. His last major work was his map of India (1822). He engraved and printed many of his own maps and all of those produced in his shop (at 10 Soho Square from 1814) were noted for the functional beauty and simplicity with which they were engraved. He died at Soho Square on 23 April 1823 and was buried at St Anne's Church, Soho Square. 
After the death of his first wife Arrowsmith married Sarah Hare (died 1824) on 2 July 1801 at St Marylebone. They had at least two daughters and two sons, Aaron the younger and Samuel ['see below'], and it was to these two sons that he left his business in his will of 16 January 1822. 


@@@@@


doc= 699


Arrowsmith, Edmund (1585-1628), Jesuit, was born at Haydock in the parish of Winwick near Warrington, Lancashire, the son of Robert Arrowsmith, a yeoman farmer, and Margery Gerard, a member of a Lancashire family well known for its adherence to Catholicism. Baptized Bryan, he took Edmund as his confirmation name after his arrival at Douai. Both parents were Catholics who suffered for their faith. Robert and his oldest son Peter fought on the continent. Originally forced to assist the Dutch, both allegedly fired their muskets into the air lest they wound any Catholic. Eventually they joined Sir William Stanley's regiment. Peter was wounded in service of Spain and died in Brussels. After a brief visit to his brother Edmund Arrowsmith, a secular priest on the faculty at Rheims or Douai (the lack of specific dates precludes certainty) Robert Arrowsmith returned to England and died shortly thereafter. 
Because of the poor financial straits of his widow, a secular priest in Lancashire took Bryan Arrowsmith into his service in order to assist the mother and to educate the child. At first he seemed dull and slow, but later proved to be an apt student. In December of 1605 he arrived at the English College in Douai. After a few months he returned to England for medical reasons but upon recovery set out again for Douai, arriving on 15 May 1607. Often ill during his studies, his training was hastened so that he could return to England to breathe his native air. Ordained priest in Arras on 9 December 1612 he was sent on the English mission on 17 June 1613. Some time during his sojourn in Douai he made the spiritual exercises of St Ignatius of Loyola under the direction of a Jesuit spiritual father. As a consequence he longed to enter the society. 
In England Arrowsmith recovered his health and worked in Lancashire. According to an anonymous fellow worker Arrowsmith was very zealous 'especially against an heretic, and so forward that often I wished him merrily to carry salt in his pocket to season his actions, lest too much zeal without discretion might bring him too soon into danger, considering the vehement, sudden storms of persecution that often assailed us. (Foley, 2.29)' Arrested, perhaps in 1622, he was examined by John Bridgeman, bishop of Chester, before being pardoned and released. 
On 21 July 1623 Arrowsmith entered the House of Probation of St Ignatius, the Jesuit noviciate established in London probably in or near the French embassy in Blackfriars. Although the Jesuit catalogues list him there during his two-year noviceship, a contemporary claimed that he did no noviceship but 'labour[ed] amongst us, except for some ten or twelve days once a year for a spiritual recollection, at a place where the Jesuits used to meet in Lancashire for that end' (Foley, 2.32). After his noviceship he was sent to the College of Blessed Aloysius, that is, the Lancashire district. 
Angry because of disagreement surrounding a marital dispensation, a Mr Holden and his wife betrayed Arrowsmith, who was apprehended a second time shortly before the summer assizes of 1628. Tried before Sir Henry Yelverton he was convicted of being a priest and a Jesuit. On 28 August 1628 he was drawn to the place of execution on a hurdle, and after having been hanged, his body was cut down, dismembered, disembowelled, and quartered. His head, as the sentence directed, was set up upon a pole among the pinnacles of Lancaster Castle, and the quarters were hung on four parts of the building. 


@@@@@


doc= 700


Arrowsmith, John (1602-1659), college head and theologian, was born on 29 March 1602 in Gateshead; nothing is known of his parents or early life. He entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1616 and graduated BA in 1620. He proceeded MA in 1623, and in the same year became a fellow of St Catharine's College. In 1631 he resigned his fellowship, married (his wife's name is unknown), and went to King's Lynn as curate and then vicar of St Nicholas's Church. 
With the civil war Arrowsmith emerged as a leading presbyterian in both Cambridge and London. He was an active member of the Westminster assembly of divines set up to advise parliament on religious matters; a skilled Latinist, he translated a letter from the assembly to protestant churches in Europe. In 1645 he became rector of St Martin Pomeroy, Ironmonger Lane, London, and was nominated by parliament in 1645, 1646, and 1648 among those authorized to choose presbyterian elders in the city. In 1644 Arrowsmith had been admitted by the earl of Manchester as master of St John's College, Cambridge, replacing the ejected royalist William Beale. As master he had to contend with a persistent and troublesome royalist faction among the college's fellows. He served as vice-chancellor in 1647/8. 
Arrowsmith opposed religious toleration, stating that 'every variation from unity is a step to nullity' ('Englands Eben-ezer', 1645, 14). Three published sermons to parliament in the 1640s -- 'The Covenant-Avenging Sword Brandished' (1643), 'Englands Eben-ezer' (1645), and 'A Great Wonder in Heaven' (1647) -- voice his mounting concern about the rise of religious sects and parliament's unwillingness to suppress them. His best-known work, 'Tactica sacra' (1657), 'a figurative description of the Christian's equipment for the fight' (Mullinger, 476), laments the loss of church discipline and religious uniformity. Several of his writings contain defences of traditional university learning and a learned ministry against criticism from religious radicals. 
Arrowsmith was distressed by the civil war's bloodshed and was a reluctant subscriber to the engagement, the declaration of loyalty imposed after Charles I's execution. Nevertheless, republican regimes made him regius professor of divinity at Cambridge in 1651 and master of Trinity College in 1653; he was also one of thirty-eight commissioners nominated by parliament in 1654 to approve and admit ministers, and in the same year was appointed one of the parliamentary visitors for the university. With Thomas Hill, Arrowsmith maintained Cambridge's tradition of powerful puritan preaching, which had a great effect on some students. He made particular use of religious aphorisms, delivered on Sunday evenings in St John's College, to teach the main points of Christianity succinctly. Only six of the thirty aphorisms were ready for the press at his death: these were published posthumously in 1659 under the title 'Armilla catechetica'. Notes of three more, taken by a student, have been preserved (St John's College Library, MS 0.82). Of catechetical rather than theological importance, the aphorisms are marked by a clarity of thought and exposition. ''Theanthropos', or, God-man' (1660), an extensive exposition of the first eighteen verses of the gospel according to 'St John', does more to demonstrate his contemporary standing as a theologian. His writings in general are clear, and display sincerity and decency; his firm Calvinist beliefs are evident throughout. Benjamin Whichcote, who differed with him theologically, wrote: 'I have scarcely either spoken or thought better of a man; in respect of the sweetness of his spirit, and amiableness of his conversation' (Salter, 7). 
Little is known of Arrowsmith's personal and family life. He wore a glass eye following an accident with an arrow. Thomas Baker wrote that he had children, and a son, Thomas, became a fellow of Trinity in 1656 during his father's mastership. Arrowsmith's later years were dogged by illness, which forced him to resign the regius professorship in 1656. He remained master of Trinity but seldom ventured out. He died on 15 February 1659 and was buried on 24 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 701


Arrowsmith, John (1790-1873), cartographer and map publisher, was born on 23 April 1790 on a farm in Winston, co. Durham, the son of Thomas Arrowsmith of an old-established family. With limited education, he arrived in London on 14 February 1810 where he learnt map making, engraving, and printing under his uncle Aaron Arrowsmith the elder. He set up in business on his own account about 1824 at 33 East Street, Red Lion Square, moving later the same year to 35 Essex Street, Strand. He established his reputation with his 'London Atlas' (1834) in fifty plates before buying at auction in December 1839 the plates, manuscripts, and copyrights of the business of his cousins Aaron and Samuel, and their house at 10 Soho Square. His cartographic skills outstripped those of his cousins and rivalled those of his uncle. In 1830 he was a founder fellow of the Royal Geographical Society and he took a particular interest in the exploration and discovery of the time. He knew many explorers and was responsible for converting their rough sketch maps and surveys into accurate maps on which was consolidated all the available information. The explorers showed their appreciation of his work by naming after him mountains, plains, and lakes in Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. At least 181 of his maps appeared in the Royal Geographical Society's publications and he persuaded the society to use copper-engraving instead of the cheaper but inferior lithography; this was typical of his search for perfection in both the content and presentation of his maps. His high standards were followed, under his influence, by the cartographers who took over his work for the society. Arrowsmith was a member of the council of the Royal Geographical Society from 1851 to 1868 and for his contributions to geography he was awarded the society's patron's medal in 1862, although he was too shy to attend the meeting at which it was awarded. He retired from business in 1861 to his house at 35 Hereford Square, South Kensington, from where he continued to work -- in particular to help his friend David Livingstone, the explorer and missionary -- until his death, at home, on 2 May 1873. In July 1874 the assets of the Arrowsmith firm were sold at auction to Edward Stanford, who was then rising to pre-eminence in the map trade, but they were destroyed by bombing in the Second World War. Arrowsmith never married. It was said that he laboured over his maps 'quite irrespective of any pecuniary profit' (Markham, 94) and this is probably true of his maps of newly explored areas whose discoverers were in many instances personal friends. None the less, after a frugal life he left a substantial fortune settled at $22,000 after suits in chancery. 


@@@@@


doc= 702


Artaud, William (1763-1823), portrait and history painter, was born in London on 24 March 1763, the son of Stephen Artaud, a Huguenot jeweller, and his wife, Elizabeth. He was awarded silver palettes by the Incorporated Society of Artists in 1775/6, 1777, and 1782, and from 1778 attended the Royal Academy Schools, where he won the silver medal (for an academic figure) in 1783 and the gold medal in 1786. A Royal Academy travelling studentship took him to Rome in 1795, by which time he was already enjoying success as a history painter. There he was patronized by the radically minded William Henry Lambton, for whom he painted 'Liberty Tearing Away the Veils of Ignorance and Superstition' (1797; drawing in the V&A). The four years that he spent in Italy (1795-8) coincided with the French invasion and are described by Artaud in part of a journal and in letters, chiefly to his father (John Rylands Library, University of Manchester; transcribed in Sewter). A number of informative sketchbooks also exist (distributed between eight institutions, including the Victoria and Albert Museum, the British Museum, and Whitworth Art Gallery, University of Manchester). 
Joseph Farington described Artaud as a 'violent democrat' (Farington, 'Diary', 2.485); he welcomed the French invasion of Rome but none the less twice had to flee to Naples (in 1796 and 1797), and finally left for Florence in March 1798. After five months there he spent a year in Dresden, arriving back in London in October 1799. The next four years were successful, and he exhibited portraits and history paintings at the Royal Academy, but they were followed by a 'slow but evident reversal of his fortunes' (Sloan, 84). This decline dates from the death in 1804 of his patron Bertie Greethead, through whom he had received commissions in Dresden. Artaud also seems to have failed to retain the confidence of the engravers upon whom his income chiefly depended, although he worked variously for or with Robert Bowyer, Thomas Macklin, J. G. Landseer, and F. Bartolozzi, among others. For Macklin's 'The British Poets' he executed eight history paintings, of which a few survive, including 'Jethro Bringeth to Moses his Wife and Two Sons' (Carnegie Institute, Pittsburgh; engraved, 1792), and 'The Woman Taken in Adultery' (Art Institute of Chicago; engraved by P. Thompson, 1794). Commissioned designs such as the lost 'Conference between Wallace and Bruce' were not included in Bowyer's uncompleted illustrated edition of Hume's 'History of England'. Artaud was an unsuccessful candidate for associateship of the Royal Academy in 1811, and last exhibited there in 1822. 
Artaud's great ambition to be a history painter often led him to paint on a huge scale. This in part accounts for the descent of his reputation into obscurity, as so many of these unwieldy works have been lost, while the few that survive were mutilated or wrongly attributed until quite recently. Only half of Artaud's 'Triumph of Mercy' (engraved by Bartolozzi) survives (1788; Yale U. CBA) but that half itself measures no less than 81/2 x 6 feet (241.3 x 204.5 cm). It plainly shows the influence of Gavin Hamilton's monumental compositions created in Rome (widely known through engravings by Domenico Cunego). It has been claimed that Artaud's paintings show him to have been 'as talented as any contemporary history painter and certainly better than many' (Sloan, 78). He habitually took itinerant working tours in the midlands, and his portraits can be impressive, painted in the manner of Thomas Phillips or, sometimes, Henry Raeburn. His drawing style resembles that of George Romney with a hint of Henry Fuseli, and many of his works are very striking: for example 'John Deare's Wife at Rome' ('c'.1796; BM) and 'The Temples of Paestum' ('c'.1796; Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester). The faintly preserved sketches that he made in Naples in 1796 of Lady Hamilton's 'attitudes' (BM) are especially evocative. 
Artaud seems not to have married; a self-portrait pencil sketch of 'c'.1800 (NPG), in which he wears a studio cap, also shows two little children by a side table, but these could well have been the children of his sister Anna Susanna Tayler, through whom his papers and sketches descended. He died in March 1823 in London. The circumstances of his death are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 703


Arthur (supp. fl. in or before 6th cent.), legendary warrior and supposed king of Britain, has an attested career that is entirely posthumous. From obscure beginnings in British legend, he became internationally known in the twelfth century, particularly through the success of Geoffrey of Monmouth's imaginative 'Historia regum Britanniae' ('c'.1138). He then became a central figure in a new literary form, the romance, and his career in literature and the arts, adapted for successive tastes and purposes, has continued to the present day. Arthur has been a subject of debate between romantics and sceptics from the twelfth century onwards. From the earliest records (ninth century) through to early modern times two strands of tradition are discernible, one learned and often historicizing, the other popular and fantastic, less well attested, but also feeding into the literary tradition. Within the literary tradition itself there is a contrast between those works whose authors have accepted a minimum historical outline, and have built around that, and those in which there is no concern for historicity, only the elaboration of the developed, and obviously fictional, legend. 
Arthur is not mentioned in any contemporary record. The earliest datable source which mentions him is the 'Historia Brittonum' (attributed to Nennius), composed in Wales 'c'.829-830. This is a history of the inhabitants of Britain, intended to link them into biblical and classical history. Its main themes are the Roman rule of Britain, the Saxon invasions encouraged by the wicked king Vortigern, and the attempts of St Germanus to convert the British to Christianity despite Vortigern's opposition. This text already displays two different images of Arthur, one apparently semi-historical (chap. 56, a list of his battles and associated legendary achievements), the other patently legendary (chap. 73, magical local folklore attached to his name). 
The historical dimension appears in the statement (chap. 56) that Arthur fought against the Saxons as 'dux bellorum', 'battle-leader', of the British kings in the sixth century; Arthur himself is not referred to as a king. He is said to have fought twelve successful battles, at nine named places. These are: first at the mouth of a River Glein; then four above a River Dubglas in the region of Linnuis; sixth above a River Bassas; seventh in the 'Caledonian Wood' 'Coit Celidon'; eighth at a castle called Guinnion; ninth at the 'City of the Legion'; tenth on the shore of a River Tribruit; eleventh on a hill called Agned (or, in some manuscripts, on a hill called Breguoin or Bregion); twelfth on the hill of Badon, where Arthur alone killed 960 men in a single day. 
There have been many attempts to identify these locations. It has been suggested that the source of the list could have been an Old Welsh poem celebrating victories attributed to Arthur, and, if so, that traces of its rhymes may survive in some of the names (Bassas and Dubglas; Celidon, Guinnion, Cair Legion, Bregion, and Badon). The exaggeration of Arthur's achievement at Badon would be consistent with poetic hyperbole. Whether or not that is so, it is recognized that the list may incorporate famous battles, here attracted to Arthur's name, but actually fought under another leader. The assertion that four of the battles were fought at a single location has suggested to some that the number of battles may have been altered to reach a round total of twelve. Several of the names are not otherwise known as battlesites, or at all (Bassas; Dubglas, seemingly in Lincolnshire though not known there; Guinnion; Agned); others have more than one possible identification (Glein, the River Glen in Lincolnshire or Northumberland; the 'City of the Legion', Chester or Caerleon-on-Usk); the 'Caledonian Wood' was in Scotland, and is mentioned elsewhere in Welsh legend. Apart from Badon (discussed below), only one of these nine locations is linked with Arthur in any other source, namely that on the 'shore of 'Tribruit'', which is the same as the 'strands of 'Trywruid'', mentioned in an early Welsh poem as the location of a battle fought by Arthur's men, but also unlocated. 
Owing to the lack of circumstantial information or external evidence concerning the names in the list, many theories and identifications are possible. The names of the battles have been variously sought, and optimistically located, in Scotland, the English midlands, south-eastern England (Sussex and Kent), and indeed all over Britain. By reading between the lines, it has proved possible to establish Arthur's strategy, and to discover a cavalry or a naval commander, a champion of Roman Britain or of Christianity, or an opponent of the church. The best discussions of this much-studied passage are still those of K. H. Jackson (1946-59) and T. Jones (1964). 
The last battle, Badon, is the best attested, for it is also named by Gildas, a contemporary, and in the later Welsh annals (see below); but Gildas notably fails to mention Arthur at all, and seems to imply that the leader at Badon was Ambrosius Aurelianus. This silence by Gildas, who was born in the year that the battle was fought, as he asserts, has never been satisfactorily explained by proponents of a historical Arthur who fought the English in the fifth or early sixth centuries. An Arthur who had been famously successful against the English before Gildas's time would be expected to appear beside Ambrosius in his account. 
The location of Badon remains uncertain. The popular identification with Bath has a long history, going back to Geoffrey of Monmouth. However, Bath is an English name, so is very unlikely to have been used by Gildas; nor is Bath likely to have had an established English name as early as his time. The best suggestion is that Badon is one of several hill forts called Badbury, all in southern Britain (the recurrence of the name has not been satisfactorily explained, nor its meaning); Badbury Rings, near Wimborne Minster in Dorset, may be the likeliest of these. 
The other early and apparently historical references to Arthur appear in 'Annales Cambriae'. This text contains two references to Arthur. In a year which can be calculated as 516 appears the entry, 'Bellum Badonis, in quo Arthur portavit crucem Domini nostri Jhesu Christi tribus diebus et tribus noctibus in humeros suos, et Brittones victores fuerunt' ('The battle of Badon, in which Arthur carried the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ for three days and nights on his shoulders; and the British were victors'); and under a year calculable as 537 the entry, 'Gueith Camlann, in qua Arthur et Medraut corruerunt' ('The battle of Camlann, in which Arthur and Medrawd fell'). The battle of Camlann is additional to the twelve battles listed in the 'Historia Brittonum'; presumably it did not belong among Arthur's victories over the Anglo-Saxons. Its location is again unknown; the name, meaning 'crooked bank', occurs in Romano-British form on Hadrian's Wall (Camboglanna, the fort at Castlesteads, Cumberland) and more than once in Wales. Geoffrey of Monmouth located it in Cornwall, probably for literary purposes. It is notable to find Arthur's name linked with that of Medrawd (the later Modred), but the annalist does not say whether they were on the same or opposing sides, nor whether Arthur's opponents were other British or the English. 
Both the annals and the 'Historia Brittonum' thus credit Arthur with a victory at Badon; but their evidence is not independent. The first entry in 'Annales Cambriae', referring to Arthur carrying Christ's cross on his shoulders at Badon, echoes a comment in the 'Historia Brittonum' concerning another of Arthur's battles, at Guinnion: 'bellum in castello Guinnion, in quo Arthur portavit imaginem sanctae Mariae perpetuae virginis super humeros suos' ('a battle at Castle Guinnion, in which Arthur carried the image of holy Mary, ever-virgin, upon his shoulders'), and the pagans were turned to flight with great slaughter. Although the differences indicate that neither statement is drawn directly from the other, they can hardly be unrelated. The earliest copy of the annals (BL, Harley MS 3859, dated 'c'.1100), also contains a text of the 'Historia Brittonum' (as well as some early Welsh genealogies which do not mention Arthur), so the histories of the two texts are associated. It has been suggested that, in both cases, the words 'humeros suos' ('his shoulders') are due to a confusion of Old Welsh 'iscuid' ('shoulder') with 'iscuit' ('shield'), the two words being often linked in Welsh poetry of the ninth century and later. If so, it is curious that Welsh authors, familiar with the vocabulary, made the same confusion in both accounts. The statement in the annals is reminiscent of Constantine's carrying the symbol of Christ, and having it painted on his soldiers' shields, at the battle of the Milvian Bridge, outside Rome, in 312, when he gained control of the empire. The idea of Arthur as a champion of Christianity became a recurrent theme of the developed legend, particularly in the thirteenth century when his association with the legend of the holy grail became prominent. 
The two entries in the annals, and possibly the battles listed in the 'Historia Brittonum', or some of them, are the only recorded events which can be associated with a historical Arthur, if he existed in the sixth century. The texts in which they occur were compiled long after the events which they purport to record. The Welsh annals of the early period (including the sixth century) include retrospective entries, added in the light of later events (for instance the births of St Brigid and St Columba, given in 454 and 521); and the annal entries were also prone to collect additional legendary comments. Under 573 an entry for the battle of Armterid (Arthuret in Cumbria) states that Merlin went mad in the battle; this statement is not found in the Harleian text, but is added in a later version of the annals. (Merlin's association with Arthur is first found in Geoffrey of Monmouth's history, 'c'.1138.) The clauses mentioning Arthur in the annal entries could both be later additions of this kind, made between the first compilation of the annals (probably in the late eighth century) and the copying of the earliest extant manuscript 'c'.1100 -- perhaps when they were revised in the mid-tenth century. Even if the entries belonged to the original compilation, they would have been written two and a half centuries after Arthur's supposed time, if it was at the period which they claim. The entries therefore carry little or no historical weight for events of the sixth century, though they are important as showing what was believed in Wales. 
The poverty of the evidence is such that those who wish to hypothesize a historical figure behind the legends need not confine themselves to the sixth century. Arthur's name is derived from one used in the Roman empire, Artorius; at least eleven men of this name are recorded in the first to third centuries. Most had nothing to do with Britain, but one who did is Lucius Artorius Castus, a native of Dalmatia who led two legions from Britain against a rebellion in Armorica (modern Brittany) in the late second or the third century. What is known of his activities has nothing in common with the Arthurian legends as reflected in the earliest sources. The only common ground between the two is the leading of an army to the continent (first attributed to Arthur by Geoffrey of Monmouth); but that attribute does not constitute a strong argument without a hypothesis of British legends about Lucius Artorius Castus which survived, unrecorded, to the twelfth century. 
Another British war leader who led troops to the continent has also been suggested as the original Arthur. This is a Briton known in fifth-century continental sources as Riothamus (for Riotamus). However, as he has the wrong name, he is an even less likely original; and he suffers from the same drawback as Lucius Artorius Castus, in that his known activities have nothing in common with those of Arthur found in the earliest (ninth-century) sources, only with those of the legendary figure later portrayed by Geoffrey of Monmouth. At most it is possible that Riotamus's military activities may have provided part of the basis for the continental conquests which Geoffrey included in his portrayal of Arthur. 
One other reference which potentially has historical significance is an allusion in the early Welsh poem the 'Gododdin', purportedly composed by Aneirin in what is now Scotland in the sixth century, though the date and place are both uncertain. Since the manuscript (Cardiff Central Library, MS 1) is of the thirteenth century, it is unknown whether the allusion was part of the original composition (of whatever date) or belongs among those portions which are agreed to have been composed later. A hero is praised for having 'glutted black crows on the wall of the fort, though he was not Arthur', an understatement typical of the poem. Arthur here represents an impossible standard of comparison, which even the bravest hero could not match: this is consistent with the Arthur of both chapter 56 and chapter 73 of the 'Historia Brittonum', the military leader and the folklore hero. 
The scarcity of references to people called Arthur in the pre-Norman Brittonic world has been noted. With the exception of Brittany, where the name seems to have been used slightly more, instances hardly occur. A single instance is a Welsh 'Noe' (or 'Nouy') 'filius' 'Arthur', 'son of Arthur', in the twelfth-century 'Book of Llandaff'; he is named as the grantor in a doubtful charter which may be of approximately the seventh century, but he could be a figment of the twelfth-century compiler. However, in the late sixth and the seventh centuries, men bearing this name do occur in one particular context, the Irish settlements in western Britain. Four men called Artur (a likely Irish form for Brittonic Arthur) are recorded, reasonably well attested as historical characters, all within the world of the Irish settlements in western Britain -- two within Dal Riata (the Irish-Scottish settlement in what is now Argyll), one in northern Ireland in a Dal Riatis context, and the fourth in Dyfed (south-west Wales). All four can be approximately dated to the late sixth or the seventh century. It has been suggested that these men's names commemorated an earlier British leader of great renown who had the same name -- reflections implying a substantial presence, though such commemorative naming is not readily paralleled in medieval Celtic societies. An alternative explanation is that the use of the name resulted from Irish acquaintance with British folk-tales about a legendary hero, one whose name was not current in British families perhaps because the figure of legend carried the wrong kind of resonances (in the way that 'Galahad' and 'Gandalf', for example, have not been popular Christian names); but that Irish families did not have the same reluctance to use it. Their readiness could have been encouraged by the existing Irish first-name Art. 
Some commentators have pointed out that a significant proportion of the early evidence concerning Arthur comes from the north of England or from Scotland, suggesting that this may have been his original region of activity, with his fame spreading south to Wales and beyond, as other legends are known to have done. (The 'Old North' was the chief location of heroic activity in medieval Welsh literature.) The evidence for this view is: the context of the battle-list in the 'Historia Brittonum', which places it adjacent to northern material; the fact that the only battlesite identifiable with assurance belongs (albeit vaguely) in Scotland ('the Caledonian Wood'); the reference in the 'Gododdin', a poem which portrays the heroic world of southern Scotland; and the fact that two of the four men bearing the name Artur occur in Scotland. None of this evidence is strong, and Welsh tradition, followed by Geoffrey of Monmouth, associated Arthur primarily with Cornwall, and also with local landmarks or place names in Wales. There is no bias towards a northern Arthur within the Welsh tradition itself, although that did generally favour a northern location for its heroes. 
Overall, there is no need for a historical Arthur to explain the references to him in the 'Historia Brittonum' and the Welsh annals; but if there was one he could have been a fifth- or sixth-century war leader against the English, as those texts claim, or a second- or third-century Roman leader of British troops to the continent. No contemporary text mentions him; but the paucity of British texts from the fourth to the seventh centuries means that the silence, apart from that of Gildas, is not of great weight. There might be room to postulate a historical person, of whom nothing is known, behind the legends. The strongest argument in favour of such a person may be his name, for it could be argued that a figure which was purely legendary would be unlikely to have borne a name of Latin derivation. 
The early literary references appear mainly in Welsh, which has the richest and earliest literature surviving in a Brittonic language. However, there is also evidence, scanty but clear, that Arthur was a hero of popular legend in Brittany, Cornwall, and southern Scotland -- a pan-Brittonic hero of local folklore. These legends mainly took the form of ascribing an Arthurian origin to notable features of the landscape, but there was also a belief that Arthur was not dead, a subject on which the Bretons and Cornish were known to be easily baited (as is learned in the mid-twelfth century, from Herman de Tournai's account of the miracles of Our Lady of Laon). 
The earliest such local legends are two recorded in the 'Historia Brittonum' in its list of the 'mirabilia', 'wonders', of Britain. Out of thirteen such wonders, two (chap. 73) concern Arthur. As in the list of his battles (chap. 56), so in chapter 73 Arthur is not termed a 'king'; here he is twice referred to as 'Arthur' 'miles' ('Arthur the soldier'). A rock on top of a mountain 'in the region called Buelt' (Builth, Brecknockshire) had a dog's pawprint impressed upon it. The explanation given is that when Arthur was hunting a boar called Troit, his dog Cabal ('horse') left its pawprint there, and Arthur later erected a cairn on the spot, called Carn Cabal, 'the rock-pile of Cafall' (now Carn Gafallt, near Rhayader). The wonder was that even if people should remove the stone overnight, it would be found back on its cairn the following day. The pursuit of the boar Troit forms a major part of the Arthurian tale 'Culhwch and Olwen' (possibly of the early twelfth century), and the ninth-century reference shows that this part of the tale, at least, existed at that date, localized in this instance in mid-Wales. The second wonder was the grave of Arthur's son, Amr, whom Arthur himself had killed in combat. The grave is said to be of variable length, and it bore the name Licat Amr, 'the eye of Amr' (probably in fact meaning 'source of the [river] Gamber'). Nothing more is known of this tale. 
The tradition of local legends linked to notable landmarks was not restricted to the early period; it continued through the twelfth century and into the modern era. Canons from Laon, journeying through southern England in 1113, were shown 'Arthur's seat' and 'Arthur's oven' while travelling through Devon to Cornwall. Numerous local features, often named as pieces of Arthur's household furniture (seats, tables, and ovens especially) appear at all dates down to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Neolithic cromlechs called 'Arthur's Quoit' (a name often interchanged with 'Giant's Quoit') attest his giant stature and his ability to throw such objects in sport. This is the non-literary tradition, poorly attested, especially in the early period, but remarkable for its consistency over a thousand years. Later examples of such names are often assumed to be due to the later literary tradition; but they actually have more in common with the earliest legendary references than with the literary King Arthur of Camelot. While their popularity or preservation may owe something to feedback from the literary tradition, their form seems to be authentically popular and ancient. In many of the references there are hints that Arthur was of giant stature, and his folklore has much in common with that of giants. The references in the 'Historia Brittonum' may contain allusions to this belief (including the fact that his dog's name meant 'horse'). 
There are fuller manifestations of this folklore tradition in Welsh literature. Best is the story of 'Culhwch and Olwen', an expanded folktale telling how Culhwch, Arthur's nephew, enlisted the help of Arthur and his men to win a giant's daughter as his bride. The impossible tasks set as conditions by the reluctant father-in-law are achieved in a wild romp of humour and exaggeration. The most significant task is the hunting of the great 'Twrch Trwyth', the boar Troit mentioned in the 'Historia Brittonum'. The tale is usually dated to 'c'.1100, but the text survives only in manuscripts of the fourteenth century. Arthur appears as the leader of a band of warriors, enumerated with virtuoso panache, many of them invented for linguistic or other comic effect or borrowed from random knowledge: they include 'Gwilenhin king of the French', presumably William the Conqueror, and legendary Irish heroes. As in Geoffrey of Monmouth's 'Historia regum Britanniae', Arthur is credited with continental campaigns, the author's enthusiasm here extending them to India and Africa as well as most of Europe including Scandinavia and Greece. He had a court, located at the unidentified ''Kelli Wic' in Cornwall', foreshadowing the later King Arthur's court at Camelot, though hardly in atmosphere or ethos. Some of its warriors appear later as knights of the round table, notably Kei (Sir Kay), Bedwyr (Sir Bedivere), and Owein (Yvain); even their characters also continue to some extent: Kei is touchy and sharp-tongued, Bedwyr stalwart and dependable. Arthur takes part in the action when appropriate, in contrast to the figurehead which he became in later romances. 
There are two early Welsh poems on Arthurian themes, both probably dating from before Geoffrey of Monmouth's time, their contents at any rate apparently independent of his 'Historia regum'. One contains material very close to that of 'Culhwch'. Known from its opening line as 'Pa gur yv y porthaur?' ('What man is the gate-keeper?'), it recites details of Arthur's warriors, of their conquests and escapades (including the 'strands of 'Trywruid'', echoing the battle at Tribruit in the ninth-century 'Historia Brittonum') and of men and monsters against whom they had fought. Kei's prowess is particularly prominent, but exploits of Bedwyr and other warriors are also given. Since the poem may be older than Geoffrey's 'Historia regum', it is notable that one of Arthur's warriors was the servant of 'Uthir Pendragon' ['see below'], an early instance of the name of Arthur's father. The other poem, 'Preiddeu Annwn' ('The Spoils of Annwn' -- the other world), dated between the ninth and twelfth centuries, tells of a single adventure overseas to attack a magical island-fortress in order to rescue a prisoner, a recurrent theme of Welsh Arthurian literature. The recurrent refrain is, 'Three shiploads we went there; apart from seven, no one came back'. 
Other early Welsh references are mostly allusive, and amplify without altering this picture. Arthur appears in several saints' lives, probably of the twelfth century. He plays the role of a secular figure over whom the saint triumphs, thus demonstrating his own virtue by opposing Arthur, the ultimate adversary. In some cases Arthur then provides the authority by which the saint's monastery holds its land. This may be why the lives sometimes refer to him as a 'king' (('rex'); they may be the earliest sources to use the term of him. It should be noted that Arthur here is not an evil or pagan tyrant, as other rulers in saints' lives sometimes are, but merely an unpredictable opponent, open to negotiation. 
The life in which Arthur plays the fullest role is that of St Cadog, by Lifris of Llancarfan (south-west Wales); the main body of this text, including the passages concerning Arthur, is generally dated 'c'.1090-1110. Arthur is a 'most famous king of Britain' ('rex illustrissimus' 'Britanniae'), and he and his companions Kei and Bedwyr are collectively 'three valiant warriors' ('tres heroes strenui'). They witness the abduction of a princess, destined to be the mother of St Cadog, and her father's pursuit across southern Wales. Arthur's companions remind him that they are accustomed to help those in need or distress (a notable precursor of the chivalrous ethic of the round table). They aid the abductor, making possible the lawful marriage which results in the saint's birth. Later in the same life, a man who has killed one of Arthur's followers takes refuge with St Cadog; Arthur demands compensation from the saint, and insists upon special magical cattle. These are conjured up with the saint's help, but revert to bracken when handed over to Arthur -- giving rise to certain local place names which are thereby explained. At this Arthur asks for the saint's forgiveness, and grants his monastery the right of sanctuary. 
In the first life of St Carannog or Carantoc (twelfth century) the saint, following his floating altar, arrives in Somerset, to be met by Arthur (termed a 'rex'), who reigns there. The saint asks whether Arthur had found his altar, and Arthur promises to tell him on condition that Carannog rids the land of a troublesome dragon. This the saint easily does, and Arthur in gratitude gives him land in Somerset, and returns the saint's altar, having unsuccessfully tried to use it as a table. 
Other references in the saints' lives are more conventional. In the life of St Gildas by Caradoc of Llancarfan (composed in the first half of the twelfth century) Arthur is 'king of all greater Britain' ('rex totius maioris' 'Britanniae'): 'greater' as contrasted with 'lesser' Britain, or Brittany), but also a 'warlike king' ('rex rebellis'); he kills Gildas's brother, who has plundered and harassed provocatively, and then humbly asks forgiveness of the saint, who grants it. (A later legend, reported by Gerald of Wales in his 'Descriptio Cambriae', written in 1194, says instead that Gildas, in vengeance, destroyed books which he had written in praise of Arthur -- the earliest, and not the least plausible, of many attempts to explain Gildas's silence concerning Arthur.) Later in this life Arthur lays siege in Glastonbury to Melwas, king of Somerset, who has abducted his queen, Guinevere (Guennuvar). The abbot of Glastonbury and Gildas jointly make peace between them, and the kings in gratitude give lands to Glastonbury. 
Overall, the saints' lives show that by about 1100 Arthur was used in south Wales to portray a powerful king when one was needed as a foil to the saint; and they contain further instances of the kind of local folklore which was readily attached to his name. The most notable feature about Arthur, in all the Welsh references, is his lack of an established genealogy or a position in society. Most unusually for a hero, he is not given a patronymic name (only later is he called 'ab Uthr', 'son of Uther', under the influence of Geoffrey of Monmouth) and, unlike most other heroes, he has no particular geographical position but can appear anywhere -- Wales, Somerset, and particularly Cornwall in the Welsh legends, and Devon, Scotland, and Brittany in other early references. 
One very persistent item of folklore attached to Arthur is the belief that he was not dead, only sleeping, and would come again. Such a belief is widely found attached to other figures, many but not all historical (Charlemagne, Frederick Barbarossa, Owain Glyn Dwr, and the Irish Fionn are instances). For Arthur it is first attested in the early twelfth century (in several sources), and since then has recurred as folklore from many parts of Britain. The legend was also located on Mount Etna (Sicily), presumably taken there by Normans; it is first recorded by two authors dating it about 1190-1200, one of them being Gervase of Tilbury, who also records sightings by foresters of Arthur's huntsmen in wild places in Britain. In the earliest sources -- and many later ones -- Arthur the hunter is quite as important as Arthur the soldier. 
A different explanation which has been put forward in the past concerning Arthur is that he was originally a god or mythological figure. Fashion has determined that this view, popular in the nineteenth century, now has few proponents. Its greatest adherent was the Celtic scholar Sir John Rhys (1840-1915), who kept a foot in each camp by suggesting that there was a historical Arthur who was named after a mythological one. In the enormous range of medieval Arthurian legends there is ample material (events, names, attributes, associations, details) to fit any hypothesis of this kind. The theory is now usually cited only to claim that its abandonment strengthens the case for a historical Arthur. 
The generally received view of the historical Arthur today is that he was probably a sixth-century battle leader of the British against the English, as portrayed in the 'Historia Brittonum' attributed to Nennius. This view relies on that source and the two references in the 'Annales Cambriae', records composed three to four centuries later. But the 'Historia Brittonum' also contains a contrasting portrayal of Arthur as a giant-like figure of legendary folklore. It is a matter of taste how one views this contrast in the earliest Arthurian document. It may show a historical Arthur already turning into a figure of legend, or a legendary Arthur becoming historicized. The weight of early evidence, and the absence of his name in Gildas, both favour the latter idea. The argument that there must be something behind all legends can be refuted by reference to other fictional heroes of Celtic legend who also became historicized. (For example, the legendary Irish heroes Cu Chulainn, Conaire, and Lugaid appear in the Irish annals in the first century AD, and Conchobar, king of Ulster, was alleged to have died on hearing of the crucifixion, while Merlin as well as Arthur is mentioned in one text of the Welsh annals.) If there was such a war leader in the sixth century, then the battles (or some of them) in the 'Historia Brittonum' and the 'Annales Cambriae', at sites which cannot be identified with assurance, are all that can be ascribed to him. 
Geoffrey of Monmouth's 'Historia regum Britanniae' was composed about 1138 and purports to give the whole pre-Saxon history of Britain. Geoffrey drew on Gildas, Bede, the 'Historia Brittonum', and Welsh genealogies, but claimed that his work was a translation of an ancient book in the 'British tongue'. Arthur forms the centrepiece of the work, but does not appear until two-thirds of the way through it. For the first time he appears as a stately king, with all the trappings of imperial power. 
Many of the well-known elements of the fully developed Arthurian legend appear first in Geoffrey of Monmouth's work, and were doubtless due to his own impressive imaginative powers. As in the 'Historia Brittonum', Arthur appears in the context of the British resistance against the invading English; but Geoffrey supplies a complete life-history, contrasting with the bare list of battles seen in the earlier work. Arthur was born as the result of an irregular liaison between 
Arthur's success became provocative to the Roman empire, and he received a message ordering him to appear in Rome to apologize for his behaviour. Having sent a pugnacious reply, he again campaigned on the continent with a large army, leaving his nephew Modred in Britain as caretaker. After killing single-handed a fearsome giant who had abducted and killed a Breton princess, Arthur successfully beat the forces of the Roman empire. The British army was then crossing the Alps to attack Rome when Arthur received news that Modred had seized the crown of Britain, was adulterously cohabiting with Guinevere, and had asked the continental Saxons for military aid. Arthur returned and beat Modred in three battles, the last at the River Camblanus, located in Cornwall by Geoffrey of Monmouth, thus providing a balance between Arthur's conception there and his end. Modred was killed and Arthur was 'mortally wounded' ('letaliter vulneratus') but was then taken to the Isle of Avalon ('insula Avallonis') for his wounds to be healed -- Geoffrey's allusion to the legend that he would come again. As king of Britain Arthur was succeeded by Constantine, son of Arthur's closest counsellor, Cador, duke of Cornwall. 
Geoffrey of Monmouth's Arthur thus combines the historicized Arthur of the 'Annales Cambriae' and the 'Historia Brittonum' with a little of the legendary Arthur (the killing of two giants; his sword Caliburnus 'made in the Isle of Avalon'; the allusion to his future return). As in earlier Welsh legend (presumably known to Geoffrey), Arthur is closely associated with Cornwall, except that Geoffrey moved his court from there to Caerleon near Monmouth. The association with Cornwall was to prove extremely durable, appearing even in works which lost virtually all other attributes of the traditional figure (for example, Dryden's 'King Arthur', discussed below). Well-known features of the later legend which appear for the first time in Geoffrey's history include Arthur's parents, Uther Pendragon and Igerna (the Ygraine of romance), and his illegitimate conception at Tintagel; his continental conquests (unless these are foreshadowed by references in the Welsh story 'Culhwch'); Arthur's nephew Modred as a traitor and adulterer, usurping both the kingdom and Guinevere (compare Medrawd who died at Camlann with Arthur in the annals); and the Isle of Avalon as the place where Arthur was brought after the last fatal battle. It was also Geoffrey who introduced the figure of Merlin into the story, as both prophet and magician, by combining Myrddin, a prophet who already existed independently in Welsh legend, with another Welsh story (also non-Arthurian) from the 'Historia Brittonum'. 
The career of Geoffrey of Monmouth's Arthur echoes closely that of the legendary Alexander, an already popular theme of medieval narrative; this was doubtless deliberate. Geoffrey's story established the framework which the legend has retained ever since. This included, very importantly, the treacherous end to Arthur's glorious reign: from now on, Arthur is a tragic figure. Notable features of the later legends which are absent from Geoffrey's account include: the atmosphere of chivalry and courtly love (first seen in Chretien de Troyes's romances, though Geoffrey has a phrase foreshadowing it); Arthur's unwittingly incestuous liaison with his half-sister Morgause, and Modred as the result of that liaison; the sword in the stone; the lady of the lake as provider of Excalibur (Geoffrey, like Welsh legend, names Arthur's sword, made at Avalon, but does not say how it was acquired); 'Camelot' as the name of Arthur's court; the round table (first found in Wace's Norman-French version of Geoffrey's history); and the holy grail. Most of these features were added in the French vulgate cycle, 'c'.1225, discussed below. 
Geoffrey of Monmouth's history was an immediate success in Britain and elsewhere in western Europe. As well as being circulated and copied rapidly both in Britain and on the continent, it was rendered into Anglo-Norman 'c'.1155 by Wace. The enthusiasm was not universal. Late in the twelfth century William of Newburgh commented that Geoffrey had 'cloaked in the respectable name of history fables about Arthur taken from ancient fictions of the British and augmented from his own resources' (William of Newburgh, 'Historia rerum Anglicarum', ed. R. Howlett, Rolls Series, 1884, 1.12), a just assessment; and at about the same time Gerald of Wales told of a madman, living (significantly) at Caerleon and possessed by evil spirits, who could be cured by having a copy of 'John's gospel' placed on his lap, but whom the devils would re-enter, with greater strength, if the gospel were replaced by Geoffrey's history. 
There are indications, slight but adequate, that Arthur and legends about him were already known on the continent before Geoffrey of Monmouth's history became known 'c'.1138. This knowledge concerned the legendary rather than the 'historical' Arthur. The French knew of the Bretons' belief that Arthur would return, and would argue with them on the subject; and 'c'.1120 the encyclopaedist Lambert de St Omer was interested in the 'wonders of Britain' of the 'Historia Brittonum', and added a further Arthurian marvel, situated in Scotland, from some other source. In works of art, too, it is the legendary Arthur that appears. The portal of the north door of the cathedral at Modena in north Italy shows Arthur and some of his knights (named) rescuing a lady from a castle defended by a man. The date of the doorway is disputed; it may be slightly earlier or later than Geoffrey's time. In either case the significant point is that the story portrayed seems to be independent of Geoffrey's history and consistent with scenes typical of later romances. At Otranto, in the southern tip of Italy, there survives a mosaic dated 1165, which shows Arthur, mounted on a goat, fighting against a large cat. This probably refers to a story alluded to in the early Welsh poem 'Pa gur yv y porthaur?', and also in later French stories, telling of Arthur's fight against a fearsome cat ('Cath Palug' in Welsh, 'le Chapalu' in French). Again, the Italian mosaic portrays not Geoffrey's Arthur but that of popular legend -- the Arthur of chapter 73 rather than chapter 56 of the 'Historia Brittonum'. 
It seems therefore that there existed on the continent a popular tradition of Arthur and his warriors, owing little to Geoffrey of Monmouth's history (though perhaps boosting its popularity in the twelfth century) and deriving, in part, directly from Brittonic legends (Welsh, Cornish, or Breton), in oral or written form. This could be the body of material that formed part of the background to courtly Arthurian romances. The widespread and immediate success of Geoffrey's history may thus have been due not only to its intrinsic literary merits, but also to an existing body of knowledge about Arthur, and maybe an appetite for more information. Geoffrey's achievement, whether intended or not, was that he gave this Arthurian material scholarly respectability (as in William of Newburgh's comment that Geoffrey 'cloaked fables about Arthur in the respectable name of history'), thus enabling courtly authors and reciters to take it as a legitimate theme. But the precise routes of transmission of Arthurian and other stories from Celtic legend to French romances remain uncertain. They could have travelled from the Welsh or the Cornish directly to the Anglo-Normans and thus to the continent, as a consequence of the Norman conquest of England; or they could have come from the Bretons, either in their own right or acting as intermediaries passing stories from Britain on to the continent; most likely a mixture of all these, and perhaps others as well. Nor need the material all have come from Celtic legends. The names and scattered references show that some of the material is thus derived, but authors and reciters were fully capable of incorporating material from other sources too, or of inventing it. 
Wace's mid-twelfth-century French version of Geoffrey of Monmouth's history is very close to his original (allowing for the fact that Wace used the first variant version of the history), but Wace expanded it by adding speeches, a few names, and authorial comments, resulting in a more vivid narrative, and a more chivalric and courtly atmosphere. Some new features are notable: one is the round table, which Arthur introduced during the twelve years of peace which followed the conquest of the Atlantic islands, to discourage squabbling over precedence at table. Another notable comment is given at Arthur's death, which Wace treats in a manner very similar to Geoffrey's, but adding, 'The Bretons still await him' (lines 13275-90). One consequence of the change from Latin to the vernacular, and from prose to poetry, was that the narrative could no longer pose as sober history, but had become obviously a work of fiction. Arthur's international literary career was launched. 
Soon after Wace's translation was made, the earliest extant Arthurian verse romances were composed in French ('c'.1160 onwards): Marie de France's lay 'Lanval', and the five surviving romances of Chretien de Troyes. 'Lanval' has been called 'the earliest Arthurian romance', though it is more a verse fairy story which uses Arthur's court as a background: a prince at Arthur's court is taken up by a fairy mistress, and Arthur's queen (unnamed) also attempts to seduce him. Chretien's five Arthurian romances ('c'.1160-1190) are 'Erec et Enide', 'Cliges', 'Le chevalier de la charrete' (Lancelot), 'Yvain' or 'Le chevalier au lion', and the unfinished 'Perceval' or 'Le conte del graal' (the earliest appearance of the grail legend). These romances used Arthur and his court as a framework for works of psychological introspection and chivalry, each concentrating on a single hero. The romance was a new genre, recently developed for tales relating to antiquity; Chretien was the first, as far as is known, to use it for Arthurian material. His works owe nothing to Geoffrey of Monmouth's history in their plots, which may have come from Welsh, Cornish, or Breton legends, perhaps from other sources as well. Chretien must have known Geoffrey's work, either directly or in Wace's translation, but his romances had no pretension to the status of history. Most importantly, and in contrast with Geoffrey's account (and with earlier Welsh literature), Arthur's role became, as in 'Lanval', that of a figure in the background, whose court is a focus of events, but who takes little or no part in the action himself. This is particularly noticeable in his 'Perceval', where Arthur's response when his honour is challenged is supine inactivity; the confused and unfinished state of this romance proved an enduring challenge to continuators, in both verse and prose. 
Chretien de Troyes also introduced the theme of Guinevere's adultery with Lancelot, and was the first to suggest that Arthur's court and its chivalry might represent a flawed ideal; but its central flaws (Arthur's unwitting incest which produced Modred, and his studied disregard of Guinevere's adultery) are not seen in Chretien's romances, and do not appear until about 1215-35, in the 'Mort Artu' of the prose vulgate cycle. Merlin makes no appearance (except for one passing allusion), though he was by now independently enjoying his own literary career, in Latin, as a result of the popularity of Geoffrey of Monmouth's 'Prophecies of Merlin' and the industry of explanatory commentaries spawned by the obscurity of that work; in vernacular literature he returned to the Arthurian fold 'c'.1200, in the prose romance based on Robert de Boron's verse 'Merlin'. Chretien may have been the first author to place Arthur's court at 'Camelot'; but its single mention in one text could be a later insertion into the poem. The name became much more popular in the following century, ousting Geoffrey's Caerleon. The place name itself could be derived indirectly from Camulodunum, the Romano-British name for Colchester in Essex, but it is most unlikely that the French authors who introduced and used the name had any actual place in mind. Camelot has subsequently been identified, among other places, with Winchester (Malory) and South Cadbury in Somerset (Leland); and King Arthur's court (not called Camelot) has also been located at Carlisle (frequently) and at Stirling (William Worcester); but none of these has any relevance for the period before the romances. 
At about the same time as Chretien de Troyes was writing, the earliest French and German romances concerning Tristan appeared, those of Beroul, Eilhart von Oberg, and Thomas ('c'.1170-1190). All three linked the legend peripherally with Arthur, portraying him as a powerful king in Britain. This connection is generally regarded as showing how the Arthurian cycle was attracting to itself other material, originally independent; but it is unknown whether earlier, unattested, legends of Tristan also linked him with Arthur. 
Arthur's name could by now bear political significance. Geoffrey, duke of Brittany, was younger brother to Richard I and older brother to King John, and was married to Constance, daughter of the duke of Brittany; in 1187 his posthumous son was called Arthur. The choice of name exploited Arthur's literary fame as well as Breton national sentiment. In the words of William of Newburgh, 'Having long awaited a legendary Arthur, they now raise a real one' (William of Newburgh, 'Historia rerum Anglicarum', ed. R. Howlett, Rolls Series, 1884, 1.235). Richard I adopted Arthur as his heir in preference to John; when John was suspected of putting Arthur to death in captivity in 1203 it was a cause for Brittany to swear vengeance against him. The resonances of Arthur's name were to be used again by King Henry VII. 
About 1190, during rebuilding works after a fire, Glastonbury Abbey proclaimed the discovery of King Arthur's grave. This served a dual purpose, a financial one for the abbey in producing a source of potential income, and a political one for the English government in proclaiming, against Breton and Welsh national sentiment, Arthur's death, and furthermore his burial in England. There are two near-contemporary records, by Gerald of Wales (who gives two contradictory accounts) and Ralph of Coggeshall. The grave was in the churchyard, set unusually deep, and contained gigantic bones in an oaken coffin, which also contained a woman's body with golden hair; an inscribed leaden cross lay beneath the coffin. The bodies were reburied in the church. The inscription on the cross was variously reported; it was illustrated in Camden's 'Britannia' (1607 edition), and there reads 'Hic iacet sepultus inclitus rex Arturius in insula Avalonia' ('Here lies buried the famous king Arthur in the Isle of Avalon'). In Gerald's version it also states that Arthur's second wife, Guinevere, was buried with him. The lettering on the cross, which resembles that on late-Saxon coins, probably represents a late twelfth-century idea of suitably antique lettering. The identification of Avalon with Glastonbury is probably no earlier than this discovery, although the abbey had previously claimed King Arthur (as well as St Patrick) as a benefactor. The cross is now lost, but its discovery had a curious sequel in the 1980s, when a former model maker claimed to have found it on the grounds of a reservoir at Enfield in Middlesex. There was some uncertainty whether his find was the original or a replica based upon Camden's illustration, but Enfield borough council nevertheless took legal action, claiming King Arthur's cross as its property; the finder, refusing to yield it up, was sent to prison. 
The popularity of Chretien de Troyes's romances, added to the success of Geoffrey of Monmouth's history, ensured the spread of Arthurian themes. The phrase the 'matter of Britain', signifying the cycle of Arthurian and associated literature, dates from this time; it appears first in a poem of Jean Bodel (late twelfth century), and is complementary to the 'matter of France' ('chansons de geste' of Charlemagne and other French history) and the 'matter of Rome' (tales of antiquity, primarily Troy and the Alexander legend). During the thirteenth century compositions, allusions, or translations appear in all the major languages of western Europe, including German, Old Norse, Italian, Spanish, and English. For the English-speaking world the first important development was Layamon's English version ('c'.1200) of Wace's 'Roman de Brut', notable as the earliest extant Arthurian material in English. Layamon followed Wace's story (and thus Geoffrey's) closely, but added a great deal of amplification of his own, particularly in the Arthurian section. He gave Arthur elvish guardians who endowed him with virtues, and an upbringing in Brittany; he developed the round table introduced by Wace, having it manufactured in Cornwall; he made Arthur himself more supernatural, but also more heroic and cruel, compared with Wace's figure; and he emphasized the prospect of Arthur's return, prophesied by Merlin, 'to help the English'. 
In the early thirteenth century, too, Arthurian verse romances appeared in German, related to the French ones. Apart from Eilhart von Oberg's 'Tristrant', the earliest are Hartmann von Aue's 'Erec' and 'Iwein', Ulrich von Zatzikhoven's 'Lanzelet', and Wolfram von Eschenbach's 'Parzifal', all 'c'.1190-1200, closely followed by Gottfried von Strasburg's 'Tristrant'. These were in the same vein as Chretien's romances, using the Arthurian court as a background for plots concentrating on individual heroes. 
Subsequently the major development in French was the shift to prose, and the development of the anonymous vulgate cycle ('c'.1225), a series of linked prose romances. These were partly based on the earlier verse romances of Robert de Boron ('c'.1200), though only incomplete texts of the latter survive. In the vulgate cycle the Arthurian legend took its classic form, with virtually all the elements known later. Its elaboration arose from a desire to follow through, connect, and explain all the disparate stories and motifs which had by now arisen in the Arthurian legends. Themes found here for the first time are the sword in the stone, a test establishing Arthur's fitness to rule and his role as champion of Christianity; the obtaining of Arthur's sword Excalibur from the lake, and its return there after Arthur's final battle; and Mordred (as his name comes to be presented) as the illegitimate son of Arthur, through unwitting incest with his half-sister Morgause. (In Geoffrey of Monmouth's history Modred is simply Arthur's nephew.) It has been suggested that the sword-in-the-stone motif may be of oriental origin. Other themes which now became more prominent were the quest for the holy grail, Merlin's life story, and Guinevere's adulterous love for Lancelot -- the latter as a key element in the final war which culminated in Arthur's death. The quest for the grail, in particular, altered the balance of the legend, giving it an overtly mystical message and the theme of a moral campaign, ultimately unsuccessful, to counter the creeping decadence of Arthur's court. 
Another development of the thirteenth century was the use of richly illustrated manuscripts to transmit Arthurian romances, the illustrations themselves being an important part of the material. These are particularly associated with the vulgate cycle. The illustrators naturally tended to portray the knights, and their court, in contemporary fashion (as did the texts themselves), and these illustrations, with their colour, vigour, and heraldry, have provided the dominant image of King Arthur and his court to this day. The consequence has been a lasting imbalance between the late-medieval image of the king and the dark-age period when he is supposed to have been active. 
In the fourteenth century King Arthur's position in the world of letters was consolidated. King Edward I of England used Geoffrey of Monmouth's account of Arthur's conquests as a justification (1301) for his policy towards Scotland. Across Europe Arthur was celebrated as one of the 'Nine Worthies' (three pagans, three Jews, and three Christians), and as such appeared as one of the nine statues erected in the town hall in Cologne 'c'.1325, and in many other portrayals. Dante made passing references to the romances and could expect them to be understood; and King Edward III was greatly interested in the legend, fancying himself as King Arthur, organizing tournaments and planning a 'round table' festival in 1344-5. The wooden round table displayed at Winchester was made at some time between 1250 and 1350; whichever king was responsible, it indisputably demonstrates the royal adoption of the legend for political ends. 
This was the period of the finest Arthurian literature in English, most notably 'Sir Gawain and the Green Knight'. Like Chretien de Troyes's romances, this narrative poem consists of an adventure set at King Arthur's court, rather than a story of Arthur; but Arthur is not supine -- he is himself about to accept the Green Knight's challenge when Gawain asks to stand in for him. The theme of the reciprocal 'beheading challenge' set by a magical being is found earlier in Irish legend; here it is successfully used for a courtly moral tale. Two fourteenth-century poems tell the story of Arthur's downfall. The 'Stanzaic Morte Arthur' is based on the last part of the vulgate cycle but with original material; it relates Guinevere and Lancelot's adulterous love, the resultant strife at Arthur's court, Mordred's treachery, and Arthur's end. The 'Alliterative Morte Arture' is closer to Geoffrey of Monmouth's account, with elaborations; Arthur is even offered the imperial crown after his successful campaign against Rome. Chaucer used Arthurian material to exemplify courtly behaviour, and gave his moral 'Wife of Bath's Tale' an Arthurian setting. Boccaccio similarly used Arthurian themes for tales of love and to draw morals about the dangers of pride; he was evidently worried by the fabulous aspects and the doubtful historicity of the whole cycle. Similar doubts were felt by Ranulf Higden (died 1364), who pointed out in his 'Polychronicon' (world history) that the lack of references to Arthur's European conquests in continental chronicles cast doubt on Geoffrey's account. 
In the mid-fifteenth century, however, John Hardyng had no such doubts when he composed his verse chronicle of the kings of England, with a view to justifying the claims of kings Henry V and Henry VI to overlordship of Scotland. Hardyng followed very closely Geoffrey of Monmouth's scheme of events, including Arthur's conquests first in the British Isles and then abroad, but with two major differences: first, Arthur actually conquers Rome and is triumphantly crowned emperor there, and, second, Hardyng incorporated the quest for the holy grail into his narrative, with much attendant detail about the knights of the round table. Consequently Arthur is allotted substantially more space than any other king in this chronicle. At about the same time Henry Lovelich composed his 'History of the Holy Grail' and 'Merlin'. The former is a verse translation of that part of the vulgate cycle dealing with Joseph of Arimathea; Lovelich located his burial at Glastonbury Abbey, and stressed the line of guardians of the grail, descending to Arthur's time. Lovelich's 'Merlin' was likewise a verse translation of the vulgate 'Estoire de Merlin', emphasizing the links of the grail with Merlin, and thus with Arthur. 
Sir Thomas Malory's work known as 'Le Morte Darthur' (1469-70; printed by Caxton in 1485; reprinted in 1498, 1529, etc.) is actually a comprehensive collection of Arthurian tales, echoing the scope of the vulgate cycle of 250 years earlier. The basic story is once more that of Geoffrey of Monmouth, but with the accretions of the intervening centuries, and also with attempts to reconcile the inevitable discrepancies. The main themes are the now-traditional ones of courtly valour vitiated by moral weakness, and (very relevantly) the terribleness of treachery and civil strife. Malory added little or nothing of his own, but emphasized Arthur's heroic dignity and grandeur, playing down the image of the 'roi faineant'. The power of his narrative gave it an enduring influence in English literature, while at the same time setting up an enduring contrast between the 'literary' image of Arthur, as exemplified by Malory himself, and a 'historical' one represented, however spuriously, by Geoffrey of Monmouth. However, the credibility which this dichotomy implicitly conceded to Geoffrey's account was still limited in many eyes. 
Stories of King Arthur, some derived from medieval romances, continued to circulate in anonymous ballads, of which the earliest may date from the fifteenth century; there is also a Middle Scots stanzaic poem 'Golagros and Gawane' (1508), in which Gawain's graciousness twice saves Arthur's court from disgrace. Some Arthurian ballads survived in circulation until the modern period. In 1486 King Henry VII gave the name Arthur to his eldest son, thereby both ingratiating himself to the Welsh and boosting his own position as ruler of England and Wales. King Henry was following the precedent set by Geoffrey of Brittany 300 years earlier; and King Arthur was claimed as an ancestor by first the Tudor and consequently the Stuart lines to vindicate their claims to the throne. 
The chief interest of the Arthurian legend in the Renaissance was as an object of antiquarian study. The interest followed two main strands, scholarly investigation into the historicity of Arthur, and his political use as an antecedent of the Tudor dynasty, whose Welsh descent was stressed partly in order to assert the historical unity of England and Wales. The romantic dimensions of the legend were less emphasized, and Arthur's empire-building activities, as claimed by Geoffrey of Monmouth, became his most significant attribute. This political use continued through Queen Elizabeth's reign into the seventeenth century, when King James I wished to establish his dynastic continuity from the Tudors. Geoffrey's inclusion of Ireland in Arthur's imperial conquests was particularly appreciated, and John Dee, Queen Elizabeth's astrologer, in his 'Perfect Arte of Navigation' (1577), argued that Arthur had established a 'British empire' abroad. 
The earliest example of an antiquarian investigator is probably William Worcester, in 1477-80, who naturally knew Geoffrey of Monmouth's history, but also reported items of local interest around the country. The Italian Polydore Vergil, resident in England, wrote his 'Anglica Historia' about 1506-13, at the end of King Henry VII's and the beginning of Henry VIII's reigns; Polydore impugned the veracity of Geoffrey's history and doubted the importance of Arthur. John Leland vigorously defended Arthur against this attack in his 'Assertio inclytissimi Arturii, regis Britanniae' (1544), dedicated to King Henry VIII. Leland solved the problem of Gildas's silence over Arthur by postulating lost works which did mention him (just as Gerald of Wales had done, two and a half centuries earlier), and by abusing Gildas as an evasive rogue (as modern scholars have done); Leland's defence also contains probably the earliest instance of the use of folklore as an argument, for he adduces the frequency of Arthurian sites in Britain as evidence for the king's activities. Leland also knew King Arthur's charter of confirmation to the University of Cambridge, dated 7 April 531; it was printed in 1608 by Brian Twyne, an Oxford man who had the temerity to suggest that Leland might have fabricated it. Henry VIII was himself responsible for the repainting of the round table at Winchester, incorporating a portrait of himself as King Arthur. (The memory of his older brother may have played a part in this conceit.) Antiquarian interest was greatly boosted by Drayton's 'Poly-Olbion' (1612), which drew (as always) on Geoffrey's history, and reported topographical associations of Arthur in many parts of Britain. 
Of more overtly literary works, Ariosto's 'Orlando Furioso', from the beginning of the sixteenth century, is concerned with the matter of France rather than the matter of Britain, although Arthur makes a fleeting appearance as an adjunct to the more prominent Merlin. At the end of the century Spenser, in his unfinished 'Faerie Queene', made his 'Prince Arthur' a prefiguration of Queen Elizabeth; by recounting Arthur's career before he became king, Spenser gained the historical resonances of the character while retaining the freedom to create new adventures for him, whereby he becomes perfected in the moral virtues: Arthur's person was used to represent the virtue 'magnificence' or 'magnanimity', which encapsulated striving for all the other virtues. Spenser's story hence has little in common with the traditional legend; none of the knights named by Malory is mentioned, apart from Sir Tristram. Like other writers of the period, Spenser had to find a balance between wishful myth making and dutiful scepticism. 
The seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were a low point of Arthurian literary activity. Partly this was due to the spirit of the age, out of sympathy with what it regarded as crude medieval literature and institutions. But there was also an inherent contradiction for Englishmen in celebrating Arthur as a national hero, for the 'historical' element of the Arthurian legend rejoiced in his successful opposition to the English. Ben Jonson, Milton, and Dryden all contemplated writing Arthurian epics, but none achieved them. In Milton's case the identification of King Arthur with the royalist, Stuart, cause was probably a significant factor in his change of mind; likewise his growing interest in Saxon culture as an alternative to Anglo-Norman. Dryden's operatic libretto, 'King Arthur' (1684-91), set by Purcell, owes very little to earlier works in its portrayal of the hero. Even here King Arthur is portrayed as a defender of both Christianity and British independence against the pagan Saxons; but the break with tradition is manifested in the prominent role which Arthur himself plays in the action, fighting in single combat against the Saxon Oswald to win Emmeline, the blind daughter of the duke of Cornwall. The anti-English aspect of the legend was resolved by anticipating, 'Britons and Saxons shall be once one people... in a perpetual peace' (Merlin, in act V, scene ii). Shortly afterwards Richard Blackmore's two epic poems, 'Prince Arthur' (1695) and 'King Arthur' (1697), allegories about William of Orange, owed little to previous accounts, though claiming Geoffrey of Monmouth as their primary source; they were notable mainly for the contempt heaped upon them. 
Compared with Spenser, Blackmore was hampered by (among other factors) the increasing tenuousness of any claimed link between the British hero and the current reigning dynasty. This disadvantage may have contributed to Arthur's lesser popularity as a literary figure in the eighteenth century; there are few works of note apart from ballads. Henry Fielding's 'Tom Thumb, a Tragedy' (1730-31; set as an opera by Thomas Arne, 1733) has only the name of King Arthur himself (and its burlesque of Dryden, among others) to make it an Arthurian work; his presence is due to Fielding's use of the nursery tale which placed Tom Thumb in 'the days of king Arthur' as a shorthand for 'olden times'. William Hilton's play, 'Arthur, Monarch of the Britons' (written in 1759; published in 'The Poetical Works of William Hilton', 1775-6), is a patriotic piece based (directly or otherwise) on Geoffrey of Monmouth's account, which had become accessible in its first English translation by Aaron Thompson in 1718. Hilton dealt with the anti-English orientation of the Arthurian legend by having the Saxon enemy look forward to the time when the English, having conquered the British, would themselves 'into Britons grow', and the dying Arthur himself maintain, 'Britons must be free' as his aspiration (pp. 239, 247). John Whitaker's 'History of Manchester' (1771-5) was an early example of the investigation of the 'historical' Arthur by local historians and topographers; it is notable for Whitaker's attempt to identify the sites of Arthur's twelve battles listed in the 'Historia Brittonum', and for Dr Johnson's comment upon the work as a whole, 'all a dream' (J. Boswell, 'The Life of Samuel Johnson', 1791, under 29 April 1778). Thomas Warton, professor of poetry at Oxford, combined his interests by writing poems on local Arthurian themes, notably 'The Grave of King Arthur' (1777), which used the Glastonbury discovery to emphasize Arthur's historical death. William Blake took surprisingly little direct interest in the Arthurian legend, though he did write four lines of a 'Merlin's Prophecy' ('c'.1793), and in an exhibition of 1809 he portrayed Arthur opposing the Romans rather than the Anglo-Saxons, no doubt for reasons of English sentiment. (Geoffrey of Monmouth's Arthur had done both, of course.) 
The enormous growth of interest in the middle ages during the nineteenth century has been thoroughly studied. During this period King Arthur became established, apparently permanently, as a national hero, despite suffering (as always) from the twin disadvantages of having opposed the English, and of his opposition having failed in the long term; even though these two disadvantages might appear to cancel each other out, they have failed to do so, because Arthur's adoption as a national British hero required some overlooking of the original ethnic identities in the story. 
Before the 1830s, apart from now-forgotten works such as John Thelwall's play, 'The Fairy of the Lake' (1801), set in Wales, the most notable developments were the republication of Malory's 'Morte Darthur' (three editions in 1816-17, after a gap of nearly 200 years), and the interest of Sir Walter Scott, as part of his wider medieval enthusiasm. Although Scott wrote little specifically about King Arthur, he made allusive references to Arthurian stories in his 'Marmion' (1808), precociously citing Malory (among other medieval material) in his notes; and in his verse romance, 'The Bridal of Triermain' (1813; set as an operetta by J. L. Ellerton in 1831), a quasi-ancient lay is recited, in which Arthur and Guinevere display a rather casual attitude to marital fidelity. 
From the 1830s onwards Alfred Tennyson dominated the Arthurian revival, even though, to begin with, he followed the public interest as much as he shaped it. Of his earliest published Arthurian poems, written in 1830-34, only 'Morte d'Arthur' (published in 1842) dealt with Arthur himself. These poems already displayed Tennyson's later emphases within the legend, namely Arthur as the ideal king, chastity, and the holy grail, and the social destructiveness of Guinevere's infidelity. Tennyson returned to the legend in the 1850s, notably with the first four of the 'Idylls of the King', published in 1859; he added further poems to that cycle in the 1870s, and continued to concern himself with Arthurian themes until his death. Tennyson depended heavily upon Malory's 'Morte Darthur', and produced the first significant retelling in modern times of substantial parts of the Arthurian story; his particular interest was in the high ideals of Arthur's court, and their decay due to moral frailty and human evil. He was less interested in the empire-building aspect of Arthur's activities. Tennyson portrayed sympathetically the feelings of the women in the stories; but his portrait of Arthur himself has been criticized, like those of so many others, for lacking depth. Once again Arthur was primarily a symbol for the events and ideals around him. 
Tennyson's moralistic interpretation of the legend was not the only attitude current at this time. Edward Bulwer-Lytton's epic poem 'King Arthur' (1848) resolved the problem of Arthur's necessary opposition to the English by making him the architect of political freedom (as in Hilton's play, ninety years earlier), and that of Guinevere's adultery by dividing her into two, Arthur's queen, Genevieve, and Lancelot's wife, Genevra; the action of the poem reflected contemporary activities of global exploration and empire building, and is rich in comic detail (some of it probably intentional), including the well-known episode in the Arctic, where Arthur is saved by a band of Eskimos from becoming trapped in the ice. In the 1850s both Matthew Arnold ('Tristram and Iseult', 1852) and William Morris ('The Defence of Guinevere', 1858) took a notably liberal attitude to the adultery inherent in some of the legends; likewise Algernon Swinburne, who, like Arnold, was more interested in the Tristan legend than in Arthur himself. But on the popular level, J. T. Knowles's 'The Story of King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table' (1862), in retelling Malory for boys, adhered to Tennyson's rigorous morality: the work was dedicated to Tennyson, and in that spirit Knowles acknowledged suppressing and modifying elements of Malory's story, where changed manners and morals 'have made it absolutely necessary to do so' (p. iii). 
The growing enthusiasm for Arthurian topics ensured that the legend circulated widely in British cultural life during the later nineteenth century; Queen Victoria's seventh child (and third son), born in 1850, was baptized Arthur. Tennyson's success inspired subsequent authors and artists to draw their themes from Malory. William Dyce's frescoes in Westminster Palace (1849-62) showed the establishment view of the Arthurian legend as embodying British chivalry. By contrast, the Pre-Raphaelites preferred the sensual and emotive aspects of the stories. Dante Gabriel Rossetti illustrated Tennyson's poems in 1857, and in the same year began a set of murals for the Oxford Union, collaborating with William Morris, Edward Burne-Jones, and others. The scenes were again taken from Malory. In North America Mark Twain's bitter 'A Connecticut Yankee at the Court of King Arthur' (1889) satirized Malory's Arthur, portraying the king as obtuse, and showing an equal hatred for medieval and modern society. 
Scholarly interest in the nineteenth century paid attention to two aspects in particular: the enduring debate concerning Arthur's historicity, and a new interest in the origins and literary development of the legend. Among historians, Joseph Ritson's posthumously published 'Life of King Arthur' (1825) is notable for its advanced attitude to the sources. Ritson vigorously asserted the untrustworthy nature of Geoffrey of Monmouth's 'Historia regum Brittaniae' ('a series of palpable and monstrous lies'; p. xviii), but placed faith in the ninth-century 'Historia Brittonum', while recognizing the unsatisfactory state of the text in its varying recensions. Modern scholars would also agree with his wariness towards Welsh literary allusions, because of the lateness of the manuscripts. Two historical works, both first published in 1848, demonstrate how the debate on Arthur's historicity has continued unchanged, before and since: Macaulay affirms, in his 'History of England', 'Arthur and Mordred are mythical persons, whose very existence may be questioned' (chap. 1); whereas Thomas Miller's popular 'History of the Anglo-Saxons' argues, 'there cannot be a doubt about the existence of king Arthur' (3rd edn, 1856, 82). The increased ease of travel during the nineteenth century, and the consequent profusion of tourists' guidebooks, meant wider availability, and more detailed documentation, of Arthurian landmarks and other local folklore. 
On the literary side of scholarship, the publication of Lady Charlotte Guest's English translation of the 'Mabinogion' (1838-49) raised implicitly the question of priority between Britain and France in early Arthurian narratives; and the debate could be widened, according to taste, to embrace the possibility of mythological antecedents. Jessie Weston's books (1894-1920) were particularly influential; her last work, 'From Ritual to Romance' (1920), argued that the original theme of the holy grail legend was the task of healing the Fisher King (the wounded keeper of the grail) and the removal of the curse from the Waste Land; her interpretation provided inspiration for T. S. Eliot, but Arthur himself had become irrelevant. 
In opera, the Arthurian legend has not generally provided successful themes; perhaps the matter of Britain was too weighty to make satisfactory plots. Richard Wagner had been interested in Arthurian legends since 1850, and in medieval literature generally from even earlier; but his three 'Arthurian' operas are so only in the derivation of their material. 'Lohengrin' (1859) and 'Parsifal' (1882) both recount legends of the holy grail ('Lohengrin' very peripherally so, 'Parsifal' using Wolfram von Eschenbach's romance), while 'Tristan' (1865) used Gottfried von Strasburg's poem, with Wagner's own ending. King Arthur's retreat into the background can go no further than in these works, which are undeniably 'Arthurian' in origin, yet in which the king himself plays no role, and is not even mentioned. In these works the legends of Tristan and the holy grail have effectively escaped from their Arthurian context, and become independent stories. 
Truly Arthurian operas of note, since Purcell's, have been rare. 'Le roi Artus', by the French composer Ernest Chausson, was first performed in 1903, four years after his death; it concentrates on the love of Lancelot and Guinevere, including Guinevere's suicide, Lancelot's death in battle, and Arthur's final removal to immortality across the sea. The Englishman Rutland Boughton (died 1960), emulating Wagner, composed a grand cycle of five operas telling the whole Arthurian story (1909-44), but only three were performed and they remain unpublished. They were envisaged as 'a work which achieves what Wagner failed thoroughly to achieve', and were intended to be performed at Glastonbury in a 'temple theatre', the focal point of a religious commune (Boughton and Buckley). The librettos of the first two ('The Birth of Arthur', earlier called 'Uther and Igraine', and 'The Round Table') were written in collaboration with Reginald Buckley, and those of the last three ('The Lily Maid', concerning Lancelot and Elaine, 'Galahad', and 'Avalon') by Boughton alone. They promote Boughton's message of Christian socialism, with all magic edited out: the sword in the stone is a mechanical trick solved by Arthur, Lancelot is a fascist, and Arthur dies with no suggestion of a return, but consoled by the peasants' revolutionary song which closes the cycle. Boughton's opera 'The Queen of Cornwall' (1924), based on Thomas Hardy's folk-play of the Tristan legend, 'The Famous Tragedy of the Queen of Cornwall' (1923), was more successful, though Arthur himself was again dispensed with. Harrison Birtwistle's opera 'Gawain' (1991; libretto by David Harsent) was closely based on 'Sir Gawain and the Green Knight', interpreting the poem to portray Arthur as suffering from ennui, and Gawain's momentary lapse from the highest moral standards as a victory for Morgan, Arthur's half-sister, over Arthur's court. 
In the course of the twentieth century the nineteenth-century river of Arthurian material became a flood. Arthurian literature continues in full spate, boosted by the even wider interest in 'sword-and-sorcery' literature following upon the popularity of J. R. R. Tolkien's 'The Lord of the Rings' (which does not obviously include Arthurian themes among its many sources, despite Tolkien's having co-edited 'Sir Gawain and the Green Knight'). Since the 1960s the association of anything perceived as 'Celtic' with 'new-age' alternative culture has also given Arthurian materials a fresh vogue and created a link with vague spirituality. In the conflict whether to locate the Arthurian material in the dark ages (where it is believed to belong historically) or in the late middle ages (whence all its literary iconography and manners are derived), the earlier setting has tended to replace the later as the preferred background. 
Only a few out of many works can be mentioned here. J. C. Powys wrote three novels touching on Arthurian themes, 'A Glastonbury Romance' (1932), 'Morwyn' (1937, Arthurian only in that Merlin appears), and 'Porius' (1951). They are vehicles for Powys's views on love and sexuality, science, and religion. In 'Porius' the Arthurian world is seen as one of conflict between Christianity and paganism, though not the paganism of the Saxons, as traditionally, but what is envisaged as a pre-Christian Celtic religion. The well-researched and well-produced comic strip cartoon 'Prince Valiant', written by Hal Foster in 1937-71 and still continuing, uses a non-traditional knight of King Arthur's court (the eponymous hero) for an outrageously varied series of adventures involving vikings, Huns, crusades, and the discovery of America; a film based on it was made in 1954. 
T. H. White's tetralogy, 'The Once and Future King' (1938-58), offers an ever-fresh retelling based on Malory but with much of White's own invention, and with comic episodes as well as tragedy; it inspired both the musical 'Camelot' (Lerner and Loewe, 1960; film version, 1967) and the Disney cartoon-film, 'The Sword in the Stone' (1963). White's was one of the last reworkings to be content with late-medieval courtliness as a background: more recently an awareness of academic work on the subject, and the desire for 'realism' (or at least historical plausibility) has caused almost all authors to choose a fifth- or sixth-century setting. In many cases that has meant linking the events with the earlier end of Roman Britain, by a process of historical telescoping. 
The poet Charles Williams published two overlapping series of poems on Arthurian themes, 'Taliessin through Logres' (1938) and 'The Region of the Summer Stars' (1944); they cover the whole sweep of Arthurian legend, but have particular interest in the holy grail and the conflicts which prevented its attainment. The obscurity of the poems was partly elucidated by C. S. Lewis, in 'Arthurian Torso' (1948). Lewis was also perhaps the first to bring the Arthurian world into conjunction with science fiction. In the third of his space trilogy, 'That Hideous Strength' (1945), he uses both Merlin and the grail legend in a modern university setting for an apocalyptic allegory showing the dangers of science without morals. The blend of Arthurian with futuristic themes has since proved endlessly productive. 
Rosemary Sutcliff's six novels (1959-81) are varied in their approaches, some (more for children) following Malory, but one ('Sword at Sunset', 1963) being told by Arthur in the first person. Sutcliff here followed historical plausibility in placing her Arthur firmly in the post-Roman period, away from any trace of late-medieval chivalry; and this setting has been chosen for virtually all Arthurian novels since her time. Dark-age realism has replaced courtly pageantry. Mary Stewart's four novels (1970-84), deservedly successful, similarly have a dark-age setting; the story is that of Geoffrey of Monmouth rather than Malory. The narrative is told from Merlin's and, in the last, from Modred's point of view, though not at the expense of sympathy for Arthur. M. Z. Bradley's popular 'The Mists of Avalon' (1982) takes a feminist stance, portraying Arthur's world as one of conflict between Christianity and Celtic paganism, the latter identified as the women's religion. The Arthurian legend has also been frequently reinterpreted in children's literature. Roger Lancelyn Green's 'King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table' (1953) successfully retells the stories of Malory and others, while Susan Cooper's 'The Dark is Rising' series of five novels (1965-77) powerfully combines the Arthurian legend with a modern struggle of good and evil. 
The choice of setting between late-medieval chivalry and dark-age mud and brutality is even more acute in film than in literature, because of the need to choose a mode of visual representation. As in literature, producers in the earlier part of the century tended to choose a late-medieval setting, while more recent films have preferred the supposed authenticity of the dark age. The earliest recorded Arthurian film is the silent 'Parsifal' (Edwin Porter, 1904), based on Wagner's opera, and thus only marginally Arthurian; the earliest truly Arthurian film is therefore 'Lancelot and Elaine' (Charles Kent, 1909), based on Tennyson's poem of that name, part of his 'Idylls of the King'. There were several early versions of Twain's 'Connecticut Yankee' (1921, 1931, and 1949), all emphasizing its comical rather than its bitter aspects. Various films of the 1940s and 1950s, notably 'The Adventures of Sir Galahad' (Spencer Bennet, 1949), 'Prince Valiant' (Henry Hathaway, 1954), and 'The Black Knight' (Tay Garnett, 1954) used King Arthur's court as a setting for newly composed adventures, much as Chretien de Troyes and his successors had done; these were on the whole more successful than films which reverently followed the established plots, such as 'Knights of the Round Table' (Richard Thorpe, 1953), an ambitious attempt to tell the whole Arthurian story, drawing again on Malory with simplifications, and emphasizing the desirability of constitutional law over autocracy. Most were late-medieval and chivalric in their atmosphere and setting. 
During the 1970s directors began to use settings more resembling the dark age. 'Gawain and the Green Knight' (Stephen Weeks, 1973) was unusual in being based on a single medieval text, and in being comfortable with the mystery of medieval romance. John Boorman's popular 'Excalibur' (1981) is one of the more successful attempts to portray the whole story, though dwelling unnecessarily on the violent aspects. French films continued to prefer a late-medieval atmosphere, perhaps for its greater photogenic qualities. The sombre 'Lancelot du lac' (Robert Bresson, 1974) portrays the romance of Lancelot and Guinevere and its undermining of the courtly ideals, while 'Perceval le Gallois' (Eric Rohmer, 1978) follows Chretien de Troyes's romance quite closely; it tackled the problem of setting by using artificial sets designed after late-medieval manuscript illuminations, together with medieval music. 

'Monty Python and the Holy Grail' (Gilliam and Jones, 1975) is the best-informed of medieval films, and the most influential Arthurian one. It parodies both Arthurian literature and films portraying the middle ages, making serious as well as amusing points, including the vacuous bloodthirstiness of some episodes in medieval romance and the quaintness of medieval syllogisms to modern ears. At the beginning of the twenty-first century the spate of films and novels, and likewise of books claiming to identify the 'historical' Arthur, shows no sign of abating. Helped, no doubt, by the absence of hard facts to constrain the imagination, the continuing vitality of the legend bears ample witness to the richness and variety of the material comprised in the 'matter of Britain'. 


@@@@@


doc= 704


Arthur, duke of Brittany (1187-1203), prince, was the posthumous son of Geoffrey, duke of Brittany (d. 1186), fourth son of Henry II, and Constance, duchess of Brittany (c.1161-1201). He was born at Nantes on Easter day (29 March) 1187. Despite his grandfather's wish that he should be called Henry he was baptized Arthur, to the general approval of his Breton subjects who rejoiced greatly at his birth. They recognized in this allusion to his legendary namesake a bold assertion by Constance and her advisers of their desire to be free from Plantagenet domination. But since Arthur was Henry II's only legitimate male grandson to date in the direct line, whatever hopes they may have entertained for independence, his life inevitably had wider horizons than Brittany alone. 
The circumstances of Arthur's earliest infancy can only be surmised; at first he remained with his mother, with whom he developed close and lasting mutual bonds of affection. But he was quickly caught up in international politics. After the death of Henry II Richard I took a close personal interest in Brittany. He treated Arthur and his surviving sister, Eleanor of Brittany (d. 1241), as wards, and had no compunction in using them for diplomatic ends. In negotiating terms for Arthur's marriage to a daughter of Tancred, king of Sicily, at Messina in October 1190, he did, however, recognize his nephew as his own heir, a decision which some have seen as a device for keeping his brother John's ambitions under control while he was absent on crusade. In the same year rumours also circulated about a secret treaty between William de Longchamp (died 1197) and William the Lion of Scotland (died 1214), Arthur's maternal great-uncle, which favoured Arthur's claims against those of John. The rivalry of Arthur and John was subsequently an important leitmotif in the politics of the Angevin dominions, although John's ambitions were temporarily shackled during his brother's absence by the decision of Philip Augustus of France to recognize Arthur as Richard's man, holding the latter answerable for Brittany. 
After returning from prison Richard tried to reassert his control. Early in 1196, probably as a ruse, he summoned Constance to his court in Normandy. She was captured 'en route' by her estranged second husband, Ranulf (III), earl of Chester (died 1232), who imprisoned her in his castle of St James-de-Beuvron. The king then demanded that the Bretons place Arthur in his keeping. When they refused, he invaded the duchy. The boy was kept safe at first in the care of Guethenoc, bishop of Vannes, who hid him. But Richard's sudden arrival in force in northern Brittany at Easter 1196 persuaded Arthur's well-wishers to send him to the French court. Here he kept company with his close contemporary Louis, heir to the throne. Later, after Constance's escape from captivity, hostilities in Brittany ceased and a new 'modus vivendi' with Richard was reached which allowed Arthur to return. From 1197 the duchess involved him in government. He was still well under age, but actions attributed to him begin to appear in chronicles. In August 1198 he renounced his fealty to Philip and agreed to be guided in relations with him by Richard; it is clear however that there were also ambitious barons prepared to exploit him unscrupulously. 
The death of Richard I in April 1199 was a turning point in Arthur's life. Rules for succession differed throughout Richard's lands in France and even in England, where Arthur's right to the throne was vigorously asserted at the time of John's coronation. Among those who opposed it was William Marshal (died 1219), who urged its rejection because of the evil counsellors who surrounded Arthur, and because of Arthur's own pride and deviousness. Just over a week after Richard's death Arthur's supporters in Maine and Anjou were able to take possession of Angers. Here on Easter day (18 April) 1199 Arthur issued a charter for Pontron Abbey and quickly appointed Guillaume des Roches seneschal of Anjou. Soon afterwards Philip, skilfully exploiting Plantagenet disarray, accepted Arthur's homage for Anjou, Maine, Touraine, and Brittany, although his partisans soon had to fight hard to retain control. In late May Arthur was driven out of Tours by Aimery, vicomte de Thouars, and had to retreat to Le Mans, recently devastated by John. 
During the summer fighting continued, until Philip and John met to parley on 17 August 1199, when the French king asked for Poitou, in addition to Anjou, Maine, and Touraine, for Arthur. Next month John agreed to come to terms with Arthur and gave pledges to Guillaume des Roches. When Philip, continuing the war, took Ballon in Maine and refused to hand it over, Guillaume, described by Roger of Howden as 'leader of Arthur's army' ('Chronica... Hovedene', 4.96), decided to make his own terms with John, and delivered Arthur and Le Mans into his keeping. After a brief and harsh confinement Arthur and his mother managed to escape, and re-established contact with Philip, who shortly afterwards came to Tours and took Arthur back into wardship. When a few months later the French king reached agreement with John in the treaty of Le Goulet (22 May 1200), he conceded that Arthur, deprived of wider territories, should perform homage to John for Brittany, although he was to remain in Philip's custody, and efforts were made to protect his rights as duke. 
Arthur's whereabouts in 1200-01 are largely unknown; he clearly spent some time at the French royal court, where he took part in a tournament celebrating the betrothal of Louis, the royal heir, to Blanche of Castile. But he also resided for a while with his mother and her third husband, Guy de Thouars, in Brittany, where his consent to grants to the abbeys of Melleray and St Sulpice-la-Foret is noted, while the 'safety and prosperity of the soul of my dearest son' was in the forefront of Constance's mind when she endowed the abbey of Villeneuve shortly before her death in September 1201 (Morice, 1.785-6). In the same year Arthur acted alone in dispatching envoys to inform the archbishop of Tours that he accepted a definitive papal ruling depriving the bishopric of Dol of its long-cherished claim to metropolitan status. 
When John summoned him to perform homage again a week after Easter 1202, Arthur rejoined Philip, to whose six-year-old daughter, Marie, he was then betrothed. Following the sentence of forfeiture pronounced against John on 28 April, he accompanied the French king's army on campaign in Normandy. At Gournay in July, where the king knighted him, as 'Arthur, duke of Brittany and Aquitaine, count of Anjou and Maine' (Teulet, 1, no. 647), he performed homage for the lands newly conferred on him (but still to be conquered) following their confiscation from John. He was then immediately dispatched with a small force to Poitou, where a revolt in his favour had broken out, but where his aged grandmother Eleanor of Aquitaine (d. 1204) continued to sustain John's cause. He cornered her at Mirebeau, where on 1 August he was captured when John, after a dramatic forced march from Normandy, took him entirely off guard and made many of his powerful supporters prisoner. 
Some, including Arthur's sister Eleanor, were dispatched to England, where she remained a captive until her death in 1241, but Arthur was confined at Falaise. No clear account can be given of his last months, nor of the manner and time of his death, but the broad outlines are tolerably established. Initially John was prepared to consider negotiating terms for his release; on 24 August safe conducts were issued for Breton envoys to come to his court. But when in the autumn Arthur remained a prisoner, his supporters again rose in rebellion in Brittany and elsewhere. By March 1203 they were prepared to perform homage to Philip on condition that if Arthur was released they might return to his allegiance. Simultaneously ugly rumours about the harsh conditions in which he was kept began circulating. We owe to Ralph of Coggeshall, for instance, the story, later used by Shakespeare as the crux of his 'King John', of John's ordering Arthur's mutilation at Falaise Castle, so that he would no longer be capable or considered worthy of ruling. He was allegedly saved by Hubert de Burgh (died 1243), who heeded the prisoner's piteous complaints and refused to obey the king's orders. Other chroniclers relate that when he was moved to Rouen, Arthur was in sound health, though William (III) de Briouze is reported as saying, when he delivered him into John's hands, that he would no longer answer for his safety. 
In all probability it is from Briouze that the most explicit statements on the date and manner of Arthur's death derive, for he appears to have been the common source for details later found only in the Margam annals and in the 'Philippidos' of Guillaume le Breton. These relate how on Maundy Thursday (3 April) 1203, coming suddenly to Rouen, a frenzied John struck Arthur dead with a large stone and tossed his body into the Seine, whence it was recovered by fishermen and secretly buried at the priory of Ste Marie-des-Pres. For Briouze was a patron of Margam, was at Rouen with John at the time in question, and was later driven into exile in France where he died in 1211, after his wife, who had refused to place her own children in John's hands as hostages for fear of their meeting Arthur's fate, was horribly starved to death by the vengeful king. In any event, whether killed in this fashion or drowned through John's agency as other accounts suggest, Arthur was not certainly seen alive again, though his supporters long hoped he might be. In Brittany his succession passed to his half-sister, Alix, the daughter of Constance and Guy de Thouars. 


@@@@@


doc= 705


Arthur, prince of Wales (1486-1502), was born at St Swithun's Priory, Winchester, on 19 September 1486, the eldest son of Henry VII (1457-1509) and his wife, Elizabeth of York (1466-1503), the eldest daughter of Edward IV, whom Henry had married on 18 January 1486, in fulfilment of an oath made at Christmas 1483. Arthur was baptized on 24 September in Winchester Cathedral and named after the famous British hero whose fabulous exploits fill the pages of Geoffrey of Monmouth. Initially he was put into the care of women and his nursery (which in 1487 was located at Farnham) was headed by Dame Elizabeth Darcy -- who had performed the same role for Edward IV's children. In 1489 there begin to be references to male servants in attendance on him, and after his creation as knight of the Bath and investiture as prince of Wales and earl of Chester on 29 November that year a more elaborate household structure was created for him by secondment from his father's officers. 
By this date Arthur's education was probably already in hand. He reportedly learnt the rudiments very quickly, and then, 'c'.1491, his higher studies commenced under John Rede, formerly headmaster of Winchester College. His education was subsequently taken over by Bernard Andre. Other schoolmasters, including Thomas Linacre, followed Andre in the prince's service, and by the time of his death Arthur was said to be familiar with the works of twenty-four classical authors in Latin. 
In May 1490 Arthur was described as warden of all the marches towards Scotland, with Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey, as his deputy. He was named on commissions of the peace from 1491 onwards. In October 1492 he was made keeper of England and the king's lieutenant during his father's absence in France. His main connections were with Wales, where Henry VII followed the precedent established by Edward IV and set up a council for the prince, to act as a focus for royal authority there and in the marches. The council was in existence by March 1490, although Arthur did not at this stage move to Wales and the council's effective royal figurehead was initially the king's uncle Jasper Tudor. Conciliar authority in the marches was strengthened in March 1493 by the grant of various powers to the prince, including the power to appoint justices of oyer and terminer and inquire into franchises. In November that year he received an extensive land grant in the region, including the estates of the earldom of March. 
Arthur's marriage was under discussion as early as 1488, when it was suggested that he should marry Katherine of Aragon (1485-1536). On 27 March 1489 the treaty of Medina del Campo (ratified by Henry VII in December 1490) provided for the marriage of the two children as soon as they were of canonical age. A proxy betrothal at Woodstock followed in 1497, and two proxy marriages in 1499 and 1500 before Katherine finally arrived in England, landing at Plymouth on 2 October 1501. The couple were married in St Paul's Cathedral on 14 November: the ceremony the high point of a month of festivities which had begun with their entry into London at the beginning of November. In the following month they left for the marches of Wales, where they established their household at Ludlow. Arthur died there on 2 April 1502. The news reached the royal court at Greenwich late on 4 April, and the royal council delegated the task of breaking the news to the king to his confessor, who told the king in the early hours of the following morning. King and queen comforted each other for their loss. Arthur's body lay in state for three weeks before being taken for burial at Worcester Cathedral, where his chantry chapel survives. He is also commemorated in stained-glass, in a transept window in Great Malvern Priory church. The heraldry displayed at his funeral included not only his own arms, and those of Wales, Cornwall, and Chester, but also the arms of Cadwalader and Brutus. 
With the benefit of hindsight the most important consequence of Arthur's early death was the remarriage of his widow to the prince's younger brother, the future Henry VIII, and the controversy to which that later gave rise concerning the consummation or otherwise of Katherine's first marriage. When Henry began proceedings for a divorce she was adamant that she had come a virgin to her second marriage bed, raising the possibility that Arthur's claim after first sharing a bed with his bride, that 'I have been this night in the midst of Spain' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/3, no. 5774), was no more than adolescent braggadocio. No other evidence for consummation was ever submitted, though its lack was made up for by a good deal of speculation. 


@@@@@


doc= 706


Arthur, Archibald (1744-1797), Church of Scotland minister and university teacher, was born on 6 September 1744 at Abbot's Inch, Renfrewshire, the eldest son of the farmer Andrew Arthur and his wife, Jean Snodgrass. After being taught at home by his parents, he attended Paisley grammar school, and matriculated at Glasgow University in 1758. Encouraged by the humanist George Muirhead and the professor of Greek, James Moor, he flourished at the college. He won a prize for his essay 'On the importance of natural philosophy', which was deeply indebted to the ideas of his moral philosophy professor, Adam Smith. Having graduated MA in 1763, he studied divinity at Glasgow, and supported himself by finding employment as a family tutor near Paisley. 
Arthur was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Paisley on 6 October 1767, apparently despite questions about his orthodoxy raised by a phalanx of local evangelicals, led by John Witherspoon, who were probably suspicious of his affiliations with liberal clergymen and his advocacy of greater tolerance within the kirk. He soon returned to the more congenial atmosphere of academe when he was appointed a chaplain at Glasgow University, and his ties with the moderate clergy in Glasgow were strengthened when he was chosen to assist Principal William Leechman's close associate William Craig, the minister of St Andrew's Church. Arthur again supplemented his limited income by serving as a family tutor in Kintyre and Glasgow, but his finances improved when he was appointed university librarian on 10 June 1774. His position (from which he eventually resigned on 28 October 1794) was renewed by the town council on 25 October 1775, six days after he was made a burgess and guild brother. 
About the time he first became librarian, Arthur joined the Glasgow Literary Society. The university library catalogue that Arthur published in 1791 (modelled on Thomas Ruddiman's catalogue of the Advocates' Library in Edinburgh) had its distant origins in a meeting of the society on 4 April 1777, and three of his early discourses from the society on religion, language, and the historical development of the fine arts, appeared in the anonymous collection 'Original Essays and Translations' (1780), edited by the minister of Kinfauns, George Chapman. During the 1770s Arthur was also active in a club frequented by divinity students and ministers. Essays on natural religion, aesthetics, and the study of the classics read before the two societies were later included in his posthumous 'Discourses on Theological and Literary Subjects' (1803), which was assembled at the request of his surviving siblings by his friend and colleague the professor of the humanity class, William Richardson. Outside Glasgow, Arthur was elected a fellow of the newly founded Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1783. 
On 18 May 1780 Arthur was elected assistant and successor to the professor of moral philosophy, Thomas Reid, who had nominated him as his replacement. Arthur had impressed Reid with his ability as a preacher, and had made his mark as a substitute lecturer in botany, logic, and the humanity class. Moreover, he shared Reid's taste for the natural sciences and the anatomy of the mind. Over the next sixteen years Arthur taught for Reid, though he served only one session as professor after Reid's death in 1796. His public classes, which owed much to Reid and Smith, covered three main areas: natural theology, ethics, and a combination of natural jurisprudence and politics. Like Reid, Arthur was consistently critical of the writings of David Hume in his lectures, but showed more independence in his private class, where he concentrated on aesthetics and 'belles-lettres'. After a sharp decline in health during the spring of 1797, Arthur died in Glasgow on 14 June, a bachelor and reputedly wealthy. 


@@@@@


doc= 707


Arthur, Sir George, first baronet (1784-1854), colonial official, the youngest son of John Arthur of Plymouth, maltster, brewer, landowner, councillor, mayor, and 'gentleman', and of Catherine, daughter of Thomas Cornish, 'gentleman' of East Portlemouth, near Salcombe, was born in Plymouth on 21 June 1784. He was commissioned ensign in the 91st Argyllshire Highlanders on 26 August 1804, when slightly older than was normal, and next June was promoted lieutenant (without purchase) in the 35th foot. After serving with his regiment in Sir James Craig's expedition to Sicily and Italy, in 1807 he was sent to Egypt with General Fraser's force. He fought with distinction in the attack on Rosetta and was wounded in the arm. After further service in Sicily he returned to London on leave, where in May 1808 he bought his captaincy. In July 1809 he joined the Walcheren expedition and was appointed deputy assistant adjutant-general on Sir Eyre Coote's staff. Arthur led his light company's attack on Flushing, where his conduct earned high praise in general orders and later in testimonials from his superiors, but like so many others he was soon struck down by fever. After recovering he returned to the staff, serving under Coote's successor, Sir George Don. When Don returned to Jersey as governor in May 1810, he took Arthur with him as military secretary, but in 1812 Arthur went to London on leave in the hope of purchasing a majority. He did so -- in the 7th West India regiment -- and in December sailed for Jamaica, where he was appointed assistant quartermaster-general. On 13 June 1814 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Colonel Sir John Frederick Sigismund Smith, commander of the island's artillery, a month after he had accepted the position of superintendent and commandant of British Honduras. Twelve months later, 'promotion being my idol', he was delighted to be appointed brevet lieutenant-colonel. 
Arthur quickly showed his vigour and passion for reform, improving his capital and the administration of justice, struggling against the region's endemic piracy, fighting the Board of Trade in London to win concessions for the settlement's timber, but backing it in stopping the smuggling of foreign imports into British Honduras. He also displayed a wholehearted conversion to a Calvinist-evangelical Anglicanism, which led him to encourage church building and missionary work, and to attack local slave owners for illegally importing new slaves, for their cruelty, which he discovered when suppressing a 'very alarming' slave rising up-country in 1820, and for their allegedly illegal enslavement of the descendants of Mosquito Shore inhabitants brought to the settlement in 1784. This aroused opposition which was intensified by his objections to the powers of the elected magistrates and of the 'public meeting', by his attempts to stop illegal land occupancy, and by his private conflict with Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Bradley over the military command in the settlement. Though the imperial government upheld Arthur in all these disputes except that concerning the Mosquito people, when he went home on leave because of ill health in 1822 he agreed it would be 'prudent' not to go back, and though for political reasons his brother, when mayor in 1818, had made him a freeman of Plymouth, he sought another posting overseas. 
Arthur's general efficiency and his anti-slavery policies had attracted the attention of William Wilberforce as well as his superiors at the Colonial Office, and with additional help from his army patrons in July 1823 he was appointed lieutenant-governor of Van Diemen's Land, then an important penal settlement. On arriving in Hobart next May, he immediately set about improving the convict system by establishing graduated punishments ranging from penal settlements and hard labour to assigned service and tickets of leave -- thus combining severe punishment as a deterrent for bad offenders with what he hoped would be reformatory treatment for the better behaved; by also weeding out favouritism and corruption among the overseers and superintendents, he hoped he was creating 'the best system of secondary punishment ever yet devised'. Successful while he was in charge, his policy was drastically changed after he left, and his experience and his evidence were ignored by the Molesworth committee on transportation which reported in 1837. 
In other respects during his twelve years in office Arthur improved the administration, organized an efficient magistracy and police, suppressed bushranging, completed many public works with convict labour, and encouraged religion and education. Though he wanted to protect the Aborigines from the settlers, he was unable to do so, but with the help of the 'friendly missions' of George Augustus Robinson he succeeded in transferring a remnant to a refuge on Flinders Island. 
As in Honduras, Arthur's authoritarianism aroused opposition, especially from the press, from a number of officials whom he had to dismiss for corruption or misconduct, and from settlers whose claims for land or assigned servants he rejected. Accused by his opponents of both tyranny and corruption, he triumphantly vindicated himself, and when his term expired in 1836 the secretary of state stressed his claims 'to the approbation of the King and the gratitude of his Majesty's subjects'. This was shown next year by his being promoted full colonel and made a knight-commander of the Royal Guelphic Order. He had also profited by buying 15,000 acres of land for $10,000, about 1830, for this was worth nearly $50,000 when he left, a matter of some satisfaction to a father of eleven surviving children (six born in Hobart) who wanted to pay for the education and careers of his six sons, and $5000 for each of his five daughters as either a dowry or annuity. 
In December 1837, Arthur was appointed lieutenant-governor of Upper Canada with the rank of major-general on the staff. When he went out that winter he was separated from Lady Arthur for the only time in their lives, just as when he bought Lord Durham's wine cellar next year he borrowed money for the only time in his career. As in Lower Canada, a rebellion had just been suppressed, but renewed outbreaks were threatening. During 1838 sympathizers from the USA three times raided the province, but Arthur was successful in putting down these incursions and further local risings. He strongly opposed the demand for responsible government in the province, but he was able to restore the provincial finances, improve its administration, weed out its incompetents, reduce corruption, make recommendations for the better treatment of native Canadians, and, 'cordially co-operating with Her Majesty's government', help the new governor-general, Lord Sydenham, to achieve the union of Upper and Lower Canada. On his return, he was again praised by the secretary of state and created baronet on 1 May 1841. 
In London, Arthur refused offers from two constituencies to return him to parliament without expense, but as usual was extremely active in seeking another imperial post. Early in May 1842, pushed by the prime minister, Sir Robert Peel, the East India Company appointed him governor of the Bombay Presidency. There he helped to keep up supplies and troops for the last stage of the Anglo-Afghan War and for Sir Charles Napier's campaign in Sind; he supported its annexation, but soon fell out with Napier over his high-handed administration of the new province. However he retained the confidence of the governor-general Lord Ellenborough and the directors of the East India Company, and important in this regard were his usual administrative reforms, as he found his subordinates often idle and his subjects inhibited by a 'spirit of fatalism'. Unfortunately he was hampered by a lack of funds, but he pushed ahead with the planned Deccan survey intended to relieve the burdens of the peasant-cultivators; with improvements in irrigation, communications, and methods of salt manufacture; and with the existing plans for native education. He obtained a municipal act for Bombay, improved its sanitation, and reclaimed part of its foreshore. In personal affairs, in October 1844 he witnessed the marriage of his daughter Catherine to his secretary Bartle Frere, and soon afterwards he found that wise investment had enabled him to recoup the financial losses incurred in the Australian depression in 1841-3. In 1845 he suppressed a dangerous rebellion in the south of the presidency and next year, when Lord Hardinge was engaged in another Anglo-Sikh war, Arthur received a dormant commission to succeed him as governor-general if necessary. But prolonged overwork led to a breakdown in May, and in July he resigned his post. 
Back in England, Arthur was sworn of the privy council and promoted major-general in 1846, received an honorary DCL from Oxford University in 1848, was appointed colonel of the 50th Queen's Own regiment in 1853, and promoted lieutenant-general next year. Though much preoccupied with Lady Arthur's severe arthritis and with his sons' careers in these years, he kept up his interest in the colonial empire and convict transportation, but his three requests for overseas posts were refused. Predeceasing his wife by four months, he died at 32 Gloucester Square, London, on 19 September 1854 after a stroke, leaving an estate of more than $50,000, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. He was one of the first men to undertake a career of colonial service, during which he had shown great ambition, a devotion to duty (coupled with constant requests for promotion), imperial fervour, indefatigable energy, great administrative ability, reforming zeal, and a justified pride in his work, though marred a little by an inability to delegate and a marked intolerance of opposition or criticism. 


@@@@@


doc= 708


Arthur, James (1587-1654), Dominican friar and theologian, was born into a wealthy Limerick merchant family. He was sent to Spain where in 1606 he entered the Irish secular college in Salamanca. Later he joined the Dominicans. He attended the University of Salamanca from 1610 to 1616 and began teaching there about 1616. Already in 1626 he was recommended to 'propaganda fide' by the Irish Dominican procurator as suitable for episcopal office in Ireland. In the same year he was named lector of theology at Leon and was temporarily lector in theology in Salamanca in 1627-8. He filled academic posts in other parts of Spain. On 15 November 1630 he was named regent of the Collegio de San Tommaso in Naples and was regent of the 'studium generale' in Avila in the 1630s. He was later regent of studies at the theological graduate college of San Gregorio, Valladolid, and in 1640 was nominated to the principal chair of theology at Coimbra University by Philip IV. It appears that while there he refused to take an oath imposed on all professors to defend the doctrine of the immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary. 
Arthur was known in Ireland: in 1632, for instance, the bishop and clergy of Limerick wanted him as coadjutor. In the early 1640s he appears to have retired to the Portuguese Dominican college in Lisbon. In 1649 the important Irish Dominican Dominic O'Daly referred to him as a most discerning man who might be sent to Ireland to assess the situation there. As a devoted follower of Thomas Aquinas, Arthur wrote a series of commentaries on virtually the entire 'Summa theologiae'; these survive in manuscript form in Spain and Portugal as 'Commentaria in totam fere S. Thomas de Aquino Summam'. Arthur died at the Portuguese College of St Dominic in Lisbon on 1 February 1654. Soon after his death his former pupil, John Baptist de Marinis, by then master-general of the order, directed Dominic O'Daly to collect and publish Arthur's manuscripts. Only one volume, it would seem, appeared, in 1655. 


@@@@@


doc= 709


Arthur, Thomas (d. 1532/3), religious radical, is of uncertain origins, though he may have belonged to an Arthur family of Wisbech. He studied at Cambridge, graduating in 1513 and proceeding MA in 1516. In 1518 he became a fellow of St John's, and is recorded as principal of St Mary's hostel in the same year. He may perhaps be the Thomas Arthur who was rector of Glandford, Norfolk, in 1514. He was among the Cambridge men who in the 1520s became enthused by an eclectic mix of ideas about church reform, ideas whose sources included Erasmus, Luther, and the Lollards. He seems to have been among the first to fall under the spell of the charismatic evangelical Thomas Bilney, and Foxe expressly credits him and Bilney with the conversion to their views of two future martyrs, John Lambert and Robert Barnes. 
During the summer of 1527 Arthur and Bilney preached in various churches in London and East Anglia, propounding justification by faith and attacking both images and the attribution to the saints of any mediatory or intercessory role. It is probable that the two men had been in trouble before, perhaps in the previous years, and may have been forbidden to preach. Arthur was particularly insistent that those who could preach should not, or could not, be inhibited from so doing by any episcopal, or indeed earthly, authority. He subsequently denied that he had exhorted a congregation to pray for those imprisoned for preaching 'the trew gospell of God' (Foxe, 4, appx, citing Tunstall reg. fol. 135'v'). As a result of their preaching Arthur and Bilney were summoned to appear before Cardinal Wolsey and a legatine commission of four other bishops to face investigation for heresy in late November 1527. Both men abjured in early December. 
Almost nothing is known about Arthur following his abjuration. John Bale attributes five named works to him: two Latin tragedies, two religious works, and a translation of Erasmus's 'Enchiridion'. However, no work by him is known to be extant. The English 'Enchiridion' published by Wynkyn de Worde for John Byddell in 1533 may be his, but William Tyndale has an equal if not better claim to be considered the translator. It is alternatively possible that he was responsible for the translation of the work printed by William Seres in 1561 and edited by John Gough from an anonymous manuscript. 
Bilney was burnt for heresy on 19 August 1531 in Norwich. Arthur survived him by little more than a year, dying in either December 1532 or January 1533 in Little Walsingham, site of England's premier Marian shrine and symbol of so much that he and Bilney had inveighed against. He asked to be buried in Little Walsingham churchyard. His religious views had probably not changed, however: despite consisting mostly of charitable bequests, his will has neither traditional formulas nor provision for traditional devotions. Chief among his named beneficiaries are the prisoners in Lynn, Norwich, and the Tower of London, and it is difficult not to suppose that he had in mind those victims of Thomas More and Richard Nix -- some of them his old Cambridge colleagues -- whose offence was preaching 'the trew gospell of God'. 


@@@@@


doc= 710


Arthur, Thomas (1593-1675), physician, son of William Arthur, was born on 24 November 1593 of a Roman Catholic family in Limerick. His father's name being William, he often styled himself Thomas Arthur FitzWilliam. He was educated at Bordeaux, where he obtained his master's degree, at Paris, where he studied medicine, and at Rheims, where he was awarded a doctorate. In May 1619 he returned to Ireland and began a successful practice in Limerick. From November of that year he made trips to Dublin, treating a number of people there. From April 1624 he spent most of his time in Dublin rather than in Limerick, although he had started building a house in Limerick in 1620. In August 1630 he moved with his wife and children to the capital, where he remained, except for a period between 1641 and 1652, when he sought safety from the war in Limerick. 
Arthur kept a personal and professional record book (BL, Add. MS 31885), which contains a complete list of his patients and fees from 1619 to 1666, when he retired. Among the various cases which he treated the most important one, or at least the one in which he took most pride, was that of Archbishop James Ussher (1581-1656), whose complaint had baffled English physicians. Arthur effected a cure in 1626, and received a lavish fee of $51. His success brought him the patronage of the viceroy, Viscount Falkland. 
Arthur's entry-book also contains an exact record of his gradual accumulation of property, from which he earned more than from his practice. It also contains a number of pieces of Latin verse and some autobiographical and genealogical information. He also left a manuscript catalogue of his books. 
Arthur died in January 1675, leaving two daughters; another daughter had predeceased him in 1651. In his will, he left all his property to his grandson William. 


@@@@@


doc= 711


Artlett, Richard Austin (1807-1873), engraver, was born on 9 November 1807 and baptized the following day at West Wittering, Sussex, the son of Richard Artlett and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Gadd. He was initially apprenticed to Robert Cooper, but finished his instruction under James Thomson. Between 1834 and 1842 he and his wife, Harriet, had five children, two sons and three daughters, all baptized at St Pancras Old Church, London. Artlett engraved in stipple a few figure subjects, including the pair 'Boulogne in 1805' and 'Boulogne in 1855', after John Absolon, and 'England, Folkestone' (1855) and 'France, Boulogne' (1855), after Joseph J. Jenkins. He also engraved several portraits of contemporaries for the print publishers, among which are those of Lord Ashburton, after Sir Thomas Lawrence ('c'.1810), Sir James Emerson Tennent, after George Richmond, Mrs Gladstone, after William Say, and plates after Alfred Chalon. He contributed plates for a series entitled 'Eminent Conservative Statesmen' (1838) and W. Finden's 'Female Aristocracy of the Court of Queen Victoria' (1849), and the frontispiece engraving of the Chandos portrait of Shakespeare for the Imperial edition of the works (1872). He was, however, most distinguished as an engraver of sculpture. Between 1849 and 1873 he made forty-five sculpture plates for the 'Art Journal', which he executed with great taste and delicacy. The most noteworthy among these are a portrait after a bust of Queen Victoria by Joseph Durham (1857), 'The Fawn', a statue by Charles Bell Birch, 'The Virgin Mother', a group by Albert-Ernest Carrier-Belleuse, and 'Asia', one of the groups of the Albert memorial, by John Henry Foley. Artlett also engraved some scriptural subjects for the Glasgow-based publishers Blackie & Son. He died on 1 September 1873 at 67 Carlton Road, Kentish Town, London. Several of his portrait engravings are now in the British Museum collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 712


Arundale, Francis (1807-1853), architect and painter, was born at 4 Stanhope Terrace, London, on 9 August 1807, the son of George Arundale. He was an early pupil of Augustus Charles Pugin, with whom he stayed for seven years, accompanying his master to Normandy in 1826. Together with B. Ferrey, G. B. Moore, and T. T. Bury he provided illustrations for Pugin's 'Historical and descriptive essays accompanying a series of engraved specimens of the architectural antiquities of Normandy' (1828) and also contributed drawings for 'Illustrations to the Public Buildings of London', by Pugin and J. Britton (2 vols., 1826-8). He entered the Royal Academy Schools on 22 April 1829, and in July that year travelled via Switzerland to Italy. Studying buildings designed by Palladio, he made detailed architectural drawings of four which he published in 'The edifices of Andrea Palladio, forming a selection from his most admired buildings, from drawings and measurements taken at Vicenza' (1832), with a dedication to Sir John Soane. 
Recommended by J. J. Scoles, Arundale joined the Egyptologist Robert Hay in Egypt in 1832 as a draughtsman and landscape artist, and in the course of Hay's researches after Egyptian antiquities made numerous sketches and drawings, many of which are now in the British Museum. That same year Hay was rejoined by Joseph Bonomi, and while in Upper Egypt Arundale and Bonomi lived for a while in the same tomb, a choice of residence that was later said to have contributed to Arundale's early death from an obscure disease. His frequent journal references to his delicate state of health while abroad, however, suggest that his death was probably due to a pre-existing condition. In letters to his mother and sister, which he illustrated with rapid sketches, Arundale conveyed a vivid impression of the day-to-day life of an early nineteenth-century field expedition to sites of Egyptian antiquity, which at that time were also being visited by the eminent French Egyptologist J. F. Champollion, interpreter of the Rosetta stone. In August 1833 Arundale travelled with Bonomi and Frederic Catherwood, via the Sinai, to Jerusalem, where he stayed for six weeks and where, with Catherwood, he measured the interior of the mosque of Omar: his adoption of local dress and customs possibly contributed towards the required access. His later paintings and watercolours, while accurate in their depiction of views of the city (for example, 'Jerusalem: the Via Dolorosa', and 'Jerusalem: the Arch of Ecce Homo', both priv. coll.), are also suffused with a quality of light for which the city is famous. In depicting the effect of sunlight on the local pale yellow sandstone Arundale's paintings reveal that, while his training as an architect enabled him accurately to record the construction of buildings, his temperament led him naturally to include in his works more painterly considerations of light and mood. His inclusion, too, of local figures employed in journeyman tasks in a manner similar to Delacroix in his Moroccan sketchbooks of 1832 (particularly in his use of a vibrant red to highlight costume details) is a testament to his fascination with his exotic surroundings. The fluid, sketch-like quality of his figures, compared to the detailed rendering of the architecture which formed the main subject of his work, confirms that, at least in his earlier work, his primary concern was with architecture. 
From Jerusalem, Arundale travelled north to Tyre, Sidon, and Beirut, before returning home via Cyprus, Greece, and Rome. While in Rome he sat for his portrait 'in the costume of an inhabitant of Mount Lebanon' to Penry Williams, whom he probably met on his way to Egypt in 1830: his studio was a meeting-place for British artists in the city. The portrait shows a tall, spare, dark-eyed, and heavily bearded figure in oriental dress; before him stands a narghile, the pipe of which he holds in one hand; through the Moorish window in the background a view of a domed mosque and minaret is silhouetted against an evening sky. Subsequently engraved by Maxim Gauci for Arundale's 'Illustrations of Jerusalem and Sinai' (1837), the portrait conveys a romantic, almost Byronic, view of its subject, a view that is upheld not only by reference to Arundale's letters and journal but also by the mood of his finished paintings. 
Between 1830 and 1852 Arundale exhibited at the Royal Academy over forty works, mainly views of Greek, Roman, and Egyptian ruins, some of which were large oil paintings. It was possibly at the academy that he met Mary Ann Pickersgill ('c'.1806-1893), miniaturist, who exhibited five works in the 1838 exhibition and whom he married on 11 October that year. She was the daughter of the portrait painter H. W. Pickersgill. They lived first at 48 Greek Street, London, also the address of the partnership of Arundale and Heap, architects. It seems that Arundale was not particularly active as a practising architect (his only executed design appears to have been for a boathouse for Mr Bowyer Adderly in Birmingham, exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1839); by 1841 he was involved with Bonomi in preparing for publication 'A Gallery of Antiquities Selected from the British Museum' (1842-3), with descriptions by Samuel Birch. His next project was to translate (with T. L. Donaldson) the four-volume 'Architecture ancienne et moderne' by Jules Gailhabaud; the resulting 'Ancient and Modern Architecture' appeared between 1844 and 1846. 
Declining health led to a move in 1845 from 11 Berners Street, London, to 15 Devonshire Place, Brighton. Arundale's next publication, a technical work entitled 'Designs for Verandahs' (1851), appeared in the same year as the exhibition at the Royal Academy of his unusual history painting 'The Meeting of Godfrey and Alexis' (priv. coll.), which depicts the arrival of the Crusader leader, Godfrey de Bouillon, at Constantinople in 1096, when he was met by the emperor, Alexius Comnenus. The year 1852 was the last in which he sent work to the Royal Academy exhibition; these were two views, one of Greece and one of Egypt. His last recorded works were two watercolour sketches of Brighton (priv. coll.), taken from the downs above the town, painted shortly before his death on 9 September 1853, aged forty-six. At the height of his powers Arundale sent to the 1843 Royal Academy exhibition 'St Peter's from the Tiber' (priv. coll.), in which the viewer's eye is led from a small boat in the foreground, from which a fisherman is casting a hook, in the direction of a punt crossing the river towards a line of flat barges on the far bank; these lie opposite a row of old riverfront houses which stretch back from the picture plane towards, in the distance, the cupola of St Peter's and the castle of St Angelus. Over all the clear sky and soft Roman light, the source surely of Arundale's inspiration, evoke a balanced stillness, which, as Vialla suggests, while they certainly make this his masterpiece, also confirm that many of his works deserve equally to be considered as landscapes and as architectural drawings. Arundale was described by one obituarist as 'an amiable man and an accomplished artist' ('The Builder', 84), and another noted that 'he had the enviable quality of never losing a friend on his travels, and during his residence in his native land' ('Art Journal', 50). With five young children to support, his widow moved back to London, where, as Mary Ann Arundale, she continued to paint portraits, and exhibited at the Royal Academy until 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 713


Arundel, Thomas (1353-1414), administrator and archbishop of Canterbury, was the third son of Richard (II) Fitzalan, third earl of Arundel and eighth earl of Surrey (c.1313-1376), and his wife, Eleanor (died 1372), the daughter of Henry, earl of Lancaster, and widow of John, Lord Beaumont. Sir John Arundel was his elder brother. 
The course of Arundel's life was determined by his high birth. He was the youngest of three sons, and his early career in the church was planned from birth, for his father had served as an envoy at the papal curia and was in a position to promote his son's interests. Arundel's first benefice at Taunton in July 1370 was a royal presentation, and by March 1372 he held a wide range of benefices. Thanks to parental pressure, the co-operation of Edward III, and the assistance of Pope Gregory XI ('r'. 1370-78), Arundel was provided to the bishopric of Ely on 13 August 1373 at the age of twenty. He was consecrated on 9 April following, and the temporalities were restored on 5 May 1374. The pope himself subsequently declared that 'no-one so young has been appointed to a see' ('CEPR letters', 4.129). 
Arundel's career at Oxford had begun about 1369 or 1370, though the earliest evidence of his presence there comes from some time before May 1372, when he was appointed to settle a dispute over the election of proctors. He was resident in Oriel College in June 1373, and, with the assistance of his father, endowed the college chapel in November 1373. Family pressure prevented his progressing beyond the rank of BA. His mother died in 1372, and by 1374 his father was infirm and Arundel was required to deputize in the management of the family estates in Sussex and Surrey. He was later appointed the chief executor of his father's will. Earl Richard's death, on 24 January 1376, nevertheless freed the young bishop from paternal domination, and allowed him to concentrate on a career in church and state. 
After his father's death, the shape of Arundel's career, especially his role in high politics, was determined by the influence of his eldest brother, Richard (III) Fitzalan, fourth earl of Arundel, an outspoken critic of Richard II's government. Thomas provided more measured criticism. In October 1386 he visited the king with Thomas, duke of Gloucester (died 1397), and outlined the rights and privileges of parliament 'vis-a-vis' the king. When Richard II threatened to summon French aid, Arundel claimed that the people had a right by ancient statute to depose with common consent a king who alienated his people, and to appoint a new person from the royal line. Parliament secured the removal of the chancellor, the earl of Suffolk, whose place Arundel took on 24 October 1386. A committee of fourteen was appointed to act as the king's continual council for a year, led by Arundel. Its function was to reform government and restrict the influence of informal royal advisers. The king responded by leaving Westminster, and by 1387 he was in open conflict with Richard (III) Fitzalan and Gloucester. Arundel tried to mediate between them, but a number of the king's courtiers were arrested. Arundel then opened parliament (the Merciless Parliament of 1388) with a sermon explaining how the great debates and disorders existing by reason of lack of good government could be ended. Because of his ecclesiastical position, Arundel took no part in the actual trial in parliament of Richard's favourites, but he was translated to the see of the exiled archbishop of York, Alexander Neville (died 1392), on 3 April 1388. 
In 1389 Richard II regained control of government, and Arundel lost his office as chancellor on 4 May; but while his brother, the earl of Arundel, became increasingly isolated, Thomas Arundel's prestige was such that he was reappointed chancellor on 27 September 1391. It is possible that his influence as archbishop of York was behind the king's decision to move the chancery, king's bench, and certain departments of the exchequer to York in 1392. When Richard II went to Ireland in 1394-5, affairs of church and state twice led Arundel to visit him there, and he helped to negotiate the king's marriage to Princess Isabella of France in late summer 1396. On 25 September of that year he was translated to succeed William Courtenay as archbishop of Canterbury, and resigned as chancellor two days later. By this time he was possibly falling out of royal favour and could have been behind the petition in parliament in February 1397 of a former protege, Thomas Haxey, complaining of excessive expenditure in the royal household. Haxey's arrest for treason signalled moves in September 1397 against all those involved in measures against Richard II's household in 1388: Richard Fitzalan was tried in parliament for treason and beheaded, while Thomas Arundel was condemned on 25 September as a traitor for his part in the events of 1386-8. He was barred from attending to defend himself; the speaker, Sir John Bussy (died 1399), was reported to have said 'his cunning might outwit us all' ('Annales Ricardi secundi', 210). Richard II disliked Arundel, fearing what was described in parliament as the archbishop's 'untrustworthy and vengeful character' ('Chronicle of Adam of Usk', 27). His temporalities were confiscated, and he was sent into exile and translated to the (schismatic) see of St Andrews. Arundel went to Rome to plead his case, then to Florence, Cologne, Utrecht, and other cities, before joining Henry Bolingbroke, earl of Derby (exiled in September 1398), in Paris -- in spite of royal orders forbidding such communication. 
Arundel accompanied Bolingbroke on his return to England at Ravenspur on 4 July 1399. It is likely that he influenced Bolingbroke's declaration, sworn on oath at Doncaster before the earl of Northumberland, that he did not intend to take the crown but to control the king by appointing officials and reforming the household -- measures that looked back to those of the October parliament of 1386. The deposition of Richard was probably discussed between Bolingbroke and Arundel, but only as one option among several at this stage; however, it became a more feasible option as Bolingbroke found Richard's administration collapsing before him. According to an eyewitness, Jean Creton, the king sent an envoy from Conwy to Bolingbroke at Chester to explore his purpose; Arundel held a prominent place in discussions with Bolingbroke about the reply, but probably did not go to Conwy himself. Among other things, Northumberland proposed referring the trial of Richard's unpopular counsellors to parliament, to be followed by a recrowning of Richard. As this alluded to events occurring at the end of the Merciless Parliament it is likely that Arundel was behind this programme. As Richard then rode to meet Bolingbroke he was ambushed and taken to Flint Castle where, according to Creton, Arundel spoke to the king, and told him not to be afraid, that no harm would come to his person. Richard was then taken in captivity to London. Arundel now drew closer to Bolingbroke, discussing preparations that lay behind the king's enforced abdication on 29 September and the schedule of accusations that justified Richard's deposition and Bolingbroke's recognition as his successor the following day. The leading part played by Arundel in the revolution that set Henry IV on the throne culminated in the assembly of 30 September, when Arundel directed proceedings, and preached a sermon based on God's choice of Saul as leader of the Israelites. The archbishop opened the next parliament on 6 October, and crowned the new king one week later. 
Arundel could have found intellectual justification for his role in the deposition of Richard II during his exile in the thought of the chancellor of Florence, Coluccio Salutati, whose treatise 'De tyranno' appeared in 1400. According to Salutati, anyone who did not rule justly and according to law was a public enemy, who could lawfully be resisted. But in his sermon to parliament of 6 October 1399 Arundel attempted to distance the new regime from Richard's autocracy on more traditional grounds, criticizing the deposed king's dependence on favourites, and declaring that Henry IV intended to govern not through his own will, but with the consent of those of honourable descent. Arundel's main priority during the first half of Henry IV's reign, however, was the church. By 1 October he had resumed his archiepiscopal authority, although this was not formally restored until the 19th. He now absented himself for long periods from less formal participation in government and politics and from the court. In 1400, when there was no parliament, he was only in London for two months of the year. He was still consulted on such matters as using the crown jewels as security for a loan (September 1402) and he made intermittent appearances in council meetings. Between October 1399 and February 1403, indeed, he attended a quarter of recorded council meetings, and this increased during the following four years, as he spent more time in the capital. 
However, during the latter period there seems to have been a cooling in relations between Arundel and Henry IV; as dissent grew towards the new regime, the archbishop could not escape suspicion of involvement. In January 1405 rumours of a plot against King Henry on behalf of the Mortimers led to aspersions being cast on Arundel's loyalty, and he had to kneel publicly before the king and demand that his accusers bring their charges against him. Then in June 1405 his friend and fellow archbishop, Richard Scrope, raised an army outside York in support of a Percy-led insurrection. A manifesto attributed to Scrope called for a removal of the burdens falling on the clergy. Arundel must have been compromised to some extent, for if there was a national movement against the abuse of the rights and privileges of the church he would have been its leader: less than a year earlier, in the Coventry parliament of 1404, the Commons had proposed the alienation of the temporalities of the church for the king's use for one year, and Arundel had delivered such a stinging rebuke (backed up by Scrope) that the clergy managed to escape the imposition. 
When Arundel heard of Scrope's surrender and capture outside York, and the king's intention to execute the archbishop, he rode all day and the following night from London in a bid to prevent this. On 8 June he warned Henry IV of the consequences of laying hands on an archbishop, and advised him to leave judgment to the pope, or at least to a trial in parliament. The king assured Arundel that nothing would be done without his consent, but while the exhausted prelate slept Scrope was tried and executed. Arundel reacted to this deception with a physical collapse, while Innocent VII ('r'. 1404-6) pronounced sentence of excommunication on the perpetrators of the deed; once again Arundel was compromised because of his family (the trial was presided over by his nephew, the young Thomas, seventeenth earl of Arundel), and also through his desire to preserve the stability of the new dynasty. He decided to rescue Henry from a difficult situation by neglecting to publish the sentence of excommunication. This pragmatic decision marked a drawing together of king and archbishop in a more formal association. 
In the parliaments of the years that followed, which Arundel regularly attended, Commons and council discussed ways of achieving better government, especially in the fields of financial management, defence, and the maintenance of the resources of the monarchy through the controlling of grants and the management of the household. On 22 May 1406, in the course of a parliament that sat intermittently from March to December, Henry IV accepted a bill of thirty-one articles appointing an advisory council to assist him in the business of government. Two days later Arundel, acting as its spokesman, declared that his newly constituted council would only serve if supplied with sufficient revenue. His dominant position among the king's advisers was formally endorsed when on 30 January he was appointed chancellor. Arundel's tenure of the great seal was a means by which the king, whose health was beginning to fail, held on to his full prerogative in the face of challenges from Prince Henry and the Beaufort family. At the Gloucester parliament of late 1407 he preached on the appropriate text, 'Honour the King who Honours God'. But by 21 December 1409 the king's position had become so weak that the prince was able to force Arundel to resign as chancellor and thereby gain control of the council. In late 1411 the king reasserted his authority, dismissing the prince and his associates from council, and on 5 January 1412 Arundel was reinstated as chancellor. Then on 21 March 1413 Henry V became king; he dismissed Arundel from the chancellorship the same day. 
Arundel's role in government under Henry IV was consistent with the position he had taken up under the appellants in 1388. Loyal to the interests of his family, the Fitzalans, despite his defence of Henry IV's prerogative, he nevertheless sought to make the crown financially solvent through good counsel, upholding a style of administration whereby the king could be subjected to criticism and direction from lords lay and ecclesiastical demanding a say in government. It is therefore no surprise that Arundel should have antagonized both Richard II and the future Henry V, both in their different ways autocrats; ultimately the future lay with them. 
As a leader of the church Arundel was responsible for revitalizing an institution in crisis. He was, as far as his governmental responsibilities allowed, a largely resident bishop of Ely and archbishop of York and Canterbury and a conscientious administrator; and he was also a pastoral reformer. If Archbishop John Thoresby (died 1373) and his staff had been concerned with raising standards of literacy and religious awareness among the laity and clergy, Arundel and the next generation of northern clerks met the challenge of an increasing lay piety and the growing popularity of contemplative literature and the teachings of recluses. While bishop of Ely Arundel was patron of a number of northerners, including Richard Scrope, the future archbishop of York, John Newton, who became treasurer of York Minster, Henry Bowet (died 1423), also a future archbishop of York, and Walter Hilton (died 1396). These men, all Cambridge-educated canon lawyers, were employed by Arundel in the Ely consistory court, the most important instrument of diocesan administration. Yet they were also among the first students and readers of the mystical writings of their fellow Yorkshireman, Richard Rolle (died 1349). Such men did not find it easy to reconcile the conflicting claims of spiritual aspiration and pastoral administration. Arundel himself, while preaching in 1394, expressed a desire to 'leve up his office of chaunceller and forsake the world' (BL, Harley MS 425, fol. 2'r'- 'v'), while in 1409 he joined the Mount Grace fraternity. 
Nevertheless, on the basis of an understanding of the spiritual problems of lay people acquired through pastoral work, Arundel and his servants were able to adapt the eremitical teachings of Rolle and his followers to the leading of a 'mixed life', combining action and contemplation. Less concerned with the dissemination of religious knowledge than with creating doctrinal and social orthodoxy out of the growing religious enthusiasm and independence of the period, they were able to impose structure and order on the piety of the north. The most striking expression of their outlook was the 'Myrrour of the Blessed Lyf of Jesu Christ'. A paraphrase of the pseudo-Bonaventuran 'Meditationes vitae Christi', this was a biography of Christ that concentrated on the emotions to be found in human relationships. Nicholas Love presented this work to the archbishop in 1411 and it was approved by him for wider use. 
Central to the furtherance of a socially responsible reaction to Christ's passion was devotion to the mass, and Arundel and his clerks placed special significance on the eucharist, and on the dignity and importance of the clergy in its celebration; this was set out in such pastoral manuals as John Burgh's 'Pupilla oculi'. Arundel's own reverence for the host, noted by the St Albans chronicler in 1405, was based on a realization of its potential as a symbol of social harmony. He rebuked courtiers for turning their backs on the host when it was carried through the streets of Coventry, objecting to the antisocial implications of the increasingly private and austere religion of a group of courtiers of puritanical (and in Sir John Cheyne's case Lollard) sympathies, and contrasting it unfavourably to the great processions of the eucharist he had witnessed in the streets of Italian towns. In the 'Treatise on the Eucharist', appended to Nicholas Love's 'Myrrour of the Blessed Lyf of Jesu Christ', the host is seen as the earthly body of Christ within a community held together by the charity Christ showed in his passion. 
Despite such provisions, there were anxieties over the way laymen and laywomen attempted to live like recluses without episcopal supervision and approval, simplifying and distorting the teachings of Rolle and his followers. Arundel's clerks examined self-appointed preachers. None the less, Arundel gave Margery Kempe a sympathetic hearing in 1413 in his garden at Lambeth Palace as she described to him her contemplative experiences and her gift of weeping. His approval was couched in the same language as used in Hilton's 'Epistle on the Mixed Life': he 'was ryght glad that owyr mercyful lord first schewyd swech grace in owre days' (Kempe, 37). 
Arundel and his clerks also attempted to disentangle genuine piety from the new English Lollard heresy, as it developed from the 1380s onwards. A visitation of King's Hall, Cambridge, which Arundel made as bishop of Ely in July 1383, because of the negligence of the warden and general defects among scholars, may have been intended to forestall heresy in the college. He and his former Cambridge clerks were equally active against heresy, as an important part of their pastoral work, after they left Cambridge. Hilton's tract in defence of images reached its final form during his time at Thurgarton, and may have been used by Arundel, who imposed an oath on four Nottingham suspects in 1395 that 'From this day forward I shall worship images with prayers and offerings to them in worship of the saints that they be made after' (Wilkins, 3.225). Arundel and his followers countered Lollard emphasis on the written word by defending the use of images as books for illiterate laymen and as aids to devotion. When in 1407 he examined the iconoclast William Thorpe, Arundel was reported to have asked 'were it a fair thing to come into a church and see there none image' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. C.208, fol. 48'v'). 
Concerns about the dissemination of Lollard doctrine had been expressed in March 1395, when Arundel went to Ireland and requested the king to return as quickly as possible, to defend the church from Lollards whose twelve 'Conclusions' had recently caused a stir during the Lent parliament. The archbishop began to be concerned about Lollard opinions in court circles when Sir John Cheyne (died 1414) was appointed speaker of the House of Commons in October 1399. Addressing the Canterbury convocation, Arundel singled Cheyne out as one of a group of parliamentary knights hostile towards the church; and he encouraged the clergy to forestall anti-clerical attacks by promulgating measures against blatant forms of pluralism. 
Arundel's subsequent response to the Lollard heresy was essentially 'ad hoc', meeting each threat from each new case of unlicensed preaching as it came up. In January 1401, opening the Canterbury convocation, he announced the main business was to tackle the problem of heresy among clergy and laity. William Sawtre, a priest and relapsed heretic, was brought before Arundel and convocation in February, and examined on his teaching on transubstantiation. After Sawtre refused to accept the church's authority on the matter, Arundel pronounced him a heretic, stripped him of his orders, and handed him over to the king in parliament. Heresy was now recognized as a crime against the state as well as the church. This was a test case in preparation for the trial of Nicholas Purvey on 28 February 1401. Purvey recanted forthwith. Yet only by a statute in March, 'De haeretico comburendo', was the death penalty ordained for heresy (Sawtre was executed by a retrospective application). No one was to preach without episcopal licence or produce a book that contradicted Catholic faith. All suspect books were to be surrendered to the diocesan bishop within forty days and obdurate heretics were to be handed over to the secular authorities for execution. 
In 1407 Arundel interrogated a priest, William Thorpe. A lengthy and apparently authentic account by Thorpe survives. Arundel comes through as a surprisingly patient and humane interrogator, prepared to debate with Thorpe as an intellectual equal. Arundel pointed out that Lollards were greedy for worldly advancement, that Purvey's recantation secured a benefice and Philip Repyndon's a bishopric. To Thorpe's puritanical rejection of music and images as a distraction, Arundel gave an impassioned defence, arguing that pilgrims needed singers and pipers to keep up their spirits on a journey, and organs and good songs were better than sermons. 
In the conflict against heresy Oxford required special treatment. In the 1390s Arundel commissioned the fiercely orthodox William Woodford (died 1397) to expound eighteen condemned passages from Wyclif's 'Trialogus', and in June 1397 Richard II upheld the right of the archbishop of Canterbury to visit the university. But Arundel continued to feel the need for comprehensive measures against Oxford, and in 1407 enacted a set of thirteen constitutions there. These remained operative for a year, before being finally promulgated at St Paul's on 14 January 1409 and the April following. Copies were forwarded to bishops and published in every diocese in England. They included such provisions as: no one was to preach without permission of the bishop of the diocese in which he was operating; every provost and warden in Oxford University was to conduct a monthly inquiry into what scholars were teaching and if it was contrary to the church they were to be expelled; schoolmasters were not to teach anything contrary to orthodox faith and scholars could not dispute matters of faith. A firm system of censorship was instituted. No works of Wyclif or anyone else were to be read in schools unless approved as orthodox; no one was to translate scripture into English on pain of excommunication, unless passed by a local bishop. Finally, in the summer of 1411, Arundel attempted to impose his authority on a defiant Oxford University. A hearing was held before the king, who endorsed Arundel's right of visitation, to imprison its proctors in the Tower of London and remove Richard Courtenay (died 1415) from his office of chancellor, and to have some scholars flogged. 
This visitation of the university had been preceded by a public demonstration of the church's strong stand against heresy. At the opening of parliament on 27 January 1410 Arundel faced a House of Commons backing the prince of Wales's attacks on the royal prerogative and calling for disendowment of the church. Arundel succeeded in publicly putting the prince, whose close relationship with the House of Commons and friendship with the well-known heretic, Sir John Oldcastle (died 1417), implied an equivocal attitude to Lollard heresy, into a corner by bringing an obscure fanatic, the artisan, John Badby (who had been in prison for a year), to trial for denying transubstantiation. On 5 March, in St Paul's Cathedral, Arundel pronounced Badby guilty of heresy and of being in league with the devil, and handed him over to lay jurisdiction. The burning of Badby took place at Smithfield in the presence of the prince and Arundel. The prince, possibly in an attempt to subvert the proceedings, upstage Arundel, and regain some of the initiative he had lost towards an old opponent, interrupted the burning to offer Badby clemency and a pension if he recanted. Badby remained obdurate and the prince, for once outmanoeuvred and foiled, was forced to return the heretic to the flames. Arundel had succeeded in obtaining the prince's endorsement for the church's position on heresy; thereafter Henry was wholehearted in his support for the church. The new king's reign was therefore marked by Arundel's successful attempt to bring Henry V's friend, Oldcastle, to trial for heresy in September 1413. Arundel pressed Oldcastle on his views on transubstantiation and when he failed to convince the court of his orthodoxy the archbishop excommunicated him and handed him over to the secular power for burning. Oldcastle escaped to lead a rebellion against the king, and the successful suppression of this revolt on 13 January (seven of the thirty-eight men executed were burned as heretics) marked the new co-operation between Arundel and the king. At a service at St Paul's on 15 January before Henry V, Arundel offered litanies of intercession and prayers of thanksgiving. 
A statesman-bishop, Arundel directed a church to which the Lancastrian dynasty tied itself closely. He gave that dynasty his full support, claiming the revolution enjoyed divine approval and was divinely ordained, and so helping to enable Henry IV to claim the throne through 'that ryght that God of his grace hath sent me' ('RotP', 3.422-3). But Arundel also had strong reforming tendencies, and became increasingly independent of the papacy. His decision to break with the Roman pope, Gregory XII ('r'. 1406-15), and to support the decision of the Council of Pisa to heal the papal schism by deposing Gregory and his Avignon counterpart, and electing a new incumbent, was as radical as anything Wyclif had proposed. 
However, Arundel was also a vigorous and formidable defender of ecclesiastical liberties. The Lollard heresy was part of a larger trend of anti-clericalism in the late fourteenth century that affected members of the lay nobility. Henry IV could not meet his promises to reduce heavy lay taxation, raising the likelihood that he would exploit the wealth of the church. Arundel warned the Canterbury convocation, meeting at the same time as Henry's first parliament, that certain members of parliament were ill-disposed to the church. He lectured the king on the irreverence of his knights at the Coventry parliament of 1404. During this parliament the Commons proposed that crown lands granted to the church since 1366 should be returned, and knights of the king's entourage asserted that they had been fighting rebels and enemies of the king while the clergy were idle; Arundel retorted that the church gave tenths as often as the laity paid taxes; that its tenants were as active in military service; and that the clergy prayed and celebrated masses for the benefit of their secular brethren. When the speaker questioned the value of the church's prayers, Arundel asserted that the wish to seize the church's possessions stemmed from a questioning of the value of the church itself and he threatened any who did so with excommunication. The Commons capitulated. 
Arundel's reputation as a churchman rests on the recovery of nerve that laid the foundations for the revival of the English church in the fifteenth century. The support that church could provide for an increasingly strong state was the basis for the achievements of Henry V. King and primate were alike reformers who were conservative and authoritarian by temperament. Arundel revitalized the church, restoring its prestige and authority; and after Badby's execution Henry V was to do the same as king. It was Arundel's securing the support of the state over the issue of heresy that laid the foundations of this achievement. The established church became an efficient organ of ecclesiastical discipline and inquisition. The principle of visiting the universities and supervising the nature of religious debate and education was established. Yet if the pastoral office was conceived in inquisitorial terms and control was exerted over the dissemination of religious literature, there was also a less punitive, positive dimension to Arundel's pastoral achievement. He was the patron and leader of a group of Cambridge-educated northern clergy who provided a pastoral alternative to Lollardy which, apart from its emphasis on 'Bible' reading, was primarily a negative ideology defined largely in terms of its criticism of orthodox religion and its emphasis on the separation of its predestined elect followers from the rest of society. Arundel, besides giving an articulate defence of orthodox, ritualistic religion, prevented a collision between crown and clergy, during a time of heresy and costly foreign war, over the control of ecclesiastical wealth. It is probably significant that the Commons' proposals for a radical, confiscatory, solution to the issue of the church's contribution to national taxation came in the parliament of 1410, when Arundel's resignation as chancellor took place; even if the proposals were largely anti-clerical propaganda, they still illustrate the problems that confronted the head of the English church in this period. 
Arundel was a volatile and emotional man. He is reported to have shed tears on hearing of Scrope's execution and at Oldcastle's trial. He stormed against Master Richard Flemming, a university student, and four other Oxford scholars who dabbled in Wycliffite ideas, describing them as 'beardless blabbing boys' and promised them, in a pun upon the Latin word 'arundo' ('a reed'), that he was no 'Arundel shaken with the wind' (Wilkins, 3.322). A man of strong convictions, he saw himself as one chosen to defend the church against heresy, boasting to William Thorpe in 1407, 'God as I woot wel has clepid me agen and brought me into this lande for to distrie thee and the fals sect that thou art of, and bi god I schal pursue you unto a cle, so that I schal not leue oo stap of you in this lande' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. C.208, fol. 88'v'). Although he left Oxford as just a bachelor of arts, he was scholarly and civilized. During his exile he visited Rome and Florence. He confessed to Salutati that one of his main worries on returning to England was the fate of his library. Salutati promised to send him his treatise 'De nobilitate legum et medicinae' and Arundel promised to lend the chancellor of Florence his copy of Augustine's treatise on music, 'De musica ratione'. 
For such an emotional, volatile man it is striking how successful Arundel was as a mediator, and it was his ability to compromise that enabled him to give such good service to both church and state, even if it may also have induced a sense of self-betrayal. Richard II used Arundel to secure the surrender of his brother, Earl Richard, in 1397, offering a safe conduct. It is unlikely Arundel was fooled again when in September 1399 he promised Richard at Flint that he would come to no harm. And in any case, even if Arundel was not present at Conwy, and did not think Bolingbroke was going to take the throne (though following his involvement in the events of 1386-8 this possibility must have been often on his mind), he was still guilty of perjury in the sense that he told the estates of the realm that the king had not yielded under duress in London, but voluntarily and cheerfully at Conwy when he was at liberty; he was also behind, and subscribed to, the lies and propaganda that formed the preamble to the act and process of September 1399. This, and his failure to publish the sentence of excommunication against those responsible for killing his friend and fellow archbishop Richard Scrope, may explain the self-contempt expressed in his penitential will in 1414, when he described himself as a miserable sinner, an unworthy and lukewarm minister, and ordered a lowly funeral for his fetid, putrid cadaver. The parallels between this puritanical preamble and the wills of the Lollard knights, his friendship with the conscientious and austere (and former Wycliffite) Philip Repyndon, bishop of Lincoln (died 1424), and his dedication to the educational role of the clergy, show that although his views diverged widely from those of Wyclif on essentials, Arundel at least shared the heresiarch's sense of pastoral duty and perhaps his sense of contrition. For his skills as a pragmatic mediator he probably paid a high personal price. 
Thomas Arundel died on 19 February 1414, after a stroke which deprived him of the power of speech. His will, which must have been prepared well before, shows not only a preoccupation with penance and personal unworthiness, but also a concern for the provision of masses for his soul and for the distribution of his books; many of the latter were of a pastoral character, for instance a volume containing the complete works of St Gregory. He had been a notable benefactor of Canterbury Cathedral, being responsible for the completion of the nave (by 1405), and for the beginning of work on the north-west tower. And it was in the cathedral that he was buried, in a chapel erected under the third most easterly arch of the nave's north arcade. The spot was marked by a tomb chest carrying a brass. However, both tomb and chapel were destroyed by Archbishop Cranmer in 1540, apparently in belated revenge for Arundel's repression of heresy. 


@@@@@


doc= 714


Arundell, Blanche, Lady Arundell of Wardour (1583/4-1649), royalist noblewoman, was the sixth daughter of Edward Somerset, fourth earl of Worcester (c.1550-1628), and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Hastings (died 1621), daughter of Francis Hastings, second earl of Huntingdon. Nothing is known of her early life. In 1607 (the settlement made following the marriage was dated 11 May) she married Thomas Arundell (c.1586-1643) ['see under 'Arundell, Thomas (c.1560-1639)], eldest son of Thomas Arundell, first Baron Arundell of Wardour, who succeeded to the title in 1639. Their eldest son, Henry Arundell, was baptized on 23 February 1608 at St Andrew's, Holborn. The Arundells were living at their chief residence of Wardour Castle, Wiltshire, when the civil war broke out. Lord Arundell raised a regiment of horse for the king; he was wounded at the battle of Stratton on 16 May 1643 and died three days later at Oxford. 
About the same time Lady Arundell was engaged in her own battle to hold Wardour Castle for the king. Originally built by John Lovell, fifth Lord Lovell, at the turn of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the castle had been extensively modified about 1578 by Lord Arundell's grandfather Sir Matthew Arundell. These changes, including the construction of windows, had reduced its effectiveness as a fortress, yet it remained a formidable stronghold and its defences were reinforced in the early months of the civil war. In her husband's absence Lady Arundell was in command; also at Wardour was her daughter-in-law, Cicely Compton, wife of her son Henry, with her three young sons. On 2 May 1643 parliamentarian forces under Sir Edward Hungerford and Colonel William Stroud arrived before the castle, offering terms of surrender which allegedly denied quarter to its adult male occupants. Lady Blanche refused: 'she had a command from her Lord to keep it, and she would obey his command'. Her defence inspired much purple prose, not least from the royalist propagandist Bruno Ryves. In the castle were 'but twenty-five fighting men to make good the place against an army of 1300', though the maidservants, 'valiant beyond their sex', helped them load the muskets. The constant bombardment day and night for six days left the defenders 'so distracted between hunger and want of rest, that when the hand endeavoured to administer food, surprised with sleep it forgot its employment, the morsels falling from their hands' (Ryves, 1.448). 
The future regicide Edmund Ludlow, then a captain of a troop of horse in Hungerford's regiment, arrived the day the castle fell, 8 May, and was appointed its governor. He provides a rather more sardonic and ungenerous account of the fall of the castle. After nearly a week the parliamentarians' two small field pieces had done no more than damage one of the house's chimneys. However: 'there being a vault on each side of the castle, for the conveying away of filth, two or three barrels of powder were put into one of them, and being fired blew up some part of it; which with the grazing of a bullet upon the face of one of the servants, and the threatening of the besiegers to spring the other mine, and then to storm it, if it was not surrendered before an hour glass, which they had turned up, was run out, so terrified the ladies within, whereof there was great number, that they agreed to surrender it. ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 1.51)' Conceding that none of the defenders was killed, royalist correspondents were incensed by the plundering of the house, contrary to the articles of surrender. Bruno Ryves was especially exercised by the fate of 'one extraordinary chimney piece, valued at two thousand pounds', whose elaborate carvings the roundheads found offensive. 'Five cart loads of their richest hangings' were taken, together with full wardrobes, leaving 'neither the ladies nor the servants nor any other wearing clothes but what was on their backs' (Ryves, 1.449). To the writers of the parliamentarian newsbooks, however, Wardour was not a private house cruelly violated, but rather a castle, which had acted as a storehouse for the wealth of the Wiltshire royalists: discovered within was 'great wealth in plate and money, which all the nobility and gentry in those parts had brought hither for safeguard, amongst which Lord Cottington's is the chief' ('Certaine Informations', 18.140). A further charge, that the house was a centre for papists, cannot in this instance simply be dismissed as propaganda, for the Arundell family had a long record of fidelity to the Catholic religion. John Falconer, nephew and namesake of a leading Jesuit missioner, was chaplain at Wardour during the siege and drew up the articles of surrender. 
After the fall of Wardour the prisoners were taken to Shaftesbury. Lady Arundell was already ill, and because epidemic disease was rife in Bath it was decided to send them to Dorchester instead, 'a place', Ryves observed darkly, 'no less dangerous for the infection of schism and rebellion than bath for the plague and small pox' (Ryves, 1.451). The prisoners were separated and her grandchildren exchanged in May 1644 for the children of a parliamentarian peer. Lady Arundell was released, probably before the end of May, and allowed to proceed to Salisbury, where she was provided with accommodation by the royalist commander, the marquess of Hertford; shortly after her arrival she heard of the death of her husband. In September 1643 her son Henry, now third Baron Arundell, laid siege to Edmund Ludlow's garrison in Wardour Castle, retaking it in March 1644. Lady Blanche died on 28 October 1649 at Winchester, aged sixty-five, and was buried at Tisbury beside her husband. Her will was dated 28 September and proved on 2 November 1649. 


@@@@@


doc= 715


Arundell, Francis Vyvyan Jago (1780-1846), antiquary and traveller, was born at Launceston, Cornwall, in July 1780, the only son of Thomas Jago, a solicitor in that town, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Bolt, daughter of a surgeon at Launceston. He was educated at Liskeard grammar school and at Exeter College, Oxford, where he obtained his BA in 1801 and proceeded MA in 1809. Following his ordination, he was appointed curate at Antony in his native county and in 1805 was instituted to the rectory of Landulph on the banks of the Tamar. Throughout his life he pursued a wide range of antiquarian interests and worked with great enthusiasm for many years on the history of Cornwall. He was elected FSA on 30 May 1811; in April 1845 he was removed from the fellowship for being twenty-eight years in arrears with his subscription. 
Jago's Cornish interests resulted in several publications. When Nicholas Condy, an artist in Plymouth, published a series of views of Cotehele, the ancient seat of Lord Mount Edgcumbe, Jago wrote the description of the house which accompanied them. In the church of Landulph is a brass to the memory of Theodore Palaeologus, descended from the last of the Christian emperors of Greece, who died on 21 January 1637. Jago's account of this inscription, and of the person whom it commemorated, was printed in 'Archaeologia' in 1817. This paper was subsequently expanded into 'Some Notice of the Church of Landulph', published in 1840. Jago also gave great assistance to the brothers Lysons in their history of Cornwall, and at one time himself contemplated the publication of a history of the county. 
One of Jago's ancestors had married a coheir of John Arundell of Trevarnoe, and Jago assumed that name in addition to his own on 25 February 1815. On 17 October 1816 he married Anna Maria (died 1869), second daughter of Isaac Morier, consul-general at Constantinople, and sister of James Morier, the diplomatist and novelist. 
Arundell's marriage seems to have led to his appointment, in 1822, as chaplain to the British factory at Smyrna, where he remained for fourteen years. Soon after settling at Smyrna, he arranged a tour of exploration in Asia Minor. The months from March to September 1826 were spent in a pilgrimage to the seven churches of Asia and an excursion into Pisidia, a narrative of which was published in 1828. This book was very favourably received, and with this encouragement he ventured in 1833 upon another tour of 1000 miles through districts which until then had for the most part not been described by any European traveller. He made a particular study of the ruins of Antioch in Pisidia, and two volumes describing these discoveries were published in 1834. Although Arundell made a third tour in 1835-6 through Palestine, no account of his travels was published. While living at Smyrna he made large collections of antiquities, coins, and manuscripts; on his return to England the coins were sold to the British Museum. The materials that he collected for histories of Smyrna and of his native town of Launceston were never used, and are probably lost. Arundell died at Landulph on 5 December 1846, and was buried on 11 December in the church, not far from the tomb of Palaeologus. 


@@@@@


doc= 716


Arundell, Henry, third Baron Arundell of Wardour (bap. 1608, d. 1694), royalist army officer and politician, was baptized on 23 February 1608 at St Andrew's, Holborn, London. He was the only son of Thomas Arundell, second Baron Arundell of Wardour (c.1586-1643) ['see under 'Arundell, Thomas, first Baron Arundell of Wardour], and his wife, Blanche Arundell, nee Somerset (1583/4-1649), daughter of Edward Somerset, fourth earl of Worcester. The Arundells were one of the most prominent Catholic families in post-Reformation England, seated at Wardour Castle, Wiltshire. Henry's grandfather, Thomas Arundell (c.1560-1639), had been made a count of the Holy Roman empire in 1595 (a status not recognized in protestant England) and raised to the English peerage in 1605 as Baron Arundell of Wardour shortly before Henry's birth. 
Nothing is known of Arundell's early education, though in September 1658 he was admitted to the University of Padua and in 1669 he was granted honorary admission to Gray's Inn. About 1632 he married Cicely (1609/10-1676), widow of Sir John Fermor of Somerton, Oxfordshire, daughter of Sir Henry Compton of Brambletye, Sussex, and his wife, Cicely Sackville, and granddaughter of Robert Sackville, second earl of Dorset. A son and heir, Thomas, was born in 1633, followed by a daughter and another son. 
Arundell's father died of battle wounds at Oxford on 19 May 1643, and Arundell succeeded to his estates and titles. Despite his mother's renowned defence of the family castle, Wardour was lost in the same month to parliamentarian forces led by Sir Edward Hungerford, and Arundell's wife and children seized. In September 1643 Arundell laid siege to the castle, which was garrisoned by troops commanded by Edmund Ludlow, retaking it in March 1644 after making '11 breaches in it, dismounting the rebels' ordnance that lay upon the uppermost leads, with the slaughter of 12 men of the Governor Sir Henry Ludlow's son' ('CSP dom.', '1644', 11). Arundell deliberately ruined the castle for ever by using mines to prevent its future use as a fortress. The family subsequently resided at Breamore, Hampshire, but after 1645 his estates were confiscated by parliament. 
In 1652 Arundell was second to Lord Chandos in a duel on Putney Heath with his brother-in-law Henry Compton, in which the latter was killed. Chandos and Arundell initially fled but they came to trial in May 1653: they were convicted of manslaughter and sentenced to be burnt in the hand and imprisoned for a year. Shortly afterwards Arundell petitioned the Commonwealth trustees to compound for his estates, though his Catholicism should have barred him from being able to do so, and he successfully sought the lord protector's intervention the following year. Arundell's lands were purchased and administered by three trustees, including his uncle by marriage, Humphrey Weld, at a cost of over $35,000. Following the Restoration, he was restored to his estates in title in December 1660. 
Arundell led efforts in parliament to achieve Catholic toleration, in 1661 petitioning the Lords to modify the oath of allegiance. He was appointed master of the horse to Henrietta Maria, the queen mother, in 1663. In January 1669, together with other Catholic peers, he was asked by Charles II how best to propagate the Roman faith in England. He was sent to France to seek financial support from Louis XIV and inform him of the king's desire to be reconciled with Rome, leading to the secret treaty of Dover. In 1670 Arundell received legacies under the will of the queen mother, for late in 1669 he had assisted with arrangements for her funeral in France, doubtless a cover for his diplomatic activities. 
In 1678 Arundell, a known supporter of James, duke of York, was named by Titus Oates and others as one of the chief conspirators in the plot to kill Charles II. Arundell, together with fellow Catholic lords Powis and Belasyse, was to pay an assassin, command an army of 50,000, and take over as lord keeper. One of Arundell's accusers, Miles Prance, claimed that this information came from his butler. On 25 October 1678 a panicked Commons imprisoned lords Arundell, Belasyse, Petre, Powis, and Stafford in the Tower and began impeachment proceedings. The five peers were found guilty of high treason by the Middlesex jury on 3 December, and two days later the Commons announced they were ready to impeach, but proceedings were interrupted by the dissolution of parliament. 
The newly elected parliament, however, resolved that the motion for impeachment had not been invalidated, and on 10 April 1679 Arundell and three of the other accused (Belasyse being ill) were brought to the House of Lords to put in pleas. Arundell argued that the charges were too vague, and asked for greater precision before entering a plea, but this was rejected on 24 April. Two days later the four were again brought to the Lords, and Arundell entered a plea of not guilty. In the surviving notes for his defence he wrote 'wicked principles are alleged to make good a plot, which being denied the Plot is introduced to make good the principles' (Miller, 158). A trial date of 13 May was fixed, but legal quarrels and another dissolution delayed it. During this period Arundell wrote a series of religious poems, published as 'Five Little Meditations in Verse' (1679) and reprinted in Nathaniel Thompson's 'A Collection of Eighty-Six Loyal Poems' (1685). Late in 1679 Arundell was accused by Thomas Dangerfield of offering him $2000 to kill the king in the Meal-Tub Plot. 
On 30 November 1680 proceedings began against Lord Stafford, who was condemned, and beheaded on 29 December. The trial of Arundell and the three remaining prisoners was due to begin the following day, but ceased. They remained in the Tower for a further three years. Petre's death on 5 January 1684 and the influence of the duke of York prompted a successful appeal to king's bench, and Arundell, Belasyse, and Powys were released on bail on 18 February. Following James II's accession Oates was arrested and tried for perjury, and the king issued a 'nolle prosequi' in the case of the three remaining lords, confirmed by petition to the Lords on 21 May 1685. Finally on 1 June 1685 Arundell's liberty was guaranteed on the grounds of false testimony. 
Despite his age Arundell's political career was revived by the new king. He received a royal dispensation from taking the required oaths of allegiance and supremacy, and was appointed to the privy council on 17 August 1686. In January 1687 he was admitted as justice of the peace for Middlesex. He reached his highest office in March 1687 when he replaced the earl of Clarendon as lord privy seal. In June 1687 he presented James with the thanks of English Catholics for the declaration of indulgence, and received $250 for secret service to the king. In July 1688 a warrant was issued to make him lord lieutenant of Dorset in place of the earl of Bristol. On the following 22 October he was among those who testified to the veracity of the birth of the prince of Wales. 
When James left the realm he committed his affairs to five lords, of whom Arundell was one, but with the triumph of William of Orange Arundell retired. During the 1680s he had built Wardour House on the ruins of the old castle, adding stables in 1686 and a banqueting house in 1687, but the family lived primarily at Breamore. He had remained actively involved in Wiltshire religious politics, presenting rectors to his advowsons at Tisbury and Donhead St Andrew in 1678 and 1684, while maintaining Catholic chaplains at his various residences. Two of these men dedicated books to him: Richard Mason in his 'Liturgical Discourse of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass' (1670) and John Weldon in 'The Divine Pedagogue' (1692). Arundell was a noted sportsman and one of the first hunters to breed hounds to foxes alone, animals from whom the famous Quorn pack descended. 
Arundell was remarkable (if not unique) as a Catholic peer who lived through the changing fortunes of the entire seventeenth century, actively engaging in war, espionage, and politics. Contemporaries preserved his name in London at Arundel Street, Panton Square (1673), and Wardour Street, Soho (1686). He was vigorously praised as a hero by nineteenth-century English Catholic historians. More recent scholars view him, perhaps too dismissively, as one of the 'pathetic group' of ageing peers implicated in the Popish Plot (Kenyon, 47). 
Arundell died on 28 December 1694 at Breamore; he was buried in his ancestral parish church, Tisbury, Wiltshire, with his wife, who had died on 24 March 1676. An undated will was proved on 12 August 1695. A great-grandfather in the male line at the time of his death, he was succeeded in his titles and estates by his elder son, Thomas. His only daughter, Cecily, was a nun at Rouen from 1662 until her death in 1717. 


@@@@@


doc= 717


Arundell, Humphrey (1512/13-1550), rebel, was born in 1512 or 1513, being twenty-three in 1536, the son and heir of Roger Arundell (died 1536), landowner, of Helland, Cornwall, and his wife, Joanne or Joan (died 1537), daughter of Humphrey Calwodely. Roger Arundell was a younger brother of the military commander and receiver of the duchy of Cornwall, Sir John Arundell of Lanherne (died 1545). No family in pre-Reformation Cornwall outranked the Lanherne Arundells. They were seised of extensive estates across the western counties, and their status was marked in 1525 by the offer of a barony, which Sir John Arundell declined. The traditional piety of the Lanherne Arundells was reflected in their association with the Carthusian order, and in the chantry at St Mawgan endowed by Sir John Arundell. On the death of his father on 12 June 1536, Humphrey Arundell came into a substantial landed inheritance in Cornwall and Devon. He may have seen some service in the French war, and certainly had an association with St Michael's Mount in Cornwall: John Hooker and John Foxe both describe Arundell as governor, presumably of the small garrison stationed there. He married Elizabeth (died 1565), daughter of Sir John Fulford; they had two sons, Humphrey and Richard, and a daughter. Arundell also had an illegitimate son, Giles, on whose behalf in 1544 he leased some land from John Winslade, his future comrade-in-arms. 
Arundell made little impact upon his native shire before becoming a rebel leader in 1549. He did not serve as a JP; the highest official position he achieved was as collector of taxes in Pydar and Powder hundreds, at a time when gentle status was increasingly defined by a place on the magistrates' bench. His sense of resentment would have been compounded by the exclusion of his two cousins, Sir John Arundell of Lanherne (died 1557) and Sir Thomas Arundell of Wardour (c.1502-1552), from the commission of the peace by the evangelical regime of Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset, in 1547. What is known of Humphrey Arundell before the 1549 western rising is culled largely from proceedings in chancery and Star Chamber. In 1543, for instance, he was accused of assembling an armed gang that forcibly entered property belonging to Walter Kendall in order to steal cattle. However, the modern verdicts on Arundell, that he was 'an unquiet person' (Rowse, 263) and 'clearly a troublemaker' (Fletcher and MacCulloch, 51), are unfair. Such allegations of riotous behaviour were very common among the Tudor gentry, often signifying little more than the formal initiation of a legal process to recover land. Had the crown entertained serious doubts about Arundell, it would hardly have appointed him to the grand jury arraigned in the aftermath of the 1548 religious disturbances in Cornwall. 
Arundell earned his place in history by his leadership of the Cornish host during the great rebellion in the western counties in summer 1549. According to their official indictments, Arundell and Winslade were jointly responsible for gathering a thousand of the commons together at Bodmin on 6 June 1549. Though not of the top flight among the local gentry, Arundell was well known there, since his seat at Helland lay within a league (about 3 miles) of the town. The Bodmin demonstration anticipated by three days the introduction of the first English 'Book of Common Prayer', and the defence of the traditional liturgy was its primary inspiration. Over the previous two years, a series of royal injunctions virtually outlawed the saint veneration that suffused popular religion. At Bodmin this meant an end to the cult of St Petroc, evangelist of the Cornish, whose shrine apparently survived Henry VIII's own campaign against holy relics. The rebel petitions signed by Arundell demanded that the church be returned to the liturgically conservative position defined by the 1539 'Act of Six Articles'. An earlier, lost, set of grievances indicates that certain of the Cornish also desired a prayer book in their own language. It seems that Arundell was able to muster support from the remote western and southern hundreds of Cornwall, where Cornish was still spoken, as well as from his own country. 
On Whit Monday, four days after Arundell and Winslade marshalled the popular protests at Bodmin, the Devon village of Sampford Courtenay defied the crown and compelled its priest to repudiate the new English prayer book. The demonstrators were soon to be joined by the Cornish under the common leadership of Arundell and other local gentlemen and priests. The major rebellion that ensued is most fully described by the protestant antiquary, John Hooker of Exeter. Hooker mentions Arundell only in passing, preferring to concentrate on Robert Welsh, the Devon priest who probably co-ordinated the siege of Exeter. Nevertheless, Arundell was the first of the 'chief captaynes' to sign the list of grievances, implying precedence among the commanders of the rebel army. Correspondence between the privy council and the king's lieutenant in the west parts, John Russell, first Baron Russell, also indicates that Arundell was the ringleader of the revolt. As such, he was singled out for the harshest of punishments in its wake. 
After flirting with a policy of conciliation, Somerset at last determined on a military solution to the crisis in the south-west. Cavalry and mercenaries were deployed against the insurrection, and the privy council threatened with forfeiture of goods any subject who spread rebel propaganda or 'Humfrey Arundell's poyson' (Pocock, 37). The protesters had not sought a fight; but when the government forced the issue, Arundell responded with courage and a degree of military skill. His men were well disciplined, marching under the banner of the five wounds of Christ, with the consecrated host in their midst. Exeter was besieged for six weeks, and a mine was laid under the city wall. East of the city, an estimated six thousand rebels defended Clyst St Mary on 4 August. Judging by Hooker's account, they put up stout resistance, but were unable to withstand a royal army that included Italian gunners and German landsknechts under William Grey, thirteenth Baron Grey of Wilton. The town was fired, and perhaps a thousand insurgents slaughtered. Even now, Arundell was able to effect a retreat to Sampford Courtenay, where he reorganized his forces; Russell, who had thought the campaign won, was taken by surprise. The last stand of the rebels was on 17 August. Outnumbered four to one, they were defeated, but not before Arundell led a counter-attack that caused great fear among royal troops. On Russell's own arrival in the field, the insurgents broke camp and fled, Arundell among them. Though many escaped, their commander was apprehended at Launceston in Cornwall. 
Arundell had levied war against Edward VI, and thus his fate was sealed. Under close guard, he was sent to the Tower of London to be examined. A transcript of his interrogation on 22 October survives in the state papers. It is a valuable document, because it illuminates one of the paradoxes of early modern rebellion: that popular insurrections were frequently led by the gentry. According to Arundell's own admission, he was exceedingly reluctant to become involved in the Bodmin protest; so much so that, on hearing of the unquiet temper of the people, he took refuge in a nearby wood. When his pregnant wife summoned him home again, he was intercepted by the rebels and compelled to become their leader. Whether or not Arundell was telling the truth, his confession illustrates the desire of the commons to win over the gentry to their cause. A more damning account of Arundell's conduct was offered by one Kestell, his secretary, who informed on his master during the uprising. In any case, Arundell's protestations cut no ice with the new regime of John Dudley, earl of Warwick, which found him guilty of treason. On 27 January 1550 he was taken to Tyburn and hanged as a traitor. The rebel leaders dying beside him included Thomas Holmes, a servant of Sir John Arundell; John Bury, a servant of Sir Thomas Denys; and Winslade. Their heads and quarters were displayed on London's city gates. 
Arundell's motivations for involving himself in the 1549 rebellion were mixed. His family -- ancient, pious, and Catholic -- viewed the evangelical faction surrounding the young king with suspicion and distaste. As the commissions of the peace in Cornwall and Devon came to be dominated by Godolphins and Carews, protestants and 'arrivistes', the Arundells of Lanherne were frozen out of local government. In part, Humphrey Arundell's was a political protest. Chance also played its part. At the critical moment in 1549, Sir John Arundell of Lanherne, head of the family, was absent from Cornwall. In other circumstances, the rebels might well have turned to him for leadership. As it was, they appealed to his cousin Humphrey Arundell. It was not a bad choice, since Humphrey had military experience to back his traditional understanding of the Catholic faith. His stoicism in battle bears comparison with the Cornish rebel leader of 1497, Michael Joseph an Gof. Mustering the people in a great demonstration against innovations in religion enabled Arundell to reclaim lost family pride. It also allowed him to pursue a personal grudge against Sir Richard Grenville, in the eyes of the government the principal gentleman of east Cornwall. Grenville epitomized the new protestant order prevailing in court and country under Edward VI, and was a particular focus of popular hatred in 1549. According to Arundell's Tower confession, the rebel commander made his way to Launceston after the battle of Sampford Courtenay only to declare himself to Grenville, where the latter was imprisoned. Russell told a different story, of Arundell's last-ditch attempt to persuade the people of Launceston to murder Grenville and the other gentlemen incarcerated there. 
Arundell's act of rebellion meant that his lands were forfeit to the crown. Russell acted swiftly to redistribute confiscated rebel property among his affinity of loyal protestant gentry. Arundell's lordships, manors, and advowsons in Cornwall and Devon, worth $108 18's'. 8died annually, were granted to Sir Gawen Carew before the rebel leader had even been captured. Carew's tenure was confirmed by the king in March 1550, thus denying the rights of Arundell's widow, Elizabeth. She took Thomas Cary as her second husband, and died on 24 November 1565. 


@@@@@


doc= 718


Arundel, Sir John (c.1348-1379), soldier, was the second son of Richard (II) Fitzalan, third earl of Arundel and eighth earl of Surrey (c.1313-1376), and his wife, Eleanor (died 1372), daughter of Henry, earl of Lancaster, and widow of John, Lord Beaumont. Sir Thomas Arundel was his younger brother. He married, before 1364, Eleanor, granddaughter of John, Lord Maltravers. He seems to have followed his father in a military career, but he is first mentioned when he was appointed marshal in 1377, when he was probably about thirty. He was granted $100 p.a. and was retained by the king for life; the grant was doubled in 1379. In 1377 he repulsed a French attack on Southampton, preventing the enemy from entering the town and driving them back to their ships. Later in the year, in early November, he went with John de Montfort, duke of Brittany, and Thomas of Woodstock to Brittany; the expedition succeeded in relieving Brest, which the French had besieged, and returned early in 1378. In the autumn of 1378 he went to the defence of Cherbourg, Normandy. After his return the following March, he undertook to command another expedition to Brittany in support of John de Montfort. 
Thomas Walsingham describes how Arundel allowed his men to run amok while waiting for a favourable wind for the voyage to Brittany in the autumn of 1379. Some of his report is confirmed by a commission to Arundel and the other commanders on 26 October to inquire into trespasses committed on the present expedition. They took up lodgings in a convent, and were said to have seduced or raped the nuns and their companions, while Arundel himself did nothing to deter them. His men then ravaged the neighbourhood, stealing the chalice from a local church at the end of mass, for which they were publicly excommunicated, and abducted the nuns to their ships. By contrast, the other English commanders, including Sir Hugh Calveley, whose own reputation was far from spotless, were said to have restrained their men. When the fleet eventually set sail, against the advice of Arundel's shipmaster, a storm overtook them; having tried to lighten the ships by throwing their plunder overboard, the soldiers finally threw sixty of the women into the sea. The ships eventually reached the Irish coast, and Arundel ordered his men to disembark; when they refused, because the storm was still raging, his shipmaster tried to drive the boat safely ashore, but it foundered on the rocks, and Arundel was caught in a quicksand and drowned on 15 December. He was said to have lost fifty-two bedcovers, either of gold or woven with gold, which he had just had made for himself. His body was found three days later, and buried in an abbey in Ireland. His heir was Sir John Arundel the younger ('b'. before 1364). Another son, Sir William Arundel, was created knight of the Garter about 1395. 


@@@@@


doc= 719


Arundell, John (c.1400-1477), physician and bishop of Chichester, was a Cornishman, almost certainly of the Lanherne branch of the family, whose arms he bore. The likelihood is that he was the son of Sir John Arundell (died 1433), landowner, and his wife, Annora, 'nee' Lambourn. In 1420 he became a fellow of Exeter College, Oxford, and by 1424 was principal of a hall, probably Great Black Hall. His accounts, kept on blank spaces in his logic lecture notes, provide some of the earliest evidence for the organization of residence and teaching at the university. He acted as junior proctor in 1426-7, acquired property in Oxford the following year, and perhaps remained at the college to study in the faculty of medicine. At the end of the decade he acquired the patronage of Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (whose Cornish estates neighboured Lanherne), and left his Oxford fellowship for a life of secular service. Between 1430 and 1440 Arundell received a succession of Beauchamp livings, and is recorded as physician to Henry, earl of Warwick, in the latter year, though he had probably served the family in that capacity since leaving Oxford. 
Beauchamp service brought Arundell inevitably into contact with the royal household -- Earl Richard was the king's guardian, and Henry Beauchamp and the young king grew up as brothers. Arundell was first paid as the king's physician in 1442/3, and royal service can probably be detected in his preferment to a number of prebendal stalls, and is plain from his appointment in 1449 as a canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor (where he seems to have resided), and of St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster, in 1452. When Henry VI's mental health collapsed in the summer of 1453, Arundell led the team of doctors and surgeons appointed by the council to minister to him. He was last paid for medical service to the king in 1456. On 25 February 1457, when he was described as a king's chaplain, Arundell was appointed master of Bethlem Hospital. In June 1457, with Laurence Booth, the keeper of the privy seal, he was commissioned to negotiate a truce with Scotland. 
In August 1457 the king commended Arundell to the pope for the vacant see of Durham, but Booth, the queen's chancellor and doubtless her candidate, was provided. Arundell was consoled with offices vacated by Booth's elevation -- the archdeaconry of Richmond and a richer York prebend. When his own promotion to the episcopacy came, it was far more modest. Arundell was nominated to Chichester in 1458, and received custody of the temporalities on 27 October 1458. He obtained papal provision on 8 January 1459, received full restoration of the temporalities on 26 March, and was consecrated on 3 June 1459. 
Arundell seems to have been an active bishop, and was certainly resident. In 1460 he asserted his exclusive jurisdiction over the former royal free chapel of Hastings, and in 1466 was at odds with the dean of St George's Chapel, Windsor, over the advowson of Climping. In 1459 William Waynflete, bishop of Winchester, whose brother John was the dean of Chichester, acquired the patronage of Sele Priory near Bramber, and obtained authority from both the pope and Arundell to appropriate it to his foundation of St Mary Magdalen, Oxford. Arundell visited Sele in 1463 and seems to have forced the resignation of the corrupt prior, but was allegedly partisan in the appointment of his successor. The new prior was equally scandalous, provoking a petition for redress from Waynflete, which Arundell allegedly ignored. Finally, in 1474, the pope appointed the official of Rochester and the dean and chapter of Chichester to investigate Waynflete's articles against Arundell, suspending the bull of Boniface VIII against the interference of one bishop in another's jurisdiction on account of Arundell's reported partiality. 
Arundell retained Lancastrian sympathies, and seems to have been implicated in Fauconberg's rising of May 1471. In Easter term of that year he made a gift of 400 marks to the king, which can perhaps be interpreted as a fine for failing to arrest the Bastard's flight through his diocese. In that same year he endowed a chantry at the choir door of the cathedral, and established the nightly singing of the antiphon 'Nunc Christe'; the adjoining 'pulpitum', known as the 'Arundell screen', was in fact built by Walter Walton under Bishop Robert Reade. Despite having been excused attendance at councils and parliaments in 1464, on account of age and infirmity, he remained active as a diocesan, conducting a visitation at the remotest part of his diocese at Winchelsea in July 1476. He died on 18 October 1477, and was buried in his cathedral; his tomb, which carries the indent of a brass, survives. One of the books he owned, 'Liber de ludo scacchorum', a treatise on chess by Jacobus de Cessolis, is now at Magdalen College, Oxford (MS Lat. 12), and several medical prescriptions survive. Arundell was clearly capable of inspiring affection for some years after his death. In 1485 John Wood of Midhurst left the profits of a manor and the advowson of Pulborough to endow masses for the soul of his former master, next to whose tomb he requested burial. 


@@@@@


doc= 720


Arundell, John (c.1435-1504), bishop of Exeter, was one of the two sons of Sir Renfrey Arundell and his wife, Joan Colshill. Sir Renfrey was a cadet of the important Cornish family of Arundell of Lanherne, holding property at Lanivet and elsewhere. John was educated at Oxford University from about 1453, where he graduated MA by 1461 and BTh by 1473. He pursued a career in the church, acquiring a number of prebends and parish benefices after 1459, notably the deanship of Exeter Cathedral to which he was elected about the spring of 1482, probably through support at court. In the autumn of 1483 he was closely linked with the west-country notables who rebelled against Richard III's usurpation. He was apparently indicted of treason but was pardoned by Richard in December; accordingly, he later enjoyed the favour of Henry VII who made him a commissioner for Calais in 1485, an envoy to Burgundy in 1488, and chancellor to Prince Arthur by 1493. Arundell was papally provided as bishop of Coventry and Lichfield on 3 August 1496, and was consecrated on 6 November; he was translated to Exeter by a papal bull of 8 April 1502. 
Arundell's episcopal registers survive in both dioceses. At Exeter he appointed as his registrar John Sextun, a Netherlander and friend of Erasmus, who wrote a preface to the register praising the bishop for his hospitality, the daily distribution of alms at his gate, his care to promote the careers of his chaplains, and the daily worship in his chapel at Exeter with vocal and instrumental music. Arundell's interest in worship also led him to improve the resources of the vicars-choral of St Chad's College, Shrewsbury, and to close a derelict hospital at Totnes, Devon, in order to benefit their counterparts at Exeter Cathedral. He died at Exeter House in the Strand, the bishop's London residence, on 15 March 1504 and was buried on the south side of the high altar at the nearby church of St Clement Danes; an annual obit mass in his memory was founded at Exeter Cathedral in 1515. There is a representation of him as a bishop on his mother's tomb in Birtsmorton church, Worcestershire. 


@@@@@


doc= 721


Sir John [vii] Arundell of Trerice (c.1495-1560), who was born at Efford near Bude. His first wife, Mary Beville, was the heir of Gwarnack where he lived for a time, before returning in the 1550s to live at Efford. His second wife was Juliana, widow of a man named Gourlyn and daughter of James Erisey of Erisey. He had an illegitimate son, Robert of Menadarva, together with eight children from his two marriages. A contentious and lively figure, he enhanced the family fortunes by his marriages, service to four monarchs, and economic ventures such as shipping hides to the continent for sale to his uncle Viscount Lisle, the governor of Calais. Summoned to the reception of the emperor Charles V in 1520, he earned the king's praise three years later for capturing a Scottish pirate in a sea battle, while in 1537 he confronted Spanish ships which were attempting to pursue French men-of-war up the Truro River. In 1542 he was knighted and made vice-admiral of the west for the future Edward VI, who rewarded him with lands and goods for his service against rebels. Appointed to the Cornish bench in 1530, he was sheriff three times under Henry VIII and Mary. He investigated discontent in Cornwall with the latter's religious policies, mustered troops in case of invasion, and prepared to entertain Philip of Spain 'en route' for his marriage. At his death, on 25 or 26 November 1560, Sir John held over 10,000 acres in Devon, Cornwall, and Somerset, and bequeathed over $800 to his daughters. An engraved tomb brass depicting him with his wives and children marks his burial at St Andrew's Church, Stratton, near Efford. 
Sir John Arundell of Trerice was predeceased by his eldest son, Roger, and this gave rise to problems of inheritance. Sir John was succeeded by his grandson John [viii] Arundell of Gwarnack (1557-1613), an infant whose wardship was held by Henry Fitzalan, twelfth earl of Arundel. However, a son from Sir John's second marriage, 


@@@@@


doc= 722


Arundell, Sir John (1576-1654x6), royalist army officer, was born on 22 November 1576, the eldest son and heir of John Arundell, esquire (died 1580), of Trerice, Cornwall, and his wife, Gertrude Denys of Holcombe, Devon. Admitted to the Middle Temple on 8 May 1594, at an unknown date Arundell later married Mary, daughter of George Cary, esquire, of Clovelly, Devon. Arundell was returned MP for the family borough of Mitchell in 1597 and as knight of the shire for Cornwall in 1601. In 1620 he went to great lengths to regain the county seat. Placing Richard Carew of Antony (his nephew) and John St Aubyn of Clowance (his brother-in-law) as MPs at Mitchell, he came to an arrangement about the county seats with Bevill Grenvile, apparently allowing the more experienced Grenvile to have the senior knight's place. Arundell then sent Nicholas Burton 'to sounde howe Will Currington [Coryton] woulde stande towards him'. Coryton had already decided to stand: 'but finding his cosen Arrundell to have the same designe he woulde set downe, and throwe all his voyces upon his sayd kinsman: J[ohn] A[rundell] that woulde not be behinde in courtesie, the next daye made him the like offer, which he refused and theye both agreed that JA showld stand. (TNA: PRO, SP 16/117/55)' In 1624 Arundell was returned for St Mawes; the following year he failed to regain a county seat for himself, but secured the return of his friend Charles Trevanion for Cornwall. 
Arundell maintained his political association with Coryton, from 1626 working closely with him and Sir John Eliot against the duke of Buckingham. He joined Eliot and Coryton in refusing to pay the forced loan and, in April 1627, was named by Sir James Bagg (Buckingham's agent in Cornwall) as one of their 'faction' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/60/75). In March 1628 Arundell supported Eliot's and Coryton's candidature as knights of the shire for Cornwall (against Buckingham's candidates), heading the list of signatories on their election indenture. On election day Arundell, with his friends and political allies Grenvile and Trevanion, arrived at the election, each with 500 men 'at their heels' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/96/36). Eliot and Coryton were returned for the county and Arundell was elected for Tregony. During the 1630s Arundell continued his opposition to Charles I's arbitrary taxes. On 12 July 1633 he was summoned before the privy council for non-payment of his knighthood composition fine and, in April 1636, was one of the last Cornishmen to pay; in 1637 he was also named as a ship money refuser. 
By May 1642 Arundell had changed his political stance and his name was near the head of 7000 signatures on a petition of loyalty from Cornwall to the king. On 29 June he was named to the Cornish commission of array; he was among those most active in promoting it, later 'engaging himself and all his 4 sonnes' in the king's cause (Cornwall RO, T1767). In July 1643, following the death in battle of Sir Nicholas Slanning, the king appointed Arundell as governor of Pendennis Castle, with his second son, Richard Arundel, as his lieutenant. In July 1644 Arundell harboured Queen Henrietta Maria on her journey from Exeter to France and in February 1646 he sheltered the prince of Wales before his flight into exile. On 18 March 1646 Sir Thomas Fairfax summoned Arundell to surrender, but after 'less than two minutes resolution' the governor replied that: 'I resolve that I will here bury myself before I deliver up this Castle to such as fight against his Majesty, and that nothing you can threaten is formidable to me in respect of the loss of loyalty and conscience. (Coate, 211)' The garrison held out for five months, but was beaten by hunger and plague; it was the last castle in England to surrender to parliament. On 17 August the formal surrender took place and the garrison marched out with the full honours of war, 'Drums beating, Colours flying, Trumpets sounding'. Arundell signed the treaty of surrender, but wrote at the foot, 'condescended unto by me John Arundell' (ibid., 219-20). 
Arundell was one of only eight Cornishmen who in 1641 enjoyed a landed income exceeding $1000 per annum; at the Restoration his son claimed that his estate had been worth more than $2000 a year in 1646. However, after the fall of Pendennis and the collapse of the royalist cause, Arundell's age 'required his abode in England where he was Plunder[e]d and sequestred of a very greate stock of quick and dead goods' and of his estate 'for 7 yeares at least' (Cornwall RO, T1767). Arundell's estate was not discharged until 20 December 1654, when he was fined $10,000. Of this, $8000 was written off in view of the profits the sequestrators had already received from the estate. Cromwell was sympathetic to Arundell's petition for exemption from the remaining $2000 but, upon receipt of a report from Cornwall that Arundell was considered 'one of the most irreconcilable amongst us', the council confirmed the fine and Arundell was made to pay it. 
Arundell made his will on 14 June 1654, professing his belief in 'the doctrine, worshipp and disciplyne established and professed in [the] Church of England in the reine of Queene Elizabeth King James and the beginning of the rayne of the late King Charles', and directing that his body be buried near his late wife in the parish church of Newlyn in Pyder (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/254, fol. 298). His eldest son, John, had been killed in the civil war, so Arundell bequeathed all his lands in Cornwall, Devon, and Somerset to his second son, Richard, who was created a peer in 1664 in recognition of his own and his father's loyalty and suffering. The date of Arundell's death is uncertain, but took place between 14 June 1654 and 22 May 1656, when Richard proved his father's will. 


@@@@@


doc= 723


Arundell, Mary (d. 1557), courtier, was the only child of Sir John Arundell ('c'.1474-1545), of Lanherne in Cornwall, and his second wife, Katherine Grenvile ('b'. 1489x93), the youngest of eight children of Sir Thomas Grenvile (died 1513) of Stowe, Cornwall, and his first wife, Isabella Gilbert. Mary arrived at the court of Henry VIII in 1536 and subsequently served at least two of his queens, Jane Seymour and Anne of Cleves, and his daughter Princess, later Queen, Mary. She married twice, first on 14 January 1537, when she became the third wife of Robert Radcliffe, first earl of Sussex (1482/3-1542). The couple had two sons, of whom the elder was baptized on 22 March 1538 and died in infancy; their second son, John ('bap'. 1539), was knighted in February 1547 and died on 9 November 1568. In 1545 Mary became the second wife of Henry Fitzalan, earl of Arundel (1512-1580). For nearly three centuries some writers have confused her with two other women: as the author of manuscript translations actually done by her stepdaughter, Mary Howard, duchess of Norfolk (1539/40-1557), daughter of the earl of Arundel and his first wife, Katherine Grey, daughter of the marquess of Dorset (died 1530); also, with Margaret Acland, Lady Arundell (died 1691), wife of John, second Baron Arundell of Trerice (died 1697), of another branch of the great Arundell clan of Cornwall. 
Mary died on 20/21 October 1557 at the earl of Arundel's house, Bath Place, London. Her funeral took place on 27/8 October at the church of St Clement Danes, where her body was buried. In 1847 a lead coffin, believed to contain the body of the countess, was discovered in a chapel at Arundel Castle. The coffin now lies beneath the floor of the main vault in the Fitzalan chapel at the castle. 


@@@@@


doc= 724


Arundel, Richard, first Baron Arundell of Trerice (1616-1687), royalist army officer, was the second son of John Arundell (1576-1654x6) of Trerice, Cornwall, and Mary, daughter of George Cary of Clovelly. He was admitted as a student of Lincoln's Inn on 16 November 1633. Called to the bar on 18 November 1640, he kept his chambers at the inn until suspended for royalism in 1646. About 1645 he married Gertrude Bagge of Saltram, widow of a prominent royalist, Sir Nicholas Slanning. 
Arundel represented Lostwithiel in the parliaments of 1640. On 21 April 1641 he voted against the attainder of Strafford, remaining a member until his execution of the commission of array led to expulsion from the house on 22 January 1642. Arundel's family were among the most influential within the Cornish royalist party. Little is certainly known about his early military career, but he is said to have been present at the battle of Edgehill and had a command at Lansdown on 5 June 1643. He is known to have acted in 1645 as one of the king's revenue commissioners of assessment in Cornwall and in the autumn was appointed colonel in command of the trained bands and the garrison posted in the stronghold of Pendennis, near Falmouth, where his father was governor. The royalist position, even in the far west, deteriorated rapidly, but Pendennis Castle held out long past the surrenders of Oxford and Worcester. Grasping the hopelessness of their situation, some die-hard officers -- who may well have included Richard Arundel -- are said to have tried to blow up themselves, their tormentors, and the castle itself, using the ordnance stored there, but were prevented by the ordinary soldiers. Pendennis surrendered on 16 August. 
On 24 April 1648 Arundel and his father were listed by the committee for compounding among sequestered delinquents in Cornwall, and the following month they were arrested as suspected organizers in the county of that year's provincial insurgency. In March 1650 they were more cautious in the cause of the young Charles Stuart, offering to put troops into the field only on condition that Sir Richard Grenville, the leading Cornish royalist, committed substantial forces first. The county committee of Cornwall wrote on 15 May that the Arundel family 'having the most considerable estates of any delinquents within this county, hath hitherto paid nothing' and in December they were reported to be using a clause in the terms of the surrender of Pendennis which referred to the 'enjoyment of their estates' to extract more favourable terms than their more moderate neighbours. By a parliamentary order of 20 March 1651 they were fined the huge sum of $10,000, though it seems that a petition was lodged against this. However, on 18 November 1652 they were named on a list of persons invited to compound for their forfeited estates. 
Following the death of his brother in 1644 Arundel was heir to what remained of his father's property. The death of his father in the mid-1650s did not propel his successor towards accommodation with the Cromwellian authorities. He is known to have been a Cornish associate of the Sealed Knot in 1654, and the following year, when disagreements paralysed that society, he was involved in the plans of the 'action party', charged with liaising with the agent John Trelawny. The attempt was a failure. But among the networks of royalist conspiracy Arundel's record inspired continuing trust. In July-August 1659 he was privy to new plans for a rising, but remained inactive, upon the advice of the double agent Sir Richard Willis to wait upon the intensification of mutual hostility between the army and the Rump Parliament. But the following month he was involved with Captain Silius Titus and the commander of the garrison of Exeter to deliver the city to the king's forces. 
The Restoration brought a marked improvement in Arundel's fortunes. In July 1660 he was appointed to the remodelled commission of the peace in Cornwall, and in September he was made governor of Pendennis Castle, an honorary post he held until his death. In the Convention Parliament and, from 29 January 1662 to 23 March 1665, in the Cavalier Parliament, he was member for Bere Alston, Devon. In December 1660 he was made a colonel of foot in the militia. 
Arundel served the new regime as a commissioner, for assessment (1661-5), for the relief of loyal and indigent officers (1662), for corporations (1662-3), and for oyer and terminer on the western circuit (1665). He acted as a deputy lieutenant of Cornwall from 1662 until his death, and on 23 March 1665 was created Baron Arundell of Trerice. During the course of Charles's reign he became a very wealthy man. Rapidly restored to the bulk of his estates, he was made stannator of Tywharnwaile in 1663. Perhaps in 1664, and certainly by the following year, he was appointed master of horse of the queen mother, Henrietta Maria. In 1670 he was granted a free gift of $3000 and in 1674 a pension of $1000 per annum. He was made a freeman of Plymouth in 1684, and of Liskeard, Bodmin, Mitchell, and Penryn the following year. 
Arundel retained the traditionalist cavalier outlook. He appears not to have been especially prominent in the house, but sat on nineteen committees and showed particular interest in measures designed to help royalist veterans. In 1663 he served on Commons committees for the more effective prevention of sectarian meetings and for the enforcement of restrictions on corporations. Later decisions illustrate the loyalist cavaliers' dilemma. He is known to have opposed both the exclusion of James, duke of York, from the succession, and the execution of the Roman Catholic Viscount Stafford in December 1680; but Danby reported that after the new king's accession Arundel opposed his Catholicizing policy. Richard Arundel died, probably in London, on 7 September 1687 and was buried at St James's, Piccadilly. 


@@@@@


doc= 725


Arundell, Sir Thomas (c.1502-1552), administrator and convicted conspirator, was the younger son of Sir John Arundell of Lanherne, Cornwall ('c'.1474-1545), and his first wife, Eleanor (died by December 1503), daughter of Thomas Grey, first marquess of Dorset (c.1455-1501). He had one brother, Sir John Arundell ('c'.1500-1557); three sisters: Elizabeth (died 1516x24), who married Sir Richard Edgcumbe (died 1561/2); Jane (died 1577); and Eleanor; and a half-sister, Mary Arundell, countess of Sussex and Arundel (d. 1557). In 1530 he married Margaret Howard (died 1571), sister of Katherine, Henry VIII's fifth queen, and daughter of Lord Edmund Howard (died 1538) and Joyce Culpeper. They had two sons, Matthew (1535-1598) and Charles (died 1587), and three daughters, Margaret, Dorothy ('c'.1535- 'c'.1578), and Jane ('b'. 'c'.1536). 
Arundell began his career in the household of Cardinal Wolsey, for whom he became a gentleman of the privy chamber. His working relationship with Thomas Cromwell ranged from their days as contemporaries in Wolsey's household to Arundell's appointment as the first receiver of the court of augmentations for Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, and Dorset. Two months after succeeding his father in 1533 as receiver-general of the duchy of Cornwall, Arundell was created a knight of the Bath at Anne Boleyn's coronation. He served both Henry VIII and Edward VI as a JP for Cornwall, Dorset, and Somerset, and was appointed to commissions for gaol delivery, oyer and terminer, and the defence of the western coastline. During the Pilgrimage of Grace and the king's French expedition in 1544 Sir Thomas commanded the Dorset militia. His cousin Henry Grey, third marquess of Dorset, employed him in estate management and he was general receiver for the earl of Northumberland. For the town of Salisbury he was high bailiff, and he was keeper of royal parks in Dorset and twice sheriff of Dorset and Somerset. In 1539 he sat on the council of the west with his father. He served as receiver to Anne of Cleves and chancellor to Katherine Parr, and was appointed to survey the ordnance in the Tower. His pedigree, marriage, and developing service to the government undoubtedly enabled him greatly to increase his wealth through the acquisition of former religious properties. In 1547 he purchased Wardour Castle in Wiltshire, thus establishing what became the most enduring and important branch of the great Cornish Arundell family; Henry VIII had been considering Sir Thomas for a barony at his death. He sat as knight of the shire for Dorset in 1545 and 1547. 
Birth and marriage connected Arundell to the crown and to many of the most important families in England. By the reign of Edward VI he was one of the most experienced government officers in the country. However, his name was removed from the late king's list of proposed honours, reflecting the new regime's concern with Arundell's connections, experience, and importance. Sir Thomas had the means, status, and skills to unnerve both those in power and those who sought power. Further, he and his family, the 'great' Arundells of Lanherne, remained devoted to traditional religion. In a volatile political and religious climate he could not avoid being embroiled in the continual struggle for control of the government, and was a vulnerable target for those who feared his prominent status and opposed his religious beliefs. Consequently, vague and unproven suggestions of complicity in the 1549 south-western rebellion were directed at him and his brother. Those accusations led to the imprisonment of both men in 1550 and again in 1551, and marked the end of Sir Thomas's career. His temporary alignment with the duke of Somerset in late 1551 then made him a victim of the earl of Warwick's putsch. Arundell was arrested and charged with conspiring both to overthrow the government and to murder the earl. Warwick's government undoubtedly coerced the inquest into making a conviction. Arundell consistently professed his innocence. 
During Somerset's protectorate Arundell was not an ambitious power seeker. He was an intelligent and experienced politician with decades of proven loyalty to the Tudor crown; though he had ample opportunity, there was no hint of a dangerously ambitious man. His loyalty to the king remained intact. However, he was embroiled in circumstances beyond his control, and his political and religious status played against him in a struggle that he lost. He was beheaded on Tower Hill on 26 February 1552 and buried in the church of St Peter ad Vincula in the Tower. His property was swiftly confiscated, but in June 1552 the crown began its restoration to his widow and, from 1553, to his children. 


@@@@@


doc= 726


Arundell, Thomas, first Baron Arundell of Wardour (c.1560-1639), army officer, was the son and heir of Sir Matthew Arundell (1532x4-1598) of Wardour Castle, Wiltshire, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Sir Henry Willoughby of Wollaton, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Anne. His father inherited extensive former monastic lands, serving as high sheriff, custos-rotulorum, and deputy lieutenant of Dorset. His mother was a courtier to Elizabeth I. 
Imprisoned in 1580 for his Catholic zeal, Arundell returned to favour donating $100 towards defeating the Armada. On 18 June 1585 at St Andrew's, Holborn, he married Mary ('c'.1567-1607), daughter of Henry Wriothesley, second earl of Southampton, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Anthony Browne, first Viscount Montague. Elizabeth I allegedly recommended him to the emperor, and in 1595 Sir Robert Cecil arranged for him to fight the Turks in Hungary. On 7 September 1595 he stormed the breach at Gran, replacing the Turkish crescent with the imperial eagle. Known as 'the Valiant', he was created an imperial count by Rudolf II on 14 December 1595. Elizabeth disapproved of his imperial title, and on his return committed Arundell to the Fleet prison, commenting 'I would not have a sheep branded with another man's mark' (Morey, 129). 
James I created Arundell Baron Arundell of Wardour on 4 May 1605 and appointed him colonel of the English regiment serving the archduke in Spanish Flanders, but Arundell disobeyed royal orders and sailed to Flanders in September 1605. Named by Guy Fawkes under torture, he was suspected of complicity in the Gunpowder Plot. On 1 July 1608, at St Andrew's, Holborn, he married Anne Philipson (died 1637), daughter of Miles Philipson of Crook, Westmorland, and his wife, Barbara, sister of Francis Sandys of Conishead, Lancashire. During the 1630s he engaged in acrimonious religious disputes with the bishop of Durham. After attempting to sell Wardour to the king in 1637 he died there on 7 November 1639, and was buried at Tisbury, Wiltshire. 
Arundell's eldest son was 


@@@@@


doc= 727


Thomas Arundell, second Baron Arundell of Wardour (c.1586-1643), royalist army officer. On 11 May 1607 he married Lady Blanche Somerset (1583/4-1649) ['see 'Arundell, Lady Blanche], the sixth daughter of Edward Somerset, fourth earl of Worcester, and his wife, Elizabeth, fourth daughter of Francis Hastings, second earl of Huntingdon. A committed royalist (the House of Commons issued orders for his arrest in November 1641), Thomas Arundell was described as 'a great Defender of the Romish Faith' (Newman, 6). His wife became famous for her spirited defence of Wardour Castle against the parliamentarians during his absence in May 1643. Arundell was mortally wounded at the battle of Stratton on 16 May 1643. He died in Oxford on 19 May and was buried at Tisbury. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Henry Arundell, third Baron Arundell of Wardour. 


@@@@@


doc= 728


Asaf (supp. fl. 6th cent.), bishop, is the patron of St Asaph and the nearby Llanasa in north-east Wales. According to late medieval and early modern Welsh saints' genealogies, he was the son of Sawyl Benuchel ap Pabo Post Prydain, and thus descended from the so-called Men of the North (the Britons of northern Britain), and his mother was Gwenasedd ferch Rhain Rhieinwg. Most information about Asaf comes from chapters 24-5 and 31 of the 'Vita sancti Kentigerni' by the monk Jocelin of Furness ('fl'. 1199-1214) and from some later local Welsh traditions. More might once have been available, however: Jocelin (chap. 25) alludes to a 'little book' ('libellus') of the life of St Asaf which he may have used; and the (now lost) thirteenth- or fourteenth-century manuscript called the 'Red Book of St Asaph' ('Llyfr Coch Asaph') is known to have contained a 'Vita sancti Assaph'. 
The 'Vita' by Jocelin describes how the church at Llanelwy (St Asaph) was originally founded by Kentigern of Glasgow, and not by Asaf. While in exile in Wales and having paid a visit to St David, Kentigern is said to have looked for a suitable site for a monastery and was eventually led to one on the banks of the River Elgu (Elwy) by a white boar; hence the name Llanelwy, the 'church on the Elwy'. Among his disciples was the youth Asaf, described as being 'distinguished by birth and by looks'. Asaf is said to have performed a miracle by carrying red-hot coals against his chest in order to warm up his frozen master, and the two saints subsequently argued, both seeking to attribute the miracle to the other's virtue. Kentigern thus held Asaf in high regard and designated him as his successor. Eventually, Kentigern returned to Glasgow, leaving Llanelwy through the northern door, from which developed a tradition that the door should only be opened on the feast day of Asaf. Modern historians have rejected most of Jocelin's account of Asaf as a twelfth-century fiction, but a text (dated 1256), appended to the red book but seemingly independent of Jocelin's 'Vita', describes the founding of St Asaph by Kentigern with the involvement of the sixth-century Welsh king Maelgwn Gwynedd, though in circumstances different from those related by Jocelin. 
There have been various attempts to explain why the twelfth-century monks of St Asaph attributed the founding of their church to the Glaswegian saint and not to their own patron. For example, the tradition may have been devised 'c'.1125 when there were plans (ultimately unsuccessful) to render St Asaph (then not yet a diocese) and other churches subject to York, which was also seeking to establish its authority over the Scottish churches (also unsuccessfully). Alternatively, it has been suggested that the link with Kentigern goes back to the supposed migration to north Wales in the late ninth century of political exiles from Strathclyde, who could have brought the saint's cult with them and which may have inspired the idea of Kentigern's own Welsh sojourn. A late account of the founding of the church by Asaf himself occurs in the chronicle of Elis Gruffudd ('c'.1548), in which the Welsh saint recovers a lost ring of Maelgwn's wife, who was Asaf's sister. This story, though based on a common motif, is probably an adaptation of a similar miracle in Jocelin's 'Vita' where it is attributed to Kentigern and set in Strathclyde. 
It is perhaps significant that the Welsh name for St Asaph, Llanelwy, contains no reference to the saint, who is commemorated instead in Llanasa ('church of Asa'), which is about 5 miles north-east of the more famous church. It is likely that Llanasa was Asaf's original foundation, and indeed there is no need to associate Asaf with Llanelwy until the twelfth century. The claim in a late version of the Welsh laws that a bishop of St Asaph named Chebur accompanied the tenth-century Welsh king Hywel Dda on his visit to Rome is probably best rejected. In 1125 the church is not named explicitly but is simply referred to as the diocese between those of Chester and Bangor. The Anglo-Norman diocesan church of Llanelwy was established in 1143 under Bishop Gilbert. Use of the name St Asaph first occurs in 1152 when Geoffrey of Monmouth succeeded Gilbert as bishop, and the appropriation of Asaf's cult by the new church may not have occurred until this point. Doubtless these developments gave impetus to new traditions about the church and its founder. He does not appear in any extant medieval Welsh saints' calendars -- celebration of his feast on 1 May appears later -- and his cult in Wales is limited to a few local Flintshire places, including Pantasa, Onnen Asa, the River Asa, and also Ffynnon Asa, a holy well. His appearance in some late medieval Scottish calendars probably derives from the 'Vita sancti Kentigerni'. 


@@@@@


doc= 729


Asbury, Francis (1745-1816), a founder of the American Methodist Episcopal church, was born on 20 August 1745 at Hamstead Bridge, in the parish of Handsworth, Staffordshire. He was the only son of Joseph Asbury and Eliza Rogers, both farmers and devout followers of Methodism. He was educated at a local school until the age of twelve; he began to preach, as a local preacher, at the age of eighteen, and having been admitted as an itinerant preacher at the age of twenty-one, travelled throughout Staffordshire and Worcestershire. In August 1771, when preachers were wanted by the Bristol conference to go to America, Asbury offered himself: he arrived at Philadelphia in October 1771. 
During the American War of Independence, British Methodists were vocally opposed to American revolutionary activity. As a result, Methodists in America endured substantial hardships; however, Asbury stayed, while all other Methodist missionaries returned to Britain. He avoided politics and never became a citizen of the United States. During the Christmas conference of 1784 in Baltimore, the American Methodists split formally from the Wesleyan societies in Britain to form the Methodist Episcopal church of the United States of America. Asbury was elected a joint superintendent with Thomas Coke, and he adopted the title of bishop at Coke's suggestion. Asbury continued his rigorous travel schedule, visiting each state almost every year. During his travels in North America, he preached an estimated 17,000 sermons of one hour or more and travelled over 275,000 miles. Under him the Methodist church grew from 15,000 members in 1784 to 140,000 members, stretching from Canada to the Gulf of Mexico. 
Asbury's journal, published posthumously in 1821, shows him to have been a man of simple and winning character, administrative power, and effective expression; his piety was both frank and deep. Other published work included 'The Causes, Evils and Cures of Heart and Church Divisions' (1792) and 'Extracts of Letters Containing some Account of the Work of God since the Year 1800' (1805). He died, unmarried, on 31 March 1816, in Spotsylvania, Virginia. His salary never exceeded $80, and at his death he left his estate of $2000 to the book concern of his church. His tireless efforts were remembered in the naming of the town Asbury Park, New Jersey, and of Asbury Theological Seminary and Asbury College, both in Wilmore, Kentucky. 


@@@@@


doc= 730


Askham, Anthony (c.1517-1559), writer on astronomy and almanac maker, was born at Kirby Wiske, near Northallerton, Yorkshire, the third son of John Ascham (died 1544) of Kirby Wiske, who was a yeoman farmer and steward to Lord Scrope of Bolton, and his wife, Margaret (died 1544). He was a brother of the humanist Roger Ascham. He entered Cambridge in 1532, graduating MB in 1540. Nothing is known of his medical practice, probably in Yorkshire, except for 'A Lytel Herbal' (1550), a guide to herbal medicine, and 'A Litell Treatyse of Astronomy, Very Necessary for Physick and Surgery' (1551), which gave a detailed explanation of the astrological rules applying to herbal medicine and contained a complimentary verse by the eminent translator and former Augustinian Thomas Peynell. In 1552, the year he was ordained deacon, Askham was appointed vicar of Burneston (near Kirby Wiske) and rector of Methley, near Leeds, both crown appointments. He probably owed this advancement to his friend the eminent humanist Sir John Cheke, a Cambridge contemporary and an intimate friend of Roger Ascham; Cheke was a devotee of astrology, and as tutor to the young Edward VI an influential figure at court. But Askham never shared the protestant commitment of his brother and his patron, and was to become a fervent champion of the Catholic faith under Mary. 
Askham is best known for his writings on astronomy, chronology, and astrology. In 1552 he published 'A Lytel Treatyse of Astronomy, Declarying the Leape Yeare', dedicated to Cheke, whom he termed 'his singuler good mayster' (fol. 1); Dr Henry Pendleton of Oxford, who under Mary was to become a Catholic zealot and chaplain to Bishop Bonner, provided complimentary verses. The tract, prompted by questions Askham had been posed on a recent visit to London, described the motion of the sun according to the Ptolemaic system, with notes on the variation of times and seasons throughout the world and on leap years. It is likely that he knew the pioneering astronomer John Feild (Felde), whose home at East Ardsley lay only 3 miles from Methley, though evidence is lacking. 
Askham's most ambitious astrological work was 'A Treatyse of the State and Disposition of the World', composed in 1547 but published only in 1551, which listed the major conjunctions of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars since the creation and surveyed the major political and other effects of each. He also published a series of annual almanacs from 1548 until his death, in which he stressed how the wonders of the earth and heavens demonstrated the omnipotence of God. The almanacs gave detailed forecasts of the weather and diseases, with dietary and medical advice. They also included numerous astronomical notes and figures, with advice on how to calculate the hour of the night by checking the rising and setting of certain constellations against the tables he supplied (once with a cut-out compass). This method was practised every night in his own household, he remarked in his 'Almanacke' for 1553. The 1555 edition provided copious information on the geography of Africa, Asia, and America, and promised a forthcoming work on cosmography, which appears never to have been completed. In 1556 he explained in detail how to calculate the time of the day and the height of buildings by using a notched stick to measure the length of shadows and referring the result to the tables he set out for each day of the year. The Marian almanacs are also remarkable for their Catholic polemics. The 1555 edition featured strident allegorical verses comparing the changing seasons to the advance of heresy and the restoration of Catholic truth under Mary, 'our noble Judith' ('sig'. A3'v'). He savagely condemned the protestant assault on the mass, Corpus Christi, roods, and images, and dubbed the English 'Bible' 'the sprynge and well of heresies' (ibid., 'sig'. A8'v'). These verses, ending with a fervent exhortation to faith, are among the most vigorous attempts to popularize the Marian counter-reformation. 
Askham died late in 1559. He has been tentatively identified with a namesake who was recorded in a Yorkshire genealogy of 1585 as the father of Anne Burgh of Brampton-on-Swale. Though it is just possible that Askham had married and lost a wife before his ordination, the identification remains unlikely. 


@@@@@


doc= 731


Ascham, Anthony (bap. 1614, d. 1650), diplomat and pamphleteer, was baptized on 6 March 1614 in Boston, Lincolnshire, the son of Thomas and Cicilly (died 1634) Ascham or Ascombe. Little is known of his parents, though Allen states he was descended of the same family as Roger Ascham. He attended Eton College from 1630 to 1634, and from there went to King's College, Cambridge. He was elected a fellow in 1637 and graduated BA in 1638 and MA in 1642. He took the parliamentary side during the civil war, although details of his service are somewhat obscure. He was appointed tutor to James, then duke of York, in 1646, when James and his brother, Henry of Gloucester, were put into the care of the earl of Northumberland. Although the extent of his service is unclear, in May 1650 an order in parliament was made for Ascham to be awarded money from the compounded estate of Julian de la Fountaine for his service in attending James. He was sent to Hamburg to negotiate with the Hansa over trade relations in the Baltic in 1649, and then to Spain in March 1650. 
Ascham's major service to the parliamentary side had been in terms of propaganda published in support of the regime of the Rump Parliament after the execution of Charles I. His 'A Discourse wherein is Examined what is Particularly Lawful' was first published in 1648, and then significantly expanded to be published as 'Of the Confusions and Revolutions of Governments' in 1649 in the midst of the engagement controversy resulting from the introduction of the new loyalty oath by the republican regime. He also published 'The Bounds and Bonds of Publique Obedience' in the same year, as well as a more speculative work, less closely connected with the debates over loyalty to the Rump, entitled 'The Original and End of Civil Government'. 
Members of the Rump not only had to justify the novelty of their regime in the face of traditional ties of loyalty to the crown, but also the presbyterian adherence to the loyal clauses of the solemn league and covenant, taken by them to amount to a binding oath. In 'Confusions and Revolutions of Governments' Ascham argued that the nature of political authority was such that obedience was due to those performing those tasks for which government was originally set up, rather than to those with whom it was originally entrusted. It is this relationship he regarded as important, the action of a government maintaining justice, rather than strict virtue or relationships of loyalty. Furthermore, Ascham argued that to privilege such relationships, most significantly with the exiled Stuarts, was the self-indulgent action of one ruled by passion rather than reason, and an unwelcome and destructive intrusion of private ideas into the public sphere. 
In 'The Bounds and Bonds' Ascham's argument is similar, focusing on the assertion that as long as the state performs its role of upholding justice, private individuals should not concern themselves with the legality of any regime. In 'The Original and End of Civil Government' Ascham gives a justification for parliamentary government and resistance that pays no heed to the claims of custom or constitution. He reiterates the parliamentary argument, standard by 1649, about the original location of sovereignty in the people, the untransferable nature of their rights, and their right to judge tyranny. He goes on to argue that due to the passionate and inconstant nature of the people, their power of government needs to be transferred because anarchy is unacceptable. The recipients of such power by rights are the elected representatives of the people, set up to rule them: talk of lords or monarchs can be dismissed as irrational or mere custom. 
Such views earned Ascham the derision of Edward Hyde, the committed royalist representative at the Spanish court, who urged that Philip IV should not accept an embassy from a regime that had killed a king. Ascham had been nervous for his safety since he arrived in Spain in April 1650, with George Fisher as a secretary and Giovanni Baptista Riva, a translator. He travelled to Madrid with a guard, arriving on 5 June, whereupon Don Diego de Moreda, the captain of the guard, pleaded illness, leaving Ascham in an inn which he felt was unsafe. The next morning he sent Fisher to find alternative accommodation, but before his return six English royalists burst into the inn and two of them, William Sparke and John Guillen, murdered Ascham and Riva. Ascham was buried in the courtyard of the inn. 
Hyde wrote a pamphlet justifying Ascham's murder, the 'Consideraciones dignas de atencion, y peso, sobre el caso de los cavalleros Ingeles', a translation appearing in the first edition of his letters in 1773. Milton, however, praised Ascham, on behalf of parliament, as 'a person of integrity, learned and descended of an ancient family to treat of matters very advantageous as we hope as well to the Spanish, as to the English Nation' (Milton, 13.15). Sparke and Guillen, along with Valentine Progers, Henry Progers, William Harnet, and Edward Halsell, fled first to the Venetian ambassador, who took in only Henry Progers, who subsequently escaped. The rest took refuge in the hospital of St Andrea. When they were forcibly taken out of refuge and tried under Don Augustin de Hierro, the papal nuncio, Archbishop Giulio Rospigliosi, raised objections about the breach of sanctuary and no sentence was carried out. The dispute dragged on for several years, the prisoners remaining incarcerated; Valentine Progers died in 1651 and William Sparke was executed after an escape attempt in 1654. The rest escaped in 1656 after hostilities had broken out between Spain and Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 732


Ascham, Roger (1514/15-1568), author and royal tutor, was born at Kirby Wiske, near Northallerton in the North Riding of Yorkshire, the third of the four sons of John Ascham (died 1544), steward to Henry, seventh Lord Scrope of Bolton, and his wife, Margaret, who was probably of the Conyers family. His older brothers were Thomas and John, and his younger was Anthony Askham or Ascham (d. 1559). 
Ascham received his first education in the school at Kirby Wiske, and was perhaps taught there by its vicar, Robert Wensley. In his early teens he was placed by his parents in the household of Humphrey Wingfield, a Suffolk lawyer and royal commissioner who later became a member of parliament, who had a distant connection with the Scropes. Wingfield modelled his household on that of Sir Thomas More and already had a reputation for the upbringing of youth. While in his care Ascham was taught Latin and Greek by Robert Bond. He also read the works of Geoffrey Chaucer and Thomas Malory and developed an abiding interest in archery. 
In 1530, at fifteen, Ascham matriculated at the University of Cambridge and became a student at St John's College. St John's had a northern bias and Ascham's family already had a connection. His brother Thomas had been there as an undergraduate and then as a fellow from 1516 until 1527, and his younger brother Anthony was to follow him there in 1532. The master of St John's at that time was Nicholas Metcalfe, archdeacon of Rochester. Roger's official tutor, Hugh Fitzherbert (died 1537), encouraged in him a love of Greek, calligraphy, drawing, and music. Ascham developed a long friendship with a fellow student, Robert Pember, with whom he shared a love of numismatics and of antiquity, and who has been credited with first discovering Ascham's flair for Greek. Pember encouraged him to take pupils in Greek, and his abilities came to the notice of the master and fellows who gave his teaching official approval. Ascham came under the influence of the Greek scholars Thomas Smith (of Queens' College) and John Redman, but it was John Cheke whom Ascham later acknowledged as responsible for his proficiency in Greek. 
In autumn 1533 Roger Ascham became a questionist and on 18 February 1534 he was admitted BA and nominated for a fellowship. He had criticized the pope, and Metcalfe felt bound to speak publicly against his election to a fellowship; yet Metcalfe personally supported Ascham's candidacy and manoeuvred behind the scenes to ensure that he was elected. Ascham's prospects improved with the appointment of the more reformist Thomas Cromwell as chancellor of the university in 1535. In an atmosphere more congenial to humanism Ascham studied Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and classical drama, and was tutor to several students. On 3 July 1537 he became an MA. As a regent master he had given three courses of lectures by summer 1540. That in dialectic was probably the obligatory course, but he also lectured on mathematics and on Greek. According to Sir Thomas Smith his Greek lectures focused on Isocrates, who was a major influence on Ascham. Lecturing was an important source of revenue for an impoverished fellow and Ascham received 26's'. 8died each term in 1539-40 for the mathematical lecture alone. 
Despite his apparent early preference for protestant doctrines, Ascham numbered many Catholics among his friends at Cambridge. These included John Seton, Thomas Watson, and Richard Brandisby. From Seton he learned much about the effective organization of subject matter. From Watson he developed a love for and knowledge of Greek and Latin drama. He discussed with Cheke and Watson the idea that English poetry might also be written in classical metre. 
His early biographer, Edward Grant, described Ascham at this time as: 'gentle in character, frank and ingenuous in spirit... mild and placid, affable in company, most faithful to his friends: honourable in his life, a man born for making fast friendships with good and learned persons, and especially adapted to winning over and conquering the affections of men.' But the record suggests a less halcyon period and a rather different aspect to his character which Grant neglected to mention (Ascham, 'Works', 3.313-14). Ascham became embroiled in college politics. In 1540 he tried hard to win a fellowship for his student John Thompson in competition with a candidate supported by his friends Seton, Watson, and Redman, writing to the master, John Taylor, and several of the fellows as well as soliciting outside help. Ascham succeeded in securing Thompson's election but he thereby strained Redman's friendship. Ascham was also made very unhappy by developments in the university itself. The protestant master, John Taylor (later bishop of Lincoln), whom Ascham respected, expelled three fellows including Seton and Watson. This fuelled an appeal by these men to Bishop Thomas Goodrich of Ely to visit (that is inspect) St John's. Goodrich did so in May 1542, and brought about a truce whereby Taylor remained as master until he resigned in 1547. There was also an acrimonious debate regarding the new pronunciation of Greek that had been introduced into the university by Erasmus, Cheke, and Smith to make spoken classical Greek recognizable; in May 1542 the chancellor, now Stephen Gardiner, forbade its use and Ascham was seriously alarmed, for he was by now in the words of Smith 'a most vehement defender' of the reformed usage (Smith, 42). In 1543 he was making himself ill with worry and he wrote to John Cheke in 1544 reporting that the dying wish of his father, John Ascham, had been that he should leave contentious Cambridge. Ascham wrote that he had promised his father to leave Cambridge if peace was not restored quickly. 
Ascham was not in Cambridge for all of this period, and this absence created problems of its own. In the winter of 1540-41 he made the journey to Yorkshire to visit his parents, with whom he appears to have kept in regular correspondence. While he was with them he fell dangerously ill; this removed him from college life and politics and also placed him in dire financial straits. He therefore attempted to gain the patronage of Edward Lee, archbishop of York, and was successful in obtaining a pension of 40's'. a year from Lee, which he used to pay for his return trip to Cambridge. Such an eminent patron was worth cultivating, and Ascham dedicated a Latin translation of Oecumenius's commentary on St Paul's epistle to 'Titus' to the archbishop. Unfortunately the inclusion of a quotation of Chrysostom supporting clerical marriage alienated Lee, and Ascham found it more difficult to collect even his original pension. Early in 1544 he wrote to John Redman asking for his assistance in persuading Thomas Cranmer to put pressure on Lee to pay the pension. 
Ascham received but little on the death of his father early in 1544, and remained dependent upon his college and university income and the pension. Early in 1544 John Redman conveyed to him an offer from Charles Blount, fifth Lord Mountjoy, of the post of tutor and secretary in his household. Ascham was tempted by the prospect of working in a household which had had under Mountjoy's father a reputation for learning but, as he told Redman, the stipend was too low, given the increased responsibilities of the post, and he declined. Given his later reputation and his position as tutor to Elizabeth I, it is surprising that he also claimed that he was unfit to teach grammar. In the same year Giles Arlington interviewed him for the position of tutor to Thomas More's grandchildren, the children of Margaret Roper, but Ascham again refused the post. He hoped instead to go abroad, perhaps as secretary to an ambassador, and asked for Redman's help. 
When this failed, Ascham again fastened his hopes on a career at Cambridge. When his mentor John Cheke became tutor to Prince Edward on 10 July 1544 Ascham saw his chance in the vacant regius chair; he appealed to William Paget to intercede for him with Henry VIII. He was passed over. To add to his sense of injury, the fellows of St John's refused to give him John Cheke's vacated college rooms, despite a recommendation from the university chancellor that he be granted this improved accommodation. His position in college was increasingly isolated. Ascham tried hard to win the Greek readership at St John's for his pupil, close friend, and chamber-fellow, William Grindal, in 1544. This caused contention among the fellows. Grindal was not elected. He departed to become tutor to the Princess Elizabeth on Ascham's own recommendation. A kinsman, Thomas Conyers, became Ascham's new chamber-fellow. 
To make matters worse, Archbishop Lee died on 13 September 1544, leaving Ascham with no pension and wholly dependent on his income as a university teacher. He then wrote two Latin poems of little literary merit seeking crown patronage. One of these was a birthday poem for Prince Edward based on the vernacular lullaby 'My Little Pretty One' and the other, a poem characterized by its protestant and nationalistic sentiments, was dedicated to Henry VIII. He also approached Stephen Gardiner and, early in 1545, Thomas Cranmer. Cranmer gave him a handsome gift of money. 
Ascham was still suffering from recurrent bad health -- probably bouts of malaria -- and during his convalescence from one such attack he took up archery again. (He had become skilful in this military art during his time in Wingfield's household.) He came under some criticism in Cambridge from those who scorned the leisure pursuits so popular among undergraduates and who questioned his reputation as a scholar, and so Ascham felt compelled to defend this accomplishment. His book, 'Toxophilus' (1545), took the form of a Ciceronian dialogue between Philologus (lover of study) and Toxophilus (lover of the bow), who was none the less an irreproachable scholar who had put his learning at the disposal of the commonweal. It is remembered specifically as the standard authority on physical training as an essential part of a gentleman's education, but it became a model for his contemporaries and near contemporaries in several respects: as the first learned defence of a pastime, and as a model of English vernacular prose writing in terms of both style and organization of subject matter. Characteristically Ascham achieved this by applying his understanding of classical literary theory to the English case. In the preface he wrote that to write well an author must: 'follow this counsel of Aristotle, to speak as the common people do, to think as wise men do, and so should every man understand him, and the judgement of wise men allow him. Many English writers have not done so, but using strange words, as Latin, French, and Italian, do make all things dark and hard. (Ascham, 'Works', 2.7)' So, unlike Thomas Elyot and John Cheke, he avoided coining too many words and borrowing from other languages, and succeeded in making his English work as a vehicle of wide communication. While the conversation between the two men is in a plain style, enlivened by homely metaphors, colloquial speech, and accurate observations, the discussion, dedication, and preface are presented in a much more formal style. Some of the passages describing the environment (for example, the way in which the wind could interfere with the aim of an expert archer) were vivid and at the time unparalleled in English writing. He also achieved a sense of interaction between the two speakers, whom he made both likeable and full of vitality. 
Ascham dedicated 'Toxophilus' to Henry VIII, knowing his interest in the revival of archery. Eager for patronage from any source, he simultaneously sent copies of the book to the prince of Wales, to Lord Chancellor Thomas Wriothesley, and to Sir Anthony Denny; to bishops Day, Gardiner, and Heath; to William Parr, brother of Katherine; and probably to Archbishop Thomas Cranmer, William Paget, and Prince Edward's Irish companion, Barnaby Fitzpatrick. When Ascham wrote to Gardiner he explicitly mentioned that he had written the book either to secure a patron to replace Lee or to obtain a royal pension. 
Ascham achieved his aim. The privy council received the book favourably, and Henry VIII invited him to Greenwich. A royal pension of $10 doubled Ascham's university and college income at one stroke. Then Ascham was elected public orator of the university in Cheke's stead in 1546 at a fee of 40's'. a year. It was a position he held until 1554. Since 1532 he had on occasion transcribed letters written by the senate to the king and other important people, and from 1534 he had received payment for such services. Now part of his official role was to write letters on the university's behalf. His feet were on the rungs of the ladder to a university career. He was, however, restless and depressed. Late in 1547 he wrote to Gardiner of his dismay about a recent order that would deprive the colleges of the right to elect their own fellows, and he bewailed the deterioration of scholarship and the poor living conditions of fellows. He also busied himself in writing letters to bishops and privy councillors trying to protect lands held by his college in Sedbergh, Yorkshire, which supported eight undergraduates and two fellows and a schoolmaster. He was profoundly unhappy, although his efforts were ultimately successful. 
Renewed tension at Cambridge in 1547 both drew Ascham further into university and college affairs, and encouraged him to adopt a religious position. Unsurprisingly, given his royal patronage, he supported cautious religious reform. Within St John's there were controversial, if informal, discussions about the mass and transubstantiation. In September 1547 Lord Robert Stafford, resident at the college, cut down the pyx for the eucharistic host in the college chapel. The master, William Bill, handed him over to Cranmer, hoping to avoid scandal. Throughout that autumn Thomas Lever led the reform party in the college: in September Fawden began to teach reformed doctrines discreetly; in November Lever and Roger Hutchinson discussed openly the question of whether the mass and the Lord's supper were the same. Bill condemned the actions of the fellows in writing. 
Ascham, president of the fellows and responsible as acting master for keeping peace among their number, was dismayed. He excused Lever and his disciples as 'grave, learned and good men' engaged in reverent and unquarrelsome discussion, and supported the need to sow the truth of God's word (Ascham, 'Works', 1.154). The debate was transferred to the forum of the university schools at Ascham's instigation. Cranmer and the duke of Somerset were highly displeased and the vice-chancellor, William Madew, suspended the talks. Ascham himself wrote a treatise 'Apologia... pro caena Dominica', which attempted to sway by rhetoric rather than reasoned theological argument, but probably wisely did not publish it. At about the same time he wrote his eleven 'Themata theologica'. These also were not published during his lifetime and, according to L. V. Ryan, author of the most authoritative modern biography, are significant largely because they place Ascham, who has been painted by some as a radical in religion, as a rather conservative protestant. The tone of the work is anti-papal. He upheld the new teachings about the mass but intimated that salvation comes through living a righteous life as well as through God's grace; that the church militant on earth included papists and heretics as well as reformers; that all, including reformers, must obey the civil magistrate; and that some matters of religion were things indifferent. He was no theologian. 
In January 1548 William Grindal, tutor to Princess Elizabeth and Ascham's dear friend, died of plague. Ascham comforted Elizabeth in a letter of 22 January 1548 and recommended a kinsman of Grindal as replacement. Elizabeth, despite the opposition of her stepmother Katherine Parr and of Thomas Seymour, insisted that the vacant tutor's place go to Ascham. She had her way and Ascham immediately joined the household at Chelsea. He contrived a classical and Christian curriculum for the princess that was designed to equip her for a leading role in the state. In the morning they studied Greek (the 'New Testament' as well as classical authors such as Sophocles, Isocrates, and Demosthenes), and in the afternoon Cicero and Livy and the early fathers such as St Cyprian. With her he pioneered his method of teaching languages by double translation, which he was to make famous in 'The Scholemaster'. He also taught calligraphy to Elizabeth, her brother, Edward, and Henry and Charles Brandon; it is possible that Lady Jane Grey shared this instruction. A letter of this time to Kate Astley (or Ashley), Elizabeth's governess, presages Ascham's later views on the need to approach the education of the precocious with care: 'The younger, the more tender; the quicker, the easier to break... and so her grace... by little and little, may be increased in learning' (Ascham, 'Works', 1.86). Within the household Ascham had an easy and friendly relationship with the Astleys, with whom he had a connection through John Astley's brother Richard, who was a fellow of St John's College. Ascham's correspondence speaks of 'free talk, always mingled with honest mirth' (Ascham, 'Works', 3.3), discussions about current affairs, and study (with John Astley) of Aristotle's 'Rhetoric' and works by Livy and Cicero. He shared a room with one of the gentlemen-in-waiting, John Whitney, whom he taught Latin, again using the method of double translation with Cicero's 'De amicitia' as its subject. 
This seemingly congenial situation was interrupted when the Seymour household was rocked by scandal at Whitsun 1548, resulting in the removal of the princess to the care of Sir Anthony Denny at Cheshunt, Hertfordshire. In July Ascham was expressing a wish to return to Cambridge, a desire reinforced by the death of his friend John Whitney in August. Some lines of Ascham's poetry survive from this period in which he mourns Whitney, and some others in which he deplores the ways of the ambitious: '
To laugh, to lie, to flatter, to face, 

Four ways in court to win men grace... 
(Ascham, 'Works', 3.127)' The death of Queen Katherine Parr in September 1548, and the attempts by Elizabeth's steward Thomas Parry and Katherine Astley to help Thomas Seymour marry Princess Elizabeth, made Hatfield, where the princess now was, a dangerous place to be. Wisely Ascham sought and received permission to be at St John's for the entire Christmas season. He returned to find Seymour committed to the Tower (17 January 1549) and Elizabeth in partial disgrace. No correspondence survives for this period. Ryan suggests that this could have been 'tactfully removed' by Edward Grant, Ascham's first biographer (Ryan, 112). There is a hint that Ascham fell out with Thomas Parry, thus ruining his chances within Elizabeth's entourage. Certainly on 28 January 1550 Ascham wrote to Cheke that he had been badly affected by 'recent violence and injury at court' (Ascham, 'Works', 1.174-6). He resigned. 
Despite Ascham's hankering after Cambridge, and his praise of that university to Johann Sturm, there is every sign that he had now turned his face determinedly away from the life of an academic. First of all he flirted with Elizabeth's ladies-in-waiting. Then he proposed to marry a widow with children, and to enable this petitioned in 1550 for a dispensation from the celibacy demanded of a fellow of St John's. This marriage did not happen, but Ascham's intention was clear. Third he made himself available as secretary to Sir Richard Morison, ambassador to the court of the emperor Charles V in September 1550. In a sequence of six unusual letters he described his trip through England (visiting Lady Jane Grey 'en route') to Germany, providing a fine example of early travel writing. He described his interest in numismatics and how he purchased Roman coins at Bingen. He explained how he had been afraid he would miss English beer but was now a convert to the fine wines of the Rhine. He wrote of his friendship with Charles V's physician, Vesalius, and Hieronymus Wolf the humanist; of his studying Greek with Morison; of his study of the histories of Herodotus, Machiavelli, Polybius, and Paolo Giovio; of his lessons in Italian from Morison; and of his own slow progress in learning German. The indications are that he was still very much the scholar. His letters reveal that he was engaged in a lively debate about the pronunciation of Greek with Hubert Leodius and Nicholas Cisner of Heidelberg in 1553, and that he corresponded with Strasbourg humanists Johannes Sleiden, historian of the Reformation and delegate at the Council of Trent, Michael Toxites, and Johann Sturm. His correspondence with Sturm was friendly and learned. The two debated the importance of style and content, the ideas of Pierre de Ramee (Peter Ramus), critic of Aristotle, the possibility of collaborating on a preface to Martin Bucer's 'De regno Christi', the education of Elizabeth, and so on. In late 1552 he was living a miserable and impoverished existence in Augsburg and wanted badly to return home. He wrote to William Cecil on 28 November about his disappointment that his appointment as Latin secretary to Edward VI was being delayed. He began to envisage a return to Cambridge. 
In mid-May 1552 Ascham commenced a detailed journal of events with Charles V's flight from Innsbruck. The journal comments on attitudes to the Council of Trent. It seems that John Astley (and perhaps others) asked Ascham for news of the great events that he was witnessing. Despite Ascham's declaration that he was ill-fitted to the task, from this small beginning of journal and newsletters came a larger project: a history. On 7 July 1553 Ascham informed Cheke that he was writing a narrative of what occurred day by day in the imperial court. On 22 July Sturm appealed to him, as one who understood the principles of historiography, to compile a history of those events in Germany that he had observed, read about, or heard reported, not knowing that his friend already had the project well in hand. A fragment of the resulting history covering events down to February 1553 has survived in published form. Possibly, as Ryan argues, it was seen by Ascham as a work for Edward VI's council, predicting the course of Emperor Charles V's affairs and indicating how best to handle the emperor. Ascham had transcribed the correspondence between the privy council and the English ambassador at Brussels about the duke of Northumberland's proposed changes in foreign policy, and was therefore well aware of the relevance of his interpretation of the course of events and view of Charles V as a man fatally flawed and unreliable as an ally. This supposed political purpose in producing the 'Report' could explain why Ascham discontinued the project after Edward's death, but internal evidence suggests that he intended to complete the work. It has been lauded by historians as a pioneering essay in pragmatic political history in which the subject matter was ordered not chronologically but according to the author's understanding of its importance judged in terms of cause and effect, and which certainly provided instructive lessons. Ascham appears to have used Machiavelli's 'History of Florence' and 'Discourses' as models. 
While Ascham remained in royal employ when Mary I ascended the throne, he ceased actively transcribing letters for the privy council. Instead he lingered, ill, in Brussels, only returning to England in August 1553 when matters were more settled. Because his former patrons Gardiner and Paget were in favour he was reasonably secure. In September he returned to Cambridge for Thomas Watson's induction as master of St John's but, impoverished, he left shortly afterwards. Morison helped him financially but he was soon desperately in debt, asking Gardiner in October for a pension to support him in scholarly activity but, failing that, for another diplomatic duty. Later he determined never to return to live in penury at Cambridge but instead to find another career. Gardiner wanted him to come to court and Ascham himself declared to Sir William Petre on 25 December 1553 'I shape myself to be a courtier' (Ascham, 'Works', 1.396). Possibly he resided at Middle Temple for a while. A flood of letters seeking patronage and place followed. He put himself forward as tutor to Petre's children and also to Mary Clarke, lady-in-waiting to Mary. Simultaneously he asked Petre to gain him a place in a bishop's or a dean's household. Almost anything would do, although not quite anything: he refused a prebend because he was a layman and intended to remain so. Much later, in 1566, he would explain to the earl of Leicester that, although he had retained the favour of Paget, Gardiner, Heath, and Pole, some courtiers, especially Sir Francis Englefield, objected to him on religious grounds, and that this had delayed his progress at court. Whatever the opposition, by 7 May 1554 objections were overcome and he was confirmed as Mary's new Latin secretary at a salary of 40 marks a year; Mary also doubled his pension for 'Toxophilus' to $20 a year for the rest of his life. 
Ascham hoped to marry Margaret Howe of South Ockenden, Essex, the daughter of Sir Clement Harleston and, according to Ascham, Margaret had freely acquiesced. In January 1554 he wrote to Sir William Petre that he had chosen his wife because of her good qualities: 'the more sorry am I that hitherto she hath found rather a loving than a lucky husband unto her' (Ascham, 'Works', 1.413). Another suitor, one J. B., attempted to kidnap Margaret, however, and the case went to court. Ascham won and on 1 June 1554 the marriage took place. A letter from 1555 survives in which Roger comforts his 'sweet wife' 'Mine own good Margaret' on the death of their first-born and describes their nightly prayers and their discussions of how to bring up their child in virtue and learning (ibid., 2.170-73). Over the next years Margaret had at least four sons and three daughters. 
The position of Latin secretary was no sinecure. In one period of three days Ascham wrote no fewer than forty-seven letters to princes and cardinals (BL, Add. MS 35840). Ascham it was who drafted the announcements to Pope Paul IV and others of the birth of a royal heir from Hampton Court in May 1555 during the queen's phantom pregnancy. In addition to official duties he wrote letters for individuals such as Paget, Sir John Bourne, and Lord Lumley and drew up petitions. Two of these, from Lady Elizabeth Dudley, wife of Lord Ambrose, could help explain Ascham's later good relations with Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. 
Ascham dined with Pole, discussed the whereabouts of Cicero's lost 'De republica', debated Sturm's work with him, and lent him books. He even inspected the 'Pro ecclesiasticae unitatis defensione', which had occasioned Pole's attainder in 1536 and which was published in Strasbourg in 1555. He continued his interest in Sturm's work and in the activities of his friends in Europe, including Sleiden and Toxites. There is, however, little other information regarding Ascham's intellectual pursuits during these years and, apart from his displeasure at Mary's treatment of Elizabeth, no evidence of his reaction to the events of the reign. Some apparently suggested that he accommodated his views to suit the times, but his biographer Grant rejected this idea. Certainly Ascham's annotation of a book he studied at Christmas 1555 (when staying with Margaret at her parents' house in Whittlesford) suggests his religious conviction and his approval of the doctrine of justification by faith alone. He was also extremely dismayed when Cheke recanted his protestant beliefs before his death. 
Ascham maintained his connection with Elizabeth throughout her sister's reign. From August to October 1555 Elizabeth returned to court from Woodstock Palace. Ascham studied with her and, as he recounted to Sturm, was amazed by her erudition, linguistic skills, and political understanding. By October, however, Elizabeth was banished once more, appearing briefly at court only in summer 1557. Mary allowed Ascham occasional visits to Hatfield when they briefly resumed their relationship of tutor and pupil. 
Busy Ascham might be, rich he was not. When he married he was forced to resign both his college Greek readership and his university public oratorship. Margaret brought with her little dowry and, as Ascham said, he 'did choose her to live withal, not hers to live upon' (Ascham, 'Works', 1.413). Nevertheless he had to find some way of supporting his growing family and Margaret's poverty-stricken relatives. His close connection with Reginald, Cardinal Pole, probably helped him to secure from the queen on 22 January 1557 the reversion to a lease of the manor of Salisbury Hall, Walthamstow, Essex (a manor once owned by Pole's family) with its 200 acres of farmland, its fishery, and its osiery. 
The return from exile of many of Ascham's friends which began following Queen Mary's death late in 1558 must have seemed to bode well for him. Although some of his former friends, notably Watson and Seton, were imprisoned, others such as Thomas Lever and James Pilkington were given place, and two men who looked upon him with favour, William Cecil and Robert Dudley, were in positions of power. The queen read with him after dinner each evening from favourite Greek and Latin works. It was after one such session studying Demosthenes that Ascham determined to write 'The Scholemaster'. He continued his work as Latin secretary and was in the earl of Leicester's confidence. In 1563 he even found time to become member of parliament for Preston, Lancashire. 
Ascham was in chronic poor health, however, and in summer and autumn 1560 was so incapacitated that Cecil transcribed letters into Ascham's copybook and composed the royal letters (BL, Royal MS 13 B.i, fol. 33'v'). He was also in deep financial trouble. In 1615 William Camden asserted that Ascham's poverty was caused by his addiction to dicing and cock-fighting: this may have been information gleaned from Edward Grant, the previous headmaster at Westminster, or it may simply be Camden's deduction from statements in Ascham's 'Scholemaster' about a 'book of the cockpit' which has never been found. He did advise his brother-in-law against gambling and possibly he spoke with the voice of experience. Ryan, however, attributes Ascham's poverty mainly to his large family of seven or possibly eight children, his demanding relations, and his inability to enter on the manor of Salisbury Hall, the rectory of Whittlesford, and the prebend of Wetwang in York Minster. Giles, the second child and first surviving son, was born in 1560 or 1561, the second son, Sturm, appeared in October 1562, and the third, Dudley, in August 1564, while the fourth son, Thomas, was born posthumously in 1568. There were also at least three daughters whose names are unknown. From spring 1559 Ascham also helped his widowed mother-in-law with her younger children. This led him to mortgage his estate and to place one of her sons with Ralph Radcliffe, schoolmaster. In order to pay the fees Ascham taught Radcliffe's son calligraphy. At last, on 20 June 1566, the queen ordered the archbishop of York to admit him to Wetwang and allowed him to keep Whittlesford and Salisbury Hall which he had been forced to mortgage in order to repay a crown bond by 1561. He took a forty-year lease on a college property, Broomhall Manor near Windsor, at a rent of $7 6's'. 8died, which property, unfortunately for the family, reverted to the college on death. 
During his last years, racked as he was by poor health, Ascham continued a lively intellectual life and had friendly meetings with other scholars, notably George Buchanan (who thanked him for the gift of a book with Latin verses), Bartholomew Dodington, regius professor of Greek at Cambridge (to whom he gave a copy of Carlo Sigone, 'De republica Atheniensium libri III', Venice, 1565), Walter Haddon, Thomas Wilson, and Thomas Smith. Perhaps with the intention of writing a treatise on Elizabeth as a model for princes, he bought several political and historical works such as Claude de Seysell's 'De republica Galliae'. His heart was still in the classics, however, and he is known to have read Cicero, Horace, Plato, Aristotle, Homer, Euripides, and Xenophon in the original and used several recent translations including Arthur Golding's 'Ovid' (1561) and Jasper Heywood's tragedies of Seneca (1559-66). 
Ascham's principal project, and the most lasting memorial to him, was 'The Scholemaster'. He saw it as showing his sons Giles and Dudley 'the right way to good learning' (Ascham, 'Works', 3.86). It consisted of two books: the first gives the character of the ideal tutor and scholar and draws heavily on Plato; the second treats the method of instruction by double translation using proper imitation of classical models, and draws equally heavily upon Cicero. He discussed how best to judge the aptitude of a pupil, how best to encourage a student, how best to inculcate a love of learning. He wrote in it: 'that the youth in England, specially gentlemen, and namely nobility, should be by good bringing-up so grounded in judgement of learning, so founded in love of honesty as, when they should be called forth to the execution of great affairs in service of their prince and country, they might be able to use and to order all experiences, were they good, were they bad, and that according to the square, rule, and line of wisdom, learning and virtue. (ibid., 3.138)' In fact he gave more space in the book to moral excellence than to academic study. A manuscript version of book 1 survives in the British Library and appears to have been complete by 1563; the book could have been completed after the death in 1568 of the author's son Sturm, for it was then that Ascham wrote of its existence to the elder Sturm. The preface was apparently written shortly before Ascham's own death, for in it he thanked Cecil for giving him the hope that enabled him to finish the book. 
This book, which popularized the educational views of Renaissance Englishmen, has made Ascham famous among educational theorists, and one of the most influential of their number. He was concerned to rear an elite capable of assuming what he considered their proper place in serving the commonweal, and he wrote in English to guarantee as wide an audience as possible, thus opening up ideas previously hidden from those who knew no classical languages. He has been singled out for bringing to an English audience the educational ideas of Johann Sturm. 'The Scholemaster' was published in 1570 by John Daye at the request of Ascham's widow, Margaret, went through five editions between 1570 and 1590, and has been repeatedly republished and referred to both in English and in translation. Ascham's place as an English prose stylist -- in the words of Ryan 'the indispensable link between the earlier Tudor writers and the great Elizabethan and Jacobean writers of English prose' (Ryan, 292) -- has only relatively recently been recognized by scholars, although contemporaries had no doubts. In the sixteenth century Gabriel Harvey was to praise Buchanan's style for approaching that of 'our Ascham' (Harvey, 'Marginalia', ed. G. C. M. Smith, 1913, 158), Thomas Wilson's 'Arte of Rhetorique' (1560) was markedly influenced by Ascham's approach to the use of language, and George Buchanan wrote a verse elegy (Ascham, 'Works', 1.cxii). In 'Toxophilus' and his later work Ascham showed how classical forms and rules of organization could be applied intelligently and elegantly to the vernacular. His fragmentary history of Charles V's court represents a pioneering effort to escape mere chronicling of events and to explain their cause and effect. The survival of a great deal of his correspondence and the semi-autobiographical content of much of his published work also makes Ascham the source of valuable information about contemporary events and people (including Henry VIII, Thomas Cromwell, Stephen Gardiner, Lord Burghley, Elizabeth I, Cardinal Pole, and Robert Dudley). 
Ascham did not live to experience fame. On 23 December 1568, shortly after completing (as an intended new year's gift for the queen) a Latin poem of thanksgiving for the blessings bestowed upon England by Elizabeth during the past decade, he was taken mortally ill, probably with malaria. During the last week of his life he received Dean Nowell and made his last confession to William Gravet, parish priest of St Sepulchre without Newgate, according to Grant saying simply 'I want to die and be with Christ' (Ryan, 248-50). He left no written will but made clear his wishes before four witnesses between 8 and 9 p.m. on 30 December 1568; he died shortly afterwards. This nuncupative will was sworn by his widow before his friend William Ireland on 3 January 1569. On 4 January Ascham was buried on the north side of St Sepulchre without Newgate, London, in St Stephen's chapel. The funeral oration was preached by Dean Nowell. His widow Margaret married Thomas Rampston, a gentleman, on 28 September 1569; they had a daughter, Anne. Margaret still needed to find support for her existing children and busied herself arranging for publication of Ascham's works. William Cecil petitioned the queen on behalf of Ascham's surviving sons. Giles, the eldest, became a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1583 as a consequence of Cecil's patronage. He went on to graduate MA and BTh, to become senior fellow of Trinity, and to hold several ecclesiastical livings, including Trumpington and Duxford. Thomas, Ascham's posthumous son, had two sons between 1597 and 1600: in 1622 John was a grocer in Cheapside and Roger was a gentleman of the City of London. Margaret died between 1 August 1590 and 26 June 1592 and her son Giles died in April 1600. 


@@@@@


doc= 733


Asgill, Sir Charles, second baronet (1762-1823), army officer, was born on 6 April 1762 and baptized at St Swithin London Stone on 3 May 1762, the only son of Sir Charles Asgill, first baronet (died 1788), and his second wife, daughter of Daniel Pratville, secretary to Sir Benjamin Harris, ambassador to Spain. The first baronet had risen from a clerkship to a partnership in a bank. He was alderman from 1749 to 1777, was made sheriff and knighted in 1752, became lord mayor in 1757, was made a baronet in 1761, and died on 15 September 1788. The son entered the army on 27 February 1778, as ensign in the 1st foot guards, and became lieutenant in the same regiment with the rank of captain on 3 February 1781. 
In 1781 Asgill was ordered to North America, joining the army commanded by the Marquess Cornwallis. With the capture of Yorktown, Virginia, in the following October, Asgill was taken prisoner. Several months afterwards a Captain Huddy, an officer in the American army, was captured by some loyalists and hanged by a party under the command of Captain Lippincot in retaliation for the death of a loyalist, Philip White. This incident led Washington to demand that the British general, Sir Henry Clinton, surrender Lippincot. Sir Henry, while disavowing the act 'with unmeasured severity', refused to give up Lippincot, and referred the matter to a court martial. Washington's reaction was to order that a British captain should be drawn by lot from those in captivity and sentenced to death if Lippincot was not executed, and he wrote to Sir Henry to that end. The lot fell on Asgill. The court martial which tried Lippincot acquitted him, on the ground that the responsibility for the act lay mainly with the Board of Associated Loyalists at New York, the president of which had verbally ordered Lippincot to execute the prisoner. Sir Henry sent the proceedings of the court martial to Washington, who, considering the British commander's disavowal and censure of the act, and the irresponsible nature of Lippincot's conduct, was inclined to release Asgill. 
When Asgill's mother heard what had happened, she made a pitiful appeal to the comte de Vergennes, the French prime minister, to intervene on behalf of her son. The 'comte' disclosed the matter to Louis XVI and Queen Marie Antoinette, and, directed by them, sent an urgent appeal to Washington, who forwarded the letter to the American congress. On 7 November an act was passed by congress releasing Asgill, who immediately returned on parole to England. 
On the death of his father in 1788 Asgill succeeded to the baronetcy, and in 1790 he married Sophia Jemima, daughter of Admiral Sir Chaloner Ogle. Soon afterwards he was appointed equerry to the duke of York, and on 3 March 1790 was promoted to a company in the guards with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In late 1793 he joined the army of the duke of York on the continent, and served throughout the campaign in Flanders and the retreat, before returning home. On 26 February 1795 he was promoted to the rank of colonel, in 1797 to that of brigadier in Ireland, and on 1 January 1798 to that of major-general; during 1798 he was actively engaged in suppressing the Irish uprising. On 9 May 1800 he was appointed colonel of the 46th foot, and placed in command of the garrison of Dublin, and occasionally oversaw the training camp at the Curragh. He obtained the rank of lieutenant-general on 1 February 1805, the colonelcy of the 5th West India regiment, and of the 85th foot in 1806, and that of the 11th foot on 25 February 1807, for which he raised a second battalion. He remained on the staff until 1812, and was promoted general on 4 June 1814. When he died in 1823 the baronetcy became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 734


Asgill, John (bap. 1659, d. 1738), author, was baptized on 25 March 1659 at Hanley Castle, Worcestershire, the son of Edward and Hester Asgill. His parents provided him with a religious education, and as a young man he attended both Anglican and nonconformist services. In 1686 he entered the Middle Temple, where he studied with the whig lawyer Giles Eyre. On 22 June 1691 he was named an assistant of the Company of the Royal Corporation, which concerned itself with employing the poor, and by September 1691 he was an assistant in the company of merchant adventurers interested in trade with north-western America. He was called to the bar in 1692, and in February 1695 he became a trustee of the Orphans' Fund. 
Convinced that merchants and traders made it difficult to raise funds secured by land, Asgill and Nicholas Barbon founded the first land bank on 29 May 1695. As they explained in 'The Settlement of the Land-Bank' (1695), their institution funded mortgages through stock composed of liquid capital. By the autumn of 1695 they had subscriptions totalling $350,000. A rival, John Briscoe, established his own land bank on 11 June but on 3 February 1696 the two institutions became affiliated as the Land-Bank United. Asgill and his partners pledged to raise at least $2 million, and for the first seven years to lend at least $500,000 p.a. to the government at 31/2 per cent interest. However, although it had some influential backers, including Edward Harley, by 1 August 1696 it had raised only $2100, and by January 1699 it had closed. 
In 1698 Asgill published 'An Essay on a Registry, for Titles of Lands', arguing that such an entity would prevent the clandestine conveyance of lands and be worth the cost because it would provide assurance of ownership. In 1699 he was elected to the House of Commons for Bramber, Sussex. In June 1700 Asgill published the book that made him notorious, 'An Argument Proving, that... Man may be Translated'. Christ, he argued, had discharged Christians from death, the punishment for having violated the law given to Adam, for Christ's covenant gives believers 'that absolute and indefeasible Estate of Eternal Life' (p. 52). Those who believe in translation will not die but go directly to heaven. The book elicited both mirth, as exemplified in the anonymous verse 'The Way to Heaven in a String' (1700), and 'An Account of Mr Asgil's... Translation' (1717), and outrage. Among the critics was Daniel Defoe, who rejected his thesis in 'An Enquiry into the Case of Mr Asgill'[s] General Translation' (1704). 
Within days of the book's publication, Asgill left for Ireland to provide legal services to people affected by the 'Act of Resumption' (1699), which established a commission to examine the disposal of Irish lands forfeited since 1688. Adept in this work, he amassed nearly $10,000, part of which he used in June 1703 to purchase a life interest in the estate of the Jacobite Nicholas Brown, Viscount Kenmare, which was worth $3500 p.a. By the same year he had married Kenmare's eldest daughter, Jane, who, though her parents were Catholic, had been raised as a protestant by her grandmother. When the Irish parliament met in September 1703, Asgill sat for Enniscorthy, co. Wexford, but at the outset the house briefly debated his 'Argument', and on 1 October a petition alleging that he had been improperly elected was referred to the elections committee. On 9 October he and William Lilly submitted a petition on behalf of the Hollow Sword Blades Company but two days later the Commons expelled him, having ordered his 'Argument' to be burnt by the hangman. According to Edward Southwell, 'the character of the man and his generosity in his profession, together with several useful proposals he has for the improvement of the country', almost persuaded the house not to punish him, but the objections of his critics and his refusal to recant led to his ouster ('CSP dom.', '1703-4', 157). On 10 November Anthony Hammond, the guardian of Kenmare's children, petitioned the house, accusing Asgill of breach of trust, but it rejected his charges. Nevertheless, after Asgill left Ireland the leaser of part of Kenmare's estate had him outlawed for debt and thereafter refused to pay rent. 
In May 1705 Asgill again sat in the English House of Commons for Bramber. His legal problems worsened on 4 April 1707 when he was accused of financial misconduct, and on 11 June he was arrested and imprisoned for debt. In response to his plea to Robert Harley, the House of Commons appointed a committee on 10 November to investigate possible precedents for his discharge. While the committee undertook its work, the Commons heard accusations on 25 November that Asgill's 'Argument' contained passages that contravened Christian principles. The house permitted him to resume his seat on 17 December, and the following day he defended his 'Argument'. Unpersuaded, the Commons, having resolved that the work contained blasphemous statements, ordered that the hangman burn it and that Asgill be expelled. He petitioned the Commons in January 1708, protesting his innocence in his financial affairs. Unable to pay his debts, Asgill spent the rest of his life imprisoned in king's bench or the Fleet, practising law and writing numerous pamphlets. His wife, who died at some point between 1707 and 1712, shared his confinement. 
In 'De jure divino' (1710) Asgill argued for the Hanoverian succession on grounds of heredity and divine right. Two years later he published 'Mr Asgill's Defence upon his Expulsion from the House of Commons... in 1707', defiantly maintaining that he still believed in translation, though asserting that he had originally intended only to have a few copies of his 'Argument' printed for his personal use. He insisted he had neither blasphemed nor intended to criticize scripture. 'We are fallen into such a sort of Uniformity, that we would fain turn Religion into a Tyrant's Bed, 'Torturing one another into our own Size of it only'' (p. 60). 
Asgill has plausibly been suggested as the author of the proem to 'Dr D -- Nant's Prophecys' (1713), and his tory convictions were certainly compatible with those of Charles Davenant. The poem's author justified the right of citizens to speak out when those in power endangered the nation, and he castigated businessmen who engaged in activities that undermined protestant interests in Europe and threatened to bring the world under the rule of a single kingdom, an allusion to France. He had no tolerance for Jacobites, as he made clear in 'The Pretender's Declaration Abstracted from Two Anonymous Pamphlets' (1713), which likened the Pretender to Lambert Simnel and Perkin Warbeck. 
Economic issues continued to interest Asgill in his late years. In 'An Abstract of the Publick Funds' (1715) he proposed that parliament redeem all 'perpetual funds' owed to the Bank of England (except for $100,000), the East India Company, the South Sea Company, and other bankers, and replace these funds with a loan of $2 million in specie, paid into the Bank of England, 'for circulating and maintaining the Credit of Exchequer Bills' bearing 3 per cent interest (p. 11). He further proposed that the Irish parliament grant a 'hereditary' excise or customs to the crown in return for termination of quitrents imposed on selected landowners by the 'Act of Settlement'. In 'A Brief Answer to a Brief State' (1719) he asserted that commerce in printed calicoes should not be restricted, and in 'The Computation of Advantages' (1721) he opposed a proposal for remission of $7.5 million owed by the South Sea Company on the grounds that this would amount to unjust taxation on the public. His wide-ranging interests also led to tracts on the press, divorce, God's kingdom within believers, the 'Peerage Bill', the Marshalsea court, and the miracles of Christ. In 'An Extract of the Act' (1729) he criticized the 'Act for the Relief of Insolvent Debtors', arguing that debtors should be allowed to retain 20 or 25 per cent of their possessions and a reasonable portion of their future earnings. Twice in 1731 he wrote in defence of the Charitable Corporation, arguing in 'Remarks on the Bill' that it should be allowed to issue notes or bills, and in 'An Essay upon Charity' that the 10 per cent interest it charged on loans was reasonable, and that loans were the greatest form of charity because they prevented penury. 
Some readers have interpreted Asgill's doctrine of translation as a spoof. Likening his irony to that of Defoe and Jonathan Swift and calling his thesis a clever piece of special pleading, Samuel Taylor Coleridge thought Asgill himself did not know if he was serious. Asgill's 'Defence' seems to suggest as much: 'We Authors, when once we put Pen to Paper... can scarce tell a Man what a clock 'tis, without also entertaining him with some Tale of the Planets, or Lecture upon the Zodiack' (p. 35). Yet the fact that he refused to recant to save his parliamentary career suggests that he was either serious about translation or defending the right to espouse unorthodox views. He died in November 1738 in the parish of St George, Southwark, and was survived by his sister Martha, a spinster, and his niece Penelope, wife of Arthur Thornton. 


@@@@@


doc= 735


Ash, John (1724-1779), lexicographer and grammarian, was born in Stockland, Dorset; the details of his parents are unknown. At first a blacksmith's apprentice, he received encouragement from the minister of Loughwood, near Lyme, in whose parish he had been baptized, and from 1740 he studied for the Baptist ministry under Bernard Foskett at Bristol Baptist Academy. Ash evidently served at Loughwood, but most of his adult life was spent at Pershore in Worcestershire, where, having been chosen in 1746, he was ordained as minister in June 1751. He married Elizabeth Goddard that year, and they had six children. The combination of Ash's talent and connections helped the family to prosper, and considerable real estate was acquired. Contacts in the south-west were maintained, and in 1771 he delivered a funeral oration at Bristol for Sarah, only daughter of Joseph Jeffries of Taunton, Somerset; he had baptized her at Pershore in 1760. 
Ash's popular grammar, 'Grammatical Institutes', was written 'to oblige a few of the Author's friends who were engaged in the education of youth' and was first published in 1762 ('Grammatical Institutes', 1762, sig. A4'r'- 'v'). His former friend and fellow minister John Ryland stated in the 1768 edition that it had been written for Ash's five-year-old daughter and that he, Ryland, had used it in his own school for six years. In 1763 the subtitle was opportunistically changed to 'An easy introduction to Dr Lowth's English grammar' (title-page). 'Grammatical Institutes' became the first grammar produced in England to be published in America, and was also twice translated into German. 
Ash's dictionary, 'A New and Complete Dictionary of the English Language' (2 vols., 1775), was an attempt to include the best features of various earlier dictionaries but is, unfortunately, best-known for the blunder under 'curmudgeon', which Johnson had derived from 'coeur mechant', on the authority of an 'unknown correspondent'. Ash gives it as 'from the French 'coeur' unknown, 'mechant' correspondent' (sig. 2E3'r'). 
Ash gained his LLD degree from a Scottish university in 1774. In 1777 he published an anthology of educational texts as 'Sentiments on Education'. He died at Pershore on 10 April 1779, at the age of fifty-five, having developed diabetes; he was buried at Pershore Baptist Church, probably on 13 April. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 736


Ash, John (bap. 1722, d. 1798), physician, was baptized at St Michael's Church, Coventry, on 25 July 1722, the younger son of Joseph Ash, a prosperous local brewer, and his wife, Anna. He was probably educated at King Henry VIII School, Coventry, before entering Trinity College, Oxford (BA 1743; MA 1746; MB 1750; MD 1754). It has been said that Ash travelled and studied in Europe for some eight years after leaving Oxford, but in 1752 he took a house in Temple Row, Birmingham, from which he practised until 1769. By 4 November 1765 Ash was sufficiently established in the town to arrange a public meeting of potential supporters in favour of building a new infirmary there. When the Birmingham General Hospital opened in October 1779, Ash was a substantial subscriber and the most senior of its four honorary physicians, consulting there for three months during the year. 
Ash's associates at the hospital included William Small, who arrived in Birmingham from Virginia in 1766, and was sharing Ash's consulting rooms by March of that year, and William Withering, who became one of Ash's closest friends and colleagues. Ash was reputed to have made $25,000 from his very considerable practice; his patients included the antiquary William Hutton and the poet William Shenstone. His income enabled him to build a sumptuous house, Ashted, to the north of Birmingham on land leased from Sir Lister Holte MP of Aston Hall. Ash became a prominent citizen of the growing town, serving as one of the first 'Lamp Act' commissioners and as a governor of the King Edward VI School; he was also a proprietor of the Birmingham Canal. Although not one of the close-knit fourteen who formed the Lunar Society, he was on cordial terms with various members: Matthew Boulton (for whom he gained admission to the British Museum) and Robert Augustus Johnson (whom he proposed as a fellow of the Royal Society). 
As early as 1781 there were fears for Ash's mental health, as Withering undertook more consultations. Although a locum for Ash at the hospital was discussed early in 1786, he did not resign his appointment there until 17 December 1787. Contemporaries noted that a decline in Ash's practice had 'hurt his spirits' and he had come to regret the cost of building Ashted. He disposed of the lease and in 1788 went to Bath; the house was later converted into a chapel. Ash was admitted as a candidate of the Royal College of Physicians on 22 December 1786, and became a fellow a year later. Also in 1787 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and joined the Dilettanti; he was elected FRS on 8 November. In London he founded the Eumelian Club, a convivial learned society which met at the Blenheim tavern, Bond Street, and whose members included Joshua Reynolds, Richard Payne Knight, and James Boswell. Between April and July 1788 Reynolds painted Ash's portrait for the General Hospital, for which the governors paid $210. 
It was claimed that Ash recovered from his mental disorder by studying botany and mathematics. He settled in London to practise and became a leading member of the Royal College of Physicians, being censor in 1789 and 1793, Harveian orator in 1790, Goulstonian lecturer in 1791, and Croonian lecturer in 1793. In 1788 he published 'Experiments and observations to investigate by chemical analysis the properties of the mineral waters of Spa, Aix', followed in 1790 by the 'Oratio Harveiana'. Ash lived in Brompton Row, Knightsbridge, and died there on 18 June 1798. He was buried on 26 June in the small vault of St Mary Abbots, Kensington, which was rebuilt between 1869 and 1872; there is no surviving monument or tablet to him. In 1965 a lecturership in Ash's memory was established at the faculty of medicine, University of Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 737


Ashbee, Henry Spencer (1834-1900), book collector and bibliographer, was born on 21 April 1834 at 24 Blackfriars Road, Southwark, London, the only child of Robert Ashbee (1804-1867), manager of the Curtis and Harvey gunpowder mills, and his wife, Frances Elizabeth, 'nee' Spencer (1810-1862). He was educated at Esher and then at Kensington Proprietary Grammar School (1848-50). Leaving school at sixteen, he was shortly afterwards apprenticed to Groucock, Copestakes, Moor & Co., Manchester warehousemen, at 5 Bow Churchyard, London, for whom he later travelled. 
On 27 June 1862 in Hamburg Ashbee married Elizabeth Josephine Jenny (1841-1919), daughter of Edward Otto Charles Lavy, a wealthy German-Jewish Hanseatic League merchant, and his English wife, Marian, 'nee' Benjamin. An independent London branch of Lavy's firm, Charles Lavy & Co., at 9 Bow Lane, was founded that year, with Ashbee as senior partner. The firm exported machinery, Sheffield goods, and textiles to Europe; it moved to 7 New Basinghall Street in 1863, becoming silk mercers in Mercer Street in 1871. In 1867 Ashbee set up a branch in Paris at 38 rue des Jeuneurs. The couple lived at first in Spring Grove estate, Heston and Isleworth, then from 1865 to 1884 at 46 Upper Bedford Place, Bloomsbury. They then moved to 53 Bedford Square. They had three daughters and a son, Charles Robert Ashbee (1863-1942); another son born in 1881 died at birth. 
Ashbee travelled extensively, on business and for pleasure, and was able to create an important collection of erotica during frequent visits to Paris, Brussels, and Amsterdam (influenced in this by his early friendship with the Belgian consul in London, Joseph Octave Delepierre, thirty-two years his senior). The collection of erotica was kept in chambers three quarters of a mile from home, at 4 Gray's Inn Square ('the Inn'), where he could entertain his fellow collectors. These included John Camden Hotten, publisher; Jules Gay, Belgian publisher and bibliographer of erotica; Richard Burton, traveller and translator; and Richard Monckton Milnes, organizer of a select group of book collectors, the Philobiblon Society. Ashbee was much influenced by James Campbell Reddie, collector of erotica of every sort, 'more extensive than choice' (H. S. Ashbee, 'Catena librorum tacendorum', 1885, XLVIII) and Frederick Hankey, living in Paris, whose much smaller, finer collection included 'exceptional copies of the most esteemed erotic works' (ibid., L). Robert Samuel Turner, a collector of more general interests, also had much influence on Ashbee, who regularly joined him at his Saturday morning gatherings of bibliophiles in his chambers in Albany. 
In 1877 Ashbee published the first of his three bibliographies of erotica, privately published in editions limited to 250 copies, 'Index librorum prohibitorum', followed by 'Centuria librorum absconditorum' (1879) and 'Catena librorum tacendorum' (1885). He used a scatological anagram of the Latin words for ash and bee, 'fraxinus apis', as his 'nom de plume': Pisanus Fraxi. The volumes were elaborately produced: the bibliographical descriptions were detailed, with long extracts appended, and there was a plethora of notes; the indexes were closely constructed and fully analytical of their subject. 
Ashbee might also have been the author, who called himself Walter, of 'My Secret Life', published in eleven volumes between about 1888 and 1894 in an edition said to have been no more than six copies (but perhaps as many as twenty-five). Recounting the writer's erotic affairs in over 4000 octavo pages, its authorship, and whether it is in fact fictional or genuinely autobiographical, remains unsettled. Ian Gibson considers it to be by Ashbee, though a fictional account; Gershon Legman also thought it by Ashbee, but autobiographical; other authorities have disagreed. The text has an air of truth rather than fiction; its diction, and the detailed form of its index, are arguably in Ashbee's style. The misprints in the original, which Ashbee would never have tolerated, argue against his authorship, as does the fact that the two surviving prospectuses date from the late 1890s, when he was still alive, and would presumably have objected to the sale of the volumes. 
Apart from erotica, Ashbee's collection of Cervantes, particularly illustrated editions of 'Don Quixote', was the largest in private hands apart from one in Barcelona. He presented his 'An Iconography of Don Quixote 1605-1895' (1895) to the Bibliographical Society for issue to its members at a quarter of its actual cost. He also had a large collection of early editions of Moliere and Le Sage. Among his extra illustrated books may be noted Nichols's 'Literary Reminiscences', extended from nine to thirty-four volumes. He possessed a considerable number of books illustrated by Daniel Chodowiecki, the German Cruikshank. He was also collecting books written in French by English authors, and was preparing a bibliography of these at the time of his death. 
Travelling was another major enthusiasm. In his early years he spent much time on the continent. In 1881-2 he spent nine months travelling round the world, returning via San Francisco and New York, disliking America intensely; he kept a detailed diary, but never wrote the book about the journey that he had intended. He went on three occasions to Tunisia with Alexander Graham, and with him wrote 'Travels in Tunisia' (1887), a factual travel book; its bibliography, with an added second part, was issued separately in 1889. 
Apart from these major works, there were a great many smaller pamphlets and articles, including over a hundred contributions to 'Notes and Queries', about seventy relating to general bibliographical matters, Cervantes in particular, the remainder, signed 'Apis' or 'Fraxinus', concerned with matters erotic. 
On the day of his silver wedding anniversary in 1887 Ashbee quarrelled violently with his wife, and she left him in 1891, taking their daughters Agnes and Elsa with her. Frances, the eldest daughter, had recently married, and Charles had previously moved away. The cause of the quarrel has never been established. It may have been because of his wife's discovery of the collection of erotica, or she may perhaps have learned that a second establishment existed, said to have been maintained by her husband with Ellen Mary Jane Montauban, by whom he may have had a daughter, Irene (a relationship evidenced only by the Montaubans' partial replacement of the family in Ashbee's will, supported by persistent though unsubstantiated family rumour). 
Ashbee was for ever teeming with energy, writing truthfully in his diary for 31 December 1887: 'No entry for over 5 months. And yet those five months have been as pregnant as my time generally is.' He was successful in business, in collecting books and pictures, at bibliography, and in his travel worldwide -- achievements marred only by the failure of his marriage. His rooms in Gray's Inn, the branch of the firm in Paris, and his extensive travels all gave ample scope for liaisons elsewhere, but apart from the question of the Montaubans no evidence remains. He was deeply upset by the strain of homosexuality in his son. He had a genial temperament, with many friends among fellow collectors. He spoke several languages; was proud to be English, and of the empire, thought little of those outside Europe apart from the Japanese. By religion a lapsed protestant, he had a particular disregard for the Church of Rome and its priests. 
Ashbee was much respected in the city and was renter warden of the Curriers' Company in 1895-6, upper warden in 1896-7, and master in 1897-8. He was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries (1877), the Societe des Amis des Livres, Paris (1879), and the Royal Geographical Society (1881); he was a founder member of Les Bibliophiles Contemporains (1889) and of the Bibliographical Society, London (1892) (and was on its council until his death). He was also corresponding member of the Royal Academy of Madrid (1896). 
In 1895 or 1896 Ashbee moved to Fowler's Park, Hawkhurst, 4 miles south of Cranbrook in Kent, where he was looked after by his first cousin Louisa Maud Ashbee, then aged fifteen. He died there on 29 July 1900 of congestion of the lungs, heart trouble, liver and kidney complaints, and finally dropsy. He was cremated at Woking crematorium on 1 August 1900, and his ashes were placed in the family tomb at Kensal Green the next day. His estate was valued at just over $63,000. 
Ashbee's wife and children were disinherited in favour of the children of his eldest daughter Frances, but then only following the deaths of his business partner Arthur Peterson, his cousin Louisa Maud Ashbee, and Edward Montauban, who were to receive the income from the residuary estate (40 per cent, 40 per cent, and 20 per cent respectively). Ashbee's share in the firm was also left to Peterson. Irene Montauban and his cousins Louisa Ashbee and Edith Blaxland were each left $1000. Ashbee's two livery companies, the Curriers and the Armourers and Brasiers, each received $5000. 
The books were left to the British Museum. Of a total of 8764 works, in 15,299 volumes, about 1600 volumes were of an erotic or obscene nature. Of these last the museum was allowed to destroy duplicates, but in fact destroyed others which it deemed to be 'of offensive matter which is of no value or interest' (preliminary report to the BM trustees), six boxes in all, almost certainly including Ashbee's 'numerous exemplars... of poorly produced, illustrated pornographic fiction (particularly in English) of the nineteenth century' (Mendes, 466). The remainder were taken into the museum's private case, to which were added about 200 other erotic volumes from the collection that were bought by the museum about 1900. In the rest of the collection there were about 750 works by Cervantes, in 1715 volumes, as well as many French seventeenth- and eighteenth-century titles that the museum did not possess. The Victoria and Albert Museum acquired 204 pictures, mostly watercolours, many illustrating 'Don Quixote'. 


@@@@@


doc= 738


Ashburnham, John (1602/3-1671), courtier and politician, was the eldest son of Sir John Ashburnham (1570/71-1620) and Elizabeth (1577-1651), daughter of Sir Thomas Beaumont. William Ashburnham, army officer and politician, was his younger brother. He was educated at Gray's Inn and Peterhouse, Cambridge. His father died in 1620, having wasted his estate and leaving his family in penury. But within two years his heir had so far repaired their broken fortune, that (says the epitaph in Ashburnham church, Sussex) 'there were none of them but were in a condition rather to be helpful to others than to want support themselves' (Horsfield, 1.559). 
Elizabeth Beaumont was of the same family as Lady Villiers, mother of the duke of Buckingham, and under Buckingham's patronage began the court career of John Ashburnham. In 1627 he was already known to the king, who styled him 'Jack Ashburnham' in his letters to the duke. In 1628 he was elected MP for Hastings, speaking in defence of his patron when that parliament attempted the duke's impeachment. The murder of Buckingham in that year did not injure Ashburnham's fortunes; he was in November sworn in as groom of the bedchamber, although there is no evidence that he served in that capacity for any length of time. The calendars of state papers contain ample evidence that he and his friend, the secretary Nicholas, omitted few of the many opportunities given them by their position at court to enrich themselves by money-lending or by the purchase of land at easy rates. In 1638 the Star Chamber fine of 2000 marks, inflicted on Sir Walter Long and his brother, was assigned to Ashburnham 'in satisfaction of so much due from his majesty to him' ('DNB') and in December of the next year a warrant under the privy seal enabled him to regain his ancestral estate of Ashburnham, which had become a ruinous burden to its actual possessors. If the dates assigned in the printed calendars are correct, Ashburnham had not obtained the favour of this warrant until six years after his petition for it. His friends Nicholas and Goring were 'very careful of his interest' (as he himself acknowledges), in promoting his appointment as 'provider' to the army then in preparation for Scotland ('CSP dom.', '1639-40', 510). Their success prevented his election for Hastings when the Commons were summoned in April 1640 only to be dissolved in May; but he was returned for that place on the interest of Lord Lumley in November, when the failure of the war, the necessities of the king, and the exasperation of the people had rendered inevitable the meeting of another -- the Long -- parliament. No speech of his is recorded, but his name frequently occurs as on committees, or as a teller on divisions, during the earlier sessions of that assembly. As time went on his two functions of member of parliament and servant of the king became incompatible, and when his attendance on his master prevented his obeying the summons of the house he was proceeded against for contempt (6 May 1642). The king wrote a letter to the Commons in his justification, but the house maintained its prior right to the obedience of its member. Ashburnham was 'discharged and disabled' (5 February 1644), and his estate was sequestrated (14 September). His wife, Frances (died 'c'.1651), daughter of William Holland of West Burton, Sussex, whom he married by licence of 24 September 1629, petitioned unsuccessfully for some allowance for their four sons and four daughters. 
Retaining the favour of Charles I, Ashburnham became the treasurer and paymaster of the king's army. For the next three years his name occurs in several negotiations for peace. He was one of the commissioners at Uxbridge (1644), and one of the four appointed to lay the king's proposals before parliament (December 1645). When Fairfax prepared to besiege Oxford, and Charles determined upon flight, Ashburnham and Michael Hudson were the sole attendants of the king in his perilous journey to the Scottish camp. Hudson was released, and Ashburnham was positively commanded by the king to fly before confirmation of the order to send him up to London as a delinquent could be received. He made his way safely to the Netherlands and thence to the queen at Paris, where he joined the chorus urging the king to drop his opposition to the covenant and make himself a 'King of Presbytery' (Wedgwood, 552). In 1647 the king's fortune seemed upon the turn. The army had taken possession of him at Holmby, had treated him with respect, and allowed him 'to have what servants about him he pleased' ('DNB'). Ashburnham resumed his attendance on his master at Hampton Court. But the army leaders changed their tone. Charles was haunted by the dread of assassination. He was constantly receiving warnings, anonymous and avowed, that his murder was resolved upon. At Ashburnham's suggestion he made proposals to the Scottish commissioners for his sudden journey to London and personal treaty with the parliament. But the arrangement fell through, the commissioners dreading the responsibility. Charles, resolved to stay no longer in Hampton Court and impatient to be gone, commanded Ashburnham and his other confidants, Sir John Berkeley and Legge, to propose some place for him to go to. Ashburnham mentioned Sir John Oglander's house in the Isle of Wight as a place where the king might be concealed until the disposition of the governor of the island, Colonel Robert Hammond, could be ascertained. If Hammond were not to be trusted, the fugitive could secretly take ship for France. There was nothing impracticable in the plan, but its success depended upon keeping the royal whereabouts from the knowledge of Hammond until the governor had fully engaged himself to respect the king's liberty of action. This particular was neglected, and the secret divulged by Berkeley. The governor, having given assurances of loyalty, was taken to the house wherein Charles was awaiting the result of the interview. When informed of his approach, the king exclaimed, 'O Jack, thou hast undone me!' The foreboding was true. Refusing the desperate offer of Ashburnham to make all safe by killing Hammond, Charles again became virtually a prisoner. 
Ashburnham's share in the transaction to relocate the king exposed him to the suspicions of the royalists, and his explanation, printed in 1648, was of necessity so guarded as to be ineffective. A full narrative drawn up by him and shown to many of his contemporaries -- Clarendon among the rest -- remained unpublished until 1830, when his descendant, Lord Ashburnham, printed it with full elucidation and a complete, caustic commentary on all the passages in which Clarendon mentioned the writer. The reputation of Ashburnham is repaired, if not entirely cleared, and the splenetic bias of Clarendon is exposed with unsparing severity. 
Ashburnham was parted from the king by order of parliament on 1 January 1648, was imprisoned in Windsor Castle (May), and when the second civil war broke out was exchanged for Sir William Masham. He was not allowed to attend Charles during the treaty at Newport (August), and was included among the delinquents who were to expect no pardon (13 October). His position after the king's death was unenviable. The royalists suspected his fidelity, and in March 1650 a memorial to Charles II asked whether Ashburnham was to be trusted. He acquired an estate by his second marriage, about 1651, to the Dowager Lady Poulett and the king gave him permission to stay in England to preserve it. However, Ashburnham found himself harassed by the new republican regime. He was sued for debts contracted for the late king and was forced to compound for one half of his estate, an unparalleled severity. He was bound in heavy securities to appear, when required, before the council of state. His private journeys were licensed by a pass from the same authority. For three years he was so persecuted by committees to discover who had lent the king money during the wars that 'I had scarce time to eat my bread'. 'Five years more', he continues, 'were spent in close imprisonment at London, and three banishments to Guernsey Castle, the cause being for sending money to his majesty' ('DNB'). In a list of the Tower prisoners furnished by Colonel Barkstead (2 June 1654) Ashburnham appears as prisoner for high treason, as both John and his younger brother, William Ashburnham, were taken into custody for their suspected complicity in the plot of Gerard and Vowel. John's case was (27 December 1655) referred to the major-generals of the counties where his estate lay. 
At the Restoration Ashburnham came back to his old place of groom of the bedchamber. Of the Hampton Court business, Pepys notes that having 'all solemnly charged one another with their failures therein, and... been at daggers-drawing publicly about it', Ashburnham, Berkeley, and Legge were 'now none greater friends in the world' (Pepys, 'Diary', 6.317). Besides his place Ashburnham received what acknowledgement of his loyalty the royal Treasury, impoverished by many claimants, could afford. In September 1661 he was the head of a commission to inquire into the abuses in the Post Office. His house at Chiswick, with its contents, was purchased by the king for the duke of Monmouth, of whom in January 1665 he was made one of the guardians. Ashburnham's loans to Charles I were paid by grants of crown leases, but his schemes for the acquisition of land do not appear to have run so smoothly as in the former reign. The dean and chapter of Exeter were menaced (November 1662) with the royal displeasure should they carry out their projected lease 'to John Ashburnham or to any other' ('DNB'). He was MP for Sussex from 1661 until his expulsion in 1667 for taking a bribe of $500 from French merchants. 'An active member', he appears generally to have supported 'Cavalier' policies, and remained loyal to the court interest even when denied appointment to the office of keeper of the privy purse (Crook, 552). He and his brother, William, shared in an enterprise for reviving the manufacture of tapestry at Mortlake in 1671. The principal source of his wealth was the wealden iron works on which his family's fortunes were originally built. He died on 15 June 1671, aged sixty-eight, and was buried in the family vault at Ashburnham. His grandson was raised to the peerage in 1689. 


@@@@@


doc= 739


Ashburnham, William (1604/5-1679), army officer and politician, was the second son of Sir John Ashburnham (1570/71-1620) of Asburnham, Sussex, and Elizabeth (1577-1651), daughter of Sir Thomas Beaumont. His family were long settled in east Sussex and had first represented the county of Sussex in parliament in 1397. However, the family fortunes were in disarray following Sir John's injudicious dependence on the fluctuating profits of wealden iron. Ashburnham's was an unenviable position, though never so bleak as the subsequent comment that he was 'not born to a farthing' might suggest (Henning, 1.554). He was able to call upon the position of his elder brother, John Ashburnham, in the household of the first duke of Buckingham and became a soldier, seeing service for the states general in the Low Countries in 1625 and then acting on the Scottish border in 1639 and 1640. He also secured appointment to the bench in Bedfordshire and Hampshire from 1636 and was a deputy lieutenant in the latter county by 1640. 
About 1627 Ashburnham made a promising marriage to Jane (died 1672), widow of James Ley, first earl of Marlborough, and daughter of John, first Baron Boteler of Brantfield. The marriage, though childless, was, according to his monument at Ashburnham church, a felicitous one: 'William coming from beyond sea, where he was bred a soldier, married her, and lived after five-and-fortie yeares most happily with her.' The memorial goes on to bring Ashburnham's brother, John, into the picture and to emphasize their family 'esprit': 'William lived after her to a great age and gloried in nothing in this world but in this his wife, and the almost love and entire friendship that for about fiftie yeares was between his deare elder brother, John Ashburnham, and himself. 
He died without issue, and, by God's blessing, was a happy preserver of his brother's posterity.' Through his marriage Ashburnham gained land on the Wiltshire-Hampshire border and its influence probably accounts for his return to the Short and Long parliaments of 1640 as member for the nearby borough of Ludgershall. He was a natural and probably fiery royalist and took part in the army plot of 1641. His expulsion from the Commons followed on 9 December. Charles I made him cofferer of the household in 1642, but soldiering preoccupied him. Lieutenant-colonel of foot in 1639, he became colonel in the first civil war, was a major-general for the 1643 campaign, and governor of Weymouth (which he held against the parliamentary forces) in 1644. He and his wife suffered from the financial exactions of the triumphant parliamentarians: the estate which Jane had brought him at Tidworth in Wiltshire was lost. In 1654 he and his elder brother were arrested for sending money over to the exiled Charles II, and, perhaps, for complicity in the Gerard plot of that year. 
The family fortunes, William's among them, had been at a low ebb before and during the civil wars, but were rapidly revived in 1660. Both Ashburnhams, indeed, seem to have been more concerned to profit where they could than to look back in anger at the 1640s and 1650s. Charles II reinstated William to his old office of cofferer of the household. He became a JP for Middlesex and Westminster and an assessment commissioner there. He also served as one of the commissioners for loyal and indigent officers in the capital in 1662. Ashburnham also, symbolically, threw in his lot with the burgeoning companies of the Restoration era. He was a member of the Society of Mineral and Battery Works and of the Society of Mines Royal from 1662 (and deputy governor of the former from 1664 and of the latter from 1675, both to his death). He was an assistant of the Royal Adventurers into Africa in, and at times after, 1664. He was in the Royal Africa Company by 1672 and the Royal Fisheries by 1677. Samuel Pepys knew him well and summed him up as 'an old experienced man and a Courtier' (Pepys, 'Diary', 7.407). Ashburnham's metropolitan contacts and his reputation as a man in favour at court no doubt facilitated his access to money-making schemes. He was a substantial investor in the Duke of York's Theatre in Dorset Gardens. But it must have been his position of cofferer that provided the most substantial and sustained opportunities for building up his resources and his property: he was said to have 'got by the Court $50,000'. William and John between them had an eye open for investment opportunities (including, in 1671, the Mortlake tapestry factory) and systematically nursed the family fortunes back to health, doing much to improve the family's main estate at Ashburnham. Ashburnham Place and the church were rebuilt and William built almshouses. Such co-operation between brothers was unusual. In John's will of 1670 he bequeathed to William Molton Park in Northamptonshire in lieu of $5000: this, together with any other property, was to be sold to make up that debt. By the time of his own death William's property included estates at Ampthill in Bedfordshire and the manor of Mountfield, very close to the ancestral estate at Ashburnham in east Sussex. These went to William's great-nephew, John (Baron as from 1689) Ashburnham. 
Despite the loss of his Tidworth estate, and probably reliant on support from the Seymours, Ashburnham had been returned to parliament for Ludgershall in 1661. He sat, and remained active, throughout the Cavalier Parliament. He was known, denounced, and celebrated as a consistent supporter of the court. It was only in 1678 that illness began keeping him from the Commons. He did not stand in 1679 and died, in his seventy-fifth year, on 9 December 1679. He was buried at Ashburnham. 


@@@@@


doc= 740


Ashbury, Joseph (1638-1720), actor and theatre manager, was born in Covent Garden, London. The names of his parents are not known. After an education at Eton College he was commissioned as ensign in the Irish army of James, first duke of Ormond, either in 1657 or 1658. He assisted the royalists at the taking of Dublin Castle in December 1659, and the following year was appointed lieutenant of an infantry company granted to the city of Dublin by Charles II. 
Ashbury first seems to have been recruited as a professional actor by the theatre impresario John Ogilby. At the beginning of his new career, however, he combined acting with soldiery: Ogilby's Dublin enterprise, the Smock Alley Theatre, at which Ashbury was employed, opened in 1662, and in 1667 Ashbury still had a military occupation, since in this year he entered the king's guard of horsemen, on whose roll he was listed, at the age of thirty, as a 'comedian' with 'black hair'. Smock Alley was Ireland's first professional theatre after the Restoration. In 1668 or 1669 Ogilby departed for London, leaving his nephew William Morgan behind in Dublin as deputy master of the revels in Ireland and Smock Alley's manager. When the duke of Ormond also quitted Dublin in 1669, Smock Alley was for a while closed during the viceroyalty of his successor, John, Baron Robartes, who, as a strict presbyterian, was hostile to theatre. Baron Robartes's stay in Dublin proved short-lived, and the theatre reopened in 1670 under his successor. Although on 26 December in that year, during a performance of Ben Jonson's 'Bartholomew Fair', the theatre's galleries collapsed, the building was evidently soon restored, since Ashbury is known to have played Cassius in Shakespeare's 'Julius Caesar' there on some occasion between 1670 and 1676. He assumed the management of Smock Alley in or before 1675, when William Morgan left Dublin to join his uncle in London. 
The Smock Alley company's first tour abroad was arranged about this time, to Oxford in 1677, and then in 1681 there was another to Edinburgh. Here, according to a tradition, possibly fanciful, first recorded in 1784, Ashbury tutored the future queen, Anne, in the role of Semandra in Nathaniel Lee's 'Mithridates'. A year later Ashbury went to London to recruit actors for Smock Alley, though not until 1684 did he and his son Charles receive recognition of a more formal kind when, along with William Morgan, they were made joint patentees in the office of master of the revels in Ireland. Ashbury also married his second wife, Ann Darling, on 7 October in this year, and she in turn became a Smock Alley actress. (The date of his marriage to his first wife, the sister of the actor John Richards, is not known. She seems to have suffered from ill health, and died some time in the 1670s, perhaps 'c'.1679. She had a series of children who died soon after their births.) 
The theatre was closed between 1688 and 1691 during the struggle for supremacy between James II and William III, but reopened with Shakespeare's 'Othello' some time during Christmastide 1691. This production, in which Ashbury played Iago, was presented by the king's guard of horsemen, with whom Ashbury seems never to have lost touch. The theatre formally reopened, again with 'Othello', on 31 March 1692, the day appointed to mark the end of the war in Ireland. The rest of Ashbury's career was devoted chiefly to Smock Alley. After Morgan's death (some time before 1701) and that of his son Charles (some time before 1704), Ashbury was left sole possessor of the patent of the office of master of the revels in Ireland. He fought off at least two attempts to remove the patent from him, and continued acting and managing, 'notwithstanding his great Age, erect', at least into his seventy-eighth year. He died in Dublin on 24 July 1720, aged eighty-two, and was buried in the cemetery of St Michan's Church, Dublin, not far from his residence in Bowling Green House, Oxmantown. 


@@@@@


doc= 741


Ashby, George (b. before 1385?, d. 1475), administrator and poet, was of unknown origins. Many of the details of his life have to be deduced from his surviving poems, but they are borne out by record evidence. In 'The Active Policy of a Prince', written for Edward, prince of Wales (died 1471), probably in 1463, he claims to be 'Right nygh at mony yeres of foure score' ('Ashby's Poems', 15), that is, nearly eighty, which would make his date of birth shortly before 1385. In 'A Prisoner's Reflections', also to be dated 1463, Ashby says that he grew up in 'the hyghest court that I coude fynd' with Henry VI, Margaret of Anjou, and Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and that he had written in their signet offices '
full fourty yere 

As well beyond the see as on thys syde. 
('Ashby's Poems', 3)' During the minority of Henry VI he appears to have worked for Duke Humphrey, but in 1437, when the king took charge of his own affairs, Ashby moved to the royal signet office as one of its four clerks. In June 1438 he was granted the office of constable of Dynefwr Castle, Dyfed, while in 1439 he went to Calais with the king's secretary, Thomas Beckington (died 1465), and was paid $6 13's'. 4died of the king's gift as his expenses. In July 1441 he was granted $10 yearly for life until recompensed with an office of the same or greater value, and in 1446 he was made steward of Warwick. In 1444 he had been one of the embassy that brought Margaret of Anjou to England, and Queen Margaret later wrote to an unidentified lady thanking her 'for service to George Ashby, Clerk of Our Signet' (Margaret of Anjou, 114). In 1459 he represented Warwick in the Lancastrian-dominated parliament held at Coventry. He was in the Fleet prison, possibly because of his Lancastrian sympathies, in 1463, and since he says he had been there 'a hoole yere and more' ('Ashby's Poems', 2), he may have been committed in 1461 or 1462 after the Yorkist takeover. 
It was while Ashby was in prison that he wrote his surviving poems, first published by Mary Bateson in 1899. In 'A Prisoner's Reflections' Ashby addresses his own situation. He says he was unjustly imprisoned 'By a gret commaundment of a lord', that many lies were told about him, that he had been deprived of property and reduced to penury, and that he had been reviled with 'vnfyttyng langage' ('Ashby's Poems', 1-3). But he determines to school himself to 'patience' and to see in his suffering a 'lesson' which may benefit himself and others. 'The Active Policy of a Prince' is a much longer and more ambitious poem, and seeks to advise Prince Edward, the Lancastrian heir to the throne, on the proper conduct of a ruler. Much of the advice is of a very conventional sort, and Ashby makes extensive use of the 'Liber de dictis philosophorum antiquorum', a collection of proverbial maxims: sometimes he quotes the Latin and then translates it. But sometimes he addresses the contemporary situation precisely: advice to 'bryng vp ayen clothe makyng' ('Ashby's Poems', 29), and to regulate the apparel of his future subjects, are consistent with many of the proposals set out in the sumptuary legislation of 1463. Like many fifteenth-century poets Ashby praises Gower, Chaucer, and Lydgate -- not only for their aureate language, as was usual, but also for the new stanza forms they had devised. He acknowledges their pre-eminence and says he follows them 'not as a master but as a prentise' ('Ashby's Poems', 14), which is not a bad self-estimate. 
Ashby was evidently released from prison without facing trial. He died on 20 February 1475 and was buried in Harefield, Middlesex, where he owned a small estate called Breakspeares. According to their funeral brass in Harefield church, Ashby's wife was Margaret, who died on 24 September 1474. He left a son John, who died in 1496. A grandson George, who followed his grandfather's profession and was a clerk of the signet under Henry VII and Henry VIII, died on 5 March 1515. 


@@@@@


doc= 742


Ashby, George (1724-1808), antiquary and Church of England clergyman, was born in Red Lion Street, Clerkenwell, London, on 5 December 1724, the son of Edmund Ashby (1690-1775), merchant tailor, and his wife, Elizabeth Judith, daughter of Robert Lock of Dinton, Wiltshire. He was educated at Croydon at a school kept by a Mr Mills and at Westminster School (1737-40), and was elected to a place at Eton College in 1739 but did not take it up. He entered St John's College, Cambridge, as a sizar in November 1740 and proceeded to the degrees of BA in 1744, MA in 1748, the year of his election to a college fellowship on 29 March, and BD in 1756. He was ordained deacon in December 1746 and priest in 1752, and licensed to the curacy of Halesworth and Chediston, Suffolk. Ashby later held other preferments including two family livings in his native county of Leicestershire at Twyford with Hungarton; he gave up Twyford in 1766 and Hungarton in 1769. He resided in college and held several offices, of which the most important were steward (1766-7) and president or vice-master of St John's from January 1767, a position he held until March 1775. Thereafter he had little to do with Cambridge, surrendering his fellowship, which was filled up again in March 1776, perhaps on account of a change of mastership in the college and some involvement in an abortive scheme to remove the legal requirement of celibacy from Cambridge fellows. In July 1774 he had taken the college living of Barrow in Suffolk and in 1780 his patron John Ross, bishop of Exeter, added an Oxfordshire parish which he exchanged after irksome delay for the rectory of Stansfield in Suffolk. He then held Barrow and Stansfield until his death. 'I move very little, being perfectly happy at home', he wrote in May 1791 (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 9.684). 
Ashby was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1775 and William Cole wrote to salute him as a brother antiquary and express his 'raptures at the genuine antiquarian minutiae in your papers' (BL, Add. MS 5847, fol. 397). A year later Cole was to describe him as 'a very able scholar, and lively and talkative to a degree; but immensely vain and fond of admiration'; he surprised everyone at Cambridge by casting off his wig and appearing in 'natural grey locks' (BL, Add. MS 5821, fol. 82). As an antidote to grief Ashby urged Cole to follow his own example: 'I always fall to reading and writing harder than ever and never fail to find the benefit of thus giving a turn another way to my thoughts' (ibid., fol. 83). His fellow antiquary Michael Tyson, who had a much lower opinion of Ashby's attainments than Cole, nevertheless found him 'as entertaining a companion as any can be', with an extraordinary memory (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 8.658). 
Although he published little on his own account beyond contributions to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', and an essay on a coin of Nerva found at Colchester ('Archaeologia', 3, 165), Ashby had a wide circle of friends and correspondents, including Thomas Gray, Richard Gough, Bishop Thomas Percy, Craven Ord, Thomas Pennant, and James Granger, to whom he supplied useful information on various topics. John Nichols was indebted to him for notes printed over the whimsical initials T. F. (that is, Taylor's friend) in 'Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century' and for a long account of the Roman military at Leicester incorporated in Nichols's vast 'History of Leicestershire' (1. cix-clvii). He also helped Daines Barrington in his 'Observations on the Statutes' (1775) and Thomas Hanmer in his 'Observations on Scripture'. Nichols repaid him by including an account of Ashby with parts of his correspondence in his 'Illustrations of Literature', and much of the rest survives with his manuscript collections in the British Library, the Bodleian, Suffolk Record Office, and elsewhere. He had very catholic tastes and made notes on old plays, ornithology, coins, literature, topography, and genealogy among many other subjects. 
Ashby's sight failed in 1793 and he became quite blind. He died after repeated strokes of paralysis at Barrow on 12 June 1808 and was buried in his church at Barrow where there is a monument to him and his youngest sister, Hannah, with whom he had lived and whom he survived by barely a month. He never married. His constant companion and amanuensis from about 1780, one Thomas Lyus of Barrow, inherited his library, but it was soon sold to a bookseller at Bury St Edmunds and dispersed by sale with his maps and prints. Despite this scattering of materials Ashby deserves to be more than a footnote in the lives of others and his contribution to antiquarian studies has never been examined fully. 


@@@@@


doc= 743


Ashby, Harry (bap. 1744, d. 1818), engraver, was baptized Harry on 8 April 1744 at Wotton under Edge, Gloucestershire, the second son of Robert Ashbee ('c'.1716- 'c'.1799) and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Gardiner ('b'. 'c'.1715). Ashby was originally apprenticed to a Wotton clockmaker who also engraved dial-plates, spoons, and tankards. As he showed unusual aptitude for writing engraving, he subsequently worked (probably as a continuing apprentice) for Thomas Jefferys, geographer, of Charing Cross, engraving titles for maps. Later he worked for Jefferys's former apprentice, John Spilsbury, writing-engraver and inventor of the jigsaw puzzle, at 30 Russell Court, Drury Lane. Spilsbury died in 1769, and about 1772 Ashby married his widow, Sarah Spilsbury, 'nee' May (1732-1802). Their sons Robert and Harry were born in 1774 and 1778. Ashby took over the engraving business, disposing of the jigsaw section. By 1785, when Ashby joined the Musicians' Company, he had moved with his family to 83 Holborn Bridge, and by 1788 to 5 King Street, Cheapside, where he was in partnership with his son Robert. Apart from engraving maps (including London, Bath, and the Isle of Man), Ashby's main employment was engraving notes for the emerging banks at home and abroad. In this he showed unusual skill and ingenuity, and many of his bank notes and plates are now at the British Museum, London. He also excelled as an engraver of specimens of calligraphy. He engraved the plates for Richard Langford's 'Beauties of Penmanship' (1785), John Hodgkin's 'Specimens of Greek Penmanship' (1804), and H. Genery's 'Geographical and Commercial Copies' (1805), now at the British Library, also Hodgkin's 'Calligraphia Graeca' (1794), William Milns's 'The Penman's Repository' (1795), and some plates in Thomas Tomkins's 'Beauties of Writing' (1777 and 1808), now at the National Art Library. On 16 April 1805 Ashby married, second, Phoebe Everett, at St Matthew's, Bethnal Green. Harry Ashby lived in retirement at Exning, Suffolk, where he died on 31 August 1818. He is buried in Exning churchyard. Robert Ashby and his sons ran the engraving business after his father's retirement. The firm continued as Ashby & Co. until 1886, but Robert died in obscurity in Hanley, Staffordshire, in 1843. Ashby's second son, Harry Ashby (1778-1847), a portrait artist, exhibited sixty-nine pictures at the Royal Academy. His son, Harry Pollard Ashby ('b'. 1808), exhibited twenty landscape paintings there. 


@@@@@


doc= 744


Ashby, Sir John (bap. 1646, d. 1693), naval officer, was baptized on 21 March 1646, the fourth son of Robert Ashby (1607-1659), merchant of Lowestoft, and his wife, Alice, a sister of the naval officer Sir Thomas Allin. The Allin connection probably explains Ashby's entry into the navy and subsequent promotion. He was lieutenant of the 'Adventure' from November 1665 to June 1666, then lieutenant of the 'Princess' in 1668 before being appointed to his first command, the 'Deptford Ketch', on 4 October 1668, serving in her until June 1669. He commanded the 'Advice' and 'Rainbow' in 1670-72. Ashby took command of the 'Pearl' in January 1672 and remained aboard her until the end of May 1673, fighting in the first battle of Schooneveld. He moved to the 'Lion' before the second battle of Schooneveld on 4 June, serving in Prince Rupert's division of the Red squadron, and also served in her at the battle of the Texel on 11 August. 
Ashby commanded the 'Rose' from 1674 to 1677, partly in American waters, and took part in the naval operations connected with the 1675 rebellion in Virginia. He commanded the 'Dunkirk' in 1678-9, the 'Constant Warwick' in 1680-81, and the 'Mary Rose' from 1681 to 1684, employed in the latter chiefly in convoying the Levant trade. In May 1685 he succeeded his uncle Sir Thomas Allin as governor of Sandgate Castle in Kent. From June to August 1685 Ashby commanded the 'Mountague', one of the ships mobilized to counter the rebellion of the duke of Monmouth, before taking command of the 'Henrietta', then in use as a guardship. Ashby commanded the 'Mordaunt' in 1687-8, and in September 1688, as part of the mobilization in response to the threatened invasion by William of Orange, he was appointed to command the third-rate 'Defiance'. Those in the fleet who covertly supported William were keen to win Ashby over, he being 'zealous for the King, and had great credit in the fleet' (Laughton, 27). Ashby was reluctant at first, 'replying that in their profession they were not taught to turn against the King', but was eventually won over by his lieutenant, George Byng, who persuaded him of the need to fight 'popish oppression' (ibid., 28). During 1689 Ashby was warmly recommended by both of William's leading naval commanders, Arthur Herbert and Edward Russell, as a staunch supporter of the revolution. After commanding the 'Defiance' creditably in the battle of Bantry Bay on 1 May 1689, he was knighted by William III aboard the flagship on 16 May, becoming rear-admiral of the Red squadron on 6 June. 
In the 1690 campaign Ashby served initially as vice-admiral of the blue but was vice-admiral of the red during the battle of Beachy Head (30 June), flying his flag in the 'Berwick'. The removal of Herbert from the chief command after the battle led to the appointment of three joint admirals on 6 August 1690, with Ashby serving alongside Sir Richard Haddock and Sir Henry Killigrew. His own conduct at Beachy Head was praised by Queen Mary, who assured him 'of her esteem of his courage and conduct... and that she will never forget his good service' ('Finch MSS', 2.336) He reverted to vice-admiral of the red for the 1691 campaign but served as admiral of the blue in both 1692 and 1693, commanding from the 'Victory' at the battles of Barfleur and La Hogue (19-24 May 1692). Additionally, Ashby served on the Navy Board as controller of storekeepers' accounts from 11 July 1690 until his death, which occurred at Portsmouth on 12 June 1693. He was buried at Lowestoft, where a monument was erected in the parish church. He seems never to have married, and by his will, dated 7 June 1693, he bequeathed most of his estate to his brother Thomas, along with smaller bequests to several cousins and naval colleagues. 


@@@@@


doc= 745


Thimbleby, Richard (1614-1680), Jesuit, was born in Lincolnshire, the fifth son of Richard Thimbleby esquire (died 1623), of Irnham, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Edward Brookesby esquire, and granddaughter of Lord Vaux of Harrowden. He entered the novice college at Watten in 1631 and was admitted to the Society of Jesus in 1632, and was professed of the four vows in 1646. After having taught philosophy and theology at Liege he was made minister and consultor at the English College, St Omer, in 1642. He was sent on the English mission about 1648, being attached to the residence of St Dominic in Lincolnshire, of which he became superior. He was rector of the house for novices at Watten from 1666 until 1672, during which time he gave spiritual exercises at the convent of the blue nuns in Paris, and acted as confessor there. He was the author of 'Purgatory Surveyed' (1663), reprinted, with a preface, by Father W. H. Anderdon in 1874. It is, in part, a translation of Etienne Binet's 'De l'estat heureux et malheureux des ames souffrantes du purgatoire' (1625), with his own additions. He was also the author of 'Some generall observations upon dr Stllingfleet's book... with a vindication of St. Ignatius Loyola and... the Jesuits' (1672), a response to Edward Stillingfleet's 'Discourse Concerning... Idolatry' (1671). He died at the English College, St Omer, on 7 January 1680. 


@@@@@


doc= 746


Ashdowne, William (1723-1810), Unitarian preacher, was born at Tunbridge Wells, where, according to Walter Wilson, his father, a tradesman, was pastor of the General Baptist Society meeting at Mount Ephraim. He was educated at home, and after becoming a probationer for the General Baptist ministry moved to Dover, where on 21 November 1755 he married Mary Pyall ('b'. 1730), the daughter of the Revd Robert Pyall, pastor of the General Baptist church, and his wife, Mary. They had several children. On Pyall's death in 1759 he took over responsibility for the congregation, but for twenty-two years he performed his duties without pay. In 1781 he was elected pastor, with Stephen Philpott as his associate, and at about this time he came to adopt and preach Unitarian beliefs. Although he seldom preached in later years, he continued as pastor until his death. 
Ashdowne wrote numerous theological treatises, most of which were works in defence of his Unitarian opinions, such as the pamphlet, published in 1789, entitled 'The Unitarian, Arian and Trinitarian opinion respecting Christ examined and tried by scripture alone'. Contemporary critics respected his candour and eagerness to ascertain the truth, but while Unitarians held his works in high regard those of orthodox religious persuasion dismissed his arguments as 'desultory, negligent and unsatisfactory' ('New Catalogue of Living English Authors', vol. 1). Ashdowne died in Dover at the age of eighty-seven on 2 April 1810. 


@@@@@


doc= 747


Ashe, John (1672-1735), Presbyterian minister and religious writer, was born at Malcoff, Derbyshire, on 11 February 1672, the son of Edward Ashe, grocer and mercer of Tideswell, and his wife, Susannah, who was the widow of William Barber of Chapel-en-le-Frith, daughter of William Bagshaw of Litton, and sister of the Revd William Bagshaw (1628-1702), the Apostle of the Peak. 
Ashe was educated at Mr Foxlow's school in Chesterfield and at Samuel Ogden's school at Wirksworth before being admitted on 7 May 1688 to Richard Frankland's academy, then located at Attercliffe, near Sheffield. He completed his ministerial training at the home in Ford, Derbyshire, of his uncle, William Bagshaw. His first ministerial appointment was in 1692 as chaplain to Lady Sarah Houghton of Houghton Towers, Lancashire. In the following year he returned to the Peak District to become minister to the nonconformist congregation at Ashford and was ordained at Malcoff on 21 June 1696. He also ministered to congregations at Hucklow, Bradwell, Chelmorton, and Stony Middleton, and in addition to these duties gave occasional lectures or sermons at Tideswell and Litton. In return for these exertions he received a stipend of only $20 per annum, paid in part from a grant from the Presbyterian Fund and from a share in the charitable bequest of Philip, Lord Wharton. 
Ashe married Sarah (died 1709), daughter of the Revd Thomas Swetnam of Turnditch, Derbyshire, at Carsington on 6 May 1703. They had two daughters, Elizabeth and Sarah, and a son, but in February 1709 Ashe suffered the double loss of both his wife and son. He married again in December 1716. His second wife was Martha Halstead of Worley, near Halifax, who 'was to him a very valuable companion and friend through the remainder of his life' ('Memoirs', 5.407). 
Ashe was a popular and devoted minister. As his congregations were composed of mainly uneducated country people he endeavoured to ensure that his preaching was plain and simple and did not contain terms which would not be understood. He visited the sick and old and gave generously to the poor even though he was not a rich man. He was much respected not only by fellow nonconformists but by the clergy and laity of the Church of England. It was written of him: 'Few ministers had a more ardent concern for the salvation of the people committed to their care' ('Memoirs', 5.409). According to his colleague and great friend James Clegg, Ashe was an 'unwearied reader', reading even when travelling on foot or on horseback around the Peak District, with the result that 'he frequently lost his way and was hard put to find it again' ('Diary', 3.946). He appears to have been orthodox in his theological views. In politics he was a whig and staunch supporter of the Hanoverian succession, sentiments which caused the destruction of his meeting-house at Bradwell by Jacobite sympathizers in 1715. He was the author of a number of religious and biographical works, the most important of which was his 'Short Account of the Life and Character of the Rev. William Bagshaw' (1704). He also published several single sermons and a preface to Bagshaw's 'Essay on Union with Christ' (1702). 
Ashe was blessed with a robust constitution, but by the beginning of 1731 his health began to deteriorate. He complained increasingly of a 'dizziness in the head' ('Memoirs', 5.408), which prevented him from travelling and obliged him to resign his care of Bradwell and Hucklow and confine his duties chiefly to Ashford. His illness grew worse and he died, apparently as a result of a stroke, at Ashford on 2 October 1735. He was buried in the churchyard at Ashford, and his funeral sermon was preached by Revd James Clegg, minister at Chapel-en-le-Frith. 


@@@@@


doc= 748


Ashe, Jonathan (b. 1766), Church of Ireland clergyman and freemason, was born at Limerick, the son of Jonathan Ashe. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 26 March 1783, took his BA in 1787, and became BD and DD in 1808. He was ordained a deacon in the Church of Ireland in September 1787 and was licensed in May 1790, becoming curate of St Andrew's, Dublin, in the same year. At some point he also became a freemason: he was warden of the Royal Arch Lodge 190, Dublin, in 1795 and helped to found the Society for the Schooling of the Orphan Female Children of Distressed Masons. He was also a popular preacher of masonic charity sermons. 
Almost nothing is known of the rest of Ashe's life; he left Dublin shortly after 1801 and was living in Bristol in 1813, where he published a work entitled 'The masonic manual, or, Lectures on freemasonry, containing the instructions, documents, and discipline of the masonic economy'. This work, which seems to have been largely plagiarized from William Hutchinson's 'Spirit of Masonry' of 1775, was dedicated to the duke of Sussex, then grand master of the order, and claimed to offer 'a fair review and estimate of masonry'. The work was edited, with annotations and additions, by George Oliver in 1843 and by John Edward Cox in 1870 and went into several editions. After publishing this work -- his only claim to fame -- Ashe fell into obscurity; even the date of his death is not recorded in accounts of Irish freemasonry. 


@@@@@


doc= 749


Ashe, Robert Hoadly- (1750/51-1826), Church of England clergyman, was born Robert Ashe, the son of Robert Ashe, a prebendary of Winchester Cathedral. He was educated at Pembroke College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1773. Ashe proceeded MA in 1793, and BD and DD in 1794. He was ordained in 1773, and under the patronage of Philip Yorke, second earl of Hardwicke, became a curate in Dunstable, Bedfordshire. Hardwicke knew of him through the poet John Hoadly (1711-1776), who had married Ashe's aunt Elizabeth. From 1775 to 1826 Ashe held the living of Crewkerne, Somerset, and also served as master of the grammar school there. In 1786 Ashe edited 'Poetical Translations from Various Authors' by 'Master John Browne of Crewkerne, a boy of twelve years old'. Ashe took the additional surname of Hoadly in 1793 upon inheriting the Hoadly estate from his aunt. In 1799 he published a letter to the Roman Catholic priest John Milner which sought to vindicate Bishop Benjamin Hoadly, father of John Hoadly, from 'false and illiberal aspersions' ('GM', 181) included in Milner's history of Winchester. He died on 3 May 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 750


Ashe, St George (1658-1718), Church of Ireland bishop of Derry and scholar, was born at Castle Strange, co. Roscommon, on 3 March 1658, the second of the three sons of Thomas Ashe, who belonged to a Wiltshire family that had settled in Ireland. As the family estates were inherited by the eldest son, Thomas, St George (Sainty), like his younger brother, Dillon, opted for an academic and clerical career. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, and graduated BA in 1676 and MA in 1679. In the latter year his college elected him fellow and tutor, and in 1685 appointed him Donegal lecturer and professor of mathematics. By this time Ashe had become involved in the 'New Science', not only assisting William Molyneux in founding the Dublin Philosophical Society and succeeding his friend as secretary, but also becoming one of its most active members. When the earl of Clarendon, then lord lieutenant of Ireland, attended a meeting in January 1686, St George Ashe, in the address, enunciated what may be the fullest statement of the society's aims and philosophical attitude (Ehrenpreis, 53-4, 275-8). 
Simultaneously, Ashe began to pursue a career in the church. He graduated BD in 1687, and, in the troubles preceding the Williamite revolution, left Ireland. In 1689 he obtained employment as chaplain to Lord William Paget, the English ambassador at Vienna. Ashe stayed in Vienna until the end of 1691. While there he persevered in his scientific studies, establishing contact with some of the most noted continental scientists of the day. He also kept in touch with the Royal Society, of which he had been a member since 1686. Ashe was married to a daughter of Sir George St George, MP for co. Leitrim from 1661 to 1692. Another daughter married Ashe's brother, Dillon. Ashe and his wife had a son, St George, and a daughter. In early 1692 Ashe returned to Ireland, and having graduated DD in the summer, was appointed provost of Trinity College, Dublin, in October of that year. He resigned the provostship in July 1695, however, and in February 1696 was consecrated bishop of Cloyne. In 1697 he was translated to Clogher, and from there to Derry, where he was enthroned on 19 June 1717. 
Evidence suggests that Ashe laid himself open to criticism in the discharge of his episcopal duties. Examples of prolonged episcopal absenteeism abound in Ireland at this time, yet even so Archbishop King is known to have remonstrated with Ashe, his crony, charging him with 'making his bishoprick 'only a pompous sinecure'' (Mant, 2.282-3). However, Ashe's many public duties frequently required his presence in Dublin. He was a member of the privy council of Ireland for a time and was known for the administrative energy with which he worked for the interests of the church and his diocesan clergy during parochial visitations. Ashe's public-spiritedness is further affirmed by his will, in which he bequeathed his mathematical books and scientific instruments to Trinity College Library. 
Ashe was not a distinguished theologian. Seven published sermons constitute the whole of his theological remains. They are remarkable for their lucidity of exposition and style as well as for their moderation and kindness of tone. 
Despite his presence in Irish intellectual and political life, Ashe is likely to be remembered above all as Jonathan Swift's teacher at Trinity College. On 24 April 1682 the future dean of St Patrick's was admitted as a pensioner, 'under the tuition of St. George Ashe' (Barrett, 8-9). In due course, the young student and his teacher became friends for life. While Swift clearly admired Ashe, the older man may also have occupied 'a fatherly place' in the feelings of young Jonathan, who had grown up fatherless (Ehrenpreis, 909). Their friendship remained unaffected by the occasional political and theological disagreement the two men had in later years. 'I have got Mr Harley to promise', Swift told Stella in January 1711, 'that whatever changes are made in the council, the [whiggish] bishop of Clogher shall not be removed' ('Journal to Stella', 1.165-6). 
However, no event associates Ashe more closely with Swift than the account of the marriage ceremony, first circulated by John Evans, an old enemy of Swift's, and subsequently reiterated, with modifications, by all his eighteenth-century biographers. According to this account Swift and Stella were privately married in 1716 'by Dr. Ashe, Bishop of Clogher... in the garden' (Johnson, 'Poets', 3.30). Whoever is inclined to accept the truth of this story will have to account for two facts: first, that Swift himself never mentioned the marriage, and, second, that Stella, in her will, described herself as spinster (Wilde, 94). Whatever the truth, St George Ashe is now remembered as the friend of Esther Johnson and Jonathan Swift. 
Ashe died in Dublin on 27 February 1718 and was buried in Christ Church. On the news of Ashe's death, Addison wrote to Swift: 'I must here condole with you upon the Losse of that Excellent man the Bp of Derry who has scarce left behind him his equal in Humanity, agreeable conversation, and all kinds of Learning' (Addison, 400). 


@@@@@


doc= 751


Ashe, Simeon (d. 1662), Church of England clergyman, was admitted in April 1613 to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he was a protege of Thomas Hooker, and ordained deacon and priest at Peterborough on 5 and 6 October 1619. Nothing is known for certain of his parentage or early life, although he clearly had close connections with Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire. After Cambridge he served a clerical apprenticeship under the noted puritan minister of the town, Arthur Hildersham, and led the godly of the county in prayer and fasting during Hildersham's last illness. Ashe was apparently vicar of Rugeley, Staffordshire, by 1627, but fell foul of the authorities for his opposition to the 'Book of Sports'. Shortly afterwards he became chaplain to the radical puritan Robert Greville, second Lord Brooke, travelling with his patron and preaching regularly at Warwick Castle when Brooke was in residence. Ashe was a central figure in the 'puritan opposition' to Charles I, involved in many of the clerical conferences that debated the proper responses to the innovations of the 1630s, and in touch, through Brooke, with the most prominent lay opponents of royal government. Ashe was a more moderate figure than Brooke, committed throughout his life to a disciplined national church. Along with John Ball and others, he sent pointed queries to the ministers of New England revealing their anxiety at the tendencies to separatism and at the power given to congregations in the New England church. Ashe and William Rathband oversaw the publication of these exchanges in 1643, as 'A Letter of Many Ministers in Old England', a contribution to the emerging controversy over church government in old England. 
Ashe was committed to the overall reform of the English church. He played a large part in the clerical protests against Laudianism, both in the midlands and in the national co-ordination of petitions into the ministers' remonstrance presented to the Long Parliament. He preached a rousing fast sermon to the House of Commons in March 1642, published as 'The Best Refuge for the Most Oppressed' (1642), insisting that the removal of 'prelacy' was necessary before the church could be reformed, and he was appointed to the Westminster assembly in 1643, replacing a clergyman who died before its first meeting. His activities there were mostly in the later 1640s when he had given up service with the army. 
At the outbreak of the civil war Ashe became chaplain to the regiment of Edward Montagu, Lord Mandeville (later the second earl of Manchester), in the earl of Essex's army, and he moved to the army of the eastern association in the summer of 1643 when Manchester became its commander. Ashe travelled with the army and in the summer of 1644 he and another of Manchester's chaplains published a series of newsletters with a vivid account of the battle of Marston Moor, 'A Continuation of True Intelligence from the English and Scottish Forces'. The Scottish minister resident in London, Robert Baillie, regretted that his friend Ashe's account gave 'much more to Cromwell' and the Independents than was their due, underplaying the role of the Scottish presbyterians in that great victory ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 2.209). The sufferings of the soldiers in 1644, along with Manchester's resignation following the self-denying ordinance, ended Ashe's career as a military chaplain. Thereafter he was based in London, becoming one of the most determined of the City presbyterians, close to Baillie and others working to bring the English church into line with the more rigorous Scottish kirk. Ashe defended Manchester against Oliver Cromwell's attacks and acted as an intermediary between the Lords and the City presbyterians. He signed the 'Desires and reasons' of the ministers in November 1645, which outlined to the City's common council clerical objections to the parliament's limited presbyterian legislation. With Edmund Calamy he preached a hard-line, high-profile sermon when the City authorities renewed their commitment to the solemn league and covenant in January 1646 as a symbol of their zeal for a presbyterian church and their hostility to sectarianism; this was published as 'Religious Covenanting Directed and Covenant Keeping Perswaded' (1646). Ashe, again with Calamy, was heavily involved in the unrest in the City in the summer of 1647 when presbyterian zealots sought to raise a military force to counter the influence of the Independent New Model Army. But, like most ministers of City and assembly, Ashe drew back from the brink as the New Model Army approached the City and, with Calamy and Thomas Case, took a plea for peace to the City militia committee in early August. He was, predictably, one of fifty-two City ministers who in December signed 'A Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, and to our Solemn League and Covenant, as also Against the Errours, Heresies and Blasphemies of these Times and the Toleration of them' (1648). 
Ashe was prominent among the presbyterian ministers who lobbied New Model Army leaders in December 1648 and January 1649 in a vain attempt to prevent the regicide, a horrendous breach of the solemn league and covenant and a betrayal, in presbyterian eyes, of the cause for which the civil war had been fought; their arguments appeared in 'A Serious and Faithfull Representation' (1649) and 'A Vindication of the Ministers of the Gospel in and about London' (1649). Although there is no evidence Ashe was involved with the presbyterian-royalist plots for which Christopher Love was executed in 1651, he was a loyal friend to Love and with Edmund Calamy attended him on the scaffold. Temperamentally Ashe was neither a martyr nor a natural conspirator. With Calamy, Jeremiah Whitaker, and others, he oversaw the posthumous publication of the martyr's works as a less provocative way of keeping presbyterian aspirations alive. 
Ashe spent more than twenty years in London but did not hold a pastoral charge until 1655, preferring to concentrate on lecturing on the one hand, and service in the extra-parochial London presbyterian committees or classes on the other. In March 1642 he was recommended by the House of Commons as lecturer at St Bride's, Fleet Street, and he was still described as of St Bride's in 1645-6, but there is no evidence of his activity in the extensive parish records. Churchwardens' accounts of St Michael Bassishaw record the payment of $10 per annum to Ashe in 1646-51 as preacher of weekly lectures on Tuesdays and Sunday afternoons, while from October 1651 until January 1655 he acted as assistant to his friend and ally of long-standing, Edmund Calamy, preaching every Sunday and assisting with the administration of the sacrament at St Mary Aldermanbury. He was also one of the Cornhill lecturers. Finally, in 1655, Ashe became parish minister of St Augustine by St Paul, Watling Street, in succession to an equally hot presbyterian, Francis Roberts. Ashe was active in the relevant classes and in the London Provincial Assembly throughout. He was nominated as a 'trier' for elders in the fifth London classis in October 1645 and September 1646, and acted as a delegate to the assembly from the seventh classis (1647-9); the sixth classis (1652-6); and the first classis (1658). He served as moderator of the assembly in 1652. 
Ashe was a conscientious editor of key puritan and presbyterian works, preparing those of friends such as John Ball, Ephraim Huitt, and Love for the press. His own publications were mostly of set-piece sermons -- above all of funeral sermons, of which he was the most famous preacher of his day. Many ministers asked Ashe to preach at their funerals, and took pains to ensure he had ample information on their lives, notably the octogenarian Thomas Gataker ('Gray Hayres Crowned with Grace', 1655). Other notable subjects were Jeremiah Whitaker, Jonathan to Ashe's David ('Living Loves betwixt Christ and Dying Christians', 1654), and Ralph Robinson ('The Good Mans Death Lamented', 1655). In these sermons Ashe celebrated the tradition of the 'good old nonconformists' who had suffered under prelacy and worked devotedly to establish a presbyterian national church. Although the deaths of godly ministers in the 1650s could be seen as God's judgment on a sinful nation that had rejected godly reform, Ashe's praises also revealed the resilience of the ordained ministry in the national church and their remarkable successes in difficult times. 
Ashe corresponded with Baillie throughout the 1650s, the two men sharing their disquiet at the liberty allowed under the Cromwellian regime, and denouncing attacks on their own high Calvinism. Richard Baxter, agreed Ashe, was 'doubtless a godly man, though tenacious in his mistakes' on justification ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 3.302-7). Despite his horror at the regicide and the rise of sectarian religion, Ashe remained committed to the cause of moderate parliamentarianism. In the dedication to the earl of Manchester in the printed funeral sermon for Manchester's wife he denounced the radical hijacking of the parliamentary cause and praised: 'your lordship (with all others) who continue firm to their primary principles from the aspersions of distempered spirits. When the late king forsook his parliament, being misguided by evil counsellors, the raising of an army was judged necessary to restore peace, preserve religion, establish fundamental laws and secure the ancient privileges of parliament. This was the good old cause, held forth by the Solemn League and Covenant... others crying up the good old cause, do pollute religion, violate laws, tear parliaments into pieces and govern according to their own pleasure. ('The Faithfull Christians Gain by Death', 1658)' Ashe, like Manchester, therefore welcomed the restoration of Charles II, and he was among the ministers who travelled to Breda to welcome the king. 
Ashe was married with a 'family' in the 1630s but no surviving children of his are mentioned in the will he made late in life, and his widow, Susanna, may have been a second wife (a Simeon Ashe married Susanna Miller in Derbyshire in 1658). Ashe was 'frail' when he made his will in December 1661, and died shortly before the imposition of the 'Act of Uniformity' on 24 August 1662. He was 'bury'd the very even of Bartholemew Day', that is, on 23 August, his funeral sermon preached by his old friend Calamy -- 'the last office of love for an eminent and antient servant of Jesus Christ, and excellent Minister of the Gospel... one who hath formerly performed this office for many other Ministers' (Calamy). Besides substantial provision for his widow, her daughter, and a married niece, Ashe left generous bequests to a range of kin, friends, and charitable concerns, especially to the poor of Ashby. His trustees included long-standing friends among the puritan elite, such as Anthony Tuckney and John Micklethwaite, and those remembered in bequests included William Dillingham of Emmanuel College and Matthew Newcomen of Dedham. Widows of old friends such as John Ball, William Taylor, and the 'Love plotter', Thomas Cawton, were not forgotten. Ashe's property, mainly in Derbyshire and Lincolnshire, must have been worth some $5000, suggesting that his rather chequered career had been materially rewarding. The looming difficulties for City presbyterians were clearly in Ashe's mind, and his will arranged for rings to be given to 'forty ministers my friends in London and elsewhere' with the inscription, 'I am not ashamed of the Gospell of Christ'. 


