@@@@@


doc= 2583


Blake, Thomas (1596/7-1657), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born in Staffordshire. He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 25 October 1616, aged nineteen, graduated BA on 5 May 1620 and proceeded MA on 21 February 1623. By about 1630 he had begun a ministry in Tamworth, on the Staffordshire/Warwickshire border. As he reminded the dedicatees of his first publication, 'The Birth Priviledge, or, Covenant-Holinesse of Beleevers' (1644), 'I have served you for Christ a double apprenticeship of yeares almost compleat'. In 1645, following the surrender of Shrewsbury to the parliamentary forces, Blake became vicar of St Alkmund there. 
Blake's pamphlet launched him into a sustained controversy over the inclusiveness or exclusiveness of admission to the church's sacraments, conducted with a number of notable protagonists, including eventually his fellow west midlands minister, Richard Baxter of Kidderminster. While he set much store on catechizing the young in order to produce a Christian nation, Blake argued in 'The Birth Priviledge' for a latitudinarian largeness: the right to baptism was in his view as wide as the name 'Christian'; visible penitence from the child's parents was sufficient to satisfy the requirements. In 'Infants Baptisme, Freed from Antichristianisme' (1645), dedicated to Ruth, Lady Scudamore, he defended the practice against the 'assault' on it, and on his previous work, by the baptist Christopher Blackwood in 'The Storming of Antichrist' (1644). Here Blake was ranged with the eminent minister Stephen Marshall, as he was again in 'Mr Blakes Answer to Mr Tombes' (1646), a reply to the 'Two Treatises' (1645) of another baptist, John Tombes, who had by this time returned to his native west midlands. In 1648 Blake was among the Shropshire ministers who signed the covenant. 
In 1650 Blake and a colleague, with their families, left Shrewsbury, probably owing to an outbreak of plague. With Blake suffering from a fever, and subject to suspicion that they might be carrying infection, the party could find only 'mean accommodations' until given hospitality by the Shropshire minister Samuel Hildersham and his wife, Mary. Blake acknowledged their kindness in the dedication to them of his next work, 'Vindiciae foederis, or, A Treatise of the Covenant of God Entered with Mankind' (1652): 'for many months we had free and liberal entertainment... in your house I had not only leisure to make a good progresse in this work, but singular accommodation from your accomplisht Library' (sig. A2'v'). He signed the dedication on 4 November 1652 from his study in Tamworth, having in the interim resumed his ministry there and become an assistant to the local committee of triers and ejectors in its work of regulating the clergy of Staffordshire. 

'Vindiciae foederis' resumed the controversy with John Tombes, but it extended the discussion to consideration of admission to holy communion (on which Blake again advocated inclusiveness), and was also a very oblique attack on Richard Baxter's first work, 'Aphorismes of Justification' (1649). Blake respected Baxter, praising him when he could, and only attacked the arguments of 'Aphorismes', not the man. In 1654 three of Baxter's allies, John Humfrey, Henry Bartlett, and Giles Firmin, were urging him to take up the cudgels against Blake, Firmin reporting that 'good men' were being won over to the latter's side (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.150). Baxter duly replied in 'Rich. Baxters Apology' (1654) and 'Rich. Baxters Confession' (1655). In May or June 1655 Blake wrote in a conciliatory vein to Baxter, thanking him for the gift of the 'Apology' and expressing himself 'loath indeed to appear your professed adversary' (ibid., 1.182), but his 'The Covenant Sealed' (1655), which included a 'brief answer' to the 'Apology', further antagonized Firmin. On 7 April 1656 Firmin wrote to Baxter that, though he understood that Blake was 'very godly', he dealt 'too slightly in such a solemne ordinance': while he himself did not turn away from the sacrament those whose views on church government differed from his own, he was concerned about the level of ignorance in some of the candidates, which was worthy of 'Heathens' or 'Indians' (ibid., 1.207-8). In reply Baxter pronounced 'The Covenant Sealed' 'a Volume of mistakes and passions', but was persuaded 'to handle the Controversie Argumentatively' and to cut out the personal abuse, and advised Firmin to 'keep your eye on the Center, where Mr Blake & you & I are one' (ibid., 1.211-12). This did not prevent Baxter's continuing the exchange in 'Certaine Disputations of Right to the Sacraments' (1657). 
Blake drew up his will on 11 January 1656, when he was enjoying a 'good measure of health' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/270, sig. 477), but following an illness he died the following year. He was buried in Tamworth church on 11 June 1657. Anthony Burgess, minister of Sutton Coldfield, who delivered at the funeral 'Pauls Last Sermon' (1658), remarked on Blake's 'Doctrinall abilities', his wisdom as a spiritual director, his studiousness, and his preaching (pp. 18, 20). In the controversies that had taken place among the godly, to which Burgess had also been a party, he praised Blake for his willingness to vindicate himself publicly and for giving the lie to those who criticized his 'promiscuous admission of all' to the sacraments by his vigilance in catechizing the young. An oration by Samuel Shaw, master at Tamworth school, complemented the picture of a godly pastor. Blake's will was proved by his widow, Jane; as Burgess had noted, he died childless, and his estate was divided between Jane and his brother John, with books and manuscripts left to two clerical nephews, William Blake of Mashfield and Samuel Beresford of Aston, Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 2584


Blake, William (1773-1821), Presbyterian minister, was born on 29 March 1773 at Crewkerne, Somerset, the second son in the family of five children of William Blake (1730-1799), who was married twice, a former pupil of Philip Doddridge at Northampton and Presbyterian minister at Crewkerne, 1754-98. He came from a long line of Presbyterian ministers in the west of England. The younger Blake was educated at Litton, Dorset, and then at the free school in Crewkerne, before going to the academy at Northampton in 1790, where he studied under John Horsey. 
Blake preached for a year at Yeovil in 1793, and was chosen to succeed his father at Crewkerne, where he remained for the rest of his life. A humanitarian in his Christology, he published 'Devotional Services for the Public Worship of one True God' (1812) and one of his sermons, 'Private Judgement' (1810). 
Blake married twice, leaving one son and three daughters. He died on 18 February 1821. 


@@@@@


doc= 2585


Blake, William (1757-1827), engraver, artist, and poet, was born on 28 November 1757 at 28 Broad Street, Soho, London, the third son of James Blake (1723?-1784), a hosier, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Wright (1723-1792), the widow of Thomas Armitage. Blake had four brothers, James (1753-1827), John ('b'. 1755, died before 1760), Robert (1762?-1787), and John (1760-1800?), and one sister, Catherine (1764-1841). Records at St James's, Piccadilly, note the baptism of a Richard Blake in 1762, but this may be an error for Robert. Only James, who continued the family business, and Catherine played roles in Blake's adult life. The younger John was apprenticed to a baker but ran away to 'enlist as a Soldier & died' (Tatham in Bentley, 'Records', 509). William Blake was baptized on 11 December 1757 in St James's Church, Piccadilly. Blake was born into the class of London shopkeepers and artisans known for its hard work in pursuit of financial security and a tendency toward independent opinions in religion and politics. His mother had been a member of the Moravian church while married to Armitage. She left that sect shortly before marrying James Blake on 15 October 1752, but their children's early education may have been shaped by Moravian concepts and customs. 
Little is known about the outer circumstances of Blake's childhood, but the special character of his inner life made itself apparent at an early age. When walking on Peckham Rye, aged 'eight or ten perhaps', he beheld 'a tree filled with angels' (Gilchrist, 1.7). On another occasion 'his mother beat him for running in & saying that he saw the Prophet Ezekiel under a Tree in the Fields' (Tatham in Bentley, 'Records', 519). At about this same time, Blake showed an interest in the pictorial arts. While still a youth, he began sketching and attending auctions to acquire old and then unfashionable prints after artists such as Raphael, Michelangelo, and Durer. The intertwining of extrasensory perception and artistic expression continued throughout Blake's life and is integral to his concepts of mind, art, and religion. 
Blake's father disapproved of his son's reports about angels in trees, but he was supportive of William's ambitions in the arts, buying for his young connoisseur casts of antique sculpture for copying with pencil or pen. When ten years old Blake began to attend a drawing school directed by Henry Pars -- apparently his first contact with formal education. His character and interests indicated that Blake would become an artist; his family's finances would dictate the first step toward such a career. 
At the age of fourteen it was time for Blake to begin an apprenticeship. A 'painter of Eminence' (Tatham in Bentley, 'Records', 510) -- or, according to Gilchrist, the fashionable engraver William Ryland (1.13) -- was first considered as a master, but the fee was too high for the family purse. The Blakes settled instead on James Basire, an old-fashioned line and stipple printmaker who practised the 'mixed method' of preliminary etching followed by engraving. William was apprenticed to Basire on 4 August 1772 for a bond of 50 guineas. Blake probably lived for the traditional period of seven years with his master at 31 Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields. 
Blake learned from Basire the profession he would practise throughout his life. Gaining the necessary skills involved a good deal of drudgery preparing copperplates and replicating the abstract linear patterns of Basire's graphic technique. Blake mastered his craft quickly -- given the 1773 date he later inscribed on 'Joseph of Arimathea among the Rocks of Albion', a plate based on a figure by Michelangelo. The print's competent conventionality gives no hint of Blake's later graphic innovations. 
In addition to providing professional instruction, Blake's master introduced him to the intellectual life of London. Basire was engraver to the Royal Society and the Society of Antiquaries, and Blake assisted in the execution of many plates for them. He probably also worked on engravings for Jacob Bryant's 'A New System, or, An Analysis of Ancient Mythology' (1774-6), which influenced Blake's later excursions into syncretic myth-making. From these projects, and possibly from authors and publishers who visited Basire's shop, Blake learned about the natural sciences, philology, and archaeology. 
Beginning in 1774, Basire sent Blake to Westminster Abbey to make drawings of its medieval monuments and wall paintings for later engraving. This assignment, which probably lasted on and off for three years, may have been prompted by a desire to separate Blake from fellow apprentices and thereby end a quarrel with them (Malkin in Bentley, 'Records', 422). Blake's earliest known drawings record the opening of the coffin of Edward I on 2 May 1774. Later efforts are careful copies of the effigies and tombs of monarchs; many were subsequently engraved in Basire's shop (some probably by Blake) as book illustrations. The sculpture filling the abbey 'appeared as miracles of art, to his Gothicised imagination' (ibid., 423) and shaped Blake's lifelong interest in early British history and medieval art. 
At the end of his apprenticeship in August 1779, Blake began his career as a journeyman copy engraver. He was hired by the print-publisher Thomas Macklin to execute stipple engravings after Watteau and by several booksellers, including the liberal publisher Joseph Johnson, to engrave illustrations. Many of these were based on designs by Thomas Stothard, a friend of Blake's from at least 1780 and an artist just beginning a career as Britain's most prolific book illustrator. Blake became part of a circle of engravers regularly employed to reproduce Stothard's designs. 
Blake's efforts as a commercial engraver in the 1780s are what one would expect for a young man trained in that craft. His ambitions in the arts, however, extended beyond what copy engraving could satisfy -- or was expected of engravers. He began training as an original artist by enrolling, probably in July 1779, as a student in the Royal Academy of Arts. After a three-month probation, Blake was granted permission to study works in the academy's collections, featuring casts of classical sculpture, for six years. Among his first compositions was a series of watercolours illustrating the history of England from the legendary arrival of Brutus to the reign of Edward IV. Blake exhibited one design, 'The Death of Earl Goodwin', at the Royal Academy in 1780. Many other drawings based on historical, literary, and biblical subjects followed, with two on the consequences of warfare in the academy's 1784 exhibition and four on the story of Joseph in 1785. These works exhibit the strong outlines and frieze-like arrangement of figures typical of the then dominant neoclassical style, but with an attempt at monumentality influenced by Michelangelo, Raphael, and Blake's contemporary James Barry. Blake was aiming at a career in 'history' painting, then considered the highest genre of pictorial expression. 
Blake's circle of friends was growing. In addition to Stothard, Blake became acquainted in the early 1780s with the sculptor John Flaxman, the connoisseur John Hawkins, the artist (and later biographer) John Thomas Smith, and George Cumberland, an amateur artist and collector of early Italian prints. In 1784 Hawkins tried, but failed, to raise funds to send Blake to Italy. Stothard, Flaxman, and Cumberland would play significant roles in Blake's later life. The arts provided a common interest for these young men and prompted activities such as sketching tours. One such, on the River Medway late in the summer of 1780, proved memorable. Stothard, Blake, and another friend strayed too close to the naval base near Upnor Castle and the trio was briefly detained as suspected spies. This may not have been the first time Blake was caught up in political events. A few months earlier, London had been swept by the anti-Catholic Gordon riots. According to Gilchrist (1.35), Blake 'encountered the advancing wave' of the mob and 'was forced... to go along in the very front rank, and witness the storm and burning' of Newgate prison. 
Blake's social life in the early 1780s included romantic interests. His first proposal of marriage was rejected. He told his broken-hearted tale to Catherine Sophia Boucher (1762-1831) ['see 'Blake, Catherine Sophia], the daughter of a market gardener, and a bond of affection soon developed (Tatham in Bentley, 'Records', 517-18). About a year after first meeting, they were married on 18 August 1782 in the church of St Mary, Battersea. Catherine may have been illiterate, or at least embarrassed by her penmanship, for she signed the register with an X. Blake probably lived in his father's house until his marriage; soon after, the couple took lodgings at 23 Green Street, near Leicester Square. Little is known about Catherine Blake, but she managed the family purse and, in later years, would place an empty plate before her husband at mealtime to remind him of monetary necessities (Gilchrist, 1.313). She was the most important person in Blake's adult life, a constant companion, helpmate, and faithful believer in his genius. The couple had no children. 
From the age of twelve Blake had been testing his powers as a poet. Some of these efforts were privately published as 'Poetical Sketches' (1783). The collection shows an indebtedness to eighteenth-century verse, but also an uneasiness with its conventions and a desire to reach back to earlier models -- Shakespeare, Spenser, and the supposedly ancient works of Ossian -- to revivify present sensibilities. The cost of producing the volume was borne by Harriet Mathew, her clergyman husband, and Flaxman, who had introduced Blake into the Mathew home, one 'frequented by most of the literary and talented people of the day' (Smith in Bentley, 'Records', 456). The group included Thomas Taylor 'the Platonist', who apparently instructed Blake in mathematics (Bentley, 'Records Supplement', 94-5). Blake had impressed these worthies by reciting and singing his compositions, but by 1784 he became uncomfortable with their pretentious conversations. His criticism found expression in 'An Island in the Moon' ('c'.1784-5), a fragmentary manuscript that playfully satirizes contemporary speculations in the arts and sciences. 
It may have been a small inheritance from his father, who died in July 1784, that helped Blake begin a print-publishing partnership with another former Basire apprentice, James Parker. The two families moved to 27 Broad Street, next door to the Blake family home. Blake probably acquired his engraver's rolling press at this time. Only two prints bear the partnership's imprint and the business may have ceased when the Blakes moved to 28 Poland Street, Soho, late in 1785. Blake's first attempt at artistic and financial independence had not prospered. 
Blake was exceptionally close to his youngest brother, Robert, who was also set on a career in the arts and was perhaps a lodger with the Blakes. When a quarrel developed between brother and wife, Blake made Catherine apologize humbly to Robert (Gilchrist, 1.58-9). The youth fell ill in the winter of 1786-7 and died in early February. In his exhaustion after the 'last fortnight' of Robert's life, having tended him 'day and night by his bedside', Blake fell into 'an unbroken sleep of three days' and nights' duration' (ibid., 1.59). But his brother's spirit remained alive for Blake and grief turned to inspiration in the following year. 'Robert stood before him in one of his visionary imaginations, and so decidedly directed him' in how to publish his works without 'the expense of letter-press' (Smith in Bentley, 'Records', 460). Whatever its other-worldly origins, Blake's invention of relief etching also developed from his craft as an engraver. His new method was more direct, faster, and required less technical expertise than intaglio printmaking. It permitted Blake the artist to paint his images directly on a copperplate in acid-resistant varnish; Blake the poet could write his words in the same medium. The text must be executed in reverse, so that impressions would print right-way around, but this was only a slight impediment for a trained engraver. After the uncovered areas of the metal were etched away, the images stood in relief and could be inked quickly on, and printed with low pressure from, the surface. The process embodied a unity between conception and execution -- a practice that became a principle of Blake's later aesthetic doctrines -- rather than the divisions between invention and production embedded in eighteenth-century print technology and its class distinctions among authors and printers, artists and engravers. 
Blake's first relief etching, one that includes the related technique of white-line etching, may have been 'The Approach of Doom', a print based on a wash drawing by Robert in his notebook, a treasured memento that Blake used for his own compositions. A combination of words and pictures soon followed: 'All Religions are One' and 'There is No Natural Religion', both of 1788, are Blake's first 'Illuminated Books', as he called his new genre in 1793 (Blake, 693). These aphoristic tractates reject rationalist doctrines and welcome the imaginative truths of revealed religions which were, in Blake's view, one with artistic expression. 
Blake produced his first illuminated book of poems, 'Songs of Innocence', in 1789. These brief lyrics, their illustrations, and interlinear decorations, reach beyond the genre of children's literature to express Blake's ideal of a unified sensibility incarnate in children, as in Christ. The poems may have been influenced by Moravian hymns Blake had learned from his mother. Catherine Blake helped with the presswork and hand colouring of this and other illuminated books and bound the leaves in wrappers. Although he may have exhibited a few of these singular works at Johnson's shop, Blake apparently sold his illuminated books directly to collectors rather than through booksellers. He and his wife thereby had complete control over all stages of production and distribution. 
At about the same time that he developed relief etching, Blake was composing a narrative poem, 'Tiriel', his first extensive attempt to create mythic texts by conflating ancient Greek, British, and Hebraic motifs. The format of the 'Tiriel' manuscript and its associated wash drawings indicate that it was intended for letterpress publication illustrated with intaglio engravings. In 'The Book of Thel' (late 1789), Blake combined for the first time his new mode of illuminated printing with so-called 'prophetic' verse in long lines evocative of allegorical meanings couched in rhetoric alternately gentle and horrific. 
Illuminated printing supplemented, without replacing, Blake's other graphic activities. In 1788 the great print-publishers John and Josiah Boydell hired Blake to execute his largest copy engraving, 'Beggar's Opera', after a painting by William Hogarth. He completed the plate in the summer of 1790 and it may have been the fee (unrecorded, but probably substantial) that permitted the Blakes to move to a fine terrace house at 13 Hercules Buildings, Lambeth. Their relative prosperity in this period is indicated by Tatham's story that Blake's house was robbed of goods valued at $100 (Bentley, 'Records', 522). 
London's booksellers continued to use Blake's skills, commissioning him to engrave illustrations for modest volumes of poetry, mathematics, and medicine, and for influential works such as Erasmus Darwin's 'The Botanic Garden' (1791) and James Stuart and Nicholas Revett's 'The Antiquities of Athens' (vol. 3, 1794). After a brief hiatus in the mid-1780s, perhaps caused by Blake's dilatoriness in completing assignments, Johnson was again his main employer. He appears to have appreciated Blake's abilities as an artist and poet, for he hired him to both design and engrave illustrations for Mary Wollstonecraft's 'Original Stories from Real Life' (1791) and agreed to publish Blake's verse narrative, 'The French Revolution' (1791), and a small emblem book, 'For Children: the Gates of Paradise' (1793). Sales of the latter must have been meagre; the poem never progressed beyond proofs of 'Book the First'. 'The French Revolution' set a pattern repeated throughout most of Blake's life: ambitious projects begun with great hopes, only to be cut short by financial or personal failings. 
Johnson's commercial importance to Blake's career was matched by his role in introducing Blake to some of England's leading liberal writers and artists, many of whom regularly gathered at the bookseller's. It was probably through Johnson that Blake met and befriended the Swiss-German artist Henry Fuseli, for whose translation of J. C. Lavater's 'Aphorisms on Man' (1788) Blake engraved the frontispiece. Other plates based on Fuseli's compositions, similar to Blake's own, followed. Blake may have also met more radical figures in the Johnson coterie, including Joseph Priestley and Thomas Paine. Tatham asserts that Blake warned Paine of imminent arrest, just before he left England in 1792, but the story is questionable (Tatham in Bentley, 'Records', 530; expanded in Gilchrist, 1.95). 
Blake and his wife attended an organizational meeting of the New Jerusalem church, which based its doctrines on the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg, on 13 April 1789. Blake was no thoughtless convert; his annotations to two of Swedenborg's works express growing misgivings. These turned to outright rejection in 'The Marriage of Heaven and Hell' (1790), Blake's most heterodox illuminated book in both its form, a loose gathering of prose and poetry, and content. Through the 'voice of the Devil' and 'Proverbs of hell' (Blake, 34-5), he parodies Swedenborg, reverses the cosmology of Milton's 'Paradise Lost', pronounces that the sensual is an avenue to the spiritual, and attacks the biblical history and morality constructed by the 'Angels' of the established church. Energy is celebrated as eternal delight, at war with the restraints of reason. The book concludes with 'A Song of Liberty' calling for the revolutionary overthrow of tyrannies religious and secular. 
Blake's radical political views continue in 'Visions of the Daughters of Albion' (1793). Like 'The Book of Thel', the poem and its designs centre on a female character. Her rape initiates an incantatory protest against exploitation and enslavement influenced by Wollstonecraft and by John Gabriel Stedman, for whose 'Narrative' (1796) about a slave revolt in Surinam Blake began engraving illustrations in 1791. 'America a Prophecy', also dated 1793, was the first of Blake's 'Continental Prophecies' that continued through 'Europe' (1794) and concluded, somewhat diminished, in 'The Song of Los' (1795), divided into sections entitled 'Africa' and 'Asia'. The designs in these books extend beyond direct illustration to establish their own iconographic drama. The texts intermingle figures real (Washington, Franklin) and fictive (Enitharmon, Rintrah), places local (Great George Street) and biblical (Mount Sinai). Blake alludes to contemporary events, but he typically seeks for their ancient origins and millennial conclusions. Three separate engravings of this period, 'Albion Rose', 'The Accusers of Theft Adultery Murder', and 'Lucifer and the Pope in Hell', also herald apocalyptic revolution. 
The record of Blake's active engagement with politics is equally complex. Gilchrist claims that Blake was 'a vehement republican' who 'donned the famous symbol of liberty and equality -- the 'bonnet rouge' -- in open day' (1.93-4). But, when Blake learned of 'the Days of Terror' in France in September 1792, he 'assuredly never wore the red cap again' (1.94). His cancellation of three plates in 'America', one containing direct reference to George III, suggests that Blake may have feared prosecution if his views were stated too directly. Perhaps such fears, coupled with a general sense of dread, led Blake to scribble in his notebook, 'I say I shant live five years And if I live one it will be a Wonder June 1793' (Blake, 694). 
There is no record of Blake attending political gatherings of any sort; perhaps his anti-deistic convictions separated him from the secular revolutionaries of his day. His singular religious beliefs also seem to have set Blake on a lonely course. There are striking parallels between Blake's poetry and the writings of several radical protestant groups; but, except for the meeting with Swedenborgians in 1789, it may be true that Blake did not 'attend any place of Divine worship' for the last forty years of his life (Smith in Bentley, 'Records', 458). 
By October 1793 Blake had built up a stock of illuminated books and other prints sufficient to issue an advertisement 'To the Public'. This handbill includes 'Songs of Experience' (1794), the contrary companion to 'Songs of Innocence'. Blake first issued 'Experience', etched on the backs of the 'Innocence' copperplates, as a separate volume, but soon combined the collections under a general title-page, 'Songs of Innocence and of Experience'. Its subtitle, 'Shewing the two contrary states of the human soul', indicates that child and adult are temporal expressions of eternal mental states. Experience enacts a fall into division, but the Bard, 'Who Present, Past, & Future sees' and 'Whose ears have heard, / The Holy Word', can reclaim a unified vision (Blake, 18). Yet these spiritual concerns did not carry Blake away from this world: several poems, including 'The Chimney Sweeper' and 'London', are lyrics of social protest. 
Blake's next project in illuminated poetry was potentially enormous -- a version of 'Genesis', perhaps as the first book in the 'Bible of hell' announced in 'The Marriage of Heaven and Hell' (Blake, 44). 'The First Book of Urizen' (1794) ranges beyond a satanic retelling of the 'Bible' to establish an even more primordial perspective and construct an ur-myth in which material creation -- spatial, temporal, and biological -- is one with the fall. Urizen and Los, representatives of both cosmic and psychic forces, are the chief actors in the agonistic drama. There is no 'second' book of Urizen; but the brief poems 'The Book of Los' and 'The Book of Ahania', both etched in conventional intaglio in 1795, are fragments of Blake's grand intentions. 
Blake ceased producing illuminated books in 1795, probably owing to poor sales of all but 'Songs of Innocence and of Experience' and the commencement of other, time-consuming projects. In the previous year, Blake had begun to print his relief etchings in dense, glue-based pigments. He used the technique to create a group of twelve large colour prints without accompanying texts in 1795. Most were printed planographically rather than from relief surfaces. They are among his most powerful designs, with subjects ranging from the 'Bible' to Shakespeare and Milton. Word and image were further disengaged when, in 1796, the miniature painter Ozias Humphry commissioned a selection of colour-printed designs without texts from Blake's illuminated books. Blake next separated his colouring medium from printing and began to produce his so-called 'tempera' or 'fresco' paintings on biblical subjects. He exhibited two at the Royal Academy, 'The Last Supper' in 1799 and 'The Loaves and Fishes' in 1800. The temperas were commissioned by Thomas Butts, a clerk to the commissary general of musters, the government office in charge of military pay. Butts became Blake's major patron for his drawings and paintings, hiring him to execute over eighty watercolours, also illustrating the 'Bible', between 1800 and 1805. Presumably Butts had financial resources beyond his clerk's salary, but the source of additional funds is not known. Perhaps 'like most government servants of the period, the system of fees and patronage allowed him to acquire a modest fortune' (Ackroyd, 206). 
Butts is the source for a famous incident related by Gilchrist. Visiting the Blakes while they lived in Lambeth, Butts found the couple nude in their garden summer house. '''Come in!'' cried Blake; ''it's only Adam and Eve you know!'' Husband and wife had been reciting passages from 'Paradise Lost', in character' (Gilchrist, 1.115). Although friends who met Blake later in his life and Butts's grandson denied the tale, it does not seem out of character for the man who wrote that 'The nakedness of woman is the work of God' and that 'Art can never exist without Naked Beauty displayed' (Blake, 36, 275). Similarly, Tatham's story (Bentley, 'Records', 521) about how 'Blakes blood boiled' when he saw a boy punished by having his foot tied to a log befits the man who wrote '
A Robin Red breast in a Cage 

Puts all Heaven in a Rage. 
(Blake, 490)' Blake began the largest commercial project of his career in 1795. The publisher Richard Edwards contracted Blake to execute designs for Edward Young's then famous poem, 'Night Thoughts', first published in 1742-6. With his usual attention to what he called 'minute particulars' (Blake, 194), Blake carefully translated Young's words into pictures; but by using his own vocabulary of images, Blake created a visual commentary on the poem. By 1797 Blake had produced 537 large watercolours surrounding the printed text of 'Night Thoughts'. The modest fee of $21 was probably based on the expectation of much more to follow for engraving the designs. Forty-three plates grace the 1797 volume, the first of four announced, but Edwards closed his business shortly thereafter and no further instalments appeared. Blake's immense labours had failed to produce profit or fame. 
The 'Night Thoughts' project inspired two others. Blake's 116 watercolours illustrating the poems of Thomas Gray, which repeat the format of the 'Night Thoughts' designs, were commissioned in 1797 by Flaxman as a gift for his wife. Probably in the previous year, Blake began to compose an epic, first titled 'Vala' and later changed to 'The Four Zoas' as layers of revision accumulated. Like Young's poem, Blake's is divided into 'Nights' and treats some of the same vast subjects -- life, death, immortality. Blake wraps these issues in his own mythology centred on the Zoas (Urizen, Los, Luvah, Tharmas) and their female counterparts, or 'emanations'. These beings, their speeches, and contentions, represent phenomena both physical and mental, the two being one in Blake's system. Blake probably worked on the manuscript and its marginal drawings, many sexually explicit, until 1807, but finally abandoned a poem that had spiralled beyond control. 
Blake's fortunes waned as the new century approached. In August 1799 he told Cumberland that 'even Johnson & Fuseli have discarded my Graver' (Blake, 704). Lacking these employers, Blake turned increasingly to patrons for his paintings and drawings. Among these were Butts, a good friend by 1799, and Dr John Trusler, who commissioned a watercolour of 'Malevolence' and apparently tried to instruct the artist in its composition. Blake could not brook interference with his talents and defended his work in two letters of August 1799, the second implying that Trusler was an 'Idiot' (ibid., 702). Patronage ceased. 
Another prospect began more propitiously. Blake had been in contact with the popular writer William Hayley, or at least his son Thomas, a student of Flaxman's, since June 1796. By February 1800 Blake was engraving plates for Hayley's 'Essay on Sculpture'. Hayley was dissatisfied with Blake's copy of a portrait of Thomas, but Blake seems not to have reacted as he did with Trusler. The professional relationship became more personal when Thomas died in May and Blake wrote a letter of condolence to Hayley comparing the father's grief to his own when, years earlier, Blake's brother had died at a similarly early age. The growing friendship between the men, each perhaps a replacement for the other's loss, was strengthened by Hayley's tendency to take under his wing talented men who, he believed, needed him to direct their genius. Blake was a good candidate, a man of heightened imagination who also possessed artisanal skills Hayley could use advantageously. 
Blake visited Hayley in July 1800 at his home in Felpham on the Sussex coast. There they apparently came to an informal agreement: Blake would take up residence in Felpham -- he immediately made arrangements to rent a cottage -- and Hayley would engage him on several designing and engraving projects. Blake had confessed to Flaxman, in a letter written just before his trip, that he was emerging 'from a Deep pit of Melancholy' (Blake, 706), a return to optimism stimulated by the developing relationship with Hayley. Letters to friends through the summer evince Blake's overwrought joy as he and his wife prepared to move to their new home. He associated the change in residence, an escape from 'Londons Dungeon dark', with financial and artistic independence, for under Hayley's patronage Blake hoped to be sufficiently compensated, yet able to 'be Poet Painter & Musician as the Inspiration comes' (letter to Cumberland, 1 Sept 1800, in 'Blake: an Illustrated Quarterly', 32, 1998, 4-5). The journey took all day, 18 September. The party included Blake's sister Catherine; the seven chaises of household goods included his rolling press. 
As his letters indicate, Blake's enthusiasm continued once in Sussex. Hayley received him 'with his usual brotherly affection' and Felpham was certain to prove 'propitious to the Arts' (Blake, 710-11). In a letter to Butts of 2 October 1800 Blake included a poem in couplets testifying to his renewed 'Vision' by the sea (ibid., 713). Hayley provided ample employment: a series of portraits of poets to decorate his library; a broadside etched in relief and white-line of Hayley's poem, 'Little Tom the Sailor'; portrait miniatures; illustrations for a series of ballads authored by Hayley and distributed (with scant success) by his friends; and engravings for Hayley's 'Life of William Cowper'. In May 1801 Blake reported to Butts that 'Hayley acts like a Prince' and that Felpham remained 'the sweetest spot on Earth' (ibid., 715). 
The first dissonant notes emerged from work associated with the biography of Cowper. Beginning in March 1801, Cowper's cousin Lady Harriet Hesketh criticized Blake's miniature, and later his engraving, based on George Romney's portrait of her beloved relation. More generally, Hayley tried to divert Blake from poetry and history painting and direct him into the practical crafts of copy engraving and miniature portraiture. As Blake later jotted in his notebook: '
When H -- y finds out what you cannot do 

That is the Very thing hell set you to. 
(Blake, 506)' Although he assisted Blake in acquiring at least a little Latin, Greek, and Hebrew and thereby elevated the London artisan closer to the society of educated gentlemen, differences in class and taste persisted. Hayley treated Blake as a protege possessing 'admirable Talents' and 'uncommon powers of mind', but also an 'eccentric Soul' evincing 'Touches of nervous Infirmity' verging on 'Insanity' (Hayley's letters in Bentley, 'Records', 83, 87, 106, 164). The decaying relationship with Hayley was compounded with poor health: Catherine Blake's recurring bouts of rheumatism began in November 1800; husband and wife were both ill in spring 1802 and again in January 1803. 
Blake's distresses went beyond professional and medical inconvenience. Growing tensions with his patron created, or at least augmented, profound psychic disturbances; indeed, Hayley's characterizations of Blake's mental states may have been reasonably accurate. Blake initially suffered in silence from Hayley's 'Genteel Ignorance & Polite Disapprobation' (letter to Butts, July 1803, Blake, 730), in part because of pecuniary dependence on Hayley's patronage. Such repression produced anguish and a disruption of those extrasensory perceptions that Blake believed to be one with his imagination. He was increasingly torn between fulfilling commissions from Hayley and from Butts, between his calling as an artist and the advice of his more worldly companions (including Hayley, Flaxman, and possibly Catherine Blake), and between temporal and spiritual responsibilities. This fall into a divided consciousness -- a dominant motif in much of Blake's poetry -- emerges in his letters from the autumn of 1801 to 1803. 
In September 1801 Blake confessed to Butts that his 'Abstract folly hurries' him away from 'Duty & Reality' (Blake, 716). If by 'folly' Blake meant his inner visions, then he had become alienated, however temporarily, from the wellsprings of his art. Unspecified distresses led Blake to write, in November 1802, that he had been 'very unhappy', having 'traveld thro Perils & Darkness', but that he had 'again Emerged into the light of Day' with renewed faith in 'him who is the Express image of God' (ibid., letter to Butts, 720). The restoration was short-lived; for several years, Blake's moods alternated between depression and hope, the former expressed in letters and poems through images of darkness, the latter through images of intense illumination and a turn toward Christ as saviour. By January 1803 Blake hinted that Hayley was the 'source' of his difficulties and stated his determination 'not to remain another winter' in Felpham (ibid., 724-5). This letter to Butts and an equally revelatory one to his brother James record Blake's most intimate observations on his practical circumstances and psychological state. Prompted (or excused) by ill health and the impending end of the lease on his cottage, Blake states his determination to distance himself from Hayley's friendship, now seen as malevolent. But why would Hayley, outwardly so mild, appear to Blake as a sneaking serpent? -- Because he was 'jealous' of Blake's talents (ibid., 725). Surprisingly, Blake likens Hayley's motivation to similar feelings on Stothard's part. It is difficult to believe that either the popular author or successful illustrator coveted the abilities of a man they considered an engraver needful of their advice, but Blake became convinced that 'Corporeal Friends are Spiritual Enemies' (ibid., 98). Blake concluded that he could 'alone carry on' his 'visionary studies in London unannoyd' by 'the Doubts of other Mortals' (ibid., letter to Butts, 25 April 1803, 728). 
Hayley was aware, by May 1803, of Blake's plans to leave Felpham, but the Blakes were still in their cottage when, on 12 August 1803, a private soldier in the 1st regiment of dragoons, John Scolfield, entered the garden. Not knowing that the man was there on the gardener's invitation, Blake told him to leave. Scolfield refused; heated words were exchanged. Finally Blake, short of stature but not of strength, took Scolfield 'by the Elbows &... pushed him forwards down the road' (letter to Butts, 16 Aug 1803, Blake, 732). The confrontation, witnessed in its final stages by several villagers and Scolfield's fellow soldier John Cock, ended at The Fox inn, a public house where Scolfield may have been drinking. Three days later Scolfield went before the Chichester justice of the peace, John Quantock, and accused Blake of seditious expressions favouring the French and damning the king of England. Blake refuted the charges vigorously but was ordered to appear at the Michaelmas quarter sessions of the court (Bentley, 'Records', 124-8). Blake's bond of $200 was paid by the accused, Hayley, and Joseph Seagrave, a local printer who had worked with both men. At its sessions on 4 October in Petworth, the grand jury returned bills indicting Blake for sedition against king and country and assault against Scolfield. Blake pleaded not guilty, but it would hardly have been inconsistent with Blake's anti-monarchical views, so evident in his work of the 1790s, to have damned the king while struggling with one of his soldiers. 
Blake was 'in anguish', as he states among the inscriptions he cut into a glass rummer in August (Bentley, 'Records Supplement', 24). And not without cause, for sedition was a grave charge at a time when England was fearful of Napoleonic invasion on the coastline where Blake resided. The encounter with Scolfield and its legal consequences increased Blake's paranoia and influenced his writings and friendships for years. He was initially grateful to Hayley for his support and regretful of earlier misgivings, even asking Butts to 'burn what I have peevishly written about any friend' (letter, 16 Aug 1803, Blake, 733). Yet gratitude can become a burden and the benefactor insufferable in the mind of the debtor. Such may have led Blake to believe, contrary to all appearances, that Hayley was implicated in a conspiracy against him, and thus to write a few years later in his notebook that Hayley, having failed to '
act upon my wife 

Hired a Villain to bereave my Life. 
(Blake, 506)' The Blakes moved to London in September, staying briefly with James Blake before taking rooms at 17 South Molton Street, Westminster, on the edge of Mayfair. Blake returned to Sussex in October to answer the indictment and again for trial on 11 January 1804 in the Chichester Guildhall. He was represented at trial by Samuel Rose, a London barrister retained and paid by Hayley. Before the duke of Richmond and six other magistrates, Rose opened his defence by acknowledging the seriousness of the charge of sedition, impugning Scolfield's character, and insisting on the defendant's innocence. Rose's speech was cut short by illness, but several witnesses testified on Blake's behalf and he was acquitted of all charges. 
Shortly after his return to London, Blake complained that 'Every Engraver turns away work... Yet no one brings work to me'. He had little taste for the hurly-burly of the commercial arts in 'a City of [character] Assassinations' (letters to Hayley, 7 Oct 1803 and 28 May 1804, Blake, 736, 751). Blake had to rely on friends, principally Fuseli, Flaxman, and Hayley, for engraving commissions. He assisted Hayley in preparation for a biography of Romney and negotiated with the publisher Richard Phillips for an edition of Hayley's ballads with new engravings of Blake's illustrations. Blake invested in the 1805 'Ballads', but probably lost money. For the Romney biography Blake began to engrave two plates, but only one appeared in the 1809 volume. Commissions for most of the Romney engravings, and for plates in a new edition of the Cowper biography, were given to Caroline Watson, whose softer style Hayley preferred. Blake must have been disappointed, but he told his patron that 'the Idea of Seeing' Watson's 'Engraving of Cowper' was 'a pleasing one' (letter, 22 March 1805, Blake, 764). This and other insincerities prompted by financial dependence led Blake to scrawl in his notebook, '
I write the Rascal thanks till he & I 

With Thanks & Compliments are quite drawn dry. 

' Another couplet addressed 'To H -- ' summarizes Blake's view of the relationship: '
Thy Friendship oft has made my heart to ake 

Do be my Enemy for Friendships sake. 
(Blake, 506)' In October 1804 Catherine Blake received electrical treatment for her rheumatism that reduced 'the swelling of her legs and knees' (Blake, 756). Blake reported, in this same letter to Hayley, an equally dramatic restoration in his psychic condition. After visiting the Truchsessian Gallery, an exhibition of paintings dubiously attributed to artists such as Michelangelo and Rembrandt, Blake 'was again enlightened with the light' he had enjoyed in his youth. 'I am really drunk with intellectual vision... as I have not been for twenty dark, but very profitable years'. Blake had 'reduced... to his station' the 'Spectrous Fiend' -- a personification of those distresses internal and external that had led him astray as an artist, 'incessantly labouring and incessantly spoiling' his work (ibid., 756-7). Blake remained ebullient in early December, telling Hayley that he had 'fought thro a Hell of terrors & horrors... in a Divided Existence now no longer Divided' (ibid., letter, 4 Dec 1804, 758). While it is difficult to discern any significant change in Blake's pictorial art datable to autumn 1804, his improved spirits may have affected his labours as a poet, an activity known to few, and appreciated by none, except for his wife. 
When still in Felpham, Blake had begun to compose in his notebook (and probably in separate drafts now lost) a group of short poems integrating his mythic structures and imagery with a more personal, often anguished, voice. A few years later, Blake wrote out in a clear hand ten poems of a similar tenor in what is now known as the Pickering manuscript, including 'The Mental Traveller' and 'Auguries of Innocence'. It may have been about this time that Blake began to rise 'in the middle of the night' and 'write for two hours or more', often with Catherine Blake at his side (Smith in Bentley, 'Records', 475; Gilchrist, 1.316). His renewed poetic instinct culminated in two epics in illuminated printing, 'Milton' and 'Jerusalem', dated 1804 on their title-pages. Both evolved out of, and incorporated many passages from, 'The Four Zoas' manuscript. As Blake reported to Butts, these interrelated poems were written 'from immediate Dictation... without Premeditation'. The result was a 'Sublime Allegory' of which Blake was 'the Secretary' for 'Authors... in Eternity' (letters, 25 April and 6 July 1803, Blake, 729-30). All three poems turn from political revolution and toward mental reconfigurations leading to biblical apocalypse. All three question conventional suppositions about imagination and reality, time and space, self and other, to entertain alternative ways of thinking and being at the core of Blake's visionary literalism. 

'Milton', not printed until 1810-11, follows the titular hero in a journey of self-discovery and renewal that also reconstructs the bond between Blake and his great predecessor. In the poem's second 'Book', Milton unites with his feminine aspect, Ololon, in progress towards the apocalyptic overcoming of divisions between the sexes, between the living and the dead, and between mind and its projections into the external world. This plot is interwoven with allusions ranging from the 'Bible' to Blake's own life, particularly the difficult relationship with Hayley. The lyric beginning 'And did those feet in ancient time', now well known as the hymn 'Jerusalem', appears in the 'Preface' to 'Milton'. 
The illuminated book entitled 'Jerusalem', the one hundred plates of which were not completed until 1820, takes for its subject all of history as a record of desire struggling for fulfilment. The cast of characters is vast, with Los (the artist's imagination at work in the material world), Jerusalem and Albion (the female and male portions of divided humanity who must be reunited), the nature goddess Vala, and Jesus playing major roles. The poem is divided into four chapters, each with a preface addressed to a different audience (the Public, the Jews, the Deists, the Christians), and concludes with a vision of consciousness, liberated and empowered, in a post-apocalyptic universe. Blake beautifully hand-coloured one complete copy of 'Jerusalem', but it remained unsold at his death. 
Blake's commercial prospects (and probably his spirits) were again rising when, late in the summer of 1805, he was commissioned by the engraver and would-be publisher Robert H. Cromek to illustrate Robert Blair's poem 'The Grave', first published in 1743. Blake quickly produced about twenty designs for 'the insignificant sum of one guinea each' (Smith in Bentley, 'Records', 464). Fifteen were selected for Blake to engrave, as Cromek announced in a November prospectus. Blake etched one design, 'Death's Door', as an example; Cromek exhibited it, along with the drawings, at his shop. The darkly reticulated white-line etching proved so out of step with contemporary tastes that Cromek soon hired the fashionable engraver Louis Schiavonetti to engrave all twelve designs actually published. Blake's loss of this potentially lucrative commission motivated his detached mood, as 'one who cares little for this World', in his letter of 11 December 1805 to Hayley (Blake, 767). Relations with Cromek may have remained polite until the publisher rejected Blake's dedicatory vignette 'To the Queen' in May 1807. Blake recorded his opinion of Cromek in his notebook: '
Cr -- loves artists as he loves his Meat 

He loves the Art but tis the Art to Cheat. 
(ibid., 509)' When 'The Grave' finally appeared in 1808, it included a frontispiece based on Thomas Phillips's 1807 portrait of Blake. The painting emphasizes Blake's hypnotic eyes, by all accounts his most prominent feature and even more evident in an anonymous wash drawing (probably a self-portrait) of 'c'.1803. 
The unhappy results of Blake's dealings with Cromek did not forestall another attempt to reach a wide audience. Blake began preparations in 1806 for a panoramic engraving of Chaucer's Canterbury pilgrims starting on their journey. The project was soon embroiled in controversy. When Blake learned that Stothard was painting a similar scene for Cromek, he believed that the publisher, having first commissioned Blake's design and seen the preliminary drawings, had stolen his idea. Although Stothard was almost certainly innocent of any double-dealing, Blake was furious with his old companion. 'Chaucer's Canterbury Pilgrims', Blake's largest print, found few purchasers when he published it in 1810. The engraving of Stothard's version, published in 1817, was a popular success. 
The 'Grave' and Canterbury imbroglios, coupled with reactions to his work of the sort represented by Robert Southey's condescending review of the 1805 'Ballads' illustrations, led to Blake's discomfort with commerce in the arts. He felt 'stigmatised as an engraver, who might do tolerably well, if he was not mad' (Malkin in Bentley, 'Records', 424). A few words Blake jotted in his notebook offer an even darker self-description: 'Tuesday Janry. 20. 1807 between Two & Seven in the Evening -- Despair' (Blake, 694). 
There are no known commercial engravings from Blake's hand between 1806 and 1813. Sales to Butts of watercolours, paintings, a set of the large colour prints designed in 1795, and several illuminated books became a major source of income. During a five-year period beginning in 1806, Butts paid Blake over $400, including fees for teaching engraving to his son (Bentley, 'Records', 175-6). Among the more important projects were series of watercolours illustrating Milton's major poems. The Revd Joseph Thomas commissioned a group of eight designs for 'Comus' in 1801, followed by 'Paradise Lost' (1807) and 'On the Morning of Christ's Nativity' (1809). Between 1808 and 1815, Blake produced similar sets for Butts, to which he added twelve illustrations to 'L'allegro' and 'Il penseroso' about 1816-20. Perhaps prompted by the 'Day of Judgment' design he drew for Blair's 'Grave', Blake painted a more elaborate watercolour of that subject for Butts in 1806. A year later, the countess of Egremont commissioned a similar watercolour, for which Blake wrote a detailed description. Patronage supplied what commerce denied. 
The 1808 Royal Academy exhibition included two of Blake's watercolours, but a year later he complained that his designs were 'regularly refused' by the academy (Blake, 527). Blake took matters into his own hands and, in May 1809, opened an exhibition of his tempera paintings and watercolours at the family home, 28 Broad Street, now occupied by his brother James. The display may have lasted until June 1810, when Charles and Mary Lamb saw Blake's paintings. Among the sixteen works were 'Apotheoses' ('Prospectus', Blake, 527) of Admiral Nelson, William Pitt, and Napoleon; the tempera of Chaucer's pilgrims; 'Satan Calling up his Legions'; and 'The Ancient Britons', Blake's largest painting, commissioned by the Welsh antiquary William Owen Pughe, now lost but reported to have been 10 by 14 feet. A letterpress 'Descriptive Catalogue' contains notes on each design, the longest an analysis of Chaucer's characters and the errors in Stothard's portrayal. This catalogue, along with the harshly critical annotations of 'c'.1808 to Joshua Reynolds's 'Discourses' and the 'Public address' and 'A vision of the last judgment' Blake drafted in his notebook 'c'.1810, presents his basic aesthetic concepts: the rejection of classical art in favour of a synthesis of the Hebraic and the Gothic (also boldly stated in the 'Preface' to 'Milton' and there intertwined with a rejection of Hayley's tastes), the superiority of line to colour (in part an inheritance from Blake's training as a line engraver), and the unity of conception and execution (in part a reaction against the complaint that Blake could conceive but could not adequately execute his sublime images). As he wrote in the 'Public address', 'Resentment for Personal Injuries' played a role in shaping Blake's views (Blake, 574). 
There is no record of sales resulting from the 1809 exhibition. The single review, by Robert Hunt in 'The Examiner' on 16 September 1809, mocked the paintings and branded the artist 'an unfortunate lunatic' (Bentley, 'Records', 216). After 1810, even commissions from Butts appear to have slowed as Blake sank deeper into obscurity and into his visions as he laboured on 'Jerusalem' and on another painting of the last judgment, measuring 7 feet by 5 and 'containing upwards of one thousand figures' (Smith in Bentley, 'Records', 467), left unsold at Blake's death and now lost. It was during this period that Catherine Blake told the artist Seymour Kirkup, 'I have very little of Mr. Blake's company; he is always in Paradise'. In June 1814, George Cumberland's son found Blake 'still poor still Dirty' -- the dirt probably ink from printing copperplates (Bentley, 'Records', 221, 232). After a period of coolness between the two in 1808, Blake was once again on good terms with Flaxman, on whose recommendation Blake received, by September 1814, the commission to engrave Flaxman's thirty-seven outline illustrations to Hesiod. Without this employment, lasting until 1817, and work (also gained with Flaxman's help) engraving illustrations for Rees's 'Cyclopaedia' and Wedgwood's catalogue of earthenware, the Blakes might have fallen into dire poverty. 
The artist John Linnell visited Blake in June 1818 and hired him to etch the preliminary stages of a portrait of James Upton. From this modest beginning developed a relationship that shaped the final nine years of Blake's life. Although Linnell was thirty-five years Blake's junior, they became good friends, attending art exhibitions and the theatre together. After Linnell moved to Hampstead in March 1824, Blake, always a great walker, often made the uphill journey on foot. There he 'sang, in a voice tremulous with age, sometimes old ballads, sometimes his own songs, to [unrecorded] melodies of his own' (Gilchrist, 1.294). 
The artist John Varley was among the first in a new circle of friends to which Linnell introduced Blake. During seance-like sessions, beginning in October 1819 and intermittently repeated during the next six years, Blake drew for Varley over one hundred 'Visionary Heads' of persons historical (Edward I, William Wallace) and spiritual ('The Man who Taught Blake Painting in his Dreams'). Varley, prompted by his interests in physiognomy and astrology, apparently believed in the literal presence of these figures. Blake may have taken the conjurations less seriously, yet his belief in the reality of imaginative apperception is consistent with visionary portraiture. Blake developed one of his more bizarre images, 'The Ghost of a Flea', into a tempera painting; Linnell's engravings of the creature's anthropomorphic head were published in Varley's 'Treatise on Zodiacal Physiognomy' (1828). 
In September 1819 Linnell introduced Blake to his family physician, Robert Thornton, who soon after hired Blake to design illustrations for Ambrose Philips's 'Imitation' of Virgil's first eclogue to appear in the third edition of Thornton's school text of Virgil. Blake first produced a relief etching of four small vignettes. These were rejected, probably for reasons both technical and stylistic. As with the 'Grave' project years earlier, Blake had failed to introduce one of his special graphic methods into a commercial publication. He next prepared twenty-one wash drawings -- apparently accepted by Thornton and his publishers -- and executed seventeen as wood-engravings. These were so ruggedly different from established conventions that they would have been excluded from Thornton's 1821 edition except for praise from several respected artists, including Sir Thomas Lawrence. The images of melancholy and disruption pictured in Blake's only engravings in wood suggest that Virgil's pastoral lament reminded Blake of his own pastoral sojourn in Felpham under Hayley's burdensome patronage. 
Blake's financial circumstances had not improved by the early 1820s; indeed, he may have become poorer. In 1821 he sold his collection of old master prints and moved to just two rooms at 3 Fountain Court, Strand. Blake received a charitable grant of $25 from the Royal Academy in June 1822; Thomas Lawrence also assisted with a gift of money. Blake persevered through these trying times, painting in 1821 one of his most mysterious allegorical designs, 'The Sea of Time and Space', illustrating Milton's 'Paradise Regained' with twelve watercolours, and in 1822 etching in relief two brief works, 'On Homers Poetry' [and] 'On Virgil', a disquisition on the errors of classicism, and 'The Ghost of Abel', a response to Byron's 'Cain: a Mystery'. In the latter, Blake emphasizes the need for forgiveness, suggesting that Blake was seeking release from self-defeating anger through the forgiveness of erstwhile enemies. 
Linnell's commissions may have been motivated in part by a desire to provide the ageing artist with a regular income. Blake had produced for Butts a series of nineteen watercolour illustrations to the book of 'Job' in 1805-6. Linnell traced these in September 1821; Blake later coloured the tracings and added two more designs. This work provided the basis for the contract, signed by Linnell and Blake on 25 March 1823, to engrave the 'Job' illustrations. The commission provided Blake an income of about $1 a week from 1823 through 1825. The task proved arduous, for Blake engraved the plates without preliminary etching, and the twenty-one designs plus an engraved title-page were not published until March 1825. Blake's graphic retelling of the story begins with Job's blind adherence to the letter of the law; follows Job and his wife through miseries inflicted by Satan, a projection of Job's false vision; and concludes with Job restored to prosperity, the physical sign of his spiritual awakening. Blake's mastery of traditional line engraving in the 'Job' illustrations recalls the Renaissance artists he so much admired, particularly Durer; but the interplay between darkness and light exhibited throughout the series may have been influenced by Linnell's engraving style. This revival of traditional graphics prompted Blake, probably at some point after 1818, to return to intaglio plates he had executed years earlier, including 'Joseph of Arimathea' and the large 'Job' and 'Ezekiel' separate plates, thoroughly to revise them and add new inscriptions. The emblems 'For Children' became 'For the Sexes: the Gates of Paradise'. 
Through Linnell, a group of young artists met Blake and came to admire him greatly, both for his character and his art. They looked upon him as a seer or 'Old Testament' prophet come to life; in turn, Blake's peace of mind was enhanced by finding a worshipful audience. Samuel Palmer, only nineteen when first recorded in Blake's company in May 1824, would kiss the 'bell-handle' before entering Blake's home, which the group called 'the House of the Interpreter' after a passage in Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress' illustrated by one of Blake's white-line etchings (Bentley, 'Records', 292, 295). George Richmond was the most influenced by the figural style of Blake's art. Works by Palmer and Edward Calvert reveal their profound debt to the Virgil wood-engravings, described by Palmer as 'visions of... Paradise; models of the exquisitest pitch of intense poetry' (ibid., 271). This loose brotherhood of Blake followers, one that also included Francis Oliver Finch, Frederick Tatham, and Welby Sherman, called themselves 'The Ancients' and often sought their own intense responses to nature in the environs of Shoreham, Kent, which Blake visited in late summer 1825. 
Blake's youthful associations, perhaps rich with memories of the lost bond with his brother Robert, were complemented by gatherings at the home of Linnell's patrons Charles and Elizabeth Aders. There Blake met Henry Crabb Robinson, who had written an article about Blake in 1811 for a German periodical and had discussed Blake's poems with William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Late in 1825, Robinson began to record Blake's conversations, including gnomic observations uttered in all honesty, but in such a way as to perplex the audience. Robinson writes in his 'Reminiscences' that Blake said: 'the most strange things in the most unemphatic manner, speaking of his 'visions' as any man would of the most ordinary occurances. '... I was Socrates' -- and then as if he had gone too far in that -- 'Or a sort of brother -- I must have had conversations with him -- So I had with Jesus Christ.'... Concerning the imputed Divinity of Jesus Christ He answered -- 'he is the only God' -- but then he added -- 'and so am I and so are you'. (Robinson in Bentley, 'Records', 538-40)' As in 'The Marriage of Heaven and Hell' and the 'Visionary Heads', Blake again intertwined the profound and the playful. 
Continued creativity, in spite of declining health, characterizes Blake's final years. He executed a separate etching/engraving of the 'Laocoon' 'c'.1826, surrounding the famous Hellenistic sculpture with aphorisms on the unity of art and religion and the evils of money and empire. New customers for the 'Songs of Innocence and of Experience' led Blake to print and elaborately hand colour five copies in the last three years of his life. In the summer of 1824, long before the 'Job' engravings were completed, Linnell commissioned an even larger project, the illustration of Dante's 'Divine Comedy', which provided Blake an income of about $2 a week. He 'applied himself to learning Italian' (Gilchrist, 1.334) and produced 102 watercolours which, like the seven Dante engravings, remained incomplete at his death. Other endeavours cut short by mortality included twenty-nine watercolour illustrations to Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress', begun in 1824, and an illuminated manuscript of 'Genesis'. 
Blake began, in the spring of 1825, to have periodic bouts of 'Shivering Fit[s]' and 'Ague' -- perhaps a return of the abdominal maladies he had suffered in Felpham (letters to Linnell, Blake, 773-4). Although growing ever weaker in the winter of 1826-7, he carried on heroically with the Dante designs and a small calling card for his old friend Cumberland. In April 1827 Blake told Cumberland that he had been 'near the Gates of Death & have returned very weak & an Old Man feeble & tottering, but not in Spirit & Life not in The Real Man The Imagination which Liveth for Ever' (Blake, 783). A failing liver caused jaundice, but still he laboured on. According to Tatham, in his last few days Blake coloured an impression of the 'Ancient of Days' (the frontispiece to 'Europe') and drew Catherine Blake's portrait (Bentley, 'Records', 527-8). 
Blake died at 3 Fountain Court on 12 August 1827. Three days later, Richmond informed Palmer that Blake 'died on Sunday Night at 6 Oclock in a most glorious manner. He said He was going to that Country he had all His life wished to see & expressed Himself Happy hoping for Salvation through Jesus Christ -- Just before he died His Countenance became fair -- His eyes brighten'd and He burst out in Singing of the things he Saw in Heaven. (Bentley, 'Records', 346-47)' The precise cause of Blake's death is not known, but the most detailed analysis of the symptoms suggests biliary cirrhosis, possibly caused by years of inhaling cupreous fumes while etching (Robson and Viscomi). Blake was buried on 17 August at Bunhill Fields, Finsbury, traditionally a cemetery for nonconformists where his parents and other family members were interred. Yet, according to Smith, Blake had requested a funeral service 'of the Church of England' (Bentley, 'Records', 476). Catherine Blake went to live with Linnell, but after about six months she moved to Tatham's home, where she served as housekeeper. In 1829 the earl of Egremont purchased from her Blake's 'The Characters in Spenser's Faerie Queene', a companion to the Canterbury pilgrims painting, for 80 guineas, a sum sufficient to supply her needs for the rest of her life. She died on 18 October 1831, leaving to Tatham the remaining stock of Blake's works, possibly including manuscripts which Tatham destroyed. After reprinting some of Blake's illuminated books, he claimed that most of the copperplates had been stolen (Gilchrist, 1.126); only one small fragment of a relief-etched plate has survived. 
The mythologizing of Blake's life began with the (embellished?) descriptions of his final days written by friends who considered him a sage. A different characterization emerged in obituaries: Blake was 'one of those ingenious persons... whose eccentricities were still more remarkable than their professional abilities' ('Literary Chronicle', 1 Sept 1827, in Bentley, 'Records', 351). J. T. Smith's reasonably straightforward memoir of 1828 was followed two years later by Allan Cunningham's more dramatic account of Visionary Blake, a compound of genius and madness. For the next three decades, Blake was remembered primarily as a psychological curiosity, his poetry unknown beyond 'Songs of Innocence and of Experience' (first published in letterpress in 1839), his designs little known beyond the illustrations to Blair's 'Grave'. 
Alexander Gilchrist's 'Life of William Blake' (1863) soon belied its subtitle, 'Pictor ignotus', by bringing the man and his work to the attention of a far larger audience than he had previously commanded. Although he rarely indicates his sources, Gilchrist includes information learned from people who had known Blake. Gilchrist died two years before publication; his widow saw the biography through the final stages of its production, assisted by Dante Gabriel Rossetti and his brother William Michael, whose catalogue of Blake's art appeared in the second volume of the work. Arguably the most important book ever published on Blake, Gilchrist's biography sets Blake within his intellectual and social milieu, but presents him as a secular saint -- a perspective influenced by Thomas Carlyle's theories of the artist as hero. Growing interest in Blake led to the first exhibition devoted to his art at the Burlington Fine Arts Club (London) in 1876. 
Algernon Charles Swinburne, also a Blake enthusiast in the Gilchrist/Rossetti circle, published the first book-length study of Blake's poetry in 1868. A heterodox and revolutionary Blake emerges in Swinburne's critique, one that includes high praise for 'The Marriage of Heaven and Hell'. While even Swinburne could do little more with Blake's later poetry than extract brief passages for comment, Edwin John Ellis and William Butler Yeats plunged headlong into the apparent chaos. Unfortunately, their three-volume edition and study of 1893 is marred by poor scholarship, a Procrustean notion of mystic symbolism, and a belief that Blake was Irish. 
John Sampson brought scholarly expertise to the editing of Blake's poetry in 1905, but a full and accurate edition of Blake's writings was still wanting. The challenge was taken up by Geoffrey Keynes, who more than any other individual shaped the public perception of Blake in the twentieth century. In 1921 Keynes published a detailed bibliography of Blake's writings, engraved book illustrations, and texts about him, followed four years later by a complete edition. Keynes continued to produce editions and scholarly essays devoted to Blake until his death in 1982. He was the key figure in founding in 1949 the William Blake Trust, which sponsored publication of facsimiles of the illuminated books (1951-76) and a second series of more affordable reproductions with scholarly introductions (1991-5). 
Joseph Wicksteed's commentary on the 'Job' engravings (1910) set a new standard for the study of Blake's pictorial art; S. Foster Damon's 'William Blake: his Philosophy and Symbols' (1924) made a similar but more extensive contribution to the study of Blake's ideas and poetry, thereby initiating the critical appreciation of Blake in the United States. His reputation continued to develop in America through the inter-war years, assisted by major collectors (particularly Henry Huntington and Lessing Rosenwald) and a comprehensive exhibition of his works in Philadelphia in 1939; but it was not until 1947, with the publication of Northrop Frye's 'Fearful Symmetry', that Blake's reputation as a poet began an exponential ascent. By setting Blake within a tradition of poetry extending from the 'Bible' to Virgil, Spenser to Milton, Frye's book, more than any other single study, established Blake as a defining presence in the pantheon of English Romantic poetry, the equal of Wordsworth and Coleridge. Seven years later, David Erdman's 'Blake: Prophet Against Empire: a Poet's Interpretation of the History of his Own Time', constructed an alternative foundation for the scholarly understanding of Blake in the second half of the century. Whereas Frye's perspective tended to emphasize a unifying system in Blake's work, nascent at the beginning and fleshed out in the later (and now fully appreciated) epics, Erdman perceived an evolution in response to shifting events in a revolutionary age. Frye's Blake rose above history; Erdman's Blake was fully engaged in time. 
By the last two decades of the century, Erdman's view became dominant, as a host of scholars set Blake within various historical and cultural contexts, ranging from printmaking to radical protestant and political groups. Others argued for Blake as a prophet of twentieth-century intellectual fashions, finding him a Marxist, Freudian, or deconstructionist 'avant la lettre'. The illuminated books, with their complex interactions between words and pictures, remained at the centre of critical debate, but every document, visual and verbal, received attention. During this same period, all requisite scholarly tools were produced: editions true to Blake's unconventional spelling and punctuation; a concordance to his writings; an exhaustive bibliography; complete catalogues of his paintings, drawings, and prints; several biographies; a journal-of-record devoted to its eponymous hero; and, by the century's final decade, an electronic archive on the internet. 'Blake' signified an academic industry as much as a man. 
Blake's influence on the arts and on popular culture forms an important part of his twentieth-century legacy. In 1916 Charles Hubert Parry set to music the 'Jerusalem' lyric from 'Milton'; it soon became one of the most sung hymns in the Church of England. The dramatic postures in Blake's 'Job' designs led Keynes to conceive of the ballet 'Job', which debuted in 1931 with music by Ralph Vaughan Williams, stage and costume designs by Gwendolen Raverat, and choreography by Ninette de Valois. Except for his profound effect on Yeats, Blake was not a major influence on twentieth-century British poetry. In America, however, the important poets Theodore Roethke and Allen Ginsberg, and the author and illustrator Maurice Sendak, considered themselves inspired by Blake. His impact on the visual arts was similarly limited, but intensely felt in the 1920s by a group of young printmakers, including Graham Sutherland. 
By mid-century Blake had become one of the cultural icons of the English-speaking world. The British Museum, the British Library, and the Tate Gallery housed important collections of his works, as did the National Gallery of Victoria in Melbourne, Australia, and several major institutions in the United States, including the National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC, the Yale University Center for British Art, and the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston. Single drawings and letters fetched at auction more than Blake made in his lifetime; copies of his illuminated books sold for over $1 million. 'The Tyger' from 'Songs of Experience' became the most anthologized text in the language, 'The Ancient of Days' one of the most widely recognized images. The installation of Jacob Epstein's bust of Blake in Westminster Abbey in 1957 signalled Blake's acceptance by the establishment; in the next decade he became a hero to a youthful counter-culture. 'The road of excess leads to the palace of wisdom' (Blake, 35) and other energetic outbursts in Blake's writings became rallying cries for those advocating political, sensual, and intellectual liberation. 
Blake's reputation reached international proportions by the end of the century. Translations of his poetry were complemented by exhibitions of his art in Germany, Italy, Japan, Israel, and Spain. In his homeland, a single sculptural response epitomized Blake's stature. Eduardo Paolozzi's monumental bronze of Isaac Newton, installed in the forecourt of the new British Library in 1995, copies Blake's 'Newton' colour print of 1795. Britain entered a new millennium with the image of its greatest scientist, placed at the entry to its greatest repository of knowledge, shaped by the vision of William Blake. 


@@@@@


doc= 2586


Blakeley, William (1830-1897), actor, of whose early life nothing is known, played as an amateur at the Gough Street Theatre (later pulled down) and at the Soho Theatre (later named the Royalty). His first professional appearance was at the Theatre Royal, Dublin, with Sir William Don. At the Amphitheatre, Liverpool, he performed as Polonius and in other parts, and he accompanied Edward Sothern on tour, playing Asa Trenchard to his Lord Dundreary in Tom Taylor's 'Our American Cousin'. He made his London debut on 21 December 1867 at the Prince of Wales's Theatre, Tottenham Street, as Sir Abel Hotspur in Dion Boucicault's 'How She Loves Him', having played the same role at the Prince of Wales's Theatre, Liverpool, in 1863. Among his most notable parts in the next few years were that of the original Bodmin Todder in T. W. Robertson's 'Play', John Chodd senior in a revival of the same author's 'Society', and Mr Tweedie in Yates's 'Tame Cats'. 
After accompanying Sothern to America in 1880, Blakeley appeared at the Criterion on 23 July 1881 as Jeremiah Deeds in 'Flats in Four Stories' ('Les locataires de Monsieur Blondeau'), adapted by G. R. Sims. It was this theatre with which his name was principally associated, and where he played comedy roles in the revivals of F. C. Burnand's 'Betsy', James Albery's 'Pink Dominos', and Taylor's 'Still Waters Run Deep'. Some of his most successful original characters at this theatre arose out of his skilful delineation of old men, from Talbot in Gilbert's 'Foggerty's Fairy' (1881) to the hen-pecked old General Bletchingley in Burnand's 'Headless Man' (1890). At Daly's Theatre in 1895 he appeared as Smoggins in 'An Artist's Model' and Duckworth Crabbe in 'The Chili Widow'. His last appearance in London was on 17 July 1897 at the Criterion, as Thomas Tyndal in Walter Stokes Craven's 'Four Little Girls'. 
Besides being what was known as a 'mugger', or maker of comic faces, Blakeley was a genuine comedian, and was particularly successful as Hardcastle in 'She Stoops to Conquer'. In showing self-importance, in airs of assumed dignity, and in the revelation of scandalized propriety, he stood alone. Blakeley, who had been married, died at Criterion House, Clovelly Terrace, Walham Green, London, on 8 December 1897, and was buried in Fulham cemetery on 13 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 2587


Blakely, Fletcher (1783-1862), non-subscribing Presbyterian minister, was born on 13 May 1783 at Ballyroney, co. Down. He was the youngest son of Joseph Bleakly, a farmer, and was named after the Revd William Fletcher (died 1824), Presbyterian minister of Ballyroney, who gave him his early education; both his parents died when he was very young. In 1799 he entered Glasgow University (at which time he spelled his name Bleakly), and is said to have graduated ('DNB') though he is not included in the university's roll of alumni. On 19 September 1809 he was ordained by Bangor presbytery as minister of Moneyreagh, co. Down, in succession to Samuel Patton. 
In 1810 Blakely married Margaret Lindsay (1783-1825), daughter of David Lindsay of co. Down. They had four children: Jane, who married the Revd William Cochrane; Sarah (1814-1844); David (1816-1854), inspector of Irish national schools; and William Joseph (1818-1842), Unitarian minister at Billingshurst, Sussex. 
Although Blakely was raised a Calvinist he gradually turned to Unitarian views. He was the first self-styled 'humanitarian preacher' in Ulster. Under his influence Moneyreagh became so well known for heterodox opinion that it was popularly said of Moneyreagh that it was the place 'where there is one God and no devil'. When, in 1821, the English Unitarians sent John Smethurst (1792-1859) on a mission to Ulster, the Moneyreagh meeting-house was one of the five meeting-houses which were open to him. 
In 1829 Blakely led his entire congregation to join the remonstrant secession from the synod of Ulster. He had throughout the previous synodical debates been one of the most powerful associates of Henry Montgomery, the leader of the New Light party, and helped him to form the Remonstrant Synod. On 27 April 1836 a public testimonial bore witness to his 'successful advocacy of the rights of conscience and human freedom'. Locally he also worked hard for popular education, for tenants' rights, and for the promotion of the flax industry. He was a joint editor from 1830 to 1833 of the 'Bible Christian'. His early tracts and sermons, published anonymously, include 'A Dialogue' (1817), 'On the Bible and other Standards of Faith', which was followed by 'The battle of the two dialogues... a conversation between a rev. Covenanter and a rev. Presbyterian on the impropriety of adhering to any standard of faith except the Bible' (1818). In reply to it John Paul, minister in the Reformed Presbyterian church at Carrickfergus (died 1848), published his first work, 'Creeds and Confessions Defended' (1819). Blakely's later works were 'The Doctrine of the Trinity not Comprised on the Faith' (1846) and 'An Explicit Avowal of Truth the Best Mode of Teaching it' (1853). He resigned his charge on 22 September 1857 but continued to preach until his successor, John Jellie, was installed on 27 September 1859. He died on 25 February 1862 at Cradley, Worcestershire, the residence of his son-in-law the Revd William Cochrane. Fletcher Blakely was a prominent Unitarian and a committed advocate of religious and civil liberty. He was buried in the graveyard of Moneyreagh non-subscribing Presbyterian church on 1 March 1862, and a monument was erected there to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 2588


Blakely, Johnston (1781-1814), naval officer in the United States service, was born in Dublin in October 1781. When he was an infant, his parents emigrated to North Carolina. In 1800 he entered the United States Navy and, when the Anglo-American War broke out in 1812, had attained the rank of master commandant. Commanding the 'Wasp', a new, large, heavily armed sloop, he sailed from Portsmouth, New Hampshire, on 1 May 1814. He crossed the Atlantic, and in the channel on 28 June fought and captured the much weaker British brig 'Reindeer', for which congress voted him a gold medal. In September 1814, on another cruise, he captured a merchant vessel and defeated the much weaker British brig 'Avon'. When other British warships approached, he ran. The 'Wasp' sailed south, captured two or three merchantmen, and was last seen in the Atlantic, west of Portugal, on 9 October; her fate was unknown. For one who fought so few actions and only against decisively weaker opponents, Blakely gained an apparently exaggerated reputation among his compatriots. 


@@@@@


doc= 2589


Blakeney, Sir Edward (1778-1868), army officer, born at Newcastle upon Tyne, was the fourth son of Colonel William Blakeney of Newcastle upon Tyne, MP for Athenry in the Irish parliament (1781-3, 1790-1800). He was appointed a cornet in the King's Royal Irish light dragoons on 28 February 1794, lieutenant in an unattached regiment of foot on 24 September 1794, and captain in the 99th foot on 24 December 1794. He accompanied the expedition under Major-General White to the West Indies and was present in British Guiana at the capture of Demerara, Berbice, and Essequibo in 1796; during this service he was taken prisoner by privateers three times. After a short period on half pay he joined the 17th foot as a captain on 8 March 1798, and in 1799 he went with the duke of York's expedition to the Netherlands, taking part in actions on 10 and 19 September and 2 and 6 October. After being promoted major on 17 September 1801, and again going on half pay the following year, he joined the 47th foot on 9 July 1803 and exchanged into the 7th foot on 24 March 1804. In 1807 Blakeney sailed to the Baltic with Lord Cathcart's force, which captured the Danish fleet and secured the surrender of Copenhagen. Appointed brevet lieutenant-colonel on 25 April 1808, he was present with the 1st battalion of the 7th foot at the capture of Martinique in 1809, then led it during the battles of Busaco (27 September 1810) and Albuera (16 May 1811), once the battalion had joined the duke of Wellington in the Peninsula. After recovering from a severe thigh wound suffered at Albuera, on 20 June 1811 as a substantive lieutenant-colonel Blakeney assumed command of both battalions of the 7th, which had been combined after sustaining heavy losses at Albuera. He subsequently commanded the regiment during the action at Aldea de Ponte, the sieges of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz (where he was severely wounded in the arm), and the battles of Vitoria, Pamplona, the Pyrenees, and Nivelle, as well as various minor encounters. 
Having been made colonel on 4 June 1814, Blakeney took part in the British expedition to the United States and fought at the battle of New Orleans. Subsequently, he joined the duke of Wellington's allied force in the Netherlands prior to its entry into Paris in 1815, and remained in France with the army of occupation. Appointed KCB on 2 January 1815, he also received the gold cross and one clasp for Martinique, Albuera, Badajoz, Vitoria, and the Pyrenees, and the silver war medal with four clasps for Busaco, Ciudad Rodrigo, Nivelle, and Nive; in 1812 he had been created a knight of the Tower and Sword of Portugal. He married, in 1814, Maria, daughter of Colonel Gardiner of the East India Company's service. She died at Chelsea Hospital, London, on 21 January 1866, aged seventy-six. 
Although retaining nominal command of his regiment until 2 June 1825, and being promoted major-general on 27 May 1825, Blakeney commanded the 1st brigade of the army sent to Portugal in 1826. On 20 September 1832 he was appointed colonel of his old regiment, the 7th foot, and he served in Ireland as commander-in-chief from 1836 to 1855. A privy councillor from 7 May 1836 (thereafter appearing in the 'Army List' as 'Rt Hon.'), Blakeney was promoted local lieutenant-general on 26 August 1836, substantive lieutenant-general on 28 June 1838, and general on 20 June 1854. He had been appointed GCH in 1836 and GCB on 7 May 1849, before leaving the 7th foot on 21 December 1854 to become colonel of the 1st foot, a post retained until his death. After his return from Ireland he became lieutenant-governor of Chelsea Hospital in London (with a salary of $400 p.a.) on 6 February 1855 and governor (at $500 p.a.) on 25 September 1856. Sir Edward attained the rank of field marshal on 9 November 1862 and was made colonel-in-chief of the rifle brigade on 28 August 1865. He died at Chelsea Hospital on 2 August 1868 and was buried at Twickenham, Middlesex, on 8 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 2590


Blakeney, Richard Paul (1820-1884), Church of England clergyman, was born in co. Roscommon on 2 June 1820, the son of Richard Blakeney, a Royal Marines officer, and his wife, Susan Maria, elder daughter of John Purdon of Low Park, co. Roscommon. His father's family came originally from Norfolk. He was educated at Mr Sargent's school in Dublin and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he matriculated in 1837, graduated BA in 1842, and took his LLB and LLD in 1852. He was awarded a DD by the University of Edinburgh in 1868. 
Blakeney was ordained deacon in 1843 and priest in 1844. His first curacy was at St Paul's, Nottingham, and in 1844 he was appointed perpetual curate of the new district church of Hyson Green, Nottingham. He became involved in local controversies with Roman Catholics, and rapidly acquired a reputation as a protestant polemicist through his involvement in the British Reformation Society. From late 1850 he was employed by John Hope (1807-1893), the barrister and philanthropist, to write tracts for his Edinburgh-based anti-Catholic movement. These works formed the basis of Blakeney's 'Manual of the Romish Controversy' (1851) and 'Popery in its Social Aspect' (1852). 
Blakeney had married first about 1840, but his wife, Anna, was, he subsequently alleged, 'torn from me by the demoniacal machinations of Popery for ten years' (Blakeney to J. Hope, 24 May 1851, NA Scot., Hope MSS). In May 1851 Blakeney's brother carried her off from alleged confinement at Gort in co. Galway and returned her to her husband, who found her to be in a mentally and physically enfeebled state. It would seem that this personal tragedy gave particular intensity to Blakeney's hatred of the Roman Catholic church. Anna Blakeney appears to have died in 1855. 
In 1852 Blakeney moved to Birkenhead, as perpetual curate of Christ Church, Claughton. During the subsequent two decades he combined an energetic parochial ministry with national roles as a prominent organizer and writer on behalf of militantly protestant evangelicalism within the Church of England. He was a dominant force in the British Reformation Society, a key opponent of ritualism, and supporter of the Church Association, formed in 1865. His works, which also notably included a 'Protestant Catechism' (1854) and 'The Book of Common Prayer in its History and Interpretation' (1865), became textbooks for his party. In the meantime he was married a second time in 1856, to Elizabeth Bibby. They had four sons and six daughters, born between 1858 and 1874. 
In 1874 Blakeney was appointed vicar of Bridlington, Yorkshire, where he adopted a gentle and effective pastoral style which belied his reputation as a formidable controversialist. He was instrumental in the restoration of Bridlington priory church, and his growing respectability was evidenced by his appointment as a rural dean in 1875 and as a canon of York Minster in 1882. He died at the parsonage in Bridlington on 31 December 1884, after a short illness, and was buried on 6 January 1885 in the shadow of the priory church. At a subsequent memorial meeting the archbishop of York, William Thomson, paid tribute to his unsurpassed learning and unfailing humility of demeanour. Blakeney's brother, John Edward Blakeney (1824-1895), first archdeacon of Sheffield, shared his religious opinions, and won renown as a church builder and ecclesiastical administrator. 


@@@@@


doc= 2591


Blakeney, William, Baron Blakeney (1671/2-1761), army officer, the eldest son in the family of five sons and four daughters of William Blakeney (died 1717/18) and his wife, Elizabeth Bowerman, was born at Mount Blakeney, co. Limerick, Ireland, on 7 September 1671 or 1672. His father was a fairly wealthy country gentleman who represented the borough of Kilmallock in the Irish House of Commons for many years, and he expected his eldest son to lead the same life as himself. During the Rapparee insurrection of 1690 the family retreated to Castle Blakeney, but the young William Blakeney was left to defend the estates with a small military force organized out of his father's tenants -- which he did successfully. 
Blakeney's early military career is uncertain. He was commissioned as an ensign in 1695 and became a lieutenant on 1 August 1701. His anonymous biographer says he received an ensigncy in Lord Cutt's regiment of foot guards (Coldstream) in 1702 at the siege of Venloo, but there is no evidence of this in the regiment's archives. He continued to serve in Flanders, becoming a lieutenant in the 1st foot guards on 9 March 1708 and lieutenant-colonel in 1712. After the treaty of Utrecht came a long period of peace, during which promotion was slow; Blakeney was made lieutenant-colonel of Lord John Kerr's regiment of foot on 3 April 1718, but received no further promotion until 1737. 
On 27 January 1737, possibly through the influence of the duke of Richmond, Blakeney became colonel of a regiment of foot on the Irish establishment. In 1739 the regiment was ordered to England in response to the growing crisis with Spain. War was declared on Spain on 19 October, and early in 1740 a large expedition was prepared to attack the Spanish colonies in the West Indies. Blakeney's regiment was selected to go on this service, and Blakeney himself was appointed adjutant-general to the expedition, which was commanded by Charles, Lord Cathcart. Blakeney had gained a solid reputation during the 1730s as a good trainer of officers. A major element of the expeditionary army was to be a regiment of 3000 American levies, raised in the northern colonies, officered partly by local gentry and partly by officers from Britain. In April Blakeney sailed for New York to assist organizing and disciplining this regiment. In his absence, in August, he was appointed as third brigadier on the expedition. 
The Americans began to appear at Jamaica from late September 1740. Blakeney arrived at the end of November, while the main expeditionary army arrived from Britain in late January. Cathcart had died in December 1740, and had been replaced by his second in command, Major-General Thomas Wentworth. Blakeney served throughout the expedition. At Cartagena he registered his objection to the army council of war decision on 8 April 1741 to assault the fort of San Lazar -- an attack which ended in disaster. From mid-1741 he acted as Wentworth's second in command. He was present with the army during its occupation of Guantanamo Bay, on the south coast of Cuba, but remained at Kingston during the abortive attack on Porto Bello in March 1742. He returned to England when the expedition was abandoned in the autumn of 1742. 
After his return from the West Indies, Blakeney was made lieutenant-governor of Stirling Castle, which was besieged by the Jacobites during the rising of 1745-6. The siege began in early January 1746, and Blakeney vigorously defended the castle, inflicting substantial casualties upon his besiegers, until relieved by the duke of Cumberland's army on 2 February. His good service was not forgotten by George II. Blakeney had been promoted major-general on 20 July 1745. He became lieutenant-general in 1747, and lieutenant-governor of the island of Minorca. 
Blakeney went at once to Minorca, and as Lord Tyrawley, the governor, remained in Britain, he was left in chief command for ten years. As Britain and France drifted to war, a French expedition to attack Minorca was dispatched in April 1756 under the duc de Richelieu and Admiral la Galissonniere. They intended to make a rapid attack before reinforcements could reach the garrison. Blakeney had become concerned about the French preparations as early as February but had been unable to achieve much. His only hope was that he could hold out at Fort St Philip, Port Mahon, until reinforcements arrived. Admiral the Hon. John Byng's return to Gibraltar after the inconclusive battle with Galissonniere's fleet on 19 May ended hopes of relief, and Blakeney, after seventy days' defence, surrendered on the honourable terms that his garrison was to be transported to Gibraltar, and not made prisoners of war. Blakeney's gallant defence of Minorca contrasted greatly in the minds of the English people with the apparent failure of Byng to press home his attack. Blakeney gave ambiguous evidence at Byng's trial as to the prospects of resisting the French and reinforcing his garrison. No blame was attached to Blakeney, and he was made a knight of the Bath and Baron Blakeney of Mount Blakeney in the peerage of Ireland. He was MP for Kilmallock from 1725 to 1757. He was a popular figure; a statue of him by Van Most was erected in Dublin, and after his death on 20 September 1761, at the age of eighty-nine, he was buried on 9 October in Westminster Abbey. 
Blakeney left no major collection of private papers. His personality and private life are therefore difficult to establish. The anonymous biography written in 1756 presents him as a traditional soldier and gentleman. He was depicted as a soldier of the soldiers, always living among them, enjoying his punch as well as any of them, and beloved by them. In his family relations he was always exemplary; he used to live on his pay, and to allow his brothers to live on his estate of Mount Blakeney. One brother swindled him grossly; but he made no change in his arrangements, and merely transferred his estate to another brother, Robert, who succeeded to the property on Blakeney's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 2592


Blakesley, Joseph Williams (1808-1885), dean of Lincoln, was born at 38 Coleman Street, in the city of London, on 6 March 1808, and baptized privately on 22 April. His parents were Jeremiah George and Elizabeth Blaksley, as the name was then spelt. His father, who was a factor, died before his son had reached the age of ten. He entered St Paul's School, London, on 3 October 1819, after which he matriculated with a Stock scholarship and a special exhibition at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, on 3 November 1827. Among his close friends there were R. Chenevix Trench (subsequently archbishop of Dublin), R. Monckton Milnes (Lord Houghton), Henry Alford, James and Thomas Story Spedding, Alfred Tennyson, and his brothers. His friendships among Trinity men led to his migration from Corpus to Trinity in Lent 1830. As an undergraduate Blakesley was influenced by J. C. Hare and Connop Thirlwall, through their association with the Cambridge Conversazione Society. 
Blakesley joined the 'youthful band of friends' forming the celebrated Apostles' club. The club, under the influence of its 'second father', Professor F. D. Maurice, the 'creator not of its form but of its spirit' ('Maurice's Life and Letters', i. 110), greatly influenced Blakesley. He was the '
Clear-headed friend, whose joyful scorn, 

Edged with sharp laughter, cuts atwain 

The knots that tangle human creeds 

' to whom Lord Tennyson addressed one of his first published poems. 
In 1829 Blakesley was president of the Cambridge Union, and in 1830 was elected to a foundation scholarship. He graduated BA in 1831, MA in 1834, and BD on 5 April 1849. He was a wrangler in the mathematical tripos and was placed third in the classical tripos, where his chief strength lay, subsequently obtaining the senior chancellor's medal. He was elected a fellow of Trinity in 1831, became assistant tutor in 1834, and was tutor from 1839 to 1845. Among his pupils were Lord Lyttelton, Lord Frederick Cavendish, George Denman, A. J. Beresford Hope, and Arthur Cayley. 
Blakesley had originally intended to adopt the law as his profession, being admitted at the Inner Temple on 16 April 1831. He had a capacity for expressing opinion and summing up facts, but weak health led him to change his career. He was ordained deacon in 1833 and priest in 1835. In 1834, together with other Trinity liberals, including Sedgwick and Thirlwall, Blakesley announced his opposition to university religious tests. In 1840 he acted as campaign manager to the whig Lord Lyttelton in the election of the university high steward. He twice occupied the university pulpit at Cambridge (1840, 1843); his sermons were published as 'Conciones academicae' (1843). In 1850 he was an unsuccessful candidate for the regius chair of divinity. 
In 1845 Blakesley left Cambridge to take up the Trinity College living of Ware, Hertfordshire. On 21 August 1845 he married Margaret Wilson Holmes, daughter of Revd Thomas Holmes of Brooke Hall, Norfolk. They had seven sons and four daughters before Margaret Blakesley died in 1880. From 1850 to 1863 he was classical examiner in the University of London. As vicar of Ware he became widely known as the Hertfordshire Incumbent, whose letters in 'The Times' newspaper examined social and political subjects of the day. The letters greatly increased his reputation, and in 1863 he received a canonry at Canterbury from Lord Palmerston, with whose political views he fully sympathized. In 1860 Palmerston had offered Blakesley the regius professorship of history at Cambridge in preference to Dr Woodham of Jesus, despite Blakesley's lack of credentials as a modern historian. He became proctor in convocation for his chapter, and was an influential, although very independent, member of the lower house, serving as a regular member of the committee for revision of the translation of the 'New Testament'. Although no scientific theologian, Blakesley took much interest in theological studies, especially in the critical and evidential department. He believed the divine nature of the 'Bible' could not be established by impersonal science but was apprehended by individual conscience. By diminishing rational Christianity as a foundation for belief, he felt he could safely pursue rational biblical criticism. Poor health drove him to Algiers in the winter of 1857-8. On his return he published an account of his sojourn under the title of 'Four Months in Algiers, with a Visit to Carthage'. 
In 1872 Blakesley succeeded James Jeremie as dean of Lincoln on Gladstone's recommendation. As dean he made Lincoln his home, and devoted himself to the interests of his cathedral and of the city of Lincoln. A practical man, he gave attention to the management of the cathedral, and opposed some of the enthusiastic projects for increasing cathedral activities favoured by his bishop, E. W. Benson. He did not see the cathedral as the mother church of the diocese, but as existing by and for itself. His view of the church was expressed in 'Thoughts on the recommendations of the ecclesiastical commission... a letter to W. E. Gladstone' (1873), in which he argued that the church needed variety to retain all channels for talent: the scholar and the antiquary, not just the preacher and bishop. 
Blakesley was master of the court of the Mercers' Company in 1864. As one of the governors he took a warm interest in the welfare of St Paul's School. His chief work was an edition of Herodotus for the 'Bibliotheca Classica'. His annotations were chiefly devoted to geographical and historical questions. He contributed articles to the 'Quarterly' and 'Edinburgh' reviews and other periodicals, and wrote many reviews of books for 'The Times' newspaper. He died on 18 April 1885, at the deanery, Lincoln, and was buried on 23 April at St Mary Magdalene, Lincoln. 


@@@@@


doc= 2593


Blakeway, John Brickdale (1765-1826), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, the eldest son of Joshua Blakeway, of Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth, sister of Matthew Brickdale, merchant and MP in several parliaments for the city of Bristol, was born at Shrewsbury on 24 June 1765. He was educated initially in the free school there (1772-5). From 1775 to 1782 he attended Westminster School, from where he went to Oriel College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1786 and proceeded MA in 1795. Disappointed in his hopes of election to a fellowship at Oriel, he left the university and entered Lincoln's Inn; he was called to the bar in 1789. He followed the law more for pleasure than as a means of support, and worked on the Oxford circuit, where he was quite successful, despite having a slight speech impediment. The collapse of the family fortunes, however, compelled him to earn his living. The legal profession proved too expensive, and Blakeway resolved to enter the church. He was ordained in 1793. 
In 1794 Blakeway was presented by his uncle the Revd Edward Blakeway, then mayor of Shrewsbury, to the ministry of the royal peculiar of St Mary's, Shrewsbury. On his uncle's death in 1795 he became official of the peculiar, and also succeeded to the vicarage of Neen Savage, Shropshire, and the rectory of Felton, Somerset. In October 1797 he married Mary-Elizabeth, youngest daughter of Thomas Wilkieson, a Hamburg and Dutch merchant, formerly of Blackheath. They were happily married, but had no children. In 1800 he was presented to the vicarage of Kinlet, Shropshire. From 1800 until 1816 he divided his time between Kinlet and Shrewsbury, but, finding it inconvenient to keep up two houses, he gave up Felton and Kinlet in 1816, and subsequently lived only in his native town. 
Comfortably settled with his various livings, Blakeway found time to turn to antiquities, which became his favourite pursuit. He was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1807. Blakeway's main works are 'A History of Shrewsbury' (2 vols., 1825), written in collaboration with Hugh Owen, and 'The Sheriffs of Shropshire' (1831). He also contributed fifty-six notes to the Boswell-Malone edition of Shakespeare (1821). 
Although he had suffered from asthma as a child, Blakeway was generally in good health until he began to suffer from a tumour on his hip in around 1823. It was operated on in early 1826, but he died on 10 March 1826 at the Council House, Shrewsbury, which had been his home since 1815. He was buried in St Mary's Church, where a fine Gothic monument, by John Carline, was erected to his memory by his parishioners. 
Much of Blakeway's work remained in manuscript. His topographical history of Shropshire was published posthumously by the Shropshire Archaeological Society in 1905-7. His quick mind and good memory, combined with great industry and his legal training, made his work highly respected by contemporaries, although it was increasingly superseded by that of specialist students of the next generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 2594


Blakey, Nicholas (d. 1758), draughtsman and engraver, is principally known for his book illustrations and for several large-scale scenes representing episodes from Britain's early history. He was born in Ireland and by 1747 was studying in Paris. Here, it can be assumed, he developed the late rococo style that can be seen throughout his work but is most notable in his composition of dancing nymphs in a rocaille cartouche. He worked principally for publishers, producing, and sometimes engraving, illustrations to embellish a wide variety of books. Although it is not clear whether he returned from Paris, he regularly collaborated with other noted book illustrators, including L. P. Boitard, Charles Grignion, Simon Francois Ravenet, and Louis Gerard Scotin, on British publications. This was the team behind the illustrations for Bernard Siegfried Albinus's anatomical publication 'Tables of the Skeleton and Muscles of the Human Body' (1749), where Blakey's earliest published designs appear. 
Between 1751 and 1753 Blakey worked closely with the painter Francis Hayman, producing frontispieces, very much in Hayman's distinctive style, for 'The Works of Alexander Pope' (1751), Jonas Hanway's 'An Historical Account of the British Trade over the Caspian Sea' (1753), and J. H. Merchant's 'The Revolution in Persia' (1753) -- all of which are simply signed 'Blakey del.'. Again produced with Hayman, Blakey's most complex works were designed for a subscription scheme launched by the publishers John and Paul Knapton and Richard Dodsley between 1749 and 1750. Eventually published as part of their 'English History Delineated' (1750-52), compositions such as 'Alfred in the Isle of Athelney' reveal Blakey's abilities with expression and the human figure, as well as his sensitivity to the contemporary debates surrounding the need for a school of history painting in England. Blakey died in Paris on 20 November 1758, survived by his wife, Elizabeth, who died in 1770. 


@@@@@


doc= 2595


Blakey, Robert (1795-1878), radical and historian of philosophy, son of Robert Blakey ('c'.1774-1796), mechanic, and his wife, Elizabeth Laws ('b'. 1773), was born in Manchester Street, Morpeth, Northumberland, on 18 May 1795. His father died when he was nine months old. When he was six, he was taken charge of by his grandmother, also Elizabeth Laws ('c'.1728-1818), a staunch Presbyterian. 'She awakened within me that love of knowledge which has been to me, not only a cold sentiment, but a positive passion from my earliest recollections' ('Memoirs', 46). From his eighth year he worked almost full time for his uncle, market gardening and making 'corve rods'. In February 1809 he moved to Alnwick, where he became a furrier, learned fishing and shooting, and became a radical in the mould of William Cobbett. His minister, the Revd David Paterson, gave him private tuition which, with his own extensive reading, made him unusually well educated. 
In 1815 Blakey returned to Morpeth, selling rabbit fur to hat makers throughout much of England and Scotland. He opened two hat shops and speculated in property. On 11 June 1822 he married Mary Gibb (1791-1858), daughter of Henry and Isabella Gibb of Alnwick. They had six children, of whom four survived -- Mary (1823-1895), Isabella Elizabeth (1824-1901), George (1827-1890), and Robert (1828-1855). Blakey 'had at times very indifferent health, and I have known him laid up for months, and never out of doors' (Haslam). He wrote pamphlets and squibs on the Morpeth poor-law fraud (1818-21), contributed to 'Cobbett's Register', the 'Black Dwarf', 'Durham Chronicle', and 'Tyne Mercury', was elected to Morpeth town council in 1835, and became mayor in November 1836. His most important achievements were the founding of the Morpeth Mechanical and Scientific Institution (1825) and the new corporation schools (1837-8), which anticipated by thirty years the Cowper-Temple clause of 1870 on religious teaching in schools. 'Cottage Politics' (1837) contains his charges of cruelty against the Morpeth guardians, with their replies. In 1841, in the 'Newcastle Journal', he detailed two appalling cases of their interference in medical treatment, but also admitted making errors in his original accusations. 
In 1838 Blakey purchased the 'Northern Liberator', the only Chartist newspaper to attract extensive advertising. He and Thomas Doubleday wrote the leaders, and in 1839 Blakey bought a new press and doubled its size, after which it enjoyed an average circulation of over 2400. His sub-editor, Thomas Devyr, inserted his own 'Address to the middle classes' in the first enlarged issue. The government charged Blakey and his printer, John Bell, with seditious libel. Bell went to prison for six months, but Blakey's case was twice postponed because of illness. His account of what happened is confused, but the case was evidently compromised, and Blakey closed down the 'Liberator' in December 1840. The home secretary was privately delighted (Napier, 2.148) and on 25 February 1841 Blakey was merely bound over. The prosecution and closure cost him severe worry and financial loss, made worse by the failure of 'The Politician' (June-July 1841). 
In philosophical speculation Blakey was an orthodox follower of the intuitive school. His literary career began in 1820 in the 'Newcastle Magazine'. He published 'An Essay on Moral Good and Evil' in 1831. 'History of Moral Science' (2 vols., 1833) established him as a scholarly writer, but after 1834 philosophy gave way for a time to politics and business. In 1840 he moved to London, and in 1841: 'I went to France with my wife and family. Here I resolved to devote all my time and energies to philosophical literature' ('Memoirs', 115). They moved to Belgium, constantly short of money, but in 1843-4 Blakey made $300 from ghost-writing, and with a friend wrote 'Hints on Angling' under the pseudonym Palmer Hackle (1846). He returned to London and brought out his principal work, 'History of the Philosophy of Mind' (4 vols., 1848), dedicated to Prince Albert. In 1849 Leopold, king of the Belgians, awarded him a gold medal. 
In 1849 Blakey became professor of logic and metaphysics at Queen's College, Belfast. He made a good start, but then missed a whole academic year due to illness, and in October 1851 was dismissed, technically for neglect of duty. During his illness he published 'Historical Sketch of Logic' (1851) and, after he recovered, 'The Angler's Complete Guide to the Rivers and Lakes of England' (1853), 'Rivers and Lochs of Scotland' (1854), and 'History of Political Literature' (2 vols., 1855), the unpublished third and fourth volumes of which are held in manuscript in the British Library of Political and Economic Science. In 1856 he was elected PhD by the University of Jena. 
After 1849 the Blakeys lived in Glasgow, but were at Moffat when Mrs Blakey died in 1858. Blakey returned to London and on 10 December 1859 married Charlotte Esther Aldous, 'nee' Reynolds ('c'.1799-1878). In 1860 the former Chartist agitator was awarded a pension from the civil list, 'in consideration of his exertions to aid and promote the study of philosophy' ('The Athenaeum', 11 Aug 1860). He lived for several years at Walford, near Ross-on-Wye, but returned to London in 1873-4. He died on 26 October 1878 at his home, 20 Blomfield Road, Maida Hill, Paddington, and was buried at Kensal Green. Twenty-five of his works appeared between 1831 and 1879. Most can still be read with profit, and his fishing books continue to be of use, if sometimes only as a contrast to modern times -- the upper Spey, Blakey notes, is so full of fish that 'one grows absolutely tired of the sport' (Blakey, 'Rivers and Lochs of Scotland', 134). 'Hints on Angling' is mentioned in the eighth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' but, contrary to report, Blakey was not a contributor. His 'Angling, or, How to Angle and where to Go' (1854) published at 1's'. was constantly reprinted and came out in a new edition in 1898, while 'History of Political Literature' was republished by Kennicat as recently as 1970. Blakey never finished his memoirs, which must be used with caution, but they mention many contemporaries, from Jack Mitford to Cardinal Newman. Unfortunately his papers and portrait are lost. His daughter Isabella married George Adam Bell of Brooklyn; they had four sons, and their granddaughter Madeline Bell Gilbert had children of her own in New York in 1920. Blakey's last known descendants in Britain were Elizabeth Lewis, 'nee' Sinclair ('b'. 1897), and Arthur Reginald Sinclair Lewis ('b'. 1918). 


@@@@@


doc= 2596


Blakiston, John (bap. 1603, d. 1649), politician and regicide, was baptized on 21 August 1603 at Sedgefield in co. Durham, the third son of Marmaduke Blakiston (1565-1639) and Margaret James (1575-1636). He was apprenticed to Christopher Shafto of Newcastle upon Tyne, probably in 1613, and became a free burgess, as a mercer, in 1627. Later, royalists described him as either a pedlar, butcher, chandler, or shopkeeper, but such disparaging comments cannot detract from the fact that by 1632 he was one of Newcastle's chamberlains. His growing prominence within the town's mercantile community was perhaps assisted by his marriage to Susanna Chamber ('b'. 1607, died in or after 1661), the widow of a local merchant, at All Saints, Newcastle, on 9 November 1626. Blakiston's father was a prebendary of Durham Cathedral and a noted Arminian ally of John Cosin, his son-in-law, who was much criticized by puritan commentators such as Peter Smart. However, Blakiston himself emerged as a puritan during the 1630s. He helped secure a lecturer (William Morton) for Newcastle, and was fined by the high commission in Durham for his attack upon a local minister, Yeldard Alvey. 
Blakiston was returned to the Long Parliament for Newcastle in a contested election, being declared eligible to sit on 30 January 1641. He became a zealous reforming member and later parliamentarian, who subscribed $1200 for the Irish Adventure, and whose interests lay in religious reform and local affairs, both because of the royalist threat in the north, and because of the involvement of the Scots in later years. He was styled an 'Annabaptisticall' sectary by royalist commentators ('Mercurius Pragmaticus', 21-8 Nov 1648, sig. Bbb3'v'), but he seems rather to have been a more moderate puritan whose friends included Independents such as Sidrach Simpson, and presbyterians such as Robert Jenison, and who was prepared to act as a commissioner for scandalous offences and for exclusion from the sacrament in the mid-1640s. Blakiston's deep religious convictions underpinned his attempt to establish a godly ministry in Newcastle, and his attempt to secure a place for Hezekiah Woodward as one of the town's schoolmasters. 
During the course of the civil wars Blakiston emerged as an immensely powerful figure among northern parliamentarians, and was made mayor of Newcastle in October 1645. In July 1646 he was named as a commissioner for conserving the peace between England and Scotland. He, along with Sir Arthur Hesilrige, came to dominate political affairs in the region. Once parliamentarian unity disappeared in the mid-1640s Blakiston emerged as a supporter of the Independents, not least in his opposition to the Scots. Denzil Holles called him an 'incendiary' between the two kingdoms, and one of the Independents' 'little Northern Beagles' who were set to work to provoke a confrontation between the covenanters and the New Model Army (Maseres, 1.227, 228). In the north he was aligned with Hesilrige against the interest of Robert Lilburne, causing some acrimony, not least over claims that Blakiston made undue personal gains during the wars and acted to protect local delinquents, including members of his own family. However, the civic leaders in Newcastle defended him against the 'unjust and scandalous reflections' made by Lilburne, and remarked on his 'sincerity' and 'faithfulness', and upon 'how unapt he is to cram himself with the riches of a ruined country' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 56, fol. 22). At Westminster Blakiston became aligned with the more radical elements in the Commons, and his closest allies were probably Thomas Scot and Sir Henry Vane junior. There is also evidence of a close personal friendship with Philip, Lord Wharton. Blakiston joined those MPs who fled to the safety of the army in the summer of 1647, and was later styled one of the 'Levelling sort', who apparently supported the Levellers' 'large petition' of September 1648 ('Mercurius Pragmaticus', 22-9 Aug 1648, sig. Cc4). Having indicated his opposition to further negotiations with the king in December 1648, Blakiston was named to the high court of justice for the trial of Charles I in January 1649, and proved to be one of the most assiduous of the commissioners, attending all but one session in the painted chamber and all four days of the trial, before signing the death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. Although probably a zealous supporter of the constitutional changes of 1649, Blakiston was not named to the council of state, but he was an active member of the Rump Parliament until his death, which occurred some time between 1 June 1649, when he drew up his will, and 6 June, when the Commons awarded $3000 to his widow and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 2597


John Blakiston (1785-1867), army officer, and his wife, Jane, daughter of the Revd Thomas Wright of Market Harborough, Leicestershire. 


@@@@@


doc= 2598


Blakiston, Thomas Wright (1832-1891), army officer and explorer, was born at Lymington in Hampshire on 27 December 1832, the second of three sons of 
Major John Blakiston was the second son of Sir Matthew Blakiston, second baronet (1761-1806), and his wife, Anne (died 27 November 1862 in her 101st year), daughter of John Rochfort of Clogrenane, co. Carlow, Ireland. He served in the Madras engineers and in the 27th regiment (Enniskillens), participated in the battle of Assaye and the capture of Bourbon, Mauritius, and Java, and fought during the Peninsular War from Vitoria to Toulouse. On 26 September 1814 he married Jane Wright, retiring from active military service around the same time. He published 'Twelve Years of Military Adventures' anonymously (1829) and 'Twenty Years in Retirement' under his name (1836). He died on 4 June 1867 at Moberley Hall, Cheshire. 
His son Thomas was educated at St Paul's Proprietary School at Southsea, and at the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, from which he obtained a commission in the Royal Artillery on 16 December 1851. He served with his regiment in England, Ireland, and Nova Scotia, and in the Crimea before Sevastopol, where his younger brother Lawrence was killed in the battle of the Redan on 8 September 1855. In 1857 Blakiston was appointed, on the recommendation of Sir Edward Sabine, a member of the scientific expedition for the exploration of British North America between Canada and the Rocky Mountains, under the command of John Palliser. He was principally employed in taking observations on the magnetic conditions and temperature; but in 1858 he crossed the Kutanie and Boundary passes independently, and subsequently published 'Report of the Exploration of Two Passes through the Rocky Mountains' (1859). 
During the Chinese war of 1859 Blakiston was left in command of a detachment of artillery at Canton (Guangzhou), and there he organized a widely reported exploration of the middle and upper course of the Yangtze (Yangzi), the idea being to ascend the river as far as the Min, and then cross the province of Szechwan (Sichuan), and reach north-western India via Tibet and Lhasa. The party consisted of Blakiston, Lieutenant-Colonel H. A. Sarel, and Dr Alfred Barton, and with the Revd S. Schereschewsky as interpreter, together with four Sikh and three Chinese attendants, it set out from Shanghai on 12 February 1861, convoyed by Vice-Admiral Sir James Hope's squadron, which left the party at Yaan (Ya'an) on 16 March. They reached Pingshan on 25 May, having travelled 1800 miles from Shanghai, 900 miles further than any other Europeans, except the Jesuits in native costume. The country there being subject to considerable insurgency, they were forced to retrace their route on 30 May, reaching Shanghai on 9 July. Blakiston produced a remarkably accurate chart of the river from Hangchow (Hangzhou) to Pingshan, published in 1861, for which he received in 1862 the royal (patron's) medal of the Royal Geographical Society. Blakiston quickly published a substantial account of their journey, 'Five Months on the Yang-tsze' (1862), with illustrations by Barton. This remained a standard account for the region for at least the following fifty years. 
Towards the end of 1862 Blakiston made a brief visit to Yezo (Hokkaido), the northern island of Japan. Returning to England at the end of the year, he resigned his commission and entered into a business arrangement with a small group of Scottish merchants. Together they registered the West Pacific Company Ltd, on 12 February 1863, to exploit the rich timber resources of the area with the aim of erecting sawmills in Yezo, as well as acting as general shippers between China and Japan. Blakiston, having subscribed nearly half the company's $4400 capital, returned to Japan, via Russia, Siberia, and the Amur River. Settling at the treaty port of Hakodate, then widely regarded as an isolated and storm-battered settlement, he acted as local manager for the company, as well as establishing his own local trading firm, Blakiston, Marr & Co. The West Pacific Company failed to prosper, however. Hostility grew between Blakiston and the Scottish shareholders, local Japanese officials proved increasingly obstructive, and, finally, political turbulence initiated by the Meiji restoration of 1868 badly disrupted trade. With losses of nearly $25,000 the company went into liquidation in July 1869. 
Notwithstanding this set-back Blakiston remained in Hakodate, operating as a merchant on his own account. He also designed fortifications for the port, undertook scientific surveys, and soon became the longest established and best-known of the European residents -- 'le veritable Roi d'Hakodate' -- keeping open house for travellers, especially those with scientific interests. In 1872 he contributed to the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society' a narrative of a journey round Hokkaido, containing information on its topography, climate, forests, fisheries, mines, and population, and first calling attention to the existence of a pre-Ainu race of pit-dwellers. 
During Blakiston's residence at Hakodate he cultivated a deep interest in the ornithology of Hokkaido. He made an extensive collection of birds, which was later housed in the University Museum of Natural History at Sapporo, Japan, and in 1878 compiled, with H. Pryer of Yokohama, a pioneering catalogue of the avifauna of Japan ('Ibis', 4th ser., 2, 1878, 207-50), revised and reprinted in London in 1884. He demonstrated that the birds of Hokkaido belong to the Siberian as distinct from the Manchurian sub-region of the Palaearctic region; and the zoo-geographical line of division formed by the Strait of Tsu-garu was termed Blakiston's line in contemporary ornithological literature. In 1883 he read to the Asiatic Society ('Transactions', 11, 1883) a paper entitled 'Zoological Indications of the Ancient Connexion of the Japan Islands with the Continent'. Seven new species of Japanese birds were named after him. Blakiston also published a book, 'Japan in Yezo' (1883), consisting of articles reprinted from the 'Japan Gazette' as well as a number of papers in 'The Ibis', 'The Chrysanthemum', the 'Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan', and the 'Proceedings of the United States National Museum', on the birds of British North America and Japan. Besides the collection at Sapporo, he gave Japanese birds to the United States National Museum (Smithsonian Institution), and sent living specimens to the gardens of the Zoological Society of London. 
In 1884, after a visit to Australia, New Zealand, and England, Blakiston retired from his business and left Japan for the United States. He was married relatively late in life, on 16 April 1885, to Anne Mary, daughter of James Dun of Dundaff, London, Ohio. They had a son, Lawrence Wright, and a daughter, Jessie Carmichael. He eventually settled in New Mexico; he died on 15 October 1891 at San Diego, California, and was buried at Columbus, Ohio. 


@@@@@


doc= 2599


Blacman, John (1407/8-1485?), biographer of Henry VI, was born in the diocese of Bath and Wells, and was admitted about 1437 to Merton College, Oxford; he graduated MA, and became a fellow of that college, some two years later. In 1443 he resigned his fellowship, to become a fellow of Henry VI's new foundation of Eton College, where he was precentor from 1444 to 1452. Early in the latter year he was admitted rector of Sapperton, Gloucestershire, while on 3 December 1452 he was appointed warden of King Henry's other foundation, King's Hall at Cambridge. He resigned from Eton in the following year. By this time he had obtained the degree of BTh and qualified as a notary public. On 3 January 1456 he was collated to the deanship of Westbury-on-Trym, Gloucestershire. However, in 1457 or 1458 he resigned from his wardenship and livings, and entered the London Charterhouse. 
Blacman commemorated this change in his life by compiling a commonplace book of meditations on death. He describes his state of mind on abandoning the world, associating his anxieties about physical death with the death to all worldly things implicit on entering a Carthusian house, a form of death that he sees as leading to eternal life. About 1465 he moved to Witham Charterhouse in Somerset. His status here, described in 1474 as that of a 'clericus reditus' (half monk, half lay brother), gave him the freedom to acquire a large library. In this year he donated to Witham a large collection of Latin books, some copied and annotated by himself, with a note after the sixty-sixth: 'take these, your books, Father, as many as my years' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Laud misc. 154, fols. 1'r'-2'v'). The most comprehensive private collection of devotional texts known from fifteenth-century England, Blacman's library represents a strand in English spirituality dominated by Richard Rolle's emphasis on extremes of physical and emotional excitement. Notably absent are vernacular English works by writers like Nicholas Love and Walter Hilton, representing a more moderate, pastorally orientated form of contemplative instruction geared to the needs and responsibilities of the layman. This imbalance in Blacman's collection is not surprising given his eremitic vocation, but it had wider implications because of his influence on the spirituality of England's most pious and unsuccessful king, Henry VI. 
Blacman was brought into close contact with Henry VI when, as precentor at Eton, he was responsible for collective worship at the college and acted as a priest for the king; he celebrated private masses in the king's presence when the king acted as his server. After Henry VI's death in 1471, and probably in 1483 (that is before Richard III moved Henry's body from Chertsey Abbey to Windsor in August 1484), Blacman wrote at Witham his 'Collectarium mansuetudinum et bonorum morum regis Henrici VI' ('Compilation of the meekness and good life of Henry VI'). In it he refers to a long series of miracles at the king's tomb at Chertsey, and to others performed during his lifetime. However, this is not a mere work of hagiography, but a unique insight into the private life and limitations of a medieval king, based on the author's personal reminiscences for the period between 1444 and 1461, when Henry lost his throne, and on the eyewitness testimonies of royal associates such as Bishop William Waynflete (died 1486) and the royal chaplain William Kymberley from the period from 1461 to 1471, a period covering the king's wanderings and captivity. 
As an Eton fellow, Blacman was in a position to give an accurate account of the unique combination of piety and learning that lay behind Henry's close involvement with his foundation of Eton. He describes how the king met Eton boys at Windsor Castle, and advised them to follow the path of virtue and discouraged them from visiting his corrupting court. Blacman is candid about Henry's political limitations, but this is because he sees them as a sign of the king's religious vocation, his detachment from temporal things. One vivid personal reminiscence describes Blacman and the king engaged in the study of holy books, and the king giving them signs of his most deep devotion. A mighty duke of the realm knocked at the door, and the king said 'They do so interrupt me that by day and night I can hardly snatch a moment to be refreshed' (Blacman, 15-16). 
Blacman goes further, and tries to establish that Henry's limitations as king were positive spiritual virtues. He therefore describes the king's insanity in 1453 as the mystical rapture of one 'not conscious of himself or of those about him as if he were in a trance' (Blacman, 16). Henry's neglect of royal display, such as his failure to notice his hat falling off, and his inattention to political realities are celebrated as the sort of indifference to temporal things, 'as if he might gain Christ' (Blacman, 11), that had been espoused by Rolle. Instead Henry is shown to be a visionary, devoted to the cult of the holy cross, and the sufferings of Jesus, and experiencing visions of Christ presiding in human form at the sacrament of the altar. 
Blacman's portrait of the king is that of a true follower of Christ, a holy fool who in 1470 forgave the enemies who had wounded him in 1461, and who in 1471 patiently endured mockery, abuse, and violent death; and the compilation explains why this incompetent king remained loved by so many of his people. It also demonstrates the prescience of Walter Hilton's reservations about the social implications of too enthusiastic a following of Rolle's teachings at the expense of fulfilling social responsibilities. Henry VI was decidedly not a successful practitioner of the mixed life, and this seems to have met with Blacman's approval. This was a failing that was to have profound consequences for the peace and stability of fifteenth-century England. 
The date of Blacman's death is uncertain but it is thought to have occurred in 1485. His 'Compilation' was published in 1510 by Robert Copland, whose text was reprinted by Thomas Hearne in 1732. An English translation by M. R. James appeared in 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 2600


Blamire, Susanna (1747-1794), poet, known as the Muse of Cumberland and the Poet of Friendship, was born on 12 January 1747 at Cardew Hall, near Dalston, Cumberland, the youngest of the four children of William Blamire (1703-1758), a yeoman farmer of the Hollin estate (later named The Oaks), and Isabella, 'nee' Simpson (1709-1753), of the nearby manor of Thackwood Nook, Stockdalewath, whose mother was a Richmond of the neighbouring manor of Highhead Castle. Susanna's parents died when she was a child, and on her father's death she went to live at Thackwood with her widowed aunt, Mary Simpson (1703-1785), a shrewd but unfailingly kind woman. Her brother William, a distinguished naval surgeon, was married to Jane, 'nee' Christian (1749-1837), sister of John Christian Curwen (1756-1828) MP and agricultural reformer. Susanna's other brother, Richmond, was the London publisher of many of William Gilpin's books on the picturesque. 
After briefly attending the dame school at Raughton Head, Susanna is thought to have been taught at home by assistants from the distinguished grammar school at nearby Sebergham, where the poet Josiah Relph had been headmaster. By mid-adolescence she already had a wide and discriminating literary knowledge. She was a tall, sociable, and 'bonny and verra lish young lass' (Blamire, 'Poetical Works', xxiii). Her face was slightly marked by smallpox (which Giacomo Cambruzzi tactfully ignored in his portrait of her of about 1778). Her brother William commented that the most vivacious youths of his day were dull and phlegmatic in comparison with his lively sister. Indeed her passion for dancing was so extreme that if she met travelling musicians on the road she would dismount and dance to a jig or hornpipe. 
Blamire often wrote poems beside a stream in her own garden at Thackwood, sometimes playing an air on her guitar or flageolet, and occasionally pinning her verses to oak trees, where they could be read by passers-by. She was able to broaden her horizons, and master the music and phrasing of Scottish song, as a result of her sister Sarah's marriage in 1767 to Colonel Thomas Graeme of Duchray Castle, Stirlingshire, an officer in the Black Watch. She was introduced to a circle at Gartmore House that sympathized with and encouraged her, and she often paid visits to Scotland. She henceforth wrote many songs in the Scots dialect as well as in the Cumbrian. Among the best of the Scots songs are 'What ails this heart o'mine?'; the beautiful, semi-autobiographical 'The Siller Croun'; and 'The Nabob', set to the air 'The Traveller's Return'. At the end of chapter 66 of 'The Old Curiosity Shop' Charles Dickens quoted the first two lines of 'The Siller Croun' a year before Blamire's authorship had been acknowledged by Maxwell in her 'Poetical Works' of 1842. ''Sir' said Dick [Swiveller]... 'we'll make a scholar of the poor Marchioness yet! And she shall walk in silk attire, and siller have to spare, or I may never rise from this bed again!'' Dickens had presumably heard it sung to the haunting tune composed some time after Blamire's death by Sir Henry Rowley Bishop (1786-1855). 'The Nabob' is a nostalgic poem with a setting near Duchray Castle that anticipates Robert Burns's 'Auld Lang Syne'. 
While visiting a relation at Chillingham, in Northumberland, Blamire attracted the attention of Charles Bennet, Lord Ossulston (1743-1822). Maxwell says that Ossulston's father, the third earl of Tankerville, encouraged her to write one of her best sketches of rustic life, a dialogue beginning 'Wey, Ned, man! thou luiks sae down-hearted', a remarkable amalgam of political ferment, involving a political argument that Blamire had overheard between two neighbours on the subject of Thomas Paine's 'Reets o'man' of 1791 (Blamire, 'Poetical Works', xxx). While the earl may indeed have been amused by Susanna's compositions in Cumberland dialect, his death in 1767 makes nonsense of the claim that he requested her to compose 'Wey, Ned, man!'. Blamire and Ossulston had a love affair that was thwarted when in 1767 Ossulston was sent away to prevent marriage. One of the allegories in 'Stoklewath', with its authentic ring of a real lovers' quarrel, points to an angry confrontation some twelve years later between Susanna and Lord Ossulston (now the married fourth earl of Tankerville). This allegory, coupled with the poem 'Hope', a paean to the picturesque, probably set at Painshill Park, suggests that the meeting could have occurred at or near Painshill, only 4 miles distant from the earl's Surrey house at Walton-on-Thames. 
While staying in Carlisle, Blamire met William Gilpin's sister, Catherine Gilpin, of Scaleby Castle. They lived together for a while and collaborated on a number of poems including 'The Cumberland Scold' -- a 'perfect masterpiece of dramatic dialect poetry' (MacDiarmid). They also jointly composed 'Peer Body', a bawdy version of the traditional song 'Comin' thro' the Rye'. Blamire herself wrote a number of songs in Cumberland dialect about which the Denwoods enthused: 'It is all there in a torrent of rich, lively, homely rhymed sense, hitting off character sketches that are truly delightful, and when we remember that they are the first of their kind in Cumbrian dialect our amazement is not lessened. (Denwood and Denwood, 42)' Blamire detailed her method of composition in 'Epistle to her Friends at Gartmore' (1773), an amusing letter-poem to her Scottish friends Isabella and Elizabeth Graham in which she light-heartedly and cleverly showed the difficulties of writing poetry. This poem was later taken as evidence for Blamire's already being 'a very accomplished poet' who had 'created for this more personal side of her poetry a free-moving, airy, conversational style, such as no one else is using at this period' (Wordsworth, 1). 
It is sometimes thought from the concluding verses of 'Wey, Ned, man!' that Blamire was a reactionary, but this is not borne out in her most powerful poem, 'The nun's return to the world, by the decree of the national assembly of France, February 1790', where she expresses unequivocal support for the principles of the French Revolution and a sympathy for the lot of the unenfranchised labourer. Sections of the poem appear to anticipate Byron's 'The Prisoner of Chillon', especially canto 14. The fact that Blamire's nephew William Brown was Annabella Milbanke's tutor makes it possible that Byron could have read a transcript of the poem while at Seaham Manor, immediately following his marriage to Annabella in 1815. 
Blamire, who suffered from debilitating recurrent bouts of rheumatic fever, was also an early female practitioner of orthodox medicine, having learned physic from her brother William. In an unpublished Gothic prose allegory she used desert imagery to describe the pain and malaise of a severe attack of her illness and expressed longing for recovery when, significantly, she would again be able to 'dispense blessings to the world as the physician, Counsellor and friend of Mankind' (Susanna Blamire MSS). Her illness was possibly aggravated by her ministrations to the poor; Blamire, as reflected in her poetry, never lost sight of the grim reality that she had seen at first hand when attending the sick in dark, cramped labourers' cottages. Dr William Paley was a friend of the family, and his philosophy of 'moral utilitarianism' -- that 'virtue is the doing good to mankind in obedience to the will of God, and for the sake of everlasting happiness' (W. Paley, 'Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy', 2 vols., 1787, 1.41) -- would certainly have struck a chord with the warmly altruistic Susanna, and probably influenced her own philosophy. 
Susanna Blamire died at 14 Finkle Street, Carlisle, on 5 April 1794, of what is now believed to be rheumatic heart disease. She was buried at Raughton Head church, near Dalston, on 9 April. Many regretted the loss of 'Miss Sukey's' lively and friendly company at 'merry-neets' (late-night social gatherings): 'Weel, weel, t'merrie neets wullent be worth gangin' till at aw, noo that she's gean' (Bullock and Tutor, 21). 
Blamire published virtually nothing in her lifetime, and even then anonymously, in magazines and collections such as 'Calliope, or, The musical miscelleny' (1788) and Johnson's 'Scots Musical Museum' (1790). 'The Chelsea Pensioners' was at first wrongly attributed to Dr James Moor, professor of Greek at the University of Glasgow. Blamire's works were collected for the first time in 1842 by Henry Lonsdale and Patrick Maxwell, who contacted friends and family in search of fragments of her poems, many of which were written on the backs of recipes and letters. Maxwell extolled her as 'unquestionably the best female writer of her age' (Blamire, 'Poetical Works', xxxix). Further unpublished poems were included in Sidney Gilpin's edition of 'Songs and Poems by Miss Blamire, together with Songs by her Friend Miss Gilpin' (1866). 
Hugh MacDiarmid much regretted Blamire's obscurity and praised her Scottish songs, which in their unsentimental, natural sweetness 'can be set beside the best that have ever been produced by Scotsmen writing in their own tongue' (MacDiarmid). For MacDiarmid, Blamire was a 'sweet Cumbrian singer whose lyric genius bridged the gulf between Scotland and England, and rang its mirthful or sorrowful changes so effectively in the three different linguistic media of Scots, Cumbrian, and English' (ibid.). Blamire has also been credited with anticipating the Romantic view expounded by Coleridge and Wordsworth -- that the natural world can be influenced by the power of the mind -- as early as 1767: '
Now grief obscures the cheerful sky 

And clouds the sunbeam of her eye 

So does the black descending storm 

The smiling face of heaven deform. 
('Lament for the Happy Swain')' In her Scots and Cumbrian poems she is understood to have initiated a 'new order, a new magic in freedom of rhythm, in sheer spontaneous lyrical beauty' (Denwood and Denwood, 32). 
On 20 March 1994 an inscribed stone in Carlisle Cathedral was dedicated as a bicentennial memorial by Bishop Harland. This coincided with a renewed critical interest in her work. A reprint of her collected poems appeared in 1994. Her biography, 'A Passionate Poet: Susanna Blamire, 1747-94' by Christopher Maycock, was published by the Hypatia Trust in 2003. 


@@@@@


doc= 2601


Blamire, William (1790-1862), farmer and politician, was born on 13 April 1790 at The Oaks, near Dalston, Cumberland, the son of William Blamire (1740-1814), yeoman farmer and naval surgeon, and Jane Curwen (1739/40-1837). He came on both sides of his family from long-established Cumberland yeoman farming stock. His mother was the sister of John Christian Curwen, the Cumberland agriculturist and whig MP, who exerted a major influence on both Blamire's agricultural interests and his political views. Another early influence was William Paley who, as vicar of Dalston, officiated at Blamire's baptism and later gave him informal tuition. In 1799 Blamire became a private pupil of Revd John Fawcett in Carlisle. He was king's scholar at Westminster School, London, from 1805 to 1808 and entered Christ Church, Oxford, with a studentship in 1808 but left the university in 1811 without taking a degree. 
Blamire's education had fitted him for a professional career but he preferred practical agricultural experiments, and to these he devoted himself with enthusiasm in the 1810s and 1820s. He attended Curwen's Schoose Farm on his Workington estate, where he learned about animal husbandry, and then travelled extensively in the north-west of England and southern Scotland. At considerable financial cost, since he freely indulged what was in large part a hobby, he became thereby an authority. The contacts he forged with yeoman farmers proved useful to his later political career. To his obituarist in the 'Carlisle Journal' he became 'the very idol of the yeomanry; and his name a household word in every hamlet, dale and nook of Cumberland'. His close links with local landed society were decisive in what was a very popular appointment as high sheriff of Cumberland in April 1828 on the death of the incumbent Thomas Parker. 
Blamire was a whig and a reformer and worked to secure Curwen's nomination and election as MP for Cumberland in 1818 and 1820. He was one of the largest graziers in the north of England and his political instincts reflected 'country' concerns. He believed in the independence of the landowning classes and -- ironically given his career after 1836 -- was suspicious of central government influence. In 1816, at a public meeting in Cockermouth, he opposed the Liverpool government's attempt to preserve the new income tax in peacetime. Blamire became an MP at the exceptional general election of 1831, which the whigs called after defeats in committee over their parliamentary reform bill. Strongly supported by landowners across the county, he agreed to stand as a reformer alongside Sir James Graham. This involved a challenge, against Graham's advice, to the entrenched political interest of the tory Lowther family and a rare party battle in Cumberland. His success was assured in May when Lowther withdrew from the contest with polls showing that he had less than half the votes cast for Graham and Blamire (453 against 942 and 917 respectively). Blamire's success was part of the pronounced pro-reform swing throughout the country but was widely acclaimed in Cumberland, where large numbers of 40 shilling freeholders had made the frequently difficult journey to the sole polling station in Cockermouth. Blamire celebrated 'the force of public opinion in destroying the magic spell of wealth and unconstitutional influence' ('Carlisle Journal'). He also welcomed support from ordinary clergymen who had forsaken normally tory loyalties, noting tartly: 'You will find no pluralist, no man who holds two livings in the list of Blue [the whig colour in Cumberland] voters' (Lonsdale, 246). 
Blamire took his seat on 20 June 1831 and remained an MP until 1836, being returned unopposed for the newly created seat of East Cumberland at the general elections of 1832 and 1835. He spoke rarely and pithily in parliament, and nearly always from the basis of local knowledge. While generally loyal to the whig government on the reform question, he never neglected local concerns. In July 1831 he concurred, against tory objections, that Cockermouth should lose one of its two members since its population was below 4000. He did not neglect to praise his fellow Cumbrians: 'He must... bear witness to the respectability of the constituency... He knew of no place more deserving of two Members, if respectability and independence were to determine the question' ('Hansard 3', 5, 1831, 488-9). He opposed the government on two other matters. He moved an unsuccessful amendment on 22 June 1831 to have the boundaries of Whitehaven adjusted to remove rural voters from the constituency. In August, in a coded attack on the Lowther interest in west Cumberland, he unsuccessfully opposed the creation of a second county seat, arguing that the 9000 county voters would be freer from electoral influence in one constituency. 
Most of Blamire's parliamentary speeches after 1832 concerned property. He opposed the 'General Registry Bill' in January 1832 because of its adverse consequences for copyholders. He stated in July 1833 that new Bank of England charter regulations would damage property owners 'in northern parts of the country... where they had a serious objection to Bank of England paper and preferred country paper, as they had much less difficulty in detecting forgeries' ('Hansard 3', 18, 1833, 1393-4). On 3 April 1834 he married his cousin, Dorothy, youngest daughter of John Taubman of The Nunnery, Isle of Man, and widow of Colonel Mark Wilkes, the late governor of St Helena. The couple, who had no children, lived in Upper Harley Street, London. 
Blamire's most important parliamentary contributions concerned the tithe question and these determined the shape of his future career. His extensive knowledge of Cumberland agriculture convinced him of the damage done to rural society by tithes and of the urgent need for legislation. In 1833 he introduced a bill to suspend the rash of tithe suits under the so-called 'Tenterden Act' of 1832, which had allowed a period of one year during which long-dormant claims could be pressed. His bill, delayed in the Lords, became law in 1834. He made a decisive contribution to the proposals for tithe commutation made by Melbourne's government. His speech to the Commons on 25 March 1836 was made, he said, as 'a practical man' with ample opportunity of observing 'the workings of the tithing system in its various ramifications' ('Hansard 3', 32, 1836, 607-16). He urged that parties be given time to come to voluntary agreements, since the imposition of compulsory tithe awards would be unnecessarily expensive and might ignore relevant local circumstances. He also stressed the need to safeguard improving landowners from punitively high commutation awards which threatened their investments. 
Blamire's speech won warm commendation from both sides of the house. It also led to his being appointed on 22 August 1836 first tithe commissioner under the new 'Commutation Act'. With the two other commissioners, Thomas Wentworth Buller and Richard Jones, he wrestled with the complexities of intricate issues of property right. Blamire was recognized as 'primus inter pares' in a job to which he committed enormous time and reserves of energy. He took great care over the appointment as assistant tithe commissioners of practical land agents, since it was their task to negotiate agreements and impose settlements. His determination to let local knowledge and experience carry as much weight as possible within the scope of the act paid rich dividends. The much cheaper voluntary tithe commutation agreements, which his speech of March 1836 had advocated, were effected in almost 58 per cent of all cases. The work of the tithe commission proceeded smoothly. Three-quarters of all tithe awards were completed within the first ten years -- a much faster rate of progress than was achieved by the poor-law commissioners -- and the tithe commission was able to be wound up on 8 August 1851, virtually laying to rest one of the most contentious areas of property dispute in eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century England. 
By this time Blamire's success had brought other administrative duties. On 22 June 1841 he became commissioner for copyholds as well as tithes under new copyhold enfranchisement legislation. The work of the copyhold commission increased substantially when compulsory powers were taken under amending legislation passed in 1852, and it absorbed him until his retirement. Blamire's practical efficiency also impressed Peel, who described him as 'that indefatigable public servant' (Lonsdale, 297). He gave influential evidence (1 July 1844) to the House of Commons select committee on commons' enclosure, in which he estimated that there were 8 million acres of unenclosed waste land in England and Wales, much of which could be brought under cultivation. He was invited on 14 August 1845 to become commissioner in charge of the enclosure of commons and wastes under legislation passed to expedite and reduce the cost of enclosure agreements. Here, again until retirement, he supervised the enclosure of about 350,000 acres of common and waste land. Such was the scale of his work that it has been said that he 'helped to re-make the face of rural England' (Spring, 167). 
Blamire was one of a small number of elite administrators who flourished in the new world of government commissions and regulation created in the 1830s and 1840s and who inaugurated a new era of bureaucracy. Long working hours and prolonged absence from rural Cumberland alike took their toll. He endured paralysis of his right arm from 1847, after which he required the assistance of two secretaries to take dictation, and never fully recovered from his wife's death on 20 September 1857. Deteriorating health forced his resignation from all official duties in September 1860, when he received a pension from the lords of the Treasury. His return to Cumberland did not improve his health and he died at his property, Thackwood Nook, 4 miles south-east of Dalston, on the edge of Inglewood Forest, on 12 January 1862. He was buried on 18 January at Raughtonhead churchyard, 1 mile north of his home. 


@@@@@


doc= 2602


Blanchard, Edward Litt Leman (1820-1889), writer and playwright, was born on 11 December 1820 at 28 Great Queen Street, London, the second son of William Blanchard (1769-1835), comic actor with the Kembles' Covent Garden company, and his second wife, Sarah Harrold (1784-1875). 
After a brief education in Brixton, Surrey, and then Lichfield, Blanchard went with his parents to New York in 1831. Back in London, and forced by his father's death to find employment at an early age, he became sub-editor of Pinnock's 'Guide to Knowledge' in 1836. Although he continued to edit periodicals such as 'Chambers's London Journal' (1841) and the 'New London Magazine' (1845), he also wrote illustrated guidebooks, among them some of Bradshaw's 'Descriptive Railway Guides'. He edited Willoughby's 'Shakespeare', wrote unmemorable novels, and demonstrated his lifelong interest in spiritualism and seances by founding and editing 'The Astrologer and Oracle of Destiny' (1845). 
Blanchard's most important work, however, was done for the stage, under his own name and the pseudonyms Francesco (or Francisco) Frost and (with T. L. Greenwood) the Brothers Grinn; he wrote innumerable pantomimes, entertainments, farces, and dramas, as well as comic songs such as 'A Norrible Tale' and 'Villikins and his Dinah'. Beginning with a pantomime for amateurs (1839), in which he devised 'trick' staging and played Harlequin, he went on to write annual Christmas pantomimes for the Drury Lane Theatre from 1852 to 1888, as well as for other London and provincial theatres. Sometimes three, even four, of his works were staged concurrently. In these seasonal productions he strove seriously for prettiness and coherence as well as comic effects, and for a moral to adorn the fairy-tales on which many were based. 'See Saw Margery Daw, or, Harlequin Holiday and the Island of Ups and Downs' (1856), for example, shows Necessity in her cottage 'with a Prospect of Hard Work in the Distance'. She says: '
those that work are the illustrious, 

And those most noble are the most industrious. 

' During the last years of his Drury Lane pantomimes he was made increasingly unhappy by interpolated vulgarisms in his text and by the introduction of music-hall performers. 
Blanchard also contributed theatrical obituaries, reviews, and articles about the stage to many periodicals, including 'Fun', the 'Illustrated Times', the 'Era Almanack and Annual', 'The Observer', and 'The Era'. From 1863 to 1887 he was the drama critic of the 'Daily Telegraph'. He was married to Amelia (1821-1873), but there appear to have been no children. 
Blanchard was one of the kindliest of men and, privately, one of the saddest. In his diary for 11 December 1861 he recorded: 'Have at least the satisfaction of knowing that... I have never injured a living creature' (Scott and Howard, 1.264). His brother William and William's family, however, were a continual and heavy drain on his resources, when his indefatigable work brought him only between $200 and $400 a year; eventually his income rose to $500 but rarely to $600 or $700. His happiness was greatly increased after his marriage to his long-adored Caroline (1821-1907) ['see 'Howard, Caroline Cadette], whom he called Carina, on 11 June 1874. Many years earlier she had married and had gone to New Zealand, and he had lost touch with her, but had never forgotten her. Caroline was a widow by 1874. Having begun his career at such an early age, he always seemed much older than he actually was, and his appearance was anything but youthful. His theatrical knowledge was encyclopaedic, and he did not like to admit ignorance of anything being discussed (Watson, 172). 
After a long illness Blanchard died at his home, 6 Albert Mansions, 114 Victoria Street, Westminster, on 4 September 1889 of 'general decay', though he was only sixty-eight. He was buried on 10 September in Kensington Hanwell cemetery, Ealing, Middlesex, and left an estate valued at $441. Carina, who had been a tireless worker for the Emigration Society, survived him. She was awarded a civil-list pension of $50 on 24 May 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 2603


Blanchard, (Samuel) Laman (1803-1845), author and journalist, was born at Great Yarmouth on 15 May 1803, the only son of Samuel Blanchard and his wife, the widowed Mary Cowell, 'nee' Laman. There were five other children of the marriage, all of them daughters. In 1804 his father moved to Southwark, establishing himself as a painter and glazier. In 1809 Blanchard entered St Olave's School in Southwark, where he became the chief Latin scholar, but despite the wishes of the master and the school's trustees to send him to a university and maintain him there for two years, his father's strained finances did not allow him to contemplate supporting his son for a third year. On leaving school in 1816 Blanchard became a clerk to Charles Pearson, a proctor in Doctors' Commons, an occupation he found uncongenial. His preference for a literary career was evident in the precocious dramatic sketches ('Flores histrionici') he published in 'The Drama' in 1823, sketches marked by the influence of the work of B. W. Procter (Barry Cornwall) and Byron. About 1822 he formed a close and enduring friendship with Douglas Jerrold, and through Jerrold made the acquaintance of the actor John Buckstone. After abandoning a whimsical notion of going with Jerrold to fight with Byron in Greece, Blanchard resolved to dedicate himself to the stage and was briefly engaged by the manager of the Margate Theatre. According to Buckstone, quoted by Bulwer-Lytton, 'a week was sufficient to disgust him with the beggary and drudgery of the country player's life' (Bulwer-Lytton, xii) and he was obliged to return to London penniless and on foot. He subsequently worked as a reader for the printer Bayliss in Fleet Street, the publisher of the 'Monthly Magazine', to which he had already begun to contribute verse and prose. 
In 1823 Blanchard married Ann Elizabeth Gates. There were four children of the marriage, three sons and a daughter. Through the influence of his brother-in-law, Nicholas Vigors, he was appointed to an assistant secretaryship at the Zoological Society of London in 1826, holding the post for three years. In this period his literary activity burgeoned, and in 1828 his friend William Harrison Ainsworth published his volume of verse 'Lyric Offerings', a volume dedicated to Charles Lamb. In 1831 he was appointed sub-editor of the 'Monthly Magazine', then under the direction of George Croly, and editor of the 'Belle Assemblee'. He contributed verse to both journals. In the following year he also became associated with the Liberal daily the 'True Sun', and when the paper failed in 1836 he assumed the editorship of the short-lived daily 'The Constitutional'. From 1836 to 1837 he also directed the 'Court Journal' and from 1837 to 1839 the whig evening paper 'The Courier'. Following a shift in 'The Courier's' ownership and political bias in 1839, a failed attempt was made by, among others, Bulwer-Lytton, to obtain for him either a clerkship or the editorship of the 'London Gazette' from the whig government. From 1841 to 1845 he was closely associated with the 'Examiner' and for a year from February 1842 he served as sub-editor of 'Ainsworth's Magazine'. In 1842 he also directed and contributed to the monthly journal 'George Cruikshank's Omnibus'. 
In February 1844 Ann Blanchard was struck with what was described at the time as 'paralysis', and after a protracted period of suffering died on 16 December. Distracted by his wife's illness and death, by the pressures of periodical journalism, and by concern for his four children, Blanchard entered an acute depressive state during which symptoms of his wife's paralysis were repeated in him. On 14 February 1845 he committed suicide by cutting his throat with a razor at his home at 11 Union Place, Lambeth Road, London. A coroner's inquest decreed that he was of unsound mind at the time. He was interred the following month at Norwood cemetery. 
Blanchard's death occasioned a good deal of supportive activity from his wide circle of literary friends, many of whom raised funds to benefit his orphaned children. Those friends included Douglas Jerrold, Edward Bulwer-Lytton, William Harrison Ainsworth, Thomas Noon Talfourd, Charles Dickens, Leigh Hunt, John Forster, B. W. Procter, Robert Browning, George Cruikshank, W. M. Thackeray, and W. C. Macready. In 1831, at the distraught father's request, Blanchard had arranged the funeral of William Godwin's only son, who had died of cholera in the epidemic of that year. He had also been a steady friend and supporter of Laetitia Landon (L.E.L.) and published a sympathetic appreciation of her career in his 'The Life and Literary Remains of L.E.L.' of 1841. He was godfather, and subsequently father-in-law, to Douglas Jerrold's son, William Blanchard, who in 1876 collected his 'Poetical Works'. His essay on Harrison Ainsworth, published in 'The Mirror' in 1842, was regularly reprinted as a preface to later nineteenth-century editions of Ainsworth's collected works. 
Blanchard was described by Bulwer-Lytton as being 'small and slight, though sufficiently well-knit' and his dark features as 'of rather an oriental cast' (Bulwer-Lytton, xxxvi). Ainsworth, referring to the Maclise sketch reproduced in 'Sketches from Life', noted that 'it has his gravest looks, and wants that cordial and bewitching smile which ordinarily lighted up the features' (Ainsworth, 134). Thackeray too remembered 'his keen, kind, beaming Jew face, -- a mixture of Mendelsohn and Voltaire' (Thackeray, 347). Defending Blanchard's decision to concentrate on a career in periodical journalism, Thackeray also insisted that 'his education and habits, his quick easy manner, his sparkling hidden fun, constant tenderness, and brilliant good-humour were best employed as they were' (ibid., 346). 
Blanchard's prose essays were collected in three volumes by Bulwer-Lytton in 1846 as 'Sketches from Life'. In his obituary of Blanchard in 'Ainsworth's Magazine' (7 March 1845, 220) Ainsworth remarked that the essays placed Blanchard 'on a level with one whom he admired and knew well -- the celebrated Elia'. The first volume contains a substantial memorial essay by Bulwer-Lytton and a lithographic portrait after a drawing by Daniel Maclise. The collected 'Poetical Works' of 1876 has on its title page a photographic reproduction of a miniature by Louisa Stuart Costello. Blanchard's 'Corporation Characters: Forming a Select Portrait Gathering of Civic Celebrities', illustrated by Kenny Meadows, appeared posthumously in 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 2604


Blanchard, William (1769-1835), actor, was born at Nessgate, York, on 2 January 1769, and for a few years was educated at a private school in that city. Both his father, John Blanchard, a staymaker and hosier, and his mother, Ann Bowzer, or Nancy as she was commonly called, died when he was still a child, and he was left to the care of his uncle, William Blanchard, long well known as the proprietor of the 'York Chronicle'. In 1782 he was placed in his uncle's office, but he took such delight in Shakespeare that in 1785 he resolved to become an actor. He joined Welsh's company of travelling comedians at Buxton. His first appearance was as Allan-a-Dale in MacNally's 'Robin Hood'. For four years he played under the name of Bentley, but from 1789 he resumed his own name. He took the parts of Achmet, Douglas, and even Romeo. Blanchard next became a manager and opened theatres at Penrith, Hexham, Barnard Castle, and Bishop Auckland, but he lost a lot of money, and abandoned this occupation to join Brunton's company of players on the Norwich circuit, taking on comic parts. 
Blanchard's first appearances in London were at Covent Garden in October 1800, as Bob Acres in Sheridan's 'The Rivals' and Crack in Thomas Knight's musical farce 'The Turnpike Gate'. He was so successful that he remained at Covent Garden, except for a brief professional visit to America in 1832, continuously for thirty-four years. He was especially noted for playing Shakespeare's Fluellen, Sir Hugh Evans, Menenius, and Polonius. According to Leigh Hunt, his best performance was as the Marquis de Grand-Chateau in the musical toy show 'The Cabinet'. Hunt also praised highly his Russett in Colman's 'The Jealous Wife'. 
On 15 May 1807 Blanchard's first wife, Susan, an actress, died, leaving behind four children. On 15 October 1808 Blanchard married the Sarah Harrold (1784-1875), a schoolfriend of one of his daughters. They had two sons, William and Edward Litt Laman Blanchard (1820-1889); the latter later became famous as a writer of pantomimes and Christmas extravaganzas. Blanchard's daughter Elizabeth also took to the stage; she appeared at Covent Garden and the Haymarket and, after marrying Thomas Hamblin about 1824, continued playing under her married name. 
In 1831 Blanchard was engaged by Hamblin to appear at the Bowery Theatre, New York, and subsequently performed in Boston and Baltimore. This trip, however, was not very successful, so eventually he returned to England. The last character created by him was that of Counsellor Crowsfoot in Douglas Jerrold's comedy 'Nell Gwynne', produced at Covent Garden in January 1833. 
Blanchard's death occurred suddenly. On 6 May 1835 he dined with a friend and left for home at 6 p.m. Some nine hours later he was found in a ditch, having had a fit. Two more attacks followed before he died, on 9 May 1835, at his residence, 1 Camera Square, Chelsea. He was buried in the graveyard of St Luke's Church, Chelsea. Sarah Blanchard survived her husband nearly forty years; she died on 15 February 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 2605


Blanchard, William Isaac (bap. 1741?, d. 1796), stenographer and legal writer, was the grandson of a French refugee and is probably the William Blanchard baptized on 20 December 1741 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, London, son of Isaac Blanchard and his wife, Ann Mary Delpeuch. He became a shorthand writer in the Westminster law courts about the year 1767. In 1779, following the court martial of Admiral Augustus Keppel, in which he served as shorthand writer for defence counsel, Blanchard published and sold at his office at 4 Dean Street, Fetter Lane, London, 'A Complete System of Short Hand, being an Improvement upon All the Authors whose Systems have yet been made Public', the first of his two distinct systems of shorthand. 
Blanchard recorded, chiefly in London but also elsewhere in the country, numerous proceedings of special commissions, speeches, and trials, such as the speech of Charles James Fox to explain his resignation from the cabinet, 17 July 1782; the trial of William Davies Shipley, dean of St Asaph, for libel, 1784; and the trial of Warren Hastings, 1788-95, which he recorded for defence counsel opposite the government shorthand writer, Joseph Gurney. Presumably Blanchard's reputation as a legal shorthand writer was enhanced by the verbatim publication of his transcribed notes. 
In late 1786 or early 1787 Blanchard published his second and more elaborate system, 'The Complete Instructor of Short Hand, upon Principles Applicable to the European Languages'. In this work he attacked an unnamed author (Samuel Taylor) whose recently published system, Blanchard claimed, is 'entirely useless for the gentlemen of the law, as it will never suit the language of Westminster-Hall (the only test of a good Short-Hand) neither can it possibly be of the least assistance to students in anatomy' (p. 8). In Blanchard's own system, the writer is 'not reduced to the miserable shift of leaving out a great number of monosyllables [with reference to Taylor's omission of vowels], by doing which it would be impossible to convict a person of perjury upon a trial' (p. 13). Among the subscribers to Taylor's 'An Essay Intended to Establish a Standard for an Universal System of Stenography' (1786) was, ironically, Admiral (then Viscount) Keppel, whose defence Blanchard had taken in 1779 and published with Keppel's permission. 
While his system never achieved the public acclaim accorded that of Taylor, Blanchard established a reputation as a successful and efficient legal shorthand writer 'of the first note among gentlemen of the law' ('GM', 1797). His notes recording a speech of an hour and forty minutes by Thomas Erskine required 208 law sheets, which at 72 words per sheet made a total of 14,976 words ('Complete Instructor', 3), or about 150 words a minute. Present during a famous speech by Richard Brinsley Sheridan at the impeachment trial of Warren Hastings in June 1788, Edward Gibbon recalled: 'As I was waiting in the manager's box, I had the curiosity to inquire of the shorthand writer, how many words a ready and rapid orator might pronounce in an hour? From 7000 to 7500 was his answer. The medium of 7200 will afford 120 words a minute, and two words in each second. But this computation will only apply to the English language. (Gibbon, 208)' Given Blanchard's references to the suitability of his system for Latin and other languages, it is likely that Gibbon's informant was Blanchard and not a member of the Gurney family. 
Blanchard apparently continued as a legal shorthand writer until his death early in 1796, soon after the decease of his wife, who had died, aged fifty-six, in September 1795. 


@@@@@


doc= 2606


Bland, Elizabeth (b. c.1660, d. in or after 1712?), Hebraist, was the daughter and heir of Robert Fisher of Long Acre, Covent Garden, London, and his wife, who may have been named Marthare. She was born about the time of the Restoration and may have been baptized on 26 December 1660 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. Her Hebrew teacher is said to have been Franciscus Mercurius van Helmont. On 26 April 1681 at the Savoy Chapel, off the Strand, she married Nathaniel Bland, then a merchant of London and freeman of the Glovers' Company. In 1692 Bland succeeded his father, Richard, as lord of the manor of Beeston, near Leeds, Yorkshire, to where the family now moved. Of their six children all but two, Joseph and Martha, died in infancy. 
Elizabeth Bland is known only by a phylactery in Hebrew written at the request of the Yorkshire antiquary Ralph Thoresby for his 'Musaeum Thoresbianum', to which she also presented a 'Turkish commission'. Nehemiah Grew describes the phylactery as a scroll of parchment 1/4 inch broad and 15 inches long, with four sentences of the law ('Exodus' 8: 7-11, 13-17; 'Deuteronomy' 6: 3-10; and 'Deuteronomy' 11: 13-19) 'most curiously written upon it in Hebrew' (Grew, 681). She taught Hebrew to her son and daughter. It appears from Thoresby's 'Ducatus Leodiensis' that Bland was alive in 1712, but her precise death date is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 2607


Bland, Humphrey (1685/6-1763), army officer and author, was born in Ireland, of uncertain parentage, though to a Yorkshire gentry family settled there since the mid-1660s, in whose seat at Blandsfort, Queen's county, he himself later lived. On account of the loss of the Irish army's papers in the Four Courts fire of 1922, his early service is not known with certainty: he was first commissioned an ensign on 4 February 1704, made lieutenant on 1 June 1705, and promoted captain on 1 December 1706. Bland's treatise suggests that, as a subaltern and company commander, he saw service in the early campaigns of Marlborough's army in the Low Countries. He was promoted major in Sibourg's Huguenot regiment of foot on 19 July 1709, and was wounded at Almenara in 1710. Bland was reduced onto half pay in 1712 but returned to the army as a major in the 11th dragoons on 22 July 1715 and participated in operations against the Jacobites in the 1715 rising; he conducted prisoners -- 'gentlemen and noblemen of distinction taken at Preston' ('DNB') -- to London. On 5 August 1717 he was made major of the 1st dragoons, and on 26 March 1718 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel of the 2nd horse. 
Devoted to his profession and aware that, by the mid-1720s, a new generation unused to the experience of modern war in Flanders from 1689 to 1712 had entered the officer corps, Bland published in April 1727 at London and Dublin his 360-page 'Treatise of Military Discipline', a second edition of which appeared later the same year. An intelligent, well-organized, and clearly written work of sound judgement, practical and not theoretical, it summarized at length the best of the army's contemporary practice, itself the fruit of its Flanders experience. The work described in detail the army's drill and training, together with all the duties of regimental officers in quarters, in garrison, in camp, and in the field. As much of its subject was not included in the army's regulations, the book was an immensely useful guide for young officers; and, as its influence spread, it helped to systematize routine throughout the army. Bland's treatise was easily the most successful and widely used military drillbook to appear in English during the century, and it remained valuable for over a quarter-century. Later editions (all printed in London, and all actually reprints of the first edition) appeared in 1734, 1740, 1743, 1746, and 1753. In 1759 an eighth, revised, edition appeared, the revisions the work of the tactician Sir William Fawcett; Fawcett's revision was reprinted as the ninth (and final) edition in 1762. Many shortened or simplified versions appeared, particularly in the American colonies, for provincials and militia. 
Bland's book earned him royal favour and, later, the comradeship of the duke of Cumberland. On 27 June 1737 he was made colonel of an Irish corps, the 36th foot, from which he went on to the more valuable cavalry colonelcy of the 13th dragoons, another Irish corps, on 9 January 1741; and on 22 April 1742 he was made quartermaster-general of the forces on the British establishment, one of the most senior staff appointments, and one which he retained until his death. Made brigadier on 12 February 1743, he joined the army in Flanders shortly after, and was with it at Dettingen on 16 June 1743. Having been transferred to the colonelcy of the 3rd dragoons on 19 April 1744, Bland commanded a cavalry brigade in the army in the Low Countries in the campaigns of 1744 and 1745, where he was promoted major-general on 30 March 1745 and fought at Fontenoy on 30 April. At the outbreak of the Jacobite rising he returned with the troops to Britain and served with the main army in Scotland in 1745-6, commanding the cavalry and leading the pursuit immediately after Culloden; he was at the army's large Fort Augustus encampment formed that summer. When Cumberland departed Scotland in July 1746, Bland was left in command of one of the four military districts into which that country was then divided, running southwards from Stirling and including Edinburgh. He returned to the Low Countries the following April, for the 1747 campaign, where he served as second to Lieutenant-General Henry Hawley (who was general of horse) and was wounded at Lauffeldt on 21 June. Bland returned to Britain after the campaign and was made commander-in-chief in Scotland on 17 September 1747, following the earl of Albemarle (who had been commander-in-chief in Scotland since August 1746, but who had left for Flanders in March 1747). Promoted lieutenant-general on 12 September 1747, Bland arrived in his Edinburgh command on 31 October 1747, where he has been criticized for his rigour in the 'pacification' of the Highlands. Bland had obtained in 1743 the sinecure governorship of Fort William, a post which he held until rewarded for his Scottish services with the sinecure governorship of Edinburgh Castle on 6 February 1752; this position he retained until his death. He was made governor of Gibraltar on 7 March 1749, and was there in 1750-51, having been sent 'to redress the civil grievances of which the inhabitants... had complained' ('DNB'), and worked to regularize its government. He was given the colonelcy of the 1st dragoon guards on 8 July 1752. Bland had been replaced in the Edinburgh command by his second, Lieutenant-General George Churchill, who was appointed Scottish commander-in-chief on 23 December 1751; but following Churchill's death Bland was reappointed commander-in-chief in Scotland on 3 November 1753. He served actively again in Edinburgh until ill health obliged him in July 1756 to vacate the command, in which Lord George Beauclerk replaced him permanently that November. 
Bland was married late in life, on 12 January 1755 at Edinburgh, to Elizabeth (1732-1816), the daughter of George Dalrymple of Dalmahoy, who was the brother of Field Marshal John Dalrymple, second earl of Stair, and the eldest sister of John Dalrymple, fifth earl. Bland had no children, but assisted the army careers of several nephews, one of whom, Thomas Bland, was his coheir. His last years were marred by the illness and infirmity that obliged him to leave Edinburgh, and he died in London on 8 May 1763, aged seventy-seven. 
Bland was typical of the senior career soldiers who served under the first two Georges and the duke of Cumberland, a bluff, methodical, proficient general officer who took his duties seriously: 'you are quite unacquainted with my character, or you wou'd have been more punctual in several parts of your Duty', he advised a junior officer in 1749 (Taylor, 29). The blunt disciplinarian could strike some, even thorough, soldiers as the martinet: 'I am afraid General Bland is not quite so well-bred and polite as might be wished. He has a roughness about him that breaks out sometimes into ill-manners when he is in authority', said Lieutenant-Colonel James Wolfe, no less, in 1750 (F. H. Skrine, 'Fontenoy', 1906, 131); and a less thorough officer, John Mostyn, hoping in 1758 to succeed to Bland's colonelcy and hearing that he was dying, could even refer to him as a 'tedious old fool' (P. Mackesy, 'The Coward of Minden', 1979, 44). However, Lord George Sackville remarked in 1759 on 'the good old General, for whom I always had the greatest regard' (T. Hayter, 'An Eighteenth-Century Secretary at War', 1988, 287). The influence of the 'Treatise' lasted into the late 1750s, by which time its drill had become obsolete, but Bland's name had become a byword in the army: when as late as August 1774 a youthful newly joined ensign proposed to reform the interior management and discipline of the 4th foot, at Boston, 'to his great amazement the boys only laughed at his schemes, and called him 'Humphrey Bland' and 'the young General', and I am afraid have laughed him out of his plan of reforming the army' (G. D. Scull, 'Memoir and Letters of Captain W. Glanville Evelyn', 1879, 29-31). 


@@@@@


doc= 2608


Bland, John (d. 1555), protestant martyr, was born at Sedbergh, Yorkshire, and was educated by Roger Lupton, the provost of Eton College, before becoming a fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, where he took the degree of MA in 1536. According to John Foxe, Bland was at some point in his career the teacher of Edwin Sandys, a fellow Yorkshireman and alumnus of St John's, who went on to become archbishop of York. In 1537 Bland was presented to the living of Ospringe, Kent, which was in the gift of St John's. In Kent he came under the wing of Christopher Nevinson, the archbishop's commissary; in 1541 Bland received the substantial archiepiscopal living of Adisham, Kent, from Nevinson. Bland made his presence felt not only in his livings, but throughout the diocese. In the winter of 1542-3, in addition to stripping his church at Ospringe of images and furnishings, he preached in Faversham, Canterbury, and the surrounding area, denouncing images, fast days, prayer to saints, and other 'superstitious' practices. He also repeatedly preached that confession was unnecessary. At the same time, Bland was associating with protestant radicals, including some with direct ties to the Anabaptist Joan Bocher. (Significantly, when Bland was arrested a decade later, some Kentish freewillers would rally to his defence.) 
How radical Bland's own views were is hard to determine. He was accused of making some statements in 1542-3 which pushed against the envelope of prevailing English protestant orthodoxy: that the mass was just a remembrance, 'that in the christening of children priests be murderers', and that the term 'Trinitas' was not scriptural but was coined by Athanasius (Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, MS 128, pp. 67, 69, and 71). On the other hand, it is difficult to believe that Bland would have retained the support of both Nevinson and Archbishop Thomas Cranmer had his religious radicalism been too pronounced. The patronage of Cranmer and Nevinson, along with Bland's outspoken protestantism, made him a natural target for religious conservatives in Kent, and in the spring of 1543 his heresies were denounced to the king, as part of the conspiracy against Archbishop Cranmer which became known as the prebendaries' plot. Almost immediately the protestants in Cranmer's circle rallied round Bland. Nevinson resigned to him a prebend which he had held, and Rowland Taylor and Ralph Morrice, two zealous evangelicals closely associated with Cranmer, stood surety for the payment of first fruits for Bland's new living. Bland himself preached a defiant Palm Sunday sermon at Adisham, in which he denounced the hallowing of palms and other traditional ceremonies. In his sermon Bland also claimed that he had been commanded to preach on these topics by certain members of the privy council. Nevertheless, he was indicted for heresy on 27 September 1543, although the case against him disintegrated once it became clear that Cranmer retained Henry VIII's support. 
Mary's accession, and Cranmer's consequent disgrace, left Bland dangerously isolated. On 3 September 1553 Bland got into a dispute with John Austen, one of his churchwardens; when Austen tried to remove the communion table from the church at Adisham, Bland, with the support of Edward Isaac, a stalwart protestant JP, instituted legal proceedings against him. On 26 October, Thomas Austen, another churchwarden, demanded that Bland rebuild the altar and pay for the restoration of a rood loft he had destroyed. Bland refused. The conservative faction in Adisham procured a priest from a neighbouring parish to celebrate mass. But on 28 December Bland disrupted the planned service and vehemently denounced the mass as an invention of Antichrist. He was assaulted by the churchwardens and then arrested, along with Laurence Ramsey, the former parish clerk of Adisham and a close ally of Bland's. (And perhaps significantly, Ramsey had been a freewiller as late as 1551.) Bland (who was also denounced as a married priest) and Ramsey were both taken to Canterbury, where they were released under bond. 
If this had been merely a local dispute the matter might have ended here, but Bland's past came back to haunt him. In late February 1554, Sir Thomas Moyle, one of the former leaders of the prebendaries' plot, who had organized the accusations of heresy against Bland in 1543, ordered that Bland's bail be revoked. For the next year an elaborate cat and mouse game ensued as Bland was re-released on bail, then arraigned in an ecclesiastical court, then transferred to the county sessions, and finally transferred back to spiritual jurisdiction. The object of this manoeuvring was to keep Bland detained, so that he could face heresy charges the moment that the statute criminalizing heresy, which had been repealed in the previous reign, was re-enacted. Having been informally examined by Nicholas Harpsfield, the archdeacon of Canterbury, Bland was examined in the chapter house of Canterbury Cathedral on 21 May 1554. This remarkable session, which took place almost a year before Bland was actually tried for heresy, demonstrates the importance the diocesan authorities attached to this case. A particularly striking feature of this examination was that Cyriac Pettit, a layman (who had been deeply involved in the prebendaries' plot), took the lead in interrogating Bland. A little over a month after this ordeal, Bland was interrogated at the county sessions by Sir Thomas Moyle and Sir John Baker (another of the leaders of the prebendaries' plot). 
In February 1555, with the heresy statute finally re-enacted, Bland was interrogated for a final time by Sir John Baker, and then transferred to spiritual jurisdiction. Richard Thornden, the suffragan bishop of Dover, and a long-standing adversary of Cranmer, took charge of Bland's protracted trial in the spring of 1555. Bland was condemned on 25 June 1555. He was burnt at Canterbury on 12 July, along with -- in vivid, if not necessarily intentional, symbolism -- another Edwardian cleric and two radical protestants. To a remarkable degree, Bland's career epitomizes the early Reformation in Kent. The staunch support and implacable enmity Bland attracted as a particularly active agent of evangelical reform are indications of the passions that would make Kent a burnt-over district, both literally and figuratively, by the end of Mary's reign. A belated but not insignificant sign of the changing of the old order in the county was a payment of 5's'. made in the spring of 1576 by the chapter of Canterbury Cathedral to 'John Blande whose father was brent to help him withall' (Canterbury city and cathedral archives, misc. accounts, 40, fol. 451'r'). 


@@@@@


doc= 2609


Bland, John (1702-1749), writing master and accountant, was born in Crutched Friars, London, on 17 August 1702, the son of a clerk in the custom house. He spent four years at Westminster School, where, according to William Massey, 'he principally formed his hand' (Massey, 2.26). After leaving this school in 1714 he was apprenticed to Charles Snell, the writing master at Sir John Johnson's Free Writing School in Foster Lane. It appears that Bland did not complete his full indenture with Snell; in 1717 he followed his father into the custom house, where he too worked as a clerk until 1726. In this profession he must have become familiar with all the standard forms of commercial documentation, such as bills of lading and invoices, that would eventually form the basis of his output as a writing master. 
Bland's career as a penman did not begin until 1726, when he took up the post of writing master at Mr Watt's academy in Little Tower Street, where he taught for the next thirteen years. During that period he published his 'Essay in Writing Exemplified in Forms of Business' (1730), which won him the reputation for specializing in utilitarian writing styles designed to facilitate communication in 'trade, and mercantile affairs' (Massey, 2.27). In 1739 he left Watt's establishment to set up his own academy in Bishopsgate Street, where he taught writing and accounts to youths destined for a mercantile career. He seems to have published only one copybook by himself; however, several examples of his calligraphy were included in compilations engraved by George Bickham, such as 'Penmanship in its Utmost Beauty and Extent' (1731). 
Bland died on 21 January 1749 at Cornhill, and was buried in St Martin's Outwich, Threadneedle Street. From Massey's account of his funeral we can surmise that Bland was a well-liked man: despite the frequent acrimony and competition between writing masters, Bland was carried to his grave by a number of his profession, as well as two of the teachers who worked at his academy. 


@@@@@


doc= 2610


Bland, John (d. c.1788), barrister and writer, was the son of Nathaniel Bland, doctor of law, and judge of the prerogative court in Dublin. Although he does not appear to have been a graduate of Trinity College, he almost certainly enjoyed a classical education before entering King's Inns, Dublin, in Hilary term, 1741. At that date all candidates for the Irish bar were required to keep terms in one of the inns of court in London, and Bland was subsequently admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 16 January 1742. He was duly called to the Irish bar in Hilary term, 1754, and was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 12 June 1752. The fact that he took ten years to be called at Lincoln's Inn, when the minimum interval for those without a university degree was seven years, in conjunction with his extraneous scholarly preoccupations might suggest that his commitment to a legal career was less than wholehearted. His absence from 'Browne's General Law Lists' in 1779 and 1787 implies that he was not practising in these years. 
Bland is styled a gentleman on the title-page of his dramatic translation, in blank verse, of the 'Song of Solomon', his only contribution to literature, published in 1750. In his preface he claims to have completed a manuscript, now lost, entitled 'A treatise on the rhetorical power and use of the accent points of the Hebrew code, both in prose and verse' but, lacking 'proper Encouragement for the Publication thereof', he prepared this translation, and other pieces from the 'Old Testament', as a 'Specimen, to exemplify the Rules investigated and laid down in the said Treatise' ('A Grammatical Version, from the Original Hebrew, of the Song of Solomon', sig. A2'r'). 'The Song''s meticulous, scholarly footnotes, elucidating major variations from other translations, clearly demonstrate the author's impressive erudition. Bland's gambit, to advertise the intrinsic merits of the 'Treatise' itself, was seemingly unsuccessful because his manuscript was never published. 
The preface to 'The Song', signed on 10 February 1750 from Bland's house in Poorpool Lane, Gray's Inn Lane, concludes with an advertisement that the author is prepared to give lessons in the art of punctuation by Hebrew accents code. Evidence of further scholarly endeavour is revealed in an undated manuscript note in an edition of 'Biographia dramatica' preserved in the British Library (11795 DF) which states that Bland translated Addison's tragedy 'Cato' into Latin. Bland is said to have died at his house in Deptford about November 1788, although the reason why he chose to reside so far from the city, in an area which was then in decline owing to the gradual removal of naval dockyard facilities to Chatham, is unclear. There is no record of his burial in the parish churches of St Nicholas and St Paul which served the Deptford community at that date. 


@@@@@


doc= 2611


Bland, Maria Theresa (1769-1838), singer, was born of Italian-Jewish parents named Romanzini, who settled in London soon after her birth. In the spring of 1773 she was engaged at Hughes's Riding School, performing as Romanzini. She sang in the children's company at the opening of the Royal Circus on 7 November 1782, where she was also taught by the director, Charles Dibdin; she was then engaged by Richard Daly for the Theatre Royal, Dublin, where she sang with great success. In 1782 she went to Drury Lane to take the small parts known as 'singing chambermaids'. She performed at Sadler's Wells in 1786, and her first operatic appearance at Drury Lane was on 24 October that year, when she played the boy Antonio in an English version of Gretry's 'Richard Coeur-de-Lion' adapted by Thomas Linley. In 1789 she sang in Liverpool with such success, both on the stage and in concerts, that she refused to return to Drury Lane unless her salary was raised. The management rejected her request, but she returned after a few weeks. 
On 21 October 1790 Romanzini married George Bland, brother of Dorothea Jordan of Drury Lane and a minor actor. The marriage did not last, and Bland left her to go to America; she later had several illegitimate children. Although she also sang at the Haymarket from 1791 and at Vauxhall Gardens, she remained with the Drury Lane company for nearly forty years. Here she sang secondary roles in nearly all Storace's operas: Michael Kelly took Haydn and Pleyel to 'The Cherokee' in 1794 and wrote of 'the great simplicity and truth' of her singing of 'A little bird sat on a spray'. Its success led to the belief that it was a genuine Welsh folk-song, and a setting for George Thomson's collection by Beethoven. 
Mrs Bland's voice was a mezzo-soprano of very sweet quality, and, though her powers were limited, as a singer of English ballads she was free from any blemish of style or taste. In person she was short and dark, but her acting was very bright and vivacious. A deteriorating mental condition aggravated by the death of a child led to a breakdown after her last stage appearance in June 1822. A benefit at Drury Lane and a public subscription raised about $800; the money was passed to Lord Egremont, who allowed her an annuity of $80. She lived for the rest of her life with a family named Western, and died from apoplexy at their house, 11 Broadway, Westminster, on 15 January 1838. She was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 25 January. 
Her son 


@@@@@


doc= 2612


Bland, Miles (1786-1867), mathematician, was born at Sedbergh, Yorkshire, on 11 October 1786, the son of Thomas and Esther Bland. He was educated at Sedbergh School and at St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1808, as second wrangler and Smith's prizeman. He was afterwards elected fellow (5 April 1808) and tutor of his college, and acted as moderator (1814-16) and public examiner (1817-18) in mathematics. He has been described as a 'strong Tory, active in the University as well as his college' (Venn, 'Alum. Cant.'). He was twice married: his first wife was Ann, daughter of T. Templeman of Ramsgate, and his second Emma, daughter of Claud Russell of Binfield, Berkshire; he had two sons and at least one daughter. He was ordained in 1810 and became rector of Lilley, Hertfordshire, in 1823 and a prebendary of Wells Cathedral in 1826, when he proceeded DD. 
Bland wrote both mathematical works and biblical commentaries. His published mathematics consists mainly of textbooks and books of problems, for use at both school and university level. His 'Algebraical Problems' (1812) was a very popular school textbook; a ninth edition was published in 1849. He also produced books of exercises in geometry, mechanics, and philosophy. His biblical studies resulted in the publication of commentaries on the gospels of St Matthew (1828) and St Mark (1829). He was a fellow of the Royal Society, of the Society of Antiquaries, and of the Royal Astronomical Society. He died on 27 December 1867 at 5 Royal Crescent, Ramsgate. 


@@@@@


doc= 2613


Bland, Nathaniel (1803-1865), Persian scholar, was born on 3 February 1803, the only son of Nathaniel Bland of Randalls Park, Leatherhead. His father's name was originally Crumpe, but after leaving Ireland and purchasing Randalls Park, in 1812 he took the surname of his mother, Dorothea, daughter of Dr Bland of Derriquin Castle, co. Kerry. 
Bland entered Eton College in 1818, and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 16 October 1821, graduating BA in 1825. He was an elegant Persian scholar, and between 1843 and 1853 contributed several valuable papers to the 'Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society'. The first, in the June issue of 1843 (vol. 7), was a notice of the 'Atash Kada', a collection of lives of poets. This and a supplementary article in volume 9 of the 'Journal' became the standard texts for some time, but are now superseded by other translations. Bland contributed articles to the 'Journal' on several other topics, including Persian chess and the Islamic science of the interpretation of dreams as well as one describing the Pote collection of oriental manuscripts in Eton College Library. Some of these articles were later published independently. In 1844 he edited Nizam's 'Makhzun al-Asrar' for the Oriental Translation Fund, but unfortunately he did not finish this work. In the latter part of his life he took to gambling, had to sell Randalls Park, and eventually committed suicide at Hombourg-les-Bains in Belgium on 10 August 1865. His valuable collection of Persian and other manuscripts was sold through Bernard Quaritch in 1866 and purchased by the earl of Crawford. It subsequently formed part of the Bibliotheca Lindesiana. 


@@@@@


doc= 2614


Bland, Robert (1740-1816), man-midwife, was born at King's Lynn, Norfolk, the son of David Bland, an attorney in the town, and was educated at the London hospitals. He married some time about 1774; the classical scholar Robert Bland (1779?-1825) and the politician William Bland (1789-1868) were among his four children. Bland received the degree of MD from the University of St Andrews in 1778, and was admitted licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1786. He was connected to the Westminster General Dispensary from 1774 until 1781. He obtained an extensive practice as an accoucheur in London, and his reputation was such that he was engaged to write all the articles on midwifery for Rees's 'Cyclopaedia'. To the 'Philosophical Transactions' (no. 71/1, 22, 35-72) he contributed in 1781 a paper entitled 'Some calculations of the number of accidents or deaths which happen from parturition; proportion of male and female children born; of twins, monstrosities... taken from the reports of the Westminster General Dispensary', and in the same year a 'Table of the chances of life from infancy to twenty-six years of age'. He published in 1794 'Observations on Human and Comparative Parturition', and he was also the author of 'Proverbs Chiefly Taken from the Adagia of Erasmus, with Explanations; and Illustrated by Examples from the Spanish, Italian, French, and English Languages' (2 vols., 1814). From 1796 until 1816 Bland was chairman of the Basingstoke Canal Navigation Company. He was described as being 'skilled in his profession and of extensive experience but eccentric in manner' (Vine, 46). He died at Leicester Square, London, on 29 June 1816. His library was sold later by Sothebys. 


@@@@@


doc= 2615


Bland, Robert (1779?-1825), classical scholar, son of Robert Bland (1740-1816), was educated at Harrow School and at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he was admitted in 1797 and graduated BA in 1802. He entered holy orders in 1801, and was an assistant master at Harrow from 1802 until 1808, Byron being among his pupils. He was next a reader and preacher at some London chapels. Later he was appointed minister to the English church at Amsterdam, but 'the circumstances of the times not permitting him to fulfill the objects of his appointment' ('GM', 1st ser., 95/1, 646), he returned to England. In 1811 Byron helped to extricate him from a duel with an officer in the guards who had made off with the mistress whom Bland shared with another literary clergyman in Byron's circle, Francis Hodgson. In 1813 he received the curacy of Prittlewell, Essex, exchanging this in 1816 for the curacy of Kenilworth. He combined his clerical duties with private tuition, preparing pupils for university entrance. In 1813 Bland married Eliza, daughter of Archdale Wilson Tayler; they had six children. He died at Leamington on 12 March 1825. 
As a classical scholar and teacher Bland was much esteemed in his day. His 'Elements of Latin Hexameters and Pentameters', which reached its twenty-first edition in 1853, remained in use for decades. His 'Translations, Chiefly from the Greek Anthology, with Tales and Miscellaneous Poems' (1806), in which he collaborated with J. H. Merivale, attracted considerable notice. In politics a whig, Bland was a member of the literary circle which included Francis Hodgson, his future brother-in-law. His poetry received a complimentary notice in Byron's 'English Bards and Scottish Reviewers' ('Lord Byron: The Complete Poetical Works', ed. J. J. McGann, 1, 1980, 415). Well versed in French and Italian, Bland translated, with Anna Plumptre, the 'Memoirs of Baron de Grimm' and 'Diderot' (2 vols., 1813). 


@@@@@


doc= 2616


Bland, Tobias (c.1563-1605), Church of England clergyman, matriculated sizar from Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1575 and proceeded BA in 1581, in which year he migrated to Corpus Christi College. Accused of publishing a satirical libel against the master of the college, Robert Norgate, which began 'In the name of the father, the sonn, and the old wiffe' and was set out in the form of a catechism, he admitted the offence and was ordered to sit in the stocks. Norgate became vice-chancellor soon after, so that Bland's reputation in Cambridge remained questionable; a petition to the university chancellor, Lord Burghley, signed by fifty members of senate, unsuccessfully attempted to prevent Bland's progression to MA in 1584. By this date he had been ordained deacon and he proceeded to priest's orders at Lincoln in December 1585. 
Bland's early clerical career remains obscure, but by 1589 he had come under the patronage of Lord St John of Bletso, whose chaplain he was and to whom he dedicated 'A Baite for Momus', a sermon on '1 Timothy', 4: 1-2 delivered at Bedford and published in that year. The sermon appears to have aroused some controversy among the clergy of the area but is not notably partisan, though in it Bland refers to another, longer, work, apparently not published, which may have set out more contentious views. Through the influence of his patron he became, in 1589, rector of Ripton Abbots, Huntingdonshire, an office he held jointly with the mastership of St John's Hospital, Huntingdon, from 1599 until his death. 
Meanwhile, Bland had also recovered his reputation at Cambridge, moving to Magdalene College and taking his BD in 1591, and a promising career beckoned on his appointment as sub-almoner to Queen Elizabeth in 1594. He was subsequently rector of the valuable Northamptonshire living of Brington from 1599 to 1601 before being collated to the first prebendal stall at Peterborough Cathedral on 29 October 1602. He died early in 1605 and was buried at St Sepulchre's, Cambridge, on 4 April that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 2617


Bland, William (1789-1868), medical practitioner and politician in Australia, was born in London on 5 November 1789, the second son of Dr Robert Bland (1740-1816). William was said to have attended the Merchant Taylors' School, but this has not been confirmed. Certainly, he was drawn to medicine and on 6 January 1809 qualified as a surgeon's mate in the navy, rising to naval surgeon in 1812. On 7 April 1813, while aboard the 'Hesper' at Bombay, he killed the purser, Robert Case, in a duel and was sentenced to seven years' transportation. 
Having arrived at Sydney on the 'Frederick' on 14 July 1814, Bland was sent to the asylum at Castle Hill and served there until pardoned on 27 October 1815. He moved to Sydney, set up a successful medical practice, and on 17 April 1817 married Sarah ('b'. 1797), the eldest daughter of the missionary, William Henry. The couple separated and Sarah left the colony in 1818, after William accused her of infidelity and sued Richard Drake of the East India Company. On 24 September 1818, Bland was himself tried for lampooning Governor Macquarie and was sentenced to a year in Parramatta gaol. He did not again break the law and after release resumed his medical practice. 
A highly successful surgeon, who performed demanding operations, Bland contributed articles to the 'Australian Medical Journal' and became president of the Australian Medical Subscription Library in 1859. Earlier, in 1821, he had begun an involvement with the Benevolent Society that lasted until 1863. His concern for the health of the poor was further reflected in his work for the Sydney Dispensary between 1826 and 1845. He was also anxious to improve educational opportunities for the colonists, rich as well as poor. He helped establish the Sydney School of Arts and Mechanics Institute in 1833 and prepared a plan for the non-denominational Sydney College on 18 August 1828. The college offered a classical education and opened on 19 January 1835. Bland served as treasurer until 1844 and president from 1845 until 1853. His community work extended to patronage of the arts and financial support for the construction of a church at Ashfield. 
Bland also became a substantial landowner, acquiring large properties at Prospect and Hunters Hill near Sydney and grazing runs at Yass and Gerringong on the south-western plains. He thus contributed to the growth of the pastoral industry, running cattle and sheep. His interest extended to horse racing, which was one of his enjoyments. All this helped identify him with the landed gentry and like many of their number he became involved in colonial politics. During the 1820s and 1830s he threw his weight behind the cause of reform, supporting the group known variously as the Emancipists, or more accurately, Botany Bay Whigs, who advocated representative government and trial by jury. When the Australian Patriotic Association was formed in 1835 to co-ordinate the group's efforts and strengthen links with a parliamentary agent in London, Bland was made chairman of the committee of correspondence. He played a leading role in the ensuing struggle for self-government and helped draft a constitution bill. In 1842 the legislative council was enlarged, its powers were increased, and provision was made for two-thirds of the members to be elected. Bland was returned as a representative for Sydney on 15 June 1843 and over the next five years was active in council affairs, taking a generally liberal stand. He lost his seat to Robert Lowe in 1848, but regained it in 1849 when Lowe resigned. A year later Bland left politics and did not return until 1858 when he was appointed to the new upper house. Refused an annuity in 1861 at the end of his term of office, he was also declared bankrupt. 
Despite this misfortune, Bland stands out as one of the more constructive figures in early New South Wales. He possessed wide interests, contributed to numerous facets of colonial life, and published several writings. Colourful and outspoken, he was noted for his drive, progressive ideas, and professional skills. He died of pneumonia in Sydney on 21 July 1868, leaving his second wife, the coroner's widow, Elizabeth Smeathman, whom he had married on 5 February 1846, after himself being widowed. He left no children. He was buried on 23 July at Haslem Creek. 


@@@@@


doc= 2618


Blandford, Walter (1615/16-1675), bishop of Worcester, was the son of Walter Blandford, and was born at Melbury Abbas, Dorset. He became a servitor of Christ Church, Oxford, in 1635, aged nineteen, was admitted scholar of Wadham College in 1638, graduated BA on 10 December 1639, and proceeded MA on 28 June 1642. In 1644 he was admitted as a fellow of Wadham. He was recorded as having been expelled by the parliamentary visitors on 14 July 1648, but it seems that he remained in his fellowship none the less. 
There is no proof that Blandford took the solemn league and covenant. What evidence there is demonstrates Blandford's royalist sympathies. About this time he was appointed chaplain to the cavalier Lord Lovelace of Hurley. During the interregnum Blandford was a member of John Wilkins's royalist circle at Wadham. His election as warden of the college in 1659 (a post he held until 1665) demonstrated growing royalist confidence within the university. At the Restoration he was created DD in 1660 and became chaplain to Sir Edward Hyde, later earl of Clarendon, who obtained for him a prebend in Gloucester Cathedral on 6 August, and a chaplainship-in-ordinary to the king. In the same year he was made rector of Remeneham in Berkshire. Between 1662 and 1664 he was vice-chancellor of Oxford University and in 1665 he was made rector of Witney in Oxfordshire. That year he was consecrated bishop of Oxford and soon afterwards he was nominated dean of the Chapel Royal. About this time he seems to have been given a grant of arms. 
Blandford's connections with the Hyde family survived the fall and death of Clarendon. According to the memoirs of James II on 30 March 1671 he was brought to attend the deathbed of the earl's daughter, Anne, duchess of York, by her brother Laurence Hyde. The duchess had requested her husband, James, to tell any bishops who came to attend her of her secret conversion to Rome; if they still insisted on seeing her they might come in provided they did not attempt to shift her faith. When the situation was explained to Blandford by the duke, the bishop 'said to him, He made no doubt but that she would do well (that was his expression) since she was fully convinced, and did it not out of any worldly end; and afterwards went into the room to her, and made her a short Christian exhortation suitable to the condition she was in, and then departed. (Clarke, 1.453)' Three months later Blandford was translated to the see of Worcester, where he died at the bishop's house at Hartlebury, Worcestershire, on 9 or 16 July 1675. He was buried in the cathedral, where there is a memorial to him. In his will the bachelor Blandford left $100 towards the rebuilding of St Paul's Cathedral and $500 to renovate the house at Hartlebury. However, it appears that there were legal disputes over this bequest and it is unclear whether the money was ever spent on the house (there was a clause in the will which stated that if work was not begun within six months after his successor had been installed the money should be given instead to charitable causes). Blandford published nothing, though Nicholas Lloyd, also of Wadham College, dedicated his edition of Charles Estienne's 'Dictionarium historicum' (1670) to him. There is a portrait of Blandford in Wadham and a copy of the painting in the bishop's house at Hartlebury. 


@@@@@


doc= 2619


Blandy, William (fl. 1563-1581), translator, was born in Newbury, Berkshire, the son of William Blandy. He was elected to a probationer fellowship at New College, Oxford, in 1563. Following his admission to a full fellowship on 8 June 1565, he graduated BA a year later, on 3 July 1566. A devoted Catholic, he was stripped of his degree and fellowship in the same year by the evangelical college visitor, Bishop Robert Horne. Blandy was 'removed for Popery' and left Oxford (Foster, 'Alum. Oxon.', 1.138). He moved to London, where he joined the Middle Temple in 1571. 
Blandy's 'The five books of the famous, learned and eloquent man, Hieronimo Osorius, contayning a discussion of civill and Christian nobilitie', a translation into English of the work of Bishop Jeronimo Osorio da Fonseca, was published in London in 1576 and dedicated to the earl of Leicester as chancellor of Oxford University. In the preface Blandy spoke eloquently of his motivation to translate the work of a Catholic Portuguese bishop into English. He believed the interrelation between the nobility and the world of learning sketched by Osorio worthy of imitation by any Christian nobleman: 'It may appeare most manifeste, that neither Princes maye live cleare and knowen to posteritie wythoute the penne and helping hande of learneds Arte: neyther man excelling in learning would be eyther in lyfe reputed or spoken of after death, withoute the countenaunce, defence, and patronage of noble Peeres. (Blandy, 'Five Books', sig. A 3'v')' In a later work, 'The castle, or, Picture of pollicy, shewing forth most lively the face, body, and partes of a commonwealth, the duety of a perfect souldier, the martiall feates late done by our nation, under the conduct of J. Noris, generall of the army of the states in Friesland' (London, 1581), Blandy reflected on the accomplishments of the English troops in the Low Countries during the emergence of the Dutch republic. Although he was a believing Catholic, Blandy opted to support English interests in the Low Countries and so, paradoxically, played an active part in the eventual elimination of Catholic worship in the provinces of the Dutch union by spring 1580. His date of death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 2620


Blandy, Mary (1718/19-1752), murderer, was born in Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, the only child of Francis Blandy ('c'.1689-1751) and Mary Stevens ('c'.1700-1749), parents so 'excessively fond' of her that they could 'scarce bear her out of their sight', and 'whose continual Study was to promote her Happiness' ('Genuine and Impartial Account', 3; 'Authentic Tryals', 21). Francis Blandy, an attorney, whose 'whole thoughts were bent to settle her advantageously in the world', not only provided her with 'the most liberal Education' but, presumably in hopes of marrying her 'into Opulence', committed the 'pious fraud' that would ultimately prove the undoing of both father and child. Although Blandy's wealth was later discovered to amount to less than $3000, he 'gave out, or encouraged, or did not contradict, a Report, that he was a Man of $10,000 Fortune' (Roughead, 65; 'Authentic Tryals', 6; 'London Evening Post'). Not surprisingly, Mary's reputed wealth, 'join'd to her Accomplishments' -- for, although no beauty, Miss Blandy was described as having an 'agreeable' and 'genteel Person' and 'engaging' manners, as well as a 'Capacity as few Women are Blessed with' -- attracted many suitors ('London Evening Post'; 'Genuine and Impartial Account', 3). Unfortunately, however, 'every Match... was broke off, because the Father would advance no Money with his Daughter but only promis'd that he would leave her his All at his Death'. In the view of many contemporaries, 'such frequent Disappointments of Miss's Expectations, and natural Desires, undoubtedly raised her Resentment' ('London Evening Post'). 
In the summer of 1746 Captain William Henry Cranstoun (bap. 1714, d. 1752), the younger son of a Scottish lord, began to pay his addresses to Miss Blandy, then in her late twenties and still unmarried. Cranstoun cut a less than dashing figure; he was more than twelve years Mary's senior and, in the words of one account, 'diminutive in Stature', 'of a very mean Aspect', and so 'disfigured by the Small Pox... as to have his Face all in Seams'. He was, however, possessed of sufficient 'Flattery and Complaisance' to insinuate himself into the daughter's good graces, while the fact that he was 'quality' was recommendation enough for the 'unhappy father', who was said to have cherished the hope of some day becoming 'grandfather to a lord' ('Genuine and Impartial Account', 5, 4; 'GM'). However, after learning that Cranstoun had a wife and child in Scotland, Francis Blandy actively discouraged the captain's suit. But the latter continued to correspond with Mary, whom he assured that the marriage was not legal. Beginning in June 1751, apparently at Cranstoun's urging, Mary laced her father's tea and later his water-gruel with arsenic -- or, as Mary claimed to have believed, a 'love powder' which would induce her father to look more favourably upon their union. In early August Francis Blandy fell seriously ill; he lingered for over a week, finally expiring on 14 August 1751. 
Mary Blandy, who had been seen tampering with her father's oatmeal and behaving suspiciously in general, was almost immediately apprehended for murder. While Mary had burnt her correspondence with Cranstoun, several fragments of a package containing arsenic were salvaged by the servants, and an apparently incriminating letter she had sent to her lover intercepted. More damning evidence emerged at her trial at the Oxford assizes on 3 March 1752, where servants testified that Mary had cursed her father for 'a rogue, a villain, a toothless old dog' whom she wished 'dead and at Hell', and was once heard to remark, 'who would grudge to send an old Father to Hell for $10,000?' (Roughead, 105; 'Genuine Account', 7). Perhaps the most moving testimony concerned the last interview between father and daughter, when the latter confessed to administering the 'love powder' to her father, but maintained she had done so only 'to make him love Cranstoun' ('Genuine and Impartial Account', 7). When Mary begged her father not to curse her, the latter replied: 'my dear, how couldst thou think I could curse thee? No, I bless you, and hope God will bless thee and amend thy life'; he then instructed her to 'say no more', lest she say anything 'to her own prejudice' (Roughead, 93). 
While it took less than five minutes for the jury to find Mary Blandy guilty, public opinion was sharply divided over the case. Many found it incredible that the accomplished Miss Blandy could have been so foolish as to mistake arsenic for an innocent 'love powder'; others -- including, it seems, her own father -- saw Blandy as the innocent dupe of that 'cruel Spoiler', Cranstoun: a 'poor lovesick girl' who would do anything for 'the man she love[ed]' ('Covent-Garden Journal', 10 March 1752; 'Genuine and Impartial Account', 7). After all, even if 'she were, as common repute would have it, a woman of 'superior Understanding' she was still a woman' ('Case of Miss Blandy', 19). And if many characterized Blandy as a cold-blooded murderer who during her trial neither 'shew[ed] the least Remorse' nor 'shed a Tear' and who, shortly after receiving sentence of death, supped 'very heartily' on 'Mutton Chops' and 'Apple Pye' ('Authentic Tryals', 14; 'Genuine and Impartial Account', 8, 10), it was this very 'coolness and courage', as well as the steadfastness with which Blandy maintained her innocence which, as Horace Walpole sourly remarked, 'made a kind of party in her favour; as if a woman who would not stick at Parricide would scruple a lie' (Walpole, 4.317). 
Mary Blandy would maintain to the last not only her innocence but her resolution. On 6 April 1752 the 33-year-old 'Fair Parricide' went to the gallows 'with such serenity and composure... as greatly surprised and charmed many of the spectators', 'many of whom... shed tears'. A lady to the end, Blandy's last words before ascending the ladder at the place of execution were, 'Gentlemen, don't hang me high for the sake of decency'; and, shortly afterwards, a tremulous 'I am afraid I shall fall' ('London Magazine', April 1752; 'GM'). She was buried with her parents in Henley parish church. William Cranstoun, for many the real villain, died on 2 December 1752 of natural causes in France, where he had fled the previous year to avoid prosecution, leaving his small fortune to the wife and daughter whom he had once renounced. 


@@@@@


doc= 2621


Blane, Sir Gilbert, first baronet (1749-1834), physician, the fourth son of Gilbert Blane, was born on 29 August 1749 at Blanefield, Ayrshire, in western Scotland; the Blanes were a wealthy merchant family. Gilbert was educated at Kirkoswald and Maybole schools in Ayrshire until the age of fourteen, before attending the University of Edinburgh with the intention of beginning a career in the church. However, after five years in the faculty of arts Blane then undertook another five years in the faculty of medicine. Never one to remain inconspicuous, he was elected as a president of the students' medical society and during his term of office had the prestigious duty of presenting a speech at the laying of a foundation stone of a new hall for the society in 1775 ('Authentic Memoirs', 135-45). 
Blane was extremely fortunate to be acquainted with two of the most famous doctors of the late eighteenth century. Before he received his MD from the University of Glasgow on 28 August 1778, Blane studied under William Cullen who then introduced him to William Hunter in London. Blane's obvious ability quickly led to Hunter's recommendations, first to Lord Holdernesse and then to George Rodney (the future Admiral Rodney), that they should employ this young Scottish doctor as their own personal physician. It was in this capacity, rather than as a surgeon of the British navy, that Blane in 1779 sailed with Rodney to the West Indies on board the 'Sandwich'. At the time Britain was embroiled in the American War of Independence and Blane was present at no fewer than six naval battles during which he acted far beyond his duties as a doctor -- even to the point of relaying the admiral's orders to those manning the guns. In recognition of both Blane's personal bravery and his medical prowess, Rodney appointed him as physician to the West Indies fleet in 1780. Now officially recognized by the navy, Blane served in this role until the end of the war three years later. One of his first actions in his new position of authority was to compile and print at his own expense a small book entitled 'A short account of the most effectual means of preserving the health of seamen, particularly in the Royal Navy' (1781?), which he then sent to all the surgeons who served in the fleet to use as a guideline in any provision of healthcare. He became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1781. 
At the request of Rodney, surgeons were required to collect detailed figures of morbidity and mortality on board each ship. Blane collated this information, compiled nosological tables, and then, in a manner which was to become typical for him, used statistics as a tool for justifying reforms in naval healthcare. For example, on 13 October 1781 he presented data to the Admiralty that demonstrated how one in seven men had died from disease on the West Indies station and suggested ameliorative measures including an improved diet that included fresh fruit in order to prevent scurvy, and strict sanitary measures. On 16 July 1782, less than a year after the reforms were instigated, Blane relayed the news that mortality levels were now only one in twenty. Other officers of the fleet recommended to the Admiralty that Blane should receive special recompense and he was subsequently awarded a pension in recognition of his excellent work in the West Indies fleet. 
Blane's early experience at sea led him to the conclusion that prevention was better than cure, and in particular that 'cleanliness and discipline are the indispensable and fundamental means of health' ('Observations on the Diseases Incident to Seamen', 1785, 251). He also asked much more from naval surgeons who were to take a new role in the prevention of ill health. This encouragement effectively extended the traditional domain of surgeons serving in the British navy, and may have served to improve their status. However, surgeons were generally regarded as inferior in rank to ship officers throughout this period. At every opportunity throughout his life Blane fought for the higher status of naval surgeons, whom he saw as pivotal for good health in the British navy. 
Blane's work with the navy served to introduce him to powerful patrons who ensured his success as a physician in civilian life. Blane had met the duke of Clarence while serving in the navy and this led to his being appointed physician-extraordinary to the prince of Wales in 1785. Later he became physician-in-ordinary to the prince's household and was eventually physician to the king after George IV had acceded to the throne. Another factor in Blane's meteoric success was the excellent reference provided by Lord Rodney that led to his post of physician at St Thomas's Hospital, London, where, after a close-run contest, Blane was elected on 19 September 1783 by a majority of ninety-eight votes to eighty-four. However, while in the navy it was commendable that Blane appeared unflappable when under fire, this same air of detached coolness was not appreciated by his civilian medical colleagues. Astley Cooper remarked that Blane was 'a painstaking physician, but he was so cold in temperament, that we called him 'Chilblane'' (Cooper, 306). 
The revolutionary wars against France caused Blane to resign from St Thomas's in 1795 and resume his service in the navy, at the invitation of Lord Spencer, who was the first lord of the Admiralty. Blane was appointed a commissioner for sick and wounded seamen and held this powerful office until the peace of Amiens in 1802 -- seven strategically important years in the history of the Royal Navy. Britain was fighting for naval supremacy, upon which the empire depended. Any degree of mortality and morbidity within the navy exacerbated the perennial problem of a shortage of skilled and motivated men. Also, ships were at sea for long periods of time, covering long distances, and, when crews succumbed to tropical diseases or sickness such as scurvy, the efficiency of the ship necessarily deteriorated. During wartime this was particularly unsatisfactory. Blane's tactics to keep seamen healthy incorporated lessons he learned while serving in the West Indies fleet; his scientific approach to preserving the health of seamen was founded upon observation and statistical reporting. Every surgeon within the navy was encouraged to report the state of health for each ship by using standardized forms and medical logbooks. An estimated 634 surgeons served in the navy at the end of the eighteenth century, allowing Blane's love of statistics to be applied on a hitherto unknown scale (Pope, 131). The use of a scientific numerical approach to finding the best way to combat disease was not unknown during this period and other naval surgeons such as Robert Robertson (1742-1829) had taken the initiative of compiling statistics in an effort to find the answers to medical problems. Blane's important contribution to the growth of medical science was that he extended the quest for data and information to all naval surgeons. He also encouraged accountability on the part of surgeons for their actions, and this, coupled with new communications with the government board for the sick and wounded, meant that the gathering of data started to become an official and centralized procedure. 
Alongside the recommendations of Thomas Trotter, who was physician to the Channel Fleet, Blane was also instrumental in the issuing of lemon juice to all seamen in order to combat the eighteenth century's constant threat of scurvy, the direct result of a deficiency of vitamin C in the diet. The anti-scorbutic power of lemons had been recognized for centuries by seafarers, and Dr James Lind (1716-1794) had attracted recognition for his curative experiments first noted in his 'Treatise on the Scurvy' (1753). Blane's contribution came with his authorization in 1795 for lemon juice to be universally distributed throughout the navy. 
Although the role of medical practitioners in curing scurvy might be more marginal than traditionally assumed (Rodger, 333-4), contemporaries of Blane deemed his pioneering measures to be highly successful, and as a result he became a figure of authority on the subject of healthcare. In 1799, when plague struck areas of the Mediterranean, an anxious British government along with merchants in the Turkey Company enlisted help from Blane and several other eminent physicians. It was under anti-plague regulations specifically dictated by Blane that the army was allowed to return from its active service in Egypt. The Home Office also consulted Blane on a number of public health matters relating to conditions inside prisons and convict ships. His recommendations of improved ventilation, of carrying fewer men, and of the provision of an adequate diet resulted in a dramatic reduction in the deaths of convicts on board the 'Glatten' in 1802. The most striking testimony to Blane's medical expertise came when the government called upon him for advice over a medical fiasco at Walcheren. On this island off the Netherlands, troops lay totally devastated by disease. The army's medical board had performed ineptly and confidence in the army's ability to cope with the situation had evaporated. In 1810 Blane was sent out to make a report and was subsequently charged with supervising the return of the sick and wounded. He concluded that the expedition should be aborted. A baronetcy, awarded in 1812, marked the exceptional esteem placed on Blane's professional expertise. 
Healthcare at sea continued to be a concern for Blane even though he had officially resigned from the navy in 1802. For example, he supported compulsory vaccination for all seamen in 'Elements of Medical Logick' (1819), and encouraged academic study for naval surgeons. In 1829 he founded a prize medal (the Blane naval medical medal) for the best journal kept by surgeons of the Royal Navy and his express wish was that the medical knowledge of naval surgeons should be extended beyond the empirical. Using his own naval experience Blane wrote for medical journals such as the 'Transactions of a Society for the Improvement of Medical and Chirurgical Knowledge'. Blane continued to be a conspicuous medical figure in intellectual society through his activities as a fellow of the Royal Society in both Edinburgh (1783) and London (1784), as a proprietor of the Royal Institution, and as a member of the Imperial Academy of Sciences at St Petersburg. 
Blane's personal life centred round his long marriage to Elizabeth, the only daughter of Abraham Gardner. Married on 11 July 1786, they had six sons and three daughters and lived mostly at Culverlands in Berkshire. Blane outlived his wife, who died in the cholera epidemic of 1832, and also survived all his children with the exception of two sons: Hugh Seymour (1795-1869) (who inherited his father's title) and Charles Collins ('b'. 1799). 
The latter years of Blane's life were beleaguered by ill health. From 1821 onwards, suffering from an irritating skin disease named prurigo senilis, he resorted to using large doses of opium. This in turn caused distressing symptoms and eventually Blane died, aged eighty-five, on 27 June 1834, in his house at 8 Sackville Street, Piccadilly, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 2622


Henry Blaneforde (fl. c.1324) originally continued up to 1328 and that Walsingham's 'short chronicle' thus took up more or less where it left off. John Stow, who took notes from Claudius D.vi, referred to an entry for Blaneforde under 1326, but the entry in fact relates to the trial of Adam Orleton, bishop of Hereford, which took place in 1323. 


@@@@@


doc= 2623


Blanford, Henry Francis (1834-1893), meteorologist and geologist, was born on 3 June 1834 at 27 Bouverie Street, Whitefriars, London, where his father had a workshop manufacturing gilt mouldings, the son of William Blanford and his wife, Elizabeth Simpson. He was the younger brother of the geologist William Thomas Blanford. He went to schools in Brighton and Brussels. After then studying for some time at the School of Design, first at Somerset House, then at Marlborough House, he entered the Royal School of Mines, London, in 1851. There he received the duke of Cornwall's scholarship. Afterwards he studied mining for a year at the Bergakademie, Freiberg, Saxony, and spent some time preparing 'An Introduction to the Use of the Blowpipe' (1856; 3rd edn, 1875), an English translation of Carol Johann August Theodor Scheerer's work. 
In 1855 Blanford and his brother William were appointed to the Geological Survey of India. Arriving at Calcutta in late September of that year, they spent their first field season (1855-6) surveying the Talchir coalfield in Orissa. There they identified the effects of ice action in the boulder bed now known as the Talchir tillite, thereby laying a foundation for the later conception of the Gondwana glaciation and of Gondwanaland as a great southern continent. From 1 December 1856 Blanford acted as first curator of the new Museum of Geology at Calcutta, and took charge of the office of the superintendent of the geological survey. He also delivered a course of lectures on geology at Presidency College, Calcutta, during that winter. In 1857 he was dispatched to Madras, where he spent three years determining the stratigraphy and palaeontology of the cretaceous rocks near Trichinopoly and Pondicherry. In December 1861, partly because his health was suffering, he resigned from the survey and returned to Europe. However, the following year he accepted a post as professor in the Bengal education department, lecturing in physics and chemistry at Presidency College, where he remained until 1872. 
In August 1863 Blanford became one of the secretaries of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and partly in consequence of his duties there he became interested in meteorology. In the following year Calcutta suffered from a devastating cyclone, of which Blanford published a detailed description in 1866, and the urgent requirement to establish a storm warning system for the port led the lieutenant-governor of Bengal to appoint Blanford as meteorological reporter for Bengal in 1867. In this post Blanford began to systematize the gathering of meteorological data in Bengal and made important observations concerning the origin of cyclones. His accounts, published annually as the 'Report of the Meteorological Reporter', were praised as 'model monograms of the subject' ('Nature', 11, 1874-5, 146). 
Blanford married Charlotte Mackenzie, daughter of George Ferguson Cockburn of the Bengal civil service, and granddaughter of Lord Justice Cockburn, on 20 June 1867. In 1874, at the recommendation of General Richard Strachey, he was appointed meteorological reporter to the government of India, with the object of organizing a comprehensive pan-Indian system of data gathering, analysis, and dissemination. One of his most important contributions during this time was his hypothesis that the 'varying extent and thickness of the Himalayan snows exercise a great and prolonged influence on the climatic conditions and weather of the plains of North West India' ('''On the Connection of the Himalaya Snowfall with Dry Winds and Seasons of Drought in India'', Proceedings of the Royal Society', 37, 1884, 3), the application of which enabled him correctly to forecast deficient summer monsoon rainfall over western India in 1885. 
Blanford held the post of reporter until he retired in 1889, but during the final two years he was in England on furlough. From early 1892 failing health forced him to abandon scientific work, and he died of cancer at his home, 7 Ingles Road, Folkestone, on 23 January 1893. His wife, one son, and three daughters survived him. 
Blanford was elected a fellow of the Geological Society in 1862, and of the Royal Society in 1880. In 1884-5 he was president of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. He was a versatile and prolific writer, publishing over eighty scientific papers. He made a number of important contributions to both geology and, more especially, to meteorology, but also wrote on malacology and archaeology. The majority of his papers appeared in 'Nature', the 'Journal' and 'Proceedings' of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and the 'Indian Meteorological Memoirs', an important series which he instituted at Calcutta. Of his several independent works the most important were, perhaps, 'The Indian Meteorologist's Vade Mecum' (1868; enlarged edn, 1877), which was described as a 'model handbook' ('Nature', 19, 1878-79, 294); 'A Practical Guide to the Climates and Weather of India, Ceylon, Burma, and the Storms of the Indian Seas' (1889); and the pedagogic work, 'Rudiments of Physical Geography for the Use of Indian Schools' (1873; 6th edn, 1878). 


@@@@@


doc= 2624


Blankett, John (c.1740-1801), naval officer, is of unknown parentage. He served as a volunteer and midshipman in the 'Somerset' with Captain Edward Hughes, and was present at the reduction of Louisbourg in 1758 and Quebec in 1759. On his return to England he presented a report to the Admiralty concerning the possible existence of a north-west passage to the Pacific. In 1761 he was made a lieutenant. Two years later he was condemned to death for murder by a court at Gibraltar, but he was later reprieved (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/384). After the peace in 1763 he obtained leave to go to Russia to gather information concerning recent discoveries on the east coast of Asia. 
In 1770 Blankett served as lieutenant under Captain Barrington, and four years later he was granted leave to go to St Petersburg with a view to gathering information for a future voyage of exploration. Lord Sandwich, the first lord of the Admiralty, refused to make any firm commitments in support of these ventures (NMM, SAN V12, fol. 310). Some years later Sandwich was criticized in the press for not supporting Blankett and appointing others, notably James Cook, to undertake a number of the voyages Blankett had proposed (ibid., F36, fol. 24). Blankett distanced himself from these attacks but apparently harboured some ill feeling towards Sandwich. He was first lieutenant of the 'Victory', flagship of Admiral Keppel, in 1778 and was made a commander in 1779. He was then appointed to the sloop 'Nymph' and sent to the East Indies to join Sir Edward Hughes. He was made a captain in the 'Rippon' on 23 January 1780. This ship was shortly afterwards ordered home and Blankett held no further appointment during the American War of Independence. 
On his return Blankett busied himself supplying the opposition press with information to discredit Lord Sandwich, and with Lord Shelburne and Captain Robert Tomlinson he assisted in producing lists and accounts on naval matters for the opposition speakers in parliament. After the peace in 1783 he commanded the frigate 'Thetis' in the Mediterranean, where he came to the notice of the king of Naples, who accompanied him on a cruise and presented him with his portrait set in diamonds. In July 1790 he sailed for China in the 'Leopard' in command of a convoy; on his return he was appointed to the 'America' as commodore of a small squadron sent to the Cape of Good Hope. There, in August 1795, he was joined by the squadron under Sir George Elphinstone, under whom he served at the reduction of that settlement. In June 1798 he was appointed once again to the 'Leopard', with orders to proceed to India. On his arrival he was sent as senior officer to the Red Sea, where he commanded during the subsequent operations in Egypt, and about which he complained bitterly: 'The Red-Sea is a job no longer for anybody' ('The Spencer Papers', ed. J. S. Corbett and H. W. Richmond, 4 vols., 1913-24, 4.228). 
In February 1799 Blankett became rear-admiral. In August 1800 he went for a short time to Bombay; on passage he captured the 'Clarisse', a very active French privateer, which under the command of Robert Surcouf had been the terror of commerce of the Indian seas. By January he was back in the Red Sea, and from April to June in the Gulf of Suez. His health had already suffered and the terrible heat of the Red Sea summer proved fatal to him. He died on the 'Leopard' near Mocha on 14 July 1801. He was described as an unusually good linguist, having a perfect mastery of French, Italian, and Portuguese. Seen by many as a good officer and an accomplished and amiable gentleman, he was criticized by others for his bad temper and eccentricity during his last days in the Red Sea. 


@@@@@


doc= 2625


Blaquiere, John, first Baron de Blaquiere (1732-1812), politician, was born on 15 May 1732, the fifth son of Jean de Blaquiere (1675/6-1753), an emigre Huguenot merchant of Greenwich, Kent, and Mary Elizabeth, daughter of Pierre de Varennes, a Huguenot bookseller of the Strand, Westminster. His contemporaries describe him variously. James Caulfeild, first earl of Charlemont, contemptuously dismisses him as 'a man of low birth, no property and weak genius' (GEC, 'Peerage', 4.108n). According to John Lees, an astute commentator and former private secretary to the Irish viceroys, lords Townshend and Harcourt, he had a 'manly mind', but 'in other respects has all the vanity of a foolish boy of fifteen' (John Lees [to Auckland], 13 March [1798], Sneyd papers, PRONI, T/3229/2/29). 
Blaquiere was employed in the counting-house of a London merchant before taking up a military career. He entered the army in an Irish regiment, becoming a major of the 18th dragoons in 1759, and a brevet lieutenant-colonel in 1762. In the following year he became a lieutenant-colonel in the 17th dragoons. In 1771 he was appointed secretary to Simon Harcourt, first Earl Harcourt, who was ambassador-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to Paris. When Harcourt went to Ireland in 1772 as lord lieutenant, Blaquiere accompanied him as his chief secretary. In the same year he was sworn of the privy council. He retired from the army the following year because of his onerous official duties. 
As Harcourt's 'ostensible Minister of the [Irish] House of Commons', Blaquiere was chiefly responsible for creating and maintaining a government majority in it (Harcourt to Rochford, 6 March 1774, 'Calendar of Home Office Papers, 1773-1775', 1899, 3.193). Indeed, W. Hunt states that he 'exercised an authority in the House of Commons which, combined with his tactical skill, was of the highest value on any critical occasion' (Hunt, xxvi). Remoteness from London often bedevilled the Irish administration's relations with the British government -- official dispatches did not always communicate sufficient detail to British ministers. Consequently Blaquiere found it necessary to travel to London to discuss policy on sensitive issues. For example, during the summer and autumn of 1773 he canvassed support for a controversial tax on absentee landlords. This special mission was to act as a precedent for many more of the kind. In January 1775 he was in London again, this time seeking approval for Henry Flood's appointment as joint vice-treasurer of Ireland -- a post traditionally bestowed on members of the British parliament. However, there were still difficulties, and on one occasion he complained to Harcourt that he had 'waited... three hours for the sake of three minutes conversation with Lord North [the British premier]' (Blaquiere to Harcourt, 25 Jan 1775, Harcourt, 9.296). 
When Blaquiere left office in 1776, along with Harcourt, he continued to participate actively in Irish politics, and remained in residence in Ireland -- the only chief secretary, it was generally remarked, known to have done so when the pay of that office ceased. In reward for his services to the Irish administration he was invested in 1774 with the Order of the Bath, and created a baronet ten years later. He represented a number of constituencies in the Irish parliament until its legislative union with the parliament of Great Britain in 1800: Old Leighlin, co. Carlow (1773-83); Carlingford, co. Louth (1783-90); Charleville, co. Cork (1790-97); and Newtownards, co. Down (1797-1800). 
Blaquiere was a regular speaker in the Irish House of Commons and made an important contribution to the debate on the regency issue in 1789, supporting the address calling on the prince of Wales to assume the regency of Ireland. Indeed, he won considerable praise from Charles Bingham, first earl of Lucan, who declared that 'Blaquiere deserves public thanks for cutting up the odious wretch [George Nugent-Temple-Grenville, first marquess of Buckingham, the Irish viceroy] as he did' (Lucan to Edmund Sexton Pery, 12 Feb 1789, 'Buckinghamshire MSS', 196). It was one of the few occasions in his political career that he did not follow the Irish administration's policy line. However, Buckingham was so unpopular on both sides of the Irish Sea that his opposition did not damage seriously his reputation as a stalwart government supporter. 
Blaquiere was also at the centre of controversy when the issue of the legislative union was being contested. In return for his support he obtained an Irish peerage and became Baron de Blaquiere of Ardkill, co. Londonderry, on 30 July 1800. He had hoped to acquire a representative peerage, but the British government resisted strongly. However, Lord Castlereagh, then Irish chief secretary, was forced to offer him an alternative reward -- an Irish pension of $1000 per annum for the lives of his wife and daughter, $700 to be put on the pension list from March 1802, and $300 from March 1803. 
Although one of Blaquiere's first experiences on Irish soil was a duel, in 1773, with the reckless Beauchamp Bagenal, MP for co. Carlow, he enjoyed his time in Ireland. On 24 December 1775 he married Eleanor (1755/6-1833), daughter and heir of Robert Dobson of Anne's Grove, co. Cork, and his wife, Maria, coheir of Alexander Tompkins of Prehen, co. Londonderry, who brought him the Ardkill estate. They had four sons and three daughters. Apart from the chief secretaryship he held other Irish offices. He was appointed alnager of Ireland and bailiff of the Phoenix Park in 1775, a trustee of the linen board in 1784, and a commissioner of the Dublin paving board in 1786. He earned a reputation for being a jobber and pluralist, but he was popular with his peers and took great pleasure in entertaining them. Jonah Barrington comments: 'to his jobbing is that capital [Dublin] indebted for its wide streets, paving, lighting, and convenient fountains. He made as much as he could of these works, it is true; but every farthing he acquired in Ireland he expended in it. (Barrington, 1.188)' After the Union Blaquiere spent a good deal of his time in London. He represented the constituencies of Rye in Sussex (1801-2) and Downton in Wiltshire (1803-6) in the parliament of the United Kingdom. Initially he supported Addington's ministry, but later he wavered, favouring Pitt's return to power. He voted for the abolition of the slave trade, and opposed Catholic relief. Though well into his seventies, he continued to speak and vote regularly, and finished his parliamentary career in opposition to the ministry of all the talents. He was left without a seat at the dissolution in 1806. He died at Bray, co. Wicklow, aged eighty, on 27 August 1812. 


@@@@@


doc= 2626


Blathwayt, William (bap. 1650, d. 1717), government official, was baptized on 2 March 1650 at St Botolph, Aldersgate, London. He was the only son of William Blathwayt (1594- 'c'.1650), barrister of the Middle Temple, and Anne ('b'. 1618?, died in or after 1673), daughter of Justinian Povey, accountant-general to Anne of Denmark and auditor of the exchequer. Blathwayt's father died soon after he was born, leaving an estate 'extremely embroil'd and impaired' (Glos. RO, MS D1799/C9), and he was brought up by his uncle Thomas Povey, a politician and successful, if sometimes inept, government and royal official of the Cromwellian and Restoration periods. In 1665 Blathwayt was admitted to the Middle Temple, London, and three years later, in 1668, Povey and Secretary of State Arlington induced Sir William Temple to employ the young Blathwayt as a clerk in the embassy at The Hague. His linguistic skill (he was the only official at the embassy who knew Dutch) rendered him a most useful member of the staff. After Temple's recall he returned to England (January 1672) in time to join the entourage of the duke of Richmond, who was departing on a diplomatic mission to Denmark. From there, Richmond sent him to Sweden and then to Germany; after Richmond's death Blathwayt continued to Italy on what had become a grand tour before returning to England in 1673. 
With the help of the secretary of state Sir Joseph Williamson, Thomas Povey (himself an expert in colonial business), and Povey's friend Sir Robert Southwell, Blathwayt entered the plantations office in September 1675. The reorganization and expansion of plantation business in this period, combined with Blathwayt's capacity for hard work, facilitated his rapid rise; he became clerk-in-extraordinary of the privy council (July 1678) as a 'mark of... encouragement... for the pains he has taken in the plantation business' ('Ormonde MSS', 4.444) and secretary to the lords of trade in December 1679. A reorganization of colonial finance in 1680 led to Blathwayt's appointment as surveyor and auditor-general of his majesty's revenues in America, a post which he held until his death, and from 1681 to 1683 he was under-secretary of state to Lord Conway in the northern department, transacting business with his customary efficiency. In 1683, with the permission of Charles II, who already had a particular 'kindness for him' (ibid., 4.449), he purchased the post of secretary at war. Royal favour from both Charles and his brother James significantly assisted Blathwayt in these years, and in 1686 he became clerk-in-ordinary of the privy council, although not without a struggle with another claimant to the vacancy, William Bridgeman. King James, reported Blathwayt importantly to his mentor Southwell, had been his 'Advocat & Champion' (Glos. RO, MS D1799/C8). John Evelyn's diary entry for 18 June 1687 summarizes the impression made on one discerning observer: 'I din'd this day at Mr. Blathwaites... [he] having raised himselfe by his Industry, from very moderate Circumstances: He is a very proper handsome person, and very dextrous in buisinesse, and has besids all this married a very greate fortune' (Evelyn, 554). 
This last reference was to Mary Wynter (1650-1691), daughter and heiress to John Wynter of Dyrham Park, Gloucestershire. Blathwayt had initially considered her age uninviting (she was thirty-six) but soon claimed to be more interested in the person of the lady than in the size of the estate. The marriage contract was, however, constructed with that meticulous attention to financial detail which Blathwayt always displayed; the wedding took place on 23 December 1686. They had four sons, of whom two survived, William (1688-1742) and John (1690-1754), and a daughter, Anne (1691-1717), who married the son of Sir Robert Southwell. 
Blathwayt negotiated the difficulties of the revolution of 1688 successfully, despite having served as the chief government witness at the notorious trial of the seven bishops and having, as secretary at war, accompanied James II on the march to Salisbury. His many posts were, he claimed, all 'places of pains or Experience' (Glos. RO, D1799/C8), and, as he never tired of pointing out to his correspondents, they were mainly held during good behaviour rather than at pleasure. Blathwayt was challenged only in his tenure of the secretaryship at war. Sir William Temple's son, John, was appointed to the post in April 1689, but collapsed under the strain and Blathwayt was promptly reappointed. This Dutch-speaking administrator was clearly too useful to be dispensed with; William III found him dull (as did others) but admitted that he had 'a good method' (Foxcroft, 226). From 1692 to 1701 Blathwayt accompanied William on campaign to Flanders as his acting secretary of state; the king also recognized his unrivalled knowledge of the colonies in appointing him to the newly formed Board of Trade in 1696. 
However, the death of William and the accession of Anne signalled the decline of Blathwayt's career. In 1702 he told George Stepney that he had been 'no ways concern'd in Politicks a great while'; by 1706 he admitted to operating in a 'Lower Sphere' (Blathwayt papers, Box 21). He had been dismissed from the secretaryship at war in 1704; henceforth the post would be filled by a politician, not an administrator. In 1707 he lost his seat on the Board of Trade in a party purge; he had been blind to the implications of the rise of party and to the increased importance of parliament. He sat as MP for Newtown in the Isle of Wight on the government interest (1685-7), and for Bath (1693-1710) with the patronage of the duke of Beaufort. Although Stepney had once congratulated Blathwayt on having an 'unalterable' interest at Bath, the duke of Beaufort's belief that Blathwayt had voted against the high-church clergyman Dr Sacheverell in the impeachment proceedings of 1710 meant the end of Blathwayt's parliamentary career. 
Blathwayt's correspondence reveals that he preferred a mode of government modelled on the French example, an army promptly paid and efficiently run, and an empire overseen by honest and effective governors acting in the royal interest. It was a vision which could never be fully realized, particularly by someone who feared to offend the 'great men' and whose patronage was limited, but he clung to it with tenacity throughout a career of almost fifty years. Together with other 'men of business' he helped to make the civil service more professional and worked to strengthen England's sinews of power. None the less, like his fellow administrators, he operated within the standards of the day; an acquisitive man, he took palpable delight in the 'tributes' that he received from grateful diplomats and colonial officials. Many of these gifts, such as the black walnut from Virginia, the cedar from Bermuda, and the deer from Germany, contributed to the stocking of Dyrham Park, rebuilt and refurnished by Blathwayt at vast expense, although in somewhat old-fashioned style, between 1692 and 1702. It was to Dyrham, its new facade supervised by the Huguenot architect Hauduroy, its east front designed by William Talman, comptroller of the royal works, its elaborate formal gardens, including the much admired fountains and 'cascade', laid out by the famous gardener George London, that Blathwayt rather reluctantly retired in the last years of his life. There he died, after what Horatio Walpole described as a 'desperate illness', on 26 August 1717; he was buried at Dyrham church on 30 August. His estate remained for many years in the possession of his descendants; the house and parkland are now in the hands of the National Trust. 


@@@@@


doc= 2627


Blayney, Andrew Thomas, eleventh Baron Blayney (1770-1834), army officer, was born at Castle Blayney, co. Monaghan, on 30 November 1770. His father, Cadwallader Blayney, ninth Baron Blayney of Monaghan in the peerage of Ireland (1720-1775), a lieutenant-general in the army, was descended from an old Welsh family which had lived in Ireland since the reign of Elizabeth I. His mother was Elizabeth Tipping (died 1775), daughter of Thomas Tipping of Beaulieu, co. Louth. Educated at military academies in France and Germany, Blayney succeeded his brother as eleventh Baron Blayney on 2 April 1784 and entered the army as an ensign in the 32nd regiment on 25 November 1789. He became lieutenant in an independent company in 1791, and captain in the 38th on 28 February 1792. Having raised part of the new regiment in Ireland, he was gazetted major in the 89th foot on 3 December 1793 and served with it during the campaign in Flanders in 1794-5, gaining special mention after the action at Boxtel in September 1794. His regiment was then ordered to accompany Sir Ralph Abercromby to the West Indies; but the terrible storm, known as 'Christian's storm' from the name of the admiral, drove the transports back. On 3 May 1796 he became brevet lieutenant-colonel, purchasing that substantive rank in the 89th on 1 March 1798. On 5 July 1796 he married Lady Mabella Alexander (1775-1854), eldest daughter of James, first earl of Caledon. They had three children: Cadwallader Davis ('b'. 21 Feb 1803, died 1874), Anne, and Charlotte Sophia. 
In 1797-8 Blayney was actively engaged in subduing unrest in Ireland, culminating in defeat of the rebels at Vinegar Hill. In January 1799 the 89th was ordered to form part of the garrison of Minorca, which had just been captured by Sir Charles Stuart. Following Rear-Admiral Lord Nelson's recommendation that Sicily be protected from French attack, Blayney went on to Messina in command of the 89th, arriving on 18 March 1799. The regiment then joined reinforcements, who landed in St Paul's Bay, Malta, on 9 December 1799, to tighten the siege of French troops in Valletta. With little action likely, Blayney left for northern Italy, where he witnessed the exploits of General Suvorov's army, about which he sent home an admirable account; but he returned to Malta in time to plant the English flag on the ramparts of Ricasoli, on 4 September 1800. The 89th then took part in Abercromby's expedition to Egypt, being present, though not engaged, at the battle of Alexandria on 21 March 1801. The regiment advanced with the main body to capture Cairo and remain as part of its garrison until the British expeditionary force withdrew from the country. Blayney received the approbation of Lieutenant-General J. H. Hutchinson (commander after Abercromby's death) for his conduct during the campaign. The 89th landed at Cork on 28 January 1802. Following the peace of Amiens on 27 March, it was reduced to peacetime establishment and remained in Ireland for the next three years. When Lieutenant-Colonel William Stewart, his senior, left the regiment on 14 November 1802, Blayney formally obtained command. 
Promoted colonel on 1 January 1805, Blayney sailed in November with the 89th (who became known as Blayney's Bloodhounds) to join Lord Cathcart's expedition to Hanover, arriving on the River Weser on 5 January 1806 to discover cancellation of the enterprise after Napoleon's victory at the battle of Austerlitz. 'En route', Blayney had left his troopship off the Thames to visit London, and he returned to find that it had resumed passage, which meant that he had to catch up in another vessel. After a short spell in England, on 14 September 1806 the 89th left Ramsgate for South America, but put into Portsmouth due to a serious outbreak of ophthalmia. It left again, on 29 February 1807, and arrived off Montevideo after Lieutenant-General John Whitelock had surrendered; it was, therefore, ordered to the Cape of Good Hope. Three ships became waterlogged and put into Saldanha Bay on the African coast, and Blayney had to march their troops 90 miles to Cape Town over arid wasteland in extreme heat. Survival of the bulk of the party was ascribed to Blayney's determined leadership. While he was away on active service Blayney, a strong Orangeman, was MP for Old Sarum (1806-7), the notorious burgage borough which his brother-in-law, the second earl of Caledon, had bought in 1802. 
Blayney soon found that there was no fighting to be expected at the Cape; he returned to England and was sent to Cadiz, then under siege, in July 1810. He rapidly moved on to Gibraltar, where he found the 2nd battalion 89th regiment, and was promoted major-general on 25 July. He inspected it and reported unfavourably on its discipline. General Campbell, governor of Gibraltar, soon sent him -- with a mixed force of 300 British (four companies of the 89th), 800 Spanish, and 500 German, Italian, and Polish deserters from the French army -- to make a descent on Malaga. Blayney disembarked near Fuengirola on 14 October 1810, and was joined by a few Andalusian guerrillas. His force of 1400 men now spoke five languages but had no artillery. Nevertheless, in vain, he summoned the garrison of Fuengirola to surrender, as he learned of an approaching relief column under General Sebastini. Instead of re-embarking, he decided to engage Fuengirola again and to land artillery from the accompanying gunboats under cover of darkness before Sebastini could intervene. Two batteries were brought ashore during the night and, despite heavy infantry casualties the previous day, Blayney once more opened fire on Fuengirola. A sortie by the garrison on his left dispersed Spanish troops, who abandoned their artillery. He gathered the 89th successfully to retake the guns, recording: 'In advancing to the charge my horse was wounded, and soon after killed by a second shot, so I was obliged to charge on foot' (Cunliffe, 133). Thus dismounted, he could not verify reports that a body of Spanish had been seen. Belatedly, he realized that Sebastini had, in fact, arrived, and he promptly charged the enemy, though still on foot. Many of his former French troops redeserted, and he and several British survivors were captured. He recorded that he was roughly treated by Polish infantry ('they tore my cloaths, rifled my pockets, and attempted to pull off my epaulettes'; ibid.) until a French officer appeared. His conduct of the whole affair, however, was later condemned as foolhardy and impetuous. 
Lord Blayney's passage as a prisoner of war through Spain, and his imprisonment in France at Verdun, Bitche, and Gueret, provided him with a novel experience. In his two-volume 'Narrative of a forced journey through Spain and France as a prisoner of war in the years 1810 to 1814' (1814) he shows great powers of observation, describing vividly how the Spanish people lived while under French occupation. During his captivity he was entrusted with funds for the relief of the poorer English prisoners. His health was now impaired, however, and he saw no further military service, though he was promoted lieutenant-general on 12 August 1819. Blayney died suddenly at Bilton's Hotel, Sackville Street, Dublin, on 8 April 1834 and was buried at Castle Blayney, co. Monaghan. He had left the estate neglected, and it was sold to Henry Thomas Hope, Disraeli's friend and patron. His son became the twelfth baron, but never married, and at his death, on 18 January 1874, the barony became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 2628


Blayney, Benjamin (1727/8-1801), Hebraist and Church of England clergyman, may have been baptized at St Swithin's, Worcester, on 18 February 1727, and may have been the son of Thomas and Betty Blayney. He was educated at Worcester College, Oxford, where he matriculated aged eighteen on 1 July 1746; he graduated BA (1750) and MA (1753). Afterwards he became a fellow, and eventually vice-principal, of Hertford College, and took the degree of BD in 1768. 
In July 1766 Blayney was employed by the university's Clarendon Press to prepare a corrected edition of the Authorized, or King James, Version of the 'Bible'. The request followed the publication by Cambridge University Press of editions in 1743 and 1760, prepared by F. S. Parris, which -- in addition to the first edition -- served as the scholarly basis for Blayney's new text. Blayney's folio edition, for which he was paid $350, appeared in 1769. It was hailed for its accuracy and is now considered the most significant advance in the presentation of the King James 'Bible' as a modern text in which eighteenth-century norms of grammar, word order, and spelling were imposed. In his report for the delegates of the Clarendon Press (reprinted in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', 39, 1769, 517), Blayney outlined his principles and methods of editing but said relatively little about his highly influential, and lasting, changes to the text. It is these that have made Blayney's the authoritative edition which remains in use, 'the twenty-first-century text of the 'Bible'' being 'essentially Blayney's text' (Campbell, 136). Unfortunately a large part of the impression was destroyed in a fire which took place at the bible warehouse in Paternoster Row, London, though copies can still be found in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and the British Library, London. 
Blayney received much assistance in his Hebrew studies from the celebrated William Newcome, later archbishop of Armagh, also a fellow of Hertford, to whom he dedicated several of his works. In 1775 he published 'A dissertation by way of inquiry into the true import and application of the vision related, Dan. ix. 24 to the end, usually called Daniel's prophecy of seventy weeks'. This work attracted considerable attention, and was translated into German by Johann David Michaelis. (A corrected edition was published by the author in 1797.) In 1784 Blayney published new translations of 'Jeremiah' and 'Lamentations', and in 1786 and 1788 two sermons, 'The Sign Given to Ahaz' and 'Christ the Greater Glory of the Temple'. In 1787 he was appointed regius professor of Hebrew at Oxford, and in the same year was made a canon of Christ Church and received the degree of DD. In 1790 he published an edition of the Hebrew-Samaritan 'Pentateuch', transcribed in ordinary Hebrew characters, with critical notes. His last production was a new translation of the prophecy of 'Zechariah' (1797). 
Like his friend Archbishop Newcome, and many other eminent biblical scholars of the period in England, Blayney did not escape a reputation for heterodoxy, and was the object of several very acrimonious attacks, from which he defended himself with exemplary fairness and courtesy. He died at his rectory of Poulshot, Wiltshire, on 20 September 1801. By his will he directed that his unpublished writings, among them 'A new version of the Psalms', 'Critical comment on the Psalms', and 'Notes on Isaiah', after being submitted to the judgement of his friend and patron Shute Barrington, bishop of Durham, should be deposited in the archiepiscopal library at Lambeth. His will also requested that he be buried at Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, with his late daughter from his marriage to Jane (died before 1801) (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1363). 


@@@@@


doc= 2629


Bleddri (d. 1022/3), bishop in south-east Wales, was associated in later sources with Llandaff. Claims of his election as bishop by the kings, clergy, and people of Morgannwg, his investiture by AEthelred II, his consecration by AElfric, archbishop of Canterbury, and the date assigned to it (983) are not reliable. The tale of English royal and ecclesiastical involvement is likely to have been produced at Llandaff at some later period, probably the early twelfth century, as part of that see's attempts to protect itself from the temporal and spiritual ambitions of St David's. Three important grants of land to the bishop of Llandaff are attributed to the time of his episcopate but cannot originally have been made to Bleddri. 


@@@@@


doc= 2630


Bleeck, Arthur Henry (1829-1877), orientalist, was born on 18 May 1829 in Westbury, Wiltshire, the son of William Bleeck (1801/2-1873), who was from 1830 rector of Huish, Wiltshire, and his wife, Charlotte, 'nee' Goodman. He was a matriculated student at University College, London. On 26 April 1852 he married Mary Trezor Steven Robards ('b'. 1832/3), daughter of Henry Robard, clergyman; they had at least two sons and three daughters. He was for some time in the British Museum, where his remarkable linguistic capacity rendered him very useful. He had a wide knowledge of both oriental and European languages. He afterwards went out to the East during the Crimean War, and until the conclusion of peace held a post in connection with the Land Transport Corps at Sinope on the Black Sea, where his co-author, William Burckhardt Barker, was also stationed. 
Refused readmission to the British Museum on his return to England, Bleeck worked for several years for a prominent Parsi merchant, Muncherjee Hormusjee Cana, who employed him to prepare an English version of the 'Avesta', the religious books of the Parsis, who were Zoroastrians, from an existing German translation. He performed the task well, publishing the work in 1864 in three volumes. 
Bleeck's other works included 'A Practical Grammar of the Turkish Language' (with W. Burckhardt Barker, 1854), 'A Concise Grammar of the Persian Language' (1857), and 'Catalogue of the Napoleon Library in the Possession of Mr. Joshua Bates' (1858). 
By 1871, when his occupation was recorded as librarian of a university, Bleeck was a widower. He died of alcoholism at his home, 56 Bevington Road, Kensington, on 27 January 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 2631


Bleek, Wilhelm Heinrich Immanuel (1827-1875), philologist, was born at Berlin on 8 March 1827, the first of six sons and four daughters of Friedrich Bleek (1793-1859), professor of theology at Berlin University, and from 1829 at Bonn University, and his wife, Augusta Charlotte Marianne Henriette, 'nee' Sethe (died 1873). He was educated in Bonn, and then studied theology at Bonn University from 1845 to 1848. When he went to study Hebrew at Berlin for two terms in 1848-9 he developed an interest in African languages. He returned to Bonn and until 1851 studied theology and philosophy. His doctoral thesis, 'De nominum generibus linguarum Africae australis, Copticae, Semiticarum aliarumque sexualium', dealt with grammatical gender, and attributed a north African provenance to Khoi (Hottentot). Also in 1851 he translated into German a work on the Akra language (1828) by Rasmus Rask. In 1852 he studied with the famous Egyptologist Professor Carl Richard Lepsius, and adopted his phonetic script. Late in 1852, in pursuit of African language studies, he was in Berlin, where Professor Wilhelm K. H. Peters (1815-1883), who had been in east Africa in 1842-8, gave him his African languages material to edit. 
During a visit to England in 1853, or early 1854, Bleek met Dr William Balfour Baikie RN, and joined his expedition up the Niger and Isadda, as linguist and ethnographer. They left from Liverpool in May 1854, but Bleek was obliged by an attack of fever to turn back at Fernando Po, and by August was again in London. There he was introduced to Sir George Grey, recently appointed governor of Cape Colony, and to J. W. Colenso, first bishop of Natal. In November Bleek accepted Colenso's offer of work on the completion of a Zulu grammar, and in May 1855 arrived with the bishop in Natal. There, as recorded in his diaries (1855-6), he used a small German grant to travel widely, learned Zulu (and later Xhosa), visited the Zulu king, Mpande, made first-hand studies of 'Kaffir' language and culture, and published 'The Languages of Mozambique' (1856). He contributed articles to Peterman's 'Geographische Mitteilungen' (1855-7) and edited the 'Natal Witness' to earn money. He met several missionaries who had useful material on African languages. In Durban he met Archdeacon W. H. C. Lloyd, but probably did not meet his daughter, Jemima Charlotte Lloyd (1837-1909), until March 1861. 
In 1856 Sir George Grey invited Bleek to become his official interpreter, and in November he moved to Cape Town. Sir George put him in charge of his valuable collection of books and manuscripts, mainly on philology and ethnography, which Bleek catalogued in 'The Library of H. E. Sir George Grey' (vols. 1-2, 1858-9; vol. 3, 1862; vol. 4, 1867). When Grey was appointed to New Zealand in 1861, the new governor, Sir Philip Wodehouse, cancelled Bleek's post as interpreter. Fortunately, Sir George wrote from New Zealand, leaving his collection to the public library in Cape Town on condition that Bleek be made curator, a post he held from August 1862 until his death. This appointment, worth $250 per annum, enabled him on 22 November 1862 to marry Jemima Lloyd, and they set up house in Mowbray, a suburb of Cape Town. They had a son and six daughters, the son and one daughter dying in infancy. To raise money Bleek wrote ephemeral articles for the 'Volksblad' of Cape Town. In 1863 he supported his friend Bishop Colenso in his celebrated trial for 'heresy'. 
Ill health and financial worries prevented Bleek from undertaking the major African expeditions he had originally planned. Instead he produced his major work, 'A Comparative Grammar of South African Languages' (pt 1, 'Phonology', 1862; pt 2, 'The Concord', section 1, 'The Noun', 1869). In this pioneering work he clearly distinguished the two language families of sub-Saharan Africa: on the one hand the Bantu or Bantu languages (a term he introduced), which extend in a vast swathe from west Africa through the Cameroons to south Africa, and on the other the Bushman (San) group, with their distinctive 'clicks', and the possibly related Hottentot (Khoi) group. 
As early as 1857 Bleek visited Bushmen imprisoned on Robben Island and in the Cape Town gaol, where he tested a Bushman vocabulary he had received from a Dr Lichtenstein. The Bushmen, as hunter-gatherers, had come in conflict with the settlers and herdsmen, white and black, who encroached on their territories, killing game. When Bushmen retaliated by stealing or killing cattle, the settlers either shot them down or enslaved them. Governors of Cape Colony faced settler demands for punitive forays, or annexation, as opposed to Westminster's policy on human rights, and its aversion to costly campaigns and imperial adventures. Bleek sided with the pro-Bushman white missionaries who supplied him with valuable linguistic material, and in 1866 made further visits to Bushmen in prison. 
Bleek's publications in the 1860s included 'Reynard the Fox in South Africa, or, Hottentot Fables and Tales' (London, 1864; Weimar, 1870), based mainly on material from G. Kronlein. His brief work on the origin of language, 'Uber den Ursprung der Sprache', had a Darwinian approach. This was first published privately in 1867 in Cape Town and Jena, and then with a preface by his cousin Ernst Haeckel in Weimar in 1868. It received an English translation in 1869 in New York. 
In 1867 an economic depression in Cape Colony led to a 16 per cent reduction in Bleek's salary, and in addition to problems in funding and publishing his work he was still in poor health. This took him for a few months in 1869 to Europe, where he visited German relatives and was at the funeral of his brother Johann Friedrich. In England, through the influence of Sir George and other distinguished academics, he was awarded in 1870 a queen's civil-list pension of $150 p.a. 
In 1870 Bleek visited twenty-eight North Cape /Xam Bushmen in Breakwater prison, and was allowed to install several of them in his home, including an older man, //Kabbo 
(Dream or Old Jantje; died 1876)
, who had a wealth of Bushman stories. Bleek now concentrated increasingly on his Bushman studies, intent on recording this dying race, and in this he was helped increasingly by his sister-in-law Lucy Catherine Lloyd ['see below'], who had joined the household shortly after his marriage. He issued two reports: 'Report of Dr. Bleek Concerning his Researches into the Bushman Language' (Cape of Good Hope, 1873) and 'Second report concerning Bushman researches... presented to both houses of parliament of the Cape of Good Hope' (London and Cape Town, 1875). In the latter he refers to 7200 half-pages of Bushman literature and 11,000 entries to a Bushman-English English-Bushman dictionary. Bleek's numerous articles in the 'Cape Monthly Magazine' included 'Scientific reasons for the study of the Bushman language' (new ser., 7, September 1873, 149-53). By 1874, when George William Stow, a trader and geologist, sent Bleek some of his copies of Bushman rock paintings, Bleek and Lloyd were fluent in their /Xam Bushmen's language, and, using these paintings as a talking point, deepened their understanding of Bushman stories and culture. 
Early in 1875 Bleek was again unwell, but continued to work. He died suddenly at Charlton House, Mowbray, of a long-established disease of the lungs, on the morning of 17 August 1875, and was buried in the nearby Anglican cemetery at Wynberg. 


A short career as a schoolteacher was ended by ill health, and after her sister Jemima married Wilhelm Bleek in 1862, Lucy joined their household at Mowbray, Cape Town, and helped Bleek with his language studies. She proved an able pupil, and, with Bleek's ill health and increasing deafness, became indispensable in work with the Bushman informants. Some two-thirds of the Bushman transcripts are hers. In a codicil to his will, dated 30 June 1871, Bleek entrusted his posthumous papers to Lucy Lloyd, gratefully acknowledged her help in his literary labours, and asked her to continue their joint Bushman studies, 'in which her quicker ear, and great industry has been of so important help to science'. He urged his scientific colleagues to assist her financially. 
After Bleek's death Lucy appealed to his associates in Europe for financial support in the expenses of Bushman research. She continued the work with the /Xam Bushmen informants, especially with //Kabbo's son-in-law, /Han&ne;kass'o, 'an excellent narrator of Bushmen lore' (Lloyd, 'Short Account', 3), studied Bushman music and drawings, and collected material on other Bushman languages, including !Kora and !Kung. She succeeded Bleek as curator of the Grey collection, but at half salary. She was secretary of the South African Folklore Society, and in 1879 helped to establish the 'Folklore Journal'. When she was given her notice as curator in 1880, in favour of a professional, Dr J. T. Hahn, she sought legal remedy, but the case dragged on, and Hahn was appointed. When he had to resign in 1883, having proved ineffective, Lloyd was not reappointed. When G. W. Stow died in 1882 she bought his copies of rock paintings, but lacked the funds to publish them. 
Overworked and in poor health, Lucy left south Africa about 1887, and, after some time at Rhyl in Wales, joined Jemima and her daughters, who had moved to Berlin. Her work is recorded in 'A Short Account of Further Bushman Material Collected' (1889). In 1904 Jemima and her daughters returned to South Africa, where Lucy joined them about 1906 and resumed her work, assisted by her niece Dorothea Frances Bleek ['see below']. Together with Dorothea's sister Edith, they saw through the press 'Specimens of Bushman Folklore' (1911). This contained English translations of a selection of the Bushman stories, and the verbatim /Xam and !Kung transcripts as recorded between 1870 and 1884. 
In 1913 Lucy Lloyd received an honorary doctorate of literature from the University of the Cape of Good Hope, the first woman in South Africa so to be honoured. She died on 31 August 1914 at Charlton House, Mowbray, Cape Town, and was buried in Wynberg cemetery. 


In 1904 Dorothea returned to Africa and taught at Rocklands Girls' High School in Cradock until 1907. With a colleague, Helen Tongue, she visited Bushman rock paintings, and Helen's copies were exhibited in London in 1908. Some of these paintings, with notes by Dorothea and her sister Edith, were published in 1909. Back in Africa, Dorothea devoted herself to further studies of Bushman life and languages, and assisted her aunt Lucy Lloyd until the latter's death. She then edited much of the research left by her father and Lucy. She made many expeditions to study Bushman dialects and rock art, and visited the Kalahari, Bechuanaland, Angola, and modern Tanzania, taking many photographs of shelter, weapons, and dress. In 1928 Dorothea visited the original sites of sixty of the seventy-four copies of rock paintings by Stow, which she had inherited from Lucy Lloyd, and published them with descriptive notes in 1930. Besides /Xam, she studied other Bushman languages. 
From 1923 to 1948 Dorothea was honorary reader in Bushman languages at the University of Cape Town. She published her important collection of /Xam folk-tales, 'The Mantis and his Friends' (1923, 1930), and articles on the customs and beliefs of the /Xam Bushmen in 'Bantu Studies', parts 1-8 (1931-6). In the introduction to 'The Mantis' (a trickster deity) she writes: 'The Bushman is a good lover and a good hater, very loyal and very revengeful. He remains all his life a child, averse to work, fond of play, of painting, singing, dancing, dressing up and acting, above all things fond of hearing and telling stories.' Her 'Bushman Dictionary' (published posthumously in 1956) incorporated the lexicon of her father and Lucy Lloyd. 
In 1936 the University of the Witwatersrand wished to confer on Dorothea an honorary doctorate, but she declined, reputedly saying that there could be only one Dr Bleek. She died on 27 June 1948 at Plumstead, Cape Province. 


@@@@@


doc= 2632


Blegborough, Ralph (1769-1827), physician and man-midwife, was born on 3 April 1769 at Richmond, Yorkshire, where his father, Henry Blegborough, was a surgeon. He was educated at the grammar school of his native town, and, after acting for some time as apprentice to his father, continued his medical studies first at the University of Edinburgh, and then at Guy's and St Thomas's hospitals, London. Having become a member of the Company of Surgeons, London, he commenced in London as a general practitioner in Bridge Street, Blackfriars. He became MD of Aberdeen on 29 December 1804, and was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1805. About 1804 he entered into partnership with Thomas Walshman, a practitioner in midwifery, and from then on devoted himself exclusively to this branch of medicine, in which his reputation became so high that he was selected as a medical witness before the committee of the House of Peers on the question of the Gardner peerage. On 1 June 1812 he married Harriett Thresher, who predeceased him. Blegborough contributed several papers to the medical journals, and also published separately 'Two Articles on the Air Pump, Extracted from the Medical and Physical Journal' (1802); 'Facts and observations respecting the air pump and vapour bath in gout... and other diseases' (1803); and 'Address to the Governors of the Surrey Dispensary' (1810). He devoted a large proportion of his time to unpaid practice among the poor, and died at Brixton Hill, Surrey, on 23 January 1827. 


@@@@@


doc= 2633


Blencowe, John (b. 1609, d. in or after 1640), playwright and Church of England clergyman, was born on 29 January 1609 and baptized on 8 February following in St Bride's, Fleet Street, the son of John Blencowe, citizen of London. In 1620 he entered Merchant Taylors' School, where in June 1627 he was one of the 'nyne of the principall schollars who [did] pronounce orations... [and] were examined' (in his case successfully) for one of the vacant places on the school's fellowship (Vienken, 5). He matriculated from St John's College, Oxford, in 1629 and graduated BCL on 25 June 1633. He was subsequently elected to a fellowship at St John's. He wrote a Latin mythological drama, 'Mercurius, sive, Literarum lucta', which was performed at the college in the 1630s. He resigned his fellowship upon marriage in 1638, and he may be the same John Blencowe who was vicar of Abergwili, Carmarthenshire, in that year. In 1640 he published 'Michaels Combat with the Divel, or, Moses his Funerall', a typical anti-vice sermon which he dedicated to Sir Henry Martin. 


@@@@@


doc= 2634


Blencowe, Sir John (1642-1726), judge and politician, was born on 30 November 1642 at Marston St Lawrence, on Northamptonshire's border with Oxfordshire, the eldest son of Thomas Blencowe (1602-1674) and his second wife, Mary ('c'.1618-1687), daughter of the Revd Dr Francis Savage of Ripple, Worcestershire. Blencowe's family had been lords of the manor of Marston since the mid-fifteenth century, before which time they had long been settled at Greystoke in Cumberland. On 24 May 1661 Blencowe matriculated as a student at Oriel College, Oxford, several earlier members of his family having been closely associated with the college, one as a benefactor and another, Anthony Blencowe, as its provost from 1572 to 1617. 
Blencowe began his legal studies at the Inner Temple in November 1663 and was called to the bar in November 1670. On 23 December 1675 he married Anne (1656-1718) ['see 'Blencowe, Anne], the eldest daughter of John Wallis, the eminent Savillian professor of geometry at Oxford whose outstanding ability at decoding intercepted messages and documents had rendered him invaluable to the post-Restoration government. The marriage subsequently produced three sons, one of whom was the cryptographer William Blencowe, and four daughters. Blencowe established a solid reputation at the bar. In 1687 he was made a bencher of his inn of court, and in April 1689 he became serjeant-at-law. In 1690 Blencowe was elected to parliament for Brackley, a short distance from the family estate which he had inherited on his father's death in 1674. He naturally featured in Commons proceedings as a whig firmly attached to the court, but stood down at the 1695 election. John Wallis had for several years persistently badgered his contacts among senior government figures for his son-in-law's advancement to the judicial bench, though without success. In June 1696, however, Lord Keeper Somers proposed that he be appointed a baron of the exchequer; and in forwarding the recommendation to the king, the duke of Shrewsbury, secretary of state, commended Blencowe as 'an honest and able lawyer' who had given the government consistent support during his spell in the House of Commons. The appointment took effect from September, though Wallis complained to the new secretary of state, Sir William Trumbull, that he had wanted Blencowe to be a judge of the common pleas rather than the exchequer where the fees were paltry in comparison to his practice. In November 1697, however, Blencowe was transferred to the court of common pleas, and on 12 December he was knighted by the king at Kensington. When the chief judgeship of that court became vacant early in 1701, Wallis naturally pressed for Blencowe's promotion though Blencowe himself had avoided making an application for it, knowing that the lord chief justice, Sir John Holt, had it earmarked for Sir Thomas Trevor. Shortly after Queen Anne's accession there was some feeling that he might be removed, but he remained a puisne judge in common pleas and in fact was destined to progress no further on the judicial ladder. Some older authorities err in stating that he sat from this time in queen's bench. 
Blencowe retained his post at George I's accession in 1715. He retired in June 1722 aged eighty, and as a mark of ministerial gratitude for many years' service he was granted a continuation of his official salary of $1000 in the form of an annuity. While still active as a judge, he became obsessed with discovering a way of determining longitude, although his ideas, which apparently filled several reams of paper, were not taken seriously. He was remembered for his honesty and blunt integrity, and a story illustrating his humane disposition relates how he refused his wife's plea to dismiss one of his labourers, an old man of ninety, and allow him to remain at home on his wage of 8died a day. 'Let him spoil on', the judge is reported to have said, 'he has pleasure in thinking he earns his daily bread at fourscore years and ten; but if you turn him off he will soon die of grief' (Baker, 639). Dementia seems to have overtaken Blencowe in his last years when he was sometimes under an impression that he was already dead. He died on 6 May 1726 and was buried at Marston. 


@@@@@


doc= 2635


Blencowe, William (1683-1712), cryptographer, was born on 6 January 1683, the third son of Sir John Blencowe (1642-1726), a judge and baron of the exchequer, and his wife, Anne Blencowe (1656-1718), the eldest daughter of the mathematician and cryptographer John Wallis. He matriculated at Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1697 and moved later that year to Magdalen College, where he graduated BA in 1701. On the nomination of Archbishop Thomas Tenison he became a fellow of All Souls College on 21 December 1702, and he was made MA in 1704. He was instructed in the art of deciphering by his maternal grandfather, and for his encouragement received the survivorship of Wallis's pension of $100 p.a., following the latter's death on 28 October 1703. As a matter of course Blencowe succeeded Wallis as decipherer to the government; the statement of a survivor that he applied for the office 'unrecommended' cannot therefore be accepted as accurate. His eventual salary for the office was $200 per annum. 
In 1709 Blencowe sought a dispensation to permit him to retain his fellowship at All Souls without his taking holy orders. This request was resisted by the warden, Bernard Gardiner, who tried to force Blencowe and Matthew Tindal, another college fellow, to take orders or resign. Following Queen Anne's intervention on Blencowe's behalf, the dispute led to the abolition of the warden's veto on dispensations; thereafter the non-residence of the fellows became a leading characteristic of All Souls College. 
In his late twenties Blencowe fell ill with a violent fever, from which he was recovering, when, on 25 August 1712, he shot himself during temporary insanity caused by a relapse. He was buried in All Saints' Church, Northampton, where the monument to his memory records that he was a 'man studious of many kinds of learning, particularly of the common law, which he professed and practised with reputation; and of the art of deciphering letters wherein he excelled, and served the public for ten years'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2636


Blenerhasset, Thomas (c.1550-1624), poet and writer on Ireland, was a younger son of William Blenerhasset of Horsford Park, near Norwich, who died in 1598. His eldest brother, Edward, who, like Thomas, had a successful career in Ireland, was knighted on 23 July 1603. Thomas was, according to his own account, educated at Cambridge without taking a degree. Thomas subsequently entered the army, and was stationed for some years as captain at Guernsey Castle from 1577 on. 
At Guernsey Blenerhasset produced his most important literary work, an expansion of the 'Mirrour for Magistrates'. He claims that he intended it for the private perusal of a friend, but during his absence 'beyond the seas' it was published in London in 1578 by Richard Webster under the title of 'The Seconde Parte of the Mirrour for Magistrates'. An interesting letter was prefixed, which contained some autobiographical facts addressed by the author to the anonymous friend for whom the work was written. He describes the difficulties of his situation, without access to a library, and 'sittyng on a rock in the sea... in 'Garnzie' Castle, where although there be learned men, yet none whiche spende their tyme so vainely as in poetrie' ('Parts Added', 381-2). 
The original 'Mirrour for Magistrates', which dealt with episodes in English history from the time of Richard II, had been issued in 1559, under the editorship of William Baldwin, and had been reprinted in 1563. In 1574 John Higgins wrote a new series of poems on legends drawn from far earlier history than that of which Baldwin's work treated. This book, bearing the title of 'The First Parte of the Mirrour for Magistrates', was reprinted in 1575. Blenerhasset's contribution to the 'Mirrour' was a continuation of Higgins's book, 'from the conquest of Caesar unto the commyng of Duke William the Conqueror'. It dealt with the legends of 'Guidericus, Carassus, Queen Hellina, Vortiger, Uter Pendragon, Cadwallader, Sigebert, Lady Ebbe, Alurede, Elgured, Edricus, and King Harolde'. Blenerhasset's contribution to the project marks a change in emphasis. Baldwin's original version used episodes from English history to reflect on the present, whereas Blenerhasset -- like Higgins -- simply tells patriotic stories of England's past. In 1610 ten of these poems of Blenerhasset were included in a complete reprint of the various parts of the 'Mirrour for Magistrates' undertaken by Richard Niccols. 
Blenerhasset's literary work also included -- non-extant -- a translation of Ovid's 'De remedio amoris', executed while at Cambridge but never printed, and a sophisticated poem called 'A Revelation of the True Minerva', a panegyric describing Queen Elizabeth's triumph over mutability printed in London in 1582, but of which only one copy, recently in the Heber collection, is known to be extant. 
Blenerhasset notes in his dedication of the latter to Lady Leighton, one of the ladies of the queen's privy chamber, that he had taken part in long voyages into the Atlantic. He was named as one of Sir Edward Denny's discharged soldiers in Ireland on 10 April 1589. On 12 May of the same year he is recorded as a freeholder granted 6000 acres by Denny and as having numerous farmers, copyholders, and cottagers in his command. Denny appears to have used Blenerhasset as an intermediary in his feud with Sir William Herbert. It is likely that Blenerhasset remained in Ireland for much of the rest of his life, although he returned to Norfolk with his brother in 1605 or 1606 to deal with property affairs. 
In 1610 Blenerhasset was one of the 'undertakers' for the plantation of Ulster, and wrote a brief pamphlet dedicated to Prince Henry, entitled 'A Direction for the Plantation in Ulster'. Here he argued that fortified garrison towns would be required to help extirpate the recalcitrant Irish and make the plantation profitable and successful both for the settlers and the crown. In 1611 he received 2000 acres at Clancally in co. Fermanagh, and in 1612, with thirty-nine others, appealed to the lord deputy, Sir Arthur Chichester, to grant them jointly a part of Sligo, 60,000 acres in co. Fermanagh, and some neighbouring territory, on their undertaking to expend $40,000 on the land, and to settle upon it 1000 'able men furnished for all kinds of handiwork'. In his signature to this appeal Blenerhasset describes himself as being still of Horsford, Norfolk. In 1624 Blenerhasset was stated to own the barony of Lurge and two proportions of Eddernagh and Tullenageane in co. Fermanagh. Blenerhasset died on 11 March 1624, having just built a residence called Castlehasset on the shore of Lough Erne. His father's will proves him to have been married before 1598, and to have had several children. At least two, Lennard and Samuel, survived him. Sir Edward Blenerhasset, who shared with him several grants of Irish land, died in 1618, both having become substantial landowners in Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 2637


Blenkinsop, John (1783-1831), developer of the steam locomotive, was born near Leeds and became the principal agent of the Brandling family, who owned the extensive Middleton collieries in that district. On 10 April 1811 he obtained a patent for a new type of locomotive, developing some of the ideas embodied in the engine constructed by Richard Trevithick in 1803, but combining with them a new plan to overcome the presumed lack of adhesion between the engine wheels and smooth rails. This was effected by means of a racked or toothed rail, laid along one side of the road, into which the toothed wheel of the locomotive worked as pinions work into a rack. The boiler of Blenkinsop's locomotive was a plain cylinder of cast iron, with one flue -- the fire being at one end and the chimney at the other. It was supported on a carriage resting without springs directly on two pairs of wheels and axles, which were unconnected with the working parts, and served merely to support the weight of the engine on the rails, traction being achieved by the cogwheel working into the toothed rack. The engine had two cylinders instead of one as in Trevithick's engine. The invention of the double cylinder was due to Matthew Murray, of the firm of Fenton, Murray, and Wood, one of the best mechanical engineers of his time; Blenkinsop, who was not himself a mechanic, consulted him about all the practical details. The connecting rods gave the motion to two pinions by cranks at right angles to each other. These pinions communicated the motion to the wheel which worked into the cogged rail. 
The first experiment with Blenkinsop's engine was made on the afternoon of Wednesday 24 June 1812 when, according to a report in the 'Leeds Mercury' (27 June 1812), the machine ran from the coal staithe to the top of Hunslet Moor, where six and afterwards eight wagons of coal, each weighing 31/4 tons, were hooked to the rear. This immense weight was subsequently augmented by about fifty spectators mounted on the wagons. The return journey, a distance of about a mile and a half, was performed in twenty-three minutes, without incident. The machine was stated to be capable, when lightly loaded, of moving at a speed of 10 miles per hour. A drawing and description of it with the official specification were given in the 'Leeds Mercury' (18 July 1812). 
Blenkinsop's locomotive has an undoubted claim to be considered the first commercially successful engine employed on any railway. By the end of 1813 three engines were at work at the Middleton collieries and it is a tribute to Blenkinsop's reputation that others were to be found at Orell colliery in Lancashire and at the Coxlodge and Fawdon wagon-ways near the Tyne. According to contemporary accounts these locomotives proved reliable and economical in service, at least as employed on the Middleton line where they operated until the early 1830s. Despite this evident commercial success, Blenkinsop's locomotives represented an engineering cul-de-sac and it was left to George Stephenson to prove the superiority of the smooth edge-rail over the rack-rail transmission. 
Stephenson had observed one of the 'Leeds engines' at Coxlodge on 2 September 1813, and his first locomotive, 'Blucher', constructed at Killingworth, near Newcastle upon Tyne, was built to a large extent after the Blenkinsop pattern. Thereafter, however, Stephenson focused on the vital links between the weight of locomotives, their tractive effort, and the quality of the permanent way. The result, by 1820, was the practical demonstration of locomotive power reliant on the adhesion of flanged wheels running on smooth edge-rails. 
Blenkinsop died at Leeds on 22 January 1831, after a long illness, aged forty-eight. A beautiful model of his engine of 1812 was exhibited at a 'conversazione' of the Leeds Philosophical Society in December 1863, and a photograph of this model with explanatory notes was placed in the Leeds Philosophical Hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 2638


Blenkiron, William (1807?-1871), racehorse breeder, was born at Marrick, near Richmond, Yorkshire. His father was a Swaledale farmer but Blenkiron abandoned that pursuit and moved in 1834 to London, where he commenced business as a general agent in Wood Street, Cheapside. In 1845 he added a business manufacturing stocks and collars to his economic activities but three years later retired in favour of his son to devote his time to the breeding of racehorses. 
In 1847, while living at Dalston, Middlesex, Blenkiron purchased a mare named Glance. A colt of hers, Young Beverlac, was raced with moderate success and was exchanged for three mares which formed the commencement of a stud destined to become the most celebrated in Europe. About 1852 Blenkiron, wishing to expand his breeding facilities, moved from Dalston to Middle Park Farm at Eltham in Kent. The establishment rapidly increased to more than two hundred of the highest-class mares and stallions that money and experience could produce. Kingston, Touchstone, Birdcatcher, and Newminster were the four cornerstones of Blenkiron's extensive stud, and it was to the first of these that he to a great extent owed his success as a breeder, for Kingston was the sire of Caractacus, perhaps the most sensational Derby winner on record. 
Unlike many successful industrialists, Blenkiron did not abandon his business practices when he entered racing. He spent heavily but usually wisely. Among his purchases he gave 5000 guineas for Blink Bonny (one of only four fillies to have won both the Derby and the Oaks), 5800 guineas for Gladiateur (the first French horse to win the Derby), and 5000 guineas for Blair Athol (winner of the St Leger). 
The first major sale of Middle Park bloodstock took place in June 1856, when thirteen lots brought $1447, an average of $111 each; at a sale in 1871, forty-six lots produced $14,525, the average price being $315. Middle Park was by then the largest breeding stud in the country. After 1866, the year in which Blenkiron purchased all Lord Zetland's brood mares, it became necessary to hold two annual sales to dispose of the increase in the stock. 
Blenkiron bred Hermit, the Derby winner in 1867, and Gamos, which won the Oaks in 1870. This was unusual among the commercial studs as most classic winners still emanated from private breeders, to whom time and money were often no object. He died at Middle Park Farm on 25 September 1871, and was buried five days later in Eltham churchyard. His son sold the stud in 1872 for 124,620 guineas. 


@@@@@


doc= 2639


Blennerhasset, Harman (1764/5-1831), lawyer and settler in America, born in Hampshire on 8 October 1764 or 1765, was the youngest of the three sons of Conway Blennerhasset of Conway Castle, Killorglin, co. Kerry, Ireland, and his wife, the daughter of Major Thomas Lacy, the descendant of an old Anglo-Norman family. He was educated at Westminster School and Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1790 and LLB in the same year. Having, through the death of his elder brothers, succeeded to the family estates, he spent some time travelling in Europe. During this period he became a republican and resolved to settle in the United States of America. While in England he met and married Margaret Agnew (died 1842), the daughter of the lieutenant-governor of the Isle of Man. After disposing of his lands to a relative, and supplying himself with an extensive library and scientific apparatus, he sailed for New York in 1796. In 1798 he purchased part of Blennerhasset Island on the Ohio, about 2 miles below Parkersburg, West Virginia, and there lived a retired and studious life. However, in 1806 he became implicated in the treasonable schemes of Aaron Burr without properly realizing their intent. In support of the views of Burr he published a series of papers in the 'Ohio Gazette', under the signature of Querist, and spent much of his fortune on boats, provisions, and arms for Burr's contemplated expedition against Mexico, then a territory of Spain, with which the USA was at peace. In the spring of 1807 he was arrested, and although he regained his liberty his fine house was destroyed and looted during his absence. He then turned successively to cotton growing in Mississippi (1807-19), legal practice in Montreal (1819-22), and an attempt to recover his lands in Ireland. Having failed in all three undertakings, he retired to Guernsey, where he died in 1831. 
The involvement of Blennerhassett and his wife in the ill-fated schemes of Burr has inspired several novels, including those by William Venable ('A Dream of Empire', 1901), Charles Pidgin ('Blennerhassett, or, The Decrees of Fate', 1901), Edward Stanley ('The Rock Cried Out', 1949), and Marie Wood ('None Called him Neighbour', 1951), and a play by Pidgin ('Blennerhassett, or, The Irony of Fate', 1901), as well as considerable interest in their house on Blennerhasset Island. He was a strikingly unsuccessful man, but his failures were romantic enough to inspire and sustain popular interest. 


@@@@@


doc= 2640


Gardiner, Marguerite, countess of Blessington (1789-1849), author, was born on 1 September 1789 at Knockbrit, near Clonmel, co. Tipperary, Ireland, the second daughter and third of the six children of Edmund Power (1767-1837), a small Roman Catholic landowner, and Ellen, daughter of Edmund Sheehy, whose family was excessively proud of its very old Roman Catholic ancestry. As a girl Margaret was chiefly noticeable as the one plain member in a singularly handsome family. Feeling out of place among her boisterous, handsome siblings, Margaret was miserable until Miss Anne Dwyer, a kind-hearted neighbour, a spinster, and friend of her mother's, took pity on her and taught her reading and the love of story-telling. When she was eight, her father moved his family to Clonmel, where he was appointed magistrate, both in Waterford and Tipperary. 
In 1804 Margaret, then only fourteen and a half, was proposed to by two officers of the 47th regiment of foot, then stationed at Clonmel. Her parents forced her to marry one of them, Captain Maurice St Leger Farmer (died 1817) of Poplar Hall and Laurel Grove, co. Kildare, a man who indulged in such ungovernable outbursts of passion as to suggest insanity. They were married in the parish church of Clonmel in the United Church of England and Ireland on 7 March 1804. Three months later Margaret refused to accompany her husband when he was ordered to join his regiment, and she returned to her father's house at Clonmel. Because of a serious argument with his colonel, Captain Farmer soon sold his commission and went to India, ending his relationship with Margaret. He returned from India in 1816 and was killed during a drunken orgy in a fall from a window in the king's bench prison on 21 October 1817. 
After she left her husband Margaret stayed for almost three years with her parents, who treated her as an unwanted stranger; in 1807 she moved to Cahir and then in 1809 to Dublin. In that year she formed a close relationship with Captain Thomas Jenkins, an officer in the 11th light dragoons, and began a five-year residence with him in Hampshire. The ugly duckling had by now turned into a swan, whose beauty had become so well known that her portrait was painted by Sir Thomas Lawrence. It was also during this time that she met Charles John Gardiner, second Viscount Mountjoy and first earl of Blessington (1782-1829). With the approval of Jenkins, who received $10,000 from Lord Blessington as a reimbursement for the jewels and clothing that he had purchased for Margaret, and only four months after the death of her first husband, she married Gardiner. He was a widower seven years her senior with four children, two legitimate. The wedding took place at a church in Bryanston Square on 16 February 1818. On her marriage she changed both her birth name and surname: Margaret Farmer became Marguerite, countess of Blessington. Gardiner drew on his annual income of $30,000 from his estates in Ireland and spent lavishly on his bride. After honeymooning in Ireland, the couple settled at a newly leased town mansion at 11 St James's Square. This soon became a centre of social attraction, with its spacious drawing-rooms and splendid furnishings, excellent food and wine, its famous guests, such as Thomas Moore and John Galt, the writers, and William Jerdan, editor of the influential 'Literary Gazette', and its beautiful and witty hostess. When Lawrence's portrait of her was shown at the Royal Academy in 1821, P. G. Patmore, father of Coventry Patmore, wrote: 'I have seen no other so striking instance of the inferiority of art to nature as in this celebrated portrait of Lady Blessington. As the original stood before it, she fairly 'killed' the copy, and this no less in the individual details than in the general effect. (Sadleir, 41)' The famous classical scholar Dr Samuel Parr was the first to attribute to her the 'most gorgeous' appellation (ibid., 40). In autumn 1821, at one of her soirees, Lady Blessington met the twenty-year-old Alfred, Count D'Orsay ['see 'D'Orsay, Gedeon Gaspard Alfred de Grimaud], reputedly the handsomest man of his time, who was later fictionalized in Clyde Fitch's 1902 play 'Last of the Dandies'. From the date of that meeting until her death Count D'Orsay became closely associated with Lady Blessington. 
Early in 1822 Lady Blessington published anonymously her first work, 'The Magic Lantern, or, Sketches of Scenes in the Metropolis', four essays about her attendance at an auction, at the Italian opera, a visit to the Egyptian tomb, and a walk in Hyde Park. In that year she also published 'Sketches and Fragments' and 'Journal of a Tour through the Netherlands to Paris in 1821'. 
On 25 August 1822 the Blessingtons -- accompanied by Marguerite's youngest sister, the twenty-one-year-old Mary Anne, and servants -- started on a continental tour, meeting D'Orsay in Avignon on 20 November. The Blessingtons settled on 31 March 1823 in Genoa, where they met Lord Byron, whom they saw daily for approximately two months. From their conversations Lady Blessington gathered material for her most famous book, 'Journal of Conversations with Lord Byron', which she published in one volume eleven years later, after initially publishing it in instalments in the 'New Monthly Magazine' from July 1832 to December 1833. The last meeting between Lord Byron and Lady Blessington was on 2 June, at which they exchanged gifts. He gave her an Armenian grammar with his annotations, and she gave him a ring from her finger. Touched by this personal gift, Lord Byron impulsively presented to Lady Blessington a small cameo pin of Napoleon that he treasured; he regretted the gesture, however, and sent a letter the next day requesting its return. The Blessingtons remained in Italy for over another five years, settling for the most part in Naples but spending time in Florence with their friend Walter Savage Landor, whose 'Imaginary Conversations' Lady Blessington greatly admired. It was there on 1 December 1827 that Count D'Orsay married Lord Blessington's fifteen-year-old daughter Harriet, thus strengthening the tie between the count and Lady Blessington. After moving to Paris towards the end of 1828, the Blessingtons and the D'Orsays took up their residence in the Hotel Marechal Ney, where the earl of Blessington died suddenly from a stroke of apoplexy on 25 May 1829, aged forty-six. 
In November 1830 Marguerite, along with her sister Mary Anne and Count and Countess D'Orsay, returned to London, subletting the mansion in St James's Square, which would revert to Lord Blessington's family at the expiration of the present lease, and renting a house in Seamore Place, Park Lane. Here she resumed her old social pre-eminence, gathering around her a court of many of the most distinguished literary men of the time, such as Edward Bulwer-Lytton, John Forster, Benjamin Disraeli, Charles Dickens, and the American journalist Nathaniel Parker Willis, whose detailed and extravagant descriptions of Lady Blessington in his 'Pencillings by the Way' (1835) praised her wit, her beauty, her maturity, and her intelligence. To him she was 'one of the most lovely and fascinating women I have ever seen' (Sadleir, 200). On her husband's death Lady Blessington's income was restricted to her jointure of $2000 a year. Besides living expensively, she had many members of her own family dependent on her. In order to supplement her income she returned to writing, publishing her first three-volume novel, 'The Repealers' (1833), retitled 'Grace Cassidy, or, The Repealers' in its second edition (1834), and contributing articles, verse, and fiction to periodicals and magazines. She started to edit 'The Book of Beauty', an annual gift-book, for which she continued as editor and contributor until 1849, and in 1841 she started the editorship of another annual, 'The Keepsake'. Other three-volume novels and non-fiction works followed in quick succession. These included 'The Victims of Society' (1837), 'The Governess' (1839), one of the earliest Victorian novels dealing with this much discussed subject, 'The Lottery of Life and Other Tales' (1842), 'The Memoirs of a Femme de chambre' (1846), 'Lionel Deerhurst, or, Fashionable Life under the Regency' ('edited by her', 1846), and the four-volume 'Strathern, or, Life at Home or Abroad'. Although only 400 copies of this last mentioned novel were sold, she realized nearly $600 since it had first appeared as a serial in the 'Sunday Times'. Lady Blessington's novels fall within the fashionable or 'silver-fork' school, whose heyday had passed before she began her writings. Not very imaginative, her novels, however, had occasional realistic details of the mundane and domestic duties and conditions of the 1830s: she had a 'good visual sense' (Jenkins, 170). 
Among her non-fiction works the most popular ones were her three-volume 'Idler in Italy' (1839-40) and the two-volume 'Idler in France' (1841), books containing reminiscences of her sojourn in those countries, bits of gossip, and clever anecdotes. In 1838 an American publisher in Philadelphia issued a two-volume 'The Works of Lady Blessington' containing her novels written to that date, her 'Conversations with Lord Byron', and items that she had published in the annuals. Her literary legacy lies with her 'Conversations with Lord Byron', which has became a major nineteenth-century source for later biographers of Lord Byron, being praised for its grasp of the complex Byron and being valuable for its gossipy record of Byron's opinions of many of his intimates. 
In 1836 Lady Blessington's lease at Seamore Place expired, and she moved to Gore House, Kensington, where for the next thirteen years she gathered around her the most distinguished men of intellect. Although her writings earned her between $2000 and $3000 a year, she suffered financial problems. In 1845 the potato disease seriously affected her jointure; after rapidly dwindling, it disappeared in 1848. Her annual expenditure at Gore House exceeded $4000. In April 1849 to escape their creditors she and Count D'Orsay, whose wife had left him in 1831, fled to Paris, he on 1 April and she on 14 April. She rented a small apartment in the rue du Cirque, near the Champs Elysees. Not quite two months later, on 4 June 1849, Lady Blessington died aged fifty-nine from an apoplectic seizure, complicated by heart disease. She was buried at Chambourcy, near St Germain-en-Laye, the residence of her long-time friends the duke and duchess de Grammont. D'Orsay erected as a mausoleum a massive granite pyramid containing two stone sarcophagi placed side by side. A little over three years later D'Orsay joined her in the mausoleum at his death on 4 August 1852 at the age of fifty. 


@@@@@


doc= 2641


Bleddyn, William (d. 1590), bishop of Llandaff, was born at Shirenewton Court, Monmouthshire, the son of Griffith Bleddyn ('fl'. 'c'.1510- 'c'.1560), freeholder, a descendant of Hywel Dda, king of Deheubarth (900-950), and a distant relative of Morgan Bleddyn, abbot of Llantarnam. His mother was Elizabeth ('fl'. 'c'.1510- 'c'.1565), daughter of Thomas ab Ieuan Hywel. In 1559 he was appointed rector of Sunningwell, Berkshire, and, in 1560, non-resident rector of Rogiet, Monmouthshire, and canon of St Dubricius, Llandaff Cathedral. In 1562 he graduated BCL from New Inn Hall or Broadgates Hall, Oxford, and became prebendary of Osbaldwick in York Cathedral. His first wife was Anne (died 1589), daughter of Robert Young of Pembrokeshire and niece of Thomas Young, bishop of St David's (1559-61) and archbishop of York (1561-8). 
Bleddyn was licensed to preach and became resident rector of Rogiet (1563-70) and archdeacon of Brecon (collated on 25 or 27 July 1567). On 13 April 1575 he was elected bishop of Llandaff, confirmed on 16 April and consecrated on 17 April by Archbishop Parker. The temporalities of the see were restored to him on 2 May. Owing to the poverty of his diocese he retained his offices and preferments. As bishop, he attempted to reform the canons and vicars-choral of his cathedral and to protect its property. In a letter of 30 January 1576 Bleddyn severely admonished the prebendaries for seriously neglecting their duties. He reminded them of the ordinances and customs of Llandaff and declared that if the prebendaries had governed the church according to those rules its condition would not have been so critical. He sternly opposed Catholic recusancy, a major threat to the Elizabethan church, and attempted to suppress it with great vigour. 
Although Bleddyn was an ardent reformer he was also eager to advance his own interests. He purchased the manor of Bisham, near Caer-went, made his sons Morgan and Philemon prebendaries of Llandaff, and installed Philemon as vicar of Caer-went and rector of Shirenewton. Bleddyn spoke Welsh and patronized the bards, tributes being paid to him and his wife by Dafydd Benwyn; he himself composed an 'englyn' (stanza) praising Lewys Dwnn, the famous genealogist. Bleddyn's first wife died in 1589 and on 14 October of the same year he married his second wife, Anne, who survived him. He died on 15 October 1590 and was buried in the chancel in Matharn church, near the bishop's palace. His will was proved on 21 May 1591. 


@@@@@


doc= 2642


Blew, William John (1808-1894), liturgical scholar and hymn writer, the only son of William Blew of St James's, Westminster, was born in that parish on 13 April 1808, and educated with John Henry Newman at St Nicholas's School, Ealing, and at Oxford, where he matriculated from Wadham College in October 1825. He was elected Goodridge exhibitioner of Wadham in 1826, graduating BA on 13 May 1830 and MA on 13 June 1832. He was curate of Nuthurst, Sussex, from 1832 to 1840, being ordained deacon in 1832 and priest in 1834 by the bishop of Chichester. From 1840 to 1842 he was curate of St Anne's, Soho, and in 1842 became incumbent of St John's, Milton, near Gravesend, where he was free to give a Tractarian tone to the services. In 1850, owing to a difference with his bishop, George Murray (a critic of the Tractarians), he retired from active clerical work and devoted himself mainly to liturgical and theological studies. He had married after his father's death in 1845, and lived at his father's house, 6 Warwick Street, London, where he died on 27 December 1894. 
Blew was a scholar of some repute. He published translations of the 'Iliad' in 1831, Aeschylus's 'Agamemnon' in 1855, and Euripides' 'Medea' in English verse in 1887. He also edited two plays under the title 'Queen Mary' (1876): 'The Famous History of Sir Thomas Wyat' by Dekker and Webster and 'If you Know not me, you Know Nobody, or, The Troubles of Queen Elizabeth' by Thomas Heywood. But his chief interest lay in ecclesiology, and probably his most solid work was his edition of the 'Aberdeen Breviary' for the Bannatyne Club in 1854. In 1852 he published, with his friend Henry John Gauntlett, 'The Church Hymn and Tune Book', which reached a second edition in 1855. The hymns, which are chiefly translations from the Latin by Blew, 'are terse, vigorous, musical, and of great merit' (Julian). The volume also contains several original hymns by Blew. This was followed by 'Hymns and Hymn Books' (1858) and in 1877 by an edition of the 1548 'Altar Service of the Church of England'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2643


Blewitt, Jonas (1757-1805), musician, was born on 9 September 1757 in Virginia Street, in the parish of St George-in-the-East, Middlesex, the son of John Blewitt, mariner, and his wife, Mary. He was baptized at the church of St George-in-the-East on 3 October. He was almost blind. In 1769 he was apprenticed to the Lambeth organist William Godfrey, and he also studied with Samuel Jarvis, organist of St Sepulchre, Holborn. He was appointed organist of St Katharine Coleman, Fenchurch Street, about November 1777, and about April 1783 he also became organist of the united parish of St Margaret Pattens and St Gabriel Fenchurch, holding both posts until his death. By 1780 Blewitt was composer to Spa Gardens, Bermondsey, and he also wrote music for Vauxhall Gardens, the Apollo Gardens, Astley's Amphitheatre, Covent Garden Theatre, the Lyceum, and the Royal Circus; he may have played the organ at these places. In the autumn of 1793 he played at the revival of the Eidophusikon at the Great Room, Spring Gardens, accompanying readings at the piano and playing the organ while panoramic scenes were displayed. 
Blewitt's 'Six Songs and a Cantata', op. 1, was published about 1778, and 'A Collection of Favourite Ballads', op. 3, about 1785; other songs were issued individually. All his other published music was for the organ: two sets of 'Ten Voluntaries' (op. 2, 'c'.1780, and op. 5, 1796), 'Twelve Easy and Familiar Movements', op. 6 ('c'.1797), and 'A Complete Treatise on the Organ', op. 4 (1794?). The treatise is his most significant work, as it is one of the first English organ tutors and provides invaluable details of eighteenth-century performance practice; a 'Set of Explanatory Voluntaries' was appended. The work gives his address as Grange Road, Bermondsey, but Doane's 'Musical Directory' for 1794 gives his address as Bermondsey Square. The 'Treatise' was probably written a few years earlier, as the organist John Worgan (died 1790) is described in it as 'now living'. Blewitt's son Jonathan Blewitt (1782-1853) became a prominent musician, and Jonas's daughter Mary Ann Blewitt ('b'. 1784) succeeded her father as organist of St Katharine Coleman. C. Blewitt, singer at Spa Gardens (1785-8), may also have been related. Blewitt's death was reported on 10 April 1805. According to James Brown's 'Biographical Dictionary of Musicians' (1886) he was a noted organist 'famed for his powerful and effective style' (Brown). 


@@@@@


doc= 2644


Blewitt, Jonathan (1782-1853), composer, was born on 19 July 1782 in London, the son of the organist Jonas Blewitt (1757-1805). He was educated by his father and his godfather, Jonathan Battishill (1738-1801), and he is also said to have received some instruction from Haydn. At the age of eleven he acted as deputy to his father, and thereafter held several appointments as an organist in London. He was also successively organist of Haverhill, Suffolk, and of Brecon, where he remained for three years. About 1808 he returned to London for the production of an opera he had written for Drury Lane, but the theatre burnt down in February 1809, before the work was produced. Blewitt next went to Sheffield, and from there proceeded in 1811 to Ireland, where he acted as private organist to Lord Cahir. His piano sonata 'The Battle and Victory of Salamanca' appeared in 1812. He became organist of St Andrew's, Dublin, succeeded Tom Cooke in June 1813 as composer and director of the music at the Theatre Royal, Crow Street, and was appointed grand organist to the masonic body of Ireland by the duke of Leinster. An active conductor in Dublin, Blewitt also joined J. B. Logier when he introduced his system of music instruction into Ireland; he became a very successful teacher in his own right, and published in Dublin a treatise on singing and 'An Epitome of the Logierian System of Harmony'. About 1825 he was back in London, and began the long series of pantomime compositions, musical plays, and light operas with which his name was connected for the rest of his life. For over twenty-five years he wrote music for most of the London theatres, and his last work, the pantomime 'Harlequin Hudibras', was brought out at Drury Lane on 27 December 1852. In 1828 and 1829 he was director of music at Sadler's Wells Theatre, and he was also, at different times, music director at Vauxhall and at the Tivoli Gardens, Margate, and pianist for the Vocal Entertainments run by the tenor John Templeton, with whom he revisited Ireland in 1849. He wrote hundreds of vocal pieces, most of them comic songs and ballads in the Irish style, which were particularly popular, the best-known at the time being 'Barney Brallaghan' (a selective list of works is given in 'New Grove'). In his latter years Blewitt sank into great poverty and suffered from a 'painful internal disease' ('MT'). He died on 4 September 1853 in London, and was buried at St Pancras. He left a widow and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 2645


Blewitt, (John) Octavian (1810-1884), writer and literary administrator, was born on 3 October 1810 at St Helen's Place, Bishopsgate, London, the son of John Edwards Blewitt (died 1860), merchant, and Caroline, daughter of Peter Symons, mayor of Plymouth. Much of his childhood was spent in Cornwall at Marazion House, the home of his great-uncle Hannibal Curnow Blewitt. He was educated at Plymouth grammar school, and then pursued a medical career, spending his five-year apprenticeship partly with his uncle Mr Dryden, assistant surgeon of the Devonport Dockyard, and partly with Mr Pollard of Torquay. He went to London in 1833 to continue his medical studies at St George's Infirmary, Hanover Square, but never qualified. After spending some time in tutoring Sir James Clark's son in classics he went with a patient to Madeira, staying at Funchal for eight months, and subsequently travelling in Egypt, Greece, Turkey, and other countries. In the latter part of 1837 and early 1838 he resided in Italy, an experience he put to good use writing two works in Murray's 'Handbooks for Travellers' series, one about central Italy published in 1843, and the second, which came out a decade later, about southern Italy. He married Anne Roper Howard ('b'. 1811), a widow, daughter of David Edward Williams, on 12 September 1846 in London. 
After repeated petitions Blewitt was elected in 1839 secretary of the Royal Literary Fund, a post he held until his death. It was the most influential position on the committee and through it he became an adviser to the governors of Charterhouse School. More significantly, the appointment meant that he was consulted by Gladstone and other prime ministers on civil-list pensions, and for forty-five years he was under-secretary for literary patronage. His staunch Anglicanism -- he wrote 'A Treatise on the Happiness Arising from the Exercise of the Christian Faith' at the age of twenty-two -- was reflected in his stern moral attitude to applicants to the fund. During his term of office beneficiaries had to be of known good character, and no grant was given to an author's widow without the production of a marriage certificate. However, he was a kindly man, and he and his wife would occasionally receive and aid impoverished authors at their own door. 
Blewitt's secretaryship came at a crucial time for the Royal Literary Fund, which had been criticized for its methods of accounting for and distributing its funds. He gained a reputation for diligence in the fund's affairs, keeping good accounts and careful records, and he recognized the importance of the fund's archives, spending many years getting them into good order. Yet he was dogged in his defence of the fund's ways which forced authors to write begging letters for meagre grants, and he refused to accept the case for reform put by Charles Dickens and Charles Wentworth Dilke between 1852 and 1858. 
Probably the most influential of Blewitt's contributions to periodical magazines was an anonymous article in the 'Quarterly Review' in April 1871 about the revision of the pension list. However, he was a regular contributor to many other periodicals, and for twenty-nine years edited the news section of 'Gardiner's Chronicle'. He was a FRGS (1839) and was created knight of the order of Leopold by the king of the Belgians, who was a guest at the annual fund-raising dinner in 1872. Octavian Blewitt died on 4 November 1884 at his home, 133 Elgin Crescent, London, and was buried in Paddington cemetery on the 11th. 


@@@@@


doc= 2646


Blicke, Sir Charles (1745-1815), surgeon, received his medical education at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, where he was elected assistant surgeon in 1779; he succeeded Percivall Pott as surgeon 17 July 1787. Blicke was one of the court of assistants at Surgeons' Hall. In 1803 he became master of the Royal College of Surgeons; he was knighted in the same year. 
In 1772, while living in Old Jewry, Blicke published his only work, 'An essay on the biliou or yellow fever of Jamaica, collected from the manuscript of a late surgeon'. In the preface Blicke states that he has abridged the original work and simplified its style. The essayist, whose name is not preserved, advocates the treatment of the fever by bleeding, purging, warm baths, fresh air, and acid drinks. Some twenty authors are quoted to little purpose, and the only interesting contents of the composition are a few lines on the sufferings of the Carthagena expedition, in which the original writer had served, and the mention of the fact that the water of the Bristol hot wells was exported to Jamaica. Whatever he may have cut out, Blicke certainly added nothing. The essay was translated into Italian. 
In 1779 Blicke, then living in Mildred Court, received John Abernethy as his apprentice in surgery. 'The tone in which he [Abernethy] usually spoke of Sir Charles's practice did not convey a very favourable idea of the nature of the impression which it had left on him. In relating a case he would say: 'Sir Charles was at his house in the country, where he was always on the look out for patients.' (Macilwain, 42)' Blicke died on 30 December 1815 in Bedford Place, Russell Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 2647


Bligh, Richard (1780-1838), barrister, was the second son of John Bligh of Abingdon Street, London, secretary of the Chelsea waterworks, and his wife, Lucy Shuter. He was educated at Westminster School and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1803 and MA in 1806. On 30 November 1817, he married his third cousin, Elizabeth (1786-1854), daughter of Vice-Admiral William Bligh. Bligh was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in November 1826 and became an equity draftsman at the chancery bar. He did not have a large practice, but was chiefly engaged in reporting at the House of Lords for several years. Several publications resulted, including 'Reports of Cases Heard in the House of Lords, on Appeals and Errors of Writ' (1823, 1829). Bligh died of apoplexy in James Street, London, on 22 May 1838. 


@@@@@


doc= 2648


Bligh, Sir Richard Rodney (1737-1821), naval officer, was the second son of Lieutenant Richard Bligh ('b'. 1713), naval officer, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Page, and a third cousin of Vice-Admiral William Bligh. He was baptized in Holy Trinity Church, Gosport, on 8 November 1737, with George Bridges Rodney -- the future Baron Rodney -- as his godfather. 
Bligh went to sea with Rodney in the 'Rainbow' in 1750, and was a midshipman in the 'Ramillies' with Admiral John Byng at the battle of Minorca in 1756. He was commissioned lieutenant in the 'Nightingale' in 1757, and took part in Rodney's victorious West Indian campaign. Bligh was promoted commander by Rodney in 1762, and given command of the sloop 'Virgin'. On 13 November 1765 he married Ann Worsley (1744/5-1797), daughter of Sir Edward Worsley. In 1777 he was made a post captain and appointed to the 'Camel'. He took, as an acting lieutenant, Bartholomew James, who recorded that Bligh treated him with civility. Bligh seems to have been a humane commander; the punishments recorded in his logs are few and moderate. 
In 1782 Bligh commanded the 'Asia' (64 guns), under Lord Howe, at the relief of Gibraltar. He was appointed to the 'Alexander' (74 guns) in 1794 and on 6 November, in company with the 'Canada' (74 guns), met a French squadron of five line-of-battle ships, three frigates, and a brig. The 'Alexander' engaged three line-of-battle ships for upwards of two hours, allowing the 'Canada' to escape. With the ship in danger of sinking and two other enemy ships coming up, Bligh had to strike his colours and was taken to Brest a prisoner. He had been advanced to the rank of rear-admiral in October 1794, but had not been officially informed of it. On returning to England he was court martialled for the loss of the 'Alexander' but most honourably acquitted, the court very highly approving of the conduct of all the ship's company. 
From 1796 to 1799 Bligh was second in command at Jamaica. He infuriated the commander-in-chief, Sir Hyde Parker, over his conduct of a court martial arising from the 'Hermione' mutiny, during which Captain Hugh Pigot and nine officers had been murdered. The acquittal of two defendants, one a boy of twelve, and the recommendation to mercy of a third, led Parker to write to the Admiralty accusing Bligh of 'supineness' and demanding his removal (28 May 1798, TNA: PRO, ADM 1/248). 
Bligh became a vice-admiral in February 1799, and returned home in September. His wife had died on 7 July 1797 and on 28 July 1800 he married Mary Golightly (1745/6-1834). He was commander-in-chief at Leith from 1803 to 1804 and advanced to the rank of admiral in April 1804. He saw no further service afloat but was invested with the GCB in 1820. Bligh died on 30 April 1821 at Belle Vue, a mansion he had bought in Southampton. He was buried in the family vault at St Mary's, Alverstoke, Hampshire, on 9 May. 
Bligh left a son and four daughters from his first marriage. His son, Captain George Miller Bligh, had served as a midshipman with him in the 'Alexander' and as a lieutenant in the 'Victory' at Trafalgar, where he was severely wounded. The daughters were Harriet Worsley, Ann Caroline, Elizabeth, and Sophia Holmes who married Charles Carter, who had served as a lieutenant in the 'Alexander' and was later a vice-admiral. 


@@@@@


doc= 2649


Bligh, Thomas (1685-1775), army officer and politician, was born on 15 January 1685, the second son of Thomas Bligh ('c'.1654-1710) of Rathmore, co. Meath, Ireland, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1737), the daughter of Colonel James Naper, of Longhcrew, co. Meath. His father, a grazier by origin who was granted lands under the Williamite confiscations of 1688, was MP for County Meath (1695-1710) and was made a privy councillor by James Butler, second duke of Ormond. His elder brother, John (1683-1727), who was in 1725 created earl of Darnley, was buried in Westminster Abbey. Thomas Bligh was often entitled 'honourable' by contemporary writers, as if he were the younger son of an earl. He was returned to the Irish parliament as member for Athboy, co. Meath, in 1715, and held the seat for sixty years. 
In 1717 Bligh purchased a captaincy in the 6th Irish horse (later the 5th dragoon guards). His promotion to lieutenant-colonel of the regiment in October 1719 owed much to his uncle Lieutenant-General Robert Naper, colonel of the regiment. In 1737 he married Elizabeth (died 1759), the daughter of John Bury of Shannon Grove, Limerick. Their only child died young. In 1740, having failed to secure the colonelcy of his regiment upon the death of his uncle, Bligh was appointed colonel of the 20th foot, which served in Flanders during the War of the Austrian Succession (1740-46). In 1745 he became brigadier-general, and commanded in a very sharp action at the causeway of Melle when marching to reinforce the garrison of Ghent. In 1746 he was transferred from the 20th foot to the 12th dragoons, in 1747 he became major-general, in December the same year he was transferred to the colonelcy of his old regiment, the 5th dragoon guards, which had then become the 2nd Irish horse, and in 1754 he became lieutenant-general. 
In July 1758 preparations were made on an extensive scale for another descent on the French coast, to create a diversion in favour of the army under Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick in Germany. Against his better judgement, and under pressure from Pitt's government, Bligh (now aged seventy-three) accepted command of the expedition, in place of Lord George Sackville and the duke of Marlborough, who successfully lobbied to be sent with the British forces to Germany -- a command Bligh had expected to fill upon his arrival in London. The fleet under Howe, with the troops under Bligh on board, left England at the beginning of August 1758, and in seven days arrived in Cherbourg Roads. The troops were landed and Cherbourg was captured, but Bligh and his staff showed themselves inadequate leaders of men. The harbour, piers, and forts of Cherbourg were destroyed as ordered, but the troops were allowed to plunder and pillage the surrounding area with devastating effect, and the plans for re-embarkation had to be drawn up and supervised by Howe. The troops took with them Cherbourg's brass ordnance as trophies. On 3 September Bligh landed his force at St Luniare in preparation for a siege of St Malo. While the infantry were being disembarked a reconnaissance revealed that the plan to force a passage across the River Rance was impracticable. A sudden change in the weather forced the fleet to weigh anchor with the artillery and horse still on board. It was then decided to march the infantry a short distance westwards to the Bay of St Cast, where the fleet would be waiting. 
However, the march was poorly conducted, the condition and morale of the line regiments had deteriorated, and there were considerable losses from harrying French militia. The expedition reached Matignon, inland from St Cast, on 11 September and the fateful decision was taken to make camp rather than re-embark immediately. Intelligence was received during the night of an approaching French force under the command of the duc d'Aiguillon which was of similar size. Instead of slipping away quietly in the night, Bligh and his staff waited until break of day, announcing their plans to the enemy with the drumming of the reveille. The first troops were embarked at 9.00 a.m. By 11.00 a.m. three brigades of the line together with the wounded were on board when the French appeared on the heights above. They were met by the rear guard, now stranded on the beach, consisting of the Grenadier Guards and the grenadier companies of the line regiments, under the command of Major-General Alexander Dury. Despite inflicting severe casualties upon the French, the bulk of this force (approximately a thousand men) were either killed, wounded, or taken prisoner. Dury was among those who drowned in a desperate attempt to swim out to the boats. 
Bligh was severely censured for his conduct in the affair. He was criticized by the commander-in-chief, John, Viscount Ligonier, for compromising the expedition's diversionary strategy by failing to land his artillery and horse and meet the French in battle. More recent commentators have pointed to the poor condition of his troops; his real failure was in not making a more rapid re-embarkation. Bligh was snubbed at court and, believing himself to have been made a scapegoat by Pitt, he resigned all his commissions and offices and retired to his property in Ireland. 
The incident became the subject of a pamphlet war in London between supporters and opponents of Pitt's war policy. A rigid censorship was imposed and the military dispatches were never published. Bligh himself publicly disowned authorship of a pamphlet purporting to be 'A Letter from the Honourable L -- t G -- l B -- gh to the Rt. Hon. W -- m P -- t Esq.' (London, 1758), which set out a defence of his actions. However, this is believed to be founded on a genuine letter combining his own narrative with remarks by the anonymous pamphleteer. 
It is also thought that the foolhardy decision to attack St Malo (the geographical difficulties were well known) was pressed upon Bligh by the court of George, prince of Wales (the future George III), at Leicester House. The prince's brother, Prince Edward, served as a volunteer in the fleet under Howe, and General Clark, Bligh's incompetent quartermaster-general, was close to the Leicester House faction. The ministry's treatment of Bligh was taken as a slight by this group, and it was the prince of Wales's adviser, John Stuart, third earl of Bute, who prevailed upon him to resign his offices. Notwithstanding his incapacity for this command, which age alone should have precluded and his better judgement attempted to resist, his subsequent treatment as a pawn of political faction was a sad end to what had been an honourable and brave, if somewhat modest, military career. 
Some time after his retirement Bligh married again. His second wife, Frances, the daughter of Theophilus Jones, of Leitrim, had no children. He died at Brittas, near Dublin, on 15 September 1775, at the age of ninety, and was buried at Rathmore. His ample fortune of $100,000 he bequeathed to his younger brother, Robert Bligh (1703-1778), dean of Elphin. 


@@@@@


doc= 2650


Bligh, William (1754-1817), naval officer and colonial governor, was born in Plymouth on 9 September 1754, the only son of Francis Bligh (1721-1780) and his wife, Jane Pearse, 'nee' Balsam (died 'c'.1770). The Bligh family had long resided at Tinten in Cornwall. Bligh's father was a customs officer at Plymouth; other family members had entered the army and the navy. William Bligh is recorded in the 'Monmouth''s muster book as 'Captain's Servant' in 1762, as able seaman in that of the 'Hunter' in July 1770, and as midshipman ('Hunter') from February 1771. In September 1771 he transferred to the 'Crescent' (36 guns), then, in September 1775, to the 'Ranger', from which he gained his lieutenant's passing certificate on 1 May 1776. Bligh must have shown distinct ability in these postings, for in March 1776, preparing for his third voyage of exploration to the Pacific Ocean, Captain James Cook chose the still quite junior officer as master of the 'Resolution'. 
For three years Bligh oversaw the working of the ship, and assisted in the navigation and charting of this immense voyage (1776-80), which explored the islands and coastlines of the northern Pacific Ocean, and which saw Cook killed at Kealakekua Bay, Hawaii, in February 1779. Afterwards Bligh was bitter that Captain James King did not make what he considered to be proper acknowledgement of his contributions in King's 'A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean' (1784): 'None of the Maps and Charts in this publication are from the original drawings of Lieutenant Henry Roberts; he did no more than copy the original ones from Captain Cook, who besides myself was the only person that surveyed and laid the coast down, in the 'Resolution'. Every plan & Chart from C. Cook's death are exact Copies of my Works. (marginalia in the copy in the Admiralty library)' After his return to England Bligh was promoted lieutenant (September 1781), and served in a number of line-of-battle ships in the North Sea and the Mediterranean. He went on half pay on 13 January 1783. 
Bligh had married Elizabeth Betham (1754?-1812) at Douglas on the Isle of Man on 4 February 1781. The couple had three daughters in the next years, and three more subsequently. With the peace Bligh undertook a series of trading voyages to the West Indies in vessels owned by his wife's relative Duncan Campbell, the overseer of the convict hulks in the Thames. Fatefully, he took Fletcher Christian with him on two of these, and the pair became friendly. 
In mid-1787, as a consequence of Sir Joseph Banks's patronage, Bligh received the command of the 'Bounty', then being fitted to transport breadfruit and other plants from the islands of the central Pacific Ocean and from south-east Asia to the West Indies. This proposed plant transfer was part of an elaborate scheme to increase British trade with Asia: the mechanization of the spinning and weaving industry then beginning was creating the capacity for greatly expanded production; cotton goods might be manufactured in England, and exported to India and, especially, China; the growth of this trade would both give East India Company ships outward cargoes, and lessen the need for the British to find silver with which to purchase Chinese goods; for greater production of cotton goods, more raw supplies were needed; if plantation owners might feed slaves more cheaply, then large-scale cotton cultivation might become feasible in the West Indies; the breadfruit and other fruits and vegetables which grew in great abundance in the eastern tropics might become cheap staples for the slaves. 
With a crew of forty-four, Fletcher Christian among them, the 'Bounty' sailed in December 1787. After failing to enter the Pacific Ocean round Cape Horn, Bligh reached Tahiti at the end of October 1788. Laden with more than 1000 young breadfruit plants, he sailed again at the beginning of April 1789. In the early morning of 28 April 1789, when off the island of Tofua (Tonga), Fletcher Christian led part of the crew in mutiny ['see 'Bounty mutineers]. 
Subsequent events, and their repeated evocation in literature and film, have made this mutiny the most famous in the history of the sea. The rebels set Bligh and eighteen men adrift in the ship's 23 foot long launch, with little food and only minimal navigational tools. Incredibly Bligh managed to reach Kupang in Timor two months later with the loss of only one man, after a harrowing 3500 mile voyage. The mutineers spent nine months ranging the central Pacific in search of a haven. In the end some chose to remain at Tahiti, where they were arrested by Captain Edward Edwards and subsequently tried at court martial. Others went with Christian and Polynesian companions to a bloody fate on Pitcairn, then mislocated on charts. The causes of the mutiny and the motives of the mutineers have been much debated. Bligh suggested that the rebels listened to Tahiti's siren song; Christian's supporters, on the other hand, argued that Bligh's harsh treatment had driven him mad. While puzzles remain, it is clear that Bligh and Christian became locked into a deeply ambivalent symbiosis that led to tragedy. 
In 1791-3 Bligh returned to the Pacific with the 'Providence' and the 'Assistant'; and this time succeeded in bringing the breadfruit to the West Indies. On his return to England he found that his reputation had been much diminished by evidence presented at the trial of the captured 'Bounty' mutineers. War with France having broken out, he returned to active service, taking command of the 'Calcutta' (26 guns) in April 1795, then, as post captain, of the 'Director' (64 guns) in January 1796. He participated in the battle of Camperdown under Admiral Adam Duncan (11 October 1797), and in the battle of Copenhagen under Nelson (2 April 1801), in both of which he acted courageously. In these years, though, he suffered the indignity of another mutiny, at the Nore, in May 1797 after which he strenuously protected his men and ensured that none were hanged for participation. After the Nore Bligh suffered a case of serious insubordination by Lieutenant John Frazier on the 'Warrior' in 1804. In February 1805 the court martial brought by Frazier 'reprimanded' Bligh, and 'admonished' him to be 'in future more correct in his language' (Kennedy, 'Mutinies', 278). 
In 1805 Sir Joseph Banks procured for Bligh the governorship of the New South Wales colony. After a voyage during which he and Captain Joseph Short argued incessantly, Bligh arrived in August 1806, to find the society deeply divided between the military and civilian officers and free settlers ('exclusives') on the one hand, and convicts and former convicts ('emancipists') on the other. Bligh took the part of the smallholders about the Hawkesbury River in their economic quarrels with the exclusives. Following a series of skirmishes the officers of the New South Wales Corps deposed him on 26 January 1808. After a weary exile on the 'Porpoise', mostly in the Derwent estuary outside Hobart, Bligh was superseded by Lachlan Macquarie in January 1810. 
Bligh returned to England in October 1810. In May 1801 he had been elected FRS. He was promoted by seniority rear-admiral (July 1811), then vice-admiral (1814). His wife having died on 15 April 1812, Bligh relocated his family to Farningham in Kent. He died on 7 December 1817 in Bond Street, London, and was buried next to his wife at St Mary, Lambeth. 
William Bligh was clearly a superior navigator; and danger, whether on an arduous ocean or in the heat of battle, brought out the best in him. But he was an abysmal leader otherwise, and this incapacity became more pronounced with age. A brief acquaintance showed Macquarie that '[Bligh] certainly is a most disagreeable Person to have any dealings, or Publick business to transact with; having no regard whatever to his promise or engagements however sacred, and his natural temper is uncommonly harsh, and tyrannical in the extreme' (Kennedy, 'Mutinies', 299). 
It is important to note, however, that Bligh's 'violence' was habitually more verbal than physical (his cruel punishment of David Collins's young son on the 'Porpoise' notwithstanding). Greg Dening has established that Bligh flogged less than any other British commander in the Pacific Ocean in the later eighteenth century. What most threw Bligh into 'those violent Tornados of temper' (Kennedy, 'Mutinies', 306), during which he gestured violently with his hands, was perceived dereliction of duty by officers and seamen's incompetence. When either of these occurred Bligh's invective could bruise men's egos as much as any lash their backs. After the 'Bounty' left Tahiti, Bligh fretted excessively about the plants' welfare. When officers and crew offended he called them 'damn'd Infernal scoundrels, blackguard, liar, vile man, jesuit, thief, lubber, disgrace to the service, damn'd long pelt of a bitch'; he told them he would make them 'eat grass like cows'; he told the officers that he would make them jump overboard before they reached Torres Strait (Barney, 64, 69; 'Journal of James Morrison', 19). Interestingly, this 'bad language' was not obscene in the modern sense; rather, it was humiliating and dislocating. As Dening puts it, '[Bligh's language] was bad, not so much because it was intemperate or abusive, but because it was ambiguous, because men could not read in it a right relationship to his authority' (Dewing, 61). Bligh's great failing was that he was so unaware of the effect his mood swings and harsh criticisms had on those about him. The story of the 'Bounty' proved popular with twentieth-century film-makers, most notably in Frank Lloyd's 'Mutiny on the Bounty' (1935), in which Bligh was played by Charles Laughton, and in subsequent remakes in 1962 and 1984, when the role of the captain was taken by Trevor Howard and Anthony Hopkins respectively. In these depictions, Bligh appears as overbearing and cruel, and as significantly older than he was (at thirty-four he was only ten years older than Christian). 


@@@@@


doc= 2651


Blight, William (1785-1862), naval officer, entered the navy on 9 May 1793, as a volunteer on board the 'Intrepid' (64 guns, Captain the Hon. Charles Carpenter). In that ship he continued as midshipman, master's mate, and acting lieutenant, most of the time in the East and West Indies, until confirmed as lieutenant on 15 April 1803, and appointed to the 'Britannia' (100 guns) with Captain, afterwards Rear-Admiral, the earl of Northesk. In the 'Britannia' he served at Trafalgar, and was sent to take possession of the French 'Aigle' (74 guns), which was lost in the gale immediately after the battle. Blight, however, was rescued, and in the spring of 1806 followed Northesk into the 'Dreadnought'. In August 1806 he was appointed to the 'Nereide' (36 guns, Captain Corbet), and served in the attack on Buenos Aires in July 1807. The 'Nereide' afterwards went to the East Indies; the crew mutinied, and in February 1809, when Captain Robert Corbet was tried for cruelty in the suppression of the disorder, Blight, the first lieutenant, was the principal defence witness. He was afterwards (1812-14) agent for transports at Palermo; from 1819 to 1821 first lieutenant of the flagship 'Queen Charlotte' at Portsmouth, and on 12 February 1821 was promoted to commander. In May 1828 he was appointed to the 'Britannia', carrying the flag of Lord Northesk as commander-in-chief at Plymouth; from there he was transferred to the 'St Vincent', and was posted from her on 22 July 1830. He held no further appointment in the navy; he retired as a captain on 1 October 1850, and was promoted retired rear-admiral on 27 September 1855. He died at East Stonehouse, Plymouth, on 22 July 1862, survived by his wife, Jane Money Blight. He had previously been married to Louisa, sister of Commander J. B. Howell RN. 
Blight was a man of very humble origins who rose on merit to become a lieutenant in time of war and, through the earl of Northesk, acquired enough patronage for peacetime promotion to post rank. The 'Nereide' mutiny was the one blemish on his career. 


@@@@@


doc= 2652


Blind, Mathilde (1841-1896), poet and biographer, was born at Mannheim, Germany, on 21 March 1841, the elder of two children of a Jewish banker named Cohen and his second wife, Friederike Ettlinger. Cohen died in Mathilde's infancy and she subsequently adopted the name of her mother's second husband, Karl Blind (1826-1907), a political writer who participated in the Baden insurrections of 1848-9. After the suppression of the revolutionary movement the Blinds took refuge in London, where their home in Hampstead became a meeting-place for other refugees from abroad, including Garibaldi and Mazzini. Mathilde Blind was more inspired by their political conversation than by the haphazard education she received at a series of girls' schools. Her own thoughts on poetry and on the education of women were reinforced by her reading of Elizabeth Barrett Browning's 'Aurora Leigh'. In 1859 she visited Switzerland, where she went on a solitary walking tour of the Alps, was denied access to the lectures at Zurich University, studied philology, Latin, and other languages on her own, and passed much of her time with a group of dedicated revolutionaries. One acquaintance recalled Blind in her late teens as a dazzling beauty, full of the joy of life. She was profoundly affected, however, when in 1866 her younger brother, Ferdinand, failed in an attempt to assassinate Bismarck and then committed suicide in prison. In 1867 she published, under the pseudonym Claude Lake, a volume of 'Poems' dedicated to Mazzini; her 'Recollections of Mazzini' eventually appeared in 1891, in an issue of the 'Fortnightly Review'. Shelley was another of her heroes: she gave public lectures on his poetry, wrote an essay about him for the 'Westminster Review' which appeared in 1870, and edited a selection of his poetry in 1872. She translated David Friedrich Strauss's 'Der alte und der neue Glaube' (as 'The Old Faith and the New', 1873), and during the early 1870s she also contributed reviews of poetry to 'The Examiner'. 
At the age of thirty Blind, who never married, moved out of her parents' home to establish an independent life. She was one in a circle of women writers that included Mona Caird, Violet Paget (Vernon Lee), Amy Levy, Olive Schreiner, and Augusta Webster. She knew James Thomson (B.V.), William Sharp (Fiona Macleod), and Algernon Charles Swinburne, and she was particularly close to the William Michael Rossettis. In the early 1880s she lived in Manchester with the painter Ford Madox Brown and his wife, Emma; there were rumours, after Emma died, that Brown wished to marry her. Arthur Symons, who met Blind when she was in her forties, described her face as 'the most emotional, but the most worn and haggard and furrowed I have ever seen' ('Selected Letters', 42). Vernon Lee, who claimed to like Blind and admire her poetry, regarded her as 'amiable' but ugly and 'coarse... extremely like Ouida' ('Vernon Lee's Letters', 64, 80, 91). Others who knew her described her as handsome, despite a disagreeable and strongly accented speaking voice. Although she was known for her animated conversation, she had no discernible sense of humour. 
Blind travelled extensively in an attempt to improve her health and alleviate her frequent depressions. Visits to Scotland inspired 'The Prophecy of St Oran' (1881), which narrates the mission of St Columba to the Hebrides, and 'The Heather on Fire' (1886), a passionate denunciation of the highland clearances. She continued, in the 1880s, to give public lectures on Shelley, and in 1886 she edited the poems, letters, and journals of Byron. Her essay on Mary Wollstonecraft's educational theories was published in 1878 in the 'New Quarterly Magazine'. She also wrote the first full-length biography of George Eliot (1883) and a biography of Madame Roland (1889). In her only novel, 'Tarantella: a Romance' (1885), she develops a highly imaginative plot set, somewhat incongruously, against scenes of provincial realism more typical of George Eliot's fiction. She translated from French the controversial 'Journal de Marie Bashkirtseff'; in the introduction she assailed the 'cut-and-dried theories [of men] as to what women are or ought to be' ('Journal of Marie Bashkirtseff', trans. M. Blind, 1890, new edn, 1985, 695). Blind's most ambitious work, however, was 'The Ascent of Man' (1889), a poetic epic based on Darwinian theories of evolution. Arthur Symons described this volume as 'a hymn of religious ecstasy; for the scientific teaching of Darwin... inflamed her with the ardour of a worshipper' (Symons, 'Introduction' to 'Poetical Works', v). Her next three volumes of poetry show the influence of her extensive travelling, which included a trip to Egypt in 1891. Ford Madox Brown contributed a frontispiece to 'Dramas in Miniature', which includes 'The Russian Student's Tale' and other poems illustrating the inequity between the sexes. 'Songs and Sonnets' appeared in 1893, followed in 1895 by 'Birds of Passage: Songs of the Orient and Occident'. Late in life Blind inherited a sizeable legacy from her half-brother, Max Cohen. She was living in Stratford upon Avon when she wrote her last poems, a group of sonnets inspired by Shakespeare. She died at her home, 96 Belgrave Road, London, on 26 November 1896 and was cremated; the remains were interred at a memorial erected in St Pancras cemetery, East Finchley. The bulk of her estate was bequeathed to Newnham College, Cambridge. In the year after her death Symons edited a collection entitled 'The Poetical Works of Mathilde Blind'; this volume also includes a memoir by Richard Garnett, who quoted from Blind's unfinished autobiography. 
Blind was regarded in her own lifetime as an author of some repute. Twentieth-century scholars have praised her biography of George Eliot for the extent and accuracy of its research, for its incisive critical analyses, and for its emphasis on Eliot's feminism. As for Blind's poetry, her contemporary readers, as well as those in the twentieth century, have tended to prefer her shorter and more lyrical efforts such as 'The Sower', 'Reapers', 'Lassitude', 'Manchester by Night', and 'The Dead'. Feminist critics have called attention also to the impressive sonnet 'Motherhood', which describes the pain of labour and childbirth. More recently, in 'Victorian Poetry: Poetry, Poetics and Politics' (1993), Isobel Armstrong has re-evaluated the longer works, particularly 'The Heather on Fire' and 'The Ascent of Man', in the context of 'a gendered tradition in women's poetry of the nineteenth century'. According to Armstrong, Blind, by reconfiguring 'a new myth of creativity and gender', demonstrates the best that this tradition can achieve in terms of social and political analysis (Armstrong, 374-6). 


@@@@@


doc= 2653


Bliss, Nathaniel (1700-1764), astronomer, was born on 28 November 1700, the son of Nathaniel Bliss, a clothier, of Bisley, Gloucestershire. He matriculated at Pembroke College, Oxford, in 1716, and graduated BA on 27 June 1720 and MA in 1723. He married shortly thereafter Elizabeth, the daughter of Thomas Hillman of Painswick and an eminent Oxford scholar; of their very numerous offspring, four survived him. He became rector of St Ebbe's, Oxford, in 1736. 
Bliss attended James Bradley's lectures in the Old Ashmolean, and on the death of Edmond Halley his application for the Savilian professorship of geometry was supported by George Parker, second earl of Macclesfield, Martin Folkes, Bradley, and the professors of astronomy at Oxford and Cambridge, William Jones and Robert Smith. He was duly appointed on 18 February 1742 and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society the following May. A notice for his lectures advertised courses in arithmetic, algebra, and plane and spherical trigonometry, with the use of logarithms and surveying instruments. He accepted between six and ten students in each class; they had to attend three times a week, for not less than one hour daily. He charged 2 guineas for each course, which lasted about three months, another half guinea being payable for every month the course lasted thereafter. At this time Bliss established the fourth observatory in Oxford, fixing his instruments to a part of the city wall, which extended from his official house to the north-west angle of New College cloisters. His meridian mark was on the buildings of All Souls College. He sent Bradley his observations of Jupiter's satellites in 1742, and, despite the illness of his wife and several of his children at that time, data on a comet seen at the end of December 1743. 
Bliss was a frequent guest of and scientific assistant to Macclesfield, who had established his own observatory at Shirburn Castle. On 12 February 1745 Bliss wrote asking Macclesfield to attempt a meridian observation of the brilliant comet then approaching the sun, which he did on two days at the end of the month. Bliss often assisted Bradley at Greenwich, and, Bradley being unwell, Bliss undertook the observations for the transit of Venus on 6 June 1761. 
When Bradley died in 1762, Bliss applied successfully for the post of astronomer royal, to which he was appointed on 26 August 1762. With Thomas Hornsby and Antony Shepherd, then the professors of astronomy at Oxford and Cambridge respectively, he examined the instruments which Nevil Maskelyne and Charles Green took to St Helena for their longitude observations in 1763-4. He sent the Royal Society an account of Eustacio Zanotti's observations of the transit of 1761 as seen from Bologna, and of his own observation of an annular eclipse visible at Greenwich on 1 April 1764. He died suddenly, probably at Greenwich, on 2 September 1764, and was buried two days later at St Margaret's Church, Lee, in Kent. 
Bliss died intestate and, the Greenwich observations being regarded as his widow's property, the Royal Society purchased them for 50 guineas. They were published long after his death, as a supplement to those of Bradley, in 1805. Mrs Bliss remained in Oxford, from where she issued a notice on 20 May 1765 announcing that the electrical experiments for the entertainment of ladies and others, given by Hornsby, would take place on 21 May in the Schools Tower, the tickets being priced at half a crown. 


@@@@@


doc= 2654


Bliss, Philip (1787-1857), antiquary and book collector, was the elder son of Philip Bliss (died 1803), rector of Dodington and Frampton Cotterell, near Chipping Sodbury, Gloucestershire, where Bliss was born on 21 December 1787. His mother was Anne, daughter of Thomas Michell, of Corsham, Wiltshire. Bliss was educated at the free grammar school at Chipping Sodbury, then at Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1797 until 1806, when he went as a scholar to St John's College, Oxford, matriculating thence as a student of civil law. He became a fellow of St John's in 1809, and took the degrees of BCL in 1815 and DCL in 1820. He was ordained deacon in 1817 and priest in 1818; he briefly held a curacy at Newington, Oxfordshire, and in 1830 was made rector of Avening, Gloucestershire, but took little active interest in the parish. On 22 July 1823 he married Sophia, second daughter of Robert Barker Bell, formerly fellow of New College, and thereafter resided at 38 St Giles', Oxford; their son and daughter both died in childhood. 
An antiquary and book collector from boyhood, Bliss was bibliographically precocious, writing for Sir Egerton Brydges' 'Censura literaria' from 1805, and for other organs, including the 'Oxford University and City Herald' from 1808 (he became a part proprietor of this newspaper in 1835); he also published historical reprints as small tracts in limited editions. In 1808 he became an assistant at the Bodleian Library, where he worked on the catalogue of the Rawlinson and Gough collections. His major publications started soon afterwards with an edition of John Earle's 'Microcosmography' (1811), which carried a useful appendix listing English character books, a category strongly represented in Bliss's own library. 
From 1809, following a proposal negotiated for him by Thomas Park with the London bookseller Joseph Harding, Bliss was engaged in editorial work on Anthony Wood's 'Athenae Oxonienses', published in four volumes (including the 'Fasti') between 1813 and 1820. A new edition was started by the Ecclesiastical History Society in 1848 but proceeded no further than a first volume containing the 'Life of Wood'. Bliss's interleaved copy of the 1813 edition, with materials for the continuation, was bequeathed to the Bodleian (Bodl. Oxf., MSS top. Oxon. d. 8-13). 
In 1813 appeared 'Letters Written by Eminent Persons in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries, and Lives of Eminent Men by John Aubrey... from... the Bodleian', notable for Bliss's editorial contribution of the first substantial (though inaccurate) publication of Aubrey's 'Brief Lives'. 'Reliquiae Hearnianae', a selection from Thomas Hearne's voluminous diaries, was announced in a prospectus put out in 1816; 576 pages were printed in 1821-2, but work was broken off, presumably when Bliss's new administrative duties intervened, and publication was resumed only in 1857. Even then only 50 large-paper and 150 ordinary copies were published; another issue with additional matter followed in 1869. The proof sheets of the 'Reliquiae', as well as Bliss's own copy, are in the Bodleian. 
In 1822 he was appointed, on second application, to the staff of the British Museum, but later that year was brought back to Oxford by his friend Bulkeley Bandinel to be the junior sub-librarian at the Bodleian. He held the post until 1828. (He had previously, in 1818-20, attempted unsuccessfully to obtain the librarianship of the Advocates' Library in Edinburgh.) Oxford proved ideally congenial for him, but his contribution was more to the university's administration than to its library. 
From December 1824 until April 1853 (when he retired in advance of the 'University Reform Act' of 1854 on a pension of $200) he was registrar of the university, and in 1826 (having eight years before failed to secure the appointment) he was elected unopposed to be keeper of the archives, a post in which his penchant for accumulation seems to have impeded administrative efficiency. He resigned his Bodleian sub-librarianship at the end of 1828 and held numerous offices in the university, notably that of principal of St Mary Hall, 1848-57, in succession to Bishop Hampden. His prominence and diligence in university business and his polished manners made him the embodiment of the traditions of 'ancien regime' Oxford. He died at the principal's lodgings of St Mary Hall on 18 November 1857 and was buried in St Giles's churchyard on the 21st. His wife survived him. 
Bliss assembled a substantial library, much of it related to his biographical and bibliographical researches and thus strong in books with Oxford connections, sixteenth- and seventeenth-century English poets, and works by 'royal and noble authors' (of which an earlier collection of his had been sold in London on 11 January 1811). His books bear the discreet ownership mark of a 'P' written before the printed signature 'B', with a two-digit year of purchase following. His library was sold by Sotheby and Wilkinson in two main groups beginning 28 June and 9 August 1858, which with supplementary sales produced a total of $5672 14's'.; the Bodleian acquired 745 volumes of local importance. Bliss left instructions that his general correspondence should be offered to the British Museum, which purchased it from his widow in January 1858: it is now Add. MSS 34567-34582. 


@@@@@


doc= 2655


Blith, Walter (bap. 1605, d. 1654), writer on husbandry, was baptized on 7 August 1605 in Allesley, Warwickshire, the fourth and youngest son of John Blith (died 1626), yeoman farmer, and Ann, daughter of Barnaby Holbeche of Birchley Hall, Fillongley. His father, a relatively prosperous cereal and dairy farmer, had moved to Hollyfax in Allesley from Coleshill, where his family had lived for centuries, some time between 1593 and 1597, and established himself on the fringes of the lesser gentry; Walter's elder brother Francis, who became a lawyer and married Mary, daughter of Sir Thomas Hesilrig of Noseley, Leicestershire, was deemed a gentleman. 
Blith married Hannah, daughter of John Waker of Snitterfield, near Stratford upon Avon. They had three sons -- Samuel, who eventually became heir to his uncle Francis Blith, John (died 1679), who became a physician, and Nathaniel -- and four daughters, of whom Mary and Hannah were still living in 1650. 
Blith farmed his own land with diligence and care. Sir William Dugdale (1605-1686), historian of fen drainage, lived at Blythe Hall in Shustoke parish next door, and was a close friend of Walter's brother Francis. Walter became a captain in the parliamentary army during the civil war, was solicitor and sequestrator of royalist land in Warwickshire and Coventry, collector of rents from lands of the bishop and dean and chapter of Worcester, and in 1649 and 1650 was surveyor of confiscated crown lands in four counties, Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, and Norfolk, making twenty-seven surveys and certificates. He bought confiscated crown land at Potterspury, in Whittlewood Forest, Northamptonshire, using debentures as payment. The conveyance describes him as a gentleman of Cotesbach, Leicestershire. 
Blith wrote two books on husbandry which surpass all others of their time for their practical good sense, their evidence of his own and others' farming experience, the candour of the author's judgments and opinions, and the care given to describing new farming practices and making textual changes as time and improved knowledge permitted. His 'The English Improver, or, A New Survey of Husbandry' (1649), offering six pieces of improvement, was dedicated to both houses of parliament and the 'ingenuous reader'. In the same year another edition appeared. A so-called third impression was 'much augmented' (1652) and was, in fact, a thoroughly revised work. It was entitled 'The English Improver Improved, or, The Survey of Husbandry Surveyed', and its second part contained 'Six Newer Pieces of Improvement'. It was dedicated to Cromwell, the council of state, nobility, gentry, soldiers, husbandmen, cottagers, labourers, and the meanest commoner and reflected new information concerning agricultural innovations, such as woad, clover, sainfoin, lucerne, hops, liquorice, rapeseed, and orchard and garden fruits. Another edition appeared in 1653. Blith intended a further work on animal husbandry, including goats and rabbits, but evidently did not complete it. 
Blith deliberately wrote 'in our own natural country language and in our ordinary and usual home-spun terms' (2nd edn, 1649, 2). His works strongly urged agricultural improvement, but his enthusiasm for enclosure was always tempered by deep concern for poor men: enclosure should not cause depopulation, but obstruction by a few should be overruled by legislation. Blith's views were doubtless coloured by discussion with Joseph Lee, the celebrated pamphleteer who strongly advocated enclosure, and was rector of Cotesbach, where enclosure had caused turmoil in 1603 and made it a centre of the midland revolt in 1607. Blith in all his writing showed sympathy for the common man. He understood the aspirations of the Diggers, but did not think them realistic. He voiced in his first book (1649) deep reservations about fen drainage, but expressed a desire to know more. Somehow he later acquired that practical knowledge, for in the second book (1652, 1653) he praised the drainers, having learned especially to understand the role of an inspiring overseer who could capture the loyalty of his men. 
When Blith made his will in 1650, he was living at Cotesbach, but an additional memorandum declares that he lived for four years from 1650 in Lincolnshire, so he may well have spent that time in the fenland. He died in Lincolnshire in 1654 leaving some $1900 in cash to his children, of which each received between $260 and $340 apiece, to be employed 'either in a way of grazing or merchandizing'. Blith was a member of Samuel Hartlib's circle, described by Hartlib as his 'very loving and experienced friend' ('Discourse of Husbandrie', 2nd edn, 1652, 'To the Reader'), but his parliamentary sympathies precluded the republication of his work after 1660. In 1819 J. Harding, a London publisher, claimed to be 'nearly ready' to publish the 1652 edition, considering it 'not inapplicable to the present day' (advertisement in Thomas Radcliff, 'A Report on Agriculture of Eastern and Western Flanders', 1819), but it did not appear. 


@@@@@


doc= 2656


Blitheman, John (c.1525-1591), composer, is of unknown origins and parentage; the principal manuscripts of his music suggest he was born about 1525. Until 1980 works of reference, following Hawkins, usually gave his forename as William. This is indeed the form of his name in the Fitzwilliam virginal book, but other musical sources give the surname only. There is no doubt, however, that the composer of organ and vocal sacred music is identical with the John Blytheman who appears as a gentleman of the Chapel Royal in documents dating from 13 December 1558 (the burial of Queen Mary) until 1590, and it seems certain that he is also to be identified with the John Blytheman (variously spelt) whose presence at Christ Church, Oxford, is recorded in 1555-6 and at various times from December 1560 until 1578 (from 1563 as head of the lay clerks). The arrangements made for his service in the choir of Christ Church from 1560 onwards allow for his possible absence for extended periods, as would be expected of a member of the Chapel Royal. One further documentary reference is more doubtful. A John Blitheman was paid for a single quarter of the year 1548-9 as a junior vicar-choral of the cathedral of Wells, in which city there occur several contemporary references to a Bartholomew Blitheman, perhaps a kinsman. 
Much of Blitheman's surviving music is for the Latin liturgy and would have been written during the reign of Queen Mary. His six organ compositions on the plainsong 'Gloria tibi trinitas', whether or not they were intended to serve a liturgical purpose, provide a demonstration of various techniques for setting a plainsong 'cantus firmus'. His keyboard music survives mainly in the Mulliner book, copied by Thomas Mulliner. There are also two vocal compositions in the Gyffard partbooks (BL, Add. MSS 17802-17805), of which the compline responsory 'In pace' is a particularly well-knit specimen of contrapuntal writing in the mid-Tudor style. 
Blitheman died on 23 May (Whitsunday) 1591 and was buried at the parish church of St Nicholas Olave, London. His epitaph, recorded by Stow, describes him as an organist and teacher of John Bull. His will, made on 25 December 1590 and proved on 25 May 1591, includes bequests to his pupil John Bull, to his sister Elizabeth Taylor, widow, in Newcastle upon Tyne, to his sister Robinson, and to Robert Blytheman, vicar of Walgrave, near Henley-on-Thames. Monetary bequests total $49. 


@@@@@


doc= 2657


Blizard, Thomas (1772-1838), surgeon, was a pupil of Sir William Blizard, who was both his brother-in-law and half-cousin through their grandfather John Blizard. Starting as a teacher of anatomy, he became surgeon to the London Hospital in 1795. He was a skilled lithotomist, and invented a special knife for the surgical removal of urinary calculus. He also had a large private practice in the city, earning a 'larger sum than is recorded of any medical practitioner' ('London Medical Gazette', 475), but he published only two case studies. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1803. 
In 1816 Blizard retired to the continent, where he cared for his unwell wife until she died in 1837. Blizard himself died at his home in Cumberland Terrace, Regent's Park, London, on 7 May 1838, leaving $100 to the Samaritan Society and $500 to the London Hospital. 


@@@@@


doc= 2658


Blizard, Sir William (bap. 1744, d. 1835), surgeon, the third of four sons and the fourth child of William Blizard and his wife, Elizabeth Robinson, was born in Barn Elms, Surrey, and baptized at St Mary's Church there on 26 February 1744. According to a biographical sketch in 'The Lancet' written shortly before his death, Blizard 'was born in a little one-story, and now antique tenement, next door to the 'Sun' public-house at Barnes, where his father carried on the business of a hair-dresser, bleeder, and tooth-drawer' ('The Lancet', 18). A memoir written just after Blizard's death claimed that his father was an auctioneer (Cooke). Blizard was articled to a Mr Besley, a surgeon-apothecary at Mortlake, Surrey, before studying under Henry Thompson, surgeon at the London Hospital. Blizard attended lectures given by Percivall Pott, John and William Hunter, and assisted a surgeon who practised in Crutched Friars. He may have also been the 'occupier of a little shop in the 'medical way' at Lambeth Butts' ('The Lancet', 18). 
As a young man Blizard involved himself in radical politics and became a supporter of John Wilkes. Writing under the name of Curtius he contributed to the Wilkesite 'Middlesex Journal, or, Chronicle of Liberty' and the 'Freeholders' Magazine, or, Monthly Chronicle of Liberty'. The latter published a piece by him 'On the intent and end of government' in October 1769 (pp. 73-4). However, Blizard's radicalism did not endure and he became conservative in outlook and a strong supporter of Pitt. Blizard married Jane Blizard, sister of Thomas Blizard. 
Blizard was elected surgeon to the Magdalene Hospital and by 1778 was lecturing on anatomy and surgery with Robert Maclaurin at Thames Street, and then at 12 Mark Lane, Fenchurch Street, London. He later lectured with Thomas Blizard. In 1780 Blizard was appointed surgeon to the London Hospital after defeating George Vaux and John Andree in the election. During the same year he joined the Honourable Artillery Company and took part in the suppression of the Gordon riots. In 1781 he became surgeon to the company with whom he served until 1790. He was also at one time a lieutenant-colonel with the 6th regiment of London Loyal volunteers. 
Blizard's most notable achievement was establishing the London Hospital medical school which, together with Robert Maclaurin, he founded in 1785. Blizard considered himself something of a poet, and to celebrate the opening of the operating theatre he composed an ode, which was set to music by Samuel Arnold, telling of 'how providence befriends this seat of commerce and benevolence' (Cooke, 7). As a lecturer Blizard digressed too much 'and allowed too much liberty to a discursive fancy and warm imagination' (Cooke, 8); as a surgeon he was discriminating, decisive, energetic, and skilful. He was also scrupulous about professional etiquette, particularly in regard to the use of language. On one occasion he asked a student what was happening in the operating theatre and was told, 'Mr Headington is operating in a case of strangulated hernia, but the gut is quite rotten'. Blizard replied, 'Pray sir, do not call it 'gut', or say that it is 'rotten', or you will be taken for a butcher; but call it 'intestine', and say that it is 'gangrenous'' (Cooke, 11). In 1787 he was appointed professor of anatomy to the Company of Surgeons and elected a member of its court of assistants in 1796. Later he was master of the Royal College of Surgeons (1814), president in 1822-3, and three times Hunterian orator. He was a member of the court of examiners from 1810 until 1835 and was 'dreaded by the students, from his austerity and testiness of manner' ('The Lancet', 18). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1787 and a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1799. He was knighted in 1802. 
Although his early radicalism dimmed, Blizard involved himself in philanthropic activities. He founded the Samaritan Society in 1791, he knew Jonas Hanway, having worked with him in the Marine Society, and had interests in prison reform, and in ensuring the respectful treatment of dead bodies. His interest in the latter, which may have stemmed from his religious beliefs and from the experience of assisting in grave robbing as an apprentice, caused him to appear in full court dress when, as president of the Royal College of Surgeons, he received the bodies of executed criminals from the hangman at the college's house in Cock Lane. Blizard's formality on these occasions was seen by some as a sign of his pomposity; it is more likely that it was adopted out of respect for the corpse. 
In 1827, at the age of eighty-three, Blizard carried out his final operation in public. In the same year he made a journey to Edinburgh, the longest he had ever taken. The only objects that interested him on the four-day journey were the local hospitals encountered on the way. In September 1834 he underwent a successful cataract operation but went into gradual decline not long after; he began to experience difficulty breathing and developed heart problems. Blizard died at his home at Brixton Hill, Surrey, on 27 August 1835 and was buried in a vault beneath Brixton church on 4 September. He was survived by his wife. 
Tall with strongly marked features, Blizard had been prone to joke about his prominent nose. In addition to the posts already mentioned he held appointments at the Deaf and Dumb Asylum, Marine Society, Clergy Orphan Asylum, and the London Orphan Asylum. He was an earnest Anglican and a keen supporter of Sunday schools. Among Blizard's writings were 'Suggestions for the Improvement of Hospitals and other Charitable Institutions' (1796) and papers in the 'London Medical Journal', between 1789 and 1790. 


@@@@@


doc= 2659


Blochmann, Henry Ferdinand (1838-1878), orientalist, was born in Dresden, Germany, on 7 or 8 January 1838, the son of Ernest Ehrenfried Blochmann, printer, and nephew of Karl Justus Blochmann, a distinguished pupil of Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi. He was educated at the Kreuzschule in Dresden and the University of Leipzig (1855), where he studied oriental languages under H. L. Fleischer, and afterwards (1857) under Haase at Paris. In the following year he came to England. Eager to visit India and to study eastern languages further, he enlisted in the British army in 1858, and went out to India as a private soldier. 
Blochmann's linguistic and other abilities became known on the voyage to India, however, and soon after his arrival in Calcutta he was set to do office work in Fort William College, and gave lessons in Persian. In the course of about a year he obtained his discharge, and for a time entered the service of the Peninsular and Oriental Company as an interpreter. He was befriended by the Arabic scholar William Nassau Lees of Calcutta, who had assisted in obtaining his discharge, and through whom he obtained, at the age of twenty-two, his first government appointment (1860), as assistant professor of Arabic and Persian in the Calcutta madrasa. In 1861 he graduated MA and LLD at the University of Calcutta, choosing Hebrew for the subject of his examination. In the following year he was appointed pro-rector and professor of mathematics at Doveton College. In 1865 he returned to the madrasa; he remained there for the rest of his life and was principal at his death. 
Though Blochmann made some archaeological tours in India and British Burma, he generally lived quietly in Calcutta, worked hard at Persian and Arabic, and in 1868 became philological secretary to the Asiatic Society of Bengal. He contributed extensively to the society's 'Journal' and 'Proceedings'. He wrote competently on anything connected with the history of Islamic India, but the most elaborate and valuable of his papers were his 'Contributions to the history and geography of Bengal' ('Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal', vols. 42, 43, 44, 1873-5). The work, however, on which his fame mainly rests is his translation of the 'A'in-i-Akbari' of Abu'l-Fazl, the first attempt at a thorough translation of the original. Blochmann did not live to translate more than the first volume (Calcutta, 1873), and the work was completed by H. S. Jarrett. Blochmann's notes are full and accurate, and throw a flood of light on the emperor Akbar and his court, and on the administration of the Mughal empire. Prefixed to the translation is a life of Abu'l-Fazl. Another important work was 'The Prosody of the Persians' (Calcutta, 1872). With all his learning, Blochmann was the most modest of men, and welcomed criticism and correction. 
Overwork and the exhausting climate caused Blochmann's early death on 13 July 1878 in Calcutta. He was buried in the Circular Road cemetery, Calcutta. He married an Irishwoman, who survived him, and left three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 2660


Bloet, Robert (d. 1123), administrator and bishop of Lincoln, was Norman by birth, a member of the baronial family of Ivry. Hugues, bishop of Bayeux, and Jean, archbishop of Rouen, were his kinsmen. A chaplain of William I, in September 1087 Bloet was dispatched to England with William Rufus, carrying a letter to Archbishop Lanfranc, instructing the latter to crown Rufus as king. He flourished in the new reign: he was appointed chancellor by 27 January 1091, and held that office until about February 1094, when he became bishop of Lincoln. He had been nominated as bishop in the previous year, but his consecration was delayed when Archbishop Thomas of York (died 1100) claimed that Lindsey, the northern half of Lincoln diocese, belonged to his own province and diocese. The difficulty was resolved by Rufus, who granted to Thomas the abbeys of Selby and St Oswald, Gloucester, and persuaded Robert to pay a sum variously reported as $3000 and $5000 to the king himself, so as to secure Lincoln's liberties. Bloet remained close to the king for the rest of Rufus's reign; one of the 'justiciars of England' recorded in 1096, he was probably a member of the council of regency left to govern England when the king went overseas in that year, and was present at the Whitsun court of 1099 when the new Westminster Hall housed its first royal feast. 
Bloet remained at the centre of government for almost the whole of the rest of his life, serving Henry I as he had done William Rufus. In March 1101 he was one of the witnesses for the king in his treaty with Count Robert of Flanders, and in 1102 led the troops that besieged Tickhill, Yorkshire, held by the men of Henry's enemy, Robert de Belleme. In 1110 he was the first witness on the king's behalf to another treaty with Robert of Flanders, and in all witnessed 155 royal 'acta' between 1100 and his death. In 1111 he was a member of the court sitting in the exchequer, and in 1119 was a justice in the 'curia regis'. When the king went abroad, Bloet (who is only once, in 1114, reliably recorded as accompanying Henry I to Normandy) was one of the small group of administrators who stayed in England, wielding viceregal powers under the nominal direction of Queen Matilda or Prince William. He was probably also a shire justiciar in Lincolnshire, as well as exercising nationwide judicial authority as he had done in the previous reign; no doubt it was in the latter capacity that he acted as a judge at Brampton in 1116. William of Malmesbury understandably regarded him as second to none in his knowledge of secular business, though the chronicler was less impressed by Bloet's attention to ecclesiastical affairs. 
In this William may have been somewhat unfair. Bloet found a new cathedral church which needed to be completed, furnished, and to some extent endowed, and he so far busied himself with this work as to double the number of prebends, from twenty-one to forty-two. His predecessor, Bishop Remigius, had refounded a pre-conquest house at Stow, north-west of Lincoln, probably intending that its monks should replace the cathedral canons; but Bloet transferred the monks to Eynsham, Oxfordshire, and took over their estates for the cathedral. He also retained the patronage of Eynsham for the bishopric, and it is noteworthy that after his death his viscera were buried there. He used his credit with the king to obtain numerous grants and confirmations of lands, churches, and privileges for himself and his see. The manors of Nettleham, Lincolnshire, and Tixover, Rutland, the king's vineyard at Lincoln, the right to take tolls at the fairs of Stow, leave to make a way through the city walls of Lincoln to reach his own house -- these were just a few of the benefits of royal favour. 
Bloet added the considerable Huntingdonshire manor of Spaldwick to the endowments of his see, though only at the cost of agreeing to the creation in 1109 of the see of Ely from the larger part of the Isle of Ely and county of Cambridgeshire, formerly belonging to the archdeaconry of Huntingdonshire. He was, indeed, thought by some to be a rather indecisive bishop, and his failure to persuade the abbot of St Albans to allow him to ordain clerks from the archdeaconries of Hertfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and Bedfordshire in the abbey church attracted much unfavourable comment, although the episode does also show him attempting to perform an important diocesan function. His few surviving episcopal 'acta' show him to have been active in consecrating churches and in confirming gifts to religious houses. His problems with ordinations notwithstanding, he dedicated the abbey church at St Albans in 1115, and granted an indulgence of one day's remission of penance in every week for a year to penitents visiting St Albans. He himself founded the hospital of the Holy Sepulchre at Lincoln, and reportedly sent young clerks from his household to study under Bishop Ivo of Chartres, the most distinguished canonist of his time. At a national level Bloet attended Anselm's reforming council at Westminster in 1102, was present when the archbishop consecrated five bishops at Canterbury in 1107, and was among the bishops who came to the council at Westminster in 1115, which, though summoned by the king, was primarily devoted to ecclesiastical business. 
The low regard in which Bloet was held by William of Malmesbury must have been largely due to the bishop's perceived coolness towards monks. Not only did he remove the monks from Stow to Eynsham, but he was twice, in 1114 and 1123, reported as opposing the choice of a monk to succeed to the archbishopric of Canterbury. In other respects, too, Bloet would have appeared an unduly worldly figure, and not only in monastic eyes. He had a son, Simon, conceived while he was still chancellor, who later became dean of Lincoln. His household, as remembered by the chronicler Henry 'of Huntingdon' (died 'c'.1157), who was brought up in it, was large and splendid -- there was a train of noble youths, who included the king's illegitimate son Richard, as well as Gilbert of Sempringham, a future saint, whom Robert ordained to the priesthood. Bloet's appearance in the story of Christina of Markyate is less than creditable -- he is alleged to have been bribed to give judgment against Christina's efforts to enter religion. 
The end of Bloet's life was such as to give moralists much to savour. Although he continued to attend the court, he fell into Henry I's disfavour. Henry of Huntingdon tells of the bishop's dissolving in tears as he contemplated the lawsuits in which he became embroiled, the heavy fines that resulted, and his household now clad in woollens because he could no longer afford for them the splendid apparel of his great days. On 10 January 1123 Bloet went out hunting at Woodstock, in the company of Roger of Salisbury and Henry I himself, and as they were talking suddenly exclaimed 'Lord king, I am dying', and fell speechless to the ground. He died shortly afterwards, silent and unshriven. He was buried in Lincoln Cathedral, in front of St Mary's altar, at the southern entrance of the lesser cross aisle. 


@@@@@


doc= 2661


Blomberg, William Nicolas (1702/3-1750), biographer and Church of England clergyman, was the son of Charles John, Baron Blomberg, a nobleman of the duchy of Courland resident in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of the physician Edmund Dickinson. He was educated at Merton College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 16 May 1720, aged seventeen. Elected fellow of his college, he proceeded BA (1723) and MA (1726). He became vicar of Fulham in 1733, rector of that parish in 1734, and rector of Cliffe, Kent, in 1739. In the same year he published 'An Account of the Life and Writings of Edmund Dickinson', to which, in its second edition, he appended Dickinson's manuscript on the Grecian games. He died on 5 October 1750. 


@@@@@


doc= 2662


Blome, Richard (bap. 1635?, d. 1705), cartographer and bookseller, may have been the son of Jacob Blome and his wife, Mary, baptized at St Ann Blackfriars, London, on 10 July 1635, especially if this Jacob was the bookseller of Knightrider Street of that name. Beginning his career as a heraldic painter, developing an expertise in arms-painting for funerals and other solemn occasions, Blome became a publisher and was among the first to use the advance subscription method to finance many projects. He had a shop in London between 1668 and 1679 and sold his own books at Mr Kid's at the corner of Lincoln's Inn Fields, where he lodged. In 1694 his address is given as New Weld Street near Clare-Market, according to Thomas Chubb. Much of Blome's work was heraldic and geographical, specializing in topographical works. 
With his more famous rival, the cartographer and mapseller John Ogilby, Blome has been given credit for inaugurating a new period of activity in English cartography, if not geography. Both men conceived of producing an English atlas containing county maps; Blome may even have preceded his rival in the idea, having entered his proposed work by title at Stationers' Hall on 28 July 1668, whereas Ogilby's proposal for a world atlas was issued in May 1669. In any case, Ogilby probably perceived Blome's less ambitious project as a threat to his own. After a series of delays the main fruit of the project, 'Britannia' (arguably the most famous of Blome's publications), was not published until 1673. Although Blome listed about 800 subscriptions for this work it was not considered a success by the Royal Society and other contemporaries, who awaited Ogilby. A decade later Blome's 'Cosmography and Geography' (1682), which included a translation of Varenius's 'Geographia generalis' and 'A geographical description of the four parts of the world' taken from Nicholas Sanson (late geographer to the French king), marked an attempt to fill a gap in geographical theory for English readers; it also revealed Blome's environmental determinism. 
Blome has been accused of lack of originality and of employing hack writers for a pittance. In 1696 the antiquary Bishop William Nicolson accused Blome of plagiarizing William Camden and John Speed for text and maps respectively in the compilation of 'Britannia', calling him the 'boldest Plagiary in the whole pack' (Nicolson, 15). He acted more as compiler or editor than as author of his best-known work outside of the cartographic field, 'The Gentleman's Recreation' (1686), which treats the utility of the liberal arts and sciences, and includes some of the earliest illustrations published of British field sports. More credit for this work has been given to Nicholas Coxe and to prominent engravers employed in its production. Among Blome's other publications is 'A Description of the Island of Jamaica' (1672), while his most intriguing secular study is a translation of Anthony le Grand's 'Institutio philosophiae' entitled 'An Entire Body of Philosophy' (1694), containing half-baked dissertations on demonology and other curious pieces. Blome also wrote on biblical themes. 
By 1700 it appears that Blome's affairs generally and presumably his finances more particularly were in some disarray, although he continued to publish until near the time of his death. Already ill, he made his will on 7 May 1705, desiring to be buried in the church of Harlington, near Uxbridge. He left a total of 40 shillings to the poor of St Martin-in-the-Fields and Harlington, while the residue of his estate passed to Jane Hilton, with whom he lived for many years. His exact date of death is unknown, but as sole executor she proved the will on 22 October 1705. Recent reassessment of his work gives Blome an enigmatic reputation ranging from that of a farcical, petulant sycophant, to that of an opportunistic, business-like cultivator of both patronage and the mapmaker's art. 


@@@@@


doc= 2663


Blomefield, Francis (1705-1752), topographical historian and Church of England clergyman, was born on 23 July 1705 at Fersfield, Norfolk, the eldest son of Henry Blomefield (1680-1732) and his wife, Alice Batch (died 1730), daughter of Henry Batch of Lynn. He came from a family of yeomen farmers and was the first member to receive a university education. He began attending classes run by the rector of Diss, but about 1714 was sent to Thetford grammar school. In April 1724 he was admitted sizar to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, under the tuition of Sir James Burrough, the future master of the college; he graduated BA in 1727 and proceeded MA in 1728. In March 1728 he was ordained and became curate of Quidenham, and in July 1729 he was instituted into the rectory of Hargham, which he held only for six months on behalf of John Hare. In September 1729 he was instituted into the rectory of Fersfield, the next presentation of which had been purchased by his father in 1708. He also held the rectory of Brockdish (1739-52), the curacy of Poringland Magna (1736-50), and ministries in the Norwich parishes of St James and St Mary Coslany for periods during the 1740s. He married on 1 September 1732 Mary ('c'.1707-1796), the daughter of Lawrence Womack, rector of Buxton, Oxnead, and Caistor. They had three daughters, two of whom survived him. 
From about 1719 the young Blomefield began recording monumental inscriptions from churches he visited in Norfolk, Suffolk, and later Cambridgeshire. While at Caius he started to keep genealogical and heraldic notes relating to local families, transcribed historical manuscripts in the library, and undertook some critical historical writing. Soon after leaving university he was actively collecting materials for a published account of the antiquities of Cambridgeshire, but in 1732 this project was deferred when another more promising opportunity presented itself. 
In the spring of 1732 the course of Blomefield's career was determined when his friend Thomas Martin gave him virtually unrestricted access to an enormous collection of materials relating to the history of Norfolk. These had been amassed before his death in 1729 by Peter Le Neve, who had intended to publish a county history. Le Neve's collection included many original historical records, the notes and manuscripts of several previous Norfolk antiquaries and collectors, and transcripts, calendars, and indexes to local references in the public records. Le Neve had intended to leave them to a public repository, and appointed Thomas Martin and Thomas Tanner as his executors. However, the terms of his will were never carried out. Tanner was appointed to the see of St Asaph, and Martin married Le Neve's widow, Frances, in January 1732. The couple removed the collection to Martin's home at Palgrave, where they remained thereafter. 
With Martin's encouragement and assistance Blomefield planned to use these materials as the basis of a county history, and issued proposals in June 1733 for 'An Essay towards a Topographical History of Norfolk'. This was intended to comprise two quarto volumes, published in monthly parts over a two-year period beginning in March 1734. It was to be distributed to subscribers through local booksellers, or else by the author, his friends, or colleagues. The project excited sufficient interest to proceed, but Blomefield had no conception of the scale of task he was embarking upon, nor of the labour involved in collecting the additional materials required. His schedule was unrealistic, and publication did not commence until March 1736. By the time of his death sixteen years later Blomefield had almost completed three large folio volumes, but had only covered 40 per cent of the county. The years 1733 to 1735 were spent collecting additional materials, by means of tours through the county on horseback during the summer months, visits to libraries, record repositories, and country houses. However, the strain of travelling brought on a prolonged period of illness during the autumn of 1734. Blomefield was therefore compelled to collect materials through a detailed printed questionnaire -- an idea he may have copied from his friend Francis Peck. This was sent to several hundred Norfolk incumbents during the early months of 1735, and much useful additional information was gained in this way. While convalescing in April 1735 Blomefield was granted access to the muniment room of William Paston, the second earl of Yarmouth, at Oxnead Hall. Here he discovered 'innumerable letters, of good consequence in history' ('Correspondence', 85), which are now known as the 'Paston letters'. The means by which these and many associated manuscripts eventually found their way into his own and Thomas Martin's collections is obscure. 
Blomefield recruited Charles Parkin, rector of Oxburgh, as a collaborator in July 1733, and Parkin took responsibility for the west of the county that was most remote from Blomefield's Fersfield rectory. Parkin therefore contributed the accounts of the hundreds of Grimeshoe and South Greenhoe published in Blomefield's lifetime. Other significant helpers in areas remote from Blomefield were Dr Henry Briggs, rector of Holt, John Holmes, master of the grammar school there, and Dr Edmund Newdigate, a physician from Walsingham. The antiquaries Sir Andrew Fountaine, Beaupre Bell, and James Baldwin also helped, as did Antony Norris of the Middle Temple, who had substantial collections for east Norfolk. Bishop Thomas Tanner also greatly encouraged the project, both by commenting upon Blomefield's manuscript for the first two hundreds, and subsequently by granting him permission in his will to use the detailed registers of Norfolk institutions, compiled while he was chancellor of the diocese. Thus while the Norfolk history is indeed a co-operative work incorporating the work of many earlier and contemporary antiquaries, there is no question that Blomefield was the prime mover in its publication and the work is deservedly associated with his name. 
By the summer of 1735 Blomefield considered himself ready to embark upon publication of his work, although only about 10 per cent was ready for the press. He therefore looked for a suitable printer. Enquiries in Norwich persuaded him that no printer there would have the necessary materials, and he was deeply suspicious of London tradesmen, whom he felt would be likely to swindle him. As a result he set up his own press at Fersfield and employed a journeyman printer, named Nicholas Hussey, from Bury St Edmund's. The autumn and winter of 1735 were spent converting a barn and negotiating with tradesmen for the supply of the necessary equipment and materials, and also for the provision of engravings and woodcuts. His press was ready to begin operation by February 1736 and the first part was issued to subscribers the following month. 
Within a fortnight of publication the original figure of 320 subscribers had doubled, and as news of the work spread, new subscribers continued to come forward. As a result Blomefield was forced to reprint his first number on two occasions, and also to appoint a London agent, thereby delaying progress with the second and subsequent parts. Thereafter the size of the edition remained at about 800 copies. The project was further delayed for two months the following November, when Blomefield was again taken seriously ill. However, progress continued through the southernmost hundreds during 1736 and 1737 at the rate of one part every seven weeks. The twenty-eight numbers of the first volume were eventually completed by March 1740. 
During 1737 the author began to receive complaints from subscribers about the practices of many of his bookseller agents, who were seeking to enhance the meagre commission he paid by imposing delivery charges, or else lending out the work to others before delivery. As a result, after Michaelmas Blomefield dealt only with a limited number of booksellers in the large towns, and made use of a rider employed by him for the purpose of delivering them in the country. These employees are reputed to have created just as many distribution problems, and created as many opportunities for creaming off his profits, as the provincial booksellers. Indeed Blomefield appears to have been in dispute with, or cheated by, virtually every workman he ever employed. 
The success of the publication also gave rise to jealousies among the antiquarian community in Norfolk, notably with Benjamin Mackerell, who had helped Peter Le Neve collect materials and resented the unavailability of this collection to the public. Mackerell suggested to Blomefield that he should cover the urban areas of the county, leaving Blomefield to cover the rural. When the latter refused, Mackerell went ahead and published his 'History and Antiquities of King's Lynn' (itself a plagiarism) late in 1737. Blomefield then published his account of Thetford both as part of the history of Norfolk, and also simultaneously in quarto as a discrete history of the town. More significantly, Mackerell was known to be working on a detailed history of Norwich, which was complete and ready for the press at the time of his death in March 1738. Mackerell's work was never published, but the existence of the manuscript caused Blomefield to alter his plans in 1739 and publish proposals for the second volume of the history of Norfolk, devoted to the city of Norwich. Blomefield's 900 folio page history of Norwich, published between April 1741 and May 1745, represents his crowning achievement, and was the part with which he had least assistance. His public claim to have access to the papers of the late Norwich historian John Kirkpatrick was denied in the press by the latter's brother Thomas, who threatened to publish his brother's work. However, there was an element of truth in Blomefield's claim in so far as John Kirkpatrick had supplied Le Neve with his rough notes once they had been transcribed. The account of Norwich was simultaneously published to subscribers as volume 2 of the history of Norfolk, and also as a separate publication. Production appears to have run smoothly, although after March 1743 there was disruption when the press was transferred from Fersfield to a house in Willow Lane, Norwich. The suggestion by Chambers that this was after a fire at his press has not been substantiated; it was more likely due to difficulties recruiting skilled workmen in the country, or the need to reside in the city to collect materials. 
Volume 3 was also delayed owing to ill health and the lack of a workman, but the first part was eventually published by January 1747. Throughout the 1740s Blomefield had used any free capacity of the press to print his materials relating to Cambridgeshire, which were eventually published as a small quarto volume, entitled 'Collectanea Cantabrigiensia', in 1750. The volume had reached the twenty-third part by December 1751, when Blomefield went to London to visit the Rolls Chapel and present a paper to the Society of Antiquaries. He contracted smallpox, and died at his Fersfield rectory on 16 January 1752, having exhausted his health and bankrupted his family. He was buried on 18 January 1752 in his parish church, St Andrew's, where there is a memorial. At the instigation of Thomas Martin, Charles Parkin completed the history of Norfolk between 1755 and 1764, although not with anything like as much care or detail as Blomefield had expended. Parkin's completion was published posthumously between 1767 and 1775 by Whittingham of Lynn. The work was largely pirated in a history of the county published by Crouse and Booth of Norwich between 1778 and 1781, and then reprinted in its original form between 1805 and 1810. 
Blomefield's reputation was shabbily treated in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' by Walter Rye, who made scathing remarks concerning his work as a historian which do not stand up to detailed scrutiny, and spread unsubstantiated rumours about drinking and foxhunting. It is not difficult to find errors and misinterpretations in Blomefield's work, including his own genealogy, and the quality of the printing is poor. Yet given the period and circumstances in which he was at work, and the immensity of his task, his was a great achievement. His weakness was in underestimating what he had taken on. There has as yet been no other history of Norfolk on a comparable scale, and it remains the standard work. 


@@@@@


doc= 2664


Blomefield, Leonard (1800-1893), naturalist, was born on 25 May 1800 at 85 Pall Mall, London (his maternal grandfather's home). He was the youngest son of George Leonard Jenyns (1763-1848), canon of Ely and chairman of the board of agriculture, and his wife, Mary (1763-1832), a daughter of Dr William Heberden (1710-1801) and a first cousin of Dr William Wollaston (1766-1828). On the death of his cousin Soame Jenyns in 1787, George Leonard Jenyns had inherited the Bottisham Hall property in Cambridgeshire. Jenyns's mother, as Mary Heberden, had had her portrait painted by Gainsborough. 
In 1813 Jenyns was moved from a school at Putney to Eton College, where he remembered Edward and Philip Pusey as dull schoolfellows. He took no part in the school games, but was devoted to chemistry, and was introduced to Sir Joseph Banks in 1817 as 'the Eton boy who lit his rooms with gas' (Blomefield, 'Chapters in my Life', 40). In 1818 he went to St John's College, Cambridge, and took a pass degree four years later. At Cambridge he came to the attention of J. S. Henslow (1796-1861). They worked together on natural history projects until Henslow's death, and in 1823 Henslow married Jenyns's sister, Harriet. 
In 1823 Jenyns was ordained deacon by Bishop George Pelham of Lincoln in Old Marylebone Church, and next year was ordained priest in Christ's College by the master John Kaye (1783-1853), who was then also bishop of Bristol. After ordination he entered parish work immediately as curate of Swaffham Bulbeck, a parish of seven hundred souls adjoining the Bottisham estate in Cambridgeshire. During the years of his curacy he never saw his vicar. The latter resigned in 1827, and Jenyns was given the benefice by Bishop Sparke of Ely. He was the first resident vicar at Swaffham Bulbeck, but in the execution of the reforms that were necessary he observed the strictest moderation, and so gained the permanent goodwill of his parishioners. He reorganized a local charity school which had got into evil hands, enlarged the vicarage house, and planted a garden. 
Cambridge was within an easy ride, and Jenyns was thus able to maintain regular communications with his fellow natural historians. He proceeded MA in 1825, the year in which he read his first paper, on the 'Ornithology of Cambridgeshire', to the Cambridge Philosophical Society. From about 1828 he began regularly to contribute pieces to both learned and popular publications, including 'Loudon's Magazine of Natural History' and the 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History'. His diary for 1831 records that he received an 'offer of accompanying Capt. Fitzroy, as Naturalist, in the Beagle, on his voyage to survey the coasts of S. America, afterwards going round the globe'. He 'declined the appointment wh was afterwards given to Charles-Darwin Esq. of Xts' College Cambridge' -- he felt duty-bound to his parish and his health was not perfect. 
In 1832 Jenyns joined the British Association for the Advancement of Science, which met that year in Oxford. He also attended (and read a paper at) the 1834 meeting at Edinburgh. In the following year, he published two works, 'A Systematic Catalogue of British Vertebrate Animals' and 'A Manual of British Vertebrate Animals'; the latter work was held in high estimation as a work of reference. Before he had completed it, at the request of Charles Darwin, he undertook to edit the monograph 'Fishes' for 'The Zoology of the Voyage of HMS Beagle', published in 1840. 
On 23 April 1844 Jenyns married Jane (1817-1860), eldest daughter of the Revd Andrew Edward Daubeny (1784-1877) and niece of Professor Charles Daubeny of Oxford (whom Jenyns subsequently visited often). In October 1849 the state of his wife's health compelled Jenyns's removal to Ventnor, and eventually his resignation of the vicarage at Swaffham Bulbeck in 1853, when his parishioners subscribed to a handsome testimonial for him. In the autumn of 1850 he settled at South Stoke, near Combe Down, Bath, but two years later moved to Swainswick, where for eight years he served the curacy of Woolley, and for a year or two of Langridge as well. On his wife's death in 1860 he settled finally in Bath. He was the founder (18 February 1855) and first president of the Bath Natural History and Antiquarian Field Club. In 1856 at the meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science at Cheltenham, he read a paper entitled 'The variation of species', a paper of which Darwin asked to be sent a copy. (Jenyns broadly supported the latter's ideas, subsequently published in 'Origin of Species'.) In 1869 Jenyns was the donor of the Jenyns Library, a munificent gift of some 1200 volumes, which went to Bath's Royal Literary and Scientific Institution. He also donated to this institution his choice herbarium of British plants, consisting of more than forty folio and an equal number of quarto volumes, the result of his life work in this branch of science. He had originally extended his studies from zoology to botany under the influence of Henslow, and on his friend's death he wrote a masterly memoir of him, published in 1862 (the year in which, on 24 June, he married his second wife, Sarah (1819-1907/8), daughter of the Revd Robert Hawthorn of Stapleford). The 'Proceedings' of the Bath Field Club abound with papers and addresses from his pen. Not the least valuable are those on the climate and meteorology of Bath. It was entirely at his instance that the small observatory was erected in the Institution gardens in 1865. 
Towards the close of his career Jenyns was held in honour as the patriarch of natural history studies in Great Britain. He was elected a member of the Linnean Society in November 1822, and in the same year was elected into the Cambridge Philosophical Society. He was an original member of the Zoological (1826), Entomological (1834), and Ray (1844) societies. He had the greatest veneration for Gilbert White, whose 'Selborne' he copied out while a boy at Eton, and knew almost by heart. He edited the 'Natural History of Selborne' in 1843, and one of his latest interests was the welfare of the Selborne Society, before which on 14 May 1891 he read a delightful paper entitled 'The records of a rookery'. 
In 1871, through Jenyns's connection with the Chappelow family (he was the great-grandson of Edward Chappelow of Diss and his wife, Elizabeth, the sister of Francis Blomefield, the historian of Norfolk) a considerable property worth some $7000 devolved on him, on the condition he adopted the name of Blomefield. In that same year, aged seventy-one, he ascended Snowdon, in a round trip of 12 miles from his lodgings at Llanberis. In 1888 the British Association for the Advancement of Science met in Bath; Blomefield was vice-president. Extremely methodical and regular in all his habits, he retained his mental vigour almost to the last. By 1891 he was suffering bronchial attacks and gout, but rallied sufficiently to give two lectures in that year. He died at his home, 19 Belmont, Bath, on 1 September 1893, aged ninety-three. He was buried in Lansdown cemetery, Bath, on 5 September. 
Blomefield's attractive personality is revealed in his 'Chapters in my Life' (privately printed at Bath in 1889), a short autobiography written with the greatest simplicity and directness. It contains interesting vignettes of Charles Darwin, Buckland, Heberden, Wollaston, Whewell, Daniel Clarke, and Leonard Chappelow, and nothing that he relates is second-hand. 
In addition to the works mentioned above, Jenyns published, in 1846, a kind of supplement to White's 'Natural History', under the title 'Observations in natural history: with an introduction on habits of observing, as connected with the study of that science. Also a calendar of periodic phenomena in natural history'. Almost all the material for this was collected by Jenyns over a period of twenty years and assembled while he was editing White's book, which he was scrupulously careful not to overload with notes. In 1858 appeared his 'Observations on Meteorology'. At Bath, in 1885, he printed for private circulation some highly interesting 'Reminiscences' of William Yarrell and of Prideaux John Selby. A large number (fifty-five) of scientific memoirs, contributed to the transactions of learned bodies, are enumerated at the end of his 'Chapters in my Life'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2665


Blomefylde, Myles (1525-1603), medical practitioner and alchemist, was born on 5 April 1525 in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, the son of John Blomefilde and his wife, Anne. He is said to have been a scholar at St John's College, Cambridge, but records show only that in 1552 the university awarded him a licence to practise medicine. His father died in 1549, leaving him and his mother as executors of a small estate. By 1559 he must have married and been resident in Bury, since his daughter Elizabeth was baptized in St Mary's Church on 16 September that year. Sometime in the 1560s he probably moved his medical practice to Chelmsford, Essex, though 1568 saw him in Venice. Certainly by 1572 he was securely established in Chelmsford; in the 1570s he often served as juror in manorial courts, and between 1582 and 1590 was a prominent churchwarden. In the 1591 survey of the manor of Chelmsford he is 'Myles Blomefielde, gent' (Essex RO, D/bnp1), holding a substantial house and 10 acres of land adjoining the churchyard, as a freehold of the manor. 
For centuries after his death, Blomefylde's annotated collection of alchemical manuscripts led him to be mistakenly identified with an admired alchemist and probable kinsman, William Blomfild. Myles himself was a 'cunning man' whose felonious activities -- prophesying the recovery of a certain George Freeman's mare and showing in a looking-glass the stealer of one Sybil Brown's laundry -- brought him before the Essex court of quarter sessions in 1578. The legal repercussions of his soothsaying are unknown, but the future churchwarden and 'gentleman' apparently incurred no enduring ill repute. 
Blomefylde's importance lies mainly in his small but significant book collection. Beyond the alchemical manuscripts that he copied, illustrated, and annotated, he owned some unique late medieval dramatic manuscripts, the only complete copy of Medwall's 'Fulgens and Lucres' (printed by J. Rastell, 'c'.1513-19), and some twenty other volumes (devotional and polemical works, prose narratives, books on language, travel, history, mathematics, medicine, and surgery). Notes in his Sarum 'horae' imply that he was once a devout Roman Catholic, and his possession of manuscript plays such as 'Mary Magdalen' may suggest, even during his years as an Anglican churchwarden, a continuing affection for the old faith. From his varied library and its characteristically flamboyant and self-referential marginalia, and from his circumstantial and sometimes pompous churchwarden's accounts, Blomefylde emerges as a person intellectually curious and self-concerned, rather smugly proud of his community, and quite pleased with his substantial place in it. He died at his home in Chelmsford in 1603 and was buried at the parish church there on 29 November 1603. 


@@@@@


doc= 2666


Blomefield, Sir Thomas, first baronet (1744-1822), army officer, was born at Milton, Kent, on 16 June 1744, the only son of the Revd Thomas Blomefield ('c'.1691-1771), rector of Hartley and Chalk, Kent, and chaplain to the duke of Dorset, and his second wife, Mary, widow of William Branch and daughter of John Matthews. In September 1755 Blomefield was placed by his father as a midshipman in the 'Cambridge' (eighty guns) but after expressing his preference for the army he was procured a cadetship at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, which he entered on 9 February 1758. His abilities in mathematics and chemistry drew the attention of John Muller (1699-1784), then professor of fortifications and artillery, and he passed out as a lieutenant-fireworker in the Royal Artillery on 1 January 1759. Blomefield's previous naval experience secured the command of a bomb (that is, mortar) ketch that year, when aged only fifteen, at the bombardment of Le Havre, and afterwards he joined the fleet blockading Quiberon, under Admiral Hawke. Henceforth he was to become a specialist in water-borne artillery. On 5 March 1762 he sailed from Portsmouth on a bomb vessel with Lord Albemarle's expedition against Havana. He took an active part in the siege, which lasted from early July until the capitulation on 10 August. Shortly before, on 1 August, Albemarle promoted him second lieutenant, to replace losses in the field, a promotion confirmed by the Board of Ordnance the following year. 
Following the end of the Seven Years' War Blomefield served with the garrison artillery at Pensacola and Mobile. Despite widespread sickness among the troops he survived with his health intact and was promoted first lieutenant on 28 May 1766. Following his return to England he became aide-de-camp to General Conway, master-general of the ordnance, in 1771. As a staff officer he was closely involved in developments in the peacetime ordnance establishment at Woolwich -- later to become the Royal Arsenal. He was promoted captain-lieutenant on 29 January 1773 and served as aide-de-camp to Lord Townshend on his succession as master-general. Much of his time was taken up with experiments in gunnery. 
In the spring of 1776 Blomefield, at his own request, returned to active service, sailing with his company of the Royal Artillery to join General Burgoyne's army in Canada. On his arrival on 3 June he was given a staff appointment as major of brigade to Major-General Phillips, commander of the artillery. His principal task was to construct floating batteries on the Canadian lakes, which he had planned before he left England. With the army encamped for winter he returned to England in November with letters from Burgoyne and Phillips requesting further artillery and stores and his own return in the spring to assist Burgoyne's ill-fated expedition down the Hudson River. Back at Woolwich, at Burgoyne's request, he worked on a new gun and carriage designed for use on land and water. This he brought with him on his return to Canada the following year; eventually he rejoined the army at Ticonderoga on 23 July 1777. 
Blomefield was reappointed major of brigade to Phillips until the latter's order of 14 September, returning Blomefield, again at his request, to regimental duties with the field artillery. He took an active part in the battle of Freeman's Farm (or Stillwater) on 19 September and served with Major William's battery at the battle of Bemis Heights on 7 October. Some twenty minutes after the attack began he was wounded in the face and took no further part. Baroness von Riedesel, who nursed him after the battle and upon the retreat to Saratoga, described how a bullet had passed through both cheeks, smashing his teeth and grazing his tongue: 'He could not keep anything in his mouth... We had some Rhine wine. I gave him a bottle, hoping that the acid would cleanse his wounds. He took a little in his mouth, and this alone had such a fortunate effect that his wounds healed entirely, and I gained another friend. ('Baroness von Riedesel', 61)' Blomefield was included in the Saratoga convention and signed the Cambridge parole. Despite the failure of congress to abide by the terms of the convention and return Burgoyne's army 'en masse' to England, during the course of 1778 a growing number of officers were exchanged privately under parole, apparently including Blomefield, who had returned to England by the spring of 1779. In June he was called by his former commanding officer, Burgoyne, to give supporting evidence before a parliamentary committee of inquiry into the strength and disposition of the artillery. 
In 1779 Blomefield returned to his former post as aide-de-camp to Lord Townshend and on 19 January 1780 he was promoted to the rank of full captain of no. 8 company, 1st battalion of the Royal Artillery. However it was not on the field of battle but at the ordnance establishment at Woolwich that he now made a major contribution. There was then great need for stricter military supervision of armaments manufacture, and in particular the proofing of guns at Woolwich before their use in the field. In 1780 Blomefield was appointed to the new post of inspector of artillery and in his first year he condemned as many as 496 pieces of ordnance in proof. The widespread problem of 'bursting' led him to visit various foundries to examine the metals used, and to the consideration of instruments for better measuring the strength and accuracy of guns. The value of his efforts was quickly apparent and under a royal warrant of 24 January 1783 the whole department was reorganized; the artillery workshops, gun butts, and proof office were placed under Blomefield's entire control. His salary as inspector of artillery was raised to $350. His responsibilities included periodic surveys of the strength and condition of coastal artillery. Between 1779 and 1793 he produced a series of systematic and detailed reports on the military ordnance along the coasts of eastern and southern England. 
On 27 July 1788 Blomefield married Elizabeth, second daughter of John Eardley Wilmot (1709-1792), chief justice of the court of common pleas; they had one son, Thomas William, born on 23 March 1791. Blomefield was promoted major on 25 September 1793 and lieutenant-colonel on 5 December of the same year. From 20 April 1797 he took on the additional post of inspector of the royal brass foundry (in 1801 his combined salary was $441 5's'.) and continued to hold both offices until his death. The administrative and technical changes that he introduced contributed greatly to the high quality of British cast iron and brass gun manufacture, which date from this period. Having been promoted full colonel on 12 November 1800 and major-general on 25 September 1803, on the creation of the 9th battalion of the Royal Artillery he was appointed its colonel-commandant on 1 June 1806. 
In 1807 Blomefield was chosen to command the artillery in the expedition against Copenhagen, to enforce the surrender of the Danish fleet. The city was completely invested by 17 August and the bombardment began on 2 September. After 6000 shells had been fired into the city, setting it ablaze, on 5 September a flag of truce was flown, the bombardment was suspended, and the naval ships and stores were handed over. On 19 September Lord Chatham reported to Blomefield the king's intention to reward him 'as testimony of the sense entertained of your eminent services upon this occasion' (Duncan, 2.166). He also received the thanks of parliament and on 14 November 1807 was created a baronet. On 25 July 1810 he was promoted lieutenant-general, and on 19 July 1821 full general. 
After an illness of three days Blomefield died at his home at Shooter's Hill in Kent on 24 August 1822, aged seventy-eight. He was survived by his only son, Sir Thomas William Blomefield, second baronet (1791-1858). His long association with the Royal Arsenal, from the early 1770s until his death, covered a period of profound change there. What had been a miscellaneous collection of small craft-based workshops had become by the early nineteenth century an institution of national importance with the beginnings of a modern factory-based system. The great improvement in the manufacture of military ordnance, and consequently of their strength and reliability in the field, that Blomefield oversaw was an integral part of this process. 


@@@@@


doc= 2667


Blomfield, Sir Arthur William (1829-1899), architect, was born at Fulham Palace, Middlesex, on 6 March 1829, the fourth son of Charles James Blomfield (1786-1857), bishop of London, and his wife, Dorothy (1795-1870), widow of the barrister Thomas Kent and daughter of the brewer Charles William Cox. He was educated at Rugby School and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1851 and MA in 1853. After university he was articled for three years to Philip Charles Hardwick (1822-1892), architect to the Bank of England and the son of Philip Hardwick; a continental tour with Frederick Pepys Cockerell (1833-1878) followed. 
During 1856 Blomfield set up in independent practice at 8 Adelphi Terrace in London, where he rapidly developed a significant ecclesiastical practice through his family connections. He later relocated his office to Henrietta Street, at the corner of Cavendish Square, and then to 6 Montagu Place. His London houses were at 8 St Martin's Place and later 28 Montagu Square, and he also had a house at Broadway in Worcestershire. In 1860 he married Caroline Smith (1839/40-1882), the daughter of Charles Case Smith, and they had two sons -- Charles James Blomfield (1863-1935) and Arthur Conran Blomfield (1863-1935) -- who joined his architectural practice as partners in 1890. His first wife died in 1882 and in 1887 he married Sara Louisa Ryan ['see 'Blomfield, Sara], the daughter of Matthew Ryan. 
Blomfield was one of the last great Gothic revivalists. He was also a prolific architect, whose primary activity was church building and restoration. His favourite style was English Perpendicular, which he considered particularly suitable for church designs, though his variant of this style was not based on a slavish copying of architectural precedent, or on any search for eccentric originality. He was also open to the possibilities offered by modern materials, especially iron, which he used regularly, for instance in an iron screen at St Peter's Church, Eaton Square (1895), and for iron columns in St Mark's Church on the Marylebone Road (1871-2). His reputation was such that 'The Builder' described his works as being 'distinguished both by knowledge and by refinement' (4 Nov 1899, 407). He was architect to the diocese of Winchester and, at various times, responsible for works on the cathedrals at Lincoln, Chichester, Canterbury, Peterborough, Salisbury, and Hereford. His ecclesiastical connections made him especially knowledgeable about nineteenth-century Anglican liturgical needs, and he was active in reordering existing churches so that they could be made appropriate to modern worship. His ecclesiastical output was considerable, and it was in such buildings, and others with an ecclesiastical connection, that he produced his best work, the most notable example being that concerned with the erection of a nave, south porch, and south transept for St Saviour's, Southwark (1890-97). His successful practice drew the attention of the young Thomas Hardy (1840-1928). Hardy's training as a Gothic draughtsman was a strong recommendation to Blomfield, in whose office he worked on his arrival in London in 1862. 
Blomfield also received commissions from a number of wealthy patrons. Of particular note are: the work he did at St Mary Magdalene, Sandringham, for the prince of Wales (1890); the chapel he added to Tyntesfield, Somerset, for the Gibbs family (1872-7); Holy Trinity at Privett, Hampshire (1876-8), which he designed for the Nicholson family; St Mary's, Portsea, Hampshire (1887-9), for William Henry Smith; and Denton Manor, near Grantham, Lincolnshire, for Sir William Welby Gregory. Other important works included completion of the law courts in London (with A. E. Street) after the death of George Edmund Street (1824-1881), the law courts branch of the Bank of England (1886-8), which he designed in a classical style, and Church House in Dean's Yard, Westminster (from 1896). He was responsible for designing a number of colleges and schools, or for making additions to existing buildings, including: the Whitgift Hospital schools at Croydon (1869-71); King's School, Chester ('c'.1875-7); Bancroft's School, Woodford, Essex (1887-9), which was commissioned by the Drapers' Company; a headmaster's house at St Edmund's junior school, Canterbury (1897); Sion College Library on the Thames Embankment, London (1886); Queen's School and the lower chapel for Eton College (1889-91); a library and master's house at Trinity College, Cambridge (1876-8); a chapel and other buildings at Selwyn College, Cambridge (1882-9); chapels for Malvern College ('c'.1898) and for Queen Anne's School at Caversham, Berkshire; and the great hall for the relocated Charterhouse School at Godalming, Surrey (1885). In London the most notable buildings for which he was responsible included the Royal College of Music (1894), St John's Church, Wilton Road, St Barnabas's, Bell Street (1875), St Saviour's, Oxford Street, St James's, West Hampstead, and the rearrangement of St Peter's in Eaton Square (1873-5 and 1894). 
Blomfield was also active overseas, and designed: St George's Cathedral, Georgetown, Demerara, which he designed to be built of timber on a concrete raft (1881); Christ Church Cathedral, Port Stanley, Falkland Islands (1890-92), for which most of the materials were exported from Britain; St George's Church, Cannes (1887); an English chapel at St Moritz; and St Alban's Church in Copenhagen (1885-7). 
Blomfield was a member of the Architectural Association, and became its president in 1861. He was also an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects, became a fellow in 1867, was made vice-president in 1886, and was awarded the institute's royal gold medal in 1891. He was elected honorary member of the Royal Academy of Fine Arts of Copenhagen, and received the third-class medal of the Dannebrog from the king of Denmark; both awards resulted from his designs for the English church in Copenhagen. At home he was a trustee to the Soane Museum, was appointed architect to the Bank of England in 1883, was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1888, and was knighted in 1889. He pursued an active social life. In his youth he was a rower, and occupied the bow seat in the Trinity College eight; somewhat later in life he became an amateur actor, and the president of the Westminster Abbey glee club. He died suddenly at the Royal Societies Club, 63 St James's Street, London, on 30 October 1899, and was buried at Broadway on 3 November. A memorial service was held at St Mary's, Bryanston Square, London. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 2668


Blomfield, Charles James (1786-1857), bishop of London, was born on 29 May 1786 at Bury St Edmunds, the eldest son among the six children of Charles Blomfield (1763-1831), a schoolmaster (as was Charles James's grandfather, James), JP, and chief alderman of Bury, and his wife, Hester (1765-1844), daughter of Edward Pawsey, a Bury grocer. Charles James began his formal education at the age of eight under Michael Thomas Becher at Bury grammar school, where he acquired the nickname 'Tit' Blomfield. He often rose at five o'clock in the morning to commence his studies and displayed a precocious ambition, boldly declaring that 'I mean to be a bishop'. In 1799 Blomfield was awarded a King's scholarship at Eton College, but his father refused to send him to the school. 
In 1804 Blomfield was admitted pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge. He had been a sickly child, and his efforts as an undergraduate left him with an enduring nervous condition. For years after he suffered from disordered digestion and would experience nervous spasms when riding. None the less he showed great promise: in 1805 he gained a scholarship and won Browne's prize for a Latin ode, and the following year won a Craven scholarship and took Browne's prize for a Greek ode. Edward Maltby was sufficiently impressed to take Blomfield as a pupil without payment. Solitary by nature, Blomfield nevertheless counted as friends some promising contemporaries, including his brother Edward Valentine Blomfield, James Henry Monk, and Thomas Rennell the younger; Frederick Pollock coached Blomfield when, from 1806, he decided to concentrate on his mathematical studies. Blomfield graduated BA as third wrangler in 1808, also winning the chancellor's medal and the member's prize for a Latin dissertation. In 1809 he was elected a fellow of Trinity. Blomfield was ordained deacon in March 1810 and priest in June by the master of Trinity, William Lort Mansel of Bristol, and, having declined the position of tutor to Lord Chesterfield's sons, accepted a curacy at Chesterford, Essex. In October 1810 he was presented to Quarrington, Lincolnshire, by Lord Bristol (a former pupil of Blomfield's grandfather and friend of his father). There being no parsonage at Quarrington, he continued to reside at Chesterford. In November 1810 Blomfield married Anna Maria ('b'. 1784/5, died 1818), daughter of W. Heath of Hemblington, Norfolk. The couple had six children, of whom only one survived infancy. 
In December 1811 Blomfield resigned Chesterford (retaining Quarrington until 1820) when the second Earl Spencer, impressed by his edition of 'Prometheus vinctus' (1810), presented him to the rectory of Dunton, Buckinghamshire, where he resided until 1817. A parish of only seventy-two inhabitants, with only one non-communicant male, this, like his previous livings, afforded Blomfield the opportunity to take in pupils (including George Spencer and Lord Hervey) and pursue his classical studies. He soon established a considerable reputation, being among the most important of a group of scholars, including Maltby, Monk, and Peter Paul Dobree, who were pupils of Richard Porson and adopted his editorial principles. Blomfield's editions of 'Septem contra Thebas' (1812), the 'Persae' (1814), 'Agamemnon' (1820), and the 'Choephoroe' (1824) were accurate and critical, if prosaic, and displayed his extensive learning. His 1815 edition of Callimachus was for some time the standard text; he also produced an edition of Euripides (1821), and contributed editions of fragments of Sappho, Alcaeus, and Stesichorus to Thomas Gaisford's 'Poetae minores Graeci' (1823). When Edward Blomfield died in 1816 Charles completed his translation of Matthiae's Greek grammar. In 1813 he founded the important journal 'Museum Criticum' with Monk, which published fragments and lesser-known authors rather than prize poems; he himself contributed many articles before it closed in 1826. Like the others in what Samuel Parr dubbed the 'critical gang' of Porsonians, however, Blomfield also sustained his teacher's academic feuds. His acerbic criticism of scholars associated with both Parr and Abraham Valpy gave notice of the arrogant manner on which many later commented. From 1810 until 1815, when the overall tone of the journal led him to sever his connection, he wrote on classical subjects for the 'Edinburgh Review'. His first review, of Samuel Butler's uncritical Aeschylus, provoked a fierce reply from Butler who thought Blomfield was 'showing himself off at my expense' and alienated Parr (Butler, 1.61). His criticism of Edmund Henry Barker's edition of Henri Estienne's Greek thesaurus in the 'Quarterly Review' of 1820 destroyed Barker's academic reputation, and elicited an equally outspoken response in 'Aristarchus Anti-Blomfieldianus'. Blomfield came to regret at least some of these spats: he was reconciled with Butler by 1818, and he later secured George Burges, who had accused Blomfield of plagiarism, a pension from the civil list. 
If clerical life at Dunton was relaxed, Blomfield was not simply a gentleman scholar. In 1813 he was appointed a JP. He was reading in patristics, and in 1817 and 1819 published on Jewish tradition and the understanding of scripture. More practically, he established a district depot at Aylesbury for the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK). In a visitation sermon for George Pretyman he called the clergy to pastoral responsibility and doctrinal orthodoxy, condemning both Calvinism and Socinianism. While in his preaching he was emerging as a high-churchman, he was widely regarded as a liberal on account of his support for Roman Catholic relief and his taking the 'Morning Chronicle'. The apparent inconsistency was seized on by Barker, who suggested that the public contrast 'his Speech in the chapel of Trinity College on the character of William the Third, worthy of a man bearing the Christian names ('Charles James') of Mr. Fox, with certain passages of his printed sermons, more worthy of the Tory and the High-Churchman' (Barker, 112). 
A new phase of Blomfield's life began a few years before 1820. His first wife died in 1818 and in the following year he married Dorothy (1795-1870), widow of the barrister Thomas Kent and daughter of a brewer, Charles William Cox, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Munnings. The eleven offspring of this marriage proved healthier than those of Blomfield's first, only one dying in infancy: among their children were Lucy Elizabeth Bather, the children's writer, and Arthur William Blomfield, architect. His clerical career now rapidly advanced. In 1817 Lord Bristol presented Blomfield to the rectory and vicarage of Great and Little Chesterford and to the rectory of Tuddenham, Suffolk (resigned 1820); he was also appointed chaplain to Bishop Howley of London. In 1819, shortly after Bristol brought Blomfield to the attention of his brother-in-law Lord Liverpool, Howley presented him to St Botolph without Bishopsgate, London, a preferred candidate having refused it on discovering that the parsonage was frequented by the graveyard rats. With his new parish yielding some $1600 per annum net, Blomfield's financial position was secured. St Botolph's was a fashionable living (it was at the request of parishioners that in 1820 Blomfield added a DD to the BD acquired in 1818). It further contrasted with Blomfield's previous cures in having a population of over 10,000; Chesterford, which he retained and where he spent three months annually, became literally a rest-cure. 
St Botolph's presented Blomfield with the pastoral challenge of the city. He reorganized the parish finances, visited his flock, promoted infant schools, and preached regularly in his straightforward style against heterodoxy and expounding basic doctrines. His classical publications were now supplemented by a catechism, sermons, occasional essays in church defence, an abandoned plan for a simplified 'Old Testament', and, perhaps surprisingly for a high-churchman, a 'Manual of Family Prayers' in 1824. Pastoral experience softened his attitude to evangelicalism, for he gradually permitted the SPCK to distribute more evangelical tracts, and even proposed Charles Simeon as a member. As importantly, however, as an associate of Howley in London he was at the heart of the network of charitable and auxiliary societies of the orthodox high-church circle of the Hackney Phalanx, and his activity in both the SPCK and the National Society probably confirmed him in his own high-churchmanship. 
The year 1822 brought further preferment when Howley appointed Blomfield archdeacon of Colchester (15 January 1822). His relish at his new authority was apparent in his primary charge, as George Biber described it exhibiting 'as much of the 'os' as of the 'oculus episcopi'' (Biber, 40). Only two years later Lord Liverpool offered him the see of Chester; he was consecrated on 20 June 1824. Lady Spencer urged him to accept exile to one of the largest, poorest, and most remote dioceses, astutely indicating the prospect of London should Howley be elevated to Canterbury: 'remember it is the step you must tread on to a richer one' (Blomfield, 'Memoir', 1.93). The pill was sugared with permission to retain St Botolph's. 
Although often absent in London, at Chester Blomfield established himself as a reformer. Diocesan committees of the national church societies were reinvigorated or established. In 1827 the post of archdeacon of Richmond was restored to full activity; he himself visited the major manufacturing towns. Among Blomfield's chief concerns, however, was the clergy. If Liverpool was 'the most orthodox and 'canonical' place that I have yet seen (Hackney always excepted)' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. c. 789, fol. 128'v'), the diocese as a whole was 'sadly relaxed' in discipline. He stressed rubrical observance, insisting on the gown in the pulpit, and deplored Wednesday evening lectures as undermining the proper services. The doctrine of the atonement was to be preached distinctly. Collections for non-diocesan charities and especially for pan-denominational causes were discouraged. A strict ordination policy was imposed to raise clerical standards, Blomfield rejecting former servicemen and reducing the number of non-graduates and Irishmen admitted. Clergy discipline brought out Blomfield's puritanical streak. He discouraged secular amusements, especially fox-hunting. Sydney Smith versified Blomfield's primary charge: '
Hunt not, fish not, shoot not; 

Dance not, fiddle not, flute not; 

But before all things, it's my particular desire; 

That once at least in every week, you take 

Your dinner with the squire. 
(Soloway, 320)' Blomfield could assume the last activity to be non-corrupting, given his attitude to lay pursuits. He was a lifelong sabbatarian. At Chesterford he successfully demanded that the Newmarket races no longer commence on Monday so that the village was not swamped by racegoers on Sunday, just as later he opposed the Sunday opening of the Great Exhibition. He was also a temperance campaigner, serving as the first president of the London Temperance Association from 1831 and in 1830 promoting a licensing bill which would have regulated not only beer but also skittles. 
On 23 August 1828 Howley's promotion to Lambeth indeed saw Blomfield translated to London, and he was also appointed a privy councillor and dean of the chapels royal. He had earned his elevation not only in his diocesan activity, but in the House of Lords, where his first speech answered Lord Holland's attack on the church in the Catholic emancipation debates of 1825. Blomfield now spoke as an opponent of emancipation. He claimed that closer examination of the Roman church had changed his opinions; critics observed the change of patron away from the pro-emancipation Bristol and Spencer. If Blomfield was now clearly aligned with toryism, however, he did not slavishly support the government, voting against Wellington in a critical division on a corn bill on the eve of his elevation. Nor was he willing to defend every aspect of the confessional state, speaking against the profanity of test acts. Blomfield's parliamentary behaviour again attracted criticism during the debates over the 'Reform Bill'. Blomfield supported the bill, fearing for the consequences if the church were seen to oppose reform. He absented himself from the crucial vote on the second 'Reform Bill' of October 1831, however, on the grounds of the recent death of his father. His excuse would have carried more weight had he not spoken the following morning at the opening of King's College, London, and he was widely accused of cowardice. Lord Grey subsequently approached Blomfield and secured his vote in April 1832, as well as his assistance in rallying episcopal colleagues to support the bill. 
During the 1830s and 1840s Blomfield's participation in parliamentary debates extended beyond ecclesiastical matters. He often spoke on social questions, on which his position was modified in the light of experience (particularly of the metropolis itself). In 1826 he compromised his 'laissez-faire' beliefs sufficiently to organize a committee to relieve distressed weavers in Chester and Spitalfields, urging Peel to intervene. By 1830, however, he seems to have lost his faith in intervention and charity, and instead looked to the moral education of the poor. This attitude underpinned his contribution when appointed by Althorp as chairman of the poor law commission, whose report led to the 'Poor Law Amendment Act' in 1834. Blomfield was initially an enthusiastic advocate of the act, arguing that it would return the poor to robust independence. He engaged in a bitter exchange with Bishop Henry Phillpotts over the bastardy clauses when the latter complained that they victimized the mothers of illegitimate children, Blomfield arguing that the only relevant consideration was whether the clauses provided an effective check on immorality. Blomfield never publicly defended the act later, however, and this seems to reflect a return to a more interventionist approach. In 1842 he argued that the state should regulate collieries and urban life; in 1847 he backed the ten-hours movement. Blomfield came to acknowledge that improvement of the physical environment of the poor was probably a precondition of their evangelization. It was at his initiative that Edwin Chadwick and the poor law commissioners were instructed in 1839 to compile a 'Report on the Sanitary Conditions of the Labouring Population', and throughout the 1840s Blomfield supported associations and legislation to improve sanitation in urban slums. In 1848 he strongly backed Chadwick over the 'Public Health Act', and in 1854 fought unsuccessfully to preserve the Board of Health. 
As bishop of London Blomfield was at the heart of the nexus of church and state and was the most important and controversial ecclesiastical statesman of his generation. He was one of Peel's main advisers on church affairs, including appointments, but his energy and administrative ability were of value to all administrations while Howley remained at Canterbury. Blomfield's approach to ecclesiastical issues was, despite his high-churchmanship, essentially pragmatic. He sought the state's co-operation in efforts to equip the church to fulfil its national function (not least as 'instructress to the people') and so answer radical criticism of the church as part of 'old corruption'. To this end he was prepared to violate what many regarded as fundamental aspects of an episcopal church polity in the search for efficiency and the resources necessary to fund reform in the absence of direct state financial support. Thus, in the debates on whig Irish church legislation in 1833, Blomfield, while denouncing appropriation, welcomed the redistribution of the church's revenues. In his charge of 1834 Blomfield spoke of discarding 'ornamental parts' of the church if they stood 'in the way of improvements, calculated to enhance and give lustre to the true beauty of the Church -- the beauty of its holy usefulness' (Blomfield, 'Memoir', 1.189). Other high-churchmen were appalled by so apparently utilitarian a conception of the church, and occasionally, as in the debates on the abortive centralizing church discipline bill of 1839, they effectively exposed the ecclesiological shortcomings of Blomfield's arguments. 
Blomfield welcomed Lord Grey's royal commission on ecclesiastical revenues of 1832, on which he served. Its report, issued in 1835, provided the statistical basis for the work of the ecclesiastical commission, with which Blomfield was associated from the start. When Peel took office as prime minister in 1834 he consulted Blomfield, Howley, and Henry Goulburn concerning church reform, and it was from these discussions that the ecclesiastical duties and revenues commission emerged in 1835, being metamorphosed into the permanent ecclesiastical commission in 1836. Blomfield became the commission's driving force: as Edward Vernon Harcourt, archbishop of York, later ruefully observed, 'Till Blomfield comes, we all sit and mind our pens, and talk about the weather' (Blomfield, 'Memoir', 1.223). The commission produced radical proposals for diocesan reorganization, legislative action on pluralities and non-residence, reduction of the cathedral chapters, and centralized management and redistribution of church property. It was primarily Blomfield who championed the proposals in the House of Lords. The cathedral reforms in particular upset both dignitaries who thought them unwarranted violations of the principles of locality and the sanctity of property and high-churchmen who thought reform should reinvigorate the cathedrals' historic functions rather than redistribute their revenues to the parishes. The failure to include representatives of the lower clergy on the commission, and its reliance on bishops as instruments of reform, prompted accusations of an unmerited arrogation of power to the episcopate, particularly the commissioner bishops, and above all Blomfield, who was one of the most regular attenders and who also served on the church estates committee after 1850. Again Sydney Smith did not spare him, writing in his first 'Letter to Archdeacon Singleton' (1837): 'He will become the Commission, and when the Church of England is mentioned, it will only mean 'Charles James'', of' 'London', who will enjoy a greater power than has ever been possessed by any Churchman since the days of Laud, and will become the 'Church of England' 'here upon earth''. A spirited riposte came in the embittered Blomfield's finest parliamentary speech, putting the case for the 'Dean and Chapters Act' on 30 July 1840. To justify his approach to church reform Blomfield contrasted the splendours of St Paul's Cathedral with the spiritual and moral destitution which surrounded it, and argued that if fear had been a motivation of the commissioners, it was not fear of public opinion but of being found 'unfaithful to our trust'. The proposals could be justified on the unanswerable ground of 'necessity'. 
In other aspects of national ecclesiastical policy Blomfield's position was more typical of a pre-Tractarian high-churchman. Blomfield opposed the 'Catholic Relief Bill' of 1844 and the Maynooth grant of 1845. He attached great importance to preserving the church's role in education. Blomfield was a leading figure in the foundation of King's College, London, in 1831 as a pointed riposte to the 'godless' University College. He contributed considerable sums to the project and sat on council, in 1853 proposing the motion which led to the dismissal of Frederick Denison Maurice on the grounds of his rejection of the doctrine of everlasting punishment. Blomfield was also a keen supporter of the National Society, not least in his own diocese, and a zealous opponent of the Central Society of Education. In 1839 he opposed the government scheme for state supervision of schooling through a committee of the privy council and a non-denominational normal school, and was one of the architects of the 'concordat' of 1840 in which a compromise on inspection enabled most churchmen to accept the new arrangements. 
To the horror of the Tractarians, but along with other orthodox high-churchmen who welcomed the prospect of introducing the apostolical succession into the Prussian Lutheran church, Blomfield strongly supported the establishment of the Jerusalem bishopric in 1841. His involvement in this last project reflected his responsibility as bishop of London for Anglican clergy overseas without their own bishops. He was a convinced advocate of the need for an increase in the colonial episcopate, and a letter he published on the issue led to the foundation of the Colonial Bishoprics Fund in 1841, no fewer than fifteen dioceses being established during the following twelve years. Blomfield also took a prominent role in the national ecclesiastical controversies at the end of the 1840s. He led the thirteen bishops who publicly remonstrated with Lord John Russell over the elevation of Renn Dickson Hampden to the see of Hereford in 1847. In 1850 he dissented from the majority of the judicial committee of the privy council in the Gorham case, finding for Phillpotts; he had previously sponsored an unsuccessful bill to alter the composition of the final court of appeal in ecclesiastical causes, and did so again after the judgment. 
In his own diocese Blomfield set out to relieve the spiritual destitution of the metropolis through an ambitious programme of church extension and diocesan reform (including the revival of the diocese's rural deans in 1833 and ruridecanal chapters in 1844). In 1836 he founded the Metropolitan Church Building Society, which aimed to finance the building of fifty new churches through voluntary contributions (Blomfield's original suggestion of a levy on coal having been rejected). By the time of its incorporation into the Diocesan Church Building Society in 1854 $266,000 had been raised ($106,000 in the first year alone), although the target of fifty churches was not attained. A separate initiative to provide ten new churches for Bethnal Green, commenced in 1839, was complete by 1850, and Blomfield encouraged other localized and private initiatives, not least through his own munificent giving. In all some 200 churches were consecrated in the diocese during his episcopate. The difficulties of financing church extension led him to accept the necessity of pew-rents at a time when others were beginning to question them. Blomfield himself came to realize, however, that church extension in itself was not enough, even when accompanied by no less essential schools. If he never lost faith in the parochial ideal, by the mid-1840s he was reconciled to lay visiting and the use of unconsecrated buildings, and in the 1850s sought to close redundant city churches to facilitate provision elsewhere. 
Blomfield's London episcopate coincided with the rise of Tractarianism, and he sympathized with some of its objectives. By 1839, however, he believed extreme high-churchmen to be 'corrupting the simplicity of the Gospel', and in 1842 resigned from the Camden Society and condemned 'Tract 90' in his charge. The same charge sought to chart a middle way, once again calling for rubrical observance. When Archdeacon Hale repeated the call in the following year evangelical clergy from Islington protested to the bishop, and Blomfield unwisely exempted them from his injunctions. This generated great controversy as others demanded similar concessions while those who had obeyed the bishop felt abandoned, not least as the bishop privately communicated to some his desire that they should disregard his own instructions. Blomfield's vacillations severely damaged his public reputation. Throughout his episcopate Blomfield's dealings with individual clergy were frequently difficult, his overbearing manner provoking much comment; he wrote to one correspondent citing ancient precedent that 'St Augustine was Bishop of Hippo, but you will be good enough to remember that I am bishop of London'. In the context of the papal aggression he took a firm line on what he regarded as the romanizing tendency of ritualism, and became involved in controversy over the ministry of William James Early Bennett at St Barnabas, Pimlico, which culminated in Blomfield's insistence on Bennett's resignation in November 1850. His previous tolerance of Bennett's activities again laid him open to the charge of irresolution. 
In 1847 an accident at Osborne left Blomfield with partial facial paralysis and slurred speech; in 1848 he was passed over for Canterbury. Together these two events marked a turning point. While Blomfield remained active, for example taking a prominent part in early proceedings of the revived convocation of Canterbury, he now ceded to Samuel Wilberforce something of his former pre-eminence among the episcopate. In 1855 his eyesight began to fail, and after a seizure he was paralysed on his left side. Early in 1856 he sought to resign his see, and his episcopate closed in controversy over the necessary legislation and its allocation of his continued use of Fulham Palace (on which he had lavished considerable expenditure) and a pension of $6000 in order to keep up his insurances on his resignation on 30 September 1856. Blomfield's health deteriorated further, and after two epileptic seizures he died at Fulham Palace on 5 August 1857. He was buried in the churchyard of All Saints, Fulham, on 11 August. 
Some 5 feet 8 inches tall, with small hands, a pale complexion, and an 'urgent walk', Blomfield's impetuosity, relentless administrative energy, self-confidence, and pomposity attracted caricature: not only from Sydney Smith but also Disraeli in 'Tancred' (1847) and Anthony Trollope, who cast him as the eldest son of Archdeacon Grantly in 'The Warden' (1855). His talents were more suited to his role as administrative reformer than to his efforts to uphold an orthodox high-church vision of the Anglican church as the rise of Tractarianism heightened party tensions. Fellow orthodox high-churchmen were worried by his cavalier way with ecclesiology in his reform initiatives and what they viewed as the unnecessary radicalism of his approach. Evangelicals resented the high-church tendency of his diocesan policy. Tractarians smarted under his criticism and were appalled by his easy relations with secular authority. His fiercest critics exploited the importance of classical scholarship and patronage to his career along with his haughty manner -- his son suggested that he had 'inherited notions of authority... disappearing before the democratic progress of the age' (Blomfield, 'Memoir', 2.211) -- to portray him as a relic of an outmoded, greedy, Erastian prelacy, an impression reinforced by the fuss over his retirement. In fact Blomfield approached his duties conscientiously and with integrity, and was extremely generous in his private philanthropy. Nevertheless, immediately posthumous assessments were generally at best lukewarm and often hostile, as in Harriet Martineau's 'Biographical Sketches' (1869), dwelling on what were seen as the shortcomings of his diocesan management and the failings of his church reforms, a judgement long perpetuated in the predominantly Anglo-Catholic tradition of ecclesiastical historiography. Later historians have offered a more positive assessment, recognizing the centrality of Blomfield's contribution to the refashioning of the Victorian church and the importance of his role in the poor law commission, and paying less attention to party disputes in which he became embroiled. He has been presented as a modernizer rather than an archaism: a character symbolized in his being the first bishop to abandon his wig. His role in energizing the ecclesiastical commission, and the explicitly utilitarian approach to church reform this embodied, has come to be regarded as his outstanding achievement. Indeed the gradual rehabilitation of Blomfield's historical reputation has effectively fulfilled his own prediction to Archdeacon John Sinclair: 'They may blame me now for these measures, but they will hereafter confess that those very measures have been the saving of the Church' (Blomfield, 'Memoir', 1.227). 


@@@@@


doc= 2669


Blomfield, Edward Valentine (1788-1816), classical scholar, was born on 14 February 1788, the second son of Charles Blomfield, a schoolmaster at Bury St Edmunds, and his wife, Hester Pawsey, and younger brother of Charles James Blomfield, bishop of London. He was educated under Dr M. T. Becher (1764-1809) at the grammar school in Bury St Edmunds and proceeded from there to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1807. In 1811 he took his BA degree as thirteenth wrangler. He had, however, obtained such classical distinctions as were then open to competition; he was Browne's medallist in 1809 and 1810, members' prizeman in 1812, and finally first chancellor's classical medallist. The fellowships in his own college being full, he was elected in 1813 to a classical lectureship and fellowship at Emmanuel, and was ordained in the same year. He died from a fever contracted in a long vacation tour in Switzerland in 1816. He managed, after being taken ill at Dover, to reach Cambridge where he died in his rooms at Emmanuel College on 9 October 1816, and was buried in Emmanuel College chapel. 
Blomfield acquired a high reputation for learning and general accomplishments, being a good modern linguist and draughtsman, as well as a brilliant scholar. His chief work was a translation of the Greek grammar compiled by A. H. Matthiae. Completed in the spring of 1816, it was left for his brother Charles James to edit. Blomfield had met with Matthiae's book in the course of a tour in Germany, undertaken in 1813, as soon as the events of that year had opened the continent to English travellers. Another fruit of this tour was a paper in the 'Museum Criticum' entitled 'The state of classical literature in Germany', a subject which had then become almost unknown in England. Besides a few other papers contributed to the 'Museum' Blomfield had projected a Greek-English lexicon to take the place of the old Greek-Latin lexicons of Scapula and Hedericus, which gave needless difficulty to students and were neither full nor accurate. He published a specimen of his lexicon, which was well received, and his plans seem to have been rational and promising. Had Blomfield lived, some of the labours of H. G. Liddell and his fellow lexicographer Robert Scott might have been anticipated. 


@@@@@


doc= 2670


Blomfield, Ezekiel (1778-1818), Independent minister and writer, was born on 28 October 1778 at North Walsham, Norfolk. His parents were very poor, and in 1783 he moved with them to Norwich. He read widely, but the book that determined his lifelong studies was Anna Letitia Barbauld's 'Evenings at Home' (1792-6), which quickened his interest in the phenomena of nature. At about fifteen he became imbued with strong religious convictions and was placed under the care of a nonconformist minister, the Revd S. Newton of Norwich. Under his capable mastership he rapidly acquired Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. After combating old doubts, in 1796 he joined Newton's church, and, resolving to become a minister, attended the Independent Homerton Academy. After a year spent at Norwich in ill health he accepted a call to a congregation at Wymondham. 
On 20 October 1800 Blomfield married Mary Fursnell of Hanworth, Norfolk. Soon after his marriage he delivered a course of lectures on history at Wymondham. As his family increased he eked out a slender income by hack work for Brightley, a printer at Bungay, and subsequently went into partnership with him. Pecuniary difficulties followed, and led to a move from Wymondham to Wortwell in 1809. Blomfield founded the Norfolk and Norwich Auxiliary British and Foreign Bible Society. In 1810 he projected a classical academy; he planned a history of education, and delivered a successful course of lectures on the philosophy of history from materials gathered in 1815 and 1816. He died on 14 July 1818 at Glemham, Suffolk, leaving his widow and young family of eight children totally unprovided for. His 'Philosophy of History' was published in a fine quarto in 1819, with a memoir, to assist in their maintenance. It is somewhat fragmentary and commonplace. In 1807 had appeared, in two huge volumes, Blomfield's 'A general view of the world, geographical, historical, and philosophical, on a plan entirely new'; this work shows wide but ill-digested reading. 


@@@@@


doc= 2671


Blondel, James Augustus (1665/6-1734), physician, was born in Paris, the son of a legal counsellor. He matriculated at the University of Leiden on 28 April 1691. At Leiden he studied medicine as the classmate of the later renowned Hermann Boerhaave, and received his MD on 17 July 1692, having published his thesis, 'Disputatio medica inauguralis de crisibus', a work dedicated to Frederick Spanheim, his Leiden professor of theology. According to the 'Dictionnaire historique de la medecine' (1828), Blondel was well versed in the dead languages, particularly Hebrew, and wrote many theological works, reputedly all published anonymously. Blondel established a practice in London, settling in 1700 with his wife, Marianne, in the parish of the French church on Threadneedle Street, the mother church of the Walloon and French congregations in England. They had two children, Marie ('b'. 1701) and Jacques ('b'. 1702). 
Blondel was made a licentiate of London's Royal College of Physicians on 26 March 1711. In 1727 he published an anonymous work entitled 'The strength of imagination in pregnant women examined; and the opinion that marks and deformities in children arise from thence, demonstrated to be a vulgar error'. He later claimed to have written this work in response to Mary Toft's delusion that her unfulfilled cravings for rabbit actually caused her to give birth to a litter of rabbits. However, another member of the college, Daniel Turner, deemed Blondel's work to be an attack on a chapter, 'Spots and marks of a diverse resemblance imprest upon the skin of the foetus, by the force of the mother's fancy', in his book, 'De morbis cutaneis', a work on skin disease, first published in 1714. In September 1729 Turner responded with a pamphlet addressing Blondel's work. Later that year, Blondel issued a second work, 'The Power of the Mother's Imagination over the Foetus Examined'. Blondel presented the whole issue of the power of the mother's imagination as a vulgar error, scorning the credulity of the medical practitioners involved in the Toft case. He represented the belief of the 'imaginationists' as irrational and mathematically unsound, using a deductive Newtonian approach to sustain his hypothesis regarding the maternal imagination. Blondel and Turner, in polemical pamphleteering common to this period, both presented arguments which gained support for many years. Their influence spread beyond London, and Blondel's 1729 pamphlet was translated into French (1737), Dutch (1737), German (1756), and Italian (1760). The widespread contemporary interest in this dispute suggests that Blondel, together with Turner, raised the phenomenon of the maternal imagination from an issue of folk belief to a concern of eighteenth-century medicine. 
Blondel died on 4 October 1734, and was buried 'Privately and with as little Ceremony' as possible at Stepney Causeway, near the area of London in which he had practised for many years. 


@@@@@


doc= 2672


Blood, Holcroft (c.1657-1707), army officer and military engineer, the third son of Colonel Thomas Blood (1617/18-1680) and his wife, Mary ('fl'. 1650-1670), the daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel John Holcroft of Holcroft, Lancashire, was born in Sarney, co. Meath, Ireland. In 1672, unknown to his father, he enlisted in the navy and served during the Third Dutch War. Later, under the false name Leture, he joined the French guards as a cadet and studied engineering. 
In April 1676, at the request of his father, who was employed at court in spying on the king's enemies, Charles II granted Blood the offices of clerk of the crown and peace in co. Clare. The Blood family had originally settled in co. Clare in the 1590s, where they were now well established. Blood did not in fact take up this office, which was assigned to a deputy. In 1678 Charles II granted him a licence of absence on the grounds that 'he has been so absent by the King's command and has remained in England on the King's service' ('CSP dom.', '1678', 241). 
Holcroft was now living in London and, it would appear, was closely connected with his father's intrigues. In 1686 he married Elizabeth Fowler, the daughter of Richard King, a barrister, at St Pancras Church. In 1688, as a result of the imminent threat of invasion, he was employed, together with Jacob Richards, in strengthening the fortifications at Sheerness. In early October, under orders from Lord Dartmouth, he was busy pressing a number of men employed on the works to serve in James II's hastily gathered fleet. Later that month, through family influence, he achieved his first important step, being appointed captain of the pioneers in James II's train of artillery; Elizabeth Blood's cousin Richard Biddulph secured Blood's appointment with Lord Dartmouth, master of the ordnance. Following the successful landing of William of Orange at Torbay, the train accompanied James's infantry under the command of Faversham down to Salisbury. In contrast to the widespread defections and disarray which affected other regiments, the train returned in good order to the Tower -- much to the satisfaction of the newly convened council of peers. 
Notwithstanding his service under the old regime, Blood remained on the establishment after William's accession. In May 1689 he was promoted second engineer on the train of artillery bound for Ireland, his salary raised from 5's'. to 10's'. per day. He served in all the major sieges and battles of the campaign in Ireland and was wounded at Cavan in February 1690. In 1693 he was in receipt of a Treasury payment for demolishing the fortifications at Cashel by the king's direct order. 
During the mid-1690s Blood's relations with the Board of Ordnance deteriorated; he was not appointed to either of the two artillery trains sent to Flanders in 1692. However, it was still a widespread practice for regiments to appoint their own engineer officers, and Blood was promoted captain in Colonel John Foulkes's regiment, then serving in Flanders with King William. In 1693 he was accused of robbing the post boy of mails from Spain, but after a trial at the Old Bailey was acquitted. The incident worked out rather to his advantage, for the king, convinced of his innocence and having first-hand experience of his abilities as a siege engineer in Ireland, secured his rapid advancement. In October 1693 he was promoted major and in 1694 received a commission in Lord Cutts's regiment. After being promoted lieutenant-colonel in Sir George St George's regiment, he served as an engineer at the siege of Namur in 1695. 
Blood continued to enjoy royal patronage. By warrant of January 1696 he was raised to the position of second engineer of England, passing over Jacob Richards, his senior, under whom he had served in Ireland. According to Porter the Board of Ordnance, much displeased with this royal interference with precedent, put off the appointment for as long as possible but was eventually forced to comply. In May of the same year Blood was paid $180 as reward for his part in apprehending the leaders of a conspiracy to assassinate the king. Later, in October, William moved to circumvent the functions of the board further by appointing Blood commander of the King's company of engineers, a little-known body under the monarch's direct control, paid by special warrant from the Treasury. Blood had twenty-eight engineers under his command, paid between 5's'. and 10's'. a day, although several were also on the establishment of the board at the same time. The company was active in the autumn of 1696, preparing fixed defensive lines in front of the British army's winter quarters near Bruges. On 18 October Blood wrote to the king with plans of his retrenchments, together with troop dispositions 'to cover Bruges from the insults of the French' ('CSP dom.', '1696', 418-19). 
However, the war in Flanders was drawing to a close, and the evolution of an independent company of engineers was ended with the treaty of Ryswick (1697). While the army was rapidly disbanded, the Board of Ordnance moved to increase its establishment, and the first artillery train in peacetime was formed under Jacob Richards, although it soon fell foul of cries for economy. Similarly, in March 1700 the King's company of engineers was finally broken. Blood, however, remained on the establishment as second engineer of England with a salary of $250; he also retained his commission as a lieutenant-colonel, with a salary of $365. 
The dispute between the board and Blood continued with the resumption of hostilities against France in 1702. When offered command of the train for Flanders he at first declined, on the grounds that the board's practice of granting short temporary commissions undermined the commander's authority when 'the confusion and disorder which always happens in new corps, seems in my humble opinion to require a greater power and authority to bring them into good order'. Blood's anticipation of the arguments for a permanent corps was not well received by the board, who wrote to the earl of Romney calling for his immediate discharge from 'the employment of the office' (correspondence, 16 April 1702, BL, Add. MS 61298, fols. 1-3). With the appointment of the duke of Marlborough as master of the ordnance in late June 1702 matters appear to have been resolved, for Blood did in fact take up the post of colonel of the train. He saw distinguished service in that capacity under the duke in the following years. At the siege of Venloo in September 1702 Lord Cutts led a foolhardy but successful assault on the fortifications, commending Blood in his dispatch; a party of 300 workmen and a number of engineers: 'under Colonel Blood who acted as First Engineer under Mr Coehorne and was to have made the lodgement continuous. When he saw that I had quitted that design he shew'd the part of a brave officer, charging with the men sword in hand and killing an officer of grenadiers who made a vigorous opposition with his party. (Porter, 1.111)' In July 1702 Blood was appointed lieutenant-colonel of Sir Matthew Bridge's regiment, and took over the regiment on Bridge's death the following year. The regiment saw service in Spain and Portugal, being present at Almanza in 1707 and at Saragossa and Brihuega in 1710. Blood remained in Flanders, and it was as colonel of the train during Marlborough's campaign of 1704 that he achieved his greatest feats of gunnery, engineering, and logistics. Transporting a train of thirty-eight field pieces and four howitzers a distance of 250 miles from the Meuse to the Danube in six weeks, partly by boat up the Rhine, then on foot through rolling country from Mainz to Heidelberg, and finally over the passes of the Jura mountains in continuous rain and deteriorating tracks, Blood arrived at the town of Donauworth on 2 July. Here he was able to bring several batteries of guns immediately to bear on the slopes between the town and the fortified heights of the Schellenberg in support of a sudden and successful assault by Marlborough's infantry. 
At Blenheim, Blood's artillery played an important role throughout the course of the battle. Arriving at dawn on the day of the battle, the combined allied artillery was positioned by Marlborough on the heights covering the Nebel Stream and surrounding marshes. In the morning the battle commenced as Blood's artillery directed its barrage on the opposing French cannon, in support of the advancing allied forces. Later Marlborough sent Blood forward with several batteries to stiffen the wavering assault by Holstein Beck's forces in the vicinity of Oberglau. At 4 o'clock in the afternoon Blood was ordered to bring a battery of nine field pieces across the marshes by pontoon bridge to support the allied advance in the centre. Under heavy fire he brought up the guns and proceeded to decimate the nine brigades of the French centre at close range with partridge shot before the main body of allied cavalry succeeded in cutting the French army in two. For his distinguished action during the battle Blood was promoted to brigadier-general. 
The campaign of 1704 continued long into December in an attempt to maximize allied gains. Desiring to secure the lower Moselle before moving into winter quarters, and being delayed by sturdy resistance at Landau, on 22 October Marlborough sent Colonel Blood, with three regiments of foot, fourteen cannon, and four howitzers, ahead of the main column towards Homburg in preparation for an attack upon the fortress at Treves (Trier). After a rapid march through densely wooded hills, made possible by unseasonably good weather, Marlborough arrived with all his forces at Treves on 29 October. The advance enjoyed complete surprise, and the French garrison withdrew, offering no resistance. The subsequent siege of Trabach, which was opened on 4 November, was not so easy, however; Blood was kept busy with siege work until 20 December, when the garrison pleaded for terms. 
Blood's military career had reached its zenith, yet professional success and public acclaim were accompanied by increasing turbulence in his private life. His relationship with his wife, Elizabeth, had deteriorated, largely as a consequence of sexual infidelity on his part -- principally, but not solely, his long-standing affair with Mrs Mary Andrews, a chief witness for the defence at his trial for robbing the mails. Elizabeth left the marital home in 1700, together with a large quantity of household goods, having run up significant debts. In October Blood attempted a reconciliation which ended in a public brawl. Elizabeth's attempts to have warrants issued against him for assault were deflected by a combination of social influence and legal trickery -- his brother Charles was a barrister. In 1702 Elizabeth turned to the consistory court of London with a suit for separation with alimony on grounds of cruelty and adultery. Her accusations appeared wild and uncorroborated, and Blood was able to call on friends of social standing for character witness. On account of his absences in the field the case dragged on until 1704. However, before judgment could be given Blood produced evidence of adultery on his wife's part and her suit was thrown out. Despite her refutation of this charge on appeal to the court of arches, Blood's public position and military career proved decisive. Separated from his independent and resourceful wife, he returned to Flanders in 1705. 
Under Marlborough's command, artillery was playing an increasingly important role, and consequently trains of artillery were becoming bigger; in 1705 Blood commanded a train of forty-six guns, including twenty 24-pounders, in addition to sixty mortars. In 1706 he commanded a similar sized train at Ramillies, perhaps Marlborough's most decisive victory. Moreover, Blood's relations with the board appear to have improved. In early June the board thanked him for his report on the victory at Ramillies and later advances and again in September for his account of the siege of Menin, where Blood was in charge of the engineering works. 
This was to prove the last action in which Blood served. The army shortly went into winter quarters. At the start of the campaign of 1707 he was lying ill in Brussels, where he died on 19 August 1707, aged fifty. He left an illegitimate son, Holcroft, of St Anne's, Soho, whose mother was Dorothy Cooke of Dort, Holland. The son died unmarried about 1724. Both were main beneficiaries of his will, which he made shortly before his death. His wife, Elizabeth, received a small payment. 
In an age when artillery was heavy, cumbersome, slow, usually late to the battle and rather inaccurate, Blood's endeavours as commander of the train in Marlborough's campaigns appear herculean. It was an age when the commander of the train combined the demanding roles of gunnery officer, siege engineer, and logistical support. More particularly Blood's career reflects the transition in the use of artillery in warfare during the early eighteenth century: a movement away from the static, defensive encounters of the seventeenth century, with an emphasis on siege warfare and territorial occupation, towards the strategy of decisive offensive action through the destruction of the enemy's army on the battlefield. This required not only greater mobility in the movement of armies and supporting artillery but also mobility in terms of the tactical requirements of the battlefield. This was exemplified by Marlborough's campaign of 1704, in which Blood's artillery played such an important part. 


@@@@@


doc= 2673


Blood, Thomas (1617/18-1680), adventurer and spy, was born at Sarney, co. Meath. His early life is obscure, but it was later claimed that his father (who was possibly Neptune Blood) was a blacksmith and ironworker, 'serious, honest and of no inferior credit' (R. H., 219). 
An Irish letter patent for Thomas Blood, gentleman, described various rented lands that he held in 1640, and in 1654-6 he was listed by the survey of Ireland as having owned some 220 acres of land at Sarney since 1640. In 1663 Blood was said to have possessed a small house and to have $100 a year in Dunboyne, which was of 'ancient inheritance', but all his lands were lost to him for his rebellious actions in that year ('CSP Ire.', '1663-5', 133). 
Between 1641 and 1654 Blood fought in the civil wars of Ireland and England. The details are obscure. In 1671 he was described as a former captain in 'the old King's army under Sir Lewis Dyve' (BL, Add. MS 36916, fol. 233), a claim supported by the appearance of 'Captain Bludd' as captain to Dyves's quartermaster in the indigent officers' list of 1663. Another source reported that Blood had served in Ireland under George Monck (which might have been either in 1642-3 in Ormond's army or in 1647-9 in parliament's). When interviewed by the king in 1671 Blood claimed that he had fought in England as a royalist under Prince Rupert; indeed, the prince was said to remember Blood as a 'very stout bold fellow' ('Sixth Report', HMC, 370; 'CSP dom.', '1671-2', 373). There is, however, no firm evidence of this service, and Rupert may have been yet another person seduced by the Irishman's eloquence: John Evelyn later noted that Blood's speech was 'dangerously insinuating' (Evelyn, 3.567). In truth Blood may never have risen any higher than the rank of lieutenant in the course of the wars, though this did not prevent his regular self-promotion to captain, major, and finally colonel as he became ever more notorious. 
In 1650 Blood, apparently having abandoned the royalist cause for that of parliament, was in Lancashire, where he married Mary Holcroft, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel John Holcroft of Holcroft Hall, on 21 June. The couple had six children: Thomas junior (who became an accomplice of his father's but predeceased him), Holcroft Blood (Marlborough's general of artillery), William, Charles (an informer for James, duke of York), Mary, and Elizabeth. By 1651 Blood and his wife had moved back to his lands in Ireland where he remained until at least 1660. According to a published account of his life, in these years Blood acted as both a good protestant and a defender of English rule in Ireland, receiving the favour of the lord deputy, Henry Cromwell. In turn he was alienated in the early 1660s by the Restoration settlement of Ireland: the 'hard usage' that he received at the hands of the court of claims, some of his lands being taken away from him, reinforced the dissatisfaction of an Irish protestant and former parliamentarian with the policies of the new regime. By 1662 Blood had begun his life as a conspirator, heavily involved in the plot that came to light in Dublin in May 1663. 
Blood acted as go-between and recruiter for the plot in Ireland. Those involved had connections with conspirators across the Irish Sea who were active in the north of England. According to the account that James Tanner later gave to the authorities, it was Blood's scheme that the Irish conspirators had intended to use in their attempt to seize both Dublin Castle, the seat of government, and James Butler, duke of Ormond, the lord lieutenant, in May 1663. Plotters disguised as 'handicraft' men waving petitions were initially to enter the castle to seize the duke. A raid on the castle itself was to follow while the guards would be distracted by a cartful of bread overturned at the castle gates; Blood and 100 men would rush the place. The scheme was betrayed by the government's paid informers, among them Philip Alden, one of the main conspirators. Blood allegedly urged that the plan should go ahead regardless. In the event, those not arrested promptly fled, Blood among them. He was said to have tried to rescue some of his captured friends, including his brother-in-law, from the scaffold, an attempt which put a price on his head. Blood was to see his subsequent escape from capture in miraculous terms as a blessing from God, and thereafter he tended to take all his daring escapades in this light: as assurance of God's providence in his life. At some point in the 1660s he wrote down all these 'deliverances' in a pocket book (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A. 185) that was taken from him upon his capture in 1671; the copy that came into the hands of Samuel Pepys provides a valuable source into both Blood's exploits and his mentality. 
After fleeing from Dublin in 1663, Blood had various adventures and many close calls in the Irish countryside before he could escape to England. Of his arrogant courage there is little doubt: returning to Dublin to visit his wife, he dared to leave 'at the gates at noonday & through the streets' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A. 185, fol. 473). In England a secret meeting with his mother-in-law in Lancashire nearly resulted in his capture; getting away, he wandered the north country, still in a state of disruption following the failure of the equally abortive northern plot. 
Blood gradually made his way to London where he met up with other conspirators -- some drawn from the nonconformist community, others former Cromwellians, republicans, and rogues -- who collectively and somewhat clumsily opposed the government of Charles II. Blood also visited the Netherlands at this time, before returning to London. Thereafter he was reported to be engaged in a number of intrigues against the regime, from organizing meetings in Coleman Street (a notorious den of nonconformity, both religious and political) to outwitting the government's 'trepanners', trying to stay one jump ahead of the authorities and, in 1665, the plague. 
In 1666 Blood was recruited for a secret mission: he and his friend John Lockyer visited the republican regicide Edmund Ludlow to try to persuade him to leave his exile in Switzerland and join with Algernon Sidney and others in a plan to overthrow the Restoration regime. The new plot was backed by the Dutch government, but in his fearful exile Ludlow chose to remain where he was and write his manuscript history of his times. Blood returned to England and in the following year was almost arrested on several occasions. He was almost certainly in London during the great fire in September 1666; in November he was on the edges of the failed Pentland rising in Scotland. Sojourns in Lancashire and Westmorland followed, but evidently tiring of these rebellious courses Blood and his family finally returned to London. Mary Blood and her family set up in Shoreditch, while the eldest son, Thomas, was apprenticed to an apothecary in Southwark (later taking to highway robbery under the alias Hunt). Blood himself, using the aliases Doctor Ayliffe and Doctor Allen, practised as a physician (despite lacking any qualifications) in semi-retirement from conspiracy. 
Blood the conspirator in the 1660s was, however, not all he seemed. There is evidence that he had contacted the government at some point and may even have worked for them as a double agent spying on his friends. The papers of Joseph Williamson, under-secretary and the regime's security chief, appear to place Blood on the side of the regime at the very least in 1666, and possibly indicate his involvement in a scheme to capture Edmund Ludlow. This ambiguous role may explain how Blood managed to survive unscathed in this period and was even rewarded at his capture in 1671 following his attempt to steal the crown jewels. 
In July 1667 Blood launched the first of a trio of daring adventures that made his name notorious. He helped rescue his friend, the plotter Captain John Mason, from an escort of soldiers who were taking him to York for his trial and probable execution. The ambush at Darrington, near Doncaster, during which five of Mason's guards were shot, was described by Edmund Ludlow as agreeable 'work for the Lord' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. hist. c.487, 1265). Blood himself was badly wounded and recognized by an informer travelling with the party, but escaped. Three years later another ambush reinforced Blood's notoriety. 
On the evening of 6 December 1670 five men led by 'Dr Allen' ambushed the carriage of the duke of Ormond as he was quietly returning to his residence at Clarence House. The raiders apparently intended either to murder the duke or to hold him for ransom for some 'ten or twenty thousand pounds' ('Eighth Report', HMC, 155). The plan went badly wrong. The elderly Ormond fought back and brought down the horse, with its rider, on which the kidnappers were trying to place him. They then fired pistols at the prostrate Ormond as he was lying on the road -- and missed. With signs of pursuit in the offing, 'Dr Allen' and his men promptly fled. A committee of the House of Lords was appointed to investigate the crime and soon discovered the names of the leading perpetrators: Thomas Blood (alias Dr Allen, Aylett, Aylofe, or Aleck), Thomas Blood junior (alias Hunt), and Richard Halliwell (alias Holloway). All three men and their dependants evaded the officers sent to seize them. A price of $1000 was set upon their heads by the government. 
Blood had forgiven Ormond neither for the seizure of the lands nor for the imprisonment and execution of his friends in 1663. Indeed, according to one version, he intended to pay Ormond back in kind: the attackers were said to have dragged the duke to Tyburn and were attempting to string him up when he broke free. However, Blood may also have been sponsored in the kidnapping by Ormond's rivals at court. It was soon alleged that Blood had been prompted into the attack by none other than George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham. The duke assuredly had the connections with prominent dissidents, former Cromwellians, and republicans to stage such an affair: according to Roger North, he had at one time set himself up as 'one of the heads of that faction' (North, 1.68). His feuds at court were intense, occasionally violent, and he 'hated the Duke of Ormonde mortally' (Carte, 2.424). Blood was certainly later linked with Buckingham; that they were associated before 1671 is not unlikely, given Blood's connections with the nonconformist community. Blood, if no one else among the nonconformists, seems to have believed that Buckingham was their protector. Moreover a letter sent from Blood to his wife in November 1670 indicates that he was near to reaching some form of agreement with an important personage that very month. Ormond's son Thomas Butler, earl of Ossory, certainly believed that Buckingham was behind the attack on his father and openly threatened him should such an event happen again. 
Six months after the attack on Ormond, on 9 May 1671, Blood engaged in the last daring escapade of this sequence: his attempt to steal the crown jewels from the Tower of London. This finally led to his capture and to a change in his fortunes in the world of conspiracy and espionage. 
Security surrounding the jewels was under Talbot Edwards, an elderly former soldier who was assistant keeper of the jewels and lived with his family above the room in which they were kept in Martin Tower. Edwards was permitted to make some profit out of his charge by taking a fee from curious visitors to the Tower. In April 1671 he had two visitors to his home: Doctor Ayliffe and his wife. Ayliffe, dressed in the habit of a parson, was most interested in the jewels, but unfortunately his wife was taken ill. The obliging Edwards allowed the lady to recover in his own apartment where his wife and daughter tended her. Ayliffe was willing to express his gratitude at such Christian charity and became a frequent visitor to the Edwards household as a result. Keen to establish this burgeoning friendship on firmer ground, Ayliffe suggested a match between Edwards's daughter and his own nephew. By such means did Dr Ayliffe, alias Thomas Blood, gain frequent access to the Tower. 
Terms for the match being agreed, the marriage day dawned on 9 May 1671. At about seven o'clock in the morning five men rode up to the Tower. One, William Smith, a fifth monarchist, remained outside with the horses. Blood (disguised as Ayliffe), his son Thomas (playing the part of the enamoured nephew), Captain Robert Perot, a former silk-dyer (later hanged for his part in Monmouth's rising), and Captain Richard Halliwell (one of Blood's accomplices in the attack on Ormond) made their way to the Martin Tower. All the men were armed with pocket-pistols, knives, and rapiers disguised as canes. There Edwards met them. Blood suggested that the regalia might be shown to his friends while they waited for his wife to arrive. Halliwell remained on guard while the others proceeded to the room on the lowest level of the tower where the jewels were kept. Once inside, and with the door closed, Edwards was overpowered and silenced by a plug of wood in his mouth. It was later claimed that he was told that if he remained quiet he would come to no harm, but the old man struggled so much that he was given several 'unkind knocks on the head'; he was also stabbed and threatened with knives. 
With Edwards out of the way, the jewels were distributed among the three men. Blood held the crown and after crushing it put it inside his parson's cloak, and Perot put the orb in his loose breeches, while Blood's son prepared to file the sceptre in two and put it in a bag. It was at this point that providence took a hand: Edwards's son, who had been overseas for several years, chose this moment to return home. He went to see his mother and sister, having first been stopped by the waiting Halliwell, then to see his father. Forewarned by this time, Blood and the others had left the jewel house and were on their way to the horses. However, the elder Edwards regained consciousness, managed to escape, and gave warning; his son soon found him, also raised the alarm, and with Captain Martin Beckman led the chase. Halliwell and the younger Blood reached their horses and rode off, though the latter in his haste crashed into the pole of a cart that had turned in front of him and was subsequently arrested, dazed but unhurt. After a brief struggle, in which shots were exchanged, Blood and Perot were also taken. Blood seems to have been undaunted by the failure of his scheme and is alleged to have merrily told Beckman that 'It was a gallant attempt... [but]... it was for a crown' (BL, Harley MS 6859, fols. 1-17). 
The capture of such a formidable set of outlaws did not provoke the consequences that everyone expected. Thomas Blood seems to have gloried in the deed, and when faced with examination in the Tower that he had so lately breached he demanded to see the king in person. To everyone's surprise, King Charles agreed. It is unlikely to have been simply idle curiosity on the king's part. Blood had great persons at court working on his behalf. One was undoubtedly Henry Bennet, earl of Arlington, the secretary of state, perhaps prompted by his right-hand man Joseph Williamson; Buckingham may have been another. 
The king interviewed Blood on 12 May 1671. Details of what passed between the two men are sparse. It was later alleged that Blood admitted his involvement in the rescue of Mason and attack on Ormond, refused to name his fellow conspirators, lied about his age, and cheekily claimed that he had been engaged in a plot to kill Charles while the latter was bathing in the Thames but that 'his heart misgave him out of awe of His Majesty' (Carte, 2.422-3; 'CSP Venice', '1671-2', 49; 'Fourth Report', HMC, 370). Asked what he would do if his life were spared, Blood was alleged to have replied that he would endeavour to deserve it. After the interview Blood was returned to the Tower. 
Blood's good fortune thereafter must not be found just in his native eloquence and persuasive manner, but in the regime's own plans for the declaration of indulgence that was issued on 15 March 1672. The offer of a form of religious toleration was intended to placate nonconformists on the eve of a new war with the Dutch, indeed to prevent elements of them from allying with the Dutch as many had done in the previous war. With these considerations in mind, the need for intelligence on the activities of the most militant members of the nonconformist community seems to have caused the regime to spare a man whom Edmund Ludlow described as 'having been acquainted with most of the secret passages that have been of late transacted in order to the reviving of the Lords witnesses' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. hist. c.487, 1265). 
The way was soon cleared for Blood's public rehabilitation. Arlington worked hard in making Blood's peace with the cynically amused Ormond; Blood even wrote an apologetic and ingratiating letter to the duke asking his forgiveness. On 18 July 1671 Arlington dined at the Tower, bringing with him the warrant for Blood's release. By 5 August a courtier noted Blood lounging in the precincts of Whitehall, free and dressed in a 'new suit and periwig... extraordinary pleasant and jocose: he has been at liberty this fortnight; he is nothing like the idea I have made to myself of him, for he is a tall rough-boned man, with small legs, a pock frecken[ed] face, with little hollow blue eyes. ('Sixth Report', HMC, 370)' On 26 August Blood received a full pardon for all his previous crimes and a grant of Irish lands worth $500 per annum. While Joseph Williamson thought that such an open action rather devalued Blood as a secret agent for the regime, he was privately to claim that Blood was still worth 'ten times the value [of the] Crowne' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. d. 37, fol. 84). 
Blood's fate was used as a spectacular display of royal mercy to reassure his still outlawed friends of the benefits that they could expect to receive should they make their peace. Arlington at least had no qualms about this, plainly telling the committee of foreign affairs on 22 October 1671 that 'upon the pardoning of Blood he went away among his brethren to bring in some of his friends on assurance of pardon' (TNA: PRO, SP 104/176, fol. 315). Soon afterwards a number of arrests were made of militants and former army officers, as Blood also named names. Others were indeed persuaded to come in to receive pardon. Blood was also soon being employed as a domestic intelligencer and mediator to several other parties, enabling him to spy on their activities. He provided Williamson with details of the movements, habits, and demands of the dissenters, information that was used to frame the declaration of indulgence. He intervened on behalf of the sectaries and acted as a channel between the court and certain presbyterian leaders. He was regarded, upon the publication of the declaration, as a man who could obtain -- for a price -- the necessary licences to worship. With the outbreak of war in 1672 Blood was occasionally sent abroad to spy on the Dutch and on those extremists who had not come in. Lastly Blood was used by many a court politician for their own purposes and rivalries, keeping in not only with Arlington and Williamson, but also with the duke of Lauderdale, the earl of Danby, and even the king's brother, the duke of York. From his daily resort at White's coffee house near the Royal Exchange Blood loudly proclaimed, 'It's no matter if one let[s] me fall, another takes me up. I'm the best tool they have' ('CSP dom.', '1671-2', 46). 
When the allegations made by Titus Oates and others of a Popish Plot burst out in the autumn of 1678 Blood was swept ever further into a world of imaginary and sham plots. His actions are inevitably obscure, though the evidence suggests that his main role was as a spy and 'agent provocateur' for the government. Little is known of Blood's dealings with Oates, though their names were occasionally linked by rumour at the height of the latter's fame. They may have met at the club of the whig magistrate Sir William Waller in Westminster Market Place, a club that both men patronized, though neither Blood nor Waller could have been considered allies of Oates and each regarded the other with contempt. According to one report Blood at one stage intended to damage Oates's credibility by planting treasonable letters in his papers to prove that he was the hireling of the presbyterian faction. This scheme, if it ever existed, failed to come off, though Blood was apparently never that sympathetic to either Oates or his confederate Israel Tonge, especially as the latter in his crazed ramblings was fond of blaming Blood for beginning the great fire of London. 
When in January 1679 an Irish Catholic in the Marshalsea prison, James Netterville, revealed to a friend of Blood's, Arthur Bury, a scheme to turn the Popish Plot against the opposition and offered him a bribe of $500, Blood was in the background advising Bury to find out more about the plot. The information was passed on to Sir Joseph Williamson, though in the event Oates, William Bedloe, and Waller successfully intimidated Netterville, leaving Bury in the lurch. (This is Bury's version. Netterville's own account actually claimed that it was Blood himself rather than Bury whom he had spoken with and tried to bribe, only for Blood to tell all to Williamson.) Other schemes followed. Blood in these years was a useful agent of the secretariat, but his activities also put him in the public eye and made him a target for accusation. Blood certainly figured in the calculations of another informer, Thomas Dangerfield, author of the so-called Meal-Tub Plot (a Catholic attempt to undermine the advocates of the Popish Plot) who mentioned Blood as one of the major-generals in a possible rebel army. Blood subsequently investigated an alleged scheme for rebel commissions apparently engineered by Dangerfield to give his story credibility. In fact, during the course of the crisis of 1678-80, Blood seems to have cautiously placed himself on the side of the regime rather than with any of its whig opponents. 
Blood had broken with Buckingham at some point in the late 1670s. The duke's reputation, both political and sexual, was already lavish in its indiscretions and in 1680 Blood became involved in a 'dirty tricks' plot, evidently at the behest of the king's fallen minister, Thomas Osborne, earl of Danby, to bring down the whig leader with a charge of sodomy. Blood and the earl's servant Edward Christian appear to have provided money to suborn witnesses to make the accusation. Two Irishmen, Philomen Coddan and Samuel Ryther, were to swear that the duke had committed sodomy on one Sarah Harwood and then sent her into France; further witnesses were found in Philip Le Mar and his mother, Frances Loveland. In the event the plot fell apart as the mud flew in all directions and the various parties attempted to make political capital out of the affair. 
According to Coddan's version of events, he and another Irishman, Maurice Hickey (alias Higgins or Higges), had drawn Ryther into the conspiracy in exchange for copious amounts of drink and money, intending him to act as first witness to the charge with Coddan himself as second witness. When Ryther began to get frightened and uncooperative Thomas Curtis, who was working for Blood, entered the scheme, trying to stiffen Ryther's resolve with promises of money and the protection of great persons. At one of the many meetings that took place in the disreputable taverns and alehouses of London they were joined by Blood himself. Blood's association with many at court in the 1670s had given him links with the factions there as a special agent and 'gun for hire'. Despite his vociferous denials he was undoubtedly involved in the plot against Buckingham, apparently acting as a go-between for Edward Christian and the Irish witnesses. Taking Coddan to one side, Blood asked him what he would swear against the duke; anything they asked him to, came the reply. Blood used all the talents at persuasion which were so central to his 'modus operandi'. He was cautious but affable to all, a trait he appears to have deliberately cultivated. In his intelligence work his preferred methods -- the ones he thought would achieve the best results -- seem to have been the quiet word, the delicate bribe, the drink, or the persuasive conversation rather than violence or the threat of violence. 
Unfortunately for Blood the whole plot soon began to unravel. In the game of double bluff that followed Coddan and Ryther soon changed sides, revealing the plot to Buckingham's solicitor Mr Whitaker; Coddan reportedly said that 'we will do this rogue Blood's business for him and get enough to swear against him by [the] time Sir William Waller comes to town' ('The Narrative of the Design', 14). On 20 January 1680 Waller sent for Blood. Neither man liked the other and Waller's over-zealous pursuit of the plot -- including bribery and tampering with witnesses -- was eventually to cost him his place on the bench. At the meeting Blood was faced by Waller, Coddan, and Ryther, Whitaker, and Francis Jenks, a Buckingham client and old enemy. Blood attempted to brazen the affair out; he also resisted arrest for a few days, but was eventually arrested and placed in the Gatehouse prison. The plotters were soon mopped up, and after a series of engineered delays on both sides Blood, Christian, Le Mar, Curtis, Hickey, and three others were tried at the king's bench on charges of blasphemy, confederacy, and subornation: all were found guilty, severely fined, and gaoled. 
In prison Blood caught a fever and, eventually released in July 1680, left it a sick man. By 22 August, after making his will, Blood lapsed into a coma, and on 24 August 1680 he died at his home in Bowling Alley, Westminster, aged sixty-two. He was buried in Tothill Fields, Westminster. Even his death was regarded as some trickery; to quash the rumours the authorities were forced to exhume his body. 
Thomas Blood was a strange mixture: deeply religious, a daring adventurer, a defender of nonconformity, and occasionally just plain greedy and untrustworthy. His career has few parallels in the period. Although his activities as plotter against, and then spy for, the regime of Charles II were not entirely untypical, his actions in the middle part of his life were quite unique. It was the trio of daring adventures between 1667 and 1671 that made Blood's name, yet his motivation remains obscure. He left no memoirs as such. His earliest biographer of 1680 appears to have had information either from Blood himself or from someone close to him; the work was signed by 'R. H.', possibly Richard Halliwell, Blood's accomplice in 1671. Blood's own correspondence is scarce, but the entries in the diary of deliverances seized in 1671 are very revealing. They are the products of nonconformist reflection and a belief in divine providence as it affected Blood's own life. Blood, a nonconformist who sought a Calvinist way to God, was more than just a one-dimensional adventurer: he was a man with a motive, a strong faith in God and in himself. This sustained him in his exploits, though even Thomas Blood was subject to self-doubt. He also possessed a strong streak of morality, claiming to avoid strong wine and drink, 'recreations, or pomps or execesse in apparele... quibling or jokeing... all obsene & scurulouse talke' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A. 185, fol. 474). His double-sided morality is strikingly seen in his condemnation of the younger Thomas's activities as a highwayman for actions that the father had also used, but in another context. Common highway robbery was not, to Blood, at all like the conspiracy, treachery, kidnapping, possible murder, and violence in which he had engaged. Blood saw his own actions as a means to an end. 
The raid on the crown jewels was thus not mere robbery, but possibly a slight against the monarchy by a republican rebel. Yet it was also rumoured that the act was merely mercenary, that Blood intended breaking up and selling the jewels. Edmund Ludlow was certainly puzzled by the affair and its result. The action did, however, raise Blood's reputation among his fellow nonconformists. They had, it was rumoured, disliked Blood's attack on Ormond: 'those congregations of nonconformists which... [Blood and his men] have formerly frequented abhor this fact, and would be glad to bring them to punishment if it were in their power' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. hist. c.487, 1265). Blood may well have gambled that the spectacular seizure of the crown jewels would make him more acceptable to those he called 'God's people' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A. 185, fol. 475). He may also have thought that the robbery would give him access to the king where he could plead both his and their cause. Blood was a man who thought on a grand scale. 
Even so there was in Blood the element of the eccentric gambler. He was a man who delighted to perform deeds for their own sake: thus his frequent resort to tricks and elaborate disguises, the baroque planning of the schemes he became involved with. Ultimately Blood's motivation in such matters could well have been the delight of making 'a noise in the world' and to escape at the last minute with all the skill of an adventurer. This mix of elements therefore should be seen together to make up the motivation of this greatest of all seventeenth-century adventurers. 


@@@@@


doc= 2674


Bloomfield, Benjamin, first Baron Bloomfield (1768-1846), army officer and courtier, the only son of John Bloomfield, of Newport, co. Tipperary, a lieutenant in the Grenadier Guards, and his wife, Anne (died 1828), daughter of Samuel Waller, barrister, and sister of Sir Robert Waller, baronet, was born at Bloomfield Lodge, Newport, on 13 April 1768. He entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in 1779 and became second lieutenant in the Royal Artillery, at the age of thirteen, on 24 May 1781. Early in his military career he served in Newfoundland and at Gibraltar. He was one of the first officers appointed to the horse artillery. He also served on a gun-brig during the early part of the French Revolutionary War, and commanded some guns at Vinegar Hill during the Irish uprising of 1798. He married, on 7 September 1797, Harriott (died 12 Sept 1868, aged ninety-two), the eldest daughter of John Douglas, of Grantham, Lincolnshire; they had one son, John Arthur Douglas Bloomfield, diplomatist, and three daughters. 
About 1806, when Bloomfield was serving as brevet major and captain of a troop of horse artillery with the 10th hussars at Brighton (and, according to his biographer, a poor man), his social and musical attainments attracted the prince of Wales, who in 1812 made him a gentleman attendant and afterwards, from 1812 to 1817, his chief equerry and clerk marshal. Earlier, when acting as the prince's spymaster against the princess of Wales in 1810, he was described by an enemy as 'a canting methodistical hypocrite, always talking religion and morality, but living, though a married man, in barefaced adultery with Lady Downshire' (HoP, 'Commons', 3.222). He was aide-de-camp from 1811 to 1814 and from 1812 to 1818 was MP for Plymouth, where the prince had electoral interest and a succession of 'Carlton House men' were returned. He supported the tory government, opposed Catholic relief, and in 1818 vacated his seat, presumably at the prince's command, to accommodate another of his favourites, Sir William Congreve, second baronet. In 1814 he was promoted major-general, and in 1815 he was made KCH. He was auditor and secretary of the duchy of Cornwall in 1816-17. From 1817 to 1822, as private secretary to the prince regent, he was the recognized confidant of the prince with considerable (some ministers thought unconstitutional) influence and power. He fell from favour in 1822 and resigned his appointments. His fall was attributed largely to the machinations of Sir William Knighton and the king's mistress, Lady Conyngham, though there was also talk of embezzlement from the privy purse. Cynical observers said he knew too much and, though his demands for a UK peerage were refused, he was generously compensated with a civil GCB (April 1822), a promise of an Irish peerage, a pension, two sinecures, and a diplomatic post. From 1822 to 1832 Bloomfield was minister-plenipotentiary to Stockholm, and while in Sweden he joined the Wesleyan connexion. In May 1825 he was raised to the Irish peerage as Baron Bloomfield of Oakhampton and Redwood, co. Tipperary. He commanded the garrison at Woolwich for some years, where his hospitality and benevolence made him popular, and where he founded the schools for the children of soldiers of the ordnance corps. 
Following a lengthy, painful illness Bloomfield died at Portman Square, London, on 15 August 1846 and was buried at Loughton, King's county, on the 22nd. He was succeeded by his only son, John Arthur Douglas Bloomfield (1802-1879), a diplomat, who was in 1871 created Baron Bloomfield of Ciamhaltha in the UK peerage; at his death his peerages became extinct. His wife, Georgiana, published a two-volume 'Memoir' (1884) of his father. In 1856 a tract was published, 'A coronet laid at the feet of Jesus: as illustrated by the conversion of the late Lord Bloomfield', by G. Scott, a Wesleyan minister. 


@@@@@


doc= 2675


Bloomfield, John Arthur Douglas, second Baron Bloomfield and first Baron Bloomfield of Ciamhaltha (1802-1879), diplomatist, was the son of Benjamin Bloomfield, first Baron Bloomfield (1768-1846), army officer, and his wife, Harriott Douglas (1775/6-1868). He was born on 12 November 1802, and educated privately; at the early age of sixteen he became an attache to the embassy at Vienna. Throughout his life he remained in the diplomatic service, and his history consists of little more than a list of the places where he served his country. He was paid attache at Lisbon, from October 1824; secretary of legation at Stuttgart, from December 1825, and at Stockholm, from September 1826; and secretary of embassy at St Petersburg, from June 1839. He served as envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to the court of St Petersburg from 3 April 1844, and then moved in the same capacity to Berlin, on 28 April 1851. He was made ambassador-extraordinary and -plenipotentiary to the emperor of Austria on 22 November 1860, but resigned on 28 October 1871, when he retired on a pension and was created Baron Bloomfield of Ciamhaltha in the UK peerage. 
Bloomfield married, on 4 September 1845, the Hon. Georgiana (1822-1905), sixteenth and youngest child of Thomas Henry Liddell, first Baron Ravensworth ['see 'Bloomfield, Georgiana]. He succeeded his father as second Baron Bloomfield in the peerage of Ireland on 15 August 1846. He played no active role in politics, but was associated with the Liberals. He was made a CB in 1848, KCB in 1851, and GCB on 3 September 1858, and was sworn of the privy council on 17 December 1860. He died childless at his residence, Ciamhaltha, Newport, co. Tipperary, on 17 August 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 2676


Bloomfield, Robert (1766-1823), poet, was born on 3 December 1766 at Honington, a village in Suffolk, the son of George Bloomfield (died 1767), a village tailor, and Elizabeth Manby (died 1803), schoolmistress at Honington. His father died of smallpox when Robert was a year old and left the family of three boys and three girls penniless. His mother augmented her earnings from her position as schoolmistress by spinning wool, but the family struggled. It was mainly under his mother's tutelage that Bloomfield learned to read and write at an early age, though he did spend three months in 1772 learning to write from a Mr Rodwell of Ixworth. Bloomfield's early reading included Thomas Gray's 'Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard' and Oliver Goldsmith's 'The Deserted Village', both of which were to influence him greatly in his own poetic compositions. 
Before Bloomfield turned seven, his mother married a man named John Glover, and additional children appeared on the scene, crowding even further the already cramped house. In or about 1778 Bloomfield was sent to his mother's brother-in-law, William Austin of Sapiston, who worked a farm in the manor of the duke of Grafton, who would later become Bloomfield's patron. Though assuming the humble position of 'farmer's boy' on his uncle's farm, he was treated decently, and details of his uncle's benevolence, as well as nostalgia for this period of his life, in which he experienced his first intimacy with nature, are present in 'The Farmer's Boy'. It became apparent by the time Bloomfield was fifteen, however, that, owing to his slight build (even in his maturity, Bloomfield was barely 5 feet tall), he was not cut out for the rigours of farm labour, and so Austin advised Bloomfield's mother to find him a situation more suited to his physical capabilities. 
Bloomfield's mother turned to her eldest sons, George and Nathaniel (the latter of whom, in a bid to capitalize on his younger brother's notoriety, also tried his hand at poetry, though with little success), then living in London, who offered to take their younger brother into their charge. It was decided that George, a shoemaker, would take in Robert and teach him the trade, while Nathaniel, a tailor, would provide the neophyte cobbler with clothing. Accordingly, on 29 June 1781, Bloomfield and his mother completed the stagecoach trip to London, where he was left in his brothers' keeping. Thus Bloomfield lived for a time with his brother George and four other cobblers in a small, low-rent garret (which also doubled as their workshop) at 7 Pitcher's Court, Bell Alley, Coleman Street. There he began learning to make shoes but earned his keep mainly by running errands and reading the newspaper aloud to the others while they worked. After he complained that he did not understand many of the words he was reading, George bought him a used dictionary, which greatly aided him in his mission to educate himself. He also enthusiastically attended the popular Sunday evening lectures of a dissenting minister, the Revd Mr Fawcet, who held forth weekly to standing room only audiences at a meeting-house in the Old Jewry. 
About 1783, apparently unsettled by the epileptic fits of a new lodger at Pitcher's Court, Robert and George decamped and took up residence at Blue Hart Court, Bell Alley. Another lodger there, James Kay generously lent Robert a number of books, among them 'Paradise Lost' and James Thomson's 'The Seasons', the latter of which became his favourite reading material. Over the years Bloomfield developed a prodigious memory for poetry and could recite any passage from 'The Seasons' or Thomson's 'The Castle of Indolence', as well as large swathes of Burns. 
In 1784, fearing prosecution by the Committee of the Lawful Crafts for illegally cobbling without having been officially apprenticed, Bloomfield fled back to the sanctuary of his uncle Austin's farm. During this period Bloomfield fell in love with a woman from Broadmere named Nancy Bantock, but the relationship did not work out, and Bantock eventually married a local man. 
Despite ongoing legal difficulties Bloomfield returned to London after a two-month retreat and managed to finagle a quasi-legal standing as a cobbler by paying 5's'. to John Dudbridge, who acted as his pro forma journey master. By 1786 Bloomfield was a skilled enough shoemaker to make his own way, and his brother George left London. 
It was also about this time that the earliest evidence that Bloomfield was composing poetry surfaces. Poems that he had apparently composed in his mind while engaged in cobbling and later copied down were dispatched to the 'London Magazine' for publication in the 'Poet's corner', but his earliest published poem, 'A Village Girl', appeared in Mary Say's 'Gazetter' for 24 May 1786. Bloomfield also acquired a violin and a taste for music. In an act rich with symbolism for a nature poet living during the Romantic period, he also began hand-crafting aeolian harps, an avocation which eventually afforded him a small income. He actually once sold an aeolian harp of his own manufacture to James Montgomery. 
Within four years, however, Bloomfield wrote to his brother George that he 'had sold his Fiddle and got a Wife' (Lofft, xiii). On 12 December 1790 Bloomfield married Mary-Anne Church, the daughter of a shipbuilder from Woolwich. Their first child, Hannah, was born on 25 October 1791. In the following year the Bloomfields took up residence at 14 Bell Alley, Coleman Street, where the growing family lived and struggled to make ends meet for the next seven years. 
In May 1796 Bloomfield began composing a poem that he at first intended only to be a present for his mother, but which eventually grew into 'The Farmer's Boy', the poem on which his reputation as a minor poet of the period chiefly rests. Like Thomson's 'The Seasons', 'The Farmer's Boy' (nearly 1500 lines in heroic couplets) is divided into four parts, with each part corresponding to one of the seasons. It depicts the experiences of Giles, a young farm boy, as he does his chores and communes with nature. After three publishers in London had rejected the work (even when, after the first rejection, Bloomfield offered to underwrite the publication costs), Bloomfield gave up trying to get the poem published and presented the manuscript to his brother George for his personal enjoyment and that of his friends. In November 1798, however, George showed the manuscript to Capel Lofft, the radical editor and writer and a prominent figure in Suffolk society, who liked it well enough to make grammatical and orthographical amendments to the text and shepherd the poem into print along with his own evaluative preface. The publishers Vernor and Hood agreed to publish 'The Farmer's Boy', but it did not begin to appear in shops until March 1800. It was immediately popular and even achieved critical success, such as Bloomfield never managed to achieve with subsequent works. It brought him to the attention of Robert Southey, who gave the book a favourable review and who remained Bloomfield's greatest champion among the Romantics. Given his predominant themes of nature and the common man, it is also understandable that William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge initially reacted with plaudits (in 1802 Coleridge reckoned Bloomfield among the major contemporary poets), but this laudatory reception lapsed over the years into indifference. Other authors of the period, such as Lord Byron and Charles Lamb, were less than charitable in their assessments of his poetic worth. In any event, the success of 'The Farmer's Boy' thrust the cobbler-poet into a limelight which proved to be simultaneously gratifying and irksome to a man who was by nature modest and retiring. Though he was initially circumspect about the income to be derived from the poem's publication, it was difficult for Bloomfield not to imagine that a better life for him and his family was at hand. 
After a brief respite, however, Bloomfield continued to experience financial difficulties, exacerbated by the demands his celebrity placed on his time. Sitting for portraits, visiting in high society, and otherwise satisfying the public's curiosity about his person and poem detracted from the time he spent cobbling, which was still his main source of income. Though he contemplated other occupations, none of these came to fruition and by September 1801 he was forced to apply for an advance from his publishers. Luckily, however, Bloomfield had continued to write during this period, and though he was caught up in a messy quarrel between his then patron Capel Lofft and his publishers, and suffering from rheumatism and the recurrence of a stomach ailment, his financial prospects seemed excellent as his 'Rural Tales, Ballads, and Songs' went to press in the autumn of 1801 and new editions of 'The Farmer's Boy' continued to come out. 'Rural Tales' contains shorter poems in various metres, mostly vignettes and lyrics depicting the joys and vicissitudes of rural life and the folk ways of villagers. The themes may be compared to those in the poems by George Crabbe or even Wordsworth, taking common folk and their lives for their subject matter. This was a trend Bloomfield continued in much of his other poetry. 
In addition to his income from his two books, his cobbling, and his manufacture of aeolian harps, Bloomfield also began to receive an annuity of $15 from the duke of Grafton. Characteristically, Bloomfield generously shared his income with his brother George and his mother. Bloomfield's good financial fortunes seemed to wax even further when in late 1802 the duke of Grafton appointed him to the position of undersealer in the king's bench court. But Bloomfield, who always craved more peaceful surroundings, found the hustle and bustle of the court noxious and resolved in the spring of 1803 to resign his post at the seal office. 
Bloomfield's mother died at the end of 1803, and Bloomfield's extraordinary generosity to her heirs and his stepfather, as well as expenditures on his mother's care in her decline and her funeral again landed him in financial difficulties. Bloomfield was also coping at this time with the illness of his son Charles, who had issued into the world about the same time as 'The Farmer's Boy'. Charles had developed a swelling on his knee and suffered from convulsions, a condition that lingered over the following three years and left the boy disabled. His son's illness had a profound impact on Bloomfield and he resolved to do what he could to keep his family healthy. Bloomfield, who had befriended Dr Edward Jenner, had for some time been interested in Jenner's controversial smallpox vaccine. When his brother Nathaniel lost a third child in 1802 to the disease which had also killed their father, Bloomfield decided to have his family inoculated. He even championed Jenner's cause in a poem at once didactic and melodramatic called 'Good Tidings', which was published in 1804, but did not do well. 
In 1806 Bloomfield published a new book of poems dedicated to his by then disabled son, entitled 'Wild Flowers, or, Pastoral and Local Poetry'. Also published in the same year was a book of illustrations of Suffolk by the engravers Storer and Grieg, whose interest in the region was inspired by Bloomfield's poetry. In 1807 Bloomfield went on a rejuvenating ten-day tour along the Wye with Mr and Mrs Thomas J. Baker and others from Gloucestershire. Mightily impressed with the mountainous countryside and delighted with his companions, Bloomfield kept a poetical journal of his experiences during this expedition. He worked in fits and starts over the next three years polishing and expanding what he had begun in the journal and it was finally published in 1811 as 'The Banks of the Wye: a Poem'. 
Despite the cheer brought by the publication of 'The Banks of the Wye' and its initial commercial success, in keeping with the pattern his life had taken on, Bloomfield was beset with other sadnesses and difficulties. First, there was the death of his patron the old duke of Grafton, who was succeeded by his son Lord Charles Fitzroy. The new duke of Grafton did not share his father's enthusiasm for cobbler-poets, and Bloomfield had to enlist the services of Capel Lofft to petition the new duke for his $15 annuity, which Fitzroy eventually granted but was thereafter sometimes desultory in supplying. The second blow came when Mr Hood, the most active member of Bloomfield's publishers, died, and the business passed into the hands of another partner, named, appropriately enough, Sharpe. By 1812 Sharpe had brought the firm near to bankruptcy and decided to bail out. He sold 4500 copies of Bloomfield's books to another bookseller and although he received $509 and a line of credit for himself, he refused to give Bloomfield his due. The Bloomfield family, now consisting of five children, was forced to borrow money, leave the expensive city, and retire to Shefford in Bedfordshire. Bloomfield returned to London in October 1812 to attend to his business matters, and although he was eventually able to secure an advance from Crosby, the bookseller to whom Sharpe had sold Bloomfield's lot, Bloomfield was by this time disgusted with the publishing business; he wrote a letter saying as much to his family, and signed it 'Your cheated and bamboozled Father' ('Selections', 55). Nor was London conducive to the production of poetry, for in another letter he complained, 'I can write only as Rabbits 'S -- t', in little bits, for the cart wheels roar, and the waiters are noisy, and there is a chimney on fire within sight, and a brave crowd' (BL, Add. MS 28268, fols. 330-331). 
Despite numerous journeys to London, efforts over the next few years to secure revenues from the sales and copyrights of his books were not very successful, and the Bloomfield family suffered for it. In 1814 Bloomfield's daughter Mary Anne died. In the next year, Bloomfield was forced to find Charles an apprenticeship and also placed Charlotte at a milliner's. The publication of a children's book, 'The History of Little Davy's New Hat', did not bring much relief, and the Bloomfields were forced to move to a less expensive house. By 1816 Bloomfield's health, never robust, was failing, and his financial distress so great that it prompted Sir Samuel Egerton Brydges and other supporters to issue a subscription on his behalf. This small income, along with what the duke of Grafton begrudgingly supplied, was augmented when in 1817 Bloomfield found Charles a position as a schoolmaster, and the Bloomfield family were able to pay off some debts. Bloomfield was thereby able to resume with renewed enthusiasm a project that he had begun years before and which culminated in the 1822 publication of 'May-Day with the Muses', the last of his books published while he was still alive. Hearing that George Crabbe had been handsomely paid by the publisher Murray for his 'Tales', Bloomfield tried in the spring of 1820 to place 'May-Day' with Murray. Murray, however, declined to publish the book, and Bloomfield was forced to go with the publishers Baldwin, Cradock, and Joy. 
Bloomfield was also contending in the last years of his life with attacks on his reputation. He had heard a report from Thomas Baker that rumours concerning his political and religious beliefs and his associates were in circulation -- rumours which might estrange the poet's patrons and conservative audience. In short, he was rumoured to be 'Deistical and Republican' in outlook (BL, Add. MS 28268, fols. 415-416). Baker even went so far as to solicit from Bloomfield a direct and public denial of such charges, but Bloomfield's partly indignant, partly whimsical response asserted that although such accusations were groundless, no such denial would be forthcoming. Bloomfield further noted that political liberals had also attempted to besmirch his name; apparently William Cobbett had accused Bloomfield of following a governmental directive to avoid writing about commoners in an ennobling light. Bloomfield's last word on the topic came in the 'Preface' to the first edition of 'May-Day', where he obliquely denied the rumours about him: 'I have been reported to be dead; but I can assure the reader this, like many other reports, is not true' (p. viii). 
Although Bloomfield found some happiness in the final year of his life through a reawakened interest in John Clare's poetry and by attempting to finish some poetical projects he had begun years before, his deteriorating health and financial situation made composition of new material difficult. Still, his chief anxieties were for his children, and for their sake he continued working until the very last months of his life. Bloomfield died on 19 August 1823 in Bloomfield House, Bedford Street, Shefford. Sadly, his family were left so destitute that they had to auction Bloomfield's books and even their household items to pay off debts. Bloomfield was buried in the country churchyard at Campton, Bedfordshire. The epitaph on his headstone read 'Let His Wild Native Wood Notes Tell the Rest'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2677


Joseph Bloor (d. 1846) was the brother of Robert Bloor. He was engaged at the works in sundry capacities, mainly in mixing 'bodies' for the paste. He died in 1846. 


@@@@@


doc= 2678


Bloor, Robert (d. 1846), ceramicist, was probably born at Church Gresley, Derbyshire, where many of his family are buried. He worked as a clerk for the Old Derby China Works for several years before buying the firm for $5000 in 1811, from Michael Kean and the younger William Duesbury. Under his management sales increased and at its height the firm employed as many as fifty painters, as well as a great number of potters, burnishers, apprentices, and female staff. It is generally considered that the former high quality and finished decoration of the Derby ware deteriorated while he was proprietor. He organized large scale auctions of stock which had accumulated in the factory, some of it either old or faulty, which simultaneously flooded the market and lowered public perceptions of Derby ware. However, according to Geoffrey Godden and John Twitchett some fine painters were employed during this period and superb quality porcelains were produced. It was during Bloor's proprietorship that the 'Japan' or Imari pattern wares which are associated with Royal Crown Derby were first produced, often painted by women. Examples of work from the Bloor period are preserved at the Museum and Art Gallery, Derby, and the Royal Crown Derby Museum. 
In 1828 Bloor suffered a mental breakdown from which he never recovered. James Thomason took over the running of the business until 1844. Robert Bloor died at Hathern in Leicestershire on 11 March 1846. The factory was taken over by his granddaughter, Mrs Thomas Clarke, who sold the concern to Samuel Boyle. The business failed and the Nottingham Road factory closed in 1848. 


@@@@@


doc= 2679


Blore, Edward (1787-1879), antiquarian artist and architect, the eldest child of Thomas Blore (1764-1818), antiquary and topographer, and his first wife (his cousin), Margaret Blore (1761-1791), was born in All Saints' parish, Derby, on 13 September 1787 and baptized on 30 September at All Saints' Church, Derby. According to C. L. Eastlake, he was apprenticed to an engraver, but an acquaintance stated that 'He was brought up to no profession except that of an Artist' (Hunter, BL, Add. MS 36527, fol. 36'v'). As a youth he lived at Bakewell, Derbyshire, with his father and his second wife and subsequently at Stamford with his father, whom he assisted by drawing architectural illustrations for his 'History of Rutland' (1811). 'In point of accuracy', his youthful sketches of church monuments, carefully outlined and shaded in Indian ink, 'have been compared to photographs' (Eastlake, 138). He then helped to illustrate James Hall's 'Essay on the Origin, History and Principles of Gothic Architecture' (1813). To Hunter at this period Blore 'appeared very prepossessing. There was a delicacy of frame, and a kind of trembling delicacy of spirit which interested agreeably', which he retained in later life (Hunter, BL, Add. MS 36527, fol. 36'v'). 
In London before 1807 Blore had made the acquaintance of the future architect Thomas Rickman. Their correspondence from 1813 to 1822 shows that by the end of 1813 Blore was 'again in London', and some months later he was engaged by the topographer John Britton to illustrate his work on Peterborough Cathedral, followed by similar commissions for Durham and Winchester (published in 1817). As his father sank into lunacy (although he did not die until 1818), Edward Blore, his sole support, was 'driven by sheer necessity' (Hunter, BL, Add. MS 36527, fol. 36'v') to draw such architectural illustrations for authors and booksellers, and also made detail drawings for architects. He contributed to R. Surtees's 'Durham', G. Baker's 'Northamptonshire', and R. Clutterbuck's 'Hertfordshire'. But he told Hunter, whom he charged $367 for work on 'Hallamshire', that his profession was not a profitable one. Britton paid him partly in books for his twenty-six drawings of Winchester and seventeen of York, charged at 7 guineas each in 1816-17. His drawings of Althorp for T. F. Dibdin's 'Aedes Althorpianae' (1822) brought him the acquaintance of the Spencer family, which was to prove of great value: the second Earl Spencer employed him to draw and restore the family tombs in Great Brington church; his younger son George ('Father Ignatius') told Blore in 1835 that 'I considered that you were my original friend' in matters of church architecture, and that 'many circumstances of ancient and happy recollection bind us together' (George Spencer to Edward Blore, 3 March 1835, CUL, Add. MS 8170). Lady Spencer, who showed his drawings among her friends, told the bishop of London in 1826 that Blore was 'a Man of deep learning, & of accurate information, as an Antiquarian, on all subjects related to Gothick Architecture, & joins to these essential & rare qualifications the most exquisite taste, & the most correct adherence to his estimates' (Howley MS 40, fol. 153). It was the Spencers' urging that secured him the restoration of Lambeth Palace; and Sir Francis Chantrey mentioned their high regard in recommending him for Weston, Warwickshire. 
Liberated by his father's death, in 1819 Blore married Sarah Ann 
(or Anne; 1799?-1862)
, daughter of the Revd W. Hodges, vicar of Mattersey, Northamptonshire; they had five daughters and three sons. In 1820 Blore was established in 56 Welbeck Street, St Marylebone. Already, however, he was seeking to stretch his wings. His first known architectural designs were in November 1816, for enlarging Abbotsford, Sir Walter Scott's farmhouse. A London actor, Daniel Terry (a former pupil of the architect Samuel Wyatt), recommended Blore to Scott, who found him 'a very fine young man, modest, simple, and unaffected in his manners, as well as a most capital artist'. He provided 'a very handsome elevation' for the new rooms ('Letters of Sir Walter Scott', 4.289). Scott found plans from William Atkinson superior, but for a time he preferred Blore's elevations as 'less Gothic & more in the old fashioned Scotch stile' (ibid., 333-40). Though supplanted, Blore remained in the Abbotsford circle. Scott subsequently recommended him to friends in the Scottish borders, and he managed the publication of Scott's 'The Provincial Antiquities and Picturesque Scenery of Scotland' (2 vols., 1819-26), for which he also furnished the architectural drawings. Blore's diversification into supplying and fitting steam boilers was a short-lived enterprise of 1819, though in 1828 he designed Chantrey's bronze foundry and superintended its execution. 
By 1824 Blore's architectural career was taking off: the Scottish judge George Cranstoun, a close friend of Sir Walter Scott, commissioned designs for a house at Corehouse, Lanarkshire, which became a model for small mansions in Tudor style; Lord Spencer wanted a new parsonage and cottages at Great Brington, Northamptonshire; at Canford, Dorset, the Hon. W. Ponsonby sought plans for a new house; while minor commissions brought in the odd 10 guineas. The following year Lord Ruthven (whose wife was another friend of Scott) wanted designs for Freeland House, Perthshire. Nevertheless, Blore, elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1823, was still substantially engaged in the preparation of antiquarian drawings, including those for his own publication 'Monumental remains of noble and eminent persons comprising the sepulchral antiquities of Great Britain'; this comprised fine engravings of medieval tombs and brasses with text by the Revd Philip Bliss, for which the publisher had demanded better and 'much more laborious' drawings than originally intended (Blore to Bliss, 23 March 1825, BL, Add. MS 34569). When the work finally appeared in 1826, it was not a success. Blore, however, was now busy with drawings for Canford (1826-36), for Sir George Philips's Weston, Warwickshire (1826-30; dem. 1932), and for improvements to the choir of Peterborough Cathedral (1828-32). Furthermore, inspired by Rickman's success, he sought work under the church building commission: he secured the appointment for St George's, Battersea (1827-8), and soon afterwards for churches at Plaistow, Essex, and Warrington, Lancashire. Thereafter, church work remained an important element in his practice, though country houses predominated. 
One of the most notable of these, and one of only three designs Blore ever exhibited at the Royal Academy, was Goodrich Court, Herefordshire (1828-31), for Dr Samuel Rush Meyricke. Goodrich Court has evoked contrary opinions: unconvincing or stylistically authentic. Its authenticity, partly copied from Goodrich Castle, just across the River Wye, was diminished by adaptation for modern life. It had a dual function: at once country house and museum for displaying medieval armour. Its rooms were of different styles, mostly drawn from Blore's precise knowledge of period examples. The banqueting hall with arch-braced roof was one of the first revivals of this feature. Unexpected continental features, such as the conical spire, are attributable to Meyricke's German tour (1823); Blore himself did not visit the continent until the 1840s and 1850s. 
Archbishop Howley's commission in 1829 to rebuild Lambeth Palace, the principal seat of the archbishops of Canterbury (1829-38; $58,000), marked Blore's arrival as a leading architect. It was in reference to Lambeth that Lady Gower designated Blore 'the cheap architect' (Leconfield and Gore, 156), a recommendation rather than a sneer, earned by Blore's uncommon facility for keeping within his estimates. This required a highly efficient office, with tight on-site controls through his clerk of works and frequent personal visits, and scrupulous record-keeping, as well as very careful preparation of designs and working drawings. Whenever possible, Blore preferred gross contracts (often with Locke and Nesham) to expensive daywork. 
Such efficiency, coupled with his old friendship with Lord Spencer's son Lord Althorp, then chancellor of the exchequer, secured Blore in 1831 the conspicuous appointment to complete Buckingham Palace (1831-8) after the dismissal of John Nash. About that time Blore moved to a 'handsome' house, 62 Welbeck Street, where an old employer, the Revd Joseph Hunter dined with him, the Revd Philip Bliss, the neurologist Sir Charles Bell, and their wives. 'The furnishing of the house had something of the superb about it', he noted (Hunter, BL, Add. MS 36527, fol. 37). Blore could well support such a lifestyle. In the 1830s his services were greatly sought after. Most of his clients were drawn from the parliamentary gentry or the peerage: whigs and tories in approximately equal numbers. He now had commissions for work at Norman Court, Hampshire (C. B. Wall, 1829); the Bishop's Palace, St Asaph (enlargement, 1830-31); Keele Hall, Staffordshire (stables and projected alterations to house for Ralph Sneyd, 1830-33); and a new house for the seventh marquess of Lothian at Mounteviot ('c'.1830; abandoned for lack of money after the office wing was built). There were subsequent commissions for country seats at Latimer, Hertfordshire (1832-7), for Lord Cavendish; Merton Hall, Norfolk (1832-5); Crom Castle, co. Fermanagh (1832-8), for Lord Erne at a cost of $26,600; Isleworth House, Middlesex (1833-4), for W. H. Cooper; and Orford Court, Shoreham, Kent (1833-9; dem. 'c'.1955), for H. St J. Mildmay. Major work -- new or rebuilding, remodelling, or enlargement -- followed at Pull Court, Worcestershire (1834-9), for the Revd E. Dowdeswell; Crewe Hall, Cheshire (1837-43), for Lord Crewe, at a cost of $30,000; Capesthorne, Cheshire (1837-9), for Edward Davies Davenport, at a cost of $20,000; Ballydrain, co. Antrim (1837-8), for H. Montgomery; Ramsey Abbey (1838-40), for Edward Fellowes; the dramatically sited Merevale, Warwickshire (1838-44), for Sir W. Dugdale at a cost of $35,000; and Haveringland, Norfolk (1839-43; dem. 1946), for Edward Fellowes. The following decade rounded off his career with substantial works or new houses at Shadwell, Norfolk ('c'.1840-43) for Sir R. J. Buxton, bt; Worsley, Lancashire (1840-45; dem. 1945-6), for Lord F. Egerton, later earl of Ellesmere; Great Moreton, Cheshire (1841-6), for G. H. Ackers, a businessman, an unusual client (sometimes regarded as his best work, its great hall has a hammerbeam roof); Hatchford, Surrey (1842-3; dem.), for Lord F. Egerton; Castle Hill, Devon (1842-5), for Lord Fortescue; Crakaig, Sutherland (1845), for the duke of Sutherland; Kingston, Nottinghamshire (1843-5), for Lord Belper; Thicket Priory, Yorkshire (1844-7), for the Revd J. Dunnington-Jefferson; North Mimms, Hertfordshire (1845-6), for Fulke Greville; and The Frythe, Welwyn, Hertfordshire (1845-6), for William Wilshere. In all, Blore was responsible for major works at some thirty-eight houses. 
All this activity demanded constant travel. Blore made, for instance, eight visits to Crom Castle in the 1830s, each of about eight days; in 1839-43 Worsley received sixty-one visits. In 1838 alone he inspected works at fifteen houses. Cranstoun of Corehouse feared in 1835 'that the extent of your engagements and the splendour of your reputation in the South' would have precluded his again working in Scotland (Cranstoun to Blore, CUL, Add. MS 8170, fol. 23); and his designs were in requisition in places as far distant as the Crimea and Sydney, New South Wales, where the governor's house (1837-45) was erected to his somewhat 'retardataire' plans. The palace erected (1830?-40) at Alupka in the Crimea for Prince Vorontsov is one of the most original of Blore's buildings, and superbly exploits its rocky site. The principal block had a Jacobean entrance front and an 'Asiatic' or 'Saracenic' garden front: his client had prescribed one front in 'Oldentime' architecture that would recall his early connections with England, and for the other a style appropriate to the locality. 
Blore was also employed by HM office of works to restore Hampton Court Palace, Middlesex, in 1838-48, to improve the royal apartments at Windsor Castle, Berkshire, in 1841-7, and to reconstruct the Military Knights' lodgings in the Lower Ward in 1840-47; also to complete Buckingham Palace by building an east front to provide private accommodation for the royal family in 1847-50, a much criticized and troubled work. On its completion he is said to have been offered, and to have refused, a knighthood. He also designed a half-timbered marine villa for the royal family at Osborne, Isle of Wight, but Prince Albert preferred his own Italianate scheme. 
Blore's later ecclesiastical work included restorations or alterations at Ripon Minster (1829-31) and at Norwich ('c'.1840), Ely (1840-41 and 1844), and Glasgow (from 1846) cathedrals; the chapels of Wadham (1831-2), Merton (1838-43), and St John's (1843) colleges, Oxford, and Trinity College, Cambridge (1831-2); Thorney (1840-41) and Ramsey (1843) abbeys; and several parish churches. He designed the new churches (many in a Norman revival style) at Waltham Cross, Hertfordshire (1831-2); Leytonstone, Essex (1832-3); Croft, Lancashire (1832-3); Stratford, Essex (1833-4); Potters Bar (1835); Vincent Square, Westminster (1836-7; dem. 1923); St Peter's, Stepney (1837-8); Christ Church, Chelsea (1838), and Christ Church, Hoxton (1839; bombed 1944) -- dismissed by 'The Ecclesiologist' as 'truly contemptible' ('The Ecclesiologist', 13, 1842, 99); St Luke's, Soho (1838-9; dem. 1936); Lambeth, London (1838-9; bombed 'c'.1941); Barkingside, Essex (1839-40); Latimer, Buckinghamshire (1841-2); St James the Great, Bethnal Green (1841-4; converted to flats 'c'.1990); St Thomas's, Charterhouse Gardens, London (1841-2; dem. 1909); Windsor, Berkshire (1842-4; altered 1875); Bushley, Worcestershire (1842-3); and Cinderford, Gloucestershire (1843-4). Blore restored or designed stone altar screens at Peterborough Cathedral ('c'.1830; dem. 'c'.1890), Ottery St Mary, Devon ('c'.1832), Bath Abbey (1835; dem. 'c'.1860); began the restoration of the spire of St Mary the Virgin, Oxford (1848-50); and designed fonts and covers for the Savoy Chapel, London (1865), and St Thomas's, Worcester (1867). He also designed a number of monuments. As surveyor to Westminster Abbey ($10 p.a.), from 1827 to 1849, Blore rescued the thirteenth-century retable, installed a screen between nave and choir, remodelled the choir to provide more seating and designed new stalls (1843-8), and restored the cloister and the exterior of the north side of the nave (1849), though the Camdenian organ 'The Ecclesiologist' condemned him as 'entirely unacquainted with the true spirit of Pointed Architecture;... manifestly unfit for the charge of any works in Westminster Abbey' ('The Ecclesiologist', 3, 1844, 99). Eastlake, however, thought that his Westminster restorations 'though wanting in life and vigour, abound in careful detail' (Eastlake, 141). 
Among secular public buildings Blore won the competition for new school buildings (1829) for the Harpur trust at Bedford (and used a similar design at Tavistock grammar school, for the duke of Bedford in 1837), but was unsuccessful in those for the houses of parliament (1835-6) and the Reform Club (by invitation, 1836). His first designs for the Pitt Press at Cambridge were chosen from a limited competition (1829), and a revised, Late Perpendicular design built in 1831-2 at a cost of $10,700. For the Oxford University Press Blore had already built a new wing in 1829. His large Romanesque residential teacher training college at Chelsea for the National Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor in the Principles of the Established Church (1840) included a free-standing chapel and an octagonal training school (1843). Extensive works for the new public school at Marlborough, Wiltshire, from 1844, included a large Decorated chapel (dem. 1884). He also designed a market house for the duke of Bedford at Woburn, and a public library in Perpendicular at Greenock (1835-7, 1846). 
Blore benefited from the increasing wealth and new living requirements of the aristocracy and gentry. His 'Old English' style, presented in delusively attractive drawings, implied length of ancestry, though its precise ingredients might range from late Gothic to Jacobean. Although Blore, together with W. Burn and A. Salvin, was a forerunner in reviving 'Jacobethan' styles, he failed to exploit the Elizabethan E and H plan; instead, his main house formed a rectangular block. Symmetry governed the principal fronts, though Blore, a child of the Picturesque, added interest by exploiting the device of approximate symmetry that became a Victorian architectural cliche, varying slightly elements on either side of the central axis. The lesser ranges are often built in a rougher stone or an older style, implying an aggregative history for the house, as at Merevale. His house, offices, and stables are frequently organized on a diagonal axis as at the Elizabethan Burghley House, Northamptonshire, but more loosely than would have been acceptable before the 1820s. While he placed the more noisome buildings -- stables, brewhouse, washhouse -- farthest from the main house, Blore did not develop the intensely organized hierarchy of service quarters that earned Burn his rosette. None the less, the result was, as Lord Erne, writing of Crom Castle, remarked, 'as comfortable a House as possible and admired by all Visitors for its compactness as well as the Handsome and convenient Arrangement of Rooms &c' (Erne to Blore, CUL, Add. MS 8170, fol. 43). 
In silhouette Blore's houses display greater irregularity than the typical Late Georgian 'Oldentime' mansion, rising from a low stable block to higher offices to a yet higher main block overtopped by a tower, and crowned by chimney-stacks and spiky ornamental chimneys. Blore's vocabulary (often anticipated by Burn) included bays, usually canted, of two storeys, their windows mullioned and transomed; gables, frequently shaped rather than simple; a principal tower, turreted in the style of Burghley (very familiar from his life at Stamford), and a lesser tower (which might have a ventilating function), often octagonal, terminating in an ogee dome; emphatic external chimney-stacks (anticipating Pugin), rising from the ground or corbelled out at a higher level; with a balustrade at roof level; and for enrichment, strapwork, of which Blore was an early proponent. He designed Tudor or Elizabethan exteriors throughout his career, but at Pull Court (1834) he extended his repertory, with Jacobean (hitherto used only internally), perhaps inspired by his acquaintance with Keele. Thereafter he remodelled Jacobean Crewe Hall (1837-8) and subsequently designed similar Hatfield-inspired Jacobean fronts at Merevale (1838) and Capesthorne (1839). Like any competent Late Georgian architect, Blore also designed in the classical style, notably at stuccoed Isleworth (1832) and Grecian Haveringland, Norfolk (1839-43), and at Buckingham Palace. 
Blore employed such modern refinements as gas lighting in the corridors (Worsley), steam heating, water-closets, and large panes of glass; and he used up-to-date techniques: iron girders to span wide spaces, copper casements in his windows, smooth and uniform machine-cut ashlar for facing, superbly constructed but leaving little freedom to the craftsman -- thereby contributing to the habitual smoothness and thin, papery quality for which he has principally been criticized, though most of his clients evidently liked this. One who did not was Ralph Sneyd of Keele Hall, who after years of consideration rejected Blore's 'slightness and poverty of detail' (Sneyd MSS, University of Keele, S/RWV/RS, 300) in favour of Salvin's more massive style, more authentic proportions, and greater feeling for materials. 
Blore received an Oxford DCL degree in 1834. A founder of the British Archaeological Association, he supported his friend Albert Way in the controversy of 1845 which led to the formation of the Royal Archaeological Institute: Way imported 'that delicious sparkling Moselle' for Blore's cheerful dinners (CUL, Add. MS 8170, fol. 87). Blore, a founder member also of the Institute of British Architects (1834), retired from practice in 1849, resigning his surveyorship of Westminster Abbey, but he continued to draw, as well as to lead an active social life for many years at 4 Manchester Square, London, where he had moved about 1839. He died there after 'a long and painful illness' ('The Builder', 13 Sept 1879, 1019) on 4 September 1879, and was buried in Highgate cemetery, Middlesex, on 9 September. He collected his drawings, including 'almost every example of ancient castellated and domestic architecture remaining in England' ('Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries', 352), and views of his own houses, into forty-eight volumes (now in the British Library). He left an $80,000 estate among his four surviving children: Edward William (1828-1885), fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge; George John (1835-1916), headmaster of King's School, Canterbury; and his two daughters. His pupils included F. C. Penrose, Frederick Marrable, Henry Clutton, and William Burges. 


@@@@@


doc= 2680


Blore, Robert (1810-1868), porcelain manufacturer, was born in Derby, the son of a monumental mason working in Bridge Gate. Blore served his apprenticeship at the Old Derby china works, but shortly afterwards left to work briefly at Minton's factory. In 1830 he returned to Derby, and set up a small establishment for himself in his father's yard. There he modelled porcelain vases and figures. In 1835 he returned to the potteries district, this time as an assistant at the factory of G. M. and C. J. Mason at Lane Delph. From there he went to Middlesbrough, Yorkshire, where he superintended the works of Isaac Wilson & Co., earthenware manufacturers. 
Blore is best known for his work in biscuit porcelain which includes a 'Sleeping Endymion' after the Canova original at Chatsworth. This and other figures can be seen at the City Museum and Art Gallery, Derby. He died in 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 2681


Blore, Thomas (1764-1818), county historian, was born in Ashbourne, Derbyshire, on 1 December 1764, the son of John Blore and his wife, Elizabeth, and educated at Queen Elizabeth's Grammar School in Ashbourne. He married Margaret (1761-1791), daughter of John and Martha Blore, also of Ashbourne, on 16 July 1786. A son, Edward Blore, antiquarian artist and architect, was born in Derby on 13 September 1787, but the couple later became estranged. Having first been employed as a solicitor in Derby, Blore went to Hopton Hall, Derbyshire, as agent to the owner, Philip Gell (died 1795). After Gell's death, Blore married his widow, Dorothy, daughter of William Milnes of Chesterfield, in May 1798, and moved to London. The relationship was acrimonious and the couple separated formally in April 1802. Dorothy Blore died in April 1808. Blore entered the Middle Temple, but was never called to the bar. 
From at least 1791 Blore was collecting materials for his intended history of Derbyshire. To encourage subscribers he published in that year his 'Proposals' and three examples of his work: histories of South Wingfield Manor and Manor House, Alderwasley, and Breadsall Priory. In the course of his researches he corresponded extensively with other local antiquaries, such as Daniel Dakeyne of Holt House, Darley Dale. 
Blore transferred his attention to Hertfordshire while living at Benwick Hall, near Hertford, and collected historical notes which formed the nucleus of Robert Clutterbuck's history of the county, eventually published between 1815 and 1827. He then moved successively to Mansfield Woodhouse in Nottinghamshire; Burr House, near Bakewell, Derbyshire; Manton in Rutland; and Stamford in Lincolnshire. The pattern of ambitious plans partially realized, first seen in Derbyshire, was repeated in Rutland, for which only the second part of the first volume of Blore's projected 'History and Antiquities of the County of Rutland' was published in 1811. For a short period he edited 'Drakard's Stamford News' and he also produced an account of Stamford's charitable foundations in 1813, and a guide to Burghley House and its collections in 1815. 
Thomas Blore died in London on 10 November 1818, and his memorial stone in Paddington church recorded that his 'days were embittered and [his] life was shortened by intense application'. He was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and all his historical writings are characterized by thoroughness and careful detail, a feature recognized by later antiquaries such as Llewellynn Jewitt (1816-1886), who regretted that Blore's projects had met with 'a lack of proper encouragement'. The bulk of Blore's papers are now in Cambridge University Library, although some survive in the Dakeyne and Gell collections in Derbyshire Record Office. 


@@@@@


doc= 2682


Blount, Charles, fifth Baron Mountjoy (1516-1544), courtier and patron of learning, was the eldest son of William Blount, fourth Baron Mountjoy (c.1478-1534), and his third wife, Alice Brown, 'nee' Kebel 
(or Keble; died 1521)
. Charles was born on 28 June 1516 in Tournai, where his father was governor, and after William was recalled in 1517 to resume his role as chamberlain to Katherine of Aragon, his son was in due time made a page in her household. Charles's education was based on the most rigorous humanist standards and his tutors were remarkable for their learning. In 1522 Jan van der Cruyce, a graduate of the university at Louvain and a friend of Erasmus, travelled to England to become private tutor to Mountjoy's children. He remained in the household until 1527, when he returned to Louvain and was appointed a professor of Greek. Possibly on the recommendation of Erasmus, van der Cruyce was succeeded by Petrus Vulcanius of Bruges, also a graduate of Louvain, who remained in England until 1531. In 1531 Erasmus praised Charles Blount for his fine written style, but after Vulcanius's departure realized that the credit should have gone to the preceptor rather than the student. John Palsgrave, who composed 'L'esclarcissement de la langue francoyse' (printed in 1530 and dedicated to Henry VIII) and was tutor to Henry Fitzroy, also gave tuition to the sons of several court noblemen, Charles Blount among them. One of his fellow schoolmates in this group was Thomas Howard, son of the second duke of Norfolk, whose own tutor at Lambeth had been John Leland. Leland in turn praised Charles's skill in Latin and presented a book along with commendatory verses to him. In 1523 Juan Luis Vives wrote a short educational treatise dedicated to Charles, 'De ratione studii puerilis ad Carolum Montioium Guilielmi filium'. This served as a parallel to the tract on female education Vives had composed in the same year for the benefit of Mary Tudor. Erasmus added Charles's name to that of his father in the dedication to the 1528 edition of the 'Adagia' and Charles was the dedicatee of the next two editions (1533, 1536) as well. Erasmus also dedicated his 1531 edition of Livy to him. 
About August 1530 Charles Blount married Anne, daughter of Robert, second Baron Willoughby de Broke. Her mother was Dorothy, daughter of Thomas Grey, fourth marquess of Dorset, who had become the fourth wife of Charles's father. Succeeding to the title after his father's death in 1534, Mountjoy was regular in his attendance in the House of Lords. In May 1537 he was one of the peers summoned for the trial of lords Darcy and Hussey and he was also on the panel of 3 December 1538 for the trial of Henry Pole, Lord Montague, and Henry Courtenay, marquess of Exeter, his own brother-in-law. His country house was at Apethorpe, Northamptonshire, and in London he lived in Silver Street. 
After the dissolution of Syon Abbey in 1539 Mountjoy granted asylum at his London house to the pious, learned, and outspokenly conservative priest Richard Whitford, who had been patronized by his father. Whitford remained in the household until his death in 1542 and may have acted as tutor to Mountjoy's children. Like his father, Mountjoy was deeply interested in the humanist educational programme and he tried to engage the learned scholar and educationist Roger Ascham, then teaching at Cambridge, as a tutor to his eldest son and secretary to himself. Although Ascham did not take the position -- and he also refused a similar offer from Margaret Roper -- he admired Mountjoy and referred in flattering terms to his learning, likening his household for its patronage of learning to that of the Medici. Mountjoy left 40 marks in his will to provide lectures for the children of Westbury under the Plain, Wiltshire, for the succeeding two years. 
Mountjoy drew up his will on 30 April 1544, just before embarking for France with the expeditionary force. In it he admonished his children to 'kepe themselfes worthye of so moche honour as to be called hereafter to dye for ther maister and countrey' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/30, fol. 343). He also composed his own epitaph in English verse. Present with Henry VIII at the siege of Boulogne he died on 10 October of that year at Hooke, Dorset (formerly the home of his mother), probably from illness contracted on campaign. In his will he reckoned his assets, in money, goods, and debts owed to him, at nearly $2100. He was buried at St Mary Aldermary, London. His widow remarried and lived until 1582. 
Mountjoy's heir was his eldest son, 


