@@@@@


doc= 25491


Shuttleworth, Obadiah (c.1675-1734), organist, was born in London, the son of Thomas Shuttleworth of Spitalfields, a teacher of music and transcriber of Corelli's works. He became a skilled violinist, took part in Thomas Britton's concerts, and was leader of the concerts established about 1728 at the Swan tavern, Cornhill. In 1724 he succeeded Philip Hart as organist of St Michael Cornhill, and was one of the organists at the Temple Church. His playing at the Temple attracted large crowds, although some claimed he was a better harpsichordist than organist. He composed much violin music, but only two concertos, adapted from sonatas by Corelli, were published ('c'.1726). An Obadiah Shuttleworth and his wife, Anne, had five children baptized between 1724 and 1732; when Shuttleworth died on 2 May 1734, he was apparently survived by a widow and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 25492


Shuttleworth, Philip Nicholas (1782-1842), bishop of Chichester, was born at Kirkham, Lancashire, on 9 February 1782, the second son of Humphrey Shuttleworth (1734/5-1812), vicar of Kirkham from 1771 to 1812, and of Preston, Lancashire, from 1784 to 1809, who wrote some tracts against the papal pretensions. His mother was Anne, only child of Philip Hoghton. Philip was educated at Preston grammar school, and in 1796 entered Winchester College, where Dr Goddard nominated him to a scholarship. He was elected a scholar of New College, Oxford, in 1800, and graduated BA in 1806, MA in 1811, and BD and DD in 1822. In 1803 he won the chancellor's Latin verse prize, the subject being Byzantium. Soon after graduating he became tutor to the Hon. Algernon Herbert, and at a subsequent date to Lord Holland's son, Charles Richard Fox, later a general and distinguished numismatist. He was admitted to the Holland circle, and visited the continent with Lord and Lady Holland in 1814 and 1815. Shuttleworth was tutor and fellow of New College until 1822, and proctor of the university in 1820. 
In October 1822 Shuttleworth was unanimously chosen warden of New College, an academic position which enabled him to marry on 29 July 1823 Emma Martha, daughter of George Welch of High Leck, Tunstall, Lancashire. The eldest of their children was the translator and poet (Emma) Frances Bevan. On 19 November 1824 Lord Holland presented him to the rectory of Foxley, Wiltshire. As a strong whig, Shuttleworth's election was welcomed by Samuel Parr as 'a triumph of learning over pedantry and of constitutional principles over sacerdotal intolerance' ('Works of Samuel Parr', 8.223). He supported Catholic emancipation and, as a member of the university's hebdomadal board, proposed in 1834 a relaxation of the religious tests which excluded dissenters. In 1836 he defended R. D. Hampden, the heterodox divinity professor. An effective preacher from the university pulpit, he published two volumes entitled 'Sermons on some of the Leading Principles of Christianity' (1827-34). A textbook, 'A Paraphrastic Translation of the Apostolic Epistles' (1829), reached a fifth edition in 1854. His 'The Consistency of the Whole Scheme of Revelation with itself, and with Human Reason' (1832) was recommended to students as a supplement to their reading of Bishop Butler. His churchmanship was orthodox, though his attack on the Tractarians, who regarded him with particular aversion, in a sermon 'Not Tradition but Scripture' (1838), was admired by evangelicals. In his own college he attempted reforms, notably presiding over the surrender of the ancient privilege by which New College men were exempt from university examinations. The deviser of a railway to speed the circulation of port in the senior common room, he was a noted wit, whose ambitions for ecclesiastical promotion were predicted in his schoolboy verse 'Make me, O Sphere-descended Queen, A Bishop, or, at least, a Dean' (Tuckwell, 169). 
Shuttleworth's trimming tendencies delayed his advancement. 'His conscientiousness, tho' sincere, has the gait of indecision and his conciliation and ingenuity assume the appearance, and perhaps in some degree the reality, of timidity and compromise', Lord Holland noted ('The Holland House Diaries', 1977, 344). He gave offence to his whig patrons by signing an address early in 1835 urging Peel to remain in office, Melbourne subsequently passing him over for vacant mitres (notably Salisbury in 1837) and only with reluctance promoting him to the see of Chichester in September 1840. His most significant act as bishop was ironically to appoint, in disregard of his wife's opposition, the 'Puseyite' Henry Manning to an archdeaconry. 
Shuttleworth died at the episcopal palace, Chichester, on 7 January 1842. Pusey saw in the sudden removal of this inveterate opponent of Tractarianism a token of God's presence within the Church of England (H. P. Liddon, 'Life of Edward Bouverie Pusey', 2, 1893, 294). Shuttleworth was survived by his widow, a son (who died in 1848), and three daughters. His occasional verse was published after his death in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (3rd ser., 11, 1861, 245, 542) and in the 'Life of William Buckland' (1894). His 'Specimen of a geological lecture' was included in C. G. B. Daubeny's collection of 'Fugitive Poems Connected with Natural History and Physical Science' (1869). 


@@@@@


doc= 25493


Shuttleworth, Robert James (1810-1874), botanist and conchologist, was born at Dawlish, Devon, in February 1810, the eldest son of James Shuttleworth (died 1846) of Barton Lodge, Preston, Lancashire, and his first wife, Anna Maria, daughter of the Hon. and Revd Richard Henry Roper, dean of Clones. His mother died of consumption a few weeks after his birth; his father married again in 1815 and settled in Switzerland. Shuttleworth was chiefly brought up by his mother's relatives. He was sent to school at Geneva, studying under Seringe, keeper of the Candolle Herbarium, and botanizing on the mountains near Geneva. At the age of eighteen he went to Germany, passing a winter at Saxe-Weimar where he enjoyed the court life and came to know Goethe. He also spent some time at Frankfurt and Heidelberg before being recalled to his father's house at Soleure (apparently his father feared his becoming too irresponsible and boisterous if left to his own devices). 
Retaining his interest in botany, Shuttleworth made a considerable collection in the Jura during the summer of 1830. From the autumn of that year until the end of 1832 he studied in the medical faculty of the University of Edinburgh. During this period he also made a vacation tour in the highlands, and helped his stepbrother Blake on his estate in the west of Ireland during the famine of 1831 and 1832. On 11 January 1833 Shuttleworth was appointed to a captaincy in the duke of Lancaster's own regiment, but after returning to Soleure in the following winter he married Susette, daughter of Comte de Sury of Soleure, and settled at Bern. The couple later had a son, Henry, and a daughter who died in childhood. 
In Switzerland, Shuttleworth resumed his botanizing. He collected on the Grimsel and the Oberland, and worked particularly on red snow ('Chlamydomonas') and other freshwater algae, until weak eyesight compelled him to abandon the microscope. In 1835 he purchased the extensive herbarium and library of Joseph August Schultes of Zurich. Between 1840 and 1850 he became interested in conchology, an interest sparked by a friendship with Jean de Charpentier of Bex, himself a zealous conchologist. 
Shuttleworth spent money freely on his researches. He sent the collector Blauner of Bern to Corsica, the Canaries, and ultimately to Puerto Rico (where he died of consumption). Other collectors in the Americas were also supported through Shuttleworth's purchase of their shells, plants, and seeds. He worked up a large number of the plants, forming a very extensive annotated herbarium. 
Shuttleworth suffered from gout, a condition which led him to winter in the south, where he botanized in the Var and Alpes-Maritimes. This resulted in a 'Catalogue des plantes de Provence' (1889). Indeed, many of his botanical discoveries were in part due to his constant comparison of French with Italian types. His letters and the notes in his herbarium also evince the critical caution which made him apt to recognize minute differences. However, following the death in 1866 of his son, Henry, then a medical student, Shuttleworth moved to Hyeres, and gave up scientific work. 
Shuttleworth joined the Botanical Society of Edinburgh as an original member in 1836, became a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1856, and was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Basel. Following his death, at Hyeres on 19 April 1874, Shuttleworth's collection of shells, considered by Mousson ('Journal de Conchyliologie', 23.99) one of the most remarkable in Europe, was presented to the state museum at Bern. His herbarium of more than 150,000 specimens of flowering plants and 20,000 cryptogams was added to the British Museum collection. An account of the various collections comprised in this herbarium appears in the official report of the department of botany in the museum for 1877 ('Journal of Botany, British and Foreign', 2nd ser., 7, 1878, 179-80). 
Shuttleworth was the author of some twenty papers, including several on the land and freshwater shells of Corsica. He also published 'Nouvelles observations sur la matiere coloriante de la neige rouge' (1840), and 'Notitiae malacologicae' (1856). 'Notitiae' contained nine lithographic plates, of which eight were unsigned, and presumably by Shuttleworth. The second part of 'Notitiae' was issued in 1878, edited with synonymy by Dr Paul Fischer and containing a 'Nekrolog von R. J. Shuttleworth', by Guthnick, director of the Bern Botanical Garden. 


@@@@@


doc= 25494


Sibbald, James (c.1595-1647), Church of Scotland minister, said to have been of an ancient family in the Mearns, matriculated at Marischal College, Aberdeen, in 1614 and graduated MA in 1618. Two years later he was the first person appointed to act as regent of fourth-year classes in natural philosophy, continuing in that position until 1626. Appointed in 1625 to the first charge of St Nicholas's Church in New Aberdeen, in 1627, following presentation of a thesis later published, he was made a BD by King's College, Aberdeen, and in 1628 a DD, though the non-academic use of that degree was disputed in Scotland at the time. He was noted for his abilities in oriental languages, and in both divine and secular studies. 
Sibbald was one of the Aberdonian divines who preached at the funeral of Patrick Forbes of Corse in 1635. His sermon, published as 'Holinesse to the Lord' and based on 'Exodus' chapter 28, expressed anti-Catholicism and Calvinist ideas of predestination, both recurrent themes in his writing. In 1637 Sibbald, along with John Forbes of Corse, Alexander Scrogie, William Leslie, Robert Baron, and Alexander Ross, encouraged the unification schemes of John Durie by giving him their opinion that Lutherans agreed with the doctrine of the Church of Scotland in those points which were agreed by the ancient church. In 1638, when the national covenant was being promoted in Aberdeen, those six ministers, together with William Guild, for a time, prepared questions for the covenanting representatives and went on to engage them in a lengthy printed debate on the authority and doctrine of the covenant. In early October of that year, Sibbald signed the king's covenant which was being circulated in opposition to the national covenant. He was elected, along with Robert Baron, to the general assembly of 1638, but neither attended. 
In 1639 Sibbald left Aberdeen for England, where he and Baron offered their services to Charles I, but, having met a cooler reception than expected, Sibbald returned to Aberdeen, which had been occupied by covenanters in his absence. In Aberdeen he accepted the political and ecclesiastical situation to the extent of reminding his parishioners not to keep Christmas day, as celebration of it had been banned by the general assembly. Despite some outward appearance of conformity he continued to refuse to subscribe the national covenant, and was at the Aberdeen general assembly of 1640, charged on this count, together with Arminianism and circulating William Forbes's unpublished writings. It was also claimed that he maintained the blessing of private baptism, approved of Lent, called communion 'viaticum' and taught that alms would discharge sin: all these were contrary to the covenanters' interpretation of Calvinist doctrine; all were admitted by Sibbald. He was deposed on 6 August of that year, and was replaced as minister at St Nicholas's by Andrew Cant, one of the region's covenanting ministers. Sibbald's books and papers were seized, but returned to him. 
In 1640 Sibbald again sailed for England, and from there went to Ireland, where he received a benefice. He spent the remainder of his career as a protestant episcopalian minister in Dublin, where he was noted for his work with the poor and ill. In 1646 he petitioned Ormond, the lord lieutenant, to preserve episcopalian protestantism in the forms of the 'Book of Common Prayer', public worship, and episcopacy. 
Sibbald died in Dublin in 1647 of plague, contracted while working with the ill of that city. He left a widow, Elizabeth Nicolson, and two children, who were granted $200 Scots ($16 13's'. 4died sterling) by the Scottish parliament of 1661, after the restoration of both the monarch and episcopacy, and because of his support for both institutions. After his death, fifteen of his sermons were published as 'Diverse Select Sermons' (Aberdeen, 1658). 


@@@@@


doc= 25495


Sibbald, James (1747-1803), bookseller and journal editor, was born at Whitlaw farm, Roxburghshire, the third of the seven children of John Sibbald (1714-1781), farmer, and Margaret Grieve. After attending the Selkirk grammar school he worked as a farmer, grazing his sheep at the farms of Newtown and Borthwickbrae, while living at Whitlaw and reading in his leisure hours such works as Withering's 'Botany' and Mair's 'Book-Keeping', bought from his bookseller cousin Charles Elliot of Edinburgh. At thirty-two he gave up the land for the book trade and journalism, and became a scholar of Scottish literary antiquities. 
Sibbald started up in trade by buying the Edinburgh Circulating Library of Mrs Margaret Yair, which formerly belonged to Allan Ramsay. In preparation, he left his brother John and a friend to sell off the sheep, and went to London in February 1779 with money to buy a large stock of books, over the next seven months lodging with a Miss Moore, milliner, at 178 Bishopsgate Street. He inspected circulating libraries, drawing ideas from Thomas Lowndes's and particularly from John Bell's British Library. Sibbald's rapid and intense introduction to bookselling, and to the relationship of the Edinburgh and London trades, can be traced in the letters of Charles Elliot, which contain a torrent of introductions, commissions, and advice. Copyright was one issue. 'Dear Jamie,' Elliot wrote early on, 'take great care when in company of great London booksellers and offer no books from me that have first been printed in London. You may not be properly acquainted with their fine ideas of Literary property' (Elliot to Sibbald, 26 April 1779). Sibbald carried out book exchanges and other business around St Paul's Churchyard with John Rivington, Joseph Johnson, and Carnan and Newbery; in Paternoster Row with Thomas Longman, George Robinson, John Bew, and Richardson and Urquhart; in Fleet Street with George Kearsley and John Murray; and in the Strand with John Nourse, John Knox, Thomas Cadell, James Mathews, and Alexander Donaldson; and he also visited William Fox, Thomas Bell, Charles Dilly, the printer William Strahan, and the stationer William Bloxham. Sibbald acquired from Bloxham a list of English country booksellers, looked after a pamphlet on the American war, 'Historical Anecdotes' (1779), that Elliot published as 'London: printed for J. Bew', registered this title for Elliot at Stationers' Hall, and completed the first transaction for himself by exchanging George Carr's 'Sermons' (an Elliot and Cadell publication) for Robinson and Bew books. Asked to send up the best printing ink to Edinburgh, he was warned to go through a friendly bookseller to avoid a curious London practice: 'when they learn it is for Scotland they often send their Trash or spoiled kind' (Elliot to Sibbald, 3 May 1779). 
Late in September 1779 Sibbald returned to Scotland on a borrowed horse and worked for some weeks at Elliot's shop in Parliament Square in Edinburgh for a guinea a week, double the wage of Elliot's clerk Thomas Dobson. Meanwhile he wrote his first catalogue for 20,000 volumes in English, French, and Italian, as well as music, then reopened the expanded circulating library a few doors away at 28 Parliament Square in November, at the start of university classes. Burns visited in 1786-7, and the shop was frequented by the young Walter Scott. Scott said he fastened 'like a tiger, upon every collection of old songs or romances which chance threw into my way, or which my scrutiny was able to discover on the dusty shelves of James Sibbald's circulating library in the Parliament Square'. He said the library contained 'many rare and curious works, seldom found is such a collection. Mr. Sibbald himself, a man of rough manners but of some taste and judgment, cultivated music and poetry, and in his shop I had a distant view of some literary characters, Burns among others. (Lockhart, 46)' Sibbald contributed to an Edinburgh fad in the early 1780s when he sold the latest coloured mezzotint engravings from London, advertising in the 'Caledonian Mercury' favourite titles with the public, such as 'Kate of Aberdeen' (7 August 1782; March-July 1783). Elliot described him as a 'perfect judge', who 'from his extensive dealing in prints, has spread such a rage for purchasing, that no gentle house is without its select collection', Elliot's home included (Elliot to David Mitchell, Goteborg, 15 Sept 1783). Public interest is said to have lessened when Sibbald was discovered colouring the prints himself. 
Sibbald multiplied his activities when he established both a magazine and a newspaper and managed a paper mill. In 1785 he began the 'Edinburgh Magazine, or, Literary Miscellany', a journal of literary sophistication which regularly had an engraved view and a page of music; it appeared monthly and sold for 1's'. An agreement was made with John Murray the next year to exchange 100 copies of the magazine for the 'English Review' and for both booksellers to share the imprints. One of the regular contributors was Lord Hailes, whose attention was first caught by Sibbald's articles, unsigned, on Scottish antiquities. Sibbald was the first reviewer to acclaim the genius of Robert Burns, and his Kilmarnock poems in the October 1786 number: 'The author is indeed a striking example of native genius bursting through the obscurity of poverty and the obstructions of laborious life.' Sibbald continued to promote him with extracts over the next two months. In the December issue he reprinted Henry Mackenzie's review in 'The Lounger' and said, 'His fame is now spreading rapidly.' Burns responded with gratitude for the way Sibbald had 'befriended an obscure man and young Author in your last three Magazines -- I can only say, Sir, I feel the weight of the obligation' (Burns to Sibbald, Jan 1787). In 1790 Sibbald also started a thrice-weekly newspaper, the 'Edinburgh Herald', in which he proposed to have literary intelligence and essays on life and manners as well as public and political news and advertisements. He published Burns's 'Tam o' Shanter' on 18 March 1791, a month before the poem appeared in Grose's 'Antiquities of Scotland'. The 'Herald' was characterized by its enemy the 'Political Review' on 20 June 1792 as 'a vehicle for ministerial dirt' taken from 'The Times' and 'The Oracle' of London, and 'dealt out in pailfuls more offensive than before' (Couper, 2.184). 
From 1788 to 1798 Sibbald was managing partner of the Auchendinny paper mill on the North Esk, 8 miles south of Edinburgh. Auchendinny served the Scottish and London trade and gave Sibbald the opportunity of a substantial income; in 1798 his joint cash account with the owner, William Cadell, stood at nearly $1500 (Cadell of Grange papers). While there Sibbald experienced the temper of the author James Bruce of Kinnaird. After Bruce signed a contract with Robinson of London to publish 'Travels to Discover the Source of the Nile' (in an edition of 2000 copies, for a payment of $6666), Sibbald seized the chance of being associated as the printer. He brought in the printer James Ruthven of Edinburgh as a partner, offered the low price of $495 to print 360 sheets in five volumes quarto, and signed a contract with Bruce between April and May 1789; Auchendinny would also supply the paper. Bruce drew for him a mock title-page whose imprint began 'Edinburgh, printed by J. Sibbald, under the author's immediate inspection' but this was a false promise. Sibbald said that while he was ill with a fever in June and July 1789 and away from the project, Bruce induced Ruthven to increase the production to twelve sheets a week instead of nine by substituting his name for Sibbald's on the imprint; this deletion caused Sibbald to be 'chagrined a little' (Bruce 'v.' Sibbald and Ruthven). The relationship, poor during printing, grew worse when Bruce accused Sibbald of sabotage. He said 'that Arch rascal Sibbald' had deliberately supplied a batch of yellowed and underweight paper for the book and asked Cadell to dismiss him; Cadell found the charge was unjustified (Cadell of Grange papers). Later, when the imperial paper sent to London for the king's presentation copy was found to be badly soiled, Bruce said it was intentional on Sibbald's part, and in November 1790 sued Sibbald and Ruthven at the court of session for failing to deliver the book in a workmanlike manner, claiming $216 in loss and expenses. After much evidence from both sides the case hinged on a letter from Bruce's clerk, which Sibbald produced, acknowledging arrival of the printed sheets in London in good order, and in 1792 Sibbald and Ruthven were cleared of the charge. 
Sibbald gave over the running of the 'Edinburgh Magazine' to Laurie and Symington in 1791 and ended his editorship in June 1792, passing it on to Dr Robert Anderson. He stopped editing the 'Edinburgh Herald' by 1796. Sibbald also rented his circulating library to Laurie and Symington from 1790 to 1800, for an annual fee of $200, which dropped to 100 guineas. He continued the bookshop for a few more years -- publishing Thomson's 'The Seasons' (1789), and 'The History of Tom Jones' (1791) -- and took to the court of session to recover debts, suing, among many others, the estate of Adam Smith for $1 12's'. 6died He also won a judgment against Thomas Dobson for $42 worth of books sent to Philadelphia. In February 1796 he sold his house in Mausie Smith's Close in the Canongate, and was referred to as 'late bookseller, Edinburgh, now in London' (register of Sasines, Edinburgh, no. 6404). He had visited London frequently, and this sojourn, which was to last several years, appears to have been relaxed: when a relative sought his whereabouts, he replied 'My lodging is in Soho, and my business is so so' (Chambers, 'Scots.', 260). While in London he wrote 'The Record of the Public Ministry of Jesus the Christ' (printed at Edinburgh in 1798). He returned to Edinburgh by 1800, when he took back his circulating library. His 'Chronicle of Scottish Poetry: from the Thirteenth Century to the Union of the Crowns' (4 vols.), published on 4 December 1802 and priced $1 4's'. in boards, offered the public extracts from the Bannatyne manuscript and followed earlier collections by Allan Ramsay and Lord Hailes. Walter Scott, picking up on a footnote, remarked that 'A heavy personage here of the name of Sibbald' had criticized his tardiness in publishing 'Sir Tristrem', but advised that the book be bought as the fourth volume 'contains some curious remarks on the ancient Scottish music & an uncommonly good glossary' (Scott to George Ellis, Dec 1802); he praised the glossary publicly in the 'Edinburgh Review' of October 1803. 
Sibbald, described as 'a man of eccentric, but benevolent and amiable character' (Chambers, 'Scots.', 261), was a member of many convivial clubs. In a John Kay caricature of 1785, 'Connoisseurs', he is portrayed with a group of friends, looking through a glass at a print of 'The Three Graces'. The centrality of his circulating library in Edinburgh life is depicted in the 1856 painting by W. Borthwick Johnstone of Scott seeing Burns there; others in the group include James Bruce, while Sibbald is shown fetching a book from a shelf for Lord Monboddo. Sibbald died, unmarried, at his home on Leith Walk on 9 April 1803, and was buried on 12 April in South Leith churchyard, in William Sibbald's tomb. 


@@@@@


doc= 25496


Sibbald, Sir Robert (1641-1722), physician and geographer, was born on 15 April 1641 in Blackfriars Wynd off Edinburgh's High Street, the fifth child and third son of David Sibbald (1589-1660), of Rankeillour, Fife, keeper of the great seal of Scotland, and his wife, Margaret Boyd (1606-1672), eldest daughter of Robert Boyd (1575-1645), advocate, of Kippis, near Torphichen, Linlithgowshire. Little is known of Sibbald's early days. His autobiography (which is incomplete and selective) relates how, although 'a tender child', he managed to get 'past all the diseases commonly incident to children without any manifest hazard' ('Memoirs'). In 1645 the family fled Linlithgow because of the plague. In 1650, as the family estate was in Fife, Sibbald was sent to the high school in Cupar. During the following year he witnessed Monck's sacking of Dundee. Sibbald was also educated at the Royal High School in Edinburgh and was a student at the university there from 1653 to 1659, studying under William Tweedy. After receiving his MA on 14 July 1659 Sibbald studied divinity at Edinburgh for about six months, stimulated mainly by Principal Robert Leighton, later archbishop of Glasgow. Sibbald's scholarly habits -- 'I shunned the playes and divertissements the other students followed' ('Memoirs') -- earned him the nickname 'Diogenes in dolio'. 
Leighton's influence turned Sibbald aside from the factionalism of church and state, and in March 1660 he sailed to Leiden to study medicine. He stayed in Leiden for eighteen months, and studied anatomy and surgery under Van Horne and Franciscus Sylvius, botany under Adolphus Vorstius, and chemistry under Christian Marcgraf. Sibbald also met Niels Stenson, who, as Nicolaus Steno, later became professor of anatomy at Padua, and theorist on the earth sciences. Sibbald was also familiar with chemistry and materia medica. Each of these influences helped to shape his later interests. From Leiden he went to Paris, and after a nine-month stay, in which he met Gui Patin, he moved to Angers, where he graduated MD on 17 June 1662. He then briefly resided in London, where he met Sir Robert Moray and other virtuosi introduced to him by his cousins, Andrew Balfour (1630-1694), a pupil of William Harvey and a later scientific associate of Sibbald, and Patrick Drummond. Sibbald returned to Scotland on 30 October 1662. 
Sibbald's intentions on settling in Edinburgh were not ambitious: 'The designe I proposed to myself was to passe quietly through the world, and content myself with a moderate fortune' ('Memoirs'). But from this period he began to develop a deeper interest in natural history, geography, and antiquarianism, which were all to form parts of his vision for the creation of useful natural knowledge. By late 1667 he and Balfour had established a botanical garden in Edinburgh, in grounds belonging to Holyroodhouse. Both there and in the second site in the Trinity Hospital the garden became a major site for plants of use in materia medica. It was run by James Sutherland, later first professor of botany at Edinburgh University and author, with Sibbald's assistance, of the unpublished 'Hortus medicus Edinburgensis'. Between 1679 and 1680, Sibbald, together with Balfour, Thomas Burnet, Alexander Stevenson, and Archibald Pitcairne, founded a medical virtuoso club, which became from 1681 the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh (RCPE). Like the botanic garden, the RCPE owed much of its success to political influence, particularly that of James Drummond, fourth earl of Perth and chancellor of Scotland, through whose patronage Sibbald was knighted on 30 September 1682, appointed physician-in-ordinary to the king, and made geographer royal for Scotland. 
In 1684 Sibbald produced a 'Pharmacopoia Edinburgensis' and on 4 December of that year was elected president of the RCPE. On 5 March 1685 he was appointed the first professor of medicine at Edinburgh University. Influenced by his patron, Sibbald became a Roman Catholic in 1685, a conversion which shocked his contemporaries, prompted a riotous mob to storm his house in Edinburgh's Carrubers Close, and led him to resign his presidency of the RCPE and flee to London. There he met Sir Robert Boyle, Samuel Collins, Thomas Witherley, Walter Charleton, and other members of the Royal Society, and on 29 March 1686 was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. Sibbald later renounced Catholicism and re-joined the Protestant church. Boswell claimed later that Sibbald's return to Protestantism was because 'he found the rigid fasting prescribed by the Church very severe upon him' ('TLS', 8 Dec 1932). However, what was perceived as his lack of principle harmed his reputation; and these events, together with the fact that he had no salary guaranteed, influenced him not to take up the chair at Edinburgh. 
Sibbald formally began his geographical work in 1682, although he had already been collecting chorographical and antiquarian material with a view to the description of Scotland. During that year he published an 'Advertisement' and a broadside circular requesting geographical information for an intended two-volume description of Scotland. Some of this never-completed work appeared in his 1683 'Nuncius Scoto-Britannus, sive, Admonitio de Atlante Scotio, seu, Descriptione Scotiae antiquae et modernae'. In 1684 he published his most elaborate work, 'Scotia illustrata, sive, Prodromus historiae naturalis', an essay on Scotland's natural history in the widest sense, from natural phenomena, through the plant and animal kingdoms, to human disease. From then until his death Sibbald was active in the fields of natural history, chorographical description, and Roman antiquities, and in promoting useful knowledge as the basis of Scotland's national identity. His cabinet of natural history specimens, gathered together with those of Balfour, was presented to the University of Edinburgh with a catalogue, 'Auctarium Musaei Balfouriani e Musaeo Sibbaldino' (published 1697), modelled on Nehemiah Grew's catalogue of the Royal Society's Repository. This collection became an important part of Edinburgh University's Natural History Museum. Between 1698 and 1701 Sibbald twice proposed the founding of a Royal Society of Scotland, an institution to mirror the Royal Society of London and the Dublin Philosophical Society. His 1699 pamphlet on 'Provision for the Poor in Time of Dearth and Scarcity' and his unpublished 'A discourse anent the improvements may be made in Scotland for advancing the wealth of the kingdom' (1698) show Sibbald to have been concerned with promoting Scotland's interests through moral enlightenment and economic improvement. 
Sibbald's geographical and natural history work reflects but develops the chorographic traditions of Robert Plot, William Petty, William Camden, and others. He extended antiquarian chorographies by practising a Baconian empiricism as a means of consolidating royal authority and as a basis to inductive national and natural knowledge. Sibbald's commission on appointment as geographer royal was to produce a natural history of Scotland, and a geographical description that combined historical data with the results of contemporary survey, which was to be based on returns to his circulated questionnaire. Geography as a whole was for Sibbald not only 'of much use for the life of man' and 'a noble Science' ('Nuncius Scoto-Britannus'), it was also crucial to correct understanding 'in Theology, Natural Philosophy, History,... Merchandising and the Practice of Medicine' (ibid.). Geography's place within a wider useful natural knowledge embracing natural history and medicine is perhaps unsurprising, given Sibbald's own interests and disciplinary training. But it is of interest to see how he undertook his work. 
Sibbald knew and drew from ancient and classical geographers, as well as from contemporary scholars, and drew together existing manuscripts. He also collaborated with the map maker John Adair (although the two had an uneasy relationship). Sibbald worked with John Slezer in the production of his 'Theatrum Scotiae' and was a contributor to the 1695 edition of William Camden's 'Britannia'; through connections with Edward Lhuyd and the Royal Society he used Martin Martin, author of 'A Late Voyage to St Kilda' (1698) and 'A Description of the Western Islands of Scotland' (1703), as a source of knowledge on the Hebrides and the highlands. Sibbald also drew together many of the maps of Robert Gordon of Straloch, and some of those from Timothy Pont's geographical survey of Scotland in the late sixteenth century. There is no complete list of respondents to his 1682 enquiries, but surviving manuscript material records about sixty-five local respondents. Many were ministers. For example, James Wallace, who compiled a lengthy report for Sibbald on Orkney, was a Puritan natural historian and physician, and author of 'A Description of the Isles of Orkney' (1693), to which Sibbald added an essay on ancient geography. 
For various reasons -- too little cash, confrontations with Adair and Slezer, too much material, lack of focus -- Sibbald's intended 'Scottish Atlas' was never published. The 1683 'Nuncius' and his 1684 'Scotia illustrata' are the only major published expressions of Sibbald's view of geography as a means to national natural knowledge. The material contains Hippocratic discourses on the quality of places, sections on flora and fauna, mountains, forests, arable and other agricultural geographies, and topographical features. The inhabitants of Scotland are viewed as 'products of their country, fitted both for war and the practice of the arts by virtue of the roughness of their native soil and the purity of the air'. Some of the regional material was later expanded and separately published, notably his 'History Ancient and Modern of the Sheriffdom of Fife and Kinross' (1710) and 'The Description of the Isles of Orkney and Zetland' (1711). 
As a physician Sibbald, who was physician to James VII, advocated what has been termed an 'old-new' medicine, a medicine improved by a return to classical principles, but supported by modern observations. He paid close attention to the predisposing causes of disease and to the nature of disease, and explored the efficacy of botanical cures by drawing on Scottish plant life. His lectures on medicine and natural history, advertised in 1706, were never given, as Sibbald considered the students ill prepared and his topics too advanced. His botanical work was admired by Linnaeus, who named the genus 'Sibbaldia' in his honour, but Sibbald saw greater value in his natural and medical work, not as classificatory knowledge for its own sake, but as a means to advance both Scotland and the empirical natural sciences. 
Sibbald's influence rests, then, in his attention to what he called 'the Knowledge of Natural things that are the products of this Country' as 'usefull to human lyfe' ('Memoirs'). Like his counterparts in Europe, Sibbald was concerned with contemporary survey as current knowledge and as a means to the future condition of the nation. Sibbald's manuscript 'Description of Scotland' pays considerable attention to the economic potential of the nation. His archaeological and antiquarian pursuits and numerous publications on Roman Scotland established the utility of artefacts to national identity. A similar set of interests informed his 1701 'Caetologia', an unpublished marine natural history. Sibbald was much interested in whales, commenting on specimens washed ashore in east Scotland in 1691 and 1701. The blue whale was once known as 'Balaenoptera Sibbaldi'. In addition to natural observation, this 1701 work remarks on potential improvements in navigation and the connections between profitable fisheries and national well-being, issues he earlier explored in his 1698 'Discourse anent the improvements'. The focus here was on the state of the nation in the future; as Sibbald put it: 'What is wanting to make the people in all those places Happy'. 
Sibbald's personal life was often less than happy. On 26 April 1677 he married Anna Lowes of Merchiston, who miscarried twin boys in a fall that year. A daughter, Katherine, born on 12 October 1678, died soon after, and his wife died on 27 December 1678. He married Anna Orrack in November 1682: a daughter, Elizabeth, born on 9 April 1685, died in 1686. A further daughter was stillborn in 1686. Two daughters survived -- Elizabeth, born in November 1687, and Euphame, born 2 September 1688 -- but a further child, Jean, born on 4 September 1690, died of smallpox in 1692. He lost many personal papers in a house fire on 20 March 1694, was struck in the face by a golf club in October 1690, and had a serious fall in July 1692 after tangling his spurs; and financial difficulties forced him to sell a large proportion of his library in 1707-8. 
Sibbald's work and ideas have enduring significance. They are representative of contemporary interest by virtuosi in useful natural knowledge. In his view, geography, medicine, botany, and archaeology were all part of utilitarian and systematic natural philosophy. It was once thought that Sibbald's reputation as a geographer rested on what he took from others. More recent scholarship has pointed to his key role in promoting national knowledge through survey and questionnaire; in being part of European interests in so doing; and, for Scotland, in being central to early Enlightenment debates about the value of natural knowledge as a means to national improvement. It does not help to describe his interests and work in modern disciplinary terms. For Sibbald, as for so many of his contemporaries, geography was closely allied to natural history, and was both a product, and a means to what we might understand as utilitarian medical-topographical knowledge. It was also a practice that embraced the formal languages of mathematics and geometry and used them to measure and to survey peoples, nations, and nature as a whole. Sibbald died on 9 August 1722, following which the remainder of his library was sold. 


@@@@@


doc= 25497


Sibbald, William (d. 1650), soldier, was 'a Fyfe gentleman borne' ('Diary of Mr John Lamont', 19), though his parentage is unknown. He recorded that 'I have been from my youth a Souldier' ('Speech', 200), and probably made his career as a mercenary in the Thirty Years' War. He first appears (with the rank of colonel) as the commander of the covenanter garrison placed in the House of Airlie at the end of June 1640 by the earl of Montrose to prevent it falling into the hands of the earl of Argyll, his rival. About a week later Argyll arrived, removed Sibbald, and destroyed the castle. 
Sibbald is next mentioned in August 1644, when he was one of Montrose's two companions when, in disguise, he made his way from England to the highlands. In November 1644 he left Montrose and joined the covenanters, and he has been roundly condemned for this. Montrose's 'courtesies and other noble benevolences' had been repaid with ingratitude (Gordon, 71) by a man who 'deserted him in his greatest need' (Wishart, 50). However, it is possible that his 'desertion' was part of some secret plan. Nathaniel Gordon, who also 'deserted' at this point, was believed to have been sent to persuade Lord Gordon to leave the covenanters and join Montrose, and Sibbald may have been acting on secret orders for some other covert mission. Certainly Sibbald, like Nathaniel, later returned to serve Montrose and, as the final episode of his life shows, he was fully trusted by him. He probably went into exile with Montrose in 1646, and about the end of 1649 was dispatched with letters from Montrose to royalist leaders. Major-General James Turner travelled with him from Hamburg to Rotterdam, and since Sibbald was short of money gave him a letter to his wife in Edinburgh, telling her to lend him some. She did so, but 'he had his head chopt of not long after... so I losd both my friend and my money', as Turner briskly relates (Turner, 92). This shows that Sibbald reached Edinburgh, but he was arrested in Musselburgh, where he was a prisoner by 23 April 1650. After Montrose's attempt at a rising had been defeated and he had been executed, the Scottish parliament turned its attention to Sibbald's fate. Montrose's trust in was indicated by the fact that the letters that Sibbald carried but had not delivered told the recipients to give 'absolute crydit' to what he said ('Historical Works of Balfour', 4.22). Sibbald was an unco-operative prisoner, and on 18 May parliament threatened him with torture unless he satisfied his interrogators. If the report of a French agent is to be trusted, under torture he revealed a royalist plot to seize Edinburgh Castle. After a trial by the committee for processes, parliament gave orders on 4 June that he be beheaded. The sentence was carried out on 7 June at the Mercat Cross, High Street, Edinburgh, Sibbald being beheaded by the Maiden, the Scottish precursor of the guillotine. He had been prevented from reading a speech he had prepared declaring his loyalty to the king and true protestant religion, and by one account he died 'verrie obduredlie' (obdurately) in that he refused to accept his guilt (Nicoll, 15). A royalist account describes, in an idealized vision of a martyr's death, how on the scaffold Sibbald 'smil'd a while, and talk'd to the disorderly rabble that was about him: then with such an heroick gesture march'd to the block, as if he had been to act a gallant in a Play' (Wishart, 270n.). 


@@@@@


doc= 25498


Sibbes, Richard (1577?-1635), Church of England clergyman, was born in 1577 according to his friend Zachary Catlin, although statements of his age at various dates place his birth anywhere between 1576 and 1581; the claim that he was baptized at Tostock, Suffolk, on 6 January 1580 lacks evidence. His parents, Paul Sibbes (died 1610), wheelwright, of Tostock, and his wife, Joane, moved their family 2 miles west to the town of Thurston while he was still young. He was educated locally, attending first the petty school at Pakenham run by Richard Brigs, a graduate of St John's College, Cambridge, and then the well-known King Edward VI Free School at nearby Bury St Edmunds. Catlin recorded that Paul Sibbes was persuaded to continue Richard's education only because of 'the Importunity of Friends'. 'His father at length grew weary of his expense for booke-learning' and made an investment in some tools for him, so that he could be set up in his own trade. But the younger Sibbes seemed ill-suited to it. Walking home from school, while his friends played games, Sibbes would 'take out of his Pocket or Sachel, one Book or other, and so to goe reading and meditating, til he came to his Father's house, which was neere a mile of, and so as he went to schole agen' ('Works', 1.cxxxv). 
In 1595, perhaps due to the influence of John Knewstub, rector of Cockfield, Suffolk, Sibbes matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge. During his years as an undergraduate an allowance of just over $8 per year from his father was supplemented by aid from friends and a sub-sizarship from the college. He graduated BA in 1599. Not quite two years later, on 3 April 1601, he was admitted as a foundress fellow of St John's and in 1602 he proceeded MA. He served in a variety of college posts, including Fell chaplain and sublector (1603), examiner (subject unspecified, 1604-8), Lady Margaret chaplain (1612-18), and Dr Thompson chaplain (1612-18), and he was also taxor for the university in 1608. In 1615 he was elected both senior dean and lector domesticus of St John's College. In 1619, when he had already left for London, he was elected senior fellow. 
At some point, probably soon after he became a fellow of St John's, Sibbes's life changed direction. 'It pleased God to convert him by the Ministry of Master Paul Baines, whilest he was Lecturer at Saint Andrews in Cambridge' (Clarke, 143). On 21 February 1608 he was ordained deacon and priest and on 1 March 1609 he was elected as a college preacher, whose duties included preaching to the townspeople. Despite his stuttering, he evidently succeeded and gained wide repute as a preacher. In 1610 Sibbes was created BD. That same year the minister, churchwardens, and twenty-nine other parishioners of Holy Trinity Church, Cambridge, established a public lecture for the town by popular subscription, to be held in the church at one o'clock on Sunday afternoon; on 22 November they offered the position to Sibbes at a salary of $40 a year. When he preached Holy Trinity was so crowded that a new gallery needed to be built to accommodate his listeners. 
It has long been asserted that Sibbes subsequently lost his positions in Cambridge due to his puritan convictions, but, the confusion of later scholars notwithstanding, he was not deprived of his fellowship at St John's in 1615. The college rental books record quarterly payments to him as a fellow continuously through the first quarter of 1626. Nor is there evidence that Sibbes was deprived of the Holy Trinity lectureship. A memorandum from the vice-chancellor's court dated 6 December 1616 relates that when he 'was asked by Mr Vice-Chancellor whether he would subscribe to the 3 articles required to be subscribed unto by the Canons [of 1604] [he] refused'. Answers to diverse accompanying questions supplied in Sibbes's own hand explained, 'I said that the signe of the cross [in baptism] was dangerous', but qualified his reservations to a significant degree. 'My meaning was in regard of those that be not well instructed and not otherwise. I said that there is nihil impie in the booke of ordination. I add it is not contrary to the word of God, but allowable' (Cambridge University Archives, vice-chancellor's court, I.42, fol. 202). The next day, John Hills, master of St Catharine's College and vice-chancellor, wrote to James Montagu, bishop of Winchester, stating that 'Mr. Sibbs at first made Some Quastion and Seemed lesse Setled in Opinion, but upon a Second conference he also Submitted and Subscribed' (Cambridge University Archives, letters 11.A.A.8.d). 
Less than two months later, on 5 February 1617, by the influence of Sir Henry Yelverton, Sibbes was chosen preacher (or lecturer, or reader of divinity) of Gray's Inn, London. By 1624 his ministry had been so well-received that, just as at Holy Trinity Church, the auditorium had to be enlarged. His presence at Gray's Inn was crucial to the growth of his network of friendships. Such a prominent platform gave opportunity for both his reputation and his influence to increase beyond what was possible simply as a provincial lecturer. 
Sibbes did more than preach in London. In 1625 he was part of a group of twelve Londoners who formed themselves into an unincorporated, self-perpetuating group of trustees in order to 'raise funds with which to acquire ecclesiastical revenue in the hands of laymen to be used for the maintenance and relief of a godly, faithful, and painstaking ministry', particularly in borough towns (Calder, vii). As they gained control of livings, these feoffees did not simply fill vacancies with any duly ordained clergyman; they wanted godly preachers to fill the pulpits. The feoffees worked to that end for eight years, collecting more than $6000 and funding eighteen preachers in eleven counties. In February 1633, after lengthy hearings, the feoffees for impropriations were dissolved in the court of exchequer for having formed a self-perpetuating corporation without having obtained a royal charter. While judiciously observing his obligations to the church, Sibbes was not beyond trying the boundaries of those obligations, or at least working apart from them. 
In 1626 Sibbes was appointed to the mastership of St Catharine's College, Cambridge. The college prospered under his leadership. He brought in increased numbers of students, large benefactions, and successfully promoted new construction. Although residing in Cambridge sometimes, Sibbes maintained his post and chambers at Gray's Inn. He also continued to be active in London circles. On 2 March 1627, with William Gouge, William Taylor, and John Davenport, Sibbes circulated a letter appealing for aid especially for the destitute ministers from the upper Palatinate. For their efforts, Sibbes and his co-petitioners were brought before Laud and the high commission and reprimanded. While such aid was not inconsistent with English foreign policy to help the protestants on the continent, publicly circulating a letter could have been seen as an inappropriately direct involvement of private persons in state affairs, and as therefore implicit criticism of government inactivity. Nevertheless, Sibbes continued to prosper. On 9 October 1627 he proceeded DD at Cambridge. On 1 November 1633 he was presented by the crown to the perpetual curacy of Holy Trinity, Cambridge. This was to be his last new appointment. 
Sibbes preached his final sermon at Gray's Inn, on 28 June 1635. That evening he fell sick. Samuel Hartlib noted that in Sibbes's final days he was unshaken: 'being asked how hee... did in his soule replied I should doe God much wrong if I should not say very well' (Hartlib, 'Ephemerides', 1635). He was obviously in control of his mental faculties. He finished his preface to 'The Soul's Conflict, and Victory over itself by Faith', the following Wednesday, 1 July, at Gray's Inn. Catlin reported that 'his Physitian, that knew his Body best' was 'then out of the Citty'. On Saturday, 4 July, Sibbes clearly knew himself to be dying. That day he revised his will, being 'weake in body, but of perfect memory', leaving his goods to family, friends, and servants at Gray's Inn. In his chamber at Gray's Inn, on 5 July 1635, Sibbes died. He had never married. His body was buried the next day in St Andrew's, Holborn, where the members of Gray's Inn had maintained a chapel from medieval times. His funeral sermon, preached by William Gouge, has not survived. 
Sibbes prefaced thirteen volumes of sermons, including those by Paul Baynes, Ezekiel Culverwell, John Preston, John Smith, Henry Scudder, Thomas Gataker, Robert Jenison, John Ball, and Richard Capel. His own sermons were either published or reprinted almost every year from 1618 to 1664. While over thirty volumes appeared in his lifetime, most were collected and published after his death, many collected and edited, at Sibbes's request, by Thomas Goodwin and Philip Nye. His most celebrated and frequently reprinted work -- both during his life and afterwards -- is 'The Bruised Reed and Smoking Flax', a series of sermons on the words of Isaiah quoted by Jesus in 'Matthew' 12: 20, 'A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory.' From the book's first printing (1630) to the most recent reprint (1998), the tender meditations of 'The Bruised Reed' have been devotional favourites. The most recent edition of his collected works (1862-4; repr. 1973-83) fills seven volumes. 
Sibbes has been presented as one of a number of early Stuart preachers who neither approved nor practised kneeling in communion, wearing the surplice, or signing the cross in baptism, and yet who remained within the established church. He was, it has been reported, constantly troubled by William Laud, archbishop of Canterbury. Doubly deprived, censured, and silenced, Sibbes was supposed to have been a model for his numerous disciples -- such as Thomas Goodwin, John Davenport, and John Cotton -- who later found their way into dissent. It has been supposed that only the power of his lawyer friends and noble patrons allowed him to retain his later ministry at Gray's Inn for almost two decades. After his death, his writings became almost entirely the possession of nonconformists, and Sibbes came to be read through separatist spectacles. 
Although Sibbes was popular, even celebrated, during his life, his thought could hardly be said to have been seminal, nor his career determinative for the fortunes of the godly in early Stuart England. Contrary to previous presentations of him, it now appears that Sibbes did subscribe to the three articles, conform, and retain his positions in Cambridge. His move to London in 1617 is much more explicable in terms of his talent for fostering friendships, combined with his obvious abilities as a preacher. His sociability certainly helps to account for his successes with the feoffees (before their dissolution) and at St Catharine's College, and perhaps for much more. It does not, however, suggest any religious radicalism which would encourage separation. Radicalism is also ruled out when account is taken of his explicit defences of the Church of England (for example, his 'Consolatory Letter to an Afflicted Conscience'), together with the general tone of his writing and indeed the direction of his whole career. 
Yet as godly preaching -- which Sibbes had taken to be quite literally the salvation of the Church of England -- became increasingly hindered by those in authority, his own position in the church certainly appeared more incongruous. His loyalty to the Church of England was consistent with his theology. He understood the church to be a covenant community far more extensive than the elect, intended to be filled with people in various spiritual states. Therefore imperfection was expected and tolerated, though not excused, and the use of means vigorously encouraged. Indeed, even more than creation, the covenant obliged one to live a life of holiness. Sibbes's interiorization of piety -- not unique to Sibbes, but powerfully communicated in his sermons -- accounts at the same time for his popularity with disparate groups, his ability to conform to the demands of the church, and yet also for the potential for a Christianity lived in disobedience to ungodly earthly authorities. Ironically, all of the misrepresentations of Sibbes as a doubly deprived puritan legend have led to a very different impression of him from what is gathered by reading his writings and contemporary testimonies about his character and temperament. Yet, with the deprivations removed from the foreground, the conciliating tone of his writings begins to appear more consistent with his own person, and his later preferments become more understandable. The picture of Sibbes which results -- of Sibbes as a reformer, but a cautious reformer, as a puritan, but a moderate puritan -- is consistent with the rest of Sibbes's life and activities. 


@@@@@


doc= 25499


Siberch, John (c.1476-1554), printer, was born in Sieglar (Lair), near Siegburg, Germany, the son of Peter von Lair (died 1533), a wool weaver, and his wife, Lena. He took his name from Siegburg, where the family moved in his childhood. On 5 December 1492 he matriculated at the University of Cologne. Probably in 1512, or later, he married a sister of Gertrud van Amersfoort, a member of the bookselling and printing family of Franz and Arnold Birckmann of Cologne, and thus became related to some of the major north European humanist printers and booksellers. They had two daughters: the elder, Katharina, married Georg Kessel of Cologne, and the younger was called Baetzgen. 
For a while during the second decade of the sixteenth century Siberch was in the service of another Cologne bookseller, Hans Beck; and it was as a bookseller that he moved to Cambridge, possibly influenced in this by Richard Croke, whom he probably met at Leipzig. The first publication bearing his imprint, a work by Croke (1520), was printed by Eucharius Cervicornus at Cologne. 
Siberch established his press in Cambridge in 1520 or 1521 with the help of a loan of $20 from the university. His house was on the site of what is now Tree Court, Gonville and Caius College, and his first book was Henry Bullock's 'Oratio', a tribute on the occasion of a visit to the university by Cardinal Wolsey in autumn 1520. In 1521 Siberch printed at least seven short books, including an unauthorized edition of 'De conscribendis epistolis' by his friend Erasmus and Thomas Linacre's translation of Galen's 'De temperamentis'. Subsequently his authors included John Fisher and Sir Thomas Elyot; he also sought the assurance of an educational market with an edition of Erasmus and Lily's grammar 'De octo partium orationis constructione'. After a period of considerable activity in 1521, the pace of his printing declined sharply, and Siberch's later work includes more ephemera, such as indulgences, rather than books. He ceased to print at Cambridge probably by the end of 1523. He was also associated with a binding shop, possibly as a part of his bookselling business. 
Despite the fame of his authors, Siberch was not commercially very successful as a printer in England. By early 1524 he had left Cambridge, possibly going to Antwerp to work with Franz Birckmann and other members of his wife's family. His wife died in England in the mid-1520s, after which time his relations with her family seem to have become strained. By 1538 he had been ordained priest, and for the remainder of his life he served a parish in Siegburg, where he died at some time before 28 September in 1554. He was probably buried at St Servatius's Church, Siegburg. 


@@@@@


doc= 25500


Sibley, George (1824-1891), civil engineer, born on 12 August 1824, was a son of Robert Sibley (1789-1849), then county surveyor of Middlesex and one of the early members of the Institution of Civil Engineers. An older brother, Robert Lacon Sibley ('c'.1818-1882), continued his father's architectural practice. From 1831 to 1838 Sibley attended University College school, London. After serving an apprenticeship in his father's civil engineering and architectural practice in London, he obtained employment in 1845 as assistant engineer on the Bristol and Exeter Railway under Isambard Kingdom Brunel, and afterwards under Charles Hutton Gregory. 
In 1851, through James Meadows Rendel, Sibley was appointed an assistant engineer on the East India Railway, in charge of the Chandernagore district. His promotion was rapid. In August 1853 he was placed in charge of the Birbhum district as resident engineer, and in this position designed the two largest brick arch bridges in India, those over the Adjai and More. In December of the same year he was made a district engineer. About 1857 he was appointed deputy chief engineer under George Turnbull, and in 1859 chief engineer of the North-Western Provinces division. On the death of Samuel Power he became, in April 1868, chief engineer of the East India Railway and a member of the board of agency. During his service in the north-west Sibley was responsible for the completion of the Allahabad Jumna Bridge, then the largest railway bridge in the world, designed by A. M. Rendel and G. W. Rendel. He also constructed the Delhi Jumna Bridge, personally designing the foundations, and designed all the works at Delhi connected with the railway. 
In 1869 Sibley was involved in a controversy with the Indian government, which had issued a notification implying that the civil engineers received commissions from others than their employers. The accusation does not appear to have been justifiable and Sibley, with the other engineers, addressed a strong remonstrance to the government, supported by the Institution of Civil Engineers. 
In January 1875 Sibley left India on furlough, and retired a year later. In consideration of his services he was made a companion in the Order of the Indian Empire. He lived in England in a house, The Mount, which he built of concrete on the summit of Whitehill, Caterham, devoting himself to literature and science. Sibley was always an individualist, marked by his becoming a vegetarian at the age of nineteen. He died of heart disease at his home on 25 October 1891, leaving funds for engineering scholarships and encouraging native students at Calcutta University. 
A brother, 
Sibley married Clara F. Carden, daughter of Sir R. W. Carden, bt, MP; their son Walter Knowsley (1862-1944) followed his father into the medical profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 25501


Septimus William Sibley (1831-1893), surgeon, distinguished himself as a student at the Middlesex and University College hospitals, where he defeated Lord Lister in competition for medals in both medicine and surgery. He was successively house surgeon, medical registrar, and lecturer in pathology at Middlesex Hospital. Becoming FRCS in 1857, he was the first general practitioner elected to the council. An active member of the British Medical Association, he published 'A History and Description of the Cholera Epidemic in London in 1854', besides papers in 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25502


Sibly, Ebenezer (1751-c.1799), astrologer and physician, was born in Bristol on 30 January 1751. The names of his parents are not known. The Swedenborgian preacher Manoah Sibly was his brother, and there was also another brother and a sister of whom nothing is known. Their father was described as a mechanic. His mother died in 1768, whereupon he was removed from school, perhaps to assist in his father's business. None the less, he continued to study on his own, becoming a formidable polymath in medicine, natural philosophy, and occultism, both traditional and contemporary. 
By 1784 Sibly was living in Portsmouth, where he was initiated into freemasonry -- the beginning of a lifelong involvement, in the course of which he joined several different lodges, and founded one. In this context he was sometimes known as Noah Sibly or Father Noah. He also completed his first book there, from an address somewhere on Portsmouth Common: it was a massive compendium of astrology, occult philosophy, and magic, entitled 'A New and Complete Illustration of the Celestial Science of Astrology', first published in four parts (1784-8). It obviously met a need, for by 1812 there had been twelve editions, some appearing under the title 'A New and Complete Illustration of the Occult Sciences'. The last known edition appeared in 1826. 
About 1785 Sibly returned to Bristol. He acted briefly as an official agent for the sale of lottery tickets but this aspect of his career was cut short when he was duped into selling false tickets by one John Wilkes of Winchester and the racket was discovered. Sibly swore his innocence in an affidavit before the mayor of Bristol on 31 January 1786, and there the matter ended. By about 1788, Sibly had moved to London, where he remained. In 1795 his address was 1 Upper Titchfield Street, and the following year he was living at 40 New Bridge Street, near St Paul's Cathedral. 
In 1789 Sibly founded a new lodge of freemasonry -- no. 253, later known as the Lodge of Joppa -- which met at The Globe inn, Hatton Garden. He had marked political views, and was a supporter of the American War of Independence. In 1790 he briefly moved to Ipswich in order to campaign vigorously (and successfully) for the whig candidate, Sir John Hadley D'Oyly. On 20 April 1792 he obtained his MD from King's College, Aberdeen (there is no evidence he ever actually lived there). 
Meanwhile, Sibly had also become a fellow of the Harmonic Philosophical Society, founded in Paris to promote mesmerism. He quickly incorporated mesmerism, or animal magnetism, into his system, as another example of new discoveries confirming and extending ancient wisdom concerning forces of sympathy and antipathy. More work was also forthcoming. In 1789, a new edition of the extremely popular and durable 'Culpeper's English Physician and Complete Herbal' appeared, with fourteen editions under Sibly's name by 1813; in 1794 came Sibly's 'A Key to Physic and the Occult Sciences', which reached five editions by 1814; 'The Medical Mirror' reached six editions by 1814; and the first volume of the 'Magazine of Natural History' appeared in 1796. 
This prodigious output amounted to about 2500 quarto pages, and all the major works were available until well into the first half of the nineteenth century. Their chief interest lies in the way they straddle and unite what are often thought to be the two irreconcilable worlds of ancient magic and modern science: that is, hermetic magic and occultism, with its focus on the sympathetic and antipathetic connections between macrocosm and microcosm, whether human or natural, and contemporary Enlightenment demonstrations of progress, both in human affairs and in knowledge. Sibly thus combined his whig reforming-populist zeal and freemasonic esoteric idealism with the tradition of vulgate self-help manuals of physic and astrology (the poor man's science, so to speak) initiated by Culpeper and other radicals during the revolution in English astrology. He freely mixed the experimental natural philosophy of Newton, Lavoisier, and Priestley with the cosmologies of Hermes Trismegistus, Paracelsus, and the alchemists. Unusually for an eighteenth-century figure, Sibly believed that the experimental and observational discoveries of the modern natural philosophers refined and developed the insights of the alchemical and magical cosmologists, while the vitalism and spirituality of the ancients corrected the tendencies toward atheism and materialism of the moderns. 
Sibly's presentation of physic was also suffused with the natural magic of alchemy and astrology, whereby every organ and function has both macrocosmic and microcosmic counterparts within a system of spiritual hierarchies and occult properties. By this reasoning the heart, for example, relates to the sun, to certain herbs such as St John's wort, to gold, and to other items which bear sun-like qualities. When focused on plants and metals, this logic suggests appropriate natural remedies for diseases. Such medicines were often cheaply available, unlike more expensive and invasive procedures. Sibly's 'Medical Mirror' was another instance of medical popularization, offering an accessible (if rather florid) account of human anatomy and physiology, including the delicate subject of reproduction. 
Within the astrological tradition, Sibly's 'Illustration' was the first comprehensive textbook for decades, covering judicial astrology (including both the genethliacal, or natal, and the horary branches) as well as mundane and meteorological applications. Also included were sections on natural and occult philosophy, witchcraft, ceremonial magic, and necromancy -- the last presented as a warning, in a satisfyingly sensational manner. Synthetic, eclectic, and populist, it incorporated a largely magical world-view, all things for which it was strongly criticized by the only other nationally known astrologer of the day, and an Aristotelian rationalist, John Worsdale. But it was precisely this approach that guaranteed Sibly the wide readership that Worsdale never attained. 
Sibly also continued the provocative tradition of apparently correct astrological predictions (or prophecies) of spectacular public events. In an essay first published in 1787, analysing the sun's ingress into Aries (at the vernal point) on 19 March 1789, Sibly concluded that: 'here is every prospect... that some very important event will happen in the politics of France, such as may dethrone, or very nearly touch the life of, the king, and make victims of many great and illustrious men in church and state, preparatory to a revolution... which will at once astonish and surprise the surrounding nations. (Sibly, 1051)' A century earlier, such a forecast and its fulfilment (with the French Revolution of 1789) would have guaranteed its author national fame and/or notoriety, as happened in the case of William Lilly and the great fire of London. But, at the end of the eighteenth century, it drew little or no comment, any more than the rest of Sibly's voluminous published work, despite its popularity, received informed appraisal from his educated and professional contemporaries. This reception points to the way professional and disciplinary boundaries of knowledge had hardened, firmly excluding anything explicitly identifiable as occult, magical, or astrological. 
At the same time, however, the middle classes at the end of the eighteenth century were beginning to grow in power and complexity, and, as part of that process, began showing patchy signs of intellectual independence from patrician hegemony. One early sign was the new market Sibly found (and helped create) among semi-erudite middle-class urban readers for a popular magical science. This was a niche that the new almanacs of Zadkiel and Raphael would further exploit and develop from the 1830s onwards. Sibly is thus a key figure in the revival of astrology and natural magic after its apparently terminal decline during the Enlightenment. 
Sibly is believed to have died in London about 1799, in an obscurity that says as much about his times as it does about himself. 


@@@@@


doc= 25503


Sibly, Manoah (1757-1840), Swedenborgian minister and banker, was born at Bristol on 20 August 1757. He was the brother of Ebenezer Sibly (1751-c.1799), a notable publisher of esoteric lore, and was himself an autodidact and nonconformist, self-taught in the classical and biblical languages, part of the self-taught artisan culture. He specialized in alchemy and astrology, and became for a period a bookseller in Goswell Street, London, specializing in books on the occult, some of which his brother was then publishing. He himself translated two astrological works by Palcidus de Titis, but his first work, 'A critical essay on Jer. xxxiii.16 (latter part) wherein the misinterpretations of the sacred text are confuted' (1777), demonstrated his competence in Hebrew scholarship. He also served as a shorthand writer, and wrote the transcripts of the trials of Thelwall and Hardy. On 7 May 1780, at St Luke, Old Street, Finsbury, he married an orphan named Sarah Lack (died 1829), and they lived happily until her death, with eleven children, although only two survived him. 
It fitted entirely with his idiosyncratic radicalism that in 1787 Sibly adopted Swedenborgian ideas, and, after serving as a lay preacher along with others, was ordained a minister of the New Jerusalem church on 7 April 1790, although serving the London congregation only on a part-time basis. After a schism in 1793 he was appointed minister of a congregationally based group meeting first in Store Street, Tottenham Court Road, then in Red Cross Street, Cripplegate, then the Cross Street Chapel, which Joseph Proud had abandoned, then at Cateaton Street; the meeting erected its own chapel in Friars Street, Blackfriars, in 1803. Although never attracting as many followers as Joseph Proud's London chapel, it was generally reckoned to provide a purer species of Swedenborgian dogma, for Sibly provided a rather meticulous and knowledgeable interpretation of Swedenborgian doctrines, yet to judge from his published sermons (twelve of which were published in 1796 and another seven at other times during his ministry), he remained a rather inward-looking pedant. From 1797 he served in the Bank of England in order to avoid Sunday work, and rose to head their chancery office. He died on 16 December 1840, and was buried in Bunhill Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 25504


Siborne, William (1797-1849), army officer and military historian, was the son of Captain Benjamin Siborn of the 9th (East Norfolk) regiment, who was wounded at the battle of the Nivelle in the Peninsular War, and died while serving with his regiment at St Vincent in the West Indies on 14 July 1819. William Siborne was born on 15 October 1797 and educated at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He was commissioned ensign in the 9th regiment on 9 September 1813. He joined the 2nd battalion at Canterbury, and accompanied it to Chatham in February 1815 and to Sheerness in the summer. In August he was one of those drafted to join the army of the duke of Wellington. Siborne was promoted lieutenant in his regiment on 8 November 1815, and at about that date he accompanied it to Boulogne as part of the British army of occupation. In February 1817 the regiment was reduced to one battalion, and Siborne was placed on half pay. He was brought back to full pay as a lieutenant in the 47th (Lancashire) regiment on 11 November 1824. 
In March 1826 Siborne was appointed assistant military secretary to Lieutenant-General Sir George Murray (1772-1846), commanding the forces in Ireland, and held the same appointment with Murray's successors, Sir John Byng, Sir Hussey Vivian, and Sir Edward Blakeney, until 1843. He was promoted captain unattached on 31 January 1840, and on the same date was placed on half pay, although he continued to hold the staff appointment of military secretary in Dublin. 
Siborne published in 1822 'Instructions for Civil and Military Surveyors in Topographical Plan-Drawing' and in 1827 'A Practical Treatise on Topographical Surveying and Drawing'. He married, in 1824, Helen, daughter of Colonel Aitken of Todhall, near Cupar, Fife, and they had two sons and two daughters. 
In 1830 Siborne was commissioned by the commander-in-chief to construct a model of the field of Waterloo. He lived for eight months at the farm of La Haye-Sainte on the field of battle, and made a survey of the whole ground, upon which he based his model. The execution of this work occupied some years, as Siborne devoted to it only such time as his professional duties permitted. In 1833 the progress of the work was interrupted by the refusal of the new ministry to allot funds for it. Thrown upon his own resources he continued the work until its completion in 1838, at a cost of nearly $3000. The model was publicly exhibited in London and elsewhere, but the receipts barely covered the expenses of exhibition, and Siborne never recovered the cost of its construction. It was later the property of the Royal United Service Institution, then of the National Army Museum, London. Siborne also constructed a smaller model on a larger scale of a portion of the field of battle, and a 'Guide to Captain Siborne's New Waterloo Model' was published. Having amassed much information from surviving officers on the battle and the entire campaign, Siborne in 1844 published his two-volume 'History of the War in France and Belgium in 1815' (with folio atlas); it long remained a standard work. 
On 6 November 1844 Siborne was appointed secretary and adjutant of the Royal Military Asylum at Chelsea, and died there while holding the appointment on 9 January 1849. He was buried at Brompton cemetery. Siborne's second son, Major-General Herbert Taylor Siborne, born on 18 October 1826, edited in 1891, with explanatory notes, 'Waterloo letters: a selection from original and hitherto unpublished letters bearing on the operations of the 16th, 17th, and 18th June 1815, by officers who served in the campaign' -- a selection from the letters his father received on the battle and campaign of Waterloo. The complete collection of letters became the property of the British Museum. Herbert Siborne died on 16 May 1902. 


@@@@@


doc= 25505


Sibson, Francis (1814-1876), physician, was born on 21 May 1814 at Cross Canonby, Cumberland, the third of the five sons of Francis and Jane Sibson. His family moved to Edinburgh in 1819, where he was baptized at St Peter's Episcopal Church. Aged fourteen he was apprenticed to the surgeon John Lizars. He received his diploma from the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh on 21 December 1831. During the cholera epidemics of 1831-2 he worked in cholera wards in Leith, Newhaven, and Edinburgh. Following a brief period in general practice in Cockermouth he continued his medical studies at Guy's Hospital, London, coming under the influence of the physician Thomas Hodgkin. 
In 1835 Sibson was appointed resident surgeon and apothecary at Nottingham General Hospital. During his thirteen years at Nottingham he laid the foundations of his subsequent anatomical and clinical research. His 1844 paper, 'On changes induced in the situation and structure of the internal organs under varying circumstances of health and disease', gained him professional repute. His acquaintance with the naturalist Charles Waterton encouraged his interest in the action of narcotics, especially curare, in the treatment of hydrophobia and tetanus. A prolific yet careful writer, he published papers on the mechanics of respiration, the blowhole of the porpoise, the treatment of gout and rheumatism, the use of ether and chloroform in the treatment of neuralgia, and the 1847 typhoid epidemic in Nottingham. 
Funded by a testimonial from his supporters in Nottingham, Sibson moved to London in 1848, taking a first in the University of London MB in 1848 and the MD in 1849. He was elected a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1849 and a fellow in 1853. His election as fellow of the Royal Society in 1849 recognized his painstakingly accurate work on the anatomy of the healthy and diseased viscera. Establishing his own practice in Brook Street in 1849 he began a well-attended series of demonstrations in visceral anatomy. He also lectured at Samuel Armstrong Lane's school of anatomy in Grosvenor Place. Four lecturers from Lane's school, including Sibson as physician, were elected to the honorary staff when St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, which Lane had promoted, opened in 1851. Planned as a teaching hospital from its foundation, St Mary's opened its medical school in 1854 with Sibson as lecturer on medicine. 
In 1858 Sibson married Sarah Mary Ouvry, younger daughter of Peter Aime Ouvry of East Acton. They hospitably hosted regular breakfast parties for his medical firms at their home, where prayers might punctuate a discussion of a post-mortem. A fair, broad-shouldered athletic man of middle height, he was noted for his obsessive punctuality and intolerance of tardiness. An art connoisseur, he collected Wedgwood china and architectural drawings. 
An inspirational clinical teacher and accurate diagnostician, Sibson showed little interest in therapeutics, uniformly prescribing tincture of perchloride of iron regardless of his own precise and painstaking diagnosis. His main interests lay in cardiac, renal, and pulmonary disease. His practice of keeping interesting cases of aortic aneurysm on the wards for months brought conflict with the board of governors keen for earlier discharge of patients blocking beds. His enthusiastic lecturing and bedside teaching on ward rounds were backed by the relish which this morbid anatomist showed in autopsies. His cases at St Mary's Hospital provided the raw materials for his 1869 book 'Medical anatomy, or, Illustrations of the relative position and movements of the internal organs'. 
Sibson was a member of the council of the Royal Society, 1872-4, and joint treasurer of the Royal Society Club. He was successively Goulstonian, Croonian, and Lumleian lecturer at the Royal College of Physicians. He was curator of the museum of the Royal College of Physicians and censor in 1874. A member of the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association from 1843, he was initially opposed to its transformation to the British Medical Association but became the latter association's president in 1866, and held the post until 1869. He was elected to the senate of the University of London in 1865 and opposed the admission of women to its degrees as fervently as he led the opposition to a suggestion that St Mary's Hospital medical school admit women medical students in 1869. He was, nevertheless, a supporter of the training of nurses. An active member of the Metropolitan Asylums Board from 1875, he was involved in the planning of isolation hospitals. 
Sibson, an ardent mountaineer, died suddenly at the Hotel des Bergues, Geneva, during his annual holiday on 7 September 1876 from an aortic aneurysm, ironically the main focus of his research. He was buried in St Mary's churchyard, Acton, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 25506


Sibson, Thomas (1817-1844), book illustrator, son of Francis Sibson, an unsuccessful farmer, and his wife, Jane, and younger brother of Francis Sibson MD (1814-1876), was born in the parish of Cross Canonby, Cumberland, in March 1817, and baptized along with his four brothers in 1819 after the family moved to Edinburgh. Sibson initially trained as an accountant and until he was nearly twenty-one he worked in his uncle's mercantile firm at Manchester. Then late in 1837, despite his family's disapproval, he left the firm and moved to London, where he studied with the painter Ralph Nicholson Wornum (1812-1877), later keeper of the National Gallery. Over the next several years Sibson, 'a pictorial Boz' (Grego, 1.456), published extra illustrations to Dickens's 'Pickwick Papers' (ten etchings and illustrated wrapper, 1838) and 'Master Humphrey's Clock' (seventy-two etchings in eighteen monthly parts, 1840-41; copies were re-etched by J. Yeager for the Philadelphia edition of 'Barnaby Rudge'), alongside 'Sibson's Sketches of Life and Humour' (1838). 
Sibson was a tall, sinewy youth with a winning manner, quaint humour, and earnest determination, who quickly earned the devoted friendship of the poet and painter William Bell Scott (1811-1890) and the wood-engraver William James Linton (1812-1897). He produced many octavo drawings for Linton's projected 'History of England', then tore them up before they were carved into the block and replaced them on a larger scale. His work, exploiting a sprightly brio, clean linearity, and considerable antiquarianism, received high praise from friends and later critics. He was much in demand, designing many of the illustrations to Samuel Carter Hall's 'Book of Ballads' and the Abbotsford edition of the 'Waverley' novels. Moved by the plans to decorate the rebuilt houses of parliament with frescoes depicting British history, Sibson decided to become a history painter. In September 1842, after taking a strenuous walking tour through Wales with Linton, Sibson went to Munich to study with Wilhelm von Kaulbach (1804-1874), court painter to Ludwig I. Although Kaulbach had ceased to take pupils, he was so impressed by Sibson that he gave the student free lessons and studio space. But Sibson, suffering from advanced tuberculosis, was compelled by his failing health to return home early in 1844. Too weak to walk, he was cared for by Linton, who brought him wild flowers from Hampstead Heath for him to draw. Richard Twentyman of Bennoch and Twentyman, silk and gimp dealers, provided money for Sibson to winter at Malta. Accompanied by Linton, Sibson set forth from Newcastle; their ship struck a reef on the Yorkshire coast and they barely made it to land. He then stayed with his physician brother in Nottingham for a few weeks to recover his strength before once more setting out for Malta. Shortly after arriving there he died, on 28 November 1844. An album containing 1426 chalk, ink, and watercolour studies that Sibson made before his visit to Munich was bequeathed to Scott, purchased at the sale of Scott's collections in 1890 by Linton, and by him presented to the British Museum. Another sketchbook is in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 25507


Sibthorp, Charles de Laet Waldo (1783-1855), politician, the second of five sons of Colonel Humphry Waldo Sibthorp (1744-1815) and his wife, Susannah, daughter of Richard Ellison of Thorne in Yorkshire and Sudbrooke Holme in Lincolnshire, was born on 14 February 1783 at North Mimms, Hertfordshire. The Sibthorps were a long-established gentry family which had close connections with Lincoln. The Oxford professor of botany Dr Humphrey Sibthorp (1713?-1797) was Charles's grandfather; John Sibthorp, the botanist, was his uncle, and the clergyman Richard Waldo Sibthorp was his youngest brother. 
Sibthorp attended a school in Chiswick and matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1801, but did not graduate. He was commissioned in the Scots Greys in 1803 and subsequently served in the Peninsular War as a captain in the 4th dragoon guards. In later life he always saw himself as a military man. He married on 21 February 1812 Maria, daughter of Ponsonby Tottenham, from co. Wexford, Ireland. They had four sons, but she was estranged from him in later years, although reconciled before his death. 
On the death of his elder brother Coningsby in 1822, Sibthorp succeeded to the family estates. He left the army, and was elected, in 1826, member of parliament for Lincoln, a borough which had previously been represented by his brother, his father, his great-uncle, and his great-grandfather. He also followed in a family succession as colonel of the South Lincoln militia, and was a deputy lieutenant and magistrate for the county. Except for a brief interval in 1833 and 1834, when Sir Edward Bulwer ousted him by a small majority, Colonel Sibthorp continued until his death to be re-elected for Lincoln, on personal rather than on political grounds, and often unopposed. 
Sibthorp was an industrious parliamentarian and a very active participant in debate. He tenaciously adhered to ultra-tory and ultra-protestant views and defied fashionable and progressive trends. Partly by his uncompromising opinions, partly by his blunt expressions, and partly by an eccentricity that did less than justice to his real abilities, he made himself for many years rather a notorious than a respected figure in political life. His moustachioed and bewhiskered face and colourful style of dress were frequently caricatured. Charles Dickens considered him 'the most amusing person in the House' ('Sketches by Boz', 1837, 233). His speeches were sometimes witty and polished, but they were too often personal and offensive. He opposed in all their stages the 'Catholic Emancipation Bill' and the 'Reform Bill', considering the latter worse than the cholera morbus because it undermined the ancient constitution ('Hansard 3', 14.1285). Sibthorp claimed that the 'Chandos' clause of the 'Reform Bill', which gave the vote to $50 tenants at will in the counties, had originally been his own idea (ibid., 9.811). The provision in the act to make better provision for the residence of the clergy (1 & 2 Vict. c. 106, section 36), which enabled widows of deceased incumbents to retain possession of the parsonage house for two months after the incumbent's death, also was strongly supported by him. 
Sibthorp opposed the ministerial proposal for a grant of $50,000 per annum to Prince Albert on 27 January 1840, largely from suspicion of foreign influences, and it was his amendment for its reduction to $30,000 which, with the support of Peel, was eventually carried. He was a die-hard opponent of free trade, savagely denouncing Peel's 'betrayal' of the country in 1846 and adhering to the tory rump who censured Lord Derby for abandoning protection in 1852. His denunciation of the 1851 Great Exhibition arose in large measure from his associated anxiety to protect British industry from foreign competition. His xenophobia had religious as well as economic roots: he was staunchly protestant (but not evangelical) and was unflagging in his opposition to the expansion of the Roman Catholic church in England. His feelings on this subject were no doubt intensified by the conversion of his brother Richard Waldo to the Church of Rome in 1841. He was also inveterately hostile to railways, particularly because of their encroachments on private property, and was instrumental in preventing Lincoln from being served by a main line. 
Sibthorp died at his house in Eaton Square, London, on 14 December 1855, after a long illness, and was buried at Canwick church, near Lincoln. His eldest son, Gervaise Tottenham Waldo Sibthorp (1815-1861), succeeded him as MP for Lincoln. 


@@@@@


doc= 25508


Sibthorp, Sir Christopher (d. 1632/3), lawyer and pamphleteer, was the third son of John Sibthorp of Much Bardfield, Essex. He matriculated at Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1580 but took no degree and instead went on to the Middle Temple in 1584. In June 1588 he was expelled for nonconformity but readmitted 'on his petition showing his detestation of the popish religion' (Hopwood, 1.300). After being called to the bar in February 1594 Sibthorp next appears as third justice of the king's bench in Ireland on 11 May 1607. Also that year he was sent to Ulster to indict the earls of Tyrone and Tyrconnell. His links with Ulster persisted and he became an undertaker in the Fermanagh plantation and MP for the borough of Limavady from 1613 to 1615. 
Sibthorp's professional efforts were rewarded by a knighthood on 3 May 1618 and appointment as treasurer of the King's Inns in 1629. 'Detestation' of Catholicism led him to defend the exclusion of Catholic lawyers from practice and into writing three controversial tracts. Attached to the first of these, 'A Friendly Advertisement to the Pretended Catholickes of Ireland' (1622), was a letter from James Ussher, archbishop of Armagh, on 'The religion anciently professed by the British and Irish'. Sibthorp remained a justice of king's bench in Ireland until his death, which occurred some time between March 1632 and March 1633, but it is on account of his association with Ussher that he has been chiefly remembered. He was married, but nothing is known of his wife or any family. 


@@@@@


doc= 25509


Sibthorp, John (1758-1796), botanist, was born in Oxford on 28 October 1758, the only son of Humphrey Sibthorp (1713?-1797), Sherardian professor of botany at Oxford, and his second wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Gibbes (died 1780). The elder Sibthorp, a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1734-44, took his MB in 1743 and his MD in 1745. Tradition has it that as holder of the Sherardian chair from 1747 to 1783 he presented but one lecture, which was not a notable success. He was said to have done more for botany by raising his son than through any research or writing of his own. Linnaeus, one of the senior Sibthorp's botanical correspondents, named 'Sibthorpia europaea' (Cornish moneywort), a small creeping plant with tiny flowers, after him. 
John Sibthorp attended Magdalen College School and Lincoln grammar school, and went on to Lincoln College, Oxford, where he earned his BA in 1777 when he was nineteen. He studied medicine for a year (1778-9) at the University of Edinburgh and took his MA at Oxford in 1780. His mother died in 1780, leaving him a considerable legacy which took the form of a substantial allowance from his father. During the year 1781-2 Sibthorp studied botany with Antoine Laurent de Jussieu at the Jardin des Plantes in Paris. This was followed by ten months of further botanical study with Auguste Brissonet at Montpellier University. On his return to Oxford in October 1783 he received a $300 a year Radcliffe travelling fellowship. Two months later his father, who had earlier inherited property from an older brother in Canwick, Lincolnshire, resigned his chair in his son's favour. Sibthorp took his MD at Oxford in January 1784, and in March, aged twenty-five, was named Sherardian professor. It is not known whether there were other aspirants for this position. In that year he attempted to buy the library and collections of Linnaeus for Oxford, but his friend, the botanist James Edward Smith (1759-1828), outbid him; these materials later went to the Linnean Society of London. 
Having no immediate desire to teach, Sibthorp turned his instructional responsibilities over to George Shaw (1751-1813), the very capable departmental lecturer, later keeper of the natural history section at the British Museum. Sibthorp spent the winter of 1784-5 studying at Gottingen, and the summer of 1785 herborizing (Sibthorp's term) in Germany. In the autumn of 1785, while working with Nikolaus Joseph von Jacquin in Vienna, he was shown a fifth-century copy (now in the Botany School Library at Oxford) of the 'Materia medica' of Pedacius Dioscorides, a first-century Greek army surgeon. Sibthorp decided to study the Greek flora, identify all 700 plants mentioned by Dioscorides, and ascertain their medicinal value. He taught himself modern Greek so that he could converse with local residents concerning plant life. With the Austrian Ferdinand Bauer (1760-1826), who became one of the greatest botanical artists of all time, he visited Cyprus, Crete, Athens, mounts Parnassus and Athos, Salonika, many of the Greek islands, Izmir, and Bithynia between March 1786 and September 1787. Uncertain political conditions, the threat of war in the region, and the onset of plague in Thessaly precluded Sibthorp's travelling through the Greek mainland. He returned to England with some 2000 plants, together with many mammal, bird, and fish specimens. During the period from 1787 to 1794, he lectured according to the advanced taxonomic principles of Linnaeus, added many specimens to the Sherardian herbarium, and completed his father's catalogue of the university's botanical garden. There were insufficient funds to improve the garden, but he did some planting, exchanging some specimens with Kew Gardens. He published 'Flora Oxoniensis' (1794), a student's guide describing some 1200 plant species of Oxfordshire, and cared for an estate he had purchased at South Leigh, outside Oxford. One of the founding members of the Linnean Society of London in 1788, he was named a fellow. In that same year, he also was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. Although Sibthorp periodically suffered from malaria, contracted on his first Greek expedition, he was determined to return for additional specimens for a projected 'Flora Graeca'. Since Bauer would not accompany him (Sibthorp treated Bauer as a servant, which the younger man bitterly resented) Sibthorp left England in March 1794 with Francis Barone, a congenial young botanical assistant. They took two months to reach Constantinople overland; having arrived there exhausted and ill, Sibthorp was obliged to spend the summer recovering from his journey, after which they moved on to Athens. Barone was killed in an accident there while sleepwalking in their quarters, but Sibthorp was joined by an English friend, John Hawkins (1758-1841). The two men spent the autumn of 1794 visiting Troy and Athens before overwintering on the island of Zakinthos. March and April 1795 were spent botanizing in the south central Peloponnese. 
Sibthorp set sail for England at the beginning of May while Hawkins remained in Greece, but his trip was arduous in the extreme. Sibthorp was obliged to spend two miserable weeks in a small Adriatic island hut owing to violent storms. He had begun his trip with a bad cold and fever, which grew worse and was complicated by dysentery. After landing in central Italy he completed his journey home by road, but on arrival in England in July he was suffering from tuberculosis. He survived six months, dying, unmarried, at Bath, Somerset, on 8 February 1796 at the age of thirty-seven. He was buried in Bath Abbey. His plant collections, including the 3000 species upon which the 'Flora Graeca' was later based, are still retained at Oxford. Much of his correspondence, which had been kept by his father and then his sister, Lady Sewell, was sold as waste paper following the death of the latter. 
In his will Sibthorp left his estate to Oxford University, but directed that his three executors, Hawkins, Thomas Platt, and the Hon. Thomas Wenman, arrange for the completion of the 'Flora Graeca'. With the aid of Sir Joseph Banks, Smith was engaged, at a salary of $150 per annum, to draft the text of the 'Flora', and was expected to finish this task within eleven years. Smith began working in 1799 but his assignment was still incomplete when he died in 1828 after twenty-nine years' labour. The entire task ultimately consumed more than forty years. Sibthorp's handwriting was execrable, he had not completed the correlation of his field notes with his specimens, and some of the latter were not labelled. Hawkins would in 1800 commiserate with Smith by writing, 'it is certainly a pity that Dr. Sibthorp did not mark all his specimens, but he trusted to his memory and dreamed not of dying' (Stearn, 'Sibthorp, Smith', 170). Smith completed six lavishly illustrated volumes and part of the seventh (published 1806-32) before his death. The remainder of the seventh and the final three volumes, which appeared between 1832 and 1840, were authored by the botanist John Lindley (1799-1865). All volumes were published in two fascicles. The faithful Hawkins, who with his surviving co-executor Platt had loyally carried out his deceased friend's charge since 1796, died early in 1841. No less faithful was Ferdinand Bauer, who, despite his treatment by the cosmopolitan and erudite Sibthorp, completed all the illustrations for 'Flora Graeca'. Only twenty-five sets of 'Flora Graeca', containing 966 plates, were finally published by the Oxford University Press, at a cost of $620 each. These were sold to subscribers for $239 8's'. Sibthorp's estate made up the deficit of more than $9000. The publisher Henry Bohn later bought the remaining oddments of text and plates from the University Press, reprinted what was missing, and produced another forty sets in 1845 and 1846, which he sold for $63 apiece. No more were printed. The overburdened Smith also produced a four-part 'Florae Gracae prodromus', without illustrations, which appeared in two volumes between 1806 and 1816. Sibthorp willed that on completion of 'Flora Graeca' the balance of his estate should endow a Sibthorpian chair of rural economy to be held by the professor of botany. Only the additional stipend ($200) would secure a dedicated botanist for the university. The prospect induced Charles Daubeny to seek the botany chair in 1834, and he became first Sibthorpian professor in 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 25510


Sibthorp, Richard Waldo (1792-1879), Church of England clergyman and Roman Catholic convert, born at Canwick Hall, near Lincoln, on 4 October 1792, was the fifth and youngest son of Colonel Humphry Waldo Sibthorp (1744-1815), MP for Lincoln, and his wife, Susannah, daughter of Richard Ellison of Sudbrooke Holme, Lincolnshire. Colonel Charles de Laet Waldo Sibthorp was his brother. After an elementary education in a private school at Eltham, Kent, he was sent to Westminster School on 25 March 1807. He matriculated at University College, Oxford, on 12 December 1809, and in 1810 was elected to a demyship at Magdalen College. 
Attracted by the Roman Catholic faith, in the Michaelmas term of 1811 Sibthorp went to Wolverhampton, where he spent two days with Bishop John Milner, with the intention of entering the Roman communion. He was brought back, under police surveillance and chancery order, by an elder brother. He graduated BA in 1813, took Anglican orders in 1815, and was appointed curate of Waddington and Harmston, Lincolnshire. There he 'preached with all the enthusiasm of a Whitefield' (Palmer, 22). He graduated MA in 1816, and afterwards became curate to John Scott (1777-1834), incumbent of St Mary's Church, Hull. In July 1819 he was elected a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, and in the same year became vicar of Tattersall, Lincolnshire. He proceeded BD in 1823. In 1825 he took the charge of Percy proprietary chapel, St Pancras, London, and was subsequently evening lecturer at St John's Chapel, Bedford Row. At this period he was recognized as one of the leaders of the London evangelicals, and he was one of the founder members of the Islington Clerical Society. In 1829 he gave up his connection with London chapels and went to reside at Magdalen College as a fellow. From 1830 to 1841 he was incumbent of St James's Church, Ryde, Isle of Wight. 
On resigning the living Sibthorp was received into the Roman Catholic church at St Mary's College, Oscott, on 27 October 1841 by Bishop (afterwards Cardinal) Wiseman. Clerical conversions to Catholicism were at that period rare, and his defection excited considerable alarm. Sibthorp studied divinity at Oscott for a few months, was ordained priest on 21 May 1842, and was then attached to the cathedral church of St Chad, Birmingham, though he subsequently moved into a house which he bought for himself at Edgbaston. Dissatisfied with his position, and mentally disquieted after a serious accident, he left Edgbaston in June 1843 and purchased a cottage near St Helens, Isle of Wight, where he continued to say mass until October. Then he returned to the communion of the established church. 
After three years of retirement at Winchester, Sibthorp made a fruitless petition to Bishop Charles Richard Sumner to be reinstated as an Anglican clergyman. After settling at Lincoln in 1847 he established a liberally endowed St Anne's bede-house, and in the same year he was readmitted to discharge the functions of the Anglican ministry. Sibthorp resigned the chaplain-wardenship of St Anne's at the close of 1864, and on 25 January 1865 resumed the privilege of saying mass in the private chapel of Cardinal Wiseman. In December 1865 he was attached to the cathedral of St Barnabas, Nottingham. He frequently preached there, but, 'though now a Roman Catholic priest, his feelings, his language, his general teaching, were, in some very important respects, still evangelical' (Fowler, 177). He was placed on the list of retired priests in December 1874, and died at Nottingham on 10 April 1879. Following a Catholic requiem mass at Nottingham, he was buried in Lincoln cemetery where, in accordance with his express desire, the Anglican service was read over his grave. 
Sibthorp was unquestionably devout and sincere (and Gladstone thought him 'a holy man'; 'Diaries', 21 April 1880), but he was never able to satisfy himself that he was in the true church. Certainly he never accepted the full range of Catholic dogma in his Catholic periods. In addition to several sermons and pamphlets, he published 'Psalms and Hymns' (1831), 'The Family Liturgy, being a Course of Morning and Evening Prayers for a Family' (1836), and 'Daily Bread, being a Few Morning Meditations for the Use of Catholic Christians' (1876; rev. and enlarged edn, 1879). His apologetic, 'Some Answer to the Inquiry 'Why are you become a Catholic?'' (1842), elicited a series of replies from Oxford friends, including William Dodsworth and William Palmer, and a further reply from Sibthorp. 


@@@@@


doc= 25511


Sibthorpe, Robert (d. 1662), Church of England clergyman, has often been confused with namesakes, including the bishop of Limerick who died in 1649. Nothing is known of his parents or early life, and the attendance at Lincoln College, Oxford, indicated on his funeral monument, lacks clear confirmation. It was as a BA that he was ordained priest at Peterborough on 21 September 1606, and on 13 February 1608 he obtained through royal patronage the vicarage of St Giles, Northampton. 
Sibthorpe soon began service in the Peterborough diocesan courts, where John Lambe, whose sister he had married, was an ecclesiastical lawyer. Like Lambe, Sibthorpe had strongly ceremonialist and absolutist convictions: he detested the word-centred piety prevailing in the Jacobean church, which he stigmatized as puritan, and longed to replace it with a piety centred on sacraments and ceremonial conformity. As he attempted to impose this in 1610 the boycotting of his ministry by godly parishioners provoked a flurry of court activity. In 1615 Sibthorpe, Lambe (now chancellor of the diocese), and the controversialist David Owen again tried to impose ceremonial conformity, especially kneeling during receipt of communion, but without support from the establishment success was limited. In 'A Counterplea to an Apostataes Pardon' (1618), a Shrove Tuesday Paul's Cross sermon, Sibthorpe, like Owen, called for an abandonment of toleration of nonconformity: by their disobedience to divinely ordained episcopacy puritans were damning their souls and should be punished; they should not be permitted to equivocate over taking oaths of conformity. 
From 1616 Sibthorpe had been serving in the cure of St Sepulchre in Northampton; in 1619, having received from Lambe formal appointment there, he resigned his St Giles living. In 1622 he relinquished his cure on receiving from the patron, William Lisle, the rectory of Brackley, and was appointed a collector of aid for the distressed ministers of the Rhine palatinate. Meanwhile he held in plurality, until he resigned it in 1627, the living of Water Stratford, Buckinghamshire, obtained from Sir Arthur Throckmorton. 
The accession of Charles I brought Sibthorpe's views into vogue. Around 1625 he was made a JP and gained a doctorate of divinity, but national notoriety was only achieved on 22 February 1627, when he preached in favour of payment of the forced loan at Northampton assizes. Those who were disobedient to divine right monarchy he denounced as puritan rebels and damned souls, proclaiming 'if Princes command anything which is against the lawes of God or Nature or impossible yet Subjects are bound to undergoe the punishment without... resistance', and 'he that resisteth the Prince resisteth the power and ordinance of God, and consequently shall receive damnation' (R. Sibthorpe, 'Apostolike Obedience', 1627, 13, 3). Archbishop Abbot's refusal to license such absolutist ideology for the press was a factor in his downfall, since the king clearly agreed with Sibthorpe's ideas, and in his eclipse by the faction of Bishop Laud, whose colleague Bishop George Montaigne of London licensed the sermon. Sibthorpe's rewards were a royal chaplaincy and the vicarage of Burton Latimer, Northamptonshire (8 April 1629). However, he was condemned in the parliaments of 1628 and 1629, and narrowly escaped impeachment. With Lambe he was questioned over his support for Laud in his feud with Bishop John Williams, which persisted into an abortive 1630s Star Chamber case. 
William Piers, bishop of Peterborough from 1630 to 1632, appointed Sibthorpe chief lecturer at Kettering, and by 1633 John Towers was suggesting that Sibthorpe replace him as dean of Peterborough. In 1634 he contributed towards Archbishop Laud's prosecution of Charles Chauncy's opposition to the altar policy. Indeed, Sibthorpe had come to regard Laud and Lambe (now dominant in the central courts) as his only protectors against a ubiquitous puritanism threatening the king, the church, and himself. However, Bishop Francis Dee's drive for conformity in Peterborough in 1637 gave Sibthorpe the chance to realize his vision of the church since, in a new departure, Dee's church survey addressed liturgical practice and the whole groundplan of parochial worship. All parishes were to possess an east end, railed altar, all clergy were to administer communion from within the rails, and all communicants were to receive there kneeling. Together with Samuel Clarke (died 1641), archdeacon of Derby, Sibthorpe executed the commission with customary zeal, making Dee's success possible. He ensured that the minister (Thomas Ball) and churchwardens of All Saints', Northampton, and Miles Burkit, vicar of Pattishall, were harried for their opposition to the altar policy. The prerogative tax of ship money was seen as another test of loyalty so when Thomas Bacon, lord of the manor of Burton, defaulted over payment, Sibthorpe prosecuted him in Star Chamber. He supported the conformist cleric Richard Powell, who preached in favour of paying the tax but was accused of preaching against it by defaulters. Violent arguments broke out with Sir Richard Samwell, a godly JP who was detailed to investigate the case, but the privy council backed Sibthorpe's notion of a puritan conspiracy to undermine the tax and removed Samwell from the commission of the peace. At Brackley, Sibthorpe perceived another puritan conspiracy, led by the godly JP John Crewe, to oust him from the living and control the Wednesday lecture. He despised Crewe's sabbatarianism in attempting to brand as vagrants a group of musicians invited to play at Brackley fair, as part of the latitude permitted by the 'Book of Sports'. Through Lambe and John Towers, bishop of Peterborough from March 1639, Sibthorpe secured the establishment of a heavily regulated combination lecture to be delivered only by himself and preachers approved by the bishop. Its future survival was linked, uniquely, to full performance of Laudian ceremonial by both preacher and congregation. The climax of Sibthorpe's anti-puritan paranoia came with the bishops' wars of 1639, which he regarded as 'Rebellio Puritanica' (Stowe MSS, 3 June 1639). When his ally, George Plowright, was pressed as a soldier by the godly deputy lieutenant Sir Rowland St John, he reported the matter via Lambe to the privy council. Again the explanation was a puritan conspiracy to ruin him, but this time the case backfired; ironically, in view of the sentiments expressed in 'Apostolike Obedience', he was advocating resistance. 
The Long Parliament moved swiftly against such a zealous instrument of Charles I's personal rule; according to Sir Thomas Aston, one of the four 'greatest Enemies to church and state that ever was' (J. Maltby, 'Prayer Book and People in Elizabethan and Early Stuart England', 1998, 163-4). Sibthorpe was sent for as a delinquent by the House of Lords in December 1640 and accused by Bishop John Williams of secular absolutism and religious innovation. On 21 January 1641 the Lords removed him from the commission of the peace, although he was later given leave of absence to go to Northamptonshire. He escaped to the royalist headquarters at Oxford in 1643 and was soon sequestered by the Northamptonshire county committee. His successor at Burton Latimer was admitted on 11 June 1644. In 1646 he was granted a university licence to preach in any part of the kingdom, and he seems to have spent some time in London: his will later mentioned a Mrs Daraston of Long Acre, London, who with her husband had 'done mee many friendly offices in the late tymes of my trouble' ('Walker rev.', 284). At the Restoration, Sibthorpe was reinstated. He died in April 1662 and was buried in Burton chancel on 25 April. His wife had predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25512


Ratcliffe, John (d. 1610), mariner and colonist, is a mysterious figure. His family name appears to have been Sicklemore; why he chose to call himself Ratcliffe remains a riddle. His patent abilities as a mariner and his evident willingness to gamble at speculative ventures most likely account for why officials in the Virginia Company of London named him a leader of their colonial enterprise in 1606. He commanded the pinnace 'Discovery', one of the three vessels that bore the original complement of adventurers to Jamestown in 1607, and he held a seat on the resident council of the colony. 
Unbeknown to Ratcliffe and the others, the worst drought in more than seven centuries lay upon eastern Virginia in 1607, and it continued well into the 1610s. Arid weather made the usual heat and dryness of summers there intensely more unbearable for the colonists, who had little tolerance for such a climate. Drought also raised the salinity of the James River and the shallow aquifers around Jamestown, and it lessened available stocks of edibles that might be gleaned from the land or the natives. Those environmental conditions give an added poignancy to the accounts of George Percy, Edward Maria Wingfield, and others, which detailed the misery and privation that befell the struggling colony. 
Death reduced numbers and dwindling supplies pinched stomachs. Constant bickering bespoke suspicions that Ratcliffe, his council colleagues, and the men all harboured for one another; contention also revealed a failure of leadership, especially that of the president, Wingfield. Ratcliffe soon fell in behind a majority of the resident council, who expelled the sickly, ever wary Wingfield in the summer of 1607 and made Ratcliffe president. 
Ratcliffe retained the presidency for about a year. On his watch, the colony survived its first winter and welcomed two additional supplies of settlers and necessaries. Even so there was little cause for cheer because new colonists died off as fast as those they had intended to replace, whereas the colony lacked a means of sustaining itself and bringing profits to the company. Those difficulties were not wholly the fault of Ratcliffe, but a measure of responsibility was surely his, given that his talents for seamanship did not translate readily into skills for leading men on dry land. Indolence and a distrustful nature also got in his way. Like Wingfield before him, Ratcliffe gave too frequent ear to whispers of conspiracies, and, like Wingfield, he turned on the boisterous but effective Captain John Smith, who had helped him rise to his place. His own illness and a severe injury limited his effectiveness too. Such liabilities put an unsteady hand on the colony's tiller and bred continued talk of mutiny. 
After the fact, John Smith hinted that mutiny finally brought Ratcliffe down in September 1608, when Smith himself became president of Virginia. Smith's allegation may have enlarged upon reality because councillors held the presidency only for a year, which was just about the length of time Ratcliffe had been in office. Whatever the truth, Ratcliffe, on Smith's orders, sailed for England in December 1608. Smith then warned company officials to keep him there because he was so fractious, but Ratcliffe returned the following August. He was one of the councillors who took charge after a gunpowder accident forced his enemy Smith back to London in search of a cure for his wound. 
Ratcliffe lived into 1610. While he was on a trading expedition a force of natives attacked his party and killed them all. He was buried in Virginia. It was another colonist, Ralph Hamor, who perhaps best summed up Ratcliffe's effect on Virginia: 'Capt: 'Ratleife'', he noted, was not 'worthy remembring, but to his dishonor' (Hamor, 7). He may have been married, since one Dorothy Ratcliffe, whose husband had been dead for two years, married George Warburton in 1612. It is, however, unlikely that he was the Ratcliff who served as a captain of horse in the Netherlands and was captured at the battle of Mulheim in 1605, since the latter was back in Dutch pay by 1607. 


@@@@@


doc= 25513


Siddall, Henry (d. 1572), Church of England clergyman, is first recorded in 1530 as a petty canon of Cardinal College, Oxford, where he was admitted BA on 10 March 1531. He was expelled the following year on royal orders when the college failed after Wolsey's fall, and endured considerable difficulties as a result. In June 1535 he supplicated for the degrees of BCL and BCnL, and was admitted on 12 July, having been excused payment of his fee of 1 gold noble on the grounds of his poverty. In the meantime he had been ordained subdeacon on 24 February 1532 (he is not known to have proceeded to higher orders), and on 24 May 1533 was admitted vicar of Farnborough, Warwickshire, though he had resigned it by the end of 1534. On 1 December 1540 he was collated to a canonry in Lichfield Cathedral with the prebend of Stotfold, exchanging the latter for Tervin on 2 December 1547. He also became master of Yotton's chantry in that cathedral. On 12 May 1546 he was admitted rector of Barrow, Cheshire. 
Under Edward VI, Siddall showed strongly protestant sympathies. On 30 April 1547 he was presented by the crown to the fifth prebend at Christ Church, Oxford, and in July he was licensed as a preacher. When Pietro Martire Vermigli (known as Peter Martyr) began to preach in Oxford in the spring of 1548, Siddall was prominent among his supporters. In January 1550 he was appointed to a commission to proceed against Anabaptists, then making headway in Essex and Kent. Recorded as vice-dean of Christ Church in 1552, in the same year he supplicated for the degree of DTh. Following the succession of Mary, however, Siddall was quick to conform to Catholicism, thereby retaining his benefices. Active in trying to persuade Thomas Cranmer to follow his example, he was one of the witnesses to the archbishop's fifth recantation, of 26 February 1556, and gave him assurance that his life would be spared. Yet after the accession of Elizabeth he was among the first to subscribe to the royal supremacy, the 'Book of Common Prayer', and the royal injunctions of June 1559. He may have become rector of Thames Ditton, Surrey, but clearly remained closely attached to Christ Church. In 1571 Siddall presented books by Erasmus to the college, and it was probably there that he died on 2 May 1572, being buried on the south side of the chancel of Oxford Cathedral. He had never married, and on 8 May letters of administration were granted to his sister Elizabeth Costerdyne. Siddall is recorded by his college as 'a man inconstant in religion but a loyal steward or treasurer of this church' (Emden, 'Oxf.', 4.551). 


@@@@@


doc= 25514


Harriet Siddons (1783-1844), actress, appeared as a child at Bath as Prince Arthur in 'King John' for her father's benefit on 1 July 1793. Her London debut was at Covent Garden, as Perdita in 'The Winter's Tale' (May 1798). She remained at that theatre until the summer of 1805, playing with success a large range of parts, from the Shakespearian heroines Rosalind, Viola, Desdemona, Portia, and Beatrice, to Lucy Ashton in Calcraft's Waverley drama 'The Bride of Lammermoor', Lady Teazle in Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal', and Miss Hardcastle in Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25515


Siddons, Henry (1774-1815), actor and playwright, born in Wolverhampton on 23 October 1774, was the eldest child of the actor William Siddons (died 11 March 1808) and the renowned actress Sarah Siddons (1755-1831). His first appearance on stage was in 1783, when his mother brought him to London to play Child to her Isabella in David Garrick's 'Isabella, or, The Fatal Marriage' at Drury Lane. He was sent first to Dr Barrow's academy in Soho Square and then for five years to Charterhouse, where he acquired a thorough knowledge of the classics. At the age of fifteen he wrote an interlude called 'Modern Breakfast, or, All Asleep at Noon', which was acted for the benefit of his aunt Elizabeth Kemble at the Haymarket in 1790. 
After leaving school Siddons went with his father to France, and on his return joined the company of his uncle Stephen Kemble in Sheffield, appearing as Zanga in Edward Young's 'The Revenge' in November 1792. He then performed at Lancaster, Liverpool, Bath, and other provincial theatres and also began to write more dramatic pieces of his own; among those produced were 'Sicilian Romance, or, Apparition of the Cliffs' (1794), 'Adventures of Tom Trip', 'What we have been and what we may be' (1796), and 'Zelida, or, The Pirates' (1799). Siddons accompanied Kemble to Newcastle and Edinburgh, and showed such talent in playing the parts of the Stranger in 'Douglas' and Rolla in 'Pizarro' that his mother, who had originally intended him for the church, withdrew her earlier objections to his becoming an actor, and was induced to recommend him to Harris, the proprietor of the Covent Garden Theatre in London. She even acted Lady Randolph to his Douglas in Hannah More's 'Percy' in May 1802, on the occasion of his benefit. 
Siddons was engaged by Harris for three years, and in October 1801 made his first appearance at Covent Garden, as Herman in a play called 'Integrity'. His future wife, the actress Harriet Murray ['see below'], daughter of the actor Charles Murray, played in the same piece. They were married on 22 June 1802. There were children of the marriage. Siddons remained a member of Covent Garden until the spring of 1805. In September 1805 he made his first appearance at Drury Lane, playing the Prince of Wales to Elliston's Hotspur in 'Henry IV'. Next he appeared as Romeo and Sir G. Touchwood in 'The Belle's Stratagem'. During his stay at Drury Lane he played a variety of leading roles, including Banquo in 'Macbeth', Jaffier in 'Venice Preserv'd', and Claudio in 'Much Ado about Nothing'. He terminated his connection with the London stage at the close of the season of 1808-9. 
Largely through Sir Walter Scott's influence, Siddons secured the patent of the Edinburgh Theatre Royal. The theatre was then over forty years old and a change of management was definitely required; Henry Siddons, his wife, and his wife's brother William Henry Murray were thought to be ideal for the job. Siddons left the old building, transferred the royal sanction to the Circus on Leith Walk, and opened the New Theatre Royal, Leith Walk, in November 1809 with John Tobin's 'The Honeymoon', in which he played the Duke and his wife played Juliana. This opening was eminently successful. To maintain the popularity and high standard of the theatre, the Siddonses engaged Sarah Siddons and Stephen Kemble for a season. Siddons and his wife regularly appeared together, as the Count de Valmont and the Unknown Female in 'The Foundling of the Forest', as Leonatus and Paulina in 'The Winter's Tale', and so on. When, around September 1814, Drury Lane asked Harriet Siddons to play Juliet to Edmund Kean's Romeo, she declined without hesitation, preferring to remain with her husband. By then Siddons was fighting a losing battle, however. His play 'Friend of the Family' was reproduced in December 1814 under the new name of 'Policy, or, Thus Runs the World Away', but played only twice. In February 1815 'The Comedy of Errors' was performed in Edinburgh for the first time in thirty years, with Murray and Samuel Russell as the two Dromios, but it could not turn the fortunes of the theatre. On 1 March 1815 Siddons appeared on stage for the last time, as Captain Downright in 'The Wild Indian Girl' for his wife's benefit. On 12 April 1815 he died in Edinburgh, leaving his wife and the theatre in severe financial difficulties. 
Siddons made a great effort to be an efficient and innovative manager and bring success to the theatre, but as an actor he was at the disadvantage of having to suffer constant comparison with his more talented relatives the Kembles, and as a result never received the acclaim that he perhaps deserved. His plays 'Time's a Tell-Tale', 'The Russian Imposter', and 'Tale of Terror, or, Castle Without a Spectre', produced at Covent Garden for Murray's benefit in 1803, as well as his other pieces, were not very successful either. He adapted from a work by Engel 'Illustrations of Gesture and Action' (1807), and published three novels, 'William Wallace', 'Leon, a Spartan Story', and 'Somerset'. 
Siddons's wife, 
In 1805 Harriet joined the Drury Lane company together with her husband and had an immediate success playing Juliet to Elliston's Romeo. Her first appearance in Edinburgh was in 1808, at the Theatre Royal, where she played Belvidera in 'Venice Preserv'd' to the Jaffier of her husband and Ophelia to his Hamlet. She shared managerial duties with her husband from 1809 to 1815; even after his death, when the affairs of the theatre were in a bad state, she was determined to survive with her brother's help in management. 
In January 1816 Mrs Siddons made her first appearance since her husband's death, playing Viola in 'Twelfth Night'. Murray played Sebastian, and the strong resemblance between brother and sister contributed to the success of the performance. They acted together again in 'The Belle's Stratagem' in 1819, Harriet playing Letitia Hardy and Murray playing Flutter. Their wisest decision was to stage the various adaptations of Sir Walter Scott's novels, whose success really helped to raise the fortunes of the house. Daniel Terry's adaptation of 'Guy Mannering' was the first of the Waverley dramas performed at the Theatre Royal, in 1817, with Harriet as Meg Merrilees. She also played Jeanie Deans in 'The Heart of Midlothian' (1820), Amy in Tom Dibdin's version of 'Kenilworth, or, The Merry Days of Old England' (1822), and Diana Vernon in 'Rob Roy', which was produced on the occasion of the visit to Edinburgh by George IV in 1822. In May 1825 the production of a series of Waverley dramas commenced with 'The Rose of Ettrick Vale', Harriet Siddons playing the title role. Murray also took part in all these plays. Harriet took her farewell benefit on 29 March 1829, as Lady Townly in Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Husband'. The address she delivered on this occasion was written by her great patron, Sir Walter Scott. This was not her last appearance, however, as during her brother's illness she helped out in a number of casts. She died in Edinburgh on 2 November 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 25516


Siddons, Sarah (1755-1831), actress, was born on 5 July 1755 at the Shoulder of Mutton inn in Brecon, the first of the twelve children of Roger Kemble (1722-1802), an actor and theatre manager, and his wife, Sarah Ward (1735-1807), the daughter of John and Sarah Ward. Like her sisters, she was baptized into her mother's religion as a protestant (her brothers were baptized, after their father, as Catholics), at St Mary's Church, Brecon, on 14 July 1755. Seven of her siblings (four sisters and three brothers), including Charles Kemble, Ann Julia Hatton, and Stephen George Kemble, also entered the acting profession, and her brother John Philip Kemble became the most important actor and manager of his time; Siddons was to establish herself as the most acclaimed tragic actress of her own age, and she has subsequently been widely regarded as the greatest female performer in English theatrical history. In her own lifetime she achieved the status of a popular icon, playing a key role in the social legitimation of the acting profession, moving from the reputedly disreputable world of provincial touring theatre to the salons of the aristocracy, and amassing substantial personal wealth. Her public success, however, was attended by a great deal of personal sadness: her marriage to the philandering and feckless William Siddons, although nominally enduring, was an unhappy one and ended in informal separation, and she outlived five of her seven children. 
Although Sarah Kemble's life was spent in the theatre from the very beginning, she entered the profession itself in the face of some parental opposition. To a certain extent this repeated the pattern seen in her own parents' careers, in that her maternal grandfather, John Ward, had initially opposed his daughter's choice of Roger Kemble as a husband. With the Kembles on the road for most of the year, Sarah received her formal education at a succession of day schools in the midlands and the north of England and was trained in elocution and singing by her mother. By the age of twelve she had managed to cultivate such a sufficiently convincing demeanour of gentility that she was invited to attend, free of charge, Mrs Harris's School for Young Ladies at Thornloe House in Worcester. Treated with condescension by her more well-heeled fellow pupils, she discovered that she could find favour by shining in school theatricals. During this period she began to appear with Kemble's company in a variety of parts (her first recorded role being Ariel in 'The Tempest' in Coventry at the end of 1766). Also in the company at this time was the actor William Siddons (1744-1808), whom she was later to marry. About 1770, at the age of fourteen or fifteen, Sarah began a romance with William; when her parents, sceptical about William's prospects, opposed it, it merely served to strengthen the relationship. The Kembles had also encouraged the advances of a local Brecon squire, Mr Evans, who was infatuated with Sarah; when William discovered this he accused Roger Kemble of treachery and was as a consequence dismissed from the company. Sarah, however, refused to marry Evans, and in 1770 was sent into service with the Greatheeds of Guy's Cliffe, Warwick, where she remained for two years, first as a maid and then as Lady Mary Greatheed's companion. She continued to correspond with William throughout; in the end the Kembles withdrew their opposition to the match, and on 26 November 1773 William and Sarah were married at Holy Trinity Church, Coventry. The couple rejoined Kemble's company for a year, then left in 1774 to join Chamberlain and Crump's company and set up for the summer in Cheltenham, which was becoming an increasingly fashionable spa town. It was here that Siddons's talents first came to the notice of certain well-connected and influential individuals who were to prove instrumental in the advancement of her career. Her portrayal of Belvidera in Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd' (which was to prove one of her most popular roles) attracted the attention of Thomas Brudenell-Bruce, second Baron Bruce of Tottenham, and his much sought-after stepdaughter Henrietta Boyle; Henrietta, who became a lifelong friend, was sufficiently impressed by Siddons to offer to supervise and supplement her wardrobe with her own clothes. Lord Bruce, in addition, recommended Siddons to David Garrick on his return to London. 
During the Cheltenham season Siddons was pregnant, and she gave birth to her first son, Henry, in Wolverhampton on 4 October 1774. Garrick, meanwhile, responded to the recommendation he had received by sending one of the leading members of his company, Tom King, to observe Siddons in Cheltenham. Although King reported very favourably back to Garrick, it was not until 1775, when the actor-manager received word from a friend, the Revd Henry Bate, confirming King's account, that he arranged to engage Siddons with his Drury Lane company. By this time Siddons was heavily pregnant with her second child (this did not prevent her from playing Rosalind in 'As You Like It'); according to Bate, her face was 'one of the most beautiful that ever I beheld', although he added that her voice struck him as 'at first rather dissonant' and 'somewhat grating', and he speculated that 'her figure must be remarkably fine, when she is delivered of her big belly, which entirely mars for the present her whole shape' (Manvell, 23). An exchange of letters between Bate, Garrick, and William Siddons followed, as they negotiated over the date for Sarah to join the Drury Lane company following the anticipated birth. The issue was resolved when Siddons went into labour during a performance in Gloucester on 4 November; the next day her first daughter, Sarah Martha, was born. Urged by Garrick to make the journey to London at the earliest opportunity, Siddons and her family moved to the capital in the middle of December. 
Sarah made her first foray onto the London stage on 29 December 1775, as Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice'. This debut, which was billed as that of 'a Young Lady (being her first appearance)', was a disaster. Siddons misjudged the scale of the Drury Lane Theatre, which was considerably larger than those in which she was accustomed to performing; she was badly costumed, and, intimidated by the London society audience, she moved awkwardly and hesitantly and lost her voice. It is fair to assume that the effect of an extremely recent birth, the demands of caring for two very young children, the fact that her family was existing on very limited means, and the hostility and suspicion with which she was regarded by the other actresses in Garrick's company also contributed to her failure of nerve. The judgement of the press was almost unanimously negative; most damningly, the 'Morning Chronicle' of 30 December recorded that she had 'vulgarity in her tones'. For six months she struggled miserably through a succession of parts in comedies for which she was clearly ill-suited (the 'Morning Chronicle' concluded that 'she had no comedy in her nature'), while also being (as she later interpreted it) exploited by Garrick as part of his manoeuvring against two of his leading actresses, Mrs Yates and Miss Younge. Siddons left London for the 1776 summer season in Birmingham, hopeful of securing further employment at Drury Lane in the winter. While at Birmingham she was informed by Garrick's prompter that she was not to be re-engaged. 
Mortified by her experience at Drury Lane, and in poor health, Siddons resolved to carry on, for the sake, as she repeatedly put it, of her 'poor babies' (Manvell, 38). She spent the next six years in a wide variety of theatres outside London; in 1776-7 this included spells in Liverpool and Manchester and with Tate Wilkinson's company at York. Before long she began to rebuild her confidence and her battered reputation, achieving growing recognition and acclaim as it became increasingly evident that her most powerful talents were for tragedy rather than comedy. Wilkinson, who was working hard to improve the conditions of the acting profession outside London by attempting to extricate it from its disreputable, provincial associations, and who was one of Sarah's most generous supporters, recorded that there was never 'so great a favourite, as a York actress, as Mrs Siddons was in that short period' (Wilkinson, 255). In 1777 her brother John Philip Kemble joined her in Joseph Younger's company in Liverpool, and in January 1778 Siddons played Desdemona opposite Kemble's Othello. This was followed, in March, by a piece of casting which gives a good indication of where her reputation stood in relation to his, by her playing Hamlet to his Laertes. 
For the autumn season of 1778 Siddons was engaged by John Palmer the younger at his Theatre Royal in Bath, the city which was now the centre of fashionable society outside London. It was here that she established herself as the most popular, acclaimed, and sought-after actress of her time. In her first season, aged twenty-four and pregnant with her second daughter, Maria ('b'. 1 July 1779), Siddons worked tirelessly, rehearsing and performing nearly thirty roles while also travelling between theatres in Bath and Bristol. In the following season, beginning in September 1779, she took on the roles for which she would become legendary, including Constance in 'King John', Queen Katherine in 'Henry VIII', and Lady Macbeth, and she became an increasing object of interest to fashionable society, being befriended by socialites such as Sophia Weston, Mrs Hester Thrale (Mrs Piozzi), Fanny Burney, and Georgiana, duchess of Devonshire. It was in Bath that she first encountered the child prodigy and painter Thomas Lawrence. Socially and professionally successful, Siddons had every intention of remaining in Bath, but by the end of the 1770s the fear of financial insecurity which she never managed to overcome made it inevitable that she would move to London, where her earnings could be vastly increased. From 1780 onwards, Richard Brinsley Sheridan, who had taken over the management of the Drury Lane Theatre, made repeated attempts to persuade her to return to the London stage, and in 1782 she finally acquiesced. On 21 May she played her last benefit in Bath, and, in a 'coup de theatre' which a number of her fellow performers thought in rather dubious taste, revealed her 'THREE REASONS' for her departure by bringing her children onto the stage. It was not the last time that Siddons's professional and maternal identities would be so publicly linked. She was, moreover, pregnant with her fifth child, Eliza Ann, who was born on 2 June (her fourth, Frances Emilia, who was baptized on 6 April 1781, had died as an infant). Siddons gave final appearances in Bath, Bristol, and Cheltenham and, at the end of September 1782, moved to London. 
There could hardly have been a greater contrast between Siddons's ignominious departure from Drury Lane in 1776 and her triumphant return there six years later. Sick with apprehension, she made her first appearance on 10 October 1782 in the title role in Garrick's version of Thomas Southerne's 'Isabella, or, The Fatal Marriage'. It was an immediate success. Reports rapidly began to circulate of the majestic scale and intensity of her acting, and of the scenes of near-hysteria that it tended to provoke. In his 'Memoirs of Mrs Siddons' James Boaden records 'sobs and shrieks among the tenderer part of her audiences', and 'those tears, which manhood at first struggled to suppress, but at length grew proud of indulging... the nerves of many a gentle being gave way before the intensity of such appeals, and fainting fits long and frequently alarmed the decorum of the house, filled almost to suffocation. (Boaden, 195)' A contemporary commentator tells of how Siddons's Jane Shore made 'two ladies among the spectators fall into hysterics, and one of them had to be carried out, laughing convulsively' (Booth, 19). That such breaches of decorum took place so repeatedly and in so spectacular a fashion may testify to Siddons's power and charisma as a performer, but they also suggest a deeper catharsis, in that the specific kinds of tragic suffering that she conveyed (more often than not, blameless women victimized, exploited, and destroyed by men) had particularly painful resonances for her audiences (and, perhaps, for Siddons herself) in the context of a society wherein the majority of women 'lived in a world of men who defined and circumscribed them, and denied them... the most basic of civil rights' (ibid., 31). Such emotional reactions were unprecedented, as was the hyperbolic vocabulary of grandeur, majesty, and awesomeness which contemporary commentators on Siddons employed to describe her stage presence, technique, and acting style. Siddons's characteristic performance style is best thought of in terms of the transition from neo-classicism to romanticism -- the first aspect becoming visible in a classically inspired, literally statuesque composition of posture, gesture, and costume which rendered her characters as legendary, iconic figures, the second element being found in the focused emotional intensity of her delivery. As audience reactions indicate, it was a mesmerizing combination that seemed to transform the actress into a force both of and beyond nature, and which readily lent itself to romantic notions of the sublime. 
Still in her late twenties, Siddons became a cult figure, an object of veneration, even near-worship, and was greatly in demand in fashionable society. She received her first invitation to read before the king and queen early in 1783; at the queen's command, she was appointed reader to the royal princesses. Her earnings rapidly multiplied. In common with all married women of the time, however, she had no control over her income, which legally belonged to and was managed by her husband. This would eventually exacerbate the Siddonses' marital difficulties, as William proved to be quite inept in his handling of the finances. In June 1783 Sarah travelled to Dublin to play Isabella at the Smock Alley Theatre, and in October returned to Drury Lane. The following summer, at the end of the Drury Lane season, she initiated a pattern of work that she maintained for the next decade, by embarking upon a punishing schedule of touring in the north of England and Scotland. Despite the fact that she was now earning quite considerable sums of money, Siddons continued to work compulsively (and to the detriment of her health). This did not always reflect entirely favourably upon her, particularly on the occasions when she became entangled in the inevitable jealousies and ill feeling generated by the benefit system (whereby individual actors could collect the proceeds of a night's performance or offer them for charitable purposes), and she acquired a reputation for meanness and ruthless self-interest. In one particularly damaging instance it was rumoured that, during her 1784 visit to Dublin, she had refused to offer a benefit for the actor West Digges, who had been paralysed some months before (although she eventually did so, rather reluctantly, on 23 August). In October of the same year the story went round that she had similarly refused to offer a benefit for the actor William Brereton (who was in reality fairly well-off and hardly in need of charitable support), which resulted in her being hissed offstage by a hostile Drury Lane audience, although she eventually succeeded in placating her critics. Such gossip was connected to other rivalries: between Brereton and John Philip Kemble, and between Siddons and the actress Anne Crawford, who was in her late forties during the period of Siddons's ascendancy, and whose position as London's pre-eminent tragic actress was rapidly being eclipsed by the rival who was twenty years her junior. Crawford had performed in Dublin during Siddons's first visit there, and in November 1783 she tried to challenge Siddons directly by playing Lady Randolph in John Home's 'Douglas' (a part closely associated with Siddons) at Covent Garden; sadly for Crawford, the comparisons that were drawn between the two actresses were unanimously to her detriment. 
On 30 September 1783 John Philip Kemble made his own London debut, as Hamlet, and made almost as much of an impression as Siddons had the previous year. Brother and sister first appeared together at Drury Lane in Edward Moore's 'The Gamester' on 22 November, and they followed this with 'King John' on 10 December, in which Kemble played the King and Siddons Constance. Although Constance appears in only three scenes, this was one of her most impressive portrayals (it was assisted by some deft reordering of the text so that Constance became the play's dominant force), and it entailed an identification with the role that was far in advance of its time. As she later recalled, Sarah would leave her dressing-room door open between her scenes; thus, overhearing events on stage, she could work herself into an appropriate frenzy, as they would cause 'bitter tears of rage, disappointment, betrayed confidence, baffled ambition, and, above all, the agonizing feelings of maternal affection to gush into my eyes'. Consciously or not, her account of Constance's 'maternal tenderness desperate and ferocious as a hunted tigress in defence of her young' (Campbell, 1.215) recalls the ever-present rationale for her own reputed ruthlessness. Constance was one of a succession of portrayals of Shakespearian tragic heroines in which Siddons stressed elements of thwarted, distorted, or betrayed conjugal or maternal love, and which included Lady Macbeth, which she first played in London in February 1785 (and which, as her most significant role, is discussed in more detail below), Volumnia in 'Coriolanus' in 1787, Katherine in 'Henry VIII' in 1788, and, in 1801, her final new role, Hermione in 'The Winter's Tale'. 
By the mid-1780s Siddons was established as a cultural icon. If her charismatic presence in the theatre produced delirious results, the circulation of her image throughout middle-class English culture in the late eighteenth century in a variety of narrative and visual forms both underpinned and further contributed to her mythical and monumental status. The already considerable impact of her performances was magnified beyond their immediate moment as she, and they, became the subject of discourse and debate within the rapidly expanding and proliferating genres of theatre journalism and commentary, which were in turn addressing themselves to a growing, increasingly critical readership; as it did in person, the figure of Siddons in print provided a focus for the emotional exploration and moral evaluation of a range of contemporary preoccupations and anxieties, particularly in the area of female sexuality. Siddons was also the subject of a wide range of visual representations, as she was commemorated in paintings, sketches, prints, and caricatures in the roles for which she became famous. During the 1783-4 season she sat for Sir Joshua Reynolds as 'The Tragic Muse', which soon became one of the most well-known images of the actress. Seated on a throne, flanked by allegorical personifications of Pity and Terror, Siddons is simultaneously tragedy's source of inspiration and its monumental embodiment. By the mid-1780s Siddons was settling into her niche in London society, mixing with the nobility, writers, and politicians; her acquaintances included Dr Johnson, Edmund Burke, and William Windham. For the next fifteen years she maintained the pattern of alternating between Drury Lane in the winter months and regional tours in the summer. 
Although this period of her life saw her at the height of her popularity and critical acclaim, it was also one in which Siddons experienced professional and personal difficulties. On the former count, the continuing saga of her reputed meanness was further complicated by the difficulties that arose from Richard Brinsley Sheridan's haphazard and less than scrupulous management of Drury Lane, which led to her breaking with the theatre for the 1789-90 season. In April 1788 she suffered a miscarriage; two weeks later her youngest daughter, Elizabeth Ann, died, aged six. The 1790s also saw a marked deterioration in her relationship with her husband. Although he had shown early signs of promise, William Siddons's own career as an actor had long since petered out in the shadow of his wife's, and his main role had been to manage the money that she earned but which he legally owned. Rumours of his infidelities began to emerge, which eventually proved to be of substance when (according to her close confidante, Mrs Piozzi) Sarah discovered in August 1792 that the ill health that had afflicted her for a decade was the result of venereal infection from her husband. According to Mrs Piozzi, the facade of loyalty and marital harmony that Siddons continued to maintain masked deep resentment and 'indignant melancholy' (Manvell, 184). Her seventh child, Cecilia, was born on 25 July 1794; she was back acting at the Haymarket a month later. During this period the Drury Lane Theatre was rebuilt on a far larger scale than before, and this was to confront Siddons with the problem that had caused her so much anxiety at her London debut. Having thrived upon the relative intimacy of the old theatre, she was now faced with the need to adjust the scale of her performances to the altered size and configuration of the new auditorium. When Drury Lane reopened on 12 March 1794, with Siddons and John Kemble in a lavish new production of 'Macbeth', it quickly became evident that the enlargement of stage and auditorium, and the increased sophistication of the stage machinery, had shifted the emphasis towards elaborate spectacle. Although Siddons was initially enthusiastic about the theatre, it would prove to render her own mode of acting obsolete. Throughout the 1790s financial pressures drove her through a succession of parts in plays of inferior quality; the greatest indignity was her performance as Elgiva in Fanny Burney's disastrous tragedy 'Edway and Elgiva' in March 1795. Even 'the solemn accents of Siddons herself' failed to rescue its 'ludicrous circumstance' (Campbell, 2.192); mortifyingly, Siddons's death scene was played to ribald laughter. Siddons continued to act at Drury Lane until the turn of the century, by which time Sheridan owed her more than $2000 in unpaid salary, while William Siddons negotiated to no effect on her behalf. 
The final decade of the eighteenth century brought the Siddons family heartache in the form of its entanglements with the portrait painter Thomas Lawrence, whom Siddons had encountered in Bath a decade earlier. From the moment of his arrival in London in 1787 at the age of eighteen, Lawrence was a celebrity: precociously talented, impulsive, narcissistic, charming, and extravagantly irresponsible in his financial and emotional affairs, he was both a charismatic figure and a dangerous one. In 1796 he began an affair with Siddons's daughter Sally, then twenty-one, which led to a marriage proposal the following year. Sarah and William Siddons refused to consent to the match. Siddons's doubts were complicated by her own attachment to Lawrence and the fact that her relationship with William Siddons was becoming increasingly distant. When the relationship between Lawrence and Sally cooled, the latter's eighteen-year-old younger sister Maria stepped in, arranging clandestine meetings with the painter which culminated (again, in the face of stiff parental opposition) in a formal engagement early in 1798. At this point, however, Maria's health began to deteriorate, prompting Lawrence to attempt to renew his attentions to Sally. As Maria's state steadily worsened, Lawrence became increasingly desperate and obsessive in his efforts to gain access to Sally; Sarah Siddons, meanwhile, was torn not only by work commitments, which were enforcing separation from a daughter who was terminally ill with consumption, but also by the conflict between her desire to protect Sally and Maria from Lawrence and her own feelings of sympathy and affection for him. Maria died on 7 October 1798, but not before she had extracted on her deathbed a solemn promise from her sister not to undertake any further liaison with Lawrence. Siddons's opposition to the relationship, which had taken its toll on her own health, confirmed the pact; none the less, she continued to maintain a friendship with Lawrence for the next thirty years until his death. Sally Siddons was rather less fortunate; she died five years after her sister. 
Although Siddons owed her popular success to her command of a wide range of tragic roles, many of them in plays by her contemporaries which have since vanished from the repertory, her most celebrated part, and the one with which she continues to be associated, is that of Lady Macbeth. Not only her contemporaries but many later commentators have considered her portrayal to be definitive; in 1812 Charles Lamb, who tended to doubt that Shakespeare's tragedies could or should be staged at all, wrote that 'we speak of Lady Macbeth, while we are in reality thinking of Mrs S'. The association was to become firmly fixed in the English cultural imagination by the numerous paintings, sketches, and engravings of her in the role. Siddons first tackled the part in her early twenties during her time in Cheltenham, and she continued to play it throughout her career, up to and after her retirement in 1812. Her prolonged immersion in the part took place in the context of the intense and sustained interest in 'Macbeth' within late eighteenth-century English literary and theatrical culture -- an interest that was substantially motivated by the play's perceived relevance to events of the French Revolution. As a study in regicide, 'Macbeth' afforded English theatre audiences a glimpse of something both fascinating and unspeakable; in the figure of Lady Macbeth, Siddons and her spellbound spectators found a focus for their own darkest fears. Siddons's accounts of her approach to the role are revealing, in that they indicate that her attempts to find her way into the character through imaginative identification and empathy did not just constitute a new and innovative acting method, but also took her into potentially dangerous psychological territory. As she later recalled, she was in the habit of learning her parts at night when she first took on the role, and had planned to rote-learn the part on the eve of the first performance, naively believing that 'little more was necessary than to get the words into my head'. However, as she went on 'in the silence of the night' to the assassination scene: 'the horrors of the scene rose to a degree that made it impossible for me to get further. I snatched up my candle, and hurried out of the room in a paroxysm of terror. My dress was of silk, and the rustling of it, as I ascended the stairs to go to bed, seemed to my panic-struck fancy like the movement of a spectre pursuing me. (Fitzgerald, 1.32-3)' Siddons's record of her appalled reaction to Shakespeare's text, which seems designed to establish her moral distance from her character, actually leads her into an uncanny, and troubling, identification with it, as she echoes Lady Macbeth's ascent to the bedchamber (where, ironically enough, she finds her 'husband fast asleep'). As Siddons depicts herself climbing guiltily towards a bedchamber containing not a soon-to-be-murdered king but the husband who, by the time she narrated this incident, had given her more than enough cause for resentment, the distinctions between the evil character and the good mother, wife, and actress seem less clear-cut than propriety might demand. For Siddons, the moral of this story was that she was sufficiently shamed by the result of (as she saw it) her own immaturity, idleness, and complacency that it 'cured me of procrastinating my business for the remainder of my life'; but it also indicates that the embryonic psychological approach to character could also subtly destabilize the conventional moral categories within which a figure such as Lady Macbeth had previously been assigned. 
Siddons's task with Lady Macbeth, as she saw it, was that of finding points of sympathy rather than presenting her (as had previous actresses) as a 'fiend-like Queen' who was, in Dr Johnson's words, 'merely detested'. As Siddons put it in an essay written some time around 1816, Lady Macbeth's propensity for evil had to be seen neither as innate and immutable nor as her sole defining characteristic; she should be regarded rather as a woman riven with conflicts between her feminine nature and ruthless ambition. Adopting what was at the time the new approach of conceiving the role as an organic whole rather than as a series of spectacular but isolated moments, she suggested that Lady Macbeth should be 'most captivating to the other sex, -- fair, feminine, nay, perhaps, even fragile' and 'captivating in female loveliness' (Campbell, 2.11); for only this could explain her hold over her husband. Thus Macbeth was driven towards regicide by the goadings of his wife, who, once the murder had been committed, collapsed with remorse as her essential femininity reasserted itself. This was an innovative reading of the part, not just because it contained the suggestion that the Macbeths' criminal acts were the perverse consequence of a profound marital love and loyalty, but also because it secretly questioned the moral priorities associated with the play. If the wickedness of Macbeth and Lady Macbeth was a matter not of nature but of the circumstances within which they found themselves, might this not put the murder of the king (which had such powerful resonances for late eighteenth-century English audiences) in a different light? 
In fact, the effect of Siddons as Lady Macbeth in performance was at first less ambivalent than her considered and sympathetic account of the character suggests. She first played the part in London, on 2 February 1785, opposite William Smith, who was generally agreed to be a weak foil to her; however, when John Kemble took over the part of Macbeth in March, their partnership became legendary. Where Kemble presented Macbeth as an introspective and naturally virtuous man, wracked with guilty imaginings the deeper he progressed in crime, Siddons was mesmerizingly powerful, a terrifying rather than a delicate and pathetic figure. Her most unforgettable moment was the sleepwalking scene, in which Siddons caused some consternation by breaking with the established stage tradition of carrying a candle throughout, choosing instead to set it down to concentrate on the washing of her hands. If this was perceived as faintly disrespectful to her predecessors in the part (notably Hannah Pritchard, who had played opposite Garrick, and whose interpretation had until then been regarded as definitive), Siddons silenced criticism by stamping her unquestionable authority on the role. Although she envisaged Lady Macbeth as a woman deserving of understanding and sympathy, she was apprehended as a vast, malign force beyond nature. William Hazlitt wrote: 'we can conceive of nothing grander... it seemed almost as if a being of a superior order had dropped from a higher sphere to awe the world with the majesty of her appearance. Power was seated on her brow, passion emanated from her breast as from a shrine; she was tragedy personified... she glided on and off the stage like an apparition. To have seen her in that character was an event in every one's life, not to be forgotten. (Hazlitt, 'Characters of Shakespeare's Plays')' History was to prove Hazlitt right: Siddons's Lady Macbeth continues to be regarded as the one against which all later interpretations have been judged. 
The turn of the nineteenth century marks the beginning of the final phase of Siddons's stage career. In March 1802 she studied her last new role, that of another wronged wife and mother, Hermione in 'The Winter's Tale'. Although she was still much acclaimed, it was becoming evident that she was no longer at her best: she was beginning to tire more rapidly, and ticket sales, particularly for her London performances, began to decline. In the summer months she continued her heavy provincial touring schedule. From 1801 onwards she suffered from erysipelas, as well as from rheumatoid arthritis; she was also prone to bouts of depression and sickness. At the end of the 1801-2 season she and John Kemble resigned from Drury Lane; he bought into the Covent Garden Theatre while she went to Ireland with Tate Wilkinson's daughter Martha (known as Patty), who had become her constant companion and would remain so until Siddons's death. Although she continued to impress critics and audiences, it was reported that she was visibly putting on weight and that her voice was sounding strained. None the less, she managed to draw large crowds in Dublin for an interesting experiment in cross-dressing, her portrayal of Hamlet on 27 July 1802. Siddons's swordplay in the final scene attracted praise: she had been tutored by a fencing instructor, Mr P. Galindo, who also played Laertes. Siddons's close friendship with Galindo and his wife, Catherine, an actress who had played alongside Siddons in Ambrose Philips's 'The Distrest Mother', was another unfortunate liaison, which in 1809 led to Mrs Galindo publishing accusations of an illicit affair between the actress and her husband, and of her subsequent betrayal of her family. Siddons had been introduced to the Galindos by Patty Wilkinson; according to Catherine, Galindo had fallen in love with her, abandoned his wife, and spent much of his time driving her about in his carriage. 
Whether or not there was a covert relationship between Siddons and Galindo, she was made godmother to the Galindos' daughter in July 1803. In March 1803 Siddons learned that her father, Roger Kemble, had died the previous December. On her return to England in April she stopped in Shrewsbury, where she received a letter from her husband written an hour before the death of her daughter Sally. This was followed by confirmation that Sally had died on 24 March. In London she made overtures to Thomas Harris, the manager of Covent Garden, to employ Galindo. When John Kemble, who had been abroad, got to hear of the plan he was outraged, and ordered Harris to retract the offer. The Galindos followed Siddons to London (where, Mrs Galindo alleged, Galindo was secretly her constant visitor), and the association continued for the next four years. Siddons lent Galindo $1000 to enable him to buy into a partnership with William Macready for a theatre in Manchester. When the venture collapsed, Siddons called in the debt; according to Mrs Galindo, this was a calculated and vindictive attempt to ruin them. Siddons did not get her money back, and the relationship was finished. Meanwhile stories were circulating of an affair between Siddons and Thomas Lawrence, for whom she had sat in March 1804. William Siddons was driven to issue a press advertisement offering a reward of $1000 for information about who was responsible for the rumours, to no effect. In any case, William and Sarah Siddons, who had spent the last few years increasingly apart, were informally separated by October. William moved to Bath, where he died on 11 March 1808. Together with Patty Wilkinson and her sole surviving daughter, Cecilia, Siddons moved to Hanover Square. 
Siddons continued to tour during the first two decades of the nineteenth century. She was briefly engaged at the rebuilt Covent Garden Theatre, which opened on 18 September 1809 with 'Macbeth'. Once again, the move to a new theatre was an unhappy experience for Siddons, this time because the management's decision to raise admission charges and increase the number of expensive private boxes precipitated the protests from the pit that came to be known as the Old Price (or OP) riots. Kemble's attempt to move the theatre upmarket (and, in the process, subtly to alter the social composition of its audiences) was viewed by the OP protesters as an assault upon the ancient rights and privileges of common theatregoers, as denying them access to the nation's drama (and, in particular, to Shakespeare). After thirty-seven nights of barracking, Kemble acceded to the rioters' demands; ticket prices were brought down and the number of boxes was reduced. Unsurprisingly, Siddons was appalled by what she, along with many other commentators, regarded as an outbreak of radical militancy. She wrote to her daughter-in-law, Harriet Siddons, that the riots were a 'barbarous outrage to decency and reason', adding ominously, 'where it will end heaven knows' (Manvell, 295). If the OP protests represented a temporary victory against theatrical profiteering, they also constituted a challenge to the authority of the patent theatres themselves, with which Siddons's Shakespearian career had been closely associated. She played her final season at Covent Garden in 1811-12, ending with a highly emotional farewell benefit on 29 June 1812, when she played Lady Macbeth. According to Joseph Farington, her rendition so affected the spectators that they again exercised their power to curtail the performance by refusing to let the play continue after the sleepwalking scene. After a considerable time had elapsed, a curtain was drawn back and Siddons was discovered 'sitting at a table in her own character'. Veiled and dressed in white satin, she stood up to face the cheers and applause, finally enforcing silence by a bow and curtsy. She spoke a farewell address which lasted eight minutes: 'having finished, the loudest claps followed, and she withdrew bowing and led off by an attendant... her appearance was that of a person distressed and sunk in spirits' ('Farington Diary', ed. Greig, 7.89). 
Siddons returned to Westbourne Farm, Harrow Road, London, where she had lived since 1805, to spend her time entertaining, sculpting, and travelling with her daughter and Patty Wilkinson. Although she continued to offer private readings and recitals at home, she at first kept away from the theatre as far as was possible, with the exception of rare appearances in benefits for members of her family. Concerted efforts were made to lure her back to the stage; within a year of her official retirement a petition calling for her return was organized. Siddons sensibly resisted the call, perhaps aware that her waning powers risked blighting her glorious reputation. Her occasional appearances in the next decade proved that she could still move and impress; none the less, in 1817 William Hazlitt severely criticized what he regarded as Siddons's prevarication over her retirement, wishing that she 'would either return to the stage, or retire from it altogether', since by her 'uncertain wavering between public and private life, she may diminish her reputation, while she can add nothing to it'. As the embodiment of a sublime conception of tragedy in Hazlitt's account, Siddons's status as a figure of sublimity in memory and imagination was now such that her actual living presence was not only no longer necessary but positively unwelcome: 'if we have seen Mrs Siddons in Lady Macbeth only once, it is enough. The impression is stamped there for ever, and any after-experiments and critical inquiries only serve to fritter away and tamper with the sacredness of the early recollection. (Hazlitt, 'Criticism and Dramatic Essays', 276)' Siddons's earlier performances had acquired an afterlife which would prove to be enduring. Absolutely her final stage appearance was on 9 June 1819, in a benefit for Charles Kemble, although the private recitals continued. Her forty-year-old son, Henry Siddons, had died of tuberculosis in 1815; Siddons recorded that this loss 'seems to have laid a heavier hand on my mind than any I have sustained' (Campbell, 2.360). Mrs Piozzi died in 1821, John Kemble in 1823; Siddons passed the final decade of her life in a state of deep melancholy. Her niece Fanny Kemble (who was later to achieve a level of celebrity as an actress that would rival that of her aunt) recorded her 'vapid vacuity' and 'apparent deadness and indifference to everything' (Kemble, 64); invoking the romantic image of Hamlet, she described a weary, solemn figure, dressed in black: 'She has stood on a pinnacle till all things have come to look flat and dreary; mere shapeless, colourless, level monotony to her' (ibid.). The friendship with Thomas Lawrence was maintained, with a final twist in 1828 in that the painter developed an intense but brief romantic interest in Fanny Kemble, who was said to bear an uncanny resemblance to both Sarah and Sally Siddons. He died on 7 January 1830. 
On 31 May 1831, aged seventy-five, Siddons fell ill with acute erysipelas. This quickly led to severe sickness and fever, and she fell into a coma on 7 June. She died at her house at 27 Upper Baker Street the next morning, 'peaceably, and without suffering, and in full consciousness', in Fanny Kemble's account. Her funeral, which took place on 15 June, featured eleven coaches of mourners, which included the Drury Lane and Covent Garden companies, and drew crowds of more than 5000. She was buried in St Mary's churchyard in Paddington. Sarah Siddons was already established as a mythical figure well before her death, to the extent that she was discouraged from making live stage appearances in her final years because they tended to corrupt the image of greatness that had been established early in her career. Since she was the subject of countless visual representations as well as reviews, eulogies, panegyrics, letters, and diary accounts, Siddons's likeness and personality were very much in the public domain in her own lifetime; posterity has continued to afford her a hallowed space in theatrical tradition and cultural history. In the final years of her life Siddons collaborated with her biographers: James Boaden's 'Memoirs of Mrs Siddons' appeared in 1827, and Thomas Campbell's 'Life' in 1836. Campbell sculpted a statue of her for the north transept of Westminster Abbey in 1849; L. Chavalliaud's sculpture (modelled on Reynolds's 'Tragic Muse') was unveiled by Sir Henry Irving on Paddington Green in 1897. A range of popular and scholarly biographies was published in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Siddons continues to exert a fascination in part because her biography (like those of many successful women) appears to conform to a familiar pattern of public success shadowed by personal tragedy, and also because she seems both to belong to natural thespian aristocracy and to embody a vanished golden age of classical acting that could seemingly move spectators almost beyond the bounds of endurance. Ultimately, however, Siddons's enduring significance may lie less in the written records than in the pictorial representations of her, both within and out of roles. Whatever view is taken of her acting or of her personal character, in this respect her status as icon seems assured. 


@@@@@


doc= 25517


Sidgwick, Henry (1838-1900), philosopher, was born at Skipton in the West Riding of Yorkshire on 31 May 1838, the elder brother of the classical scholar Arthur Sidgwick and fourth of the six children of the Revd William Sidgwick, headmaster of Skipton grammar school, and his wife, Mary Crofts, whose family came from the East Riding of Yorkshire. William Sidgwick graduated from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1829, and was appointed to his headmastership in 1836. He died on 22 May 1841; his wife survived him until 17 January 1879. 
After being educated privately, Henry Sidgwick was sent to a school run by the Revd H. Dale at Blackheath in 1850, and then in September 1852 to Rugby, where his mother took a house the following year. Edward White Benson, a cousin of the family, took up a teaching post at the school at the same time, and soon came to exercise a strong intellectual and moral influence over Sidgwick. In 1859 he married Sidgwick's younger sister Mary and he went on to follow a distinguished career in the Church of England, becoming archbishop of Canterbury in 1882. Sidgwick was a precocious and bookish boy, not given to the usual energetic sports and outdoor activities; at the age of seventeen he was urged to apply for a scholarship at Balliol College, Oxford, the great prize for outstanding boys from the school, but, wanting to follow in Benson's footsteps, he chose to go to Trinity College, Cambridge, which he entered in October 1855. From this date until his death forty-five years later Sidgwick was to spend only one term away from Cambridge. 
Sidgwick's undergraduate career was one of great distinction: he won the Bell and Craven scholarships in his first two years, was elected a scholar of Trinity, and in 1859 he graduated with a 'double first', top of the list in the classical tripos and thirty-third wrangler in mathematics; he was also awarded the chancellor's medal. In the same year he was elected a fellow of Trinity and appointed assistant tutor in classics. But at least as important as his conventional studies during this period was his membership of 'the Apostles', the highly selective (and secretive) discussion society that had been founded in the 1820s. What Sidgwick so valued about these weekly meetings was the complete frankness and intellectual sincerity with which the society's members were required to express their views, no matter how fundamental or controversial the topic under discussion. It was these gatherings rather than his formal education that revealed to Sidgwick his true vocation, which he later characterized simply as 'thought exercised on the central problems of human life' (Sidgwick and Sidgwick, 35). 
Inevitably, the central problem for an intellectually serious young man in the 1860s was the problem of 'belief', the problem of the intellectual status of the 'truths' of Christianity. Sidgwick, a clergyman's son whose attitudes had been deeply shaped by Benson's practical piety, had begun to have serious doubts about his inherited Anglicanism while still an undergraduate, and in the course of the 1860s he moved, unsteadily and with considerable anguish, towards a more sceptical position, while always hoping that historical research or philosophical reasoning might yet ground the central claims of revealed religion on a more credible footing. He was drawn by turns to the relentless empiricism of John Stuart Mill and the sociological positivism of Auguste Comte, but his was too honest and fastidious a mind ever to subscribe without reserve to any of the great intellectual systems of his age. In the early 1860s he began to learn Hebrew and Arabic in the hope that a study of the historical and textual origins of Christianity might make it possible to winnow the grains of spiritual truth from the chaff of superstitious accretion, but in the course of the decade he moved more and more towards purely philosophical investigations. From this point on, his personal quest and his intellectual career coincided very closely. In 1865 he examined for the moral sciences tripos for the first time, and in 1867 he began lecturing on 'mental and moral philosophy'. During the next three decades Sidgwick's was to be the guiding influence in the teaching and administration of the 'moral sciences' in Cambridge, studies which at the time included a good deal of psychology, politics, and economics as well as all the main branches of philosophy. 
His increasing religious scepticism, together with the public campaign against the restriction of college fellowships at Oxford and Cambridge to members of the Church of England, led the always scrupulous Sidgwick to conclude that he could no longer in good conscience hold an appointment that required formal subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', and so in 1869 he resigned his fellowship and tutorship. The college indicated its regard for his worth, and for his evident sincerity, by immediately electing him to a lectureship (without a fellowship), which allowed him to carry on his teaching as before. Sidgwick's example greatly boosted the campaign to abolish such religious 'tests', a measure eventually carried in 1871. For him the episode was also a pressing example of the kinds of dilemmas faced in practical moral reasoning, an experience that drove him to deeper enquiries into the nature of ethical first principles. 
It was at about this time that Sidgwick began work on what was to be his major intellectual achievement, 'The Methods of Ethics', first published in 1874 and several times revised (the 6th edition was published in 1901). This book has frequently been seen as a defence of utilitarianism, the ethical position associated above all with Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill, which claims that the ultimate criterion for the rightness or wrongness of actions is to be found in their consequences for the greatest happiness of the greatest number. Recent scholarship, however, has convincingly established the work's more systematic and less partisan aspirations. Essentially, Sidgwick was enquiring whether the human mind could establish any principled basis for rationally determining how one ought to act. One of the distinguishing features of the book (in which it is closer to Aristotle than to most modern ethical theory) is the serious attention which it gives to the 'morality of common sense' as a defensible guide to action, a feature that has been taken to give the book an ethically conservative colouring. But after much careful analysis Sidgwick concludes that the rules underlying common sense morality can only be given a coherent form and made to yield consistent practical guidance if they are in turn derived from implicitly utilitarian premises. However, he conceded that the axiom of utilitarianism could not be justified within the terms of utilitarianism itself; it required a rationally groundable intuition of the kind that lay at the heart of the rival nineteenth-century ethical doctrine of intuitionism. Moreover, he concluded that there was no rational way to overcome what he called 'the dualism of practical reason', that is, no demonstrable ground for asserting the superiority of rational altruism over rational egoism. The consistent pursuit of one's own interest provided a no less coherent and justifiable principle of action than did the consistent pursuit of the welfare of others, and the first edition of the 'Methods' notoriously ended with the admission that without some notion of a divine system of reward in the hereafter, this conflict is irresolvable; hence, 'the Cosmos of Duty is thus really reduced to a Chaos; and the prolonged effort of the human intellect to frame a perfect ideal of rational conduct is seen to have been foredoomed to inevitable failure' ('The Methods of Ethics', 1874, 473); the passage was softened and revised in a more optimistic direction in later editions. 

'The Methods of Ethics' has been recognized as one of the few indisputable classics in the history of moral philosophy; it was described by the later Cambridge philosopher C. D. Broad as 'on the whole, the best treatise on moral theory that has ever been written' (Broad, 143). Its stature partly derives from its sustained architectonic conception: partial or intermediate conclusions are allowed no rest until they have been chased down to first principles that form part of rational human understanding as such. But much of the book's force also comes from its painstaking analysis of the unobvious subtlety of 'common-sense morality' and from its patient demonstration of the adaptability and capaciousness of utilitarian moral reasoning. Its density and restraint meant that it was unlikely to attain the cachet among non-philosophers briefly enjoyed by, for example, the 'Principia ethica' (1903) of Sidgwick's former pupil G. E. Moore, but it exercised considerable influence over Anglo-American moral philosophy in the twentieth century. The American moral philosopher John Rawls has awarded the book the dubious accolade of being 'the first truly academic work in moral philosophy' (Schultz, 49), while late twentieth-century critical estimation placed it in the company of the ethical treatises of Aristotle, Hume, and Kant. 
On 4 April 1876 Sidgwick married Eleanor Mildred (Nora) Balfour (1845-1936), who, as Eleanor Mildred Sidgwick, was a significant promoter of university education for women. She was a sister of the Tory politician Arthur Balfour (a former pupil of Sidgwick's). They had no children. For some years after their marriage, the Sidgwicks lived at Hillside, Chesterton Road. From 1893 they lived in Newnham College. Sidgwick had long been sympathetic to the cause of women's education. In 1869 he helped to initiate a scheme of lectures for women at Cambridge and in 1871 set up, at his own expense, a house for these students, inviting Ann Jemima Clough, sister of the poet Arthur Hugh Clough, to become its superintendent. In 1875 the Newnham Hall Company was formed, supported by public subscription, to finance the first building of what became Newnham's established site, leading to the foundation of Newnham College in 1880, with Eleanor Sidgwick as vice-principal. She succeeded Ann Jemima Clough as principal in 1892 and was one of the college's principal benefactors in her own right. Sidgwick later helped the new college acquire the freehold of its site; in his honour, a road built to replace one occupied by college buildings was named Sidgwick Avenue. He successfully campaigned for the admission of women to university examinations in 1881, and freely gave his time, money, and increasing reputation to further the cause of women's education in other ways. 
In 1872 Sidgwick had unsuccessfully applied for the Knightbridge chair of moral philosophy following the death of its holder, F. D. Maurice. At this point he did not have any substantial philosophical publications to his name, and he was passed over in favour of a prominent evangelical clergyman, T. R. Birks. However, when the post next fell vacant following Birks's death, Sidgwick's claims were unrivalled, and he was elected to the chair in 1883. By inclination as well as appointment, his was a thoroughly academic career, and he was one of the earliest figures to have been recognized as a fully professional philosopher. In this spirit, he was a frequent contributor to (and financial supporter of) 'Mind', the first specialist journal of philosophy in Britain, founded in 1876. He constantly referred to the obligations of his academic position, and the title 'professor' became as constitutive a part of his public identity as the name of his diocese is of a bishop's. In 1881 he was awarded an honorary LLD by Glasgow University and made an honorary fellow of Trinity College. He received further honorary degrees from St Andrews and Edinburgh in 1884, from Oxford in 1890, and from Budapest in 1896. 
A cause peculiarly dear to Sidgwick's heart was that Cambridge University should deploy its considerable resources and reputation to enrich the national culture and further international scholarship. He involved himself in numerous schemes of reform designed to move the obstructive federation of sinecure-ridden colleges a little further along the path of becoming a university seriously committed to education and research. In 1877 a commission was established by act of parliament to determine new statutes for Cambridge University and its colleges. When these came into effect in 1882, Sidgwick became a member of the newly constituted general board, the body largely responsible for the academic policy of the university; he retained this position until 1899. In addition, he served from 1890 to 1898 as a member of the council of the senate, as well as being on several other special boards and syndicates, where he devoted countless hours to the numbing minutiae of academic administration. On all these bodies he took a leading part, and there is abundant testimony not just to his grasp of detail and his procedural fertility, but also to the persuasiveness exercised by a personality in which the passion to find the least bad outcome carried the force of disinterested reason. Inevitably, he came to be regarded in some of the more conservative quarters of the university as a troublesome meddler, and occasionally his schemes would fail as a result of their excessive ingenuity and complication, as in an abortive scheme to extend the taxation of the colleges for university purposes. He also supported several new academic ventures with his own money, financing professorships and readerships, helping to sustain an arrangement for the education of future members of the Indian Civil Service, making a substantial donation towards the costs of a building for the department of physiology, and so on. As one obituarist observed: 'His truest monument is... the difference between Cambridge as it is now and the Cambridge of forty years ago' (Schultz, 364). 
As a teacher, Sidgwick was too cautious and too thorough (and, as a lecturer, too boring) ever to attract a large undergraduate following, but he won the unstinted devotion of a small number of able pupils. He was wryly self-conscious about the contrast between his own lack of popularity and the crowded lecture-halls that hung upon the not notably clear words of his Oxford counterpart, the neo-Hegelian philosopher T. H. Green. His ingrained scepticism debarred him from imparting a doctrine or message; it was rather the example of his unceasingly probing analytic method that impressed itself on his admirers, most of whom, such as the historian F. W. Maitland, were not destined to be professional philosophers. As his one-time pupil and eventual successor W. R. Sorley put it, 'his teaching was a training in the philosophic temper -- in candour, self-criticism, and regard for truth' (Schultz, 2). 
This analytical method -- 'i.e. the method of reflection on the thought we all share, by the aid of the symbolism we all share, language' (H. Sidgwick, 'Philosophy: its Scope and Relations', 1902, 49) -- was deployed with particularly telling effect in the two treatises that represented Sidgwick's attempt to bring professorial rigour and detachment to bear upon the major questions of policy and legislation. 'The Principles of Political Economy' (1883) was an intellectually conservative work in two ways: first, its analytical or deductive method signalled its adherence to the style of classical political economy, rather than adopting the more historical or more mathematical approaches then in vogue; and second, it included within the scope of the subject not just the 'science' of economic analysis, but also the 'art' of political economy, that is, an examination of the (limited) role of state action in economic life. Implicitly, the work attempted to fend off the twin challenges to the status of traditional political economy posed by the late nineteenth-century enthusiasm for socialism and sociology. Sidgwick accepted the criticism of the historical school to the extent of acknowledging that the premises of political economy were not timeless truths, but he maintained that they did 'correspond broadly to the facts of modern societies' (p. 36). Moreover, his focus was upon matters of policy, on how to decide what to do under present conditions -- a task, he argued, for which the fashionable emphasis on historical and cultural diversity was of only limited value. The book was regarded respectfully by the increasingly professionalized economists of the next generation, but Sidgwick was, as John Maynard Keynes later observed, one of the last of those who 'could take [economics] in his stride' as 'one Moral Science out of several' (Collini and others, 309). 

'The Elements of Politics' (1891) was informed by a similarly practical purpose. As Sidgwick explained, in characteristic terms: 'The primary aim of the political theory that is here to be expounded is not to supply an entirely new method of obtaining reasoned answers to political questions; but rather, by careful reflection, to introduce greater clearness and consistency into the kind of thought and reasoning with which we are all more or less familiar. (p. 1)' In this vein, the book addressed itself to institutional and procedural matters as well as to more purely theoretical issues, attempting to show how analytical reasoning based on 'certain propositions as to human motives and tendencies which are derived primarily from the ordinary experience of civilized life' (ibid., 11) issued in broadly utilitarian conclusions. But as one reviewer noted, 'If this is Benthamism, it is Benthamism grown tame and sleek' (Collini and others, 291), and Sidgwick's practical concentration on the kinds of consideration which were at the heart of policy-making by the late-Victorian governing elite meant that the work displayed none of Bentham's strong critical antagonism to the political institutions of his time. Though 'The Elements of Politics', like Sidgwick's other treatises, never achieved any popular success, for some years it enjoyed considerable academic standing (a 4th edition was published in 1919), but it was thereafter largely neglected by historians of political theory. 
In his early years Sidgwick had been a frequent contributor to the periodicals of general culture, writing essays on a range of literary, historical, and cultural subjects (some of which were included in the posthumously published 'Miscellaneous Essays and Addresses', 1904), but from the 1870s onwards he increasingly concentrated upon his work in moral and political philosophy. His later treatises had usually first been sketched in courses of lectures, and his occasional pieces were now predominantly published in the recently established specialist journals. At the time of his death he had been preparing 'The Development of European Polity' (1903) for publication, and a further three volumes deriving from his professorial lectures were published posthumously: 'Philosophy: its Scope and Relations' (1902), 'Lectures on the Ethics of T. H. Green, H. Spencer, and J. Martineau' (1902), and 'Lectures on the Philosophy of Kant and other Philosophical Lectures and Essays' (1905). His little handbook 'Outlines of the History of Ethics for English Readers', which had first appeared in 1886, was published in its fifth edition in 1902, and continued to be used for teaching purposes for many years. 
A major expression of Sidgwick's open-minded search for truth about the 'ultimate questions of human life' (especially, in this case, the possibility of an afterlife) was his interest in psychical research. Throughout his adult years, Sidgwick eagerly collected reports and conducted experiments concerning various alleged manifestations of psychic phenomena, from hypnotism and hallucinations through thought transference to 'table-rapping' and other supposed communications from the dead. He was active in the founding of the Society for Psychical Research in 1882, serving as its first president, and he and his wife took leading parts in the society's efforts to secure intellectual respectability for its proceedings. In conducting these investigations Sidgwick was far from credulous, always sought corroborated and verifiable evidence, and participated in the exposure of several fraudulent mediums or spiritualists. But he continued to devote much time, energy, and money to these enquiries, combining a never entirely stilled scepticism with a never entirely abandoned hope. 
Another aspect of Sidgwick's constant efforts to expand the range of shared truths about fundamental questions was his membership of discussion societies made up of distinguished individuals who held very divergent religious and philosophical beliefs. He was a founder member of the Metaphysical Society (1869-80) and later of the Synthetic Society (1896-1900), as well as a member of several groups confined to Cambridge. Characteristically, he observed of the first of these societies that its aim was to attain 'not agreement, which was of course beyond hope, but a diminution of mutual misunderstanding' (Sidgwick and Sidgwick, 221). In such discussions, as in his contribution to more public debates, he steered a middle course between the aggressive positivism of the agnostic scientists and the convinced transcendentalism of the orthodox churchmen. The subsequent reminiscences of participants in these discussions concur in reporting how Sidgwick's dialectical ingenuity and resourcefulness, combined with the evident sincerity of his desire to learn from others, soon earned him a commanding position in their company despite a manner that could appear hesitant and even self-effacing. 
Politically one of the young 'lights of Liberalism' in the 1860s, Sidgwick was on the side of 'reform' in both national and academic politics. But his social and economic views reflected the individualism typical of the mid-Victorian intellectual, leaving him increasingly at odds with the more 'collectivist' ideas of the 1880s and 1890s, and his cautious and sceptical temperament meant he was bound to be resistant to the various forms of organized enthusiasm in politics. Intellectually, he was an apprehensive political traveller, nervously rehearsing the potential mishaps of any journey and made edgy by the uncertainty of the destination: the longer he studied the brochures for utopia, the more he warmed to the idea of staying at home. Nor was this simply timidity or unimaginativeness, though Sidgwick had his share of those qualities; it sprang, rather, from a kind of unshowy moral seriousness about the temptations to self-deception offered by political excitement, and an intellectual conviction that only immediate consequences could be calculated with any reasonable reliability. After the home-rule split of 1886, he (like many of the other former 'academic liberals' of the 1860s) became a Liberal Unionist, a political home that at first appeared to suit his combination of intellectual principle and cautious prudence. However, he greatly distrusted Chamberlain's imperialist adventures, and at the end of his life his deep-rooted liberalism manifested itself in his distaste for the militarism and jingoism expressed in Britain's prosecution of the South African War. 
In Sidgwick's last years there was no diminution in the range of his activities. He was president of the second international congress of psychologists in 1892, and a member of the Gresham commission on the University of London from 1892 to 1894; he submitted a memorandum to the royal commission on the financial relations between Great Britain and Ireland in 1895 and one to the royal commission on local taxation in 1899; he was prominent in the (unsuccessful) campaign for women to be granted degrees at Cambridge; and he published a collection of his addresses, as 'Practical Ethics' (1898). At the close of the century he was also the prime mover in establishing a learned body that might represent scholarship in the humanities as the Royal Society did for the sciences, though he died shortly before its official recognition as the British Academy. 
Sidgwick's personality seems to have attracted exceptionally wide respect and affection. As one obituarist recorded: 'It was impossible to know him without feeling that incomparably the most impressive thing about him was his character.... There was in him an extraordinary simplicity and goodness' (Sidgwick and Sidgwick, 591). His speech was marked by a slight stammer, which added to his air of sincerity without detracting from his gentle wit. Partly because his tastes inclined to the ascetic, his income easily exceeded his needs, enabling him to be a generous supporter of academic, philanthropic, and personal causes. There has been speculation that Sidgwick was impotent (Rothblatt, 135). Several of his closest friends, such as Roden Noel and H. Graham Dakyns, as well as his brother Arthur (a master at Rugby and later fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford), were practising homosexuals, but there is no evidence that sexual desire of any kind played a significant part in Sidgwick's life. The surviving likenesses portray the gravity characteristic of widely admired members of the Victorian professional elite, while also catching something of the philosopher's partly abstracted liveliness of mind. 
In the decades immediately following his death, Sidgwick's reputation suffered as part of the general reaction against 'Victorianism': on reading the 'Memoir', the young John Maynard Keynes hyperbolized: 'He never did anything but wonder whether Christianity was true and prove that it wasn't and hope that it was' (Harrod, 135). He was also overshadowed philosophically by the great impact of G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell in the early part of the twentieth century, and subsequently by that of Ludwig Wittgenstein. But the later decades of the twentieth century saw a strong revival of interest in utilitarianism among moral philosophers, and 'The Methods of Ethics' was widely regarded as a more careful and philosophically more interesting presentation of the utilitarian position than may be found in the work of the leading representatives of that school, such as Bentham and Mill. In addition, the more nuanced and discriminating understanding of Victorian cultural history that has been achieved by recent scholarship has made clear Sidgwick's central role in many aspects of late nineteenth-century British intellectual life. 
Sidgwick died of cancer on 28 August 1900 at Terling Place, Terling, near Witham, Essex, the home of his brother-in-law the distinguished physicist J. W. Strutt, third Baron Rayleigh. He is buried in Terling churchyard. Had the Anglican service not been used, his preference was to have the following sentences delivered at his graveside: 'Let us commend to the love of God with silent prayer the soul of a sinful man who partly tried to do his duty. It is by his wish that I say over his grave these words and no more' (Sidgwick and Sidgwick, 599). 


@@@@@


doc= 25518


Sidley, Samuel (1829-1896), portrait painter, was born in York. He studied at the Manchester School of Art and the Royal Academy Schools, and first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1855. By the end of his life he had exhibited thirty paintings at the Royal Academy and eleven at the Society (from 1887 Royal Society) of British Artists. He was best-known as a portrait painter and was commissioned to paint official and presentation portraits, including those of Professor Henry Fawcett, John Colenso, bishop of Natal (National Portrait Gallery, London), and the duke and duchess of Buckingham. His other paintings included 'Alice in Wonderland' and 'The Challenge', which were engraved by C. A. Tomkins. He collaborated with the animal painter Richard Ansdell, and one of their joint paintings was of the children of Angus Holden, with a pony by Ansdell. 
Sidley was elected a member of the Royal Society of British Artists in 1890, and he was an associate of the Royal Cambrian Academy. He died on 29 June 1896 at his home, 8 Victoria Road, Kensington, London, leaving a widow, Betty Ferns Sidley. 


@@@@@


doc= 25519


Sidney, Algernon (1623-1683), political writer, was born at Baynard's Castle, London, on 14 or 15 January 1623, the second surviving son of Robert Sidney, second earl of Leicester (1595-1677), diplomat and politician, and Dorothy Percy (died 1659), daughter of Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland. His older brother was Philip Sidney (1619-1698), Viscount Lisle and later third earl of Leicester, Cromwellian politician; his older sister was Dorothy Spencer (1617-1684), countess of Sunderland and Waller's Sacharissa; and a younger brother was Henry Sidney (1641-1704), earl of Romney and later an intimate of William III. From the Sidneys, Algernon inherited a humanist culture and protestant cause, from the Percys an ancient lineage and ungovernable pride. His great-uncle was Sir Philip Sidney, Elizabethan soldier and poet, the fame of whose protestant martyrdom at Zutphen (1586) resonated into Algernon's lifetime. It was because he saw his own struggles against popery and arbitrary power as continuing those of Sir Philip that Algernon's 1659 entry in the signature book of the University of Copenhagen read: 'PHILIPPUS SIDNEY MANUS HAEC INIMICA TYRANNIS EINSE PETIT PLACIDAM CUM LIBERTATE QUIETEM' ('This hand, enemy to tyrants, by the sword seeks peace with liberty'; 'Lantiniana', 101). His imperiousness was improved by his early (1650s) residence at Petworth, household of his uncle Algernon, tenth earl of Northumberland. His 'Court Maxims' described the 'powerful, gallant' nobility of 'the Plantagenet Age', when Percy power was at its zenith (Sidney, 'Court Maxims', 67); his 'Discourses' praised the king-making prowess of Henry Percy, first earl of Northumberland, 'and his brave son Hotspur' (Sidney, 'Discourses', in 'Works', 205). Thus Burnet explained that on the one hand Sidney 'had studied the history of government in all its branches beyond any man I ever knew', and that on the other he was 'a man of most extraordinary courage... but of a rough and boisterous temper, that could not bear contradiction' ('Burnet's History', 2.341). This lineage helped to establish two features of Sidney's perspective. The first concerned the importance of arms, whether against Counter-Reformation popery or overmighty kings. The second observed the decline in family fortunes under the Stuarts. In both respects, under the militarily invincible republican government of 1649-53, he was to discover a cause for life. 
Sidney was raised at the family seat of Penshurst Place, Kent, where the family's chaplain from 1633 was the divine and scholar Henry Hammond, echoes of whose work have been detected in Sidney's own writings. Sidney may have attended boarding-school for part of this period. In 1632, with his brother Philip, he accompanied his father on an embassy to Denmark. In 1636 Leicester was appointed ambassador-extraordinary to France; he arrived at Paris in May, again bringing his two eldest sons. Algernon would remain for five years in France, where his education was completed, either in Paris or at the Huguenot academy at Saumur, founded in 1602 by Sir Philip Sidney's friend Philippe Du Plessis Mornay. In Paris the Sidney family attended services at Charenton, where the minister was Jean Daille, formerly chaplain to Du Plessis Mornay at Saumur, and praised by Algernon in the 'Court Maxims'. In November 1636 the countess of Leicester wrote to her husband that she heard Algernon 'much comended by all that comes from you... [for] a huge deall of witt and much sweetness of nature' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 6.64). In 1640 his uncle Northumberland tried to procure military employment for him with the prince of Orange. In 1641 the family returned to an England in crisis. On 14 June Leicester was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland to replace the executed earl of Strafford, but in October Ireland was convulsed by rebellion. Over the winter of 1641-2 forces backed by the English parliament arrived in Dublin to suppress the rebellion containing, by February 1642, Lord Lisle in command of a cavalry regiment and Algernon as captain of a troop of horse. 
At a court martial in Dublin on 5 April 1643 the Sidney brothers and four other commanders of cavalry were cleared of the charge of cowardice on 28 March near Old Ross, co. Wexford. A letter to his mother in June explained Sidney's desire both to leave Ireland ('that which is... bad for that which may be better, I think not possibly worse') and to avoid the civil war in England: 'Nothing but extreame necessity shall make me thinke of bearing arms in England, and yet... theare is so few that abstaine from warre for the same reason I doe, that I doe not know wheather in many mens eyes it may not prove dishonourable to me. (J. T. Gilbert, ed., 'History of the Irish Confederation', 7 vols., 1882-91, 1.xlviii-xlx)' Granted leave to return he landed, on 22 June, with Lisle at Chester, where their horses were stolen by royalist marauders. His letter to Orlando Bridgeman threatening to pursue this matter with his father at Oxford was intercepted by the parliamentary committee at Lancaster. The brothers were arrested and taken under guard to London. On 15 April 1644, however, Algernon Sidney was appointed colonel in the earl of Manchester's regiment of horse in the eastern association. His attainment of a parliamentarian command may have been assisted by the king's replacement of Leicester as lord lieutenant (October 1643) with Ormond, while his uncle Northumberland was a leading, if on occasion wavering, parliamentarian peer. 
On 2 July, at Marston Moor, Sidney charged 'with much gallantry at the head of my lord's regiment of horse, and came off with much honour, though with many wounds, to the grief of my lord, and many others, who is since gone to London for the cure of his wounds. ('Ash's Intelligence from the Armies in the North', no. 6)' Forty years later he would be depicted in a ballad declaiming: 'View my Hack'd Limbs, each honourable wound The Pride and Glory of my numerous Scars in Hell's best Cause the old republic Wars' ('Algernon Sidney's Farewel', 1683). This action was the baptism by fire of what his 'Paper Delivered to the Sheriffs' (1683) would call his adherence to 'that OLD CAUSE in which I was from my youth engaged, and for which thou hast often and wonderfully declared thyself' (Sidney, 'Paper Delivered to the Sheriffs', in 'Works', 39-40). In April 1645 he declined a command in the New Model Army with 'extreame unwillingnesse... by reason of my lamenesse' (BL, Sloane MS 1519, fol. 112). In May he became governor of Chichester, for which Northumberland had served as an MP in the 1620s: the earl's signature headed his letter of appointment. In December 1645 Sidney became MP for Cardiff. Thereafter his votes in the house allied him with Northumberland and others, including Lord Saye and Sele, Sir John Evelyn, and William Pierrepoint. In September 1646 he and his brother Philip carried a banner at the funeral of the earl of Essex. In February 1647 both returned to Ireland, having been appointed respectively governor of Dublin and lord lieutenant of Ireland. After a brief stay in Munster they returned on 21 April, Lisle having been superseded in his command by Lord Inchiquin, lord president of Munster, Algernon Sidney losing his post to Colonel Michael Jones. Instead, in mid-1648 Sidney was appointed to the strategic governorship of Dover Castle. 
In 1659 Sidney was to defend the regicide as 'the justest and bravest act... that ever was done in England, or anywhere' (BL, Add. MS 32680, fols. 9-10). In 1649, however, he disapproved of the army's interference in parliamentary politics as much as he had of that earlier by the king. To the managers of the trial he argued: 'First, the King could be tried by noe court; secondly, that noe man could be tried by that court. This being alleged in vaine, and Cromwell using these formall words (I tell you, wee will cut off his head with the crowne upon it) I... immediately went out of the room, and never returned. (Blencowe, 236-9)' Subsequently in the house he joined Sir Henry Vane jun. and Sir Arthur Hesilrige in speaking against an oath of allegiance which would have approved the judicial proceedings against Charles I. This made 'Cromwell, Bradshawe, Harrison, Lord Grey and others, my enemys, who did from that time continually oppose me' (ibid., 238). It may also have contributed to the rift between Sidney and local army officers which culminated in his replacement as governor of Dover in May 1651. Until late 1651 Sidney's parliamentary attendance was moderate and he served on six or seven committees. The most important was for Irish affairs, in the post conquest settlement of which he played a major role, and upon which by 1653 he was the government's senior authority. For his services in Ireland he was voted $1809 13's'. 6died arrears of pay in October 1649. 
From 1652 Sidney's political commitment deepened and he was elected to the council of state in November. His work over the following six months was dominated by foreign affairs (reporting between December and April on meetings with the public ministers of Portugal, Spain, France, Sweden, Hamburg, Tuscany, Holland, and Austria) and, with Vane, by the First Anglo-Dutch War (1652-4). Vane had worked in naval administration under Northumberland; Sidney was to ascribe to him the invention of 'the Frigat' (Sidney, 'Character'). In this war the two men established a locus of military power alternative to that of the army. Both accordingly featured centrally in the drama of the Rump's ejection by Cromwell on 20 April 1653, of which Sidney left the most important eyewitness account. Thus when he later produced the most striking evocations of the republic's remarkable military achievements he was speaking of a personal experience which furnished the basis of his republican belief. '[S]uch was the power of wisdom and integrity in those that sat at the helm, and their diligence in choosing men for their merit was blessed with such success, that in two years our fleets grew to be as famous as our land-armies; the reputation and power of our nation rose to a greater height, than when we possessed the better half of France, and the Kings of Scotland and France were our prisoners. All the states, kings and potentates of Europe, most respectfully, not to say submissively, sought our friendship. (Sidney, 'Discourses', in 'Works', 240-41)' Four years of kingless government had turned the Stuart record of military failure on its head. 
In 1683 Sidney said of Cromwell: 'you need not wonder I call him a tyrant, I did so every day in his life, and acted against him too'. On 17 June 1656 Lord Lisle complained to his father about 'a play acted' at Penshurst 'of publike affront' to the lord protector during which the audience were so 'exceedingly pleased with the gallant relation of the chief actor in it... that by applauding him they put him severall times upon it' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 6.400). Thus grew the legend of Sidney playing Brutus in Shakespeare's 'Julius Caesar'. Lisle had been estranged from his father since December 1652 and the principal subject of his letter was the 'extreamest vanity' of 'the younger sonne' who 'now so dominere[s] in your house... [as to] command the whole' (Blencowe, 270-71). Algernon's ascension to the position of 'de facto' heir apparent coincided with his rise to republican power. It was no coincidence that his later 'Discourses' took as its subject for refutation the primogeniture politics of Sir Robert Filmer's 'Patriarcha'. Between 1648 and 1659 he became closely involved with his father's estate and legal affairs. From this developed his entanglement with those of his cousin and (from 1650) brother-in-law Thomas Smith, first Viscount Strangford. By 1655 he had become trustee of Strangford's estate, charged with managing it to clear his debts. In 1657 he became sole resident of Strangford's principal seat of Sterry in Kent. The process of reorganization, mortgage, and sale was still incomplete when, in May 1659, the restored Rump Parliament 'coma[n]ded... [him] into Sweadland in the Quality of a publique minister' (TNA: PRO, chancery pleading, C7 327/50). 
In the restored Rump, Sidney's work was again dominated by European (including naval) affairs, alongside Vane, and by the settlement of Ireland. The dominant concern was war between Denmark and Sweden threatening English naval supplies from the Baltic Sound. This was an interest shared with the Dutch, who had lent naval support to Denmark against Charles X of Sweden, a Cromwellian ally. Vane's reorientation of English policy sought Anglo-Dutch co-operation in keeping local control of the sound divided. Sidney left for the sound in June. One of the other plenipotentiaries was Vane's brother-in-law Sir Robert Honeywood. The initial choice as third, Bulstrode Whitelocke, declined partly because 'I knew well the overruling temper and height of Colonel Sydney' (Whitelocke, 4.351). The mission would indeed be dominated by Sidney's unorthodox diplomatic style ('a few shots of our cannon would have made this peace'; Scott, 'Republic', 129). Observers remarked 'We shall soon see the results of such unprecedented methods of negotiation' ('CSP Venice', '1659-61', 64), and Samuel Puffendorf's 'History of the Reign of Charles X' begins a new chapter at this point entitled 'Etrange conduite des ambassadeurs anglois'. 
The envoys arrived at Elsinore on 20 July ''avec une magnifique escorte'' under the command of the Cromwellian Edward Montague. As the Swedish king was not immediately available to receive them, and although Sidney 'confess[ed]' that this was 'contrary to the ordinary way of ceremony', they began by meeting the Dutch to discuss the creation of a joint fleet capable, if necessary, of imposing peace terms. Relations with Charles X deteriorated rapidly, the king expressing amazement at the English 'wish to command all, as if they were masters' ('CSP Venice', '1659-61', 66). With the Dutch, Sidney personally handed the king a treaty proposal already accepted by Denmark, and based upon the treaty of Roskilde (1658), threatening military action against the refuser. The king 'in great choler... told us, that we made projects upon our fleets, and he, laying his hand upon his sword, had a project by his side' (Sidney, 'Letters from Thurloe's state papers', in 'Works', 16). 'Everyone is amazed', it was reported, 'how Sidney stood up to him' (F. Guizot, 'History of Richard Cromwell', 2 vols., 1856, 1.160). It was in this context that the new Danish hero signed the visitor's book at the University of Copenhagen, quoted above, furnishing what would become the motto of the state of Massachusetts, USA. 
Yet trouble for this strategy was brewing from a crucial direction. When Montague announced his intention of returning with the fleet to England, Sidney gave 'his opinion, [that] for sending away the whole fleet he thought he should deserve to lose his head' (F. R. Harris, 'The Life of Edward Montagu', 2 vols., 1912, 1.149). Although the Venetians reported that the subsequent departure 'does not prevent the English from being held in great respect and practically the arbiters of the whole business' ('CSP Venice', '1659-61', 90), in practice it severely undermined England's influence. After their capture of the Swedish island of Funen, Sidney's relations with the Dutch cooled. Following the sudden death of Charles X on 12 February 1660 he reported that though 'violently transported by ambition and choller' the Swedish king was in fact 'a man of exceeding good wit, valiant, industrious, vigilant... whoe, by the many and great actions of his short reign deserves to be remembered with honour' (Blencowe, 166, 174-6, 177-8). Despite these and other difficulties a treaty was eventually signed by the Danes, Swedes, and all three mediating powers (including France) on 27 May 1660 which restored something like the 'status quo ante' of 1658. 
Late in 1659 Sidney had begged Whitelocke for more information concerning the fortunes of 'that cause, which by the help of God I shall never desert' (Blencowe, 170-71). His initial response to the restoration of Charles II was to acknowledge its parliamentary authority. 'Since the Parliament hath acknowledged a king, I knowe... I owe him duty and the service that belongs unto a subject, and will pay it. If things are carried in a legall and moderate way, I had rather be in employment, than without any. (ibid., 186)' Yet reports of his opinionated republicanism in Scandinavia had reached the English court. This included not only 'rough' behaviour toward 'the King of Denmark, as also to the King of Sweden', but most damagingly a spirited defence of the regicide. 'If it were true' responded the earl of Leicester, 'he must not thinke of coming into England, when that acsion was so much abhorred by all men, and by me in particular, that am his father' (BL, Add. MS 32680, fols. 9-10). In addition, while prepared to 'submitte', Sidney drew the line at 'acknowledgement of our faults, in having bin against this king, or his father... I shall be better contented with my fortune, when I see theare was noe way of avoiding it, that is not worse than ruine' (Blencowe, 187-8). 'I knowe the titles that are given me of fierce, violent, seditious... turbulent... I know people will say, I straine at knats, and swallow camels; that it is a strange conscience, that lets a man runne violently on, till he is deepe in civill blood, and then stays at a few words and complements... I have enough to answer this in my own minde; I cannot help it if I judge amisse... I walk in the light God hath given me; if it be dimme or uncertaine, I must beare the penalty of my errors: I hope to do it with patience, and that noe burden shall be very grievous to me, except sinne and shame. (ibid., 194-8)' On 28 July 1660, after the receipt of letters from England, he resolved against return for the time being. Despite his father's advice that he should live in Hamburg he reported: 'I dislike all the drunken countries of Germany, and the north, and am not much inclined to France. I think I shall choose Italy' (ibid., 195). The earl responded 'what to advise you, truly I knowe not; for you must give me leave to remember, of how little weight my opinions and counsel have been with you... in almost everything' (ibid., 239-40). 
In Rome, while Sidney found that the city did not 'beare such signs of Ease, Satisfaction and Plenty' as on his first visit in 1638, 'the Company of Persons excellent in all Sciences, which is the best Thing Strangers can seeke, is never wanting' (Collins, 2.700). An English observer reported: 'Colonel Sydney... has put himself into very great equipage, his coach and three lackeys; he is very gracious with some of the Cardinals, which some impute to his own Parts and wit, others to some recommendation from [Christina] the [ex] Queen of Sweade', whom Sidney had met in Hamburg ('Egmont MSS', 1.616). With the cardinals, particularly Christina's friend Azzolini, he became sufficiently familiar to send his father 'Characters' of them in April 1661. 'I have much more Aquaintance amongst the prelates, than the nobility of this place,' he reported, 'the most auncient Familyes [here], have lost all the Vigour and Virtue of their Auncestors' (Collins, 2.705). By mid-1661 he was living at the Villa de Belvedere at Frascati, at the invitation of Prince Pamphili, nephew of the previous pope. 'I... live now as a Hermite in a Palace. Nature, Art and Treasure, can hardly make a place more pleasant than this... In theis last Moneths... I have applied myself to studdy, a littel more thaen I have done formerly; and... I find soe much Satisfaction in it, that for the future I shall very unwillingly... put myself into any [other] Way of living. (ibid., 2.718-21)' Yet his contentment did not last. There was his isolation 'when I wander as a Vagabond through the World, forsaken of my Friends, poore, and knowne only to be a broken Limbe of a Ship-wrecked Faction' (ibid., 2.720). There was the 'Ruin of my Fortune' in England, reducing him to financial dependence upon a father 'lesse carefull to give me some reliefe, than I hope[d]' (Blencowe, 190). This was particularly painful 'in a Place farre from Home... wheare I am knowne to be of a Quality, which makes all lowe and meane Wayes of living shamefull and detestable' (Collins, 2.717). Finally Sidney would complain that although he had 'hoped that noe man would... disturbe me in a most innocent exile... I was defended from such as [in Rome] designed to assassinate me, only by the charity of strangers' (Sidney, 'Apology', in 'Works', 3). 
In mid-1663, on his way to the Low Countries, Sidney visited Edmund Ludlow and other exiles at Vevey. Although his 'Apology in the Day of his Death' later claimed that this trip was for 'the care of my private affaires' (Sidney, 'Apology', in 'Works', 3), Ludlow recorded that Sidney 'Now thinkes it seasonable to draw toward his Native Country, in Expectation of an Opportunity wherein he might be more Active... [in republican] Service' (Ludlow, 977). After presenting his host with a pair of Italian pistols, and thanking the magistrates of Bern for their care of the exiles, he visited the Calvinist academy at the University of Geneva where he inscribed the visitor's book: 'SIT SANGUINIS ULTOR JUSTORUM' ('Let there be revenge for the blood of the just'; C. Borgeaud, 'Histoire de l'Universite de Geneve', 5 vols., 1900-59, 1.442-3). This was the blood not only of the regicides but in particular of Vane, executed in 1662 ('noble Vane... thy death gave thee a famous victory and a never perishing Crown'; Sidney, 'Court Maxims', 49). In Brussels in December Sidney sat for the portrait by Justus van Egmont which was later hung at Penshurst. From Brussels he informed Leicester of his thoughts of spending 'the next summer as a Volunteere in Hungary' (Collins, 2.725). His hopes of transporting there 'a good strong Boddy of the best Officers and Soldiers of our old Army' may have connected to another plan closer at hand. In early 1664 in the United Provinces, however, he found 'the spirits of those who understood seasons farre better than I... not to be fully prepared' (Blencowe, 259-60). He retreated to Augsburg, where, in April 1665, he was the target of another assassination attempt. 
Thereafter Sidney returned to the United Provinces: 'Certaine I can have no peace in my owne spirite, if I doe not endeavour by all meanes possible to advance the interest of God's people'. The context for this renewed hope was the Second Anglo-Dutch War (1665-7). Burnet recorded: 'Algernon Sidney... came to de Wit, and pressed him to think of an invasion of England and Scotland... and they were bringing many officers to Holland to join in the undertaking' (BL, Add. MS 63057, 1.393). Ludlow was reluctant to join the Dutch, whom he blamed for the failure to protect the regicides Okey, Corbet, and Barkstead, kidnapped in Delft in 1662 by the English ambassador, Sir George Downing. In early 1666 Sidney's entreaties to his colleague culminated in a 'Letter stuffed with Invectives from the beginning to the End. Justifying the Dutch in what they did as to the delivery of our three freinds to be butchered', and accusing Ludlow of fixing himself 'unmoveably upon your own Imaginations, grounded upon the vainest, and most frivolous mistaken Informations that can possibly be given in things of such Importance' (Ludlow, 1079-80, 1105). Sidney's other problem was the English republic's own previous military record. As De Witt asked: 'What would the effect be of turning England into a Commonwealth, if it could possibly be brought about, but the ruin of Holland?' (BL, Add. MS 63057, 1.393). By the middle of the year Sidney was in Paris, where the young Louis XIV, a Dutch ally, recorded: 'Sidney, an English gentleman, promised me to produce a great uprising... but the proposition he put to me to advance him 100,000 ecus... was more than I wished to expose on the word of a fugitive [so] I offered him [initially] only 20,000' (Louis XIV, 'Memoires Pour les annees 1661 et 1666', ed. J. Lognon, 1923, 213). As divisions among the exiles continued, and following a failed attempt, with French assistance, to spring John Lambert from prison on Jersey, Sidney received a pass from the French king to retire to Montpellier. 
The most important literary product of 1665-6 was Sidney's 'Court Maxims', not published until 1996. Emotionally more intense than the later 'Discourses', its objective is the same: to argue for rebellion against the restored monarchy. In the process, particularly by its use of Grotius, it anticipates key features of Locke's as well as Sidney's later classic justifications of resistance. As the most important surviving attack upon the restoration process it seeks to persuade the English people that 'nothing is more reasonable than that they should repent of their choice 'and endeavour to unmake what they have made'' (Sidney, 'Court Maxims', 7). In particular it appeals to the godly to resist the restoration of religious persecution. 'Who will endure that bishops, the greatest incendiaries in the whole world, should now preach the highest meekness? They who said it was better that all the streets in England and Scotland should run with blood than that the power of the clergy be diminished, say now, it is better that England should be dispeopled, and the best men in the nation banished and destroyed, than that their lusts should be resisted... At this day we find none to espouse... [non-resistance] but our Quakers, some few Anabaptists in Holland and Germany, and some... Socinians in Poland.... all christian churches have... made use of the sword... against such princes and their ministers as have governed contrary to law. (ibid., 101-3)' More broadly the 'Court Maxims' is a systematic assault upon monarchy: 'as death is 'the greatest evil that can befall a person, monarchy is the worst evil that can befall a nation'' (Sidney, 'Court Maxims', 20). This involves deploying an argument in interest language common to English and Dutch antimonarchism. As monarchy is private interest government and republicanism government in the public interest each is 'irreconcileably contrary' to the other. The maxims of monarchy, in both domestic and international affairs, inevitably oppose the public interest of a nation. '[A]ll people grow proud when numerous and rich... The least injury puts them into a fury. But if poor, weak, miserable and few they will be humble and obedient' (ibid., 72). On the basis of this analysis, developed from Machiavelli's 'Discourses', book 2, chapter 1, Sidney asserts an Anglo-Dutch republican 'unity of interest' in 'extirpat[ing] the two detested families of Stuart and Orange' (ibid., 176). Finally to the 'maxims' of princes the 'Court Maxims' opposes the classical republican life of virtuous self-government. 'We need seek no other definition of a happy human life in relation to this world than that set down by Aristotle as the end of civil societies, namely, that men may in them enjoy 'vita beata secundum virtutem' (Aristotle, 'Politics', bk III). For as there is no happiness without liberty, and no man more a slave than he that is overmastered by vicious passions, there is neither liberty, nor happiness, where there is not virtue. (ibid., 24)' 

Sidney spent most of his exile in a country in which he had previously not only lived but been educated. His later return to England he intended to be temporary, before final settlement in Gascony. In 1683 he was to inform his English fellow conspirators of the French saying that 'He who draws his sword against his prince... ought to throw away the scabbard' (Scott, 'Crisis', 289). The 'Discourses' praises the readiness of the French nobility to act 'in the defence and vindication of their violated liberties... [if] the king... do [anything] against their laws' (Sidney, 'Discourses', in 'Works', 254-5). Above all those families listed as having rebelled in the past 'fifty years... the houses of Conde, Soissons, Montmorency, Guise, Vendome, Angoulesme, Bouillon, Rohan, Longueville, Rochefoucault, Espernon' include most of Sidney's own French associates. Rohan had been a friend of the earl of Leicester. Most important to Sidney were de Bouillon, Turenne, and De la Rochefoucauld, principal powers of the south-west and survivors of the noble Fronde (1650-52). 
From Montpellier in 1666 Sidney sent his Quaker friend Benjamin Furly in Rotterdam his transcription of 'A Prophesy of St Thomas the Martyr' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. C200, fols. 24-5). He argued violently with a local doctor whose services had not pleased him ('A physician does not exercise his art for himself, but for his patients'; Sidney, 'Discourses', in 'Works', 342). He sought the assistance of Sir William Temple, ambassador in Brussels, in the passage of letters to his uncle Northumberland. In 1670 he paid an extended visit to Paris, coinciding with one by the Northumberland family. During the same period he called upon Turenne at Versailles and made, through him, an attempt to 'render his services to... the King of Great Britain', advising his majesty to found his 'security' upon the provision of 'liberty of conscience' to all his subjects (Paris, Archives du Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres, du Roy a Colbet, 29 July 1670). While rejecting this overture by 'a man of great courage and spirit, though also the most opinionated republican he had in his realm', Charles nevertheless attempted to implement this advice two years later (TNA: PRO, Baschet correspondence 31/3, no. 125, 4 Aug 1670). About the same year Sidney retired to Nerac, in Gascony, within the duchy D'Albret of Turenne's nephew Maurice-Godefroi de la Tour, duc de Bouillon. Bouillon's grandfather was the Huguenot Henri de la Tour, 'ancien compagnon d'Henri IV, marechal de France' and friend of Philippe Du Plessis Mornay. A letter written from Nerac in early 1677 informs us that Sidney occupied himself with riding and hunting, advising the duc de Bouillon about the corruption of his local officials, and visiting De la Rochefoucauld at his seat at Verteuil. It was during another visit to Paris in late 1676 that Sidney met his great-nephew George Savile, and the boy's uncle Henry Savile. From Nerac on 18 December he wrote to the latter that he did 'not value the leave you have obtained for me to return into my country after so long an absence, at a lower rate than the saving of my life' (Sidney, 'Letters to Savile', in 'Works', 56-7). On his way back to England the following year Sidney had the series of conversations with Jean-Baptiste Lantin about his political experiences and opinions which remain recorded in the Bibliotheque Nationale, Fr MS 23254, fols. 99-101. 
In 1678 Sidney explained: 'my desir of being... somme service unto my old father perswaded me to ask leave to comme over' (Forster, 79-80). He returned in early September 1677 and Leicester died on 2 November. Thereafter, he wrote: 'I have no other businessse heare then to cleare some small contests that are growne between one of my brothers and me concerning that which he hath left me, and [then to] retire from hence... to purchase a convenient habitation in Gascony... where I may in quiet finish thoes days that God hath appointed for me. (ibid.)' In the event, in the words of his 'Apology': 'When I prepared myself to return into Guascony... I was hindered by the earl of Leicester my brother, who questioned all that my father had given me for my subsistence; and by a long and tedious suite in chancery, detained me in England, until I was made a prisoner.' In fact Robert Sidney's provision for his younger sons Algernon and Henry was punitively generous. Algernon collected $5000 immediately, but was forced to seek a remaining $5000, plus various rents and annuities, through proceedings in chancery. Pending settlement, and as executors of the earl's estate, Henry took up residence at Penshurst, and Algernon at Leicester House in London. It was from there that he became drawn into the gathering political crisis. 
Naturally one aspect of this involvement consisted of contacts with the French ambassador, Barillon. On 6 October Barillon reported: 'At the moment my most intimate liaison is with Mr. Algernon Sidney; he is the man in England who seems to me to have the greatest understanding of affairs; he has great relations with the rest of the Republican party; And nobody in my opinion is more capable of rendering service than him. (Paris, Archives du Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres, correspondance politique, Angleterre XLI)' After assisting the French-engineered fall of Danby in December 1678 Sidney received a payment of 500 guineas, and another a year later. Over the following three years, through the French ambassadors in England and the United Provinces, he sought to construct an Anglo-Dutch republican alternative to Stuart-Orange foreign policy. Equally he attempted to convince Barillon 'that it is an old error to believe that it is against the interest of France to suffer England to become a republic' (Dalrymple, 2, appx, 313). Meanwhile Barillon reported Sidney's involvement with the politics of London: 'He is in the party of the independents and other sectaries... [who] were masters during the late troubles... they are strong in London... and it is through the intrigues of... Sidney that one of the two sheriffs, named Bethel, has been elected. (TNA: PRO, Baschet correspondence, 147, 402-3)' In 1679 the post-Danby court was dominated by two nephews of Sidney's, Halifax and Sunderland, and one cousin, Essex. Over the following five years close relationships with the former two gave way to a treasonable partnership with the latter. Until 1681 the other aspect of Sidney's personal political involvement was parliamentary. Despite his earlier promise to the king to steer clear of politics, he stood as a candidate in all three parliamentary elections of this period. His ally in these campaigns was the Quaker William Penn, to whom he may have been introduced by their mutual friend Benjamin Furly. Despite an apparent victory at Amersham in August 1679 described by William Harrington as 'the most remarkable thing about the[se] elections' ('Fitzherbert MSS', 19), the result was disputed. A by-election was ordered in December 1680, the result of which was never adjudged by the interrupted Oxford parliament. Accordingly Sidney's influence upon the parliamentary campaign of this period was wielded primarily through his close friendship with the person who emerged as the leader of the House of Commons by late 1680: Sir William Jones. Following the king's dissolution of his last parliament at Oxford in April 1681 'A Just and Modest Vindication of the Proceedings of the Two Last Parliaments' (1681), called by Burnet 'the best writ paper in all that time... was at first penned by Sidney... and corrected by Jones' ('Burnet's History', 2.276-7). 
Many echoes of the 'Vindication' appear in Sidney's 'Discourses Concerning Government', written between 1681 and 1683. Although long and sometimes repetitive the 'Discourses' places Sidney alongside Milton as the master of republican eloquence. It is the power of its prose, as much as any aspect of its content, which helps to account for the work's exceptional subsequent impact in Britain, continental Europe, and America. Polemically a refutation of Sir Robert Filmer's 'Patriarcha' (1680), the practical purpose of the 'Discourses' is again to argue for armed resistance to oppression. 'If the laws of God and men are therefore of no effect, when the magistracy is left at liberty to break them, and if the lusts of those, who are too strong for the tribunals of justice, cannot otherwise be restrained, than by seditions, tumults, and war, those seditions, tumults and wars, are justified by the laws of God and man... they who deny this deny all help against an usurping tyrant, or the perfidiousness of a lawfully created magistrate, who adds the crimes of ingratitude and treachery to usurpation. (Sidney, 'Discourses', in 'Works', 188, 193-4)' Beyond this task, which includes the only explicit seventeenth-century defence of 'rebellion', both word and thing, the 'Discourses' has three notable features. One is the most sustained English development of Machiavelli's republican militarism: 'when a people multiplies, as they will always do in a good climate under a good government, such an enlargement of their territory, as is necessary for their subsistence, can only be acquired by war' (ibid., 178-9). The second is its related defence of change. 'Changes are... unavoidable... To affirm [otherwise]... is no less than to render the understanding given to men utterly useless... whatever we enjoy, beyond the misery in which our barbarous ancestors lived, is due only to the liberty of correcting what was amiss in their practice, or inventing that which they did not know. (ibid., 304-5, 404)' The third is its defence of the principles (liberty, reason, and virtue) informing that classical moral philosophy which established the necessity of republican political architecture. Finally the 'Discourses', like the 'Court Maxims', was a defence of something going on in Sidney's life in practice. This was that self-defence of protestants, against persecution and popery, in which his ancestors had long been involved, and which had once again become necessary in England following the loyalist reaction. 
From February 1683, following the death of the earl of Shaftesbury, Sidney and his friends, the younger John Hampden, the earl of Essex, and Lord Howard, became involved in treasonable discussions with Shaftesbury's associates Lord Russell and the duke of Monmouth. As in 1665 Sidney's plan was for a 'war in both kingdoms', beginning this time with a rebellion by the persecuted godly people of Scotland, which would, as in 1640, force the summoning of an English parliament upon a militarily ineffective arbitrary monarch. When the legal crackdown began in mid-1683 Sidney's arrest warrant was the first to be issued, on June 25. During the arrest a copy of the 'Discourses' was discovered in his house and also taken into custody. Alongside an embellished subsequent 'confession' by Howard, the government lacked a second witness to Sidney's treason. There followed several months in the Tower while it attempted to construct a case. 
During this period Sidney wrote a series of letters to his fellow prisoner John Hampden. These stressed the innocence of their actions, involving nothing 'which doth not agree with the Character of gentleman and Christian... Somme say the protestants of Holland, France, or... Piedmont were guilty of treason, in bearing arms against their princes, but [this] is ridiculous... when it is certaine, they sought noe more than the security of their own lives. (E. Sussex RO, Glynde Place MS 794, letter 1, 6 October)' They made detailed preparations for any future trial, 'confident', however, in the absence of a second witness, 'that such rules being observed as the law requires, it is not possible to bring us into danger, though they could bring Jezabel's witnesses from hell to strengthen the Ld Ho[wa]rds testimony' (ibid., letter 7). This confidence disappeared in late October when an application by the prisoners for release under the provisions of the 'Habeas Corpus Act' forced the government to determine its legal strategy. This was, remarkably, to use the manuscript 'Discourses' as the second witness against Sidney: in the famous ruling of Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys: 'Scribere est agere' ('to write is to act'). 'I could hardly believe he had said this', recorded Burnet, 'till I read it in the Printed Tryall' (BL, Add. MS 63057, 2.158). 
Sidney was arraigned on 7 November and tried, amid great public interest, on 21 November. His defence was legally weak, but politically extremely effective. At the insistence of his counsel his defence depended upon the attempt to deny authorship of words and actions which he would rather have owned. In practice the defence strategy may have been almost powerless to affect the outcome, given the role being played in this crisis by treason trials in general, and by politically selected juries in particular. Of this fact, as Jeffreys pointed out, Sidney was more aware than anyone, having earlier helped his friends Sheriff Bethel and Attorney-General Jones to develop this system. Under these circumstances, given his inability to save his life, his achievement became to expose as much as possible of what was taking place in order to do the government lasting harm. He drew attention to the political selection of the jury, to his own aristocratic ancestry, and to the extraordinary invocation of the death sentence for possession of an unpublished manuscript. While giving a fine display of stoic indifference to his personal fate, he raised a series of procedural objections, drawing attention to the wider fate of later Stuart political legality. Throughout the trial and at the arraignment he confronted the lord chief justice personally, depicting him as a social inferior and an irascible bully ('Lest the means of destroying the best protestants in England should fail, the bench must be filled with such as had been blemishes to the bar' (Sidney, 'Paper Delivered to the Sheriffs', in 'Works'). Thus if 'The scandale of this Tryall was so gross that I never met with a man that offered to defend it' (BL, Add. MS 63057, 2.158); if it laid the basis for the subsequent fame both of the 'Discourses' and its author; and if the execution which followed was the last in this series for this reason, these were largely Sidney's personal achievements. As his uncle Halifax said two years later: 'Westminster Hall might be said to stand upon its head... when the reason of him that pleads is visibly too strong for those who are to judge and give sentence' (H. C. Foxcroft, 'The Life and Letters of George Savile, Bart., First Marquis of Halifax', 2 vols., 1898, 2.285-6). 
Between sentence, passed on 26 November, and his execution, on 7 December, Sidney extended this public campaign. His 'Apology' elaborated the case against the trial and set it in the context of his lifelong struggle 'to uphold the Common rights of mankind, the lawes of this land, and the true Protestant religion, against corrupt principles, arbitrary power and Popery... I doe now willingly lay down my life for the same; and having a sure witness within me, that God doth... uphold me... am very littell sollicitous, though man doth condemne me. (Sidney, 'Apology', in 'Works')' Finally his paper delivered to the sheriffs on the scaffold sensationally owned the principles informing the 'Discourses'. Having given the 'Apology' to his servant Joseph Ducasse for transmission to posterity, he made sure to consign copies of the paper 'to my friends'. Within a few days 'the Town was full of written copys' (BL, Add. MS 63057, 2.158-9) and the government was forced to accede to a publication which attracted many replies. Sidney was beheaded on Tower Hill on the morning of 7 December 1683. On the scaffold he explained that he had come 'not to talk, but die... I have nothing to say to men' ('Account... of what Passed at Algernon Sidney's Execution', 1683). The following day the king gave permission for his burial in 'the sepulchar of his family' in the parish church at Penshurst ('CSP dom.', '1683-4', 138). 
During his heyday as a whig patriot-hero and martyr Sidney was the subject of many biographies, some appended to editions of the 'Discourses' (of which there were at least fourteen between 1698 and 1805). That of G. W. Meadley, 'Memoirs of Algernon Sidney' (1813), may be considered the best, and the fullest A. C. Ewald, 'The Life and Times of Algernon Sidney' (2 vols., 1873). From 1885 he disappeared from view until in 1945 and 1947 two American scholars, Zera Fink and Caroline Robbins, laid the basis of twentieth-century interest in his political writings. Since 1985 a dramatic resurgence of work on both his life and thought has yielded six books and many articles, among which Blair Worden's 'The Commonwealth Kidney of Algernon Sidney' (published in the 'Journal of British Studies', 24, 1985) was the first, and Jonathan Scott's two-volume study is the most comprehensive. With this have come numerous manuscript discoveries including that of the 'Court Maxims'. 
It owed much to the high profile given to the 'Discourses' by Sidney's martyrdom that for subsequent influence in Enlightenment Britain, America, the United Provinces, Germany, and France he had no seventeenth-century rival except John Locke. For modern scholars his claim to a major place among early modern political writers rests upon two foundations. The first, alongside Locke, is as one of the two pre-eminent seventeenth-century English resistance theorists, a status underlined by the recovery of the 'Court Maxims'. The other is as the most influential of the English republicans. In particular his works exemplify two features of seventeenth-century English republicanism. The first is its debt, within a religious framework, to the moral philosophy of Greek antiquity (its Christian humanism). The second is its Machiavellian and Roman militarism. 


@@@@@


doc= 25520


Sidney, Sir Henry (1529-1586), lord deputy of Ireland and courtier, was the eldest and only surviving son of Sir William Sidney and Anne (died 1543), daughter of Sir Hugh Pagenham and widow of Thomas Fitzwilliam, elder brother of William Fitzwilliam, earl of Southampton; he was born, probably at Baynard's Castle, London, on 20 July 1529. 
His father, 
Some time before 1512 Sidney became an esquire of the body. For the following decades he pursued a career which combined martial and courtly pursuits. In 1513 he commanded the right wing at Flodden, for which he received a life annuity of 50 marks. In 1512 and 1513 he captained a ship royal and fought in battle against the French off Brest, where he was knighted, on 18 April 1513. During 1514 he was the agent of his cousin, the duke of Suffolk, in the Low Countries, where he had gone to learn the language with a royal letter of recommendation. He was closely involved in Suffolk's affairs when the duke secretly married Princess Mary in Paris. In the following years he served Wolsey as a messenger in French business. He was prominent in the tiltyard in these years, and served as captain in Suffolk's 1523 expedition. In 1517 he married Anne Fitzwilliam. For his career in later years the evidence is scant, but it involved service on investigating commissions and on juries during the Pilgrimage of Grace, and supervision of coastal defences. In 1538 his service was rewarded with office when he was appointed chamberlain of Prince Edward's household; in 1544 he was advanced to be steward to the prince. He was also awarded the Garter in 1542. 
Sidney benefited handsomely from the royal bounty; as early as 1514 he had a grant in tail male of two Yorkshire manors, Kingston upon Hull and Myton. In 1521 he became keeper of the scales in London, a post he held for ten years. In 1539 he exchanged the Yorkshire properties for the lands of Robertsbridge Abbey in Kent and Sussex. (He sold off his inherited lands in Surrey.) To these were added in 1541 the lands of St Swithin's Priory in Hampshire. Finally, in 1552 his royal master gave him Penshurst in Kent. He had the keepership of the honour of Otford and Knole with an annual fee, and he shared in the disposal of the Brandon lands after Duke Charles's death. 
Sidney fathered, besides Henry, four daughters: Mary, wife to Sir William Dormer and mother to Jane Dormer ['see 'Suarez de Figueroa, Jane, duchess of Feria]; Lucy, wife to Sir James Harrington of Exton, Rutland; Anne, wife to Sir William Fitzwilliam; and Frances Radcliffe, wife to Thomas, third earl of Sussex. His wife predeceased him, dying on 22 October 1543; he died of the stone at Penshurst on 10 February 1554 and was buried in the parish church. 
Henry Sidney was eight years senior to the young prince whose constant companion he became from 1538, when his father became chamberlain to the prince of Wales. He shared in the royal education and when Edward became king, the companionship continued, Sidney becoming one of the principal gentlemen of the privy chamber. In October 1551 he was knighted, significantly at the ceremonies attending John Dudley's creation as duke of Northumberland. Nine months earlier (29 March 1551) Sidney had married Dudley's daughter Mary (died 1586). Northumberland obviously thought his son-in-law's closeness to the new king an asset worth acquiring. From Sidney's point of view his marriage meant access to the innermost political circle. His father-in-law made use of him in confidential state business; in early 1553 he was sent on a mission to France to sound out Henri II on the prospect of English mediation between France and the emperor. (Sidney commanded both French and Italian.) In the parliament of 1547 he sat for Brackley; in that of 1553 for Kent. This hopeful phase of Sidney's career ended with Edward's death, in his arms -- yet in spite of his Dudley ties, Sidney speedily disentangled himself from their misfortunes. He had a pardon from Mary before the end of July 1553, followed by a confirmation of most of his father's land grants. (He had to surrender a deathbed grant from Edward.) 
In the new reign Sidney accompanied the earl of Bedford's mission to Spain to obtain Philip's signature to the marriage treaty. He probably owed this appointment to his language skills. Purportedly Sidney's private mission was to solicit pardon for his brothers-in-law. Sidney clearly gained Philip's goodwill, and on 30 November 1554 the king stood godfather to his first son, Philip Sidney. He would have been sent as agent to the emperor to report the birth of a royal child had that occurred. Sidney's acceptance into the Marian court may have owed something to the influence of his niece, Jane Dormer, Mary's lady-in-waiting and prospective wife of the Spanish envoy, the duke of Feria. She and Sidney were to maintain a correspondence in later years. 
In 1555 Sidney found a new patron to his career. He accompanied his new brother-in-law, Thomas Radcliffe, earl of Sussex, to Ireland where in 1556 the latter took up the office of lord deputy. Sidney went as vice-treasurer of Ireland and second in command. Sussex spent long intervals in England when Sidney, as lord justice, was his substitute. In the two years 1557-9 he stood in for the deputy some sixteen to seventeen months. 
In the new reign Sidney realigned his court connection, now that the Dudley star was ascendant, his brother-in-law Robert Dudley prime favourite in the new court. He resigned his Irish office (to another brother-in-law, Fitzwilliam). Sidney was now enlisted in the Dudley following, a tie which would endure for decades. In 1565 he would write to Leicester (as he now was), 'I care not in regard of any subject your enemy in England but would be accounted a feather in your wing and a principal one too' ('CSP dom.', 'addenda', '1547-65', 524). In Ireland, as a token of loyalty, Sidney would display on his personal standard the bear and the ragged staff of the Dudleys. Loyalty to his brother-in-law did not preclude good working relationships with other councillors, most notably Cecil and later Walsingham. Indeed in 1569 there was a negotiation for a match between Philip Sidney and Cecil's daughter, although it did not materialize. 
Yet, even if Sidney benefited richly from Leicester's patronage, there was a price to pay. When Sidney went to Ireland he found himself entangled in the strings of his brother-in-law's other patronage dealings. The new deputy was perforce linked to Leicester's Geraldine proteges, the earls of Kildare and Desmond, and correspondingly an enemy of the powerful Butler interest, privileged by the queen's favour to her kinsman Ormond. The hostility of the latter lord in turn frustrated Sidney's own Irish policy. Similarly the Leicester-Sussex feud made attacks on his conduct in Ireland an issue in the partisan slanging match at court, filling the royal ear with allegations Sidney was ill-situated to counter. 
In 1559 Sidney was soon pressed into the service of his brother-in-law Robert. He and his wife, one of the queen's ladies, were put to work as go-betweens with the Spanish ambassador, De Quadra. Initially it was Lady Sidney, who spoke Italian, who pressed the ambassador, in her brother's name, to back the Austrian marriage. There was talk of her husband going to Spain to advance the cause, or alternatively to the emperor. Then the death of Amy Robsart opened the way for Dudley's own pursuit of the royal hand in marriage. In January 1561 Sidney approached De Quadra in his brother-in-law's behalf, soliciting Philip's support for the match. He suggested that Dudley would in return back English participation in the Council of Trent, and hinted at the possibility of an entente with Rome. Sidney continued in this role for several months; at one point Dudley boasted that his brother-in-law would become a privy councillor and lord privy seal. Then Cecil, by dissuading the queen from participation in the council, spiked the whole intrigue. In May 1561 Sidney was dispatched to Ludlow, the seat of his new Welsh presidency. 
Early in 1560 Sidney had reaped the first fruits of his attachment to Dudley, appointment as president of the council in the marches of Wales; a post he would hold until his death, in spite of prolonged absences. There he presided over a court with wide judicial powers which brought to bear the crown's delegated authority in an area where the common-law courts were imperfectly effective. The president was as much a political as a judicial figure. He had to deal with a clutch of regional magnates and greater gentry, whose preponderance in the localities echoed something of the traditions of a more unruly age. The greatest of these was in fact Leicester; and at least part of Sidney's function was to secure the earl's interests, and assure him of a leading role in local affairs, which involved a working relationship with the other magnates. Sidney was largely successful in maintaining Leicester's predominance in the region; the marriage of Sidney's daughter Mary ['see 'Herbert, Mary, countess of Pembroke] to Henry Herbert, second earl of Pembroke, in 1577 secured the co-operation of the weightiest of the south Wales magnates. 
The performance of the council in its judicial role under Sidney was mixed. At the end of his first period of extended residence, 1571-5 (after nearly five years in Ireland), there was a burst of criticism from the working members of the council which led to new instructions from the privy council. In 1577 John Whitgift, then bishop of Worcester, was appointed vice-president. He criticized Sidney, who returned from Ireland in 1578, for laxness in enforcing laws against recusancy, quarrelled with Leicester, and formed an alliance with Sir James Croft of Herefordshire, the malcontent magnate on the council. During Whitgift's term as vice-president (1577-80) there was continued friction; the final years of Sidney's tenure were quiet. In general little was done to remedy the complaints levied against the council. Aside from unresolved functional problems, there was a perception that when the interests of the grandees were at stake judgments were political rather than judicial in character and inevitably favourable to members of Leicester's connection. 
When Robert Dudley became active in the plan to occupy Newhaven (Le Havre) in 1562, Sidney was employed in the queen's business. During the preliminaries of that enterprise he was sent on an abortive mission to Paris to offer Elizabeth's mediation between the contending religious parties. Later he went north to explain to Mary Stuart that the planned interview between the queens was to be postponed because of the French crisis. In early autumn 1562 he accompanied his brother-in-law Warwick to Newhaven where the latter assumed command of the occupying English force, Sidney then returning home to report. In summer 1563 he was sent to Portsmouth to oversee provisioning for the beleaguered garrison at Newhaven. In the following year he was honoured with the Garter. 
Another major appointment came in 1565 -- the deputyship of Ireland, again thanks to Leicester's patronage. Ireland had in the last four decades become part of the English political scene, a place where aspiring Englishmen might make a profitable career, enjoying office and acquiring property. Leicester had staked out a considerable sphere of influence in the island and had played a large role in discrediting the previous deputy, the earl of Sussex. Placing an ally in office at Dublin was an obvious move. From the queen's point of view Sidney was recommended by his considerable previous experience in the island during Sussex's tenure of the deputyship in Mary's reign. 
Although backed by Sussex's enemy, Sidney went to Ireland armed with a programme of action outlined by the outgoing deputy. In a detailed set of recommendations presented to the queen in 1562 Sussex had proposed the establishment of provincial councils, modelled on the councils in the marches of Wales and the north, each headed by an English president with a board of local associates. Each president would have a small armed force at his disposal. He also proposed the councils should use law codes which would blend common law and Brehon (Gaelic) law. This was a strategy which aimed at a bolder and more far-reaching effort than in the past. Sussex had limited himself to defending Leinster, in effect an enlargement of the pale. Sidney proposed to establish an effective royal authority and a meaningful presence in the Gaelic areas. The means were to be persuasive rather than coercive, but the new presidents would have a reserve force at hand to be used if persuasion failed. 
Sidney's first tenure of the deputyship was divided into two portions. The first lasted from January 1566 to October 1569. His initial task was one inherited from his immediate predecessor, Sir Nicholas Arnold, who filled the office after Sussex's departure from May 1564 to January 1566. In 1565 the earls of Ormond (Butler) and Desmond (Fitzgerald) had waged private war, the last instance of such conflict. The earls, arrested for their offence, had been released under bond pending royal arbitration. Sidney set out to deal with this situation by creating the proposed Munster presidency with Sir Warham St Leger (the son of an earlier deputy) as acting president. 
At this point English politics intruded again on the Irish scene. Leicester had patronized the Geraldine Desmond. Sidney attempted to balance even-handedly their interests with those of the Butlers, but the queen, solicited by Ormond and his allies, intervened in their behalf. (Ormond was a favourite at court, thanks in part to his royal cousinage on the Boleyn side.) Ormond objected to St Leger because of the latter's ancestral claim to some of the Butler lands. Sidney had to dismiss Sir Warham; no one was appointed in his place, while he had to arrest Desmond. Munster fell into disorder. At court Sidney's reputation was assailed by his predecessor as the Leicester-Sussex feud flared up. 
Sidney also inherited an urgent problem in Ulster where the O'Neill chief, Shane, was expanding his power. Elizabeth, as always, hoped for a peaceful (and cheap) solution, but she finally agreed to armed measures. There followed a campaign in which the O'Neill lands were ravaged but the chief himself avoided capture. Then an unlucky explosion destroyed the strategic fort erected at Lough Foyle. Ultimately the O'Neill problem was resolved, but not by the deputy. Shane, beaten by the rival Ulster lord, O'Donnell, fled to the Antrim Scots (the MacDonalds), his ancient foes. Seizing the opportunity, they cut off his head and sent it, pickled, to Dublin. 
Sidney had been so depressed by the Lough Foyle disaster that he sought recall. He did indeed return to England in October 1567, his reputation at court somewhat repaired by O'Neill's death. Nevertheless, when he arrived at court, where Sussex's influence was at the moment strong, he was coldly received, his recent actions devalued, and his proposals rejected. His stand-in appointee in Munster was sent to the Tower while his schemes for reordering Ulster were dismissed. He had urged the establishment of an Ulster presidency and an earldom for the O'Neill chief, Shane's successor, Turlough Luineach. The queen instead favoured his rival, Hugh O'Neill. Sidney now suffered a severe attack of the stone, which disabled him for some months until he passed a stone the size of a nutmeg. It was presumably at this time that Sussex made his unsuccessful bid to wrest the Welsh presidency from Sidney, a move thwarted by Leicester. In 1568 Sussex went to York as president of the council of the north, necessarily diminishing his influence at court. 
During 1568 various proposals were canvassed in the council, including the notion of planting English colonies, initially in Ulster but later in Munster as well. Sidney was accounted a supporter of such schemes but at the time avoided commitment to any one of them. Council discussions led to no agreement as to policy either in Ulster or Munster. By the autumn, grave disorders required immediate attention and Sidney, reluctantly, returned. He went with solid council backing and Cecil's active patronage but without specific instructions other than the observance of strictest economy. Sidney on his part was determined to press ahead with the creation of more provincial councils, for which he had royal consent. 
Most immediately, a few months after his arrival, the queen authorized Sidney to summon parliament, the first meeting of the body since 1560. The legislative programme, approved already at Westminster, included some twenty bills, of which the most notable was that for abolishing coign and livery, the ancient right of clan chieftains to levy exactions in money, kind, or service on their dependants. Its elimination would shatter the whole Gaelic social order. It would deprive the chieftains of their power to make war; force would be a governmental monopoly. As compensation the dependants would have fixed financial obligations in place of the old arbitrary assessments, while the greater lords would have a steady, calculable income (while paying an assessed tax to the crown). A second bill attainted the late Shane O'Neill, a measure which placed large parts of Ulster in royal hands. Others dealt with fiscal measures designed to increase the scant royal revenues in the island. All in all, this constituted a coherent legislative programme to extend royal authority in the island and to advance the progress of Anglicization. 
Almost every bill met protracted opposition, and what was to have been a brisk six-week session became in fact eight sessions, the last of which sat in 1570. In the end little more than half of the bills laid before the house were passed, including Shane O'Neill's attainder and some of the fiscal legislation, but the attack on coign and livery failed. Throughout, the members showed a growing distrust of the government. The palesmen's distrust of Sidney was heightened by the establishment of English colonies in Munster and even more by Sidney's encouragement of Sir Peter Carew, who successfully laid claim to ancestral rights in lands in the pale and in Munster. Such actions heightened fears of an officially sponsored take-over of Irish lands at the hands of English adventurers. 
During the years in which parliament sat, the deputy had to face two revolts in Munster, one led by a brother of Ormond, Sir Edmund Butler; the other by a Desmond kinsman, Fitzmaurice, in which the traditional enemies collaborated. The former was driven to revolt when the earl agreed to surrender coign and livery in June 1569. Ormond, a courtier moving high in governmental circles, saw potential advantage for himself in ending endemic disorder, while for his brethren the measures spelled doom to their way of life. The Desmonds were in a worse state, their earl disgraced, alien colonists in their lands, and the success of Carew threatening their whole position. Desperate, they began seeking foreign aid. For the nonce the two parties acted together until checked by Sidney's belated arrival, followed by Ormond's appearance on the scene to receive the surrender of his kin. This last move was a blow against Sidney by his long-term enemy, since it implied the deputy was incapable of managing the situation. Sidney got his own back by an act of attainder against the Butler brothers, but even here royal intervention pulled the teeth of the condemnation. Sidney did lead the forces which broke the back of the Desmond rebellion, but Fitzmaurice sustained a guerrilla war which ended after Sidney's return home, and martial law prevailed in the province until 1571. 
The queen had allowed the establishment of a Connaught presidency under Sir Edward Fitton, a Cecil protege whose tactless inflexibility provoked an uprising. Ormond, with whom Sidney was newly reconciled, suppressed it. Sidney in the meantime sponsored another colonization project, in Ulster. He proposed that the lands east of the River Bann be occupied by English settlers, some of them discharged soldiers, others husbandmen and artificers, the tenants of gentlemen adventurers who would thus carve out their own estates. 
By 1571 the country was relatively quiet and Sidney's recall, decided the previous summer, ensued. He was himself begging release. Fate was unkind to him. Beset by the disorders within the island, he was ill-supported at court. Beside the active enmity of Ormond, he suffered neglect at the hands of the council. Cecil frankly admitted that the affairs of the Scottish queen 'excluded all audience from other causes' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/26/57; Brady, 133). Sidney had also incurred royal displeasure by the mounting costs of his government. He had projected a saving of Ir$4600 on his predecessor's budget. Since 1568 the queen had spent Ir$148,000 and had accumulated debts of Ir$73,000. Nor did she favour Sidney's encouragement of colonization schemes, which so agitated both the Old English and Gaelic communities. 
Sidney was coldly received at court. Disillusioned, he begged Leicester to free him from further Irish service. Nevertheless, he was soon involved in ruthless attacks on the conduct of his successor (and brother-in-law) Sir William Fitzwilliam and from 1572 began a campaign for reinstatement. In pursuit of this goal he put forward a far-reaching programme of reform, devised originally by Edmund Tremayne, at one time his private secretary. Composition, as it came to be called, attacked head-on the vexed problems of coign and livery and of the cess. In this scheme, the provincial presidents would renounce cess, their rights of billeting, purveyance, and military service, for a fixed annual rent from the chieftains, who would in turn exchange their exactions on their dependants (coign and livery) for fixed payments. The English model of tax-paying subject and rent-paying tenant would come into being. The use of force would be a royal monopoly. 
Sidney had a rival in his bid for the deputyship -- the earl of Essex, proprietor of a colony in Ulster. Their competition was fiscal in nature. As always the queen had her eye on costs. Essex claimed that the profits of his colony would soon yield an annual rent to the crown of $5000, easily repaying an initial royal outlay. Sidney countered with a proposal by which, implementing his programme of compositions, he would render the Irish government self-sufficient within three years at a cost of $60,000, to be paid by the queen in instalments. Elizabeth accepted and a contract was accordingly signed. 
It was on these challenging terms that in September 1575 Sidney returned to a country which he 'cursed, hated, and detested'. Yet he was hopeful he 'could do that which has not been done before... where others had missed' ('Sidney's memoir', 5.308). Landing at Drogheda, he summoned the palesmen and, in accordance with his plan, offered to replace the variable burden of the cess (money, kind, and service) for a low monetary tax. He was resisted and negotiations dragged on until 1577. The deputy fared no better when he approached the Gaelic chieftains. In both Munster and Connaught his demands were termed extortionate. It was only after repressing revolt in Connaught that he won reluctant consent to composition. In the meantime the angry palesmen sent an unlicensed delegation to London where, after a rebuke for their unauthorized action, they won a hearing. Sidney sent his chancellor, William Gerard, to counter their argument. Gerard, on hearing the palesmen's case, changed his mind and backed their complaints, offering an alternative scheme which would have dismantled Sidney's programme. 
Sidney continued to face opposition; public opinion turned against him as the rumour spread that he had taken the whole country in farm, that is, in lease. Worse still, from Elizabeth's standpoint, Sidney was overrunning his cost estimates. Even in the second of the three years she had held back her payment. By Michaelmas 1577 Sidney had exceeded his original costing by more than $14,000. The plaints of both the palesmen and the Gaelic chiefs, added to the deficit, destroyed both royal confidence, always uncertain, and that of leading councillors, even his supporter (his son's father-in-law) Secretary Walsingham. In March 1578 instructions for Sidney's recall ended his Irish career. He departed in September. This was the second time that he had returned under a cloud. But in 1571 he had at least laid the foundations of his proposed provincial councils. In 1578 he left a society in which palesmen and Gael were united in their anger. A keen ear could hear the underground rumblings of a coming volcanic explosion. 
From the 1570s on the English government had pursued a course of action in Ireland which aimed at the Anglicization of that island, namely the full acceptance, at least by the Irish elite, of English institutions, social, political, and legal. This was to be accomplished as far as possible by persuasion, backed by force, but force used only when inescapably necessary. Sidney in his two terms of office brought this process to a culmination, acting on the basis of considered, clearly articulated programmes, which laid out the means for its fulfilment. Yet in spite of a consistent and conscientious effort, his record was largely one of failure. Moreover, his departure was not merely a changing of the guard. It proved to be the end of the half-century effort, described above, to bring Ireland peacefully into the English fold. 
How far was Sidney to blame? Some would see him as the architect who destroyed his own work by his advocacy of English colonization and even more specifically by his backing for Carew, whose claims seemed to endanger all land titles. Certainly the distrust this aroused engendered deep fears as to the intentions of the English government, and led to the defeat of Sidney's first attempt at a radical reform of Irish society -- the bill to abolish coign and livery in the 1569 parliament. His second attempt to achieve the same goal by the different approach of the composition programme of 1575 foundered on Sidney's high-handed impatience, which drove both palesmen and Gael to determined resistance. He had irreparably damaged the trust of the Irish (both Old English and Gael) in English intentions on which a policy of assimilation had to rest. 
It should be said in Sidney's defence that he laboured under frustrating difficulties. Given were the home-grown problems of a dysfunctional, violence-ridden society. Added were those created, on the one hand by meddling interference from London, motivated by court intrigue, and on the other by the indifference -- or at least inattention -- of the council. It is hard to envision a recipe which would have ensured success. 
Sidney on his return took the seat in the privy council to which he had been appointed in 1575. In 1579 he attended with modest regularity; thereafter he was not to be seen at court. Whether his absence was voluntary or whether it was at royal command is impossible to say. In any case it meant that Sidney played no role in the centre of power either as councillor or courtier. These years were spent at Ludlow; yet even here he suffered royal rebuke -- first for too frequent absence on private visits, then for his leniency to recusants. He enjoyed, however, a personal triumph in these years. His opponent in council, the Herefordshire landowner and privy councillor, Sir James Croft, had his eyes on a local heiress, Barbara Gamage, for his son's hand in marriage. With the aid of Leicester and of his son-in-law Pembroke, Sidney carried off the lady and her fortune, marrying her to Robert Sidney, his younger son. 
There was one more encounter with Irish matters; in 1582 Sidney's return to the island was under consideration. He made it plain he would only go if granted a peerage, the lands to support it, the dignity of lord lieutenant, and the company of his son Philip. The queen refused to accede to these demands and the matter ended. Sidney died at Ludlow on 5 May 1586. Fortunately he did not live to know of his son's death in the following October. At the queen's command his body was buried in Penshurst church, his heart at Ludlow. Lady Sidney followed him to the grave. She was buried, also at Penshurst, on 11 August 1586. 
Sidney died a disappointed man. He had gained neither the grant of lands nor the peerage which were reasonable hopes for a royal servant who had held two great offices. In 1582, after the queen's refusal to grant title and land, he wrote a long letter to Walsingham, whose daughter was about to marry his son Philip. In it he recounted in detail all his years of strenuous service in Ireland and Wales. In each of his three terms in Ireland he had suppressed rebellion; in each he had expended privately Ir$5000. Yet for all this he had nothing to show in material reward. A title was talked of in 1572, but without land. (Mary Sidney had written to oppose the bestowal.) Now, he lamented, he was forced to sell land to settle his debts. He was in fact disposing of considerable parts of his Brandon inheritance in the midlands. 
Sidney's disappointment in his career reflects as much unfavourable circumstance as lack of ability. It was not only the intrinsic difficulties of the job -- the clash of two divergent cultures -- but also the meddling from the court and the low priority given Irish affairs by the council against which the deputy had, often unavailingly, to struggle. There was also the practical disadvantage of having 'his service subject to the ear and not to the eye' of the sovereign (Sydney, 'Letters', 1.93). This disadvantage stemmed in no small part from Sidney's dependence on his brother-in-law Leicester. However generous the queen was to her favourite, she frowned on the formation of factional groups either in court or in council, based in this case on family ties. She preferred that Sidney should serve her in remote Ludlow or transmarine Dublin. He thus remained on the outer edge of the court solar system where the sun's warmth was hardly felt. 


@@@@@


doc= 25521


Sidney, Henry, first earl of Romney (1641-1704), politician and army officer, was born in Paris during the spring of 1641. He was the fourth surviving and youngest son of Robert Sidney, second earl of Leicester (1595-1677), and Dorothy Percy ('bap'. 1598, died 1659), eldest daughter of Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland. 
Sidney grew up at the Sidney family seat, Penshurst Place, Kent, a favourite of his mother and an unusually good-looking child as an early portrait of him by Lely reveals. Much of his youth was spent in the company of Robert Spencer, second earl of Sunderland, son of his older sister Dorothy Spencer, countess of Sunderland, but almost an exact contemporary in age. Apparently educated together under the tutelage of Dr Thomas Pierce, the two boys became fast and lifelong friends. Sidney and Sunderland travelled on the continent in Pierce's charge in 1658-9 and made a return visit a few years later with Henry Savile, spending the better part of 1664 in Italy as part of a congenial group of young Englishmen that also included Henry Compton, Sidney Godolphin, and William Trumbull. Sidney then gravitated to the court of Charles II looking for employment, as did many other landless younger sons of good family. It was about this time, according to the 'Memoires de la vie du comte de Gramont', that he courted Anne Temple (died 1718), who later married Sir Charles Lyttelton. He may also have been involved simultaneously in a relationship with Grace Worthley, a widow of some social standing -- she was related to several landed Cheshire families, including the Gerards, Fittons, and Minishulls -- with whom he had a son, Henry Worthley. Grace Worthley remained his mistress until about 1682, when Sidney seems to have abandoned her, perhaps to help with protracted marriage negotiations over a Dutch heiress. 
Sidney's charm also helped him towards office. In 1665 he secured appointment as groom of the bedchamber to James, duke of York, and subsequently as master of the horse to the latter's wife, Anne. 'The hansomest youth of his time' ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', 55), Sidney allowed himself to get caught up in a serious flirtation with the duchess, which led to his dismissal after their conduct became the subject of widespread gossip. His offence, however, was not serious enough to deny him a commission in 1667 as captain of a new company of foot added to the Holland regiment commanded by his brother Robert. In the following year, while stationed at Carlisle, he declared his candidacy in a by-election at Appleby, but withdrew in the face of powerful local interest exercised on behalf of Thomas Tufton. In 1669 and again in 1672 he visited France on extended leave, the second time carrying a message of condolence from Charles II to Louis XIV upon the death of the latter's daughter. 
Charles appointed Sidney master of the robes in July 1675, a post he purchased and which returned a minimum of $500 annually if managed properly. In a real sense it represented Sidney's first step out of relative obscurity. 
A more decisive development came on 25 February 1678, when Sidney was commissioned as colonel to raise a new regiment of foot. That May the regiment was sent to join the British expeditionary force in Flanders, and while there he established the beginnings of a friendship with William, prince of Orange, marked by a depth and 'dignified by consistency of which the time affords few examples' (Foxcroft, 1.165). The relationship became a factor in the decision taken in June 1679 to send him as envoy-extraordinary to the states general of the United Provinces, an appointment engineered by Sunderland, then secretary of state for the north, but also supported by Sir William Temple, Sidney's immediate predecessor at The Hague as well as another good friend and something of a mentor. His official brief was to maintain a defensive alliance with the Netherlands, a fixed point of English foreign policy since the Danby ministry. It was a difficult assignment, given doubts about whether Charles II could secure the backing of parliament if a crisis arose. The situation was further complicated that autumn when the French ambassador Count D'Avaux launched a serious effort to win over the Dutch, a move that would have left England diplomatically isolated and the Southern Netherlands vulnerable. During negotiations in late December 1679 Sidney trumped the French with a proposal to the states general actually drafted at a secret meeting with the grand pensionary, Gaspar Fagel, and William himself. News of the Dutch decision to ratify a new treaty redounded to his credit. The countess of Sunderland, as frequent a correspondent as her husband, wrote early in the new year that Sidney's 'praise is up to great height, your health drank with great ceremony in the City, and everybody that's good for any thing talks of you as their guardian angel almost' (countess of Sunderland to Sidney, 13 Jan 1680, 'Diary of... Sidney', 1.231). In addition to such public business, however, he also had a brief from Sunderland and a group of moderates on the privy council to serve as a private conduit of information to and from the prince. Sunderland, in particular, used him repeatedly to advocate the importance of the prince's coming over to England. There, William could protect the rights of his wife during the exclusion crisis, and counter the activities of Anthony Ashley Cooper, first earl of Shaftesbury, and the pretensions of James Scott, duke of Monmouth, to the succession. 
Sidney was not a member of the first Exclusion Parliament, and was abroad when elections were held to the second, later in summer 1679. A promise by William Harbord to secure him or Sir William Temple a seat at Launceston, Cornwall, came to nothing, but Sidney was returned from Bramber, Sussex, after his older brother Algernon Sidney -- with whom he was not on good terms -- was forced out of the contest. Judicious expenditure of almost $300 by Gilbert Spence, a trusted family retainer, and the influence of his brother-in-law Sir John Pelham were sufficient to win over a constituency in which he was unknown. There followed a year-long series of prorogations, a conscious policy of delay pursued by Charles II in the hopes that passions would cool. Finally in September 1680 Sidney returned to London in the expectation that parliament would be allowed to meet, and was party to a series of meetings aimed at trying to forge a coalition perhaps willing to accommodate exclusion, but bent on foreclosing the possibility of Monmouth's coming to power. Generally counted a whig at this time by historians of the period, Sidney took his seat in the Commons in late October, but was assigned to no committees and, Rapin and Cobbett to the contrary, left no record of participation in the debates that took place during the first week or so of the session. In fact, by 3 November he was back at The Hague under instruction from Sunderland to make a last-ditch effort to persuade the prince of Orange to declare his interest. 
News that the House of Lords had rejected exclusion produced a Dutch crisis of confidence in an alliance with a nation so deeply divided. It was at this point that Sidney finally abandoned the delicate political balance that had allowed him to serve Charles II while discreetly advancing William's cause simultaneously. On 25 November he transmitted to the king a memorial from the states general urging him to come to terms with parliament and suggesting indirectly that acceptance of exclusion was the only way to do so. By a manoeuvre instigated by William with the assistance of both Fagel and Sidney, D'Avaux reported to Louis XIV that the English envoy had even gone so far as to send off manuscript copies to friends in parliament, thereby virtually ensuring the document would appear in print. Sidney's actions at this time were supported and prompted by William and Fagel. Just his agency in the document's delivery was sufficient to earn Sidney the king's displeasure and a stern reprimand, which was delivered through secretary of state Leoline Jenkins now that Sunderland had fallen from power. While the prince of Orange and others expected the affair would lead to Sidney's immediate recall, it was not until June 1681 that he was summoned back to England and received by Charles more graciously than expected. Contrary to expectations Sidney was allowed to retain his position as master of the robes, and ultimately received reimbursement for all outstanding expenses from his embassy. However, the king did reject a request from William later that summer to appoint Sidney commanding general of the British brigade in the service of the states general, but early in 1682 he was given leave to return to the Netherlands to take up a commission as colonel of one of the six regiments. Thereafter he disappeared from the English political stage for the remainder of the reign, apart from an unsuccessful attempt to intercede on behalf of his brother Algernon after the latter's conviction for treason in late 1683. Sidney was allowed to arrange for Algernon's burial at Penshurst and to claim his estate. 
With the accession of James II, Sidney lost his position at court and was recalled from military service in the Netherlands in the spring of 1685. Unlike the case of a number of other officers removed about the same time, his loyalty was never in question. Rather, it was a case of James's asserting his right to select the commander of the British forces in the Netherlands, a position Sidney had managed to secure 'de facto' during the last years of the reign of Charles II, even though lacking appropriate military rank. Given dim prospects of alternative employment in the new regime, he left for the continent in November 1685, and the following year found him variously at The Hague, with William at a meeting of German princes at Cleves, and, both Burnet and Macky suggest, travelling in Italy for more than just pleasure. Sidney's especial value to the prince, however, was as a point of contact with members of his own class in England out of sympathy with James during a period of watchful waiting in 1686 and the earlier part of 1687, and then proving adept at taking on a more proactive role on his behalf after news of the queen's pregnancy radically changed the dynamics of the equation. As William gravitated toward a firm decision to intervene directly, Sidney was 'the man in whose hands the conduct of the whole design was chiefly deposited, by the prince's own order' ('Burnet's History', 3.264). Only six others -- Bishop Compton, Danby, Devonshire, Lumley, Admiral Russell, and Shrewsbury -- joined him in adding their ciphers to the cautiously phrased invitation sent off on 30 June 1688. None the less the conspiracy had a considerably broader base of support, or at least promises of neutrality from some of more timorous temperament, with the secret so well kept that Sidney could secure an official pass to take the waters at Aix-la-Chapelle when he left to join the prince in late August. 
By mid-September, according to Luttrell, Sidney had been commissioned a major-general in the invasion force. He landed with William at Torbay on 5 November 1688. His role as a senior commanding officer, member of the general staff, and long-time confidant of William was very important, but in the absence of any serious military engagement that autumn it received little or no attention in contemporary accounts of the drama unfolding. In January 1689 Sidney secured a seat in the convention after a contested election at Tamworth. He is classed by Burnet, in the supplement to his 'History', as one of the moderate Church of England men constant in their support for putting William and Mary on the throne, but in general he does not figure prominently in the proceedings of the lower House. In coronation day honours he was created Baron Milton and Viscount Sydney of Sheppey on 9 April 1689, and took his seat in the House of Lords less than a week later. Other tokens of royal favour and friendship recognized both his vital contribution to the success of the revolution and a continuing record of military and administrative service. In mid-February 1689 William had made him a member of the privy council, and that same year he was also appointed lord lieutenant and vice-admiral of Kent, a justice of the peace, and 'custos rotulorum' for the county, and in 1691 lord warden of the Cinque Ports and constable of Dover Castle. He retained most of these positions until his death, though in 1692 and 1693 he shared the lord lieutenancy of Kent with Vere Fane, fourth earl of Westmorland, because of commitments in Ireland. Sydney (his peerage name) was also first gentleman of the bedchamber (1689-1700) and groom of the stole (1700-02). Important to him professionally were a commission as colonel of the 1st regiment of foot guards (1689-90 and again 1693-1704) and a special non-regimental commission in May 1691 as commander of all foot in the king's absence while on campaign with William in Flanders. Sydney was also the recipient of a grant of almost 50,000 acres in Ireland in 1690, but title to it and a substantial annual income were lost with the resumption of Irish forfeitures by parliament in 1699. 
The final phase of Sydney's career can be said to have begun in the summer of 1690, when he accompanied William III to Ireland, continuing a family tradition of involvement in Irish affairs dating back to the reign of Elizabeth I. Both his father and elder brother Philip Sidney, third earl of Leicester, had held high office in the Irish administration. He was one of the principal officers at the battle of the Boyne and during the mop-up operation that followed, including the siege at Limerick, where the troops he commanded personally had some success before the king withdrew in the face of bad weather. At the beginning of September, William returned to England after naming Sydney and Thomas Coningsby lords justices to act in his stead, with a third person to be added to the commission at a later date. It was a particularly difficult assignment, with military operations still in progress and widespread economic distress and popular unrest a constant worry. Almost immediately the two men issued a series of proclamations from Dublin aimed at trying to restore some degree of order and stability, but nothing much of substance was accomplished before Sydney was recalled in early December to take on the post of secretary of state for the north. During his first few months in office he was based in London, while his counterpart, Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham, and William went to The Hague. The two secretaries then swapped places after the king briefly returned to England in April 1691, and then set off for a summer campaign in Flanders, for which Sydney's credentials as a seasoned military commander made him doubly useful, as well as a congenial companion. 
Shortly after Sydney and the king returned to England in October, rumours about the possibility of his appointment as lord lieutenant of Ireland began to circulate: however, it was not until the beginning of March 1692 that he surrendered his seals of office, and the middle of that month before his new commission officially took effect. In two sets of instructions William gave Sydney extensive powers over both the civil administration and all military forces, as well as a particular mandate to summon parliament to ratify the provisions of the articles of Limerick signed the year before. The king also provided him with an annual salary in excess of $6500, a substantial supply of plate, and an additional allowance of $3000 for equipage. Various factors conspired to delay Sydney's departure, but he finally arrived in Dublin at the end of August, and immediately issued writs summoning parliament to meet on 5 October. It was a session that spun out of control quickly. An exclusively protestant lower house vehemently opposed making a reality out of promises of toleration for Catholics, and a request for new taxes to help cover an anticipated shortfall between revenues and expenditures gave it some leverage in the situation. Even though Sydney seems to have understood that it would be difficult to get the king's business done without organizing a leadership group in the Commons, his lack of success in doing so tempted, if it did not actually provoke, the constitutional challenge to Poynings' law that followed. On 3 November Sydney prorogued parliament after delivering a stiff speech on the rights and prerogatives of the crown, even though it meant losing the tax bills pending. Echoes of the dispute were carried to England that winter by six members of the Irish Commons who met with William, as well as with committees from both houses of parliament, in an attempt to explain their conduct and to further their complaint that Sydney was too tolerant of Catholics, and a corrupt administrator as well. Although the king's support was unwavering, clearly his lord lieutenant had become sufficiently compromised in the eyes of the emerging protestant ascendancy to have lost his effectiveness. 
Sydney's recall from Dublin came in late spring 1693, and on 28 July it was followed by appointment to the office of master-general of the ordnance. The post represented neither a sop intended to allow him to save face, nor simply a vehicle for lining his pockets, as some have alleged. Rather, given William's military ambitions and the functions attaching to the job since the department had been reconstituted in 1683, it was a substantial vote of confidence in Sydney's abilities. William's continued respect for Sydney's qualities was confirmed in May 1694, when he was promoted lieutenant-general and created earl of Romney. For the remaining years of the reign Romney was immersed in matters ranging from weapons development and procurement, to construction and maintenance of fortifications and supply depots throughout the British Isles and the colonies. Provision of armaments and munitions for the fleet and efficient dispatch of trains of artillery to the continent were the obvious business with which he dealt, but a host of lesser matters occupied his attention as well -- including arrangements for spectacular public firework displays in St James's Square to celebrate the great victory at Namur in 1695, and again on the king's birthday and return to England after the treaty of Ryswick was signed in 1697. In that same year Romney was called upon for the first time to serve as one of the lords justices while William was abroad, and it is also when he purchased the office of ranger of Greenwich Park from Charles Sackville, fourth earl of Dorset, to have use of the Queen's House as his equivalent of a country seat. During Peter the Great's stay in England in the winter of 1698, Romney showed off new naval construction to the tsar, and also helped William entertain his difficult guest privately. He was again appointed a lord justice later that spring, and then in each of the following three years accompanied the king to The Hague, where, in the summer of 1701, Luttrell notes that he was associated with John Churchill, earl of Marlborough, during the negotiations leading to a revival of the grand alliance against France. 
The death of William III and the accession of Queen Anne led Romney largely to disappear from the political stage. His employments at court came to an end immediately, though he was continued as lord lieutenant of Kent and granted a handsome pension. A man really outside party in the years after the revolution, Romney continued to attend sessions of the House of Lords on occasion, but was never much interested in the parliamentary arena and not an influential voice there. He died of smallpox on 8 April 1704 at his house, 16 St James's Square, and was buried ten days later in the chancel of St James's, Piccadilly. While the circumstances of his death were noted by a few contemporaries, he had already begun to slip into relative obscurity after the passing of Sunderland and William III had removed the men who defined the parameters of his public life. 
Romney has been the subject of widely divergent views about both his capacity and character. Macaulay dismissively described him as 'incapable, ignorant, and dissipated' (Macaulay, 3.1050), and insisted elsewhere that the invitation to William must have been 'drawn up by some person better skilled than Sydney in the art of composition' (ibid., 3.1053), despite the fact that the document is in his hand. In turn, Macaulay seems to have been influenced by Jonathan Swift's disparaging references, one differing only slightly from the other, to the effect that Romney was 'an idel, drunken, ignorant rake, without sense or honour' ('Prose Works', 5.288). Thomas Bruce, second earl of Ailesbury, hardly a friendly witness, took a much more charitable view of his character, while John Macky called him the linchpin of the planning effort for the revolution, a man of honour and honesty who served William to the best of his ability. Both Burnet's 'History' and the supplement to that work provide an even fuller portrait. It is certainly one of an individual with flaws, but also remarkable for his even temper, straight dealing, good judgement, and a knack for gaining the trust of others. Perhaps more dependable than gifted, Romney becomes in this view a person in whom it then becomes possible to understand why William placed such a high degree of confidence over such a long period of time. 


@@@@@


doc= 25522


Sidney, Sir Philip (1554-1586), author and courtier, was born on 30 November 1554 at Penshurst, Kent, the first of seven children of Sir Henry Sidney (1529-1586) and his wife, Mary Sidney (1530x35-1586), daughter of John Dudley, duke of Northumberland, and his wife, Jane Guildford. Through his mother's relations in particular, Philip was born into a highly important family. Mary's brothers were Guildford Dudley, who married Lady Jane Grey, Robert Dudley, who was created earl of Leicester in 1564, and Ambrose Dudley, who succeeded his father as earl of Warwick in 1561; in the same year Henry Hastings, husband of Mary Sidney's sister Katherine, succeeded to the earldom of Huntingdon. On his father's side, Sidney's aunt Frances was the wife of Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex, and Sidney's first cousin Jane Dormer had married the count of Feria, a leading member of the retinue of Philip II of Spain. Queen Mary's husband, after whom Sidney was named, stood as godfather at his baptism, with his grandmother the duchess of Northumberland and John Russell, first earl of Bedford, whose daughter Anne became Ambrose Dudley's third wife, as the other godparents. 
Philip Sidney's early childhood was probably spent at Penshurst. His first sister, Margaret, was born in 1556 (died 1558); she was followed about 1560 by Elizabeth (died 1567), in 1561 by Mary, who as Mary Herbert became countess of Pembroke, and in 1564 by Ambrosia (died 1575). His two brothers, Robert Sidney, who became earl of Leicester, and Thomas, were born in 1563 and 1569 respectively. Sidney may have suffered the attack of smallpox that badly scarred his face in 1562, when his mother lost her looks nursing the similarly afflicted Queen Elizabeth. 
Sidney's earliest tutor seems to have been Johan or Jean Tassel, probably a Huguenot exile, who may have taught him the French in which he was later so fluent, and accompanied him to Shrewsbury School. The school is close to Ludlow where Sir Henry Sidney had his residence as lord president of the council in the marches. Sidney entered the school on 17 October 1564, on the same day as his future friend and admirer Fulke Greville. The school's headmaster was Thomas Ashton, a former fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, and under his direction Sidney studied Latin and some Greek, and may have taken part in Latin plays. He lodged in the town with George Leigh, six times MP for Shrewsbury, and his wife, and was godfather to one of their sons. 
Sidney spent part of the new year of 1566 at Eton near Wroxeter with Sir Richard Newport and his wife, returning to them again in May when the school was visited by sickness: he also stayed then with Sir Andrew Corbet of Moreton Corbett, whose eldest son, Robert, later accompanied him on his European travels. In August he travelled to Leicester's magnificent castle at Kenilworth, and then, accompanied by Thomas Wilson, went on to Oxford where Queen Elizabeth was entertained with speeches and plays. There is no certain evidence that he was presented to the queen on this occasion, but his family connections, not least with Leicester who was chancellor of the university, were such as to suggest that he may have been. His subsequent relationship with the queen, however, though not easy to interpret -- no letter from her to him survives -- seems generally to have been problematic. 
On 2 February 1567 Sidney was enrolled as a member of Gray's Inn, and a year later, aged thirteen, he began his career as an undergraduate at Christ Church, Oxford. He lodged with the dean, Thomas Cooper, who also acted as his tutor along with Thomas Thornton and Nathaniel Baxter. Another pupil of theirs at this time was William Camden, and Sidney's other Oxford contemporaries included his schoolfriend Greville, Richard Hakluyt, Richard Carew, Thomas Bodley, Walter Ralegh, Richard Hooker, George Peele, and perhaps John Lyly. His three earliest surviving letters, addressed to Sir William Cecil between 12 March 1569 and 26 February 1570, were all written from Oxford. 
Sidney became engaged to Cecil's elder daughter, Anne, and a formal marriage contract was drawn up on 6 August 1569 and signed in September. Within two years the contract seems to have broken down, for in the summer of 1571 Anne was betrothed to the seventeenth earl of Oxford, who became Sidney's enemy. Some time during that year an Oxford mathematician, perhaps Thomas Allen, cast Sidney's horoscope, with sections concerning marriage and journeys. When plague broke out at Oxford in the summer or autumn Sidney moved to Reading with other students. But though he may also have attended Cambridge University for a short time, he did not take a degree at either university. 
Sidney's first visit to the continent took place in 1572 when he accompanied Edward Fiennes de Clinton to sign the treaty of Blois, which allied England and France against Spain and seemed to offer some protection to French protestants: Clinton was created earl of Lincoln for the mission. Sidney's passport was signed by the queen on 25 May 1572, and allowed him to travel abroad for two years but not to consort with unlicensed English exiles. His companion for this visit was Lodowick Bryskett, and he took three servants with him. The English mission arrived just outside Paris on 8 June. The treaty was signed a week later, and on 23 June Lincoln's party left Paris, but Sidney stayed on for the next two and a half months, lodging with his future father-in-law, the English ambassador Sir Francis Walsingham. On 9 August he was created a gentleman of Charles IX's bedchamber and a baron. 
Sidney was in Paris for the marriage on 18 August of King Henri of Navarre and Marguerite de Valois, and for the elaborate celebrations that followed it. When the massacre of St Bartholomew's day (24 August) broke out, Sidney observed it from the safety of Walsingham's embassy, where he met Timothy Bright and Pietro Bizari. Among those killed in the massacre was the celebrated protestant logician Pierre de la Ramee (Petrus Ramus) with whom Sidney had become friendly. Other friends made on this, his only visit to Paris, included the protestant theologian and political theorist Philippe Du Plessis Mornay, the lawyer Jean Lobbet, the young count of Hanau, the printer Andreas Wechel, and perhaps also the poets Pierre Ronsard and Guillaume de Saluste Du Bartase, the former chancellor Michel de l'Hopital, and the diplomat, political thinker, and follower of Melancthon Hubert Languet. 
On 9 September the English privy council wrote to Walsingham instructing him to send Sidney home, but by the time the letter reached Paris Sidney and his party had left in the company of John Watson, dean of Winchester. Sidney's constant travelling over the next three years was intended to further his education and also to establish him as an internationally recognized figure who might be called upon to unite and lead the various protestant factions throughout Europe. That he should have been prepared thus for so important a role suggests that the great hopes already invested in Sidney arose as much from his personal qualities as from his birth. His guiding spirit during the tour was Languet, and an important Latin correspondence between the two survives. It is clear that Sidney frequently found the older, unmarried man's constant advice and reproaches trying: he often did not do as he was told and was not entirely open with him about his activities or his intellectual and aesthetic interests. 
Sidney's initial destination was Frankfurt, where he stayed with the printer Wechel: Languet was a fellow guest. There he also met Theophile de Banos, the Huguenot minister, who dedicated to Sidney his commentaries on the work of their joint friend Ramee. As ambassador to the elector of Saxony, Languet was sent to Vienna, and Sidney followed him there in the early summer of 1573. On the way he met the French printer Henri Estienne (Henricus Stephanus), who gave him a manuscript collection of Greek proverbs and in 1576 dedicated his edition of the Greek 'New Testament' to him. Having reached the imperial court in Vienna, in August 1573 Sidney went to Pressburg (Bratislava) in Hungary near the border with the Ottoman empire, and there he met Georg Purkircher and the botanist Charles de l'Ecluse. Before winter set in he left Vienna with his cousin Thomas Coningsby, Bryskett, and a Welsh servant named Griffin Madox, and set off for Venice, where he joined the count of Hanau, later following him to Padua. Until August 1574 he moved constantly between Venice and Padua, except when in March 1574 he went to Genoa and Florence. In Padua on 20 June 1574 he bought a copy of Guicciardini's history of Italy. In Venice he met two poets -- Cesare Pavese, a friend of Torquato Tasso's father, and the French protestant writer Francois Perrot de Mesieres -- and also hesitated as to whether to have his portrait painted by Paolo Veronese or by Tintoretto: he chose Veronese, but the portrait, which he sent to Languet, is lost, as are two portraits of him made at Vienna by the imperial artist Antonio Abondio. 
Sidney left Venice in the late summer of 1574 and in the autumn went from Vienna, where he had been ill, to Cracow, hoping to see the French crown prince, Henri de Valois, installed as king of Poland: however, following the death of Charles IX, Henri had returned hurriedly to France. This occasion may have been the basis for the myth, promoted by Robert Dow in 'Exequiae', the Oxford volume of elegies for Sidney, and later popularized by Sir Robert Naunton, that Sidney was offered the throne of Poland. He spent the winter of 1574-5 in Vienna where he became friendly with the diplomat Edward Wotton, whom he mentions in the opening sentence of 'A Defence of Poetry'. A proposed meeting with Languet in Frankfurt in the spring of 1575 did not take place; in Heidelberg he met the English ambassador Thomas Wilkes. Eventually he was summoned back to England by the queen, but although he travelled in great haste, he was delayed for nearly a month at Antwerp. On this return part of the journey Sidney was joined by Wotton: their relationship endured and Sidney remembered him in his will. 
His travels had allowed Sidney to see and admire the splendours of European Renaissance courts, the paintings of Titian, Tintoretto, and Veronese, and the wonders of mannerist art; he learned at first hand about different political systems and paid attention to the arts of war and horsemanship. The friendships he made were extensive and brought him into touch with rulers, scholars, diplomats, and politicians: his new friends tended to be better and more regular correspondents than he was. At the beginning of the tour Leicester had described his nephew to Walsingham as 'young and raw' (Wallace, 115); he returned a grown man, with the manner of a prince. 
The reasons for Sidney's rapid return and the nature of his position when he arrived back in England are uncertain. In April 1574 Sir Henry Sidney had reportedly offered his service to King Philip of Spain with 6000 men, pledging his son -- then in Italy -- 'as security for the fulfilment of it' (Duncan-Jones, 'Sidney: Courtier Poet', 88). Leicester, who had had a son from his liaison with Douglass Sheffield in August 1574 and may by the next year have begun an affair with Lettice Devereux, countess of Essex, found himself in a compromised position with Elizabeth: he may have found the return of his promising nephew a convenient way of distracting the queen from his own activities. Furthermore, if Leicester really thought that he might marry the queen, then in her early forties, but might fail to have children with her, then Sidney's position as a possible successor could have appeared strong. Sidney's own thoughts about his new standing are unknown, since no letters from him survive between the time of his return in June 1575 and November 1576. 
Sidney reached England on 31 May 1575, and came to court shortly afterwards. After a brief illness he set off on the queen's progress, centred on her visit to Leicester's castle of Kenilworth, beginning on 9 July. Accounts of this visit suggest that the earl's courtship of the queen lay behind some of the entertainments. Early in August, however, Sidney left the progress to accompany his father, who had been reappointed lord deputy in Ireland, to Shrewsbury. He witnessed his father's will on the 20th and rejoined the queen's party early in September, probably at Woodstock, where he may have first met the poet and courtier Edward Dyer: the two became closely associated in their literary careers, and Dyer, by some eleven years the older man, seems to have largely supplanted Languet as Sidney's adviser and close friend, much to Languet's disappointment. 
Sidney returned to London for the winter of 1575-6 and became prominent as a courtier. He assisted his aunt the countess of Warwick at the baptism of her niece Elizabeth, daughter of Lord and Lady Russell, in Westminster Abbey on 27 October, and may have begun his career as a tilter at Woodstock or in the Accession day tilt of 17 November. It was probably at this time that he was appointed royal cup-bearer: a post which his father had held, it was perhaps given to him when he came of age on 30 November 1575. Sidney's recurrent attempts to find employment, preferably involving military action, appear to have begun at this time. In the spring of 1576 there was a plan that he should join Francois Hercules, duc d'Alencon, the French king's brother and as the duc d'Anjou Queen Elizabeth's later suitor, in a revolt near the Loire, but this came to nothing. 
Instead, in July 1576 Sidney went to Ireland, probably accompanying Walter Devereux, first earl of Essex, who had recently been appointed earl marshal of Ireland for life. On 10 August he joined his father at Kilcullen outside Dublin, and stayed with him for two weeks in Dublin Castle before setting off for the west of the country to mop up the remaining followers of the sons of the earl of Clanricarde, latterly in revolt. In Galway he met the chieftain Grania, or Grace, O'Malley, described by Sir Henry as 'a most famous feminine sea-captain' (Wallace, 167). Sidney was still in Ireland when Essex died at Dublin Castle on 22 September, and he became friendly with the earl's secretary Edward Waterhouse, but by 4 November he was back in England, and reported on the situation in Ireland to the queen at Greenwich. 
Sidney spent the winter of 1576-7 at court, where he was joined by his younger brother Robert: by February 1577 it had been arranged that their sister Mary should marry Henry Herbert, second earl of Pembroke. On 16 January 1577 Sidney joined Leicester and Dyer in a meeting with John Dee, possibly to discuss exploration and imperial aspirations. Sidney, his mother, and Dyer had each invested $25 in Martin Frobisher's first voyage in 1576; for his second voyage of 1577 Sidney and Dyer put in $50 each. At other meetings about this time, before his embassy to Rudolf II, Sidney read the first three books of Livy's 'Roman History' with the Cambridge academic Gabriel Harvey. It may have been through Harvey that Edmund Spenser, who had once been his pupil, was brought to Sidney's attention. The exact nature of the relationship between the two poets and its duration are unknown, but neither Spenser nor Harvey accompanied Sidney on his European mission. Those who went included his friends Greville, Dyer, Henry Brouncker, Sir Henry Lee, and Sir Jerome Bowes. Sidney was appointed to convey the queen's condolences to two courts: to Rudolf II on the death of his father, Maximilian II, and to the counts palatine, Ludwig and Johann Casimir, on the death of their father, the elector Friedrich III. The further purpose of Sidney's mission was to investigate the possibility of promoting a protestant league with these leaders, and to gather intelligence about political and religious affairs. 
Sidney was now a considerable figure who enjoyed the added status which came from being employed on the queen's business: as an international diplomat he was to meet important and powerful figures. During his journey a tablet describing his relationship to the 'pro-rex' of Ireland, as his father was described, and to the earls of Leicester and Warwick, was hung outside buildings where he stayed. From Brussels he went on to Louvain where on 6 March 1577 he met Don John of Austria, the victor of Lepanto. A meeting with Johann Casimir took place at Heidelberg: Sidney reported on the growing differences between Casimir and his brother in a letter to Walsingham of 22 March. At Nuremberg, where he arrived on 29 March, Sidney was reunited with Languet; they dined with Philip Camerarius, and Sidney explained why there are no wolves in England, and talked about Ireland. Prague was reached on 4 April, which was Maundy Thursday, and Sidney had his first interview with the emperor on Easter Monday, finding him 'sullen of disposition, very secret and resolute' (Wallace, 177). 
The Jesuit Edmund Campion was among those Sidney came across in Prague: he had disputed before the queen at Oxford in 1566 and Sidney may have attended his lectures as an undergraduate. Sidney saw Campion in private on several occasions in Prague, and may even have heard him preach. Contemporary Catholic accounts suggest that Sidney was deeply influenced by Campion: 'he professed himself convinced, but said that it was necessary for him to hold on the course which he had hitherto followed; yet he promised never to hurt or injure any Catholic' (Duncan-Jones, 'Sidney: Courtier Poet', 125). Both Sidney and his father appear to have been generally opposed to harsh measures against Roman Catholics. In Venice he had consorted with Catholic friends, including his kinsman Richard Shelley and the devout Edward, third Lord Windsor: Sidney later engaged in court entertainments with Windsor's son Frederick. His interest in New World exploration and settlement may well reflect a desire to provide a tolerant society for recusants. Yet although Sidney appears to have been sympathetic towards and friendly with Catholics, and associated with them throughout his life, he was no closet adherent to their faith. His political affiliations, including his eventual marriage to Sir Francis Walsingham's daughter, and his later literary projects, like his translations of the 'Psalms' and of 'De la verite de la religion chrestienne' by his friend Du Plessis Mornay, point rather to an essentially protestant outlook. 
After a fortnight in Prague, Sidney and his party retraced their steps, via Nuremberg, Heidelberg, where he met Ludwig, the other palatine count, and Cologne where he said farewell to Languet. The queen had recalled him to England, but she now directed him to visit William of Orange. He missed the Dutch leader at Brussels, went on to Antwerp which he left on 27 May, and met William at the fortress-town of Geertruidenberg. The party moved to Middelburg where Sidney stood deputy to Leicester as godfather to the second daughter of William of Orange and his third wife, Charlotte de Bourbon. Earlier in the mission there had been talk that Sidney might marry a German princess, perhaps either Casimir's sister or Elizabeth von Anhalt. Now it seemed possible that he would marry Marie von Nassau, William's daughter from his first marriage. After a week at William's court, however, Sidney had left by 5 June and by the 10th he was back at court in England. Sidney's friends and supporters promoted the idea that the mission had been a great success, but in truth the arrangements for a protestant league had made scarcely any progress. 
Sidney's return from the continent was not followed by any progress about his marriage either. Furthermore the queen conspicuously failed to reward him with a knighthood or to give him a suitable post. On his return he had his portrait painted, and also became more involved with Du Plessis Mornay, who was beginning to write 'De la verite de la religion chrestienne', a work concerned with geography and politics as well as religion. In June 1578 he became godfather to Du Plessis Mornay's daughter Elisabeth. During the summer Sidney thought about joining his father in Ireland, visited his newly married sister at Wilton in late August and early September, and finally quarrelled with the eleventh earl of Ormond who was undermining Sir Henry Sidney's position with the queen. This row, which was current during September, led to Sidney's refusing to answer Ormond when he spoke to him, 'but was in dead silence of purpose', as Waterhouse described it (Wallace, 191): Sidney was treating a courtier nobler in birth than himself with open contempt. The dispute prompted Sidney to write a defence of his father's conduct, particularly over his imposition of the cess, a tax on Irish lords living within the pale. The work seems to have had some success, for on 1 November the queen and the privy council allowed that Sir Henry's imposition of the cess was legal. Philip Sidney returned to Wilton with his uncles Leicester and Warwick, and on 16 December wrote from there to the earl of Sussex, who was lord chamberlain, asking to be excused from court over the Christmas season. He did, however, exchange new-year gifts with the queen, giving her a cambric smock. 
Although various plans for further overseas travel are mentioned in Sidney's correspondence at this time, nothing came of them. The contacts he had made with Casimir and William of Orange did not result in a role as a European military leader; the protestant league did not materialize. When Frobisher returned from his second voyage in September 1577, Sidney thought of accompanying him to the New World, while in March 1578 he had an 'Indian project' in mind: he invested $67 10's'. in Frobisher's third voyage which began in May. But in the end he stayed in England spending his time at court and at Wilton, and launched his career as an imaginative writer by making a start on what became the first version of the 'Arcadia', now known as the 'Old Arcadia': as he put it, 'in these my not old years and idlest times', he 'slipped into the title of a poet' ('Miscellaneous Prose', 73). It combines poetry and prose, with verse eclogues placed at the end of each of the first four (out of five) books or acts. The poems show Sidney displaying a wide range of poetical forms, including experiments in writing English poetry in classical metres. 
In the meantime Sidney was also involved in the political events, the courtly entertainments, and the literary activities associated with the second courtship of the queen by the duc d'Anjou (formerly Alencon) (1578-82). It is almost certain that he took a leading part in the Accession day tilt in November 1577, contributing at least three poems to it. His verses provide further evidence that Sidney had now become an accomplished poet, had devised his pastoral persona of the melancholy shepherd Philisides, and had begun to use 'imprese', emblematic devices accompanied by apt mottoes, to sum up his feelings and ideas about his life. Among the personal 'imprese' and mottoes he is known to have used are 'Vix ea nostra voco' ('I scarcely call those things my own'), and 'Sic nos non nobis' ('Thus we do [or are], not for ourselves'). Then in May 1578, just after he had received the earl and countess of Pembroke at Penshurst, he wrote an entertainment, known as 'The Lady of May', for Queen Elizabeth's visit to Wanstead in Essex where Leicester received her. Among the characters who appear in the show is Rombus, perhaps played by Richard Tarlton: Sidney was his son's godfather. 
Sidney was still with the queen at the end of May 1578 when he wrote a short and bitterly aggressive letter to his father's secretary, Edmund Molyneux, accusing him of opening his letters to his father, and making an unambiguous threat that if Molyneux offended again 'I will thruste my Dagger into yow' ('Complete Works', 3.124): the secretary denied the charge. In April and May Count Johann Casimir sought support from the queen for an invasion of the Low Countries, and wanted Sidney appointed to lead the English forces; but although the queen gave him permission to go in July Leicester was opposed, and by the end of the year nothing had come of it. Abraham Fraunce may have prepared a manuscript summary of Ramist logic accompanied by a collection of 'imprese' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D.345) as a farewell gift on this occasion. 
Gabriel Harvey also refers to Sidney's imminent departure in a volume of Latin poems, usually known as 'Gratulationes Valdinenses', prompted by the queen's visit during her summer progress to Audley End, Essex, where the University of Cambridge joined her for academic disputations. The visit took place between 26 and 30 July, and by September Harvey had written, collected, and printed the Latin verses. The poems in the last of the four books are addressed to Oxford, Hatton, and Sidney. Although the ones to Sidney are extravagant in their claims of affectionate friendship and their praise for him as the perfect courtier, they are not as tactless as two pieces praising Leicester at the expense of Machiavelli (standing probably for Anjou), and urging the queen to marry her English suitor. However, on 20 September Leicester secretly married Lettice Devereux, who may have been pregnant at the time. When Sidney learned of the wedding he must have realized that his position as his uncle's heir was no longer secure. His expansive and undated letter of advice about foreign travel to his brother Robert probably belongs to this period, late in 1578: Robert Sidney set out on a continental tour in February 1579. 
For his new-year gift at the beginning of 1579, Sidney gave the queen a white sarcenet waistcoat. Johann Casimir now decided to visit England to make an appeal for aid to Elizabeth in person: among the party was Languet. Sidney and his father went to meet Casimir on the Kent coast and accompanied him to London, where he arrived at the Tower on 22 January. The visit was a social success with extravagant gifts and entertainment, but the queen would not accede to any of the prince's requests, and the party left on 14 February, in such a hurry -- 'as if they were taking leave of enemies, not of friends' (Duncan-Jones, 'Sidney: Courtier Poet', 158) -- that Languet did not have the chance to say farewell properly to Sidney and Dyer. The disappointment of this visit was compounded by the arrival in England on 5 January of Jean de Simier, Anjou's agent, whose task it was to open negotiations for his marriage to the queen. The debates at court and within the privy council over the marriage continued throughout the year: Sidney was bound, not least by family ties, to be part of the anti-marriage faction that gathered around Leicester, Walsingham, Pembroke, and Hatton, and which was opposed by a smaller group, led by Burghley and Sussex, which, if it did not fully support the marriage, did not wish to rule it out immediately. In July Simier revealed Leicester's secret marriage to Elizabeth (who was furious), and the earl's faction received another blow when Anjou himself arrived in England on 17 August. 
Those opposed to the marriage responded with the publication in 1579 of John Stubbe's book 'The Discoverie of a Gaping Gulfe' in print, and the circulation in manuscript of Sidney's 'A Letter to Queen Elizabeth Touching her Marriage with Monsieur'. Sidney's widely circulated tract, arguing against change to the queen's state, since it made her popular and had brought safety to the country, was probably commissioned at a meeting at which Leicester was present, held at Baynard's Castle, the earl of Pembroke's London house, shortly after Anjou's arrival in mid-August. Whereas Stubbe and his publisher William Page were punished with the loss of their right hands on 3 November, it seems that Elizabeth did not respond badly to Sidney's unsolicited advice. She did, however, reprove him for his quarrel on the tennis court with the earl of Oxford which had taken place by 28 August, when Sidney referred to it in a letter to Hatton. 
The chief source for this incident is Greville's 'A Dedication', in which -- surprisingly -- he makes no connection between the quarrel and the Anjou marriage which Oxford, a Catholic sympathizer, seems to have supported. The quarrel probably took place on the tennis court at Greenwich Palace where Sidney was playing. Upon Oxford's demanding the use of the court, Sidney replied that if he had asked politely he would have given it to him. Oxford responded by calling Sidney 'by the name of puppy'. The row attracted members of the French embassy, and Sidney challenged Oxford to repeat the insult in front of them, which he did, whereupon Sidney 'gave my lord a lie impossible... in respect all the world knows puppies are gotten by dogs and children by men'. He and his companions then left the court, defeated. Oxford sent Sidney a challenge a couple of days later, perhaps through Ralegh, but the queen now reminded Sidney of his inferior position to Oxford and of the monarch's need to maintain differences of rank. According to Greville, Sidney's response was to point out that 'the difference of degrees between free men could not challenge any other homage than precedency' ('Prose Works', 39). 
Although he was not punished either for 'A Letter' or for his quarrel with Oxford, Sidney seems now to have chosen to withdraw from public and political life and to pursue his writing career: further plans to join William of Orange and to see Languet again came to nothing. The bulk of the 'Old Arcadia', begun in 1578 after his return from his imperial mission, was probably composed between the autumn of 1579 and the spring of 1581 at the latest: Sidney then revised the work several times during 1581-2. He dedicated it to his sister and said that it was mostly written in her presence, and so presumably at Wilton. A glimpse of Sidney's literary activities at this time is provided by an exchange of letters between Gabriel Harvey and Edmund Spenser which was published in August or September 1580. In them Harvey seeks to associate himself with Sidney and Dyer, stressing their common interest in writing English verse in classical metres: his reference to an academy or learned society (the 'Areopagus') where this practice is discussed is probably a joke. Harvey linked Sidney and Dyer with the diplomat and neo-Latin poet Daniel Rogers, and it was mainly through Rogers and the English ambassador Thomas Randolph that Sidney and his circle became involved with the Scottish poet and historian George Buchanan, whose literary and political interests they shared. Buchanan's enthusiasm for 'divine' poetry, especially the translation of the 'Psalms' into Latin verse, his writings on political theory, and above all his close involvement with James VI and with developments at the Scottish court, all proved deeply sympathetic to Sidney and his friends: their concern with Scottish affairs, especially in regard to the succession to the English throne, continued after Buchanan's death in 1582. 
Sidney was at court for the Accession day tilt of 1579, and gave the queen a crystal cup with a cover as his new-year gift in 1580. But by 22 May he was back at Wilton, where he wrote a long letter of advice, in effect a reading list, to Edward Denny, a courtier and soldier who was about to go to Ireland with Lord Grey, the newly appointed lord deputy (a post Sidney himself hankered after), and also with Spenser. On 8 April Sidney's sister gave birth to a son, William Herbert, and Sidney stood deputy to Leicester as godfather at the baptism at Wilton in May. When he wrote again at length to his brother Robert on 18 October about the latter's education, and promising to send him 'My toyfull booke', almost certainly the 'Arcadia', by the following February, he was at Leicester House ('Complete Works', 3.132). 
Sidney probably spent most of the winter and spring of 1580-81 at court, signalling his submission to the queen with a new-year gift to her of a jewel in the form of a diamond-studded gold whip. In April 1581 the countess of Leicester gave birth to a son, Robert, Baron Denbigh (died 19 July 1584), who now displaced Sidney as the earl's heir: Camden reports that Sidney marked the birth by appearing at the next tilt with the crossed-through motto 'Speravi' ('I hoped'), and he was largely written out of the new will which Leicester drew up in January 1582. January 1581 saw the arrival at court of Sidney's aunt the countess of Huntingdon, along with Penelope Devereux ['see 'Rich, Penelope] (then about eighteen) and her sister Dorothy. The countess had been largely responsible for their upbringing at Ashby-de-la-Zouch after the death of their father, the earl of Essex, in Ireland in 1576. It is just possible that Sidney may have met Penelope when she was a very small child, before her arrival at court: her father had wished just four days before his death that Sidney should marry her. But at the end of February the second Lord Rich died, and his son Robert succeeded to the title and to considerable wealth. In under a fortnight he was spoken of as a suitable match for her, and they were probably married on 1 November. 
While this business was going on Sidney was particularly busy with courtly and political events; he was also finishing and revising the 'Old Arcadia'. He sat as a member for Shrewsbury in the 1581 session of the parliament of 1572: there is no evidence that he ever spoke in the House of Commons, but on 25 January he sat on a committee for the subsidy and on 1 February on one dealing with slanderous speeches and seditious practices against the queen. On 22 January he took part with Philip Howard, the future earl of Arundel, and Frederick, Lord Windsor, in a court entertainment, the 'Callophisus Challenge': its participants sought the queen's favour, and Sidney may have written his own speech as the Blue Knight. A second tournament, known as the 'Four Foster Children of Desire' or the 'Fortress of Perfect Beauty', in which Sidney appeared again with Arundel, Windsor, and Greville, was conceived on a far grander scale. It took place in a specially erected banqueting house in Whitehall over two days, 15-16 May, in front of the French ambassadors. Sidney probably helped devise the entertainment, almost certainly contributing two sonnets, and may have been responsible for some of the speeches in it, but even with the assistance of a contemporary account by one Henry Goldwell, published in 1581 and partly reprinted in Holinshed's 'Chronicles', its narrative is hard to follow. The tilting, tourney, and barriers seem to have been designed to show that the Fortress of Perfect Beauty, presumably representing the queen, could not be taken. Whatever the entertainment signified, negotiations during the summer for the royal marriage gave way to no more than an Anglo-French treaty. 
That summer also saw the distribution on 27 June of Campion's 'Decem rationes' in the university church at Oxford, timed to coincide with Leicester's visit as chancellor. Sidney may have been with the earl on this occasion, and may have attended his former friend's interrogation at York House on 26 July. He was also involved with Dom Antonio, the Portuguese pretender, who sought the queen's help in winning his kingdom and wanted to enlist Sidney in any expedition. When the pretender left Sidney accompanied him to Dover, where by the end of September he had become weary with waiting for him to go. About then he probably heard of the death of Languet (on 30 September) and of Penelope Devereux's marriage. Once more back in London in October, he wrote earnestly to Sir Christopher Hatton on 14 November in connection with an unnamed office, and three days later may have taken part in the Accession day tilt in front of Anjou, who had returned for a private visit. A month later he was at Wilton with his sister, who had given birth to a girl, Katherine, on 15 October. In December he supported Tobie Matthew who was lobbying to become dean of Durham. At the end of the year he found himself in the awkward position, in view of his tolerant religious principles, of being invited to profit from the confiscated goods of Roman Catholics. 
Sidney was absent from court at new year 1582 (though he gave the queen a diamond-studded jewel in the form of a castle, intended to hold flowers), and so he missed the elaborate and magnificent tilt that was staged for Anjou. But he accompanied the latter to Dover later in January and was one of the party, including Leicester, that went on to Antwerp. It was against this background of Penelope Devereux's marriage to Lord Rich and Sidney's own involvement at court during 1581 that 'Astrophil and Stella' grew. The sequence of 108 sonnets, interspersed with eleven songs, tells of the unhappy and unresolved love of Astrophil, the star-lover, for the married Stella, the star. There can be no doubt that Penelope's marriage to Lord Rich provided the inspirational spur for the poem. The sequence invites the reader to identify Astrophil, whose father is governor of Ireland, with Sidney himself, and Stella, who 'Hath no misfortune, but that Rich she is' (sonnet 37), with Penelope, but it does not form a simple autobiography and carefully evades telling a straightforward personal story or providing a plain historical narrative. It is therefore impossible to tell exactly how important Penelope Devereux was in Sidney's life, as opposed to her part in his poetry. 
In the spring of 1582 Sidney retired again from court and spent some time in Hereford and the Welsh marches with his father, probably with a view to eventually succeeding him as lord president. It seems likely that he composed a version of most of his sonnet sequence then, and 'A Defence of Poetry' may belong to the same period: however, the composition of both works may well have extended into 1583. Absence from court may not only have assisted literary composition, it also saved money, and the Sidney fortunes were now approaching a crisis. The family were not great landowners and Sir Henry's service in Ireland and Wales was expensive; the problem was compounded by his and his wife's keeping separate establishments, by his daughter Mary's $3000 dowry, by their eldest son's extravagance, and by the latter's failure to receive a significant official position. 
As early as 1564 Philip Sidney received the income of a church benefice in Wales; to this he added a Welsh prebend in the next year, and more may have followed. Later he derived some money from his offices as royal cup-bearer and as steward to the bishop of Winchester (a position granted in 1580), and from work in the ordnance office. Additional funds seem to have come from fines raised on recusants. But he continually had to borrow money against his uncle's inheritance, both to finance his life and to invest in speculative expeditions. In keeping with his status he spent lavishly during his continental tour of 1572-5, and in January 1575 Languet agreed to make a gift or loan to him of all his savings. The mission to the emperor in the spring of 1577 cost the Sidneys a further $840. Sidney's patronage, including his literary patronage, was also considerable. 
The queen's unwillingness to give Sidney any important office sprang from a variety of reasons: he was irascible, ambitious, proud, and perhaps unreliable; his religious faith may not have been certain; he behaved and was received as a powerful figure abroad; it may therefore have seemed best to keep his power base at home as narrow as possible. When he was finally knighted on 13 January 1583, it was because Johann Casimir had named him as his proxy for his own installation as a knight of the Garter. The rumour in March that Sidney was to be made captain of the Isle of Wight proved false. Later in the spring the Polish prince Olbracht Laski came to England, and with Sidney visited John Dee on 15 June. Another visitor, Henri of Navarre's agent, Jacques Segur-Pardailhan, went to Wilton in July with Sir Philip who introduced him to Archibald Douglas, a further sign of Sidney's developing concern with Scottish affairs. About this time he also began to lay down plans for investing in North American discoveries. Perhaps the most interesting of Sidney's new friends during this period was the philosopher Giordano Bruno, who stayed in England from the spring of 1583 until nearly the end of 1585: he spent three months at Oxford, but lived most of the time in the London house of the French ambassador, Michel Castelnau de Mauvissiere. It is likely that Sidney was present at the Ash Wednesday meal in Greville's house on 15 February 1584 which forms the setting for Bruno's 'La cena delle ceneri' (1584). 
Deprived of office and advancement, Sidney's best hope lay in making a wealthy marriage. He had been proposed as the husband for several young women: in 1573 while he was on his European tour, it was planned that he should marry one of the daughters of Henry, Lord Berkeley, perhaps to end disputes between Leicester and the Berkeleys; according to Leicester's will of 1582, there was a similar possibility that he might marry Penelope Devereux's sister Dorothy. These and other marital schemes came to nothing, and it may have seemed that like his closest friends, Dyer, Greville, and Languet, he would die unmarried. Nevertheless, by 19 March 1583 a match between Sidney and Frances Walsingham (then fifteen) had been formalized, to the annoyance of the queen, who had not been told about it. The marriage itself took place on 21 September, and as part of its settlement Walsingham agreed to underwrite up to $1500 of Sidney's debts. Marriage brought Sidney new homes at Barn Elms in Surrey and Walsingham House in Seething Lane, London, but the relationship between him and his young wife seems to have been detached: his identification with his father-in-law's political outlook appears, however, to have been quite strong. 
The year following Sidney's marriage was perhaps the most intense and complicated of his life: it was also the year in which he probably completed a radical revision of the 'Old Arcadia', transforming it into the work now known as the 'New Arcadia'. Conceived as a larger, darker, more complex and epic romance than the 'Old Arcadia', it runs to twice the length of the original version. However, the revision ends in mid-sentence in the third book, and it is possible that Sidney broke off partly because he at last was to be employed by the queen. On 10 June 1584 Anjou died; this was followed on 10 July by the assassination of William of Orange. These deaths destabilized the Low Countries. 
Elizabeth now chose Sidney to lead a diplomatic mission to convey her condolences to Anjou's mother, Catherine de' Medici, and to enlist French support against Spain in the Low Countries. The mission set out from London on 10 July but abandoned its journey at Gravesend on receiving news that Henri III had broken up his court, leaving Paris largely deserted. There is some evidence that Sidney may have tried to take out his frustration over the failed mission on the English ambassador to France, Sir Edward Stafford. On 21 July he wrote to Stafford encouraging him 'to begyn betymes to demand something of her Majesti as might be found fitt for yow', implying that Stafford had already incurred the queen's displeasure. In the same letter Sidney mentions that he and others are 'haulf perswaded... very eagerli' to join Sir Humphrey Gilbert's expedition to Newfoundland which established the first English colony on the American mainland ('Complete Works', 3.145). In the summer of 1582 Sidney had bought the right to some 3 million acres which he hoped Gilbert would discover in America: Sir Thomas Gerrard and Sir George Peckham, who were both Catholics, received similar grants, and it seems that part of the plan was to establish a colony where Catholics could live freely. A year later, in July 1583, Sidney granted part of his own lands to Peckham to equip a ship for the next expedition. 
Two days before Sidney wrote to Stafford, Leicester's infant son and heir Robert, Baron Denbigh, died at Wanstead. This gave Sidney hopes of restoring his future fortunes. Almost at once his loyalties towards Leicester were tested by the publication in September of the brilliant attack on his uncle known as 'Leicester's Commonwealth'. In keeping with his new position as his heir, Sidney's 'Defence of the Earl of Leicester' is much concerned with the question of the gentility of the Dudley family, in this perhaps reflecting his own earlier quarrels with the earl of Oxford, whose friend Charles Arundell was thought to be the leader of the Catholic exiles held responsible for 'Leicester's Commonwealth'. It is interesting that on 27 August 1584 the Catholic Henry Howard, later earl of Northampton, wrote to Sidney from prison, rehearsing his troubles and asking Sidney to renew his assured friendship on his behalf. Howard was closely associated with the circle responsible for 'Leicester's Commonwealth', but unfortunately no evidence survives for Sidney's response to his appeal. 
Sidney offered to fight his uncle's libeller 'in any place of Europe' ('Miscellaneous Prose', 140). However, his longing to leave England having been thwarted by the failure of his French mission, as well as by his not joining Gilbert's expedition, Sidney instead found himself increasingly drawn to domestic affairs. In the first part of 1583 he had begun agitating for a post in the ordnance office: in the winter of 1582-3 his uncle the earl of Warwick, who was master of the office, had petitioned the queen that Sidney should join him there. He was not granted the post until July 1585, but during the summer of 1584 he was engaged in its business, in particular in strengthening Dover harbour. 
Elected a knight of the shire for Kent in the parliament that assembled in November 1584, during the following winter and spring Sidney sat on several Commons committees, one of them concerned with Ralegh's letters patent for exploration and another with legislation against Jesuits and seminary priests. At court he took part in the Accession day tilt and on 6 December was one of ten married men who fought with swords at Westminster against ten bachelors. 
It is particularly hard to judge Sidney's state of mind during 1584-5. Early in January 1585 he must have learned that his wife was pregnant. In the following summer he was much occupied as an intermediary between three banished Scottish noblemen, the earls of Mar, Angus, and Glamis, James VI's ambassador the master of Gray, and Queen Elizabeth. This involvement in Scottish affairs led James to develop a great admiration for Sidney, which the latter returned. At some point in 1585 or 1586 Sidney commissioned an opinion from the civilian John Hammond concerning the legitimacy of the imprisonment and execution of Mary, queen of Scots. Largely absent from the court during the later part of the summer, Sidney soon found himself at the centre of affairs again, when Ralph Lane wrote to him in August, inviting him to become governor or general of the English colonists in Virginia: Sidney might have gone on the expedition that had left for America in the previous spring, but now Lane suggested that the way to diminish Spanish power was to attack their mines in the New World. 
Sidney did not pursue this offer, but it was rapidly followed by another opportunity. In the first week of September 1585 he and Greville hurriedly went to Plymouth to join Sir Francis Drake's voyage to the West Indies. According to Greville, Sidney's excuse was that he wanted to see Dom Antonio again. Sidney may secretly have hoped to share the leadership with Drake of this expedition, whose purpose seems to have been to intensify the war against Spain: but his plans were thwarted, not least because Drake was unwilling to be involved covertly and against the queen's wishes with Sidney, who was soon summoned back to court. The latter's motives in this episode are not clear, but they may have been connected to the events in the Low Countries. By September 1586 it had been agreed that Leicester would lead English forces there: their costs were to be paid by the Dutch and three ports were to be placed under English rule as security for the payment. The queen was initially unwilling to appoint Sidney to be governor of Flushing, one of these cautionary towns, and Drake's expedition may have looked especially appealing while he waited for the office. On his return to court from Plymouth, however, the queen's anger at his suddenly seeking to leave the country was mitigated by her after all appointing him to the governorship. 
Sidney's daughter Elizabeth was born in October 1586 and baptized on 20 November at St Olave, Hart Street: the queen herself was present as godmother. Sidney missed the baptism, for he had been granted letters patent for his appointment on 9 November; the next day he was at Gravesend, writing to the queen, sending her 'such a cypher as little leysure coold afoord me' ('Complete Works', 3.147) -- his father had been Edward VI's chief cipherer. Before then Sidney had had to gather men, money, horses, and arms to equip his own entourage, which included his brother Robert; Greville was not allowed to go to the Low Countries and the two schoolfriends never met again. The party arrived at Rammekens, 4 miles from Flushing, on 19 November. Sidney's melancholy mood was immediately apparent, and it became clear, as Greville reported, that almost from the start his friend had few illusions about the chances of an English success in the war against the Spanish. Furthermore, again according to Greville, Leicester had a low opinion of his nephew's capabilities, 'despising his youth for a counsellor, but withal bearing a hand upon him as a forward young man' ('Prose Works', 18). 
Sidney rented a house in Flushing from Jacques Gelee, and found the English troops already in the town to be ill, hungry, and in poor spirits. On 22 November he was sworn as governor, and set out to deal with his men's problems. He hoped that things would be much improved by Leicester's arrival. On 10 December the earl was welcomed there, along with William of Orange's young son Prince Maurice, and Sidney then accompanied his uncle on his progress around the country. At Leiden on 9 January 1586 Sidney was nominated as one of Leicester's deputies in negotiations with the states general, and became involved in the decision taken on the 24th (to the queen's fury) that the earl should take the title of governor-general. Partly as a reward for his support, Sidney was made the colonel of a Zeeland regiment, and it was also suggested that he might replace Prince Maurice as governor of the isles. None of this pleased the queen, who still suspected Sidney of overweening ambition. In fact Sidney wanted to extend the role of the English forces from a defensive to an offensive one, and at the beginning of February he began a plan to take Steenbergen. The English attempt on the town at the end of the month failed, and Sidney was left in a state of troubled depression: he ruled out the possibility that his wife might come and stay in a house in Bergen op Zoom, and when his father died on 5 May the queen refused to grant him leave to return home. 
Instead Frances Sidney came to join her husband late in June, staying with William of Orange's widow, Louise de Coligny, in Flushing. At the same time Sidney was engaged with his brother and Count Hohenlohe in attacking Spanish troops around Breda, and with Prince Maurice in an assault on the town of Axel, which was taken on 7 July. A week later Sidney was nearly captured by the Spanish in a trap set for him at Gravelines, where about forty of his troops were killed. On 9 August his mother died, and his sister was said to be unwell. His troops in Flushing were in a bad way and unpaid; he began to criticize his uncle's policies and behaviour, while quarrels broke out among the English and Dutch allies. 
At the beginning of September Sidney was present at the successful siege of the town of Doesburg, and by the middle of the month he was with his uncle and brother at Deventer. From there on 14 September Leicester and Sidney went towards Zutphen, fearing that the duke of Parma and the whole Spanish army were on their way there. The plan was for the English commanders, Sir John Norris and Sir William Stanley, to intercept a supply convoy; Sidney, who had left his regiment in Deventer, was to fight as an independent soldier. On the morning of 22 September in thick mist the English attacked enemy forces which turned out to be greater than expected. Sidney had one horse killed under him, and while rescuing Peregrine Bertie, Lord Willoughby, was hit by a musket shot just above the knee of his left leg: he was not wearing thigh armour. The skirmish failed to stop the Spanish relief of Zutphen. 
Leicester was moved by the courage with which his nephew endured his wound, and had him taken in his own barge down the River Issel to Arnhem. There he lay for twenty-five days in the house of Mlle Gruithuissens. His shattered leg appeared to be healing, and by 2 October Leicester reported to Walsingham that the worst was over, that Sidney was eating and sleeping well. But soon after a visit by Leicester on the 7th, Sidney's health began to decline dramatically. With his shoulder bones rubbed raw through lying down for so long, enduring more treatment from his doctors, Sidney realized that his leg had developed gangrene: the bullet lay too deep to be extracted and amputation was apparently not considered. He had written his will on 30 September. On 15 October his uncle paid him a final visit. During the evening of 16 October he wrote a desperate letter to Jan Wier, physician to the duke of Cleves, begging him to come. He died between 2 and 3 p.m. on the 17th, having dictated a codicil to his will. 
Sidney's body was taken from Arnhem to Flushing on 23 October and on 5 November was brought back to England, where it lay in the Minories while Walsingham tried to sort out his son-in-law's financial problems, a task that is said to have cost him some $6000: at the end of the year his daughter Frances Sidney miscarried. Sidney's funeral did not take place until 16 February 1587. Some 700 mourners processed from the Minories to St Paul's Cathedral where he was buried. His father-in-law was later buried beside him, but no permanent memorial was ever erected to Sidney; Greville's scheme of 1615 for a double tomb for himself and Sidney was not carried out. 
Sidney's death was mourned by many of the poets of the time, among them Breton, Constable, Daniel, Drayton, Gorges, Jonson, Ralegh, and Spenser. The memorial volumes published at the time of his death included ones by Churchyard, Day, and Whetstone, and collections of Latin verse from the English universities, as well as one from Leiden by Georgius Benedicti. The first poem in the Cambridge collection of 'Lachrymae', edited by Alexander Neville, was by James VI; the first elegy was by Gabriel Harvey. The Oxford volume, 'Exequiae', was edited by William Gager; a volume from New College was edited by John Lloyd. Drawings of Sidney's funeral procession made by Sidney's servant the musician and herald Thomas Lant, were engraved by Theodore de Bry to form a panorama over 35 feet in length. 
In his will Sidney divided most of his estate between his wife and his brother Robert. Among many bequests to his family, relations, friends, and servants, he left his books to Dyer and Greville and his best sword to Robert Devereux, earl of Essex, who later married his widow. The will displays Sidney's characteristic generosity, but his estate was not great enough to fulfil his bequests: legal and financial arguments over his will continued for some time. 
Sidney's extensive literary patronage led him to receive the dedications of many printed books and several manuscripts from English and continental writers. Notable among them were Spenser's 'The Shepheardes Calender' (1578); Stephen Gosson's 'The Schoole of Abuse' (1579), to which Sidney supposedly replied in 'A Defence of Poetry'; Richard Hakluyt's first book, 'Divers Voyages' (1582), with a polar map of North America also dedicated to Sidney by Michael Lok; Bruno's two works 'De gl'heroici furori' (1584) and 'Spaccio de la bestia trionfante' (1585); Alberico Gentili's 'De legationibus' (1585); the elder Janus Dousa's 'Odarum Britannicarum liber I' (Leiden, 1586); and Justus Lipsius's 'De recta pronuntatione Latinae linguae dialogus' (Antwerp, 1586). He also received manuscript dedications from Abraham Fraunce, Henry Finch, and William Temple. Latin poems were addressed to him by Daniel Rogers and an important English one was intended for him by Geoffrey Whitney, but presented instead to Dyer. 
Sidney had a number of other servants and employees. The only secretary he is known certainly to have employed was Stephen Le Sieur, but the scribe of the Clifford manuscript of the 'Old Arcadia' (now in the Folger Shakespeare Library) can be identified as Richard Robinson, who recorded that Sidney and his father were 'many tymes benevolent unto my pore study' (BL, Royal MS 18 A.lxvi, fol. 5'v'). The printer John Wolfe called himself Sidney's servant on the title-page of Jacobus Acontius's 'Una essortatione al timor di Dio' (1579?). In addition to the lost portraits by Veronese and Abondio, likenesses of Sidney were commissioned in the summer of 1577 after his mission to Rudolph II and in 1583 or 1584, perhaps in connection with his marriage. These portrait types have been attributed respectively to Cornelis Ketel and John de Critz. It seems that Nicholas Hilliard too painted a full-length miniature of him; in his 'The Arte of Limning' Hilliard reports a conversation with Sidney concerning the problems of proportion in full-length miniatures. That the young composer Daniel Bachelar accompanied him to the Low Countries as a servant suggests the importance of music and song to Sidney. 
With the possible exception of the two sonnets he may have contributed to Goldwell's account of the 'Fortress of Perfect Beauty' entertainment of 1581, Sidney probably never saw any of his writings in print. During his lifetime they circulated, if at all, in manuscript: only one of his poems survives in his own autograph. His preference for publication in manuscript was common at the time among writers who were not professional authors. When in the dedication to his sister he describes the 'Old Arcadia' as 'but a trifle, and that triflingly handled' (Sidney, 'Old Arcadia', 3), or when he makes Astrophil lament that 'My youth doth waste, my knowledge brings forth toyes' (sonnet 18), he is striking a characteristically Renaissance pose of studied negligence. In fact the care with which he revised and rewrote some of his works, most notably the 'Arcadia', shows his deep concern for his art. Sidney does not seem to have written to gain patronage or to win general applause, but rather to entertain his friends, family, and the court; to address and influence specific political issues; and to explore and perhaps relieve his own feelings of frustration in love and worldly affairs. 
Sidney's most widely copied work was 'A Letter to Queen Elizabeth', but he allowed multiple copies of the 'Old Arcadia' to be made, and some of the poems incorporated in it and others in 'Certain Sonnets' were also allowed to circulate: the few surviving manuscripts of 'Astrophil and Stella' and 'A Defence of Poetry' suggest that he kept those works to a very small circle. Those with access to his manuscript writings tended to be his family (the countess of Pembroke), friends at court (Sir Henry Lee), poets (Abraham Fraunce and Samuel Daniel), and especially school and university friends (Arthur Ottley, Humfrey Coningsby) and East Anglian music lovers: an unusually large number of these appear to have been recusants (Edward Bannister, the Paston and Cornwallis families, Sir Edmund Huddleston). The most enthusiastic of the later admirers of his work in manuscript was Sir John Harington. 
The business of transferring Sidney's works to print had begun by November 1586, when Greville reported to Walsingham that an edition of the 'Old Arcadia' was threatened. This was stopped, but the attempt to halt the publication of 'A Woorke Concerning the Trewnesse of the Christian Religion', Arthur Golding's translation of Du Plessis Mornay, failed: it was published in 1587 with the incorrect claim that Sidney was its joint author. Sidney had produced a translation of Mornay, probably late in his life, and Greville wished to include it in a collected volume of his friend's religious writings, along with his version of Du Bartas's 'Semaine' and of the forty or so psalms that he translated into various metres, also probably in his last years. The volume never appeared. Instead Greville, with the help of Matthew Gwinne and John Florio, prepared an edition of the 'New Arcadia' which was published in the spring of 1590. 
This was followed a year later by two editions of 'Astrophil and Stella', both published by Thomas Newman. The first was apparently unauthorized and was suppressed by the Stationers' Company with the assistance of Lord Burghley: in addition to a text of the sequence which differs from most others, it contained a dedication from the publisher to Francis Flower, a brilliant epistle by Thomas Nashe, a series of sonnets by Samuel Daniel, and seven further poems, two of them by Thomas Campion and Greville. All these additional elements were omitted from the second quarto of 1591 which provided a different text of Sidney's sequence up to sonnet 95, but the extra poems were included in a third printing of about 1597-8. 
Greville's edition of the incomplete 'New Arcadia' was followed in 1593 by one for which the countess of Pembroke was responsible, assisted by her husband's secretary Hugh Sanford and perhaps by Samuel Daniel. This omitted the chapter headings written for 1590, revised its text, and completed it by appending the last three books of the 'Old Arcadia': a complete edition of Sidney's works was promised. In 1595 two editions of 'A Defence of Poetry' were published: one, issued by William Ponsonby who had published the 'Arcadia' editions of 1590 and 1593, was titled 'The Defence of Poesie'; the other, issued by Henry Olney, was called 'An Apologie for Poetrie'. It was Ponsonby's version that was reprinted by the countess in her 1598 edition of her brother's works: the latter, also published by Ponsonby, provided a definitive text of his works and established Sidney's reputation as a secular, erotic, and imaginative writer. The volume opened with the hybrid version of the 'Arcadia', followed by the hitherto unprinted collection of 'Certain Sonnets', which Sidney had probably written between 1577 and 1581, 'A Defence of Poetry', and 'Astrophil and Stella' (which included sonnet 37, playing on Lord Rich's name, for the first time); the volume closed with the untitled entertainment known as 'The Lady of May'. The 1598 volume, pirated in Edinburgh in 1599, became the standard edition of Sidney's works, and was reprinted in 1605 and 1613 (with a new poem) and frequently thereafter. 
Although he valued some earlier vernacular literature, especially Chaucer's 'Troilus and Criseyde' and the ballad of 'Percy and Douglas', Sidney's particular preoccupation was to modernize writing in English, seeking to do this by imitating and adapting classical and contemporary European literature. In his poetry he was especially concerned with experimenting with different metres and verse forms. His interest in developing English took him on a different course from Spenser's exploration of an antique literary language, but he is constantly aware of the limitations of words themselves. Joseph Hall singled Sidney out for praise because of his introduction into English poetic practice of the French fondness for compound adjectives. In both its versions the 'Arcadia' represents an extraordinary development of the handling of erotic and epic themes in romance, showing in their accounts of the relations between the sexes a particular engagement with women's experience of love and courtship, and with their potential for individual tragedy. The romances also share a practical and theoretical concern with political thought and the nature of government, and especially with the relationship between liberty and monarchy. 
The sonnet craze of the 1590s was largely begun by the appearance in print in 1591 of 'Astrophil and Stella', the first such sequence to tell a story. Sidney's concern in his imaginative writings is centred on the experience of love, on the telling of stories, and on their endings. All his works display a consummate ability to control and organize his material, while maintaining a playful and usually good-tempered authorial voice. That voice, however, is never entirely free of a degree of melancholy and of a strong sense of frustration, which can rapidly change to anger and the threat of violence. The cult of the melancholy poet and lover which is so prominent in late Elizabethan and Jacobean literature owes much to Sidney's influence. 
It was not until 1906-7, when Bertram Dobell obtained three manuscripts of the 'Old Arcadia', that Sidney's original work was discovered: it was printed in full for the first time by Albert Feuillerat in 1926. The hybrid 'Arcadia', in which the ending bore little relation to the beginning, was the one known to generations of readers: the work was published with supplements and passages designed to bridge the gap between the two versions by William Alexander (1613), Richard Beling (1624), James Johnstoun (1638), and Anna Weamys (1651). It was immensely influential: the tragic story of Argalus and Parthenia was widely admired; Shakespeare took the Gloucester sub-plot in 'King Lear' from it; the author of 'Eikon basilike' (1648) accused Charles I of using Pamela's prayer when he was imprisoned, a charge taken up by Milton in 'Eikonoklastes' (1649). The 'Arcadia' was one of the first English vernacular works to achieve a European readership, with translations into French (1624-5), German (1629), Dutch (1639), and Italian (1659). The last folio edition of Sidney's works, and the first to be illustrated, was printed in 1724 by Samuel Richardson who took the name of the heroine of his novel 'Pamela' from one of the princesses in the romance. Sidney's reputation began to decline later in the eighteenth century, however, and his work was unfavourably criticized by Horace Walpole, William Hazlitt, and T. S. Eliot, though it was defended by Charles Lamb and Virginia Woolf. 
Sidney's translation of the 'Psalms', which did not reach print until 1828, was admired by John Ruskin, who produced a selected edition with commentary in 1877. Many of Languet's letters to Sidney were published at Frankfurt in 1633, reprinted at Leiden in 1646, and edited by David Dalrymple, Lord Hailes, at Edinburgh in 1776: some of these were printed in translation with Sidney's replies by Steuart A. Pears in 1845. Sidney's letters were collected in Albert Feuillerat's edition of his writings (1912-26), and can be supplemented by continental correspondence published in J. M. Osborn's 'Young Philip Sidney' (1972). In addition to the lost translations of Du Bartas and Du Plessis Mornay, Sidney's version of the first two books of Aristotle's 'Rhetoric' and his epistle to the unidentified Belerius remain undiscovered. 
As well as being extremely clever, with a well-developed sense of humour, Sidney wrote fluently and often with a very light touch. Bookish, arrogant, prickly, and often willing to take offence when none was intended, he struck some of his contemporaries as solemn, aloof, and over-serious: his health was not robust. His evident preference for male companions and friendship makes his sexual inclinations as uncertain as his religious views. He acquired his image as the perfect Renaissance courtier, simultaneously a poet, a lover, and a heroic soldier, during his lifetime, and embodied it in his own writings through the use of his personae Philisides and Astrophil. It was enshrined during and after his death in early biographical accounts, such as the one attributed to George Gifford, in which on his deathbed Sidney is reported to have said 'There came to my remembrance a vanity wherein I had taken delight, whereof I had not rid myself. It was my Lady Rich' ('Miscellaneous Prose', 169). Another early life, 'Nobilis', was written by his sister's physician, Thomas Moffet, as an exemplary model for the young William Herbert. It was Fulke Greville who promoted the myths that his friend had dispensed with thigh armour because the marshal of the camp, Sir William Pelham, had done so, and that as he was being carried from the field at Zutphen he gave the contents of his bottle to a dying soldier with the words 'Thy necessity is yet greater than mine' ('Prose Works', 77). This was the version of Sidney enshrined in P. B. Shelley's 'Adonais'. 
The recovery and re-editing of Sidney's writings during the twentieth century have led him to be seen as among the most influential authors of the Elizabethan age. It can be claimed that he was the most important English writer since Geoffrey Chaucer, whose 'Troilus and Criseyde' was one of his favourite works. Not only did he largely initiate the revival of the sonnet, his 'Arcadia' popularized and domesticated chivalric romance for aristocratic and low-born audiences to such an extent that some readers found it hard to separate the world of his fiction from real life, and 'A Defence of Poetry' supplied readers with one of the first formal pieces of vernacular literary criticism. His interest in political ideas meant that his work continued to be read well into the seventeenth century, and he has been seen as an important influence on radical and republican thought. 


@@@@@


doc= 25523


Sidney, Philip, third earl of Leicester (1619-1698), parliamentarian army officer and politician, was born at Baynard's Castle, London, on 10 January 1619, the eldest son of Robert Sidney, second earl of Leicester (1595-1677), and his wife, Dorothy ('bap'. 1598, died 1659), eldest daughter of Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland. Philip's younger brothers included the republican theorist Algernon Sidney (1623-1683) and the whig politician Henry Sidney, earl of Romney. His sister Dorothy (1617-1691) became countess of Sunderland ['see 'Spencer, Dorothy]. A group portrait of Philip and his brothers Algernon and Robert is at Penshurst Place, Kent. From 1626, when his father succeeded as earl of Leicester, until his own accession to the title in 1677, Philip bore the courtesy title Viscount Lisle. 
Lisle matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 26 July 1634. He accompanied his father on his embassy to Denmark in 1632, and on his embassy to France in 1636. By then the earl's preference for his second son over his heir was already apparent: Algernon was more often in Paris with his father, while Philip was generally left to languish in a French country town. According to Algernon, the earl held 'a sinister opinion' of Philip from when he was a boy, and in later years vainly demanded that his heir 'should leave the lewd, infamous and Atheisticall life that he led' (Scott, 'English Republic', 60). 
Lisle returned to England to serve in the second bishops' war, where he commanded the cuirassiers who formed the bodyguard of his uncle Algernon Percy, tenth earl of Northumberland. In the Short Parliament of April 1640, and in the Long Parliament, Lisle represented the borough of Yarmouth in the Isle of Wight, doubtless owing his election to the patronage of his uncle Northumberland, the lord high admiral. 
When the Irish uprising broke out Lisle was sent to Ireland by his father, the lord deputy, in command of a regiment of 600 horse, which landed at Dublin in April 1642. He relieved Geashill Castle in King's county, commanded a plundering expedition into the Irish quarters which advanced as far as Monaghan, and performed other exploits. Lisle held the rank of lieutenant-general of the horse under the earl of Ormond, and the parliamentarian sympathizers in the Irish government would gladly have seen him commander-in-chief in Ormond's place. His support of the parliamentary commissioners Reynolds and Goodwin in their intrigues against Ormond greatly hindered the public service, and Ormond was successful in excluding him from the Irish council in early 1643. Ormond's chaplain, Creichton, charged Lisle with misconduct at the battle of Ross (18 March 1643); while Sir John Temple, a client of the Sidney family, asserted that Lisle did very good service in Ireland, and was systematically discouraged and affronted. 
When Ormond's negotiations for the cessation began Lisle resolved to leave Ireland, saying, in an intercepted letter to his father, 'that no good is to be done in this place', and that he feared an oath against the English parliament was about to be imposed on the officers serving in Ireland (Gilbert, 2.60). Though arrested on landing in England, he was speedily released and voted $1000 for his services. Lisle married Lady Catherine Cecil ('b'. 'c'.1628-1652), daughter of William Cecil, second earl of Salisbury, on 19 May 1645. 
In 1646, as soon as parliament was able to think of sending fresh forces to Ireland, Lisle was appointed lord lieutenant (21 January 1646). It has been argued that his appointment was closely connected with factional rivalries at Westminster, marking an attempt by the Independents to undermine their presbyterian opponents, in pursuit of an 'imperial' vision of the three kingdoms united under English rule. Whether or not that is the case, Lisle's lord lieutenancy was a troubled and ineffective attempt to pacify Ireland. Lisle's commission is dated 9 April 1646, but not until 1 February 1647 was he able to start for his charge. He landed in Munster, bringing with him 120 horse and 5000 foot, but was able to accomplish nothing, and became involved in a violent quarrel with Lord Inchiquin. Lisle's commission expired on 15 April 1647; he returned at once to England, and was thanked by parliament on 7 May, though his command was not renewed. At the height of the presbyterian putsch at Westminster that summer Lisle fled to the safety of the army. Like his brother Algernon he was appointed one of the judges for the trial of Charles I, but declined to act. He did not, however, feel any scruples about supporting the republic, and was a member of the first, second, and fourth councils of state elected during the Commonwealth, the last of which he chaired for a month as lord president from 23 February 1653. A few of his letters on public affairs during this period are printed by Collins, with a further forty-four letters from this period appearing in the HMC report on the manuscripts of Lord De L'Isle and Dudley (6.445-88). On 31 December 1652 Lisle was selected to go as ambassador to Sweden, and accepted, but his instructions were not ready until 22 March 1653, and he had not started when Cromwell turned out the Long Parliament. In August 1653 he resigned his mission, pleading ill health. 
Lisle was high in Cromwell's favour. He was summoned to sit in the 'Little Parliament' (Barebone's Parliament) and was a member of both the councils of state elected by it, but he was 'a lazy councillor and... avoided parliamentary committees like the plague' (Woolrych, 313-14). He was also a member of each of the two councils of state of the protectorate, and was summoned to sit in Cromwell's House of Lords. At the ceremony of Cromwell's second installation as protector (26 June 1656) he took a prominent part, and a letter disapproving of his brother Algernon's ostentatious opposition to the protector has been preserved. 
Lisle signed the proclamation declaring Richard Cromwell protector, and was a member of his council. In spite of the important positions he held he seems to have exercised very little political influence, and therefore incurred very little danger when the Restoration took place, but he provided against possible trouble by obtaining a pardon under the great seal (30 October 1660); he also lived in discreet retirement on his estate at Sheen, Richmond, between 1660 and 1672. 
Lisle succeeded his father as earl of Leicester on 2 November 1677. Between 1678 and 1681 he was active in his opposition to the crown during the exclusion crisis, and then withdrew from politics after 1685. According to the eighteenth-century account of Arthur Collins, in his later years Leicester was a patron of literature, used to entertain members of the literary elite -- including John Dryden and William Wycherley -- at Leicester House, London, and set apart one day in the week for the entertainment of men of letters. Overshadowing the Restoration years, however, were the family feuds set in train by the second earl's distaste for his eldest son and his willingness to trample over the principles of primogeniture. When Lisle married Catherine Cecil in 1645 the settlement of the Sidney inheritance then made brought out into the open, and in due course irreparably widened, the breach between Lisle and his father. Lisle would inherit the estate as eldest son, but the earl maintained financial control over the future of the estate by reserving to himself the right to charge the estates with bequests up to $29,000 as he chose, which would have to be paid before Lisle could inherit. Father and son quarrelled bitterly. When Lisle's allowance was cut following the death of his wife in childbed on 18 August 1652 he sent his father word by his mother that 'he esteemed himself discharged of all duty and obedience towards him', and in a furious row struck his father in the face (Scott, 'English Republic', 61). Over the years the earl took ample opportunity of the discretion he had allowed himself, adding to and altering his will a dozen times between 1660 and his death. In return Lisle refused in 1672 to co-operate in his father's schemes to develop Leicester Fields, bitterly reflecting that for the last thirty years he had received from his father but one suit of clothes for his son, and declaring that he would now 'unwillingly lett goe any slender hold I retaine upon my naturall or legall rights' (Scott, 'Restoration Crisis', 91). With his father's death Philip became locked into a bitter struggle through the courts with his surviving brothers, Algernon and Henry, to whom he was expected to pay $20,000 or $29,000 plus extensive rents and annuities, and who as executors of the will held control of the estate. The younger brothers won their case in chancery, but Henry, recognizing the distance between winning and enforcing a judgment, used the verdict as a bargaining tool and came to terms with the earl. These family conflicts received resolution only in late 1683 when the more implacable Algernon lay in prison awaiting execution; Leicester reportedly sent him part of the money still at issue, 'because he could no longer hold up the cudgells' (ibid., 99). 
Leicester died at Leicester House, London, on 6 March 1698, and was buried at Penshurst on 17 March. He was succeeded by his son Robert Sidney (apparently his only surviving legitimate child), born in 1649, who had been summoned to the House of Lords as Baron Sidney of Penshurst by William III on 11 July 1689. Robert died on 11 November 1702. Leicester had never remarried but in his will made very generous provision for three adult daughters and one son evidently fathered by himself outside marriage, the children of liaisons with Grace Saunders, 'nee' Pensac (or Pensacke), and Jane Highems, 'nee' Pensac. The mothers received $600 apiece (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/444, fols. 263'r'-9'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 25524


Sidney, Robert, first earl of Leicester (1563-1626), courtier and poet, was born at Penshurst, Kent, on 19 November 1563, and baptized there nine days later, the second son of Sir Henry Sidney (1529-1586) and his wife, Mary Sidney (d. 1586), daughter of John Dudley, duke of Northumberland. Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, was his uncle and godfather, and Sir Philip Sidney (1554-1586) his elder brother. 
Robert Sidney received a first-rate humanist education. He attended Christ Church, Oxford, from 1575 to 1579, without graduating; he then departed on a tour of the continent that lasted -- with one interruption -- from 1579 to 1582. While he was travelling his brother Philip wrote him two famous letters of advice concerning his studies and activities. His primary base while he was abroad was Strasbourg, where Hubert Languet arranged for him to lodge with the famous pedagogue Johannes Sturm. But he also journeyed to the Low Countries, Germany, Prague, and Paris, making the acquaintance of many political leaders and scholars along the way. 
On 23 September 1584 Sidney married Barbara Gamage ('c'.1559-1621) ['see 'Sidney, Barbara, countess of Leicester], the much-sought-after heir of the recently deceased John Gamage of Coety, Glamorgan. Forewarned by Sir Francis Walsingham that the queen was sending a message forbidding Barbara's marriage without royal approval, Sidney's friends hastily arranged a wedding ceremony that concluded only hours before the command arrived. His marriage to Barbara proved close and supportive, and produced eleven children, five of whom survived him, including the poet Lady Mary Wroth. 
Sidney's father urged him to imitate his elder brother in all things, and Philip became a major influence on Robert Sidney's outlook and aspirations. The Sidneys aligned themselves with those at court, led by Leicester and Walsingham, who favoured an active English role abroad against Spain and Catholicism. In 1585 Elizabeth finally authorized armed intervention on behalf of the Dutch rebels and named Leicester the general of the English forces. Sidney accompanied the army as a captain and served in the Low Countries throughout 1586. He fought at the battle of Zutphen (22 September 1586), where Philip received the wound that eventually led to his death. On 7 October Leicester knighted Sidney for his bravery at Zutphen. Ten days later he was at his brother's bedside during his final hours, where Fulke Greville describes Robert as shedding abundant tears. 
Philip's death made Robert the head of the Sidney family, their father having died six months earlier. Sidney inherited extensive properties but also extensive debts, and his need to advance his political career increased accordingly. Following Philip's death Sidney returned to England to settle the complicated family estate. During the Armada crisis in 1588 he attended the queen at Tilbury. As the Armada approached Elizabeth dispatched Sidney on an urgent mission to James VI to ensure Scotland's support against Spain. Although he had to disavow some promises made by the previous envoy, Sidney brought the mission to a successful conclusion. His charm and handsome appearance made a lasting impression on James, who thanked Elizabeth for sending him 'so rare a gentleman' ('Letters', ed. Bruce, 54). In 1589 Elizabeth named Sidney the governor of Flushing (Vlissingen), one of the cautionary towns the Dutch had granted England as security for the large loan Elizabeth had provided. 
This appointment seemed to launch Sidney on the first steps of a potentially glittering political career. In the event, however, the 1590s turned out to be a difficult and frustrating decade for him. The governorship of Flushing was a responsible position. The port had strategic military importance, and the town provided a useful listening post on the continent. But Sidney's duties in Flushing kept him away from the centre of power at the royal court. He campaigned relentlessly to obtain leaves from his post to return to England, but his political rivals tried just as vigorously to convince the queen that he needed to stay in the Low Countries. Sidney spent about half of the time between 1589 and the end of Elizabeth's reign in honourable isolation in Flushing, which significantly impeded his hopes of political advancement. 
In addition the deaths of Leicester in 1588 and Walsingham in 1590 deprived the protestant internationalists of their leading champions. Sidney, along with many others in this camp, gravitated towards Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, and looked to his leadership; already in April 1588 Sidney had been created MA at Oxford alongside Essex and other members of his circle. Essex's patronage proved a dubious benefit to Sidney, however. Essex rose in Elizabeth's favour, but the rival faction around the Cecils was able to block significant promotions for most of Essex's friends and followers. In 1597 Sidney, who had already served in parliament for Glamorgan in 1584 and 1593, had the satisfaction of being elected senior knight of the shire for Kent over Sir William Brooke, the younger brother of his bitter enemy Henry Brooke, eleventh Baron Cobham. But other political successes were elusive. In 1597-8 Essex tried energetically to gain Sidney a number of posts and promotions, including warden of the cinque ports, vice chamberlain, and promotion to a barony. But Essex's efforts all proved fruitless, and Sidney became increasingly despondent as the 1590s progressed. 
During the periods when he was in Flushing Sidney administered the garrison, provided intelligence reports, and maintained relations with Dutch officials. In early 1594 Sidney went on an embassy to Henri IV of France, whose recent conversion to Catholicism had raised concerns in England. Sidney was able to gain reassurances from Henri about his intentions, and won the warm personal regard of the king. Sidney also developed a close friendship with Count Maurice of Nassau and sometimes joined him in the field against the Spanish, playing a significant role in the battle of Turnhout (24 January 1598). 
Sidney's correspondence from the 1590s is a rich source for the period. When Sidney was in Flushing he received regular letters from his man-of-business Rowland Whyte, who provided vivid reports on developments at court and his activities on behalf of his master. Factional manoeuvring frequently produced situations rife with tension. As Whyte commented, 'It is a very hard matter to know who are frends now a daies' (Collins, 2.37). Sidney's own letters -- and those of his lieutenants, when he had permission to return to England -- depict the tedium and alarms of the protracted struggles in the Low Countries and France. Sidney emerges from this correspondence as a man who was well aware of the Machiavellian nature of court politics and was willing to fish in those waters, but who was also a dedicated and effective administrator. In addition he possessed a strong streak of personal honour -- for example, he indignantly refused a suggestion from the privy council that he offer a suspected Catholic spy a safe conduct in order to lure him to Flushing and then seize him, saying that such deceit would be unworthy of him. 
The same prudence and discretion that made Sidney a successful ambassador helped him survive the treacherous cross-currents at court towards the end of Elizabeth's reign. By the late 1590s Sidney was growing disillusioned about Essex's ability to help him. His position as Flushing's governor made it his duty to correspond regularly with Lord Burghley and Sir Robert Cecil, and he used this opportunity to stay on reasonably good terms with them. After Essex went to Ireland in 1599 Sidney distanced himself further from the earl and his circle. This proved fortunate, for it kept him from being implicated in Essex's disgrace after he returned without authorization from Ireland in September 1599. Sidney was at court on leave when Essex launched a desperate uprising on 8 February 1601. Sidney joined the hastily mustered forces that surrounded Essex House after the rising collapsed. As one of the few individuals who were trusted and respected by both sides, Sidney played a crucial role in preventing what could have been a bloody finale. He parleyed with Southampton and Essex, who addressed him as 'brother' (Essex had married Philip's widow), and finally the two earls agreed to surrender. Even this service brought Sidney no significant reward, however. 
When James VI of Scotland succeeded to the throne of England as James I in 1603 Sidney's fortunes finally began to change. James was sympathetic to former Essexians and still remembered Sidney's visit of fifteen years earlier. By this time, however, Sidney was forty years old, and he had already begun to focus his aspirations on status rather than political power. As early as 1598 Sidney had told Essex that if it came to a choice between the vice-chamberlainship and a barony, he would prefer the barony. No evidence exists that he campaigned vigorously for high office after James became king. On 13 May 1603 Sidney received the title of Baron Sidney of Penshurst, and shortly afterwards James named him lord chamberlain of the queen's household and surveyor of the queen's revenues. Because the queen's lord steward, Sir Robert Cecil, normally attended the king, Sidney was usually the presiding official at the queen's court, which limited his opportunities to influence the king. Sidney continued as governor of Flushing, but since he now rarely left England, his lieutenant executed those duties. 
On 4 May 1605 James granted Sidney the title of Viscount Lisle. In 1613 Lisle joined the magnificent entourage that accompanied James's daughter Elizabeth, newly married to the elector palatine, to her new home in Germany. When financial exigencies led James to return Flushing to the Dutch in 1616 Lisle received an annuity of $1200 per annum to compensate him for the loss of his governorship, and James also named him a knight of the Garter (he was installed on 7 July 1616). Lisle maintained his staunchly protestant and anti-Spanish outlook, and with his nephew William Herbert, third earl of Pembroke, and others who shared these views, he supported George Villiers as a counterweight against the Howards and Somerset. In 1618 he finally achieved one of his long-standing ambitions when James created him earl of Leicester, a title Lisle had long claimed as the closest legitimate heir of Robert Dudley. Leicester called his new title '[the queen's] worck' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 5.416), and he apparently did not pay for it. The timing -- only a few days after the earl of Suffolk's fall -- suggests that Villiers may have played a role too. 
Leicester also had literary and scholarly interests. In the second half of the 1590s, when his political frustrations were at their greatest, he worked on a collection of poetry that included sonnets as well as other poems in a variety of metrical forms. The notebook containing them is the longest autograph manuscript by an Elizabethan poet that still survives and allows one to see the revisions and reorderings that he made in the sequence. An edition of these poems appeared in 1984. The collection has some resemblances to 'Astrophel and Stella', though the quality of the verse is uneven: the sonnets tend to be stiff, but some of the songs are lively and engaging. Starting around 1600 Leicester also began compiling several commonplace books on political topics, in which he organized episodes drawn from history into politically meaningful categories. These commonplace books, which give considerable attention to the problems that can afflict monarchies, form a link in the anti-absolutist political tradition of the Sidney family. 
Leicester carried out major building projects at Penshurst, including a fashionable long gallery. He also maintained the stately aristocratic lifestyle there that Ben Jonson idealized in 'To Penshurst'. Household accounts and an inventory of 1623 reveal the lavishness of the family's wardrobe and furnishings. As a result, while Leicester's income increased during James's reign, so did his expenditure, leaving him in chronic financial straits. In 1607 Leicester wrote despairingly to his wife, 'If my ill-willers should know in what state I were, it were subject enough for them to laugh at mee for ever' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 3.432). In the end, however, he managed to avoid financial disaster, as he had avoided political disaster earlier. 
In May 1621 Leicester's wife, Barbara, died. Early in 1626 he married Sarah Smythe, 'nee' Blount (died 1655), the recently widowed third wife of Sir Thomas Smythe (died 1625). Leicester died barely six months afterwards, at Penshurst Place on 13 July 1626, after falling suddenly ill in London. He was buried at Penshurst three days later. He died intestate, and was succeeded by his only surviving son, Robert Sidney, who became second earl of Leicester. 


@@@@@


doc= 25525


Sidney, Robert, second earl of Leicester (1595-1677), diplomat and landowner, was born on 1 December 1595 at Baynard's Castle, London, the youngest but only surviving son of Robert Sidney, first earl of Leicester (1563-1626), and his first wife, Barbara Sidney, nee Gamage (c.1559-1621), daughter of John Gamage of Coety, Glamorgan. When he was baptized at the end of the month his godparents were Charles Blount, Lord Mountjoy, Lord William Compton (later earl of Northampton), and Penelope, Lady Rich. 
With his older brother William (died 1612), Sidney matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 27 February 1607; he was still at Oxford in October 1610. William was knighted in January 1610 but Robert received the higher honour of a knighthood of the Bath the following June; the same year his father, who was governor of Flushing, one of the English cautionary towns in the Netherlands, made Robert captain of a foot company there. Robert visited Flushing in 1613 but was back in England the following year when he was MP for Wilton (one of the boroughs of his cousin the earl of Pembroke) in the Addled Parliament; he was appointed to a few committees but appears to have been relatively inactive. Perhaps rebelling against his father's attempts to marry him off (at least two engagements were proposed for him in 1613), in 1615 he secretly married Lady Dorothy Percy ('bap'. 1598, died 1659), daughter of Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland (1564-1632), and his wife, Lady Dorothy Devereux, daughter of the earl of Essex. Their eldest child, Dorothy ['see 'Spencer, Dorothy, countess of Sunderland], was born in October 1617. The marriage, which was not discovered until a year later, linked Sidney with two of the most powerful noble families in the realm, and the Percy connection in particular was to be an abiding influence on his career. It was probably the marriage that led to a bitter quarrel between Sidney and James Hay, Viscount Doncaster, who had married Dorothy's sister Lucy Percy, in the course of which the two men came to blows in 1620. 
When in the spring of 1616 Flushing and Brill were restored to the United Provinces their English garrisons were reconstituted into a regiment under Sidney's command and retained in Dutch service. He visited the Low Countries later that year and journeyed on to Paris; he was again with his regiment in 1620-21 and retained the command into the 1640s, but latterly it was principally a pecuniary interest. He was admitted to Gray's Inn on 25 February 1618 and when, in the August of that year, his father was made earl of Leicester, he was henceforth styled Viscount L'Isle. In the 1621 parliament he was MP for Kent and in those of 1624 and 1625 sat for Monmouthshire, but he left only a minor mark in the records. On his father's death on 13 July 1626 he succeeded as second earl of Leicester. 
In April 1632 Charles I announced Leicester's appointment as ambassador-extraordinary to Christian IV of Denmark. The ostensible and public purpose was to offer condolences on the death the previous year of Charles's maternal grandmother, Queen Sophia Frederica; the secret aim of the mission was to stir Christian to action in the Thirty Years' War and to see how Denmark stood in relation to Sweden's proposed anti-Habsburg league. Leicester left for Denmark on 15 September 1632 with a retinue of fifty-five including, as his secretary, James Howell, and had his first audience with the Danish king on 1 October. Leicester was struck by Danish customs, especially the debauchery of the court, noting in his journal that Christian led 'a strange life... drunk every day, lying with a whore every night', but he showed that he could hold his own in the mammoth drinking binges that passed for royal entertainment in Denmark. At the feast marking the end of Leicester's short embassy on 15 October, which stretched from 11 a.m. until evening, the earl proudly noted that after thirty-five toasts he could still manage stairs unassisted, while the king had to be carried from the table in his chair. Outdrinking the Danes was, perhaps, Leicester's principal achievement on the embassy, for he achieved little else, apart from some minor trading concessions. He returned via Hamburg and reached England on 2 November 1632. Only a few days later all his negotiations were overtaken, and the whole European situation was altered, by the death of Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden at the battle of Lutzen. 
Leicester's family traditions (his uncle had been Sir Philip Sidney) and his Dutch command inclined him to support a policy of vigorously pursuing the protestant interest in the Thirty Years' War, while his Percy connections tied him to the circle of Queen Henrietta Maria in the mid-1630s, a time when her court briefly represented a 'puritan' clique pushing for war with Spain. He professed himself the queen's 'Slave' (Collins, 2.387) and, with her influence over affairs growing, in April 1636 Henrietta Maria procured Leicester's appointment as ambassador-extraordinary to France, seconding the mission of the ambassador-in-ordinary, Viscount Scudamore, whose negotiations with the French had proved unsuccessful. Leicester arrived in Paris on 3 June 1636 (NS) and promptly fell out with Scudamore. The two men could agree on nothing: they employed different solicitors and different agents, they took contrary positions in many diplomatic questions, and they even went to different church services, Scudamore worshipping in his own chapel, Leicester attending the services of the French Reformed church at Charenton in a gesture of solidarity with Huguenots and in defiance of the predilections of Charles and Archbishop William Laud. Leicester successfully ridiculed Scudamore and undermined his credit at the English court, while his own reputation was safeguarded by the strenuous efforts of the earls of Northumberland and Holland, Henry Percy, and the countess of Leicester, who remained in England. Behind these differences lay a deeper division over policy. While Scudamore inclined to a pro-Spanish neutrality, Leicester agitated actively for an Anglo-French alliance against the Habsburgs, telling the secretary of state, Sir John Coke, that 'nothing can be more glorious, nor more religious in the sight of God and man then such a war' against Spain (TNA: PRO, SP 78/101, fol. 400). When Charles preferred to pursue a negotiated settlement Leicester reiterated his belief that 'the diseases of Christendome are not to be cured like the King's evil with touching, but with striking' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/102, fol. 279). Throughout 1636 Leicester frequently twisted and even ignored his diplomatic instructions in an attempt to persuade Charles and Louis XIII into an alliance. While his words and actions caused some consternation in England, in December 1636 the king showed his support for him against Scudamore by raising his allowance to unprecedented heights. 
When the principal negotiations between England and France were remitted to a proposed peace conference at Hamburg in 1637, the nature of Leicester's mission changed, as did the queen's circle, which saw renewed intrigues against Cardinal Richelieu. Leicester negotiated the change successfully. By August 1637 he was drawn into Charles's secret negotiations on behalf of Marie de' Medici's circle in Flanders. He was also implicated in the notorious La Porte affair, a conspiracy involving the exiled Marie de' Medici and her court in Brussels, and the French queen, Anne of Austria, and aiming both to overthrow Richelieu and frustrate the proposed Anglo-French treaty that Leicester had pressed so hard for only recently. Leicester's secretary, Rene Augier, provided the means by which Anne's letters to the Habsburgs could be sent to the Spanish Netherlands. Leicester's negotiations were thwarted by the French, however, whose spies had penetrated the English court, who were intercepting Leicester's post, and who were almost certainly receiving information from Augier himself. 
The earl was left with little purpose to his mission. He was temporarily recalled in February 1639, at the same time as Scudamore's mission was ended, but was sent back alone to France in August. The English government was entirely preoccupied by its Scottish and domestic troubles, and Leicester was instructed by Charles in the spring of 1639 to 'mesnage the proceedings by such degrees, that you cum to no conclusion til wee bee freed from our trobles at home' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/107, fol. 154'v'). 
From August 1637 Leicester had been scheming to be recalled to England and to be made secretary in place of Coke. Two years later an alternative was suggested by Northumberland, that he should succeed Thomas Wentworth, Viscount Wentworth, as lord deputy of Ireland. He was constantly frustrated. Although he was sworn a privy councillor on 5 May 1639, further preferment was blocked by Laud, who opposed Leicester on account of the earl's treatment of his friend Scudamore. Laud represented Leicester to the king as a puritan, an accusation which Leicester strenuously denied. The earl's preferment of Henry Hammond to the living of Penshurst, the Sidneys' seat, in 1633, after hearing him preach at court, does not suggest any radical religious leanings. 
The fall of Strafford created the opportunity, the fall of Laud removed the obstacle; Leicester was again recalled to England in May 1641, and on 14 June 1641 he was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland. He returned to France in August to conclude his embassy, and arrived back in England at the beginning of October. 
Leicester was thus ready to take up his commission just as the Irish rising broke out, preventing his travelling to Dublin. The next three years were the most testing of his life. The appointment which he had sought, and which Charles had hoped would placate some of his godly opponents in parliament, succeeded in satisfying no one. As Leicester later rued, 'that which should have bin for my good became unto me an occasion of falling' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 6.555). Although he sent his sons Philip Sidney (1619-1698) and Algernon Sidney (1623-1683) to Ireland in April 1642 with 600 horse, he never managed to get there himself. Leicester was caught between king and parliament as they argued and divided over who should control the army sent to crush the Irish rebels. The lord lieutenant's position was probably impossible. For Leicester, who according to the earl of Clarendon was 'rather a speculative than a practical man', and who 'expected a greater certitude in the consultation of business than the business of the world is capable of' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.531), it proved personally disastrous. 
None the less, Leicester retained the confidence of the Lords until the summer of 1642, acting as temporary speaker of the house in May and June, and appointed parliament's lord lieutenant for Kent. As England drifted into civil war, however, he was unable to choose between the two sides and irresolutely sought to satisfy both. He repeatedly refused to grant commissions to his deputy lieutenants under the militia ordinance, stymying efforts to raise Kent for parliament until he was replaced in mid-August 1642. That month he bewailed his plight to the countess of Carlisle, his sister-in-law: 'I am environed by such contradictions, as I can neither get from them, nor reconcile them. The Parliament bids me go presently; the King commands me to stay till he dispatch me. The supplyes of the one, and the authority of the other, are equally necessary. I know not how to obtain them both, and am more likely to have neither; for now they are at such extremes, as to please the one is scarce possible, unless the other be opposed... I am suspected and distrusted of either side. (Blencowe, xxi-xxii)' When parliament insisted on seeing his instructions from the king, Leicester initially refused, increasing the suspicions by then harboured by many in the Commons and the Lords about his intentions, but in October 1642 he yielded, so incurring the king's displeasure. In late November, with Leicester in Chester on the point of embarking for Dublin, Charles, preferring to use Ormond, whose loyalty he did not doubt, forbade him to go and summoned him to Oxford where he arrived shortly after Christmas. 
Leicester passed the next year in the royalist headquarters in a tortured state, declining to take any part in the king's affairs. Penshurst was sequestered by the Kent county committee on the grounds that Leicester had flown to an enemy garrison, but the countess, probably with the help of Northumberland, one of the most influential parliamentarian peers, persuaded the parliament to lift the sequestration. In November 1643 the king induced Leicester to resign the lord lieutenancy so that he could appoint Ormond in his place. Leicester remained in Oxford, expecting that he would be appointed governor to Prince Charles. His refusal in January 1644 to sign the letter from the English peers at Oxford to the Scottish privy council urging them not to support the covenanters' invasion of England, however, lost him all hope of preferment, and in June 1644 he left Oxford to make his peace with parliament before retiring to Penshurst, where he attempted to sit out the war quietly, declining to seek readmission to the House of Lords. 
Leicester was a broken man and spent almost all of his remaining three decades in retirement at Penshurst, occasionally visiting his London residence, Leicester House, and concerning himself with his estates and scholarly pursuits. Clarendon described him as 'very conversant in books, and much addicted to the mathematics' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.531). He possessed a large library, valued at $100 at his death, and his reading concentrated on the politics, religion, customs, and history of ancient and modern nations of the world. Many of his notes and reflections from these survive, and show that he could write interchangeably in five languages (English, Latin, French, Spanish, and Italian). His son Algernon later claimed that Leicester 'writ his own mind to see what he could think of it another time, and blot it out again may be' (Scott, 56). His studies tended towards the relativism and scepticism fashionable in the intellectual circles he had encountered in Paris, where he also met, and clearly admired, Hugo Grotius, the exiled Dutch philosopher who was ambassador of Queen Kristina of Sweden. Leicester was much preoccupied with 'the opinions and fancyes of men' (Scott, 55) and differing political and legal customs. While such relativist thoughts encouraged some, notably his son Algernon, towards radical politics and republicanism, in Leicester they reinforced his tendency towards indecision, what Clarendon called 'the staggering and irresolution in his nature' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.531). 
Although two of his sons -- Philip, Lord Lisle, and Algernon -- served the regimes of the interregnum in various capacities, Leicester refused to have much to do with the Commonwealth or protectorate. The countess was, however, through the influence of her brother Northumberland, given the care of two of the late king's children in May 1649. The duke of Gloucester and Princess Elizabeth lived at Penshurst from 14 June 1649 to 9 August 1650, when they were removed from the countess's care and sent to Carisbrooke Castle by the council of state. The earl took the engagement on 18 April 1650, but only because 'if I had not don so I could not have bin plaintiffe nor have sued in any Court of Justice upon what occasion soever' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 6.598). He had, indeed, a stack of suits to prosecute and defend, concerning both his own estate and that of his nephew, Philip Smythe, Viscount Strangford, whose wardship he reluctantly took on in December 1649 after the death of Strangford's former guardian, Sir Thomas Fotherly. He even more reluctantly agreed the following August to the marriage of his daughter Isabella to Strangford, a union pressed on him by the couple and his wife. Strangford, however, was an easily misled drunkard and his affairs were hopelessly chaotic. Strangford initially accused Fotherly of embezzlement and launched a legal suit against the family which Leicester had to prosecute, before, in 1653, revoking Leicester's title to his guardianship and pursuing the Sidneys through the courts on the same charge of embezzlement. A further case concerned a diamond that Princess Elizabeth, who had died shortly after her removal to Carisbrooke, had bequeathed to the countess of Leicester. Long proceedings ensued, the trustees for the sale of the goods of king and queen claiming that they belonged to the state, the Sidneys basing their title on the princess's personal ownership of the jewel, as originally a gift from her brother-in-law the prince of Orange. 
Leicester employed his second son, Algernon, as his principal assistant and agent in the management of his estate and legal affairs from 1648 to 1659. The earl's preference for the able Algernon in preference to his dull and indolent elder brother, Philip, caused a permanent estrangement between the father and his heir. In December 1652 Philip struck his father in the face and proclaimed himself discharged of all duty towards him; three and a half years later Philip complained that the earl allowed Algernon to domineer and command at Penshurst. Two decades later, when the earl's attempts to develop his London property at Leicester Fields had led him into further legal difficulties, it was Algernon's support and advice he sought, procuring a pass for Algernon, in exile on the continent since the Restoration, to return to England. Algernon, however, did not return until after his father's death. 
In April 1660 Leicester took up his seat in the House of Lords. Charles II made him a privy councillor on 31 May 1660, but in October 1660, after the adjournment of the parliament, he obtained the king's permission to retire to Penshurst on the grounds of ill health. On the same grounds his attendance at the coronation in April 1661 was also dispensed with. The countess's death on 20 August 1659 had prompted the earl to announce his own imminent end, but he went on to enjoy a further eighteen years of ill health, obsessively writing and rewriting codicils to his will to exclude his son Philip from the estate and control the portions of his other children according to their current standing in his affections. He died at Penshurst on 2 November 1677 and was buried there six days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 25526


Sidney, Samuel (1813-1883), writer on agriculture, was born on 6 February 1813 in Paradise Street, Birmingham, where his father, Abraham Solomon MD, practised as a physician. He was educated for the law, and acted for a short time (about 1834) as a solicitor in Liverpool. He soon took, however, to journalistic and literary work, using the 'nom de plume' of Sidney, which he afterwards adopted for all purposes. His earlier writings dealt largely with railways and the gauge question and attacked Isambard Kingdom Brunel and the Great Western Company. Most of his works on this subject appeared between 1846 and 1848, notably pamphlets on the gauge controversy and his 'Railways and Agriculture in North Lincolnshire' (1848), which suggested the benefits of railways in the era of 'high farming' following the repeal of the corn laws. He followed this with an account of 'Rides on Railways' (1851) to the scenic regions of the Lake District, north Wales, and Derbyshire dales. In 1847 the return of his brother John from Australia appears to have aroused Sidney's interest in the colonies, and he wrote much on emigration and colonization between 1848 and 1854. In collaboration with his brother he edited 'Sidney's Emigrant's Journal' between 1848 and 1850, when it was discontinued 'as barely paying its necessary expenses'. From 1847 to 1857 he wrote regularly for the 'Illustrated London News', acting as hunting correspondent, and visiting agricultural exhibitions in Britain and abroad. He wrote also for the 'Live Stock Journal' a series of articles extending over many years entitled 'Horse chat' and signed Cavalier. He contributed many articles to the earlier volumes of 'Household Words', and wrote a novel dealing with Australian life, entitled 'Gallops and Gossips in the Bush of Australia' (1854), which he dedicated to Charles Dickens. 
In 1850-51 Sidney became one of the assistant commissioners for the Great Exhibition, and was afterwards for some years assistant secretary to the Crystal Palace Company. In 1859 he was an unsuccessful candidate for the secretaryship of the Royal Agricultural Society, and in the following year he became secretary of the Agricultural Hall Company. In 1864 he organized the first horse show held at that hall, and he later acted as manager of many succeeding horse shows there. 
In 1857 Sidney edited and in great part rewrote W. C. L. Martin's book 'The Pig'; and in 1860 he re-edited William Youatt's book of the same title. But by far his most important contribution to literature was 'The Book of the Horse', for which he had long collected materials and which was first published in 1873. It is a mine of information on the various breeds of horses, British and foreign, on fox-hunting and deer-hunting, on horsemanship and horsewomanship, on the management of the stable, breeding, breaking, and so on. It is in this work that Sidney's versatile pen appears at its best. The book became popular at once, and was reissued five times up to 1898. In its compilation he had valuable assistance from many leading experts, but he was himself a good judge of a horse, and was a fine rider in his early days. His wife, Marie, was a journalist. He died of heart disease at his home, 10 Bethune Road, Stamford Hill, London, on 8 June 1883, and was buried at Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 25527


Sir William Sidney (c.1482-1554), courtier, was the son of Nicholas Sidney and Anne, sister of Sir William Brandon, father of Charles, duke of Suffolk. The Sidneys were Sussex-Surrey landowners who acquired wealth and local eminence in the mid-fifteenth century. William Sidney entered court through the patronage of his maternal uncle, Sir Thomas Brandon, a prominent courtier under Henry VII and his son. William Sidney lived with his uncle until the latter's death in 1510. In 1511 he attended Lord Darcy on his abortive expedition to aid Spain against the Moors, lingering after Darcy's rapid return to England in a visit to the Spanish court, where he was reputedly offered and declined a knighthood. 


@@@@@


doc= 25528


Siemens, Sir (Charles) William (1823-1883), electrical engineer and metallurgist, was born at Lenthe, Hanover, the fourth son of Christian Ferdinand Siemens (1787-1840) and his wife, Eleonore, 'nee' Deichmann. To avoid confusion with his younger brother Karl Heinrich, he was known as Wilhelm in Germany and as William in England. Together with their elder brother Werner, who remained in Germany, William, who spent most of his life in England, and Karl Heinrich, who worked in Russia, were in business as electrical engineers, concentrating first on the electric telegraph and later on electric lighting. 
Christian Siemens, a farm manager, had eight sons and a daughter who lived to adulthood. On his death Werner, the eldest surviving son, who was then an officer in the Prussian army, had to care for the younger brothers, a responsibility in which William later shared. 
William was educated at a commercial school in Lubeck, then at a technical school in Magdeburg, where Werner was stationed. From there he went to Gottingen University, where he studied under Professor Himly, who had married his elder sister, Mathilde. It having been decided that William was to be an engineer, Werner obtained a place for him in the Stolberg factory at Magdeburg in 1843. Here Werner and William collaborated on their scientific and mechanical ideas, including improvements in the then novel application of electricity to the deposition of metals, for which Werner had already obtained a Prussian patent, specifying a thermo-electric battery to supply the electric current, and improvements in the solutions (alkaline hyposulphites) used for gilding and silvering. 
For some reason, probably because it was in England that the greatest progress had been made in electroplating, the brothers determined to try to dispose of the invention there. William was dispatched in 1843 for the purpose. Speaking many years afterwards at a meeting of the Birmingham and Midland Institute (of which he was then president), he gave an account of the difficulties attending this first visit, when he was so ignorant of the language of the country that he was led to visit an undertaker, under the idea that this was the proper person to take up and dispose of his invention. Ultimately, however, perseverance triumphed over difficulties, and he sold his process to Elkington for $1600. 
Such a success stimulated the brothers to fresh efforts. William gave up his position at the Stolberg factory in 1844 and started for London with two fresh inventions -- a 'chronometric governor' for steam engines, devised by Werner and worked out by William, and the process of 'anastatic printing', invented by Baldamus of Erfurt and developed by the brothers. However, they set too high a value on these two inventions, and no capitalist could be found willing to purchase either, meritorious as they were. The 'governor' was an instrument of extreme ingenuity; it was fully appreciated by leading mechanical engineers, and obtained prizes from the Society of Arts in 1850 and at the Great Exhibition of 1851. It did not, however, come into practical use for its intended purpose -- a purpose, indeed, for which it was too delicate -- though it was afterwards successfully applied by Sir George Airy for regulating the movement of certain instruments at the Royal Greenwich Observatory. 
The anastatic process was employed for the reproduction of printed matter until superseded by modern photographic methods. It was a transfer process. The page to be copied was moistened with acid and laid down on a metal plate. On pressure being applied, the result was a slight etching of the metal by the acid in the parts in contact with the unprinted portions of the paper and a slight setting off of the ink from the printed portions. The plate could then be inked up and printed from by the usual lithographic methods. The process, however, brought no profit to its introducer, and the factory which he started for its application was a source of considerable loss. The first five years of Siemens's stay in England were so discouraging that in 1849 he even discussed the idea of emigrating with Karl and Frederick, another brother, to California, then in the first flush of the gold discoveries. 
The next invention about which the brothers busied themselves, though it contained within itself the germs of ultimate success, was no more profitable than its predecessors. The regenerative steam engine and condenser, worked up by William Siemens from earlier ideas, sought to prevent the great waste of energy which occurs in all forms of heat engine in consequence of the high temperature at which the products of combustion are discharged, and also from the steam being condensed to water after a portion only of its heat has been utilized as energy. The most important feature of the invention was that the steam after use in the cylinder passed through a heat-exchanger, and reached the condenser in a partly cooled state. The water from the condenser was afterwards forced back through the exchanger, absorbing its heat and causing its own temperature to rise on its way to the boiler. In spite of all the labour and ingenuity expended between 1847 and 1859, the brothers' hopes were never realized. That the merits of the invention were recognized is shown by the fact that a leading firm of Birmingham engineers, Fox and Henderson, paid Siemens a considerable sum for a share in the patent, and also engaged his services at a salary which provided him with a sufficient means of livelihood. In addition to this he was now earning money in other ways, and in 1851 he produced a water meter, which fulfilled its intended purposes so well, and was so superior to other instruments, that in a year or two it was producing a handsome income from royalties, and the inventor's long struggle against adverse fortune was at an end. 
The success of the meter, however, was soon eclipsed by that of the great invention with which the names of William and Frederick Siemens must always be connected -- the regenerative furnace. The brothers had long endeavoured to apply the principle of their condenser to various manufacturing processes, especially to those in which, as in salt extracting, large quantities of liquid have to be evaporated. Their efforts met with little practical success until they finally hit on the very simple idea of applying the principle of the condenser to furnaces, an idea which was embodied in a patent taken out by Frederick in 1856. The products of combustion from the furnace, instead of passing direct to the chimney, were led through a chamber filled with refractory brickwork, to which they gave up their heat. As soon as the chamber was sufficiently hot the current was shut off, and the air supply of the furnace led through it. The air thus reached the burning fuel hot, instead of cold. By the use of two chambers used alternately to receive and give out the heat, the process was made continuous. By a further improvement gas was used in place of solid fuel, and this was passed through the 'regenerator' so that it arrived at the place of combustion in a highly heated state. Not only was there an enormous economy of heat, but the gas could be made from fuel of a very inferior sort, while processes formerly requiring crucibles were now conducted in the open furnace. The first practical application of the furnace was to the melting and reheating of steel in 1857. It was soon after applied, in a modified form, to heating the air for blast furnaces, then to glass making (the subject of the last lecture ever given by Faraday was the use of the furnace at Chance's glassworks), and eventually to a large number of industrial processes where great heat is required. Its most important application was to the manufacture of steel, either by melting wrought iron and cast iron together on the open hearth of the furnace or direct from iron ore. The former was known as the 'Siemens-Martin' process, and the latter as the 'Siemens' or 'ore' process. For the manufacture of steel the 'Siemens' process was first used in 1865 or 1866; its employment spread rapidly, so that by 1882 it was estimated that 4 million tons of steel had been produced by it, and in 1896 the output for the whole world was calculated at over 7 million tons as compared with over 11 million tons produced by the Bessemer process. In Great Britain 2,355,000 tons were produced in 1896 by the Siemens process, and 1,845,000 by the Bessemer process. 
In order to develop the process, and to test its working on a large scale, Siemens, with some personal friends, formed a company, and works were established at Landore in south Wales in 1869. Though for a time the company promised well and held a leading place among the steelworks of the United Kingdom, it was not commercially successful, and the attempt was abandoned about 1888. 
Siemens became a naturalized British subject in 1859, the year in which he married Anne (died 12 April 1901), the daughter of Joseph Gordon, an Edinburgh lawyer and the brother of Lewis Gordon, professor of electrical engineering in the University of Glasgow. The couple had no children of their own, but they adopted Alexander Siemens, the son of a third cousin. Siemens obtained medals at the exhibitions of London in 1862 and of Paris in 1867. In 1860 he became a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, in special recognition of his merits -- since he was a manufacturer rather than an engineer -- and in 1862 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. 
Meantime Siemens had turned his attention to electrical science, and was building up another reputation. On the first introduction of the electric telegraph, Werner Siemens appreciated its possibilities, and determined to devote himself to its development. In 1847 he associated himself with Halske and founded in Berlin the great firm of Siemens and Halske, of which William was appointed the London agent. Werner invented the method of insulating telegraph wires with gutta-percha, and the use of such wires for conveying messages under water led to the invention of submarine cables. The first of these was the Dover to Calais cable, laid, after an unsuccessful attempt in the previous year, in 1851. This was soon followed by others, with many of which the firm of Siemens and Halske was associated. In 1858 this department of their business had developed to such an extent that the brothers determined to establish works in England, and a small factory was started in Millbank, afterwards in 1866 transferred to Charlton in Kent, where the great works of Siemens Brothers (Werner, William, and Karl) were eventually established. These works in course of time occupied an area of over 6 acres, and employed more than 2000 people. Of the undertakings carried out by the brothers, one of the greatest was the telegraph line from Prussia to Tehran, a length of 2750 miles, which formed a principal part of the direct line from England to India. This was carried out by the London and Berlin firms jointly in 1869. A few years later a still more important undertaking was brought to a successful issue by the London firm alone, which in 1874 laid the direct Atlantic cable. For this the cable ship 'Faraday' was specially designed by William Siemens, though he had no previous knowledge or experience of marine engineering. The execution of works of such magnitude, indeed, involved the designing and construction of much new machinery and apparatus. In all this detailed work Siemens took his full share, though as time went on, and the concerns with which he was associated increased in importance, he withdrew from detail work and confined himself more to supervision and initiation. 
When the Society of Telegraph Engineers (later the Institution of Electrical Engineers) was formed in 1871, Siemens was elected its first president, and he was very influential in the society's early development as a body bringing together both practical engineers and academic researchers. 
The electric telegraph was the first widespread industrial application of electricity, but two inventions made electric lighting the focus of attention. The first was the self-excited electric generator, a machine in which the current for energizing the field windings came from the output of the generator itself. The importance of this was that electrical generation was no longer dependent on permanent magnets, and much higher currents could be produced. The self-excited principle was announced at a meeting of the Royal Society on 14 February 1867, when both Siemens and Charles Wheatstone, working quite independently, described the principle. It was then found that Cromwell F. Varley was applying for a patent for the same idea. The second invention was the development about 1879 of a successful incandescent filament lamp by Joseph Swan, the American Thomas Alva Edison, and several other inventors. The Siemens undertakings took up the manufacture of generators and of arc lamps, but not filament lamps, though none of the leading inventions connected with electric lighting can be associated with the name of William Siemens. The firm supplied some of the machines first used for lighthouse illumination, and one of the earliest electric light installations in London -- that of the British Museum -- was carried out by them in 1879. 
The first time that an electricity supply was made available to people in their own homes was in the autumn of 1881, at Godalming, Surrey. The supply was provided by a firm whose main interest was street lighting, and they used a Siemens generator, driven initially from a water-wheel in a local mill. Neither William Siemens nor any other member of the family seems to have been involved in the original undertaking, but before long they had taken over the running of it. In May 1882 Siemens gave evidence to the House of Commons select committee on the 'Electric Lighting Bill', in which he described the experience gained at Godalming. 
William Siemens was also one of the first to suggest the transmission of power by electricity, and to apply electric power to locomotion, in the Portrush Railway, in 1883. When invented in 1879 his electric furnace had no practical application, but it later found a place in industry as a means of reaching otherwise unattainable temperatures. His 'bathometer' for estimating sea depths without a sounding line, though ingenious, was impractical. His electric thermometer proved useful in cases where it was required to record temperatures at inaccessible or scarcely accessible positions, though not, as he had hoped, in deep-sea investigations, where the cable failed before the apparatus itself. His researches into the effect of electric light on plants were carried far enough only to prove the possibility of aiding the growth of plants and fruit by its means. His patent of 1855 led to a means of achieving extremely low temperatures by the expansion of liquefied gases already cooled down to the lowest attainable point. How prolific was his inventive faculty is shown by the fact that no fewer than 113 British patents were taken out in his name. 
Siemens's inventions and his scientific work brought him many honours. He was president of the mechanical section of the British Association in 1869, and president of the association itself in 1882; he was the first president (1871) of the Society of Telegraph Engineers, and in 1878 he became president of the same society for the second time; he was president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (1872) and of the Iron and Steel Institute (1877), and chairman of the council of the Society of Arts (1882); he was an honorary DCL of Oxford and LLD of Dublin and Glasgow. He received the Albert medal of the Society of Arts in 1874, the Howard prize of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1883, and the Bessemer medal of the Iron and Steel Institute in 1875. He received many foreign orders, including the French Legion d'honneur, and in 1883, only seven months before his death, he was knighted in recognition of his services. 
Siemens made few contributions to pure science. In 1882 he sent some ingenious speculations as to the source of solar energy to the Royal Society. Among these was a theory, well received at the time, that gaseous matter might be dissociated by radiant solar energy and driven out by centrifugal action at the sun's equator, to be drawn in towards the poles and subjected to intense combustion. This was his last important piece of work. He died at his home, 3 Palace Houses, Bayswater Road, London, of heart disease and pneumonia, on 19 November 1883, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery after a funeral service in Westminster Abbey, where a memorial window was set up in his honour. 
William Siemens was a born inventor, but he was also, what so few inventors are, a shrewd and capable man of business. He made a large fortune, and used it liberally. He established prize medals at King's College, London, at the Birmingham and Midland Institute, and at the City and Guilds of London Technical Institute. After his death Lady Siemens provided funds for the foundation of a Siemens electrical laboratory, as a memorial, at King's College, London. 
Siemens's collected works, including his very numerous addresses, lectures, and papers to scientific societies, were edited by E. F. Bamber, after his death, in three volumes (1889), uniform with the biography by Dr William Pole FRS. 


@@@@@


doc= 25529


Sievier, Robert William (1794-1865), engraver, sculptor, and scientist, was born in London on 24 July 1794. He decided to become an engraver after gaining a silver medal from the Society of Arts in 1812 for a pen-and-ink drawing. He trained under John Young and afterwards with Edward Scriven, and on 8 January 1818 entered the Royal Academy Schools. He produced at this time a large number of stipple engravings after artists such as Hans Holbein, Sir Thomas Lawrence, William Etty, and G. S. Newton. 
To improve his knowledge of the figure Sievier learned to model in clay and studied anatomy under Joshua Brookes. Subsequently, around 1823, he gave up engraving in favour of sculpture. 'Rapidly improving', according to Redgrave, 'his great facility of seizing the likeness and characteristic expression of his sitters led many persons of distinction to his studio' (Redgrave, 'Artists', 394). His portrait busts included those of Lord Chancellor Eldon (exh. RA, 1825), Sir Thomas Lawrence (1830; Soane Museum, London), and Prince Albert, the prince consort (1842; Royal Collection). He also executed several memorial statues, including those of the physician Edward Jenner (1825; Gloucester Cathedral) and William Harcourt, third Earl Harcourt (1832; St Michael, Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire), and a large number of church monuments. He exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1822 to 1844, at the British Institution from 1825 to 1831, and at the Society of British Artists from 1829 to 1843. Sievier's portraiture was characterized by a bold naturalism which sometimes tended towards exaggeration, especially in the depiction of facial expressions and fleshy form -- a manner in which his work is comparable to that of his contemporary Samuel Joseph. He had an eye for detail -- for example, in his reliefs for monuments -- gained from his training as an engraver. Sievier also designed some 'ideal' works, including figures of a 'Bacchante Asleep' (1824) and 'Musidora' (1830), which were formerly in the collection of Joseph Neeld at Grittleton House, Wiltshire, 'The Three Graces' (1824; Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery), after Canova, and genre subjects such as 'Boy and Tortoise' (exh. RA, 1829). His chimney-piece figures of 'Bacchus' and 'Ariadne' (1833) are at Chatsworth, Derbyshire. 
In the latter part of his life Sievier abandoned sculpture and devoted himself to science, being involved in rubber production and in the early development of electric telegraphy. According to Redgrave he was 'of an active inventive mind... and distinguished also by his manners and power of conversation' (Redgrave, 'Artists', 395). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1841. Sievier died on 28 April 1865 at his home, 35 Rochester Road, Camden Town, London, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. With his wife, Ann Eliza ('b'. 'c'.1811), Sievier had a son, Robert Moore Sievier ('b'. 'c'.1827), who was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools on 2 April 1845 to study sculpture. 


@@@@@


doc= 25530


Sigeberht I (fl. 626), though he too seems to have been a pagan. However, the next king, 


@@@@@


doc= 25531


Sigeberht (fl. 630/31-654), king of the East Angles, is known only from Bede's 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum', where it is stated that he was the brother of Earpwald, son of Raedwald. William of Malmesbury and John of Worcester say that he was Earpwald's half-brother by his mother. It is uncertain whether they had additional information or whether they were reading more into Bede's wording than may have been intended. So it is an open question whether Sigeberht was Raedwald's son or his stepson. During Raedwald's reign he was in exile in Francia, where he was converted to Christianity and baptized. After the death in 627 or 628 of Earpwald, Raedwald's successor, a period of three years' disorder ensued in East Anglia. After Sigeberht became king, in 630 or 631, he obtained the help of Felix, a Burgundian ordained in Francia. Felix had come to Honorius, archbishop of Canterbury, who sent him to East Anglia. He was given an episcopal 'sedes' at 'Dommoc', which may have been Dunwich, or Felixstowe, or somewhere else. With Felix's assistance Sigeberht set up a school for children, after the model of those at Canterbury. He patronized an Irish monk, Fursa, and gave him the site for a monastery at Cnobheresburg. The oft-repeated statement that this was at Burgh Castle, Suffolk, is probably erroneous. At some stage (probably somewhat before, possibly long before, 654) Sigeberht resigned the kingdom to his kinsman Ecgric, who had previously been ruling a subordinate part, and entered a monastery. The statement of the twelfth-century 'Liber Eliensis' that this was at Betrichesworde (later Bury St Edmunds) is untrustworthy. Upon Penda, king of the Mercians, assaulting East Anglia, Sigeberht was urged to leave his monastery and lead the army. He did so, reluctantly; but he would not bear arms, carrying only a rod into the battle in which he was killed. Bede's summary indications are of a career of interest and importance, not least for its place in a context of relations with Frankish Gaul. That Sigeberht's name was one borne by Frankish kings and that he spent his exile in Gaul are, like the Merovingian coins at Sutton Hoo, suggestive of a stronger East Anglian connection with Francia than is directly demonstrable. 


@@@@@


doc= 25532


Sigeberht II (fl. c.653), who was probably the son of King Saeward, was converted through the influence of his overlord, King Oswiu of Northumbria, and was baptized 'c'.653 by Bishop Finan on a Northumbrian royal estate near Hadrian's Wall. As a result of Oswiu's intervention, Cedd (who had been trained at Lindisfarne) was dispatched to become the second bishop of the East Saxons. However, Sigeberht's change in religion was not approved by all his court, and he was murdered by two brothers (who were also his kinsmen) on the grounds that by being too willing to spread Christian forgiveness to his enemies, he was not sufficiently honouring his supporters. His successor 


@@@@@


doc= 25533


Sigeberht (d. 757), king of the West Saxons, became king on the death of Cuthred in 756 and was murdered the following year. He is not named in any of the extant genealogies of the West Saxon kings, and nothing definite is known of his ancestry and connections, except that he had a brother, Cyneheard. According to the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', Cyneheard was descended in the paternal line from Cerdic, but such claims cannot be taken at face value since genealogies were sometimes manipulated to provide the descent which was considered to confer legal title to rule. Virtually nothing is known of Sigeberht's brief reign, but he is recorded as granting lands in what are now Somerset and Dorset, possibly to the monasteries of Glastonbury and Sherborne respectively. 
Sigeberht's rule was successfully challenged in 757 by Cynewulf, who obtained the support of most of the West Saxon councillors. For a while Sigeberht retained a power base in the area of modern Hampshire and the support of Ealdorman Cumbra; but eventually he killed Cumbra and was driven out into the weald, probably in Sussex. On venturing back westwards, he was stabbed to death at Privett (near modern Petersfield) by a swineherd who was avenging the ealdorman. 
The fact that Cyneheard attempted to secure the kingship twenty-nine years later, when he fought and killed Cynewulf, suggests that the brothers were very young in 756-7, and the unjust acts which the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' mentions as the cause of Sigeberht's loss of support in Wessex may have been the errors of youth and inexperience. Nothing in his story suggests that he was very capable, and he presumably acquired the kingship for other reasons, possibly as the rightful heir of his predecessor. Cumbra, who stood by him longest, was an ealdorman in the reign of Cuthred and it is possible that Sigeberht and Cyneheard were the sons of Cuthred. Cyneheard was buried at Axminster, but Sigeberht's place of burial is not recorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 25534


Sigered (fl. 762-765), who in one charter is explicitly called 'king of half Kent' and whose name suggests that he may have had some connection with the East Saxon royal dynasty. By 765 Sigered had also been swept away, and west Kent was in the hands of King 


@@@@@


doc= 25535


Sigered (fl. 811), son of Sigeric, who was ruling in 811, though recognizing Mercian supremacy. Sigered may have been expelled in 825 when the East Saxons surrendered to Ecgberht of Wessex and became a West Saxon dependency. Even after the West Saxon take-over, there is a surviving reference to a Sigeric styled king of the East Saxons in the entourage of King Wiglaf of the Mercians. 


@@@@@


doc= 25536


Sigeric (d. 994), archbishop of Canterbury, formerly a monk at Glastonbury, was elected abbot of St Augustine's, Canterbury, in 980, and was consecrated by Archbishop Dunstan. He was made bishop of Ramsbury in 985 through the influence of Dunstan, who consecrated him, and perhaps retained his abbacy until he was elected to Canterbury at the beginning of 990. He went to Rome for his pallium, and an account of his travels records twenty-three churches which he visited, his midday meal with Pope John XV, and the seventy-nine stages of his homeward journey from Rome to the place of his embarkation for England, at or near Calais. According to John of Worcester, Sigeric, together with the ealdormen AEthelweard and AElfric, advised AEthelred II to render tribute to the vikings in 991. Text A of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' identifies his co-adviser as Bishop AElfhead of Winchester. In 994 Sigeric rendered a further tribute to stop the Danes from burning down Canterbury Cathedral. He is said to have turned out the secular clerks from Christ Church, Canterbury, and to have put monks in their place. He is also said to have advised King AEthelred to found Cholsey Abbey for the soul of his brother Edward the Martyr and to commemorate Edward at Shaftesbury. Sigeric died in old age on 28 October 994, and was buried in the crypt of Christ Church. Abbot AElfric ('fl'. 'c'.950-1010), dedicated his first and second series of 'Catholic Homilies' to him. Sigeric had a valuable collection of books, which he left to Canterbury. He bequeathed to Glastonbury Abbey seven wall-hangings decorated with white lions, with which the whole of the Old Church was hung on his anniversary. 


@@@@@


doc= 25537


Sigfrid (d. 689), co-abbot of St Peter's, Wearmouth, was a monk and deacon of that house and was elected abbot during the absence of Benedict Biscop on his fifth journey to Rome. Bede gives a contemporary account of Sigfrid in his 'Historia abbatum' of Wearmouth and Jarrow. On his departure Benedict had left the monastery under the charge of Eosterwine, who, together with a large number of the brethren, died of the plague about 686. Those who were left, on the advice of Ceolfrith, abbot of the daughter monastery at Jarrow, elected Sigfrid in his place. Sigfrid was well versed in the scriptures, but he suffered from an incurable disease of the lungs. On his return Benedict was pleased at his election and confirmed it, assigning to him the active charge of the monastery, and devoting himself to teaching and prayer. Before long Sigfrid's health became much worse, and, Benedict also falling sick, the two lay helpless in their separate cells until one day both desired to be brought together, and Sigfrid was carried into Benedict's cell, where the brethren supported the two abbots so as to enable them to give each other a farewell kiss, and Benedict, with the consent of all, appointed Ceolfrith abbot of Wearmouth as well as of Jarrow. The anonymous historian of Wearmouth and Jarrow, who closely followed Bede's account, states that Sigfrid died on 22 August 689. After the death of Benedict, apparently on 12 January following, the bodies of Sigfrid and Eosterwine were laid with his body in the church of Wearmouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 25538


Sigeheard (fl. 693/4) and 


@@@@@


doc= 25539


Sigehere (fl. 663-664), who was probably the son of Sigeberht Sanctus, and 


@@@@@


doc= 25540


Sigillo, Nicholas de (fl. 1156-c.1187), administrator and priest, was a royal clerk in the exchequer, where he held the office of 'clericus de sigillo', or 'magister scriptorii', in which capacity he ranked next to the chancellor. He derived his name, 'de Sigillo', from his office, as did Robert de Sigillo, the bishop of London, who held the same position in the reign of Henry I. It is possible, although far from certain, that Nicholas served King Stephen. Between 1148 and 1160 the bishop of Lincoln confirmed the church of Warboys to Ramsey Abbey in Huntingdonshire, stating that Nicholas was to hold it for life unless he became a monk. In 1156 he accounted for two hawks in Lincolnshire, and in 1157 was involved in the administration of Henry II's expedition to Wales. Between 1157 and 1159 he was a witness to royal charters, and in September 1173 he tallaged the king's demesnes together with Richard fitz Nigel and Reginald de Warenne. He succeeded Henry of Huntingdon as archdeacon of Huntingdon, probably between 1164 and 1166, and received a letter of congratulations from John of Salisbury, commenting that Nicholas would now have to change his mind about the small hopes of salvation enjoyed by archdeacons. He is last mentioned as archdeacon about 1187. A case of John's reign mentioned that he gave a messuage in Southampton to his niece (or conceivably his granddaughter) Emma. 


@@@@@


doc= 25541


Sihtric inn Gamli (d. 871), viking leader, fought and was slain, along with his namesake, 


@@@@@


doc= 25542


Sihtric inn Ungi (d. 871), at the battle of Ashdown. Both men were earls ('the Old' and 'the Young' respectively) and they were among the five who jointly headed a division of the heathen army during the battle. 


@@@@@


doc= 25543


Sihtric Caech (d. 927), king of York, was a grandson of Ivarr the Boneless, probably the son of the Sihtric who ruled in Dublin from 888 until his death in 896, and probably also brother of his predecessor as king at York, Ragnall. The annals of Ulster describe Sihtric Caech (whose epithet means 'the Squinty') as 'king of the Finngaill and the Dubhgaill' (the 'Fair Foreigners' and the 'Dark Foreigners', that is, the Norwegian and Danish settlers in Ireland and northern England). Most of what is known about Sihtric comes from English and Irish annals, but their ambiguity is such that reconstruction of his career is very difficult and many uncertainties remain. 
It seems that, together with other grandsons of Ivarr, Sihtric was expelled from Ireland in 902. He may have been the Sihtric active in the eastern Danelaw, who ruled as an earl in Cambridgeshire, where coins were issued at this time bearing the legend SITRIC COMES and the mint name SCELDFOR (Shelford). The possible identity of the two Sihtrics becomes less implausible when one recalls that Ivarr the Boneless was one of the vikings who slew King Edmund of East Anglia. Coin evidence shows links between York and the eastern Danelaw at this period. The chronology of the two Sihtrics also dovetails. The Danes of Cambridgeshire surrendered to King Edward the Elder in 917, but the fate of their Earl Sihtric is not recorded in English sources. It seems more than a striking coincidence that in the same year Sihtric Caech arrived with a fleet off Ireland and established himself at 'Cenn Fuait', presumably Glynn in the south of co. Carlow. There he was attacked unsuccessfully by the forces of the high king Niall Glundub. Sihtric then occupied and fortified Dublin and when Niall attacked on 17 December 919 he was killed, together with twelve satellite kings, by Sihtric's forces. A year later Sihtric departed for York, where he succeeded as king his kinsman Ragnall. Sihtric signalled his arrival by a raid on Davonport in Cheshire, but there is no record of further conflict with the southern English. Instead, after King AEthelstan's accession, Sihtric sent an embassy to the new king's court, which led to their meeting at Tamworth in Mercia on 30 January 926, when Sihtric accepted Christian baptism and took AEthelstan's sister as his wife. Very soon afterwards he renounced her and reverted to paganism. Roger of Wendover, who names Sihtric's wife as Eadgyth, records that she retired to a nunnery at Polesworth (about 3 miles from Tamworth), where she was revered as a saint. The choice of Tamworth for the meeting-place between the two kings may indicate that Sihtric's kingdom then extended much further south than has generally been conceded. Numismatists have suggested that the coins bearing his name, SITRIC REX, were struck at Lincoln, as also were those bearing the 'St Martin' legend; others, with the legend 'St Peter', were struck at York during his reign. 
Sihtric had several children, the most famous being Olaf Sihtricson, king of Northumbria and of Dublin. Another was Gytha, who married Olaf Tryggvason, king of Norway. Sihtric died at York in 927, some time before the end of June. He was followed there as king by his kinsman 


@@@@@


doc= 25544


Sihtric Cam (fl. 962), warrior, raided Dublin's territory. Sihtric's ships landed to the north of Dublin and raided from the sea to Ui Colgain (near Lusk). Olaf led a force against him, but in the ensuing fray he was struck by an arrow through the leg (perhaps the origin of his epithet, which means 'the Crooked'). His injury notwithstanding, Olaf drove Sihtric back to his ships and out of his territory. 


@@@@@


doc= 25545


Sihtric (d. 1042), king of Dublin, was the son of Olaf Sihtricson (d. 981), sometime king of Dublin and Northumbria, and Gormflaith (died 1030), daughter of Murchad mac Finn, king of Leinster; his alternative Old Norse name, Sigtryggr Silkiskegg, may be translated as Sihtric Silkenbeard. Sihtric acceded to the kingship of Dublin after the murder of his paternal half-brother Gluniairn in 989. In 994 a rival viking leader named Ivarr of Waterford forced him from the city, but he was reinstated by the following year. He was allied with his mother's brother Mael Morda, who was soon to be king of Leinster, when the pair were defeated late in 999 at the battle of Glenn Mama (Wicklow) by the future high-king Brian Boruma mac Cennetig. Brian captured Dublin on new year's day. 
For more than a decade Sihtric was a faithful subordinate, but in 1013 challenges appeared to Brian's lordship, and Sihtric and Mael Morda rose in revolt. A campaign against Dublin by Brian late in the year achieved nothing, so he made plans to return in the spring. Sihtric sought support from the viking settlements round Britain; an account of his mission to Sigurd, earl of Orkney, is found in 'Njals saga'. At the eventual confrontation, the famous battle of Clontarf fought on Good Friday (23 April) 1014, Sihtric and Mael Morda had in their ranks vikings from Orkney, the Hebrides, the Isle of Man, and northern England, in addition to troops from Leinster and Dublin. On the actual day of battle Sihtric remained aloof and watched the conflict from the walls of Dublin, although his sons and kinsmen fought. Even though Clontarf is considered to have been a victory for Brian, it was a Pyrrhic victory; the high-king was slain, his army sustained heavy losses, and Sihtric remained in control of Dublin. 
By this time Dublin was one of the leading ports on the Irish Sea, and Sihtric had to contend with Irish princes who wanted a share of Dublin's riches. A brief glimpse of this wealth can be seen when, in 1029, he had to pay a ransom for his son Olaf, which included 1200 cows, 120 Welsh ponies, 60 ounces of gold, and another 60 ounces of silver. In 1030 Sihtric allied with the king of the English, Cnut, and their fleets raided Wales, after which a Dublin colony was established in Gwynedd. For the following years Sihtric was at the height of his power, defeating neighbouring Irish kingdoms, including an alliance of three at the Boyne in 1032, and executing rivals at Dublin. Sihtric was forced to abdicate, however, in 1036 in favour of Echmarcach Rognvaldsson, lord of the Isles. He died in exile, at an unknown place, in 1042. 
Sihtric was also a patron of the arts, a benefactor of the church, and an economic innovator. Verses survive that were composed in his honour by the Icelandic poet Gunnlaug Serpent-Tongue. He established a bishopric at Dublin in addition to beginning the construction of Christ Church Cathedral, and in 1028 he made a pilgrimage to Rome. In the last decade of the tenth century Sihtric founded a mint at Dublin, the first mint in Ireland. His wife was Slaine, daughter of Brian Boruma. Their son Olaf was killed in England in 1034, but Olaf's dynasty ruled in Wales after his grandson Gruffudd ap Cynan took lordship of Gwynedd. Other children of Sihtric were Artalach (died 999), Olaf (died 1013), Gluniairn (died 1031), Guthfrith (died 1036), and Cellach (died 1042). 


@@@@@


doc= 25546


Sikes, Sir Charles William (1818-1889), banker, was born on 15 February 1818 in Huddersfield, the second son of Shakespear Garrick Sikes, banker, and his wife, Hannah, daughter of John Hurst of Huddersfield. In 1833 he entered the office of the Huddersfield Banking Company, in 1837 became cashier, and in 1881 managing director. 
In 1850 Sikes wrote anonymously to the 'Leeds Mercury' to propose the establishment of savings banks, and in 1854 developed his proposals in a pamphlet entitled 'Good Times, or, The Savings Bank and the Fireside'. A state savings bank had been proposed on a number of occasions in the past, by Jeremy Bentham in one instance, who suggested the creation of 'frugality banks'. Sikes's initial proposal was to reform the existing trustee savings banks, which were run by local trustees on a voluntary basis; all deposits were handed to the national debt commissioners who paid interest at a fixed rate. The problem was that the hours of opening and coverage of the banks were inadequate, and Sikes's solution was to utilize mechanics' institutes as 'feeders' to the nearest trustee savings bank, with a central guarantee fund to provide security. The Yorkshire Union of Mechanics' Institutes adopted his suggestion, but it was clearly only a partial solution. In 1859, in an open letter to the chancellor of the exchequer, William Gladstone, he suggested that the Post Office should take on the role of 'feeder', remitting sums of $1 and above to a central savings bank in London by means of its existing money-order system; in return, depositors would receive 'interest notes' paying 21/2 per cent. Sikes assumed that the central bank would be a separate institution, and that the existing transfer services of the Post Office would simply offer a means of providing an adequate coverage of the country. 
The plan was drawn to the attention of Rowland Hill by Edward Baines, one of the members for Leeds, and it became the basis of a dispute within the Post Office on the limits of state action. On the one side Rowland and Frederic Hill insisted that the money orders should pay the full rate, and that transfers should be limited to multiples of $1, so as to prevent any competition with commercial banks in transmitting money or with the trustee savings banks, and to remove the danger that it would be a distraction from the main business of the Post Office. On the other side were Frank Ives Scudamore and George Chetwynd, who were eager for the Post Office to expand, particularly where competition between public and private concerns was possible as a guarantee of efficiency. Sikes's scheme was transformed by Chetwynd and Scudamore, in opposition to the Hills, whose caution was overruled by the postmaster general: money orders and interest notes were abandoned, and the Post Office simply entered deposits, of any amount, in a bank book; funds were transferred to a central Post Office Savings Bank which was an integral part of the department. 
This expansion of the Post Office was accepted by Gladstone as a solution to the financial problems of the trustee savings banks. The national debt commissioners paid more to the banks than was received from investment in government securities, and Gladstone's attempt to resolve this problem had resulted in deadlock. The Post Office Savings Bank offered a solution, for deposits were transferred to the national debt commissioners which paid only the actual interest earned. The Post Office Savings Bank started operation in 1861, in a form far removed from the suggestion of Sikes, whose proposal had fortuituously coincided with the tussle between minimalists and expansionists within the Post Office, and with Gladstone's desire to prevent the trustee savings banks from imposing a financial drain. Sikes was knighted in 1881 in recognition of his role in the creation of the Post Office Savings Bank. He died unmarried on 15 October 1889 at his home, Birkby Lodge, Huddersfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 25547


Sillery, Charles Doyne (1807-1837), poet, born at Athlone, Ireland, on 2 March 1807, was the son of an Irish artillery officer, Captain Charles Doyne Sillery, a native of Drogheda, co. Louth, who died of wounds received at the battle of Talavera in 1809, and Catherine, youngest daughter of Barclay Fyfe of Leith, Midlothian. She later married James Watson of Tonthey Hall, Berkshire. The younger Charles entered the navy at an early age, serving as a midshipman on a voyage to China and India. Delicate health prevented him from following a naval career, and in 1828 he settled in Edinburgh in order to study surgery at the university there. The university records make no mention of him after 1829. Besides three small religious works, entitled respectively 'A Discourse on the Sufferings of Our Saviour' (1833), 'An Essay on the Creation of the Universe' (1833), and 'The Man of Sorrows', published posthumously, he published the following volumes of verse: 'Vallery, or, The Citadel of the Lake' (1829), 'Eldred of Erin' (1830), 'The Royal Mariner and other Poems' (1834), and 'The Exiles of Chamouni' (1834). He also contributed verses to the 'Edinburgh Literary Journal'. He died in Edinburgh on 16 May 1837 as a result of pulmonary consumption. Several of his poems have been included in Scottish literary anthologies. 


@@@@@


doc= 25548


Sillett, James (1764-1840), painter, son of James Sillett of Eye, Suffolk, was born in Norwich, where he was apprenticed as a heraldic painter. He moved to London, possibly in 1781. Initially employed as a copyist for the Polygraphic Society, he later joined William Capon as a scene-painter at Drury Lane Theatre. Various sources, including Sillett himself ('Norwich Mercury', 4 July 1812), claim that he studied at the Royal Academy Schools. He is not, however, entered in the register, although his ticket for admission to the winter lectures for 1796 exists in the Reeve collection at the British Museum. In 1801 he married Ann Banyard of East Dereham, through whom he came into property. They had five children, three of whom died in infancy, the two surviving being his daughter Emma ['see below'], baptized at St Stephen, Norwich, on 21 February 1802, and son Edwin James, born on 16 April 1803. 
Sillett returned to Norwich in 1801, advertising private tuition, evening classes, and afternoon schools in the local press. He was swiftly established within the local artistic scene, associating with the leaders of the Norwich Society of Artists, founded in 1803. He remained there except for a four-year period between 1804 and 1808 when he relocated to Norfolk Street, King's Lynn, teaching drawing and, in January 1808, exhibiting examples of his own work at Mr Lockett's Coffee House in the Market Place. His association with King's Lynn endured, and he produced the illustrations for William Richard's 'History of Lynn' of 1812. 
Sillett exhibited forty-three works at the Royal Academy between 1796 and 1837, including miniatures, landscapes, and still lifes. It was for his paintings of game, fruit, and flowers that he was chiefly known. These are characterized by immaculate draughtsmanship, precise finishing, and by their debt to Dutch masters. In particular, Sillett's more academic style distinguishes his landscapes from those of Norwich contemporaries who painted local scenery with a more open mind to nature. Examples include 'Flowers and Fruit' (1827) and 'Thorpe Garden Public House' (1818; Norwich Castle Museum), 'Garden Mallows' (BM), and 'Hollyhocks' (1807; V&A). Claims in 1812 that his own specialization in still life restricted his teaching practice led Sillett to state publicly 'that his mode of teaching is by no means confined to fruit, flowers &c as has been insinuated, but extends to the practice of Drawing in general' and at the same time to suggest: 'there is more beauty in the delineation of a pig-sty or cart than in the human figure or the beautiful of the flower garden' ('Norwich Mercury', 4, 11 July 1812). 
Between 1806 and 1833 Sillett exhibited 289 works at the Norwich Society of Artists at Sir Benjamin Wrench's Court, and was vice-president, then president in 1814-15. In 1816 he was one of a group of artists who broke away from that organization and in that same year was involved in the formation of the short-lived Norfolk and Norwich Society of Arts. He exhibited with other members of this society, including Robert Ladbrooke and John Thirtle, at the Theatre Plain, Norwich, until the group disbanded in 1818 and Sillett resumed his contributions to the Norwich Society of Artists. From 1823 he exhibited in other provincial centres such as Newcastle. Ackermanns, the artists' colourmen, published his 'Grammar of Flower Painting' (1820). In 1828 he published a set of fifty-nine views of public edifices in Norwich, and travelled to Holland, visiting Rotterdam and Leiden, of which he exhibited views at the Norwich Society of Artists. Sillett died at St Peter per Mountergate, Norwich, on 6 May 1840. His wife and children survived him. 




@@@@@


doc= 25549


Silver, George (fl. 1580-1599), swordsman and writer on fencing, was the eldest son of Richard Silver of Ropley, Hampshire, and his wife, Agnes, daughter of Thomas West, one of the ramified West family of Sussex and Hampshire, of whom the barons De La Warr were the chief representatives. Nothing is known of his early life, but Silver was probably ordinarily resident in London by early 1580. On 24 March of that year he married in St Clement Danes, Mary Heydon, a spinster of the city of London whose father, George Heydon of Norwich, was the son of Sir John Heydon of Baconsthorpe, Norfolk. It is not known where or how George Silver acquired his mastery of fencing. There was in London a society of swordsmen known as the 'masters of defence', originally chartered as a corporation by Henry VIII, but Silver was not a member; he thought these men were worthy, but lacked the finest skills. 
Silver's book 'Paradoxes of Defence' was entered in the register of the Stationers' Company on 30 January 1599. In it Silver recalled two Italians, Ieronimo, an apprentice, and Vincentio, a master identifiable as Vincentio Saviolo, who had for seven or eight years earned a living in England teaching the technique of the rapier to gentlemen: 'These two Italian fencers, especially Vincentio, said that Englishmen were strong men, but had no cunning, and they would go back too much in their fight, which was great disgrace unto them. Upon these words, my brother Toby Silver and myself made challenge of them both, to play with them at single rapier, rapier and dagger, the single dagger, the single sword, the sword and target, the sword and buckler, and two hand sword, the staff, battle axe and morris pike, to be played at the Bel Savage upon the scaffold, where he that went in his fight faster back than he ought, of Englishman or Italian, should be in danger to break his neck off the scaffold. ('Paradoxes', 66)' Such was their confidence, Silver here suggested, that they had consented to fight at the Bel Savage on Ludgate Hill, an inn which also served as a playhouse, even though its small stage would greatly disadvantage those who fought in rapid retreat, as the English were said to. Fencing contests were familiar sights in London, for they were used by the masters of defence as tests whereby students advanced to full membership of their society, and many were held in playhouses as a kind of theatrical entertainment. George and Toby Silver posted 'five or six score bills of challenge... from the Southwark to the Tower, and from thence through London unto Westminster'. When they arrived at the Bel Savage on the appointed day, there were 'a multitude of people there to behold the fight', but the Italians did not appear ('Paradoxes', 66-7). The credibility of the account is damaged by the author's apparent belief that the virtue of courage was not to be found among men of Italian nationality. His prefatory admonition to Englishmen urges them to reject the influence of foreign teachers, and, 'casting off these Italianated, weake, fanatical, and most divellish and imperfect fights' return to their natural style (ibid., 1). But what was this? Silver's complaint against the Italian teachers was that they 'did not teach defence but offence' (ibid., 77). 
For very nearly 300 years Silver's fame rested upon this single published book, yet he also produced a second work, which is in many respects more interesting but which remained in manuscript until its eventual publication in 1898 by Captain C. G. R. Matthey in 'The Works of George Silver'. This was entitled 'Bref instructions upo my paradoxes of defence', clearly intended as a companion to the published work. It sets out a series of tactical precepts and techniques, which rest upon a distinctive strategic approach: 'Silver lays great stress upon defence... and it is only when in safety that he advises counter-attack or riposte' ('Works', xvi). For Matthey, the manual was of more than academic interest: it could be 'put into practice in sword encounters with highly successful results, especially when they take place against men of savage or barbarian races that Her Majesty's troops are now so frequently sent to face in various quarters of the globe' (ibid., xv). According to a later authority, the work 'describes an advanced technique of short sword fencing which we would recognise as somewhat similar to nineteenth-century sabre fencing. Silver was teaching a new and radical technique of parrying with the edge of the light short sword, and with this considerable improvement in technique had evolved an early and effective sabre style,' suitable not just for duelling but for street fighting and battle (Jackson, viii). Silver's manual reveals him as an expert technician, whose impatience with his rivals was not merely arrogance or chauvinism. 
Nothing more is certainly known about George Silver's life, but his wife, Mary, married a second husband, Edward Edwards of Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire, and this may suggest that Silver died young. In 1599 the administration is recorded of the property of a Tobias Silver, who had been killed in Ireland. This was probably the brother, and partner, of whom Silver wrote. 'Paradoxes of Defence' contained a preface dedicated to Robert, earl of Essex. It may be that the two brothers enlisted together as swordsmen in the earl's expedition to Ireland in 1599, and that George, like Toby, did not return. 


@@@@@


doc= 25550


Silvester, Sir Philip Carteret, second baronet (1777-1828), naval officer, was the son of Rear-Admiral Philip Carteret (1733-1796), the circumnavigator, and his wife, Marie Rachel (died in or after 1797), daughter of Sir John Baptist Silvester (died 1789), born in France but educated in the Netherlands, and physician to the British army in the Low Countries, under the duke of Cumberland, during the War of the Austrian Succession (1740-48). His mother's brother, whose title and name he eventually inherited, was Sir John Silvester, first baronet (1745-1822). 
Philip Carteret entered the navy in 1792 under the care of his father's old lieutenant, Captain Erasmus Gower, on the 'Lion', in which he went out to China, and returned in 1794. He was then with Gower in the 'Triumph' (74 guns) and was slightly wounded in the partial engagement with the French fleet on 17 June 1795. On 8 October of that year he was promoted lieutenant of the frigate 'Imperieuse'; he afterwards served in the 'Greyhound', 'Britannia', and 'Cambrian' in the English Channel and on the coast of France; and on 29 April 1802 he was promoted commander of the sloop 'Bonne Citoyenne' in the Mediterranean. She was paid off in 1803, and the following year he was appointed to the brig 'Scorpion' (18 guns), in which he served in the North Sea, and on 11 April 1805 captured a Dutch vessel bound for the West Indies with a cargo of arms and military stores. In December 1805 he was sent out to the West Indies, where, during the greater part of 1806, he watched and sent intelligence of the French squadron under Willaumez, so that it was not until his return to England in spring 1807 that he received his commission as post captain, dated 22 January 1806. 
In 1809 Carteret served as a volunteer on the 'Superb', flagship of Sir Richard Goodwin Keats, in the expedition to the Scheldt, where his conduct, especially in covering the evacuation of Walcheren, was highly commended by Sir Richard John Strachan, the commander-in-chief, and Commodore Owen, in actual command of the operations. In summer 1811 Carteret was appointed to the frigate 'Naiad' (46 guns), in which on 20 September he was off Boulogne when a division of the French flotilla got under way and stood along the coast under the eyes of Napoleon, who on the next day witnessed a detachment of this division cut off, brought to action, and captured by the 'Naiad' with three gun-brigs in company. The rest of the division escaped under the guns of the batteries which lined the coast. 
Towards the end of 1812 Carteret was moved into the frigate 'Pomone' (46 guns), employed on the coast of France and the Lisbon station. On 21 October 1813, in hazy weather in the Bay of Biscay, she fell in with a French frigate under jury masts, much disabled by a recent gale, and at the same time sighted another large ship which was supposed to be also a frigate. Carteret went to engage her, but found she was a Portuguese East Indiaman. Meanwhile the disabled French frigate had escaped, only to be captured, after very feeble resistance, by the 'Andromache' two days later. At Lisbon it was reported that the 'Pomone' had fled from the frigate, and Carteret applied for a court martial, which was held, on his return to Plymouth, on 31 December. He was acquitted of all blame and continued in command of the 'Pomone' until the end of the war. On 4 June 1815 he was made a CB and about the same time was appointed to the 'Desiree' (36 guns), from which in October he was moved to the 'Active' (38 guns). In her he served two years on the Jamaica station. After returning in autumn 1817 he had no further employment. In January 1822 he took the name of Silvester in addition to Carteret, and on the death of his uncle, Sir John Silvester, without issue, on 30 March 1822, he succeeded to the baronetcy, by a special clause in the patent. He died, unmarried, of 'apoplexy', at Leamington, Warwickshire, on 24 August 1828, when the title became extinct; he was interred at the parish church at Leamington. 


@@@@@


doc= 25551


Silvester, Tipping (1700-1768), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was born in the parish of St Mary Woolnoth, London, the son of John Silvester, linen draper of that parish, and Grace (died 1705), daughter of George Tipping, draper, who was descended from the Tipping family of Shabbington in Buckinghamshire. He matriculated from Pembroke College, Oxford, on 13 July 1717, and graduated BA in 1721 and MA in 1724. He was elected a fellow of his college and, having taken holy orders, he was presented by Prudence Tipping, on 21 March 1737, to the vicarage of Shabbington. There he lived until his death. 
Having published 'Original Poems and Translations' (1733) Silvester confined himself to theological debates. His 'Critical Dissertation on Titus iii.10, 11' refuted the heretical arguments of James Foster; this provoked a burlesque reply from Joseph Danvers, entitled 'Tipping Tipt Justice' ([1735]), in which Danvers suggested that Silvester's defence of the Church of England was largely self-interest. Silvester replied in 'The Evidence of the Resurrection' (1744). Silvester also published several sermons on various subjects and edited Thomas Cockman's 'Select Theological Discourses' (1750). He died at Shabbington in 1768. 


@@@@@


doc= 25552


Simcocks, John (1609-1695), Jesuit, was born in London on 28 September 1609. Nothing is known of his parents. He was educated at the English College at St Omer in Flanders from 1628 to 1631 and in the latter year entered the Society of Jesus at Watten in Flanders as John Manners, the name which he seems to have used more often than not. He was ordained priest about 1640. At about this time he was transferred from the English province to the Roman province of the Jesuits and for some years his name does not appear in the annual English catalogues. After lecturing in philosophy at Perugia he was appointed in 1649 director of studies at the English College, Rome, and in 1655 was named rector, an office he held until the end of 1658. He was then sent as English penitentiary to Loreto to hear the confessions of English pilgrims to the shrine. 
In 1663 Simcocks was spiritual director at the English Jesuit college at Liege and it was probably at this time that he met Lady Trevor Warner who entered among the Poor Clare nuns at Gravelines in 1666. His high opinion of her was quoted by Edward Scarisbrick in his life of her published in 1691. He crossed over to England in 1669 and served as a missionary in the Suffolk district until 1678. A controversial work, 'An Invitation of a Seeker', by J. S. (John Simcocks) was published in 1670. 
From 1679 Simcocks was at Ghent or Brussels and from 1682 he was working in London. He retired to France in 1689 and remained at St Germain at the court of James II until his death there in 1695. It was recorded under the name John Grosvenor. 


@@@@@


doc= 25553


Simcoe, Henry Addington (1800-1868), theologian, was born on 28 February 1800 in Plymouth, son of Lieutenant-General John Graves Simcoe (1752-1806) and his wife, Elizabeth Postuma Simcoe (1762-1850), the diarist and artist, only daughter of Thomas Gwillim of Old Court, Herefordshire. He was educated at Eton College and at Wadham College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 13 April 1818, obtaining his BA on 17 December 1821, and his MA on 3 November 1825. He married, on 8 February 1822, Anne (died 1840), second daughter of the Revd Edward Palmer, vicar of Moseley in Worcestershire and Stogumber in Somerset; they had five sons and four daughters. Following his ordination Simcoe was in 1826 appointed curate at Egloskerry with Tremaine in Cornwall. 
After the death of his father in 1806 Simcoe had inherited the estate of Wolford at Dunkeswell in Devon; in 1826 he inherited the estate of William Walcot of Oundle, Northamptonshire, the Simcoes' native county, and through his mother's family he acquired property in Herefordshire. In 1830 he purchased the picturesque Jacobean manor house of Penheale in Egloskerry, with its gardens, fishponds, and avenue of lime trees. Simcoe maintained a private printing press at Penheale, producing over twenty theological works and nine volumes of a periodical, 'Light from the West, or, The Cornish Parochial Visitor'. His interests also included agriculture, chemistry, and medicine; he acted as unofficial medical adviser to his parishioners, providing them with free drugs developed in his own laboratory. Anne Simcoe died on 6 December 1840, and two years later, on 21 December 1842, Simcoe married Emily (died 24 May 1877), second daughter of the Revd Horace Mann, rector of Mawgan with St Martin, Cornwall; they had two daughters. 
Simcoe was instituted perpetual curate of Egloskerry and Tremaine on 4 July 1846 (he had recently acquired the advowson) and he also served as rural dean of Trigg Major. During his long incumbency he held four services with sermons every Sunday in each of his two churches, a feat remarked upon in the sermon delivered at his funeral. Simcoe died at Penheale House on 15 November 1868, and was buried in Egloskerry churchyard on 24 November; his obituary in 'One and All' described him as 'a much-esteemed clergyman of the Evangelical school', while an illuminated address, presented to his widow by the parishioners, praised his great physical strength, punctuality, benevolence, and 'uncompromising support of Protestant and Evangelical truth': he was known locally as the Apostle of the West. 


@@@@@


doc= 25554


Simcoe, John Graves (1752-1806), army officer and colonial governor, was born on 25 February 1752 at Cotterstock, Northamptonshire, the third son (and only child to reach adulthood) of Captain John Simcoe (1710-1759), a naval officer of middle-class family who had obtained a grant of arms in 1747, and his wife, Catherine Stamford (died 1766). After his father died in command of the man-of-war 'Pembroke' early in the 1759 Quebec operations, the family moved to his mother's Exeter home, from where Simcoe was well educated for an army officer, at Exeter grammar school (1760-65), at Eton College (1765-8), and Merton College, Oxford (1769-70). He was also admitted in February 1769 at Lincoln's Inn, before leaving for the army. 
After a year with a military tutor at Exeter, through the influence of his mother's family Simcoe was commissioned ensign on 27 April 1770, by purchase, in the 35th foot, then serving in England; he embarked with his regiment for Ireland in April 1773, and was promoted lieutenant (by purchase) on 12 March 1774, serving as adjutant from 27 March 1772 until leaving the 35th. He sailed from Cork in April 1775, the 35th forming part of the first embarkation of Irish reinforcements for the army at Boston, arriving there from 11 June. In the Boston garrison Simcoe purchased a captaincy in the 40th foot, on 27 December 1775; and with the 40th he served on the 1776 New York and 1777 Philadelphia campaigns, being severely wounded at Brandywine. After being refused permission to raise a corps from the free black inhabitants of Boston, on 15 October 1777 he took command of the Queen's rangers, a loyalist 'legion' of mixed light horse and foot; at first with the provincial rank of major, and later of lieutenant-colonel commandant, Simcoe made his name in the 'petite guerre' of raids, reconnaissance, and outpost skirmishing that characterized its service. As contemptuous of the military capacity of his adversaries as he was of their republicanism, his leadership made the Queen's rangers the most successful of the American loyalist corps. He was captured in 1779 and spent six months as a prisoner. He was made brevet lieutenant-colonel in the army, on 19 December 1781, not long after being invalided home to Exeter, ending his six and a half years' service in the American War of Independence. 
On 30 December 1782 Simcoe married Elizabeth Postuma Gwillim (1762-1850) ['see 'Simcoe, Elizabeth Postuma], daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Gwillim of Old Court, Ross, Herefordshire, and niece and ward of Simcoe's godfather, Admiral Samuel Graves. A wealthy heiress, she brought him a 5000 acre estate at Dunkeswell, near Honiton, Devon, on which they built Wolford Lodge, where they lived from 1788. Their marriage was happy, and they had three sons and eight daughters. Among their sons was the theologian Henry Addington Simcoe. After being put on half pay late in 1783 with the disbandment of the Queen's rangers, Simcoe devoted his years at Exeter to convalescence and study, publishing there in 1787 his important military work, the 'Journal of the Operations of the Queen's Rangers', the outstanding tactical study of the 'petite guerre' to emerge from the eighteenth-century American wars, an invaluable training and tactical manual for officers soon to be engaged with the light forces of the French revolutionary armies. Prefixed to the copy presented to the king was an essay summarizing Simcoe's views on the organization, training, and tactics of mixed light troops. He also published 'Remarks on the Travels of the Marquis de Chastellux' (1787), condemning French intervention in America. 
Having turned down Pitt's offer of 1788 that he stand for Honiton as a friend of government, Simcoe entered parliament in 1790 as member for the marquess of Buckingham's freeman pocket borough, St Mawes, Cornwall. A supporter of the administration, he spoke on several occasions and took a particular interest in colonial issues, but his goal was a military or colonial posting, which he secured when appointed lieutenant-governor (his commission dated 12 September 1791) of the new province of Upper Canada, under the Canadian governor-in-chief, Lord Dorchester. Simcoe, his wife, and two youngest children sailed from England on 26 September 1791, arriving on 11 November at Quebec, where they wintered. They reached the temporary capital, Newark (modern Niagara on the Lake), on 26 July 1792. He had in the meantime been made colonel in a general brevet promotion of 18 November 1790, and colonel-commandant of the reconstituted Queen's rangers, his commission dated 1 September 1791. The new Queen's rangers, raised for service in Upper Canada, were intended by Simcoe as military pioneers, to form the nuclei of new, well-ordered settlements, but in fact they were used mainly to open strategic roads to funnel settlement to the west of the province and to facilitate troop movements, then later for garrison duties. He was promoted major-general, in Canada, on 3 October 1794. 
Simcoe threw himself into his governorship with the excessive enthusiasm that was characteristic of the man and, as so often in his career, his projections were on a scale beyond the resources provided for the Upper Canadian establishment. His task was to erect a framework of English civil government in the infant loyalist province, a land distribution system that would encourage settlement, and a structure for defence based on a militia and a small marine. His particular interest was in opening the trade and settlement of the south-western part of the province. Though he moved the provincial capital to the fortified harbour at York (Toronto), he envisioned the province as a strategic, offensive-defensive bulwark wedged into the heart of the north-west, with naval bases on the lakes linked by roads radiating from a centrally located, inland 'place of arms' at London (which he founded for that purpose) to forestall future American aggression. He cherished plans to create a flourishing educational system and Church of England in the province -- this, like his conception of the reraised Queen's rangers, to create a bastion of social and political conservatism and to prevent the emergence of American-style frontier democracy. However, his plans for municipal corporations, schools, a provincial university, and a full endowment of the Anglican church in Upper Canada were refused by the British government. A warm and sympathetic man, obviously zealous for the good of the province, he was apparently liked by Canadians. A lake, town, and county in Ontario were named after him. His governorship -- though the extensive goals that he set for it were mostly checked by the authorities at home, the Quebec governor-general, or his own legislative council, and though it has remained controversial among historians -- was generally successful, but the illness that dogged his career forced him to return home in the summer of 1796, resigning his governorship early in 1798. 
Simcoe was appointed governor of San Domingo, with local rank as lieutenant-general dated 10 November 1796. In the island, where he arrived early in 1797, he worked to improve the defences against the insurgency of slaves and people of mixed race inspired by the French. His switch to the offensive displeased the British government, which had expected him to oversee a withdrawal to the western tip of the island. In July, his health failing him again, he was obliged to leave for home, though the following January he offered to return to the West Indies. By late 1797 he was at Exeter, in command of the western military district, to which he was sent under the ministry of his friend Henry Addington. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 1 January 1801. Plans to stand in the government interest for Plymouth at the election of 1802 were frustrated. He was given the colonelcy of the 81st foot on 18 January 1798, leaving it on 18 June 1798 for the colonelcy of the 22nd foot, which he retained until his death. 
In July 1806 Simcoe was appointed commander-in-chief in India but in the meantime was sent with Lord St Vincent and Lord Rosslyn on a mission to Portugal. Ill health intervened, however, and Simcoe returned to Exeter, where he died on 26 October 1806. Simcoe was an inspiring soldier and a brilliant tactician, an affable and loyal comrade, and a lifelong student of history and writer of verse, but he was too great a projector, and his ambition outran the uncertain health that plagued him from early manhood. He was buried on 4 November 1806 in the chapel at Wolford Lodge. 


@@@@@


doc= 25555


Sime, James (1843-1895), journalist and writer, born on 31 October 1843, was the eldest son of the Revd James Sime of Airdrie, minister of the Independent congregation in Fraserburgh, Aberdeenshire, and afterwards of Wick and Thurso, Caithness (died 19 September 1865 at Thurso, aged sixty), and his wife, Jane Anderson of Glasgow (died 28 January 1889 at Edinburgh). He was educated at Anderson's Gymnasium, Aberdeen, which he left in 1859 for Edinburgh University (MA 1867). He married, on 6 October 1865, Jessie Aitken Wilson (youngest sister of Sir Daniel Wilson, president of Toronto University, and of Professor George Wilson of Edinburgh University). In 1866, having given up the idea of entering the ministry, he went to Germany, and studied German literature and philosophy, first at Heidelberg University, and afterwards at Berlin. During his stay in Germany he collected materials for his 'Life of Lessing', and he visited most of the places connected with his hero and with Goethe and Schiller. On his return from Germany he settled at Norland Square, Notting Hill, London, in 1869, and began journalism. In 1871 he joined the staff of the Edinburgh Academy but, finding the work uncongenial, resigned and returned to London in 1873 to writing, which occupied him until his death. 
Sime was successively connected with 'The Globe', the 'Pall Mall Gazette', and the 'St James's Gazette' (under Frederick Greenwood), writing mainly on social and educational topics, and continental politics. He was a frequent contributor to 'The Athenaeum', the 'Saturday Review', and the 'English Illustrated Magazine', did weekly work for 'The Graphic' and the 'Daily Graphic' for many years, and for some time was on the staff of 'Nature'. He had planned a history of Germany on a fairly large scale, but his everyday work and premature death prevented the achievement of this ambition. From 1880 he lived at 1 Queen Anne's Grove, a house which he had built in Bedford Park (the new 'arty' garden suburb of London at Chiswick, designed by Norman Shaw). 
Sime's publications included 'History of Germany' (1874), 'Life of Lessing' (2 vols., 1877), 'Schiller' (1882), 'Mendelssohn's Letters' (1887), 'Life of Goethe' (1888), and numerous articles on German history, literature, and biography for the ninth edition of 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. Sime died at his home, 1 Queen Anne's Grove, Bedford Park, Middlesex, of influenza, on 20 March 1895, and was buried on 25 March at Hampstead cemetery, London. His wife and their daughter, Georgina Jessie, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25556


Symeon of Durham (fl. c.1090-c.1128), Benedictine monk and historian, owes his reputation principally to a history of the church of Durham, written at some point between 1104 and 1109 on the orders of his superiors. Compiled from a variety of sources, Symeon's history deals with the fortunes of the bishopric from its foundation by St Aedan on Lindisfarne in 635 to the death of Bishop William of St Calais in 1096. It describes Bishop Eardulf's flight from Lindisfarne in 875 with the body of St Cuthbert, his settlement at Chester-le-Street, and the subsequent move of the see to Durham in 995. Approval is given to the events of 1083, when St Calais expelled a body of secular clerks from Durham in favour of twenty-three monks led by Aldwin of Winchcombe, who had settled in Jarrow ten years earlier under the patronage of St Calais's predecessor Bishop Walcher (died 1080). 
The earliest copies of the work, Durham University Library, MS Cosin V.ii.6, which has additions and alterations probably by the author, and the closely related BL, Cotton MS Faustina A.v, entitle it 'Libellus de exordio atque procursu istius hoc est Dunhelmensis ecclesie' ('Tract on the origin and progress of the church of Durham'). The bald title 'Historia Dunelmensis ecclesiae', favoured by nineteenth-century editors, derives from Twysden's edition of 1652. Although no attribution of authorship is provided in the early manuscripts, rubrics in a late twelfth-century copy, CUL, MS Ff.1.27, credit the work to Symeon. Similar rubrics in a problematic, related manuscript of about the same date, Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 139, attribute to Symeon a miscellaneous compilation of overlapping English historical material stretching between 616 and 1129. 
The compilation has become known as the 'Historia regum' from nineteenth-century editions, though the title has no manuscript authority. It comprises several distinct elements: 1 Kentish legends relating to the seventh and eighth centuries, particularly to the martyrs AEthelberht and AEthelred; 2 accounts of kings of Northumbria from the mid-sixth century to 737; 3 material derived mainly from Bede, particularly from the 'Historia abbatum'; 4 annals from 732 to 802, taken from a lost Northumbrian source; 5 annals from 849 to 887, based mainly on Asser; 6 annals from 888 to 957; 7 extracts from William of Malmesbury's 'Gesta regum'; 8 annals from 848 to 1118, based mainly on the chronicle of John of Worcester; 9 annals from 1119 to 1129. 
Symeon's precise role in this compilation remains uncertain, especially as it is likely that texts 1-5 above were written by Byrhtferth of Ramsey in the late tenth or early eleventh century. Although internal inconsistencies make it improbable that the same author was responsible both for the 'Libellus' on the church of Durham and for the 'Historia regum', it is possible that the latter represents an attempt by Symeon to gather together material for a more ambitious historical work which was not completed. 
A brief account of archbishops of York from the seventh to the tenth centuries, concluding with a bare list of names after Oswald (972-92), can be assigned to Symeon with confidence, since he describes himself in the text as 'I Symeon, a poor servant of the servants of St Cuthbert' (Symeon of Durham, 'Opera', 1.226). Precisely when he wrote the piece is a matter of surmise, since he did so at the request of Dean Hugh of York, a name that occurs at intervals over a lengthy period from 1093 to 1135. Symeon also composed a letter to Holdebert -- presumably Hildebert, successively bishop of Le Mans and archbishop of Tours (died 1133) -- extant in a mid-twelfth-century manuscript from Gloucester (Bodl. Oxf., MS Laud misc. 123) concerning uncertainties that Hildebert experienced on reading from Origen's homilies. John Bale's sixteenth-century index of British writers attributed to Symeon the composition of letters to Elmer, perhaps the prior of Christ Church, Canterbury, who died in 1137. The letters do not survive. Bale's additional attribution to Symeon of an account of a siege of Durham in 969 has no authority. 
The sources provide a few glimpses of Symeon's life. Rud suggested in 1732 that Symeon was one of the twenty-three monks who came to Durham from Jarrow in 1083, but this is uncertain. Since his name occurs in thirty-eighth place in his own list of the monks of the house in Cosin V.ii.6, folio 7'v', it may be deduced that he entered some time in the 1090s. His scribal work dates from this period until 'c'.1128. It is known that he was present at the translation of St Cuthbert's incorrupt body to the new cathedral in 1104, thanks to the later twelfth-century writer Reginald of Durham, who provided a colourful account of Symeon's involvement in the occasion, albeit an imaginative one, as Reginald himself was not present. Holding a candle in his hand, and allowing his tears to flow freely, Symeon pressed kisses on the feet of the saint. Symeon subsequently became precentor at Durham, and his renown locally may be judged from the dedication to him of an account of a vision experienced by Orm, a fourteen-year-old youth, written shortly after 1126 by Sigar, the parish priest of Newbald in the East Riding of Yorkshire. By this date Symeon was probably at an advanced age. His death was commemorated by the Durham community on 14 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 25557


Simon Stock (supp. 1165-1265), hermit and monk, is said to have been born in Kent in 1165. Although he is celebrated as the sixth prior-general of the Carmelite order, there are no contemporary references to him, unless the mention by the mid-thirteenth-century Dominican Gerard de Frachet of a Simon who is described as prior of the Carmelite order refers to Simon Stock. The earliest surviving list of priors-general of the order to list Simon dates from 1396. From the early fifteenth century a fuller tradition of his career emerged. A legendary preserved in three fifteenth-century manuscripts celebrates Simon as the eleventh out of sixteen notable saints of the order. According to his legend, Simon lived as a solitary hermit in the trunk of a tree, the practice to which he owed his cognomen. In 1201, aged thirty-six, he joined the Carmelite order, and later entered the convent at Hulme in Northumberland. Elected prior-general of the order in 1245, Simon oversaw the modification to the order's rule by Innocent IV ('r'. 1243-54) in 1247 that brought it closer into line with other mendicant orders. In some versions of his legend he performed a miracle of turning water into wine in a consecrated chalice. He is also, in one version, credited with being the first Carmelite to receive a bachelor's degree at Oxford University. The most celebrated incident of his career was the vision granted to him in 1251, in which the Blessed Virgin instructed Simon to introduce into the order the wearing of the scapular, a garment consisting of two bands worn over each shoulder. Any friar wearing the scapular would be guaranteed his salvation. Later Carmelite historians, such as Bradley, Paleonydorus, Bostius, and Bale, embellished the outlines of this tradition. Most versions of the legend supply a note of those Englishmen of noble birth, including Edward II (died 1327) and Henry, duke of Lancaster (died 1361), said to have adopted the scapular on their deathbeds. 
The 'scapular promise' appears independently of Simon Stock in the literature of the order -- initially in the 1360s in an acrostic by Johann von Hildesheim (died 1375). The tradition of the scapular promise, with its special grant of protection from the Blessed Virgin, developed from the papal protection granted to the Carmelites in the mid-thirteenth century to aid them in their expansion in western Europe. The legend of the scapular has obvious parallels with similar traditions developed by the Dominicans in the thirteenth century of divine approbation granted to the garments worn by the order, and is part of a wider concern among all mendicants to endow their habits with a distinctive spiritual identity. 
By the fifteenth century the chronology of the Carmelites' migration to the West from the crusader states had been distorted. The Simon Stock legend thus has him joining the order in 1201, although the hermits of Mount Carmel were only recognized as an order by the papacy in 1226, and did not reach England until 1242. A hermit accustomed to the solitary life would have been an appropriate recruit for the order in its early days, but if an Englishman called Simon was among those hermits of Mount Carmel who formed a distinct community around 1200 and adopted a rule 'c'.1205-14, and was in 1245 elected prior-general of the order, he must have been born rather later than 1165. Simon is not mentioned in the 'De adventu Carmelitarum in Angliam' of William of Coventry ('c'.1365) although an English Carmelite senior enough to be elected prior-general ought to have been at the forefront of the settlement in England. The legend of Simon Stock was ascribed by Launoy (1653) to Paleonydorus, who was writing in the 1480s, but it is evidently earlier than this, and possibly dates from the later fourteenth century. John Bale listed as Stock's works collections of homilies, pastoral letters, and hymns, but there is no other testimony for these. Simon supposedly died in 1265 in Bordeaux and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 25558


Warwick, Simon of (c.1225-1296), abbot of St Mary's, York, was of unknown origins. He had been a monk of St Mary's Abbey for fourteen years when he was elected the tenth abbot of his monastery on 24 June 1258. His many achievements during his extremely long abbacy are well documented in a St Mary's manuscript of the early fourteenth century (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 39), which includes a unique copy of detailed annals for the history of the convent from 1258 to 1326. It seems likely that Abbot Simon was the compiler rather than the author (as has often been supposed) of the earlier sections of this manuscript, which nevertheless testifies to his exceptionally high reputation within and without his own cloister. He played an important role in trying to pacify jurisdictional disputes between the churches of York and Durham, and frequently visited St Mary's five most important daughter houses. Although forced to leave his abbey for over a year in 1264 because of the violent onslaught of the citizens of York on his convent's economic franchises in the suburb of Bootham, in 1275 he brought that most difficult of his many legal disputes to a successful conclusion. Not surprisingly, it was during this period that Simon of Warwick supervised the building of a new stone wall (much of which survives) around the St Mary's Abbey precinct, as well as a strongly constructed abbot's house for himself. Remarkably, twenty-four years after he laid the first stone of its choir in 1271, St Mary's Abbey possessed a spectacular new church (110 metres long) constructed in the most fashionable decorated Gothic style. Abbot Simon died on 6 July 1296, and was buried before the high altar of this greatest of his many memorials. 


@@@@@


doc= 25559


Simeon, Charles (1759-1836), Church of England clergyman, was born on 24 September 1759 at Reading, the fourth son of Richard Simeon (died 1784), attorney and son and grandson of successive vicars of Bucklebury, Berkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Hutton. His mother came from the same family as two archbishops of York, one in the sixteenth century, the other in the eighteenth. His elder brother was Sir John Simeon, first baronet (1755/6-1824). Simeon went to Eton College in 1766, where his ugliness gained him the nickname of 'Chin Simeon'. Looking back on his school-days there, he said that he found no inspiration from its low religious standard: the emphasis was placed on the study of the classical authors, and the scriptures were neglected. He was noted for his extravagant dress and able horsemanship, though at the same time his companions thought him unusually religious, particularly when he observed a national day of fasting and prayer, which had been called during the American War of Independence, by shutting himself up in his study and eating only a single hard-boiled egg at dinner. 
Simeon went as a scholar on 29 January 1779 to King's College, Cambridge, where four days after his arrival an incident occurred that changed his whole life. The provost of the college announced that all its members would be required to participate in the mid-term celebration of holy communion in the chapel. Simeon anxiously doubted his spiritual fitness to do this. During some three months of great uneasiness he read the only devotional manual known to him, 'The Whole Duty of Man', which brought him no help. Then he turned, as likely to be more relevant to him in his situation, to 'A Short and Plain Instruction for the Better Understanding of the Lord's Supper' (1733) by Bishop Thomas Wilson, who wished the sacrament to have a more important part in Anglican worship; and he found a sentence in this which relieved his sense of guilt: 'The Jews knew what they did when they transferred their sin to the head of their offering' (Carus, 9). These words aroused in him the belief that he could gain salvation by transferring away his sins to 'the sacred head of Jesus' (ibid.). He went to communion on Easter day and recorded, 'At the Lord's table in our chapel I had the sweetest access to God through my blessed Saviour' (ibid.), though he considered the service in the chapel 'very irreverently performed' (ibid., 10). 
The result of this conversion was to make Simeon a devoted, practising Christian, which he remained, though this was at first seriously interrupted by a bout of drunkenness, for the rest of his life. He endeavoured to influence his university friends and during the long vacation instructed the servants at home and introduced morning and evening family prayers. He now looked forward to obtaining holy orders. In January 1782 he succeeded as an Etonian to a King's College fellowship and on that title was ordained deacon by the bishop of Ely on 26 May 1782, though he was still under the canonical age and did not graduate BA until January 1783. He was ordained priest by the bishop of Peterborough on 28 September 1783. 
Simeon had been brought up as a high-churchman, and at first he felt an affinity with high-churchmen such as Thomas Wilson, but he soon came under the influence of the evangelical movement. Since the evangelicals were still in a minority in the Church of England, they tended to gather in groups in a certain few centres of the kingdom, and one of these was Cambridge. An evangelical clergyman there was Christopher Atkinson, vicar of St Edward's Church, and Simeon began his ministry by taking duty for him during the long vacation. Atkinson introduced him to others of that persuasion, including John Venn, rector of Clapham, who put him in touch with the outstanding members of that other concentration of evangelicalism there. John Venn also introduced Simeon to his father, Henry Venn, rector of Yelling, some 15 miles from Cambridge, who had a decisive influence upon him. Henceforward he found their outlook congenial, though he called himself 'a moderate Calvinist' (Carus, 418). 
In 1782 the vicar of Holy Trinity Church, Cambridge, died. The church's size and position made Simeon wish 'I might preach the Gospel there and be a herald for Him in the University' (Elliott-Binns, 285). He persuaded his father to induce the bishop of Ely to appoint him there, but the parishioners wanted to have their afternoon lecturer as their incumbent, and Simeon was not popular as an evangelical. The seat-holders left the church, locking the doors of their pews to prevent anyone else using them. When Simeon placed benches in the aisles, the churchwardens threw them out into the churchyard, and for more than the first ten years of his ministry the congregation had to stand. 
In addition, Simeon's reputation for piety made him unpopular with many of the undergraduates. They interrupted his sermons, sought to break up the services, and roughly treated people leaving the church. He restored order in the church by appointing watchers to stand in the aisles, and when the service was ended he went immediately to stand at the north door to confront his opponents. On weekdays he met with shouts of derision in the streets, and so did his curates, even though some of them, such as James Scholefield, were known for their academic distinction in the university (Scholefield, 27). Nevertheless he persevered, steadily gaining support, and had a ministry of fifty-four years there. 
Simeon achieved this despite 'an infirmity of temper' described by Charles Jerram, a fellow evangelical divine: 'He was naturally of a haughty, impatient and impetuous temper, and these defects were sometimes exhibited in a way which was painful to the feelings of others' ('Memoirs... of the late Rev. Charles Jerram', 124). Simeon was aware of his weaknesses of character and constantly struggled against them, seeking to acquire humility and spiritual discipline. Throughout the year he rose at four o'clock in the morning to give himself to private prayer, self-examination, and devotional 'Bible' reading until he called his servant at eight o'clock to join with him in praying together. As he grew older, it was notable that his character considerably mellowed, and fewer people were offended by his approach to them. 
Simeon's access to members of the university was helped by his official position in his college; he was thrice one of its deans, second bursar from 1798 to 1805, and vice-provost from 1790 to 1792, the duties of all of which posts he performed conscientiously. Apart from his benevolent care for the afflicted during the corn famine of 1788, when he organized a subscription to enable bread to be sold at half-price in Cambridge and twenty-four neighbouring villages and rode round on horseback each Monday to make sure that the bakers were doing this, the long period of his incumbency was singularly unmarked by notable incidents, but he was an assiduous, many-sided pastor. George Corrie, later master of Jesus College, was told, when going up to Cambridge, that Simeon was seen 'either in the stable with his horses or by the sick bed of his parishioners' (Moule, 55). 
Simeon did his best to make use of the opportunity to preach which he had foreseen Holy Trinity Church would give him. Like other evangelical preachers, he broke away from the ethical sermons of Archbishop John Tillotson, which had dominated eighteenth-century preaching, and proclaimed the symbol of the cross as the supreme expression of the love of God for sinners through which they might enter into the new life of the spirit. While his emphasis was on the salvation of individual souls, he insisted also that those who accepted the faith 'became a member of Christ's mystical body', the church (Simeon, 'Horae', sermon 183). 
Like the evangelicals also, Simeon was concerned with the technique of preaching. He particularly set out to achieve a planned framework for his sermons. 'I have been preaching for forty-five years,' he said in 1827, 'but for the first seven of those years I did not know the head from the tail of a sermon.' He preached 'usually to the small door in the west gallery of Trinity Church' (Brown, 178), because, 'When I perceive that the door distinctly hears me, then I know that all the congregation may' (ibid., 186). The effect of his sermons was increased rather than diminished by certain peculiarities of phrase and style. A common gesture in the pulpit looked as if he were catching a fly between his thumb and forefinger. He preached from notes and after each service wrote out more fully the chief headings and subject matter of the sermon. These substantially formed twenty-one volumes of the 2536 sermon outlines of his 'Horae homilecticae, or, Discourses digested into one continued series, and forming a commentary upon every book of the Old and New Testament' (1819-28), with his 'Essay on the composition of a sermon', translated from the work by the Huguenot Jean Claude. 
Simeon's preaching increasingly attracted more and more of the once generally hostile undergraduates to his church. He wrote on a Sunday in 1818: 'As for the gownsmen, never was anything like what they are at this day. I am forced to let them go up into the galleries which I never suffered before; and notwithstanding that, multitudes of them are forced to stand in the aisles for want of a place to sit down. (Carus, 496)' Simeon regretted the lack of specialized, professional training provided by the Church of England to candidates for the ministry; and he was a pioneer in undertaking this in his rooms in King's College. In 1790 he started fortnightly sermon classes in term-time for ordinands, at first on Sunday evenings and later on Fridays. Each class lasted for an hour. He gave instruction in sermon composition, voice production, reading, and delivery from the pulpit, with such advice as 'A sermon should be like a telescope: each successive division of it should be as an additional lens to bring the subject of your text nearer and make it more distinct' and 'Form your voice not in your chest, not in your throat, not in the roof of your mouth, but simply with your lips and teeth' (Brown, 183, 187). In addition, the class was given a text upon which each man during the coming fortnight wrote a sermon outline to be read at the next meeting and criticized by Simeon. 
In 1812 Simeon started as well his weekly conversation parties, which were also held in his rooms on Friday evenings. After two waiters had handed tea round to those present, he sat on a high mahogany stool with his small old quarto 'Bible' beside him and said, 'Now, if any of you have any question to ask, I shall be happy to hear it and to give what assistance I can.' The questions asked covered a variety of subjects, from meditation and Christian living to slavery and national education. He earnestly explained the religious implications of such matters, but promptly rebuked flippant or foolish questions (Carus, 648-54). There were many ordinands among those who attended these parties, but there were also others who were to attain such positions in society as lawyers, politicians, soldiers, and landed gentlemen. And Henry Kirke White, the poet, was among those he helped. 
Lord Macaulay, remembering the time when he was at Cambridge, wrote in 1844: 'As to Simeon, if you knew what his authority and interest were, and how they extended from Cambridge to the most remote corners of England, you would allow that his real sway in the Church was far greater than that of any primate. (Trevelyan, 1.67)' Simeon's ministry, preaching, and particularly his classes and parties did indeed gain him the support of innumerable members of the university who later widely upheld his beliefs and spread his message. Although, like the nonconformists, the evangelicals regarded the church as an invisible communion in which all believers had their proper place and function irrespective of ecclesiastical organization, he always took care to make it clear to them that he was a firm Anglican, saying, 'The 'Bible' first, the prayer book next and all other books and doings in subordination to both' (Carus, 12), so retaining many, both clergymen and laymen, as upholders of the evangelical party within the church at a time when Methodism flourished. Bishop Charles Wordsworth, who knew Oxford during the early days of Tractarianism, made this comparison with the then preacher at its university church, when he said that Simeon 'had a large following of young men -- larger and not less devoted than that which followed Newman -- and for a much longer time' (Wordsworth, 335). 
Simeon further strengthened the position of evangelicalism in the church through the purchase of advowsons. By English law advowsons were regarded as a right of property which could be transferred by gift or (until 1924) by sale. In 1813 John Thornton of Clapham died, leaving the patronage of ten livings, which his wealth had enabled him to acquire, to trustees. Simeon became one of these, and they developed into the Simeon trustees. He used a legacy left to him in 1800, together with substantial gifts from sympathizers, to purchase further advowsons for the trustees. These included fashionable watering-places such as Cheltenham, Bath, and Bridlington, and industrial centres such as Northampton, Birmingham, and Bradford. A great opportunity came to him with the passing of the 'Municipal Corporations Act' of 1835, which compelled the corporations to dispose of livings in their gift. By the time of his death the trust possessed twenty-one livings, a number which increased to 150 during the next century. 
Simeon's influence extended not only further than Cambridge but also beyond Britain itself. He was among the founders of the Church Missionary Society in 1797 and actively supported the British and Foreign Bible Society, the Religious Tract Society, the Colonial and Continental Church Society, and the Church Mission to the Jews. His association with these societies showed his willingness to co-operate with both Anglicans of varying churchmanship and nonconformists. 
Simeon himself was mainly concerned with missionary work in India, where his interest was aroused by a memorial in 1788 from Charles Grant and other wealthy merchants in the East India Company advocating missionary and educational work there. When Grant became chairman of the court of directors of the company in 1805, he was able, though missionaries were forbidden to go to India, to enable Simeon to secure the appointment of chaplains employed by the company there, who were evangelists among the natives as well. Among these were several of his curates, notably Henry Martyn. 
In the last part of his life Simeon, having contributed greatly to the evangelical revival, and despite the widely disseminated effect of his ministry, still valued his fellowship of King's College. He died, unmarried, at King's College, Cambridge, on 13 November 1836 and was buried six days later, at his wish, in its chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 25560


Simeon, Sir John, first baronet (1755/6-1824), lawyer and politician, was baptized on 18 March 1756 at St Laurence's Church, Reading, the second son of Richard Simeon (died 1784), attorney, of Reading, and his wife, Elizabeth Hutton. His brother Charles Simeon became one of the most prominent evangelicals in the Church of England. The family were of French extraction. Simeon was educated at Eton College, which he entered in September 1765, becoming a king's scholar in 1771. He matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, on 23 October 1775, aged nineteen. 
Having become a student of Lincoln's Inn on 12 November 1773, Simeon was called to the bar in Trinity term 1779. The same year he was elected recorder of his native town of Reading, and held that position until his resignation in 1807. He was also elected to represent the town in parliament in June 1797. On 14 June 1783 he married Rebecca (died 1830), the eldest daughter of John Cornwall of Hendon, Middlesex, a wealthy Russia merchant. The couple had three sons and three daughters. Simeon had estates at Walliscot and Gresley, Oxfordshire. 
In the Commons, Simeon was normally a supporter of William Pitt's government, but was not afraid to criticize some of its measures. He lost his seat in 1802, but subsequently re-established his position by means of 'an expensive programme of ostentatious charity and some dubious business transactions' (HoP, 'Commons, 1790-1820', 175). Simeon was elected unopposed in 1806, and continued to represent Reading until 1818, when failing health forced him to retire from politics. 
In 1789 Simeon published 'A Treatise on the Law of Elections', which was well received by the profession; a second edition appeared in 1795. Simeon also proposed measures to improve knowledge of electoral law, but his action was frustrated. He was a frequent speaker on the poor laws and sat on the 1817 and 1818 select committees, but was averse to schemes of radical reform. His bill of 1800, to allow transfers of stock in equity suits, passed into law in amended form. 
In November 1795 Simeon was appointed a master in chancery in ordinary, and discharged the duties of the office for twenty-eight years; for the last sixteen years of his life he was senior master. On 7 March 1812 he was placed at the head of the commission, composed of himself, Count Munster, and General Herbert Taylor, for placing George III's real and personal estate in trust during his majesty's illness; this delicate business was executed without salary. He acted as a commissioner for the protection of the king's property until his majesty's death in 1820. In consideration of his services a baronetcy was conferred upon Simeon on 22 May 1815, and by royal licence on 26 May 1820 he received a grant of supporters to be borne by him and his successors in the title. On 9 July 1817 he petitioned to be called to the bench of Lincoln's Inn, but his application was not granted. 
Sir John was described by Mary Russell Mitford as having been 'stationary as Southampton Buildings, solid as the doorpost, and legible as the letters on a brass plate' (HoP, 'Commons, 1790-1820', 175). He died on 4 February 1824, and was succeeded as second baronet by his eldest son, Sir Richard Simeon. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25561


Lobb, Emmanuel (1594-1671), Jesuit and playwright, was born at Portsmouth and at the age of eleven was sent to Portugal to learn the language with a view to mercantile life. There he was converted to the Catholic faith by the Jesuit Henry Floyd. After a while he was sent to the college of the English Jesuits at St Omer, and on 13 October 1616 he entered the English College at Rome under the assumed name of Joseph Simons by which he became generally known; his father was noted as dead but his mother was still alive. Having received minor orders in 1617 he left Rome for the Spanish Netherlands on 14 September 1619, was received into the Society of Jesus at Liege, and was professed of the four vows on 25 January 1633. After professing rhetoric and 'belles-lettres' in the English College at St Omer for five years he became professor of theology, philosophy, and sacred scripture in the English theologate of the Society of Jesus at Liege. Between 1642 and 1644 he was involved in the foundation of the convent of the English canonesses at Liege, subsequently giving them financial help in 1668 and 1669. In 1647 he was appointed rector of the English College at Rome, and in 1650 rector of the theologate at Liege. He was also instructor of the tertian fathers at Ghent. Being subsequently sent to the English mission he was at one period rector of the college of St Ignatius. In 1667 he became the English provincial. When living in London in 1669 he was consulted by the duke of York, whom he afterwards reconciled to the Roman Catholic church. He died in London on 24 July 1671. 
Simons was author of the following tragedies, all of which are in five acts and in verse. They were all first performed at the English College, St Omer, as follows: 'Vitus' (13 May 1623), 'Mercia' (7 February 1624), 'Theoctistus' (8 August 1624), 'Leo Armenus' (between 1624 and 1629), 'Zeno' (7 August 1631). 'Zeno' and 'Mercia' were first printed at Rome in 1648 and 'Theoctistus' at Liege in 1653; Simons's collected plays were published later as 'Tragoediae quinque' (first edition Liege, 1656; reprinted 1657, 1680, and 1697). The tragedies were frequently acted on the continent in Simons's lifetime, and are perhaps the most distinguished contribution made by a seventeenth-century English author to the genre of Jesuit drama. Also speculatively attributable to him are 'S. Damianus', acted at St Omer on 13 February 1626 and preserved together with 'Leo Armenus' and 'Zeno' in two manuscripts, and a lost play on King Robert of Sicily, performed at St Omer on 19 June 1623. 'An Answer to Doctor Pierce's Sermon' (1663) is attributed to Simons by a contemporary, Thomas Blount, and in the 'Short-Title Catalogue', though this work has sometimes been assigned to John Sergeant. A manuscript treatise on penitence, dated 1642 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D. 1355), may also be Simons's. 


@@@@@


doc= 25562


Symon Simeonis (fl. 1322-1324), Franciscan friar, traveller, and author, was from Ireland, probably of Anglo-Irish origin. In 1323-4 he undertook a journey from Ireland to the Holy Land which he describes in his 'Itinerarium Symon Semeonis ab Hybernia ad Terram Sanctam'. The work survives in a firsthand copy written between 1335 and 1352, in which his second name, perhaps a patronym, is spelt Semeonis. This manuscript (now MS 407 in the library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge) very soon came into the possession of, if it was not written for, Simon Bozoun, prior of Norwich from 1344 to 1352. Symon's work is an important source for European contacts with the Near East at the time, giving information on distances, prices, religion, the value of money, and the customs of the people through whose lands Symon's party passed. Throughout his journey Symon's greatest interest was aroused by the holy sites, especially shrines of saints, that he visited. 
The 'Itinerarium' tells how, having attended the Franciscan provincial chapter held at Clonmel on 4 October 1322, Symon left Ireland in the company of Hugh Illuminator (le Luminour) on 16 March 1323, and landed in Anglesey. They journeyed through England to Dover, on to Paris and down the Rhone to Nice, by sea to Genoa, and thence to Venice, where they stayed for seven weeks. Sailing then through the Adriatic they arrived in Candia (Crete), where Symon encountered Gypsies -- the earliest datable record of the people in Europe. With the arrival of the party in Egypt, at Alexandria, on 10 October 1323, Symon's field of observation widens as he describes the economic and social conditions of the mameluke sultanate. Having gained permission from the authorities, the party travelled to Cairo. Here Symon's companion Hugh contracted dysentery and died, much to Symon's distress. He was buried in the church of St Martin in Old Cairo. Despite his relatively close contact with Muslims during this period, Symon's account of their beliefs is often mistaken, and includes inaccurate citations from the 'Koran', probably drawn from one of the unreliable Latin translations then in circulation. 
Symon obtained a passport from the sultan's officials, which authorized him to travel freely throughout Egypt and Palestine, and to visit the holy places without the payment of the ordinary dues. Symon and his party set out from Cairo across the desert to Gaza, and thence to Jerusalem, which they probably reached on 9 or 10 December 1323. They seem to have remained there for about seven weeks. The 'Itinerarium' gives a detailed description of the church of the Holy Sepulchre, which closely resembles that in other pilgrim narratives, and of other landmarks in the city, before breaking off. From references in the text, it can be surmised that Symon was back in Cairo by 2 February 1324, had reached Alexandria by 4 March, and visited Rome on his way home. Any account of the homeward journey was, however, lost before the scribe of the surviving copy set to work. Of Symon, nothing more is known. His 'Itinerarium' was first published by James Nasmith in 1778; a critical edition appeared in 1960. 


@@@@@


doc= 25563


Simmons, Bartholomew (1804-1850), poet, was born at Kilworth, co. Cork, the eldest son of an English exciseman, and a Miss Luddy of Kilworth. He was educated at Birmingham School and Quigley's school, both in Cork. Simmons's first poems were published shortly after his twentieth birthday in 'Bolster's Magazine', to which he was a regular contributor during the next three years, during which time he also contributed, sometimes under the pseudonym Harold, to 'Blackwood's Magazine', which printed his most famous poem 'Napoleon's Last Look'. 
Simmons could not, however, live by his poetic gifts alone, and so in 1830 entered the excise branch of the civil service, a sinecure obtained with the help of his father's old landlord Lord Mountcaskell. But Simmons did not cease to write altogether, and was a key member of Lady Blessington's literary circle, whose collected poems were published in London in 1843. 
Unmarried to the end of his life, Simmons died of cancer on 21 July 1850 at his lodgings in 29 Acton Street, Gray's Inn Road, London, his death hastened by the shock from an explosion that occurred while he was sailing up the Thames. He was buried in Highgate cemetery. Thanks to the repeated anthologization of his poem on Napoleon, and to Christopher North's eulogistic reference to his poetic gift in the 'Noctes Ambrosianae', Simmons's name was remembered well into the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 25564


Simmons, Samuel (c.1777-1819), actor, born in London, first appeared at the Haymarket on 21 September 1785, when, as Master Simmons, he played the Duke of York in Cibber's 'Richard III' and showed promise. Next he appeared as Tom Thumb, and is said also to have played other juvenile characters at Covent Garden. His first adult role at Covent Garden was on 5 November 1796, when he was the original Momus in John O'Keeffe's 'Olympus in an Uproar'. Endless in Prince Hoare's 'No Song, No Supper' followed, and in April 1797 he was the original Premiss, a lawyer, in Hoare's 'The Italian Villagers'. Simmons remained at Covent Garden until his death, playing such parts as Daniel in Richard Steele's 'The Conscious Lovers', Master Matthew in Ben Jonson's 'Every Man in his Humour', and many roles (chiefly small) in farces which did not survive their own era. He also took many minor parts in Shakespearian plays, such as Feeble in '2 Henry IV', Pistol in 'Henry V', Shallow in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', Lord Sands in 'Henry VIII', Peter in 'Romeo and Juliet', Stephano in 'The Tempest', and Flute in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'. However, he created several original roles in contemporary plays. He was the first Jerry in William Drummond's 'Seaside Story' (1801), the original Manikin and Squire Supplejack in Dibdin's 'The Cabinet' and 'Family Quarrels' respectively, and the original Jonathan Oldskirt and Stubby in Colman's 'Who Wants a Guinea?' (1805) and 'We Fly by Night' (1806). In the meantime, about 1803, Simmons married. His wife's name was Margaret. In March 1816 he was the first Bailie Mucklethrift in Daniel Terry's version of 'Guy Mannering', and in April 1819 the first Saddletree in 'The Heart of Midlothian'. On 8 September 1819 Simmons played his old part of Moses in 'The School for Scandal', and died suddenly of apoplexy three days later, on 11 September 1819. 
Simmons was a useful, unostentatious actor, to whom very few challenging characters were assigned. His best parts were Mordecai in Charles Macklin's 'Love a la Mode', Master Matthew Fainwou'd in James Kenney's 'Raising the Wind', and Alibi in 'The Sleep Walker'. His exclamation 'What do you think of that, eh?' is said to have been a popular catchphrase. He was very natural in his style, which, however, had no great variety. He was a good comic singer, had great freedom of action, and was popular in pantomime. He was very useful in taking at short notice parts for which absent actors had been cast, and in comic waiters and old men showed much genuine and unforced humour with no trace of affectation or extravagance. Though his voice was powerful, Simmons was small in person, and was popularly called 'Little Simmons'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25565


Simmons, Samuel Foart (1750-1813), physician, the only child of Samuel Simmons (1724-1766), town clerk of Sandwich, Kent, and his first wife, Katherine (1726-1750), daughter of Josiah Foart, was born on 6 March 1750, presumably in Sandwich. After education at a seminary in France, he studied medicine at Edinburgh and graduated MD at Leiden in 1776, with a treatise on measles. He then travelled, visiting continental universities and calling on Petrus Camper, Albrecht von Haller, and Voltaire. In Paris in 1778 he became a member of the Societe Royale de Medecine. Established in London, he became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in the same year. Simmons had a paper published in 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1773, and on 4 November 1779 he was, on the recommendation of William Cullen, elected a fellow of the Royal Society. In 1780 he was appointed physician to the Westminster General Dispensary; and in 1781, physician to the Bethlem Hospital. 
In 1780 Simmons was living in Bentinck Street, Cavendish Square, London. With his first wife, Susanna, he had a son, Richard Simmons ('bap'. 1781, died 1846), who was baptized at St James, Piccadilly, on 20 January 1781. As a widower he married, second, on 24 December 1798, Susanna Lamb. 
Simmons published a number of papers on a variety of subjects, mainly accounts of work by other people, reviews of current medical practice, or cases confirming earlier observations. He published as 'Elements of Anatomy and the Animal Economy' (1775), a translation with a commentary of a work by Claude Person. He also published one volume of a projected 'Anatomy of the Human Body' (1780). He provided no new medical insights. His contributions to medicine lay in his publication of the 'Medical Register' in 1779, 1780, and 1783. Though unofficial and incomplete, the registers were of use both to the profession and to laymen, as they displayed the extent of medical provision in England, listing practitioners with their qualifications and hospitals, and noting the availability of charitable provision for the sick poor. 
More important was Simmons's publication between 1781 and 1790 of eleven volumes of the 'London Medical Journal', and, between 1791 and 1800, eight volumes of 'Medical Facts and Observations'. Other medical journals were published by professional societies, but Simmons offered medical men outside societies an opportunity to publish their interesting cases. The journals also contained reviews of new medical works, accounts of papers in other journals, 'medical and philosophical news', and quarterly catalogues of medical books; all of particular interest to provincial practitioners. In 1780 Simmons was president of the Medical Society of London, founded by J. C. Lettsom. When the president of the Society of Collegiate Physicians, William Hunter, died in 1783, Simmons, as a member of the society, though little acquainted with Hunter, offered a eulogy on him, which was subsequently published (1783). 
When George III's illness returned in 1804, Simmons, as an expert on insanity, was called to look after him and on 15 May was gazetted physician-extraordinary to the king. His treatment relied on total restraint and the king loathed the 'horrible doctor', his son Richard, and the 'shabby attendants' who assisted them. The king was unco-operative, and on 18 August the doctors were virtually dismissed. In 1810 the king was again taken ill and, in spite of opposition from the royal family, Simmons was sent for. He demanded sole management of the case, and when this was refused, he withdrew. The king remained ill and on 6 August 1811 Simmons with others was consulted, but would not give advice without seeing the patient. The queen objected particularly to Simmons's being allowed near the king, because previously 'his Conduct and Proceedings... had rendered him 'justly' obnoxious to the King, to myself, & to the whole Royal Family & to every individual attendant' (Macalpine and Hunter, 161-2). Nevertheless, they were allowed to observe but not to talk to the king. In January 1812 Simmons believed with others that the king would not recover, and the temporary regency was made permanent. Later that same year Simmons refused to give evidence at the trial of John Bellingham, who had assassinated the prime minister, Spencer Perceval, when an attempt was made to prove that Bellingham was insane; he was found guilty and executed. 
Simmons had been elected to the Society of Antiquaries in 1791, and was an honorary member of the Manchester Philosophical Society, a member of the medical societies of Nancy, Montpellier, and Madrid, a foreign associate of the Ecole de Medecine, and a correspondent, premiere classe, of the Institut imperial. By contributing 100 guineas, he became a hereditary governor of the British Institution for the Promotion of the Fine Arts and a proprietor of the Royal Institution. 
From 1790 until his death Simmons lived in Poland Street, Westminster. On 10 April 1813 he was taken ill with violent vomiting and died on 23 April. He was buried in St Clement's churchyard, Sandwich, on 2 May. He made an ample fortune from his private madhouse, but its location is not known. By his will he left to his wife the house in Poland Street and its furnishings, and $23,900 in trust, provided that she did not remarry. Near relatives, six charities, and servants were all remembered. Land, houses, and premises in Sandwich went to his son, Richard Simmons, his residuary legatee. The latter was educated at Christ Church, Oxford, graduating BM (1806) and DM (1809), and was elected FRCP (1810), but became so wealthy that he had no further need to practise medicine. 


@@@@@


doc= 25566


Simmons, William Henry (1811-1882), engraver, was born on 11 June 1811 in St Pancras, London. Of his parents nothing is known. He was a pupil of William Finden (1787-1852), from whom he learned the craft of line engraving in copper, a method of pictorial reproduction widely used until about the fourth decade of the nineteenth century, by which time Simmons and many of his colleagues had turned to working in the much more durable medium of steel. Though beautiful when employed by a skilled craftsman the method was laborious and slow, and in response to the burgeoning demand for reproductions of popular pictures Simmons turned to the speedier technique of mixed mezzotint (in which tones and textures are achieved by a rich combination of etching, mezzotint, and engraved line). It is in this style that most of his mature work is executed. His prolific output includes many engravings after such celebrated paintings as 'The Last of the Clan' and 'Highland Mary' by Thomas Faed; 'The Marriage of Their Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Wales' by William Powell Frith; 'Christ Weeping over Jerusalem' by Sir Charles Eastlake; and 'The Sanctuary' by Sir Edwin Landseer. 
Examples of Simmons's work were exhibited at the Royal Academy on twenty-one occasions between 1857 and 1882, years during which his skills were in constant demand by such leading print-publishers as Thomas Agnew, Henry Graves, and Ernest Gambart. When Agnew commissioned him to engrave Landseer's 'Well-Bred Sitters' (eventually published in 1879), Simmons worked directly from the original canvas, which he promised to lock in his bedroom every night during progress on the large plate. It is a reflection of the arduousness of an engraver's life that Simmons undertook to complete the large image ('c'.22x29 in.) in fourteen months for a fee of $500, and of the publisher's typical anxiety for speedy results that he was offered a bonus of $25 for completion in twelve months (undated letter, Agnew's agreements book, Agnew's, London). 
Perhaps Simmons's finest work is his engraving after William Holman Hunt's 'The Light of the World', the publication of which was announced by Gambart in August 1858 (that is, the intention to publish was notified to the Printsellers' Association, formed in 1847 to prevent the production of proofs beyond an openly declared number). Gambart had been on the lookout for an appropriately skilled interpreter and his eventual choice of Simmons was applauded by the painter John Everett Millais, to whose 'Proscribed Royalist' (of which a print was declared for publication, also by Gambart, in January 1858) the engraver must have been turning his attention at about the same time. On 17 November 1858 the 'Illustrated London News' announced the completion of the plate of 'The Light of the World', declaring that 'considered both as the translation of a picture and simply as a work of the burin, it is one of the most perfect things modern art has produced... a great triumph'. 
Though the sale of prints of 'The Light of the World' alone established Hunt's international fame and brought Gambart huge financial rewards, there is no evidence that the engraver -- one of the most eminent of his profession -- was ever compensated by more than a modest living for his years of expert accomplishment. According to the 1881 census Simmons, by then a widower, lived at 247 Hampstead Road, St Pancras, London. The house was shared by his unmarried sister, Maria; his widowed daughter, Ann Hollyer; Ann's son, Christopher; an apprentice engraver named Herbert Wilde; and a housemaid and a cook. Simmons died there on 10 June 1882, leaving unfinished an engraving of Rosa Bonheur's 'The Lion at Home' (which was later finished by a colleague, T. L. Atkinson). He was buried in Highgate cemetery. Examples of Simmons's prints are in the British Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 25567


Simms, Frederick Walter (1803-1865), engineer and technical writer, was the seventh of nine children of William Simms (1763-1828), manufacturer of scientific instruments, and his wife Sarah, 'nee' Thompson (1767-1834). He was born on 24 December 1803 in the parish of St Ann Blackfriars, London. Apprenticed about 1818 to Robert Wilmott, cabinet-maker, he was turned over to his father and completed his training in 1825. He then obtained a place on the Irish Ordnance Survey, and was soon promoted to be head of the computing department. After some years in Ireland, in 1829 he was appointed assistant astronomer at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. While there he married, in the summer of 1832, Caroline Nutting (1804-1846), whose elder sister was married to his elder brother William Simms (1793-1860). Of their five children, only Frederick Walter (1835-1891) survived into adulthood. 
Simms was poorly paid at the observatory and took on other work, teaching, and adjusting ironships' compasses. He began technical writing and left the observatory to become assistant to Henry Robinson Palmer on the South Eastern Railway and other works in 1834. In 1837-8 he visited Paris as an engineer of the Asphalte Company, to study the French method of working the preparation. His next employment was under Sir William Cubitt, then engaged in laying the South Eastern railway line. In 1842 he received the Telford medal from the Institution of Civil Engineers, which he had joined in 1838, for two papers on tunnelling which were based on his work for the South Eastern line. After working on railways in England and France, including the Bordeaux-Cette line, he was appointed in 1845 consulting engineer to report to the East India Company on the advisability of constructing railways in India. The Indian climate proved too much for his health, and his wife died there. Furthermore, he was overruled as to the course of the East Indian line. At the end of his five years' engagement he declined reappointment and on his return to England was appointed consulting engineer to the London, Chatham, and Dover Railway. He was unable to deal with the stress of the post, and retired from professional employment. 
In addition to his membership of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Simms was a fellow of the Royal Astronomical and Geological societies. His most significant achievement was as the author of several important engineering textbooks, which went into many editions. These included 'A Treatise on the Principal Mathematical Instruments Employed in Surveying, Levelling, and Astronomy' (1834; 8th edn, 1860) and 'A Treatise on the Principles and Practice of Levelling' (1837; 6th edn, 1875), which helped to promote his brothers' instruments. He edited part of 'Public Works of Great Britain' (1838) for the publisher John Weale, and became involved in a subsequent copyright dispute. His 'Practical Tunnelling' was the leading authority on tunnelling techniques of the time. For the last three and a half years of his life Simms suffered from heart disease. He died at his home, 50 Torrington Square, London, on 27 February 1865. 


@@@@@


doc= 25568


Simms, William (1793-1860), maker of scientific instruments, was born on 7 December 1793 in Birmingham, the second of nine children of William Simms (1763-1828), toy maker, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Thompson (1767-1834). In 1794 the family moved to London where the father turned to the manufacture of marine compasses. William was apprenticed to Thomas Penstone, a working goldsmith, in 1808, and turned over to his father the following year to complete his apprenticeship, taking his freedom in the Goldsmiths' Company in 1815. He married Ann Nutting in 1819 and set up house in Islington where several children were born. He worked alongside his father and brothers at Bowman's Buildings, off Aldersgate Street, London, until 1826, when he entered into partnership with Edward Troughton (1753-1835), the most respected astronomical instrument maker of his day. It seems that James South introduced the two men; certainly Troughton employed William Simms as an outworker from at least 1823, and by June 1824, writing to the astronomer royal, Joshua Pond, could refer to him as 'the best [workman] I know' (Royal Society, MS Gh. 1. 30). Simms was certainly keen to improve his skill at hand-dividing large instruments, as his notebook shows, and to educate himself generally. He and his brothers were among the members of the London Mechanics' Institution, founded in 1824. He became a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1828. 
When Troughton and Simms joined forces, Simms moved to Troughton's house at 136 Fleet Street where his wife cared for the elderly bachelor. The partnership prospered, supplying superb major instruments for observatories at Greenwich, Cambridge, Edinburgh, Lucknow, Madras, and Cracow, for many private observatories, and for the survey of India under Captain George Everest, besides selling numerous lesser surveying, navigational, and mathematical instruments. When Troughton died in 1835 Simms wisely continued to trade as Troughton and Simms, and he inherited from Troughton the onerous duty of supplying and maintaining the apparatus at the Royal Greenwich Observatory. In 1838 the firm displaced W. D. and T. Gilbert as suppliers to the East India Company, and thus gained access to a vast market for mathematical and surveying instruments for the company's engineers, revenue officers, and schools. Another line of business which Simms dominated was that of producing standards of length. Building on Troughton's reputation, he benefited from the rising demand for accurate standards for trigonometrical surveys in Ireland, India, the United States of America, and elsewhere. When the national standards were lost in the fire which destroyed the houses of parliament in 1834, the authorities turned immediately to Simms as the most reliable contractor to construct replacements -- a lengthy business which involved countless hours of tests and experiments to determine the best metal, the best shape of bar, and the corrections for temperature. 
Several of the Simms family found employment with Troughton and Simms. William's sons William Henry ('b'. 1820) and James (1828-1919) were bound apprentice to him in 1834 and 1843 respectively, while his nephew William (1817-1907) joined him in 1836. His brother-in-law John Nutting kept the books until his early death around 1837, when brother Henry Simms ('b'. 1800) succeeded to the post. William's brother Frederick Walter Simms (1803-1865), who had been employed on the Irish survey and then as an assistant at the Greenwich observatory before taking up the profession of railway engineer, wrote several books on surveying and the use of instruments in which he publicized Troughton and Simms instruments, thus carrying their fame still further afield. In 1846 Simms took as apprentice Joseph Beck, the fee of 200 guineas for this binding reflecting his high status in the trade. 
Simms's residence in Fleet Street brought him obligations: he served as constable of St Bride's parish in 1836 and as a trustee from 1836 to 1839. After the death of his first wife, about 1840, William married Emma Hennell, and raised several more children. In 1841 the collapse, following a fire, of two houses adjacent to his own brought an opportunity for limited expansion. Simms leased no. 138 and erected a new house on Fleet Street with workshops behind, and moved into his new premises by 1844. He moved his own family to Carshalton around this time. The new workshops, like the old ones, were reached through the narrow entrance to Peterborough Court and this restriction obliged him to continue the practice of putting out all the casting and turning of large items, usually to the engineering firms of Maudslay and Field or Donkin, both of which were situated on the south bank of the Thames. The smaller instruments were graduated in house; Simms constructed the first self-acting dividing engine, driven, like clockwork, by a falling weight which moved down the exterior wall of the workshop. It was completed by 1843, to much acclaim in the engineering world. Troughton had built an observatory on the roof of no. 136 for testing his astronomical instruments before they were sent out, and Simms replicated this when he moved to no. 138. He was a keen astronomer, building an observatory at his Carshalton home. He had been a member of the Astronomical Society since 1831, serving from time to time on its council and joining the Astronomical Dining Club, so that he was on familiar terms with his more important customers. 
In 1852 twenty leading astronomers and engineers proposed Simms for election to the Royal Society, testifying that he was: 'the author of several papers... the inventor of a self-acting machine for dividing circles... distinguished for his acquaintance with the science of practical optics and astronomical mechanics... eminent as an astronomical observer and as an artist in the construction of philosophical apparatus, telescopes, instruments etc.' Despite this tribute to a man who was universally admired for his skill and respected for his kind, modest, and gentle nature, there were by then ominous signs that Troughton and Simms was neither maintaining its high standard nor keeping up with technical developments. There were justified complaints about defects in several costly astronomical instruments, notably those consigned to Harvard, and rumbles of dissatisfaction from India, where the levels fitted to Simms's theodolites had to be replaced by German ones. In England, too, Airy was recognizing the superiority of German instruments. 
Simms died at Carshalton on 21 June 1860 and was buried at Norwood cemetery. His estate, which included the goodwill and assets of the firm, was valued at just under $80,000. Simms's son James (1828-1915) entered into a partnership with his cousin William (1817-1907), which lasted until the latter retired in 1871. In 1864 the partners built new workshops at Charlton, Kent, where they remained until 1922 when failing business led to an amalgamation with one of their main competitors, Thomas Cooke & Sons of York, owned by Vickers. The company was re-formed as Cooke, Troughton, and Simms, and the Charlton business relocated in York, where it continued until 1988 (by then known as Vickers Instruments) when Vickers, having no further use for it, sold off the business assets and closed it down. 


@@@@@


doc= 25569


Simnel, Lambert (b. 1476/7, d. after 1534), impostor and claimant to the English throne, was born probably in Oxford, the son of Thomas Simnel, a carpenter, organ maker, or cobbler. His origins are obscure, even in official accounts; his mother is unknown and he may have been illegitimate. Nothing is known of his upbringing. 
Simnel's identity cannot be established with any certainty. Over the winter of 1486-7 a pretender claiming to be Edward, earl of Warwick, son and heir of George, duke of Clarence, the last surviving male of the house of York, was being acknowledged in Dublin. The Tudor regime rapidly set out to unmask the impostor. He was stated to be the son of an organ builder at the University of Oxford and the earliest documentation about him that names him says he was the son of Thomas Simnel, lately of Oxford, a joiner. These accounts do have a certain consistency. A Thomas Simnel worked in Oxford in the late 1470s and held a tenement on the conduit towards St Thomas's Chapel from Osney Abbey in 1479. The organ builder William Wooton was a neighbour, suggesting Thomas Simnel was a carpenter by trade who built organs. He was probably Flemish. His son was described by the historian Polydore Vergil in his account of the plot as 'a comely youth, and well favoured, not without some extraordinary dignity and grace of aspect' ('DNB'). With his father probably dead by 1496, Lambert Simnel was an ideal candidate to play the impostor. 
Simnel was put forward by former Yorkists, disgruntled with the new king, Henry VII. The mystery surrounding the fate of Edward IV's sons provided fertile ground for pretence. There may have been similar uncertainty as to the fate of Warwick. In 1485 Henry transferred him from Sheriff Hutton Castle in Yorkshire to the Tower of London, but in 1486 there were reports of his escape. To add to the confusion, stories may have continued to circulate that Clarence had plotted in 1478 to have his son sent for safety to Ireland, and to have his place in the nursery taken by a local child. William or Richard Simonds, a priest, was brought before John Morton, archbishop of Canterbury, at convocation on 17 February 1487 and confessed to having organized the imposture late the previous year and then taken Simnel to Ireland. On 2 February the king's council had decided to parade the real Warwick through the city from the Tower to St Paul's Cathedral. If Henry hoped that he would settle minds by presenting Warwick in this way, he was to be disappointed. John de la Pole, earl of Lincoln, another nephew of Edward IV and possible claimant to the throne, supported Simnel, declaring him to be the real Warwick. Simnel's plot was now escalating as other people offered support because it suited their own agenda. 
Almost all that is known about Simnel derives from sources close to the Tudor regime. It had some incentive to appear to know more than it really did about the plot, and even to resort to disinformation. With its comical and exotic sound, Lambert Simnel's name appears custom-made to provoke derision and the herald who witnessed his capture said that his 'name was indeed John'. There is some confusion about whether Simnel affected to be Warwick or Richard, duke of York, the younger of Edward IV's sons. Bernard Andre, Henry's panegyrist, who said that Simnel claimed to be York, was certainly muddled. Perhaps, as Vergil states, the conspiracy shifted its focus early on from York to Warwick. In Vergil's account, however, the priestly mentor is named Richard Simonds, not William Simonds. Vergil's insistence that the plot was hatched by a single priest likewise sits uneasily with his statement that the king regretted Lincoln's death in battle because it prevented his plumbing the depths of the conspiracy. None the less, the official line on Simnel has a certain economy and is not wholly lacking in corroboration. 
The plot was set in train in 1486, if not earlier. With a floating population of clerks and scholars, Oxford was a natural location for a conspiracy based on impersonation. While it may have originated in the mind of a single priest, who is said to have refined Simnel's manners at Oxford, it is perhaps no coincidence that two of the leaders of the subsequent revolt had their principal seats near the town: Lincoln at Ewelme and Francis Lovell, Viscount Lovell at Minster Lovell. Then there was Robert Stillington, bishop of Bath, who had retired to his old college at Oxford after the battle of Bosworth, whom Henry had good reason to suspect of involvement in a plot on behalf of Clarence's son. The king summoned him in February 1487 to answer charges regarding certain conspiracies. 
During autumn 1486 there were reports of a Yorkist pretender overseas, though Simnel need not have been the only horse in the race. By the end of 1486 he was established in Ireland, with the backing first of Thomas Fitzgerald, chancellor of Ireland, and later of his brother Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare, the king's deputy, and Walter Fitzsimons, the archbishop of Dublin. According to Andre, Henry sent a herald to question him on his background, and indeed in March a payment was made to Falcon pursuivant for a mission to Ireland in the king's service. Simnel must have had some former courtiers in his entourage. Lovell, who had been at large since Bosworth, may already have been active in the conspiracy. Simonds confessed that after he took the boy to Ireland he had been with Lovell in the Furness Fells in north Lancashire, to reconnoitre a suitable landing place. Early in 1487, too, Margaret of York, dowager duchess of Burgundy and Clarence's sister, began to lend support to the enterprise, providing a base for defectors and financial assistance. Shortly after the February council, Lincoln slipped out of England and joined his aunt at Mechelen in the province of Antwerp. By the end of April, Lincoln, Lovell, and other Yorkist exiles, and a company of German mercenaries under the Swiss captain Martin Schwartz, sailed to Ireland. With the arrival in Dublin of Lincoln, the stage was set for a most remarkable piece of theatre, the coronation of the young boy in Holy Trinity on 24 May. The fact of the coronation, and the reference to the king as Edward VI, attests that the focus of the impersonation was now Warwick. A parliament was held in Dublin in the new king's name, and coins struck. Proclamations were issued. Henry was later to make fun of the gullibility of the Irish, claiming that they would crown apes at last. The men of the city of Waterford, which remained loyal during the revolt, likewise mocked the Dubliners for taking an organ maker's son as their king. 
The invasion of England was a serious affair. Simnel, Lincoln, and a mixed force of Yorkist diehards, 1500 German mercenaries, and about 4000 poorly armed Irish kerne (light infantry), landed in Furness on 4 June. From its secure beachhead the army moved rapidly eastwards, crossing the Pennines into Wensleydale, where it found recruits among the local gentry. On 8 June a letter in the name of 'Edward VI' was dispatched from Masham to York, advertising his cause and seeking 'relief and ease of lodgings and victuals' (York City archives, House Book 6, fol. 97). Two local magnates -- John Scrope, fifth Baron Scrope of Bolton, and Thomas Scrope, sixth Baron Scrope of Masham -- led a company of horsemen to York and proclaimed the new king at Bootham bar; but the city held firm for Henry. Meanwhile the main rebel host had pressed south, desperately hoping to skittle the Tudor regime by the speed of their advance. 
Henry was well-prepared, having positioned himself strategically to raise support, and advanced purposefully northwards from Leicester. There were some moments of unease, and not all the forces summoned arrived on time. Rumours of a rebel victory prompted some Londoners to take to the streets on Simnel's behalf. None the less, by the time the king left Nottingham on 15 June he had at his command twice as many men as his opponents. On the morning of 16 June the rebels crossed the Trent upstream from Newark and positioned themselves on the hillside overlooking the road from Nottingham. The battle of Stoke was a sharp and brutal encounter. Lincoln, who was regarded as the real leader of the rebellion, was slain, but Lovell escaped and fled to Scotland. A herald, who was at the battle and wrote an early account of it, records that 'the lad' whom the 'rebels called King Edward' was captured by Robert Bellingham (BL, Cotton MS Julius B XII, fol. 29'r'). 
According to Vergil, Henry spared Simnel, and put him to service, first in the scullery, and later as a falconer. The 'Book of Howth', a later compilation drawing on family tradition, repeats this story, adding the detail that Henry had his new scullion formally presented to a group of Irish lords to underline the folly of their actions in 1487. Vergil reports that Simnel was still alive at the time of writing, 1534. For a royal servant, Lambert remains oddly elusive. The only known documentation of his later life is the issue of robes to him at the funeral of Sir Thomas Lovell, courtier and counsellor of Henry VII, in 1525. Given the rarity of the surname in England, Richard Simnel, canon of St Osith's in Essex at the time of the dissolution in 1539, may have been his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 25570


Freine, Simund de (d. before 1228?), poet, from a family connected with Sutton Freen, Herefordshire, was a canon of Hereford by 'c'.1190 and bore the title 'magister'. Two poems were addressed by him to Gerald of Wales in, perhaps, 1194-7 (extant in LPL, MS 236, folios 166-166b; the texts are also in BL, Cotton MS Vitellius E.v (sixteenth-century), and Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 400, page 119, which give thirty-one lines omitted in the Lambeth manuscript). One poem urges Gerald to stay in Hereford, commending the extensive studies of its cathedral school; one warmly defends him against Abbot Adam of Dore's criticism. Simund wrote two substantial Anglo-Norman poems in heptasyllabic lines. His adaptation of Boethius's 'Consolation of Philosophy', 'Le roman de philosophie', is extant in BL, Royal MS 20 B.xiv, folios 68'v'-77'v'; Bodl. Oxf., MS Douce 210, folios 51'v'-59'v'; and BL, Add. MS 46919, folios 107-16. Simund's life of St George, 'La vie de Saint Georges' (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Fr. 902, fols. 108-17), was perhaps written for Archbishop Baldwin's preaching of the third crusade in 1188. Both poems include Simund's acrostic signature in their first twenty lines. They were probably written under the patronage of Bishop William de Vere who may be the provenance of extra information in the anti-Muslim 'Georges'. If so, any further writings by Simund between de Vere's death in 1198 and his own, implicit in a charter datable to 1224x8, are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 25571


Wells, Simon of (d. 1207), bishop of Chichester, was probably a Somerset man, the son of Robert of Whatley, who held land of William Fitzjohn's fee in Harptree, Somerset, which was confirmed to Simon by King John in 1201. It is doubtful whether, as has been claimed, he was related to Hugh of Wells, bishop of Lincoln (though the two men were linked professionally), or to Jocelin, bishop of Bath and Wells. He owed the advancement of his career in church and royal service entirely to Archbishop Hubert Walter and the first evidence of him comes about 1192, when Hubert, still bishop of Salisbury, collated to him a Salisbury prebend newly formed out of the churches of Lyme and Halstock. It is in this connection that he is called, in the Salisbury register, Simon Fitzrobert. 
Simon attested a number of Hubert's 'acta' as archbishop of Canterbury. By 1198 he was archdeacon of Wells, and he obtained the provostship of Beverley in 1199. With his archdeaconry he held the churches of Huish and South Brent in Devon, and as archdeacon he often occurs as the datary of royal documents (the official who organized their issue). He was with King John in Normandy in 1199 and in 1203 during the campaigns against Philip Augustus of France which ended in the loss of the duchy. In 1201 he is recorded as receiving money into the king's chamber from the knights of the archbishopric of Canterbury, thereby giving substance to his title of Simon de Camera, or clerk of the chamber. He was elected bishop of Chichester in early April 1204, being consecrated by Hubert Walter at Westminster on 11 July 1204. The temporalities had been restored by 3 August. 
Once he was bishop the royal grants to Simon and his own charters suggest a strong concentration on his pastorate (ordination of vicarages, visitation of monasteries) and on exploiting the material assets of his see -- holding the royal farm of Chichester, supervising Chichester mints, building shops round the cathedral cemetery, walling Chichester city, and recovering alienated lands of the see by judgment of his own court. He also received the right to transport marble from Purbeck to Chichester for the repair of his cathedral, thereby showing his interest in the fabric of the building, and also his participation in the architectural aesthetic of the time, which favoured the use of this dark marble against light-coloured stone. His royal service did not immediately cease, for in 1204 he supervised the valuation of Gilbert de l'Aigle's fee, and he was active in the purveyance of supplies for the king's (abortive) Poitevin expedition in 1205, but there is no more evidence of royal service after Hubert Walter's death in July 1205. Bishop Simon died at St Gilles in southern France on 21 August 1207, apparently returning from a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela; he left in his will 100 marks towards a chantry for Archbishop Hubert. 


@@@@@


doc= 25572


Faversham, Simon of (d. 1306), philosopher and theologian, was presumably born at Faversham in Kent, either in the 1240s or, less likely, in the 1260s. He appears to have trained as a theologian at Oxford, though this is not established with certainty. The Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek, Vienna, MS 2302, fol. 23'r', carries an 'explicit' stating that Faversham disputed his 'Questions on the 'Posterior Analytics'' at Paris, and since this work quotes Thomas Aquinas's 'Commentary on the Perihermeneias', Simon was probably there in the mid-1270s. Some copies of his works refer to him as Simon Anglicus, so implying that he lectured outside England, and overall, it seems likely that he taught in the arts faculty at Paris before appearing in the theology faculty at Oxford. He was at Oxford in 1301, when he is recorded as participating in the 'vesperies' -- an evening disputation which formed part of a master's inception -- of the Franciscan Peter of Baldeswell. On 31 January 1304 he became chancellor of the university, and held that office until 9 February 1306. 
Faversham's ecclesiastical career in England doubtless began following his return from Paris. He took minor orders as an acolyte in 1283, and was ordained subdeacon at Croydon on 24 September 1289, and deacon at Bocking, Essex, on 23 September 1290. In the latter year he was presented by Archbishop John Pecham to Preston church, near Faversham. He is also reported to have been rector of Harrow, Middlesex, at the time of his death, but the date of 1272 which has sometimes been suggested for his obtaining this benefice seems incompatible with the history of his orders. He was appointed a canon of Hereford (prebend of Hampton) in 1304, and in September 1305 he was named archdeacon of Canterbury, but was forced to resign in the following February in favour of a papal nominee. He was also presented to the rectory of Reculver, Kent, but became involved in litigation with a rival claimant at the papal curia. Commended by Edward I in a letter to Pope Clement V, and fortified with royal letters of protection granted on 24 May, Faversham travelled to Poitiers to defend his claim, but died either at the curia or on his way there, some time before 19 July 1306. 
Faversham's extant writings are works of philosophy, especially, but not solely, in the field of logic. They include his 'Quaestiones super libros Porphyrii', 'Quaestiones super libros Praedicamentorum', 'Quaestiones super 'Perihermeneias'', 'Quaestiones super 'Analytica posteriora'', and 'Quaestiones super libros Elenchorum', along with certain titles from his 'Quaestiones super 'Analytica priora''. Some of these 'quaestiones', for instance those on the 'Elenchi', exist in double redactions, indicating that he taught some courses twice. His 'Quaestiones super libros Elenchorum', and also parts of his 'Commentarium in Summulas logicales Petri Hispani' (probably also glossed in the middle of the 1270s at Paris), as well as his 'Quaestiones' on Porphyry, the 'Praedicamenta' and the 'Perihermeneias' have been published, as has his 'Sophisma: universale est intentio'. Of his works not concerned with logic, the only ones edited so far are his 'Quaestiones in tres libros 'De anima'' and the 'Quaestiones super tertium 'De anima''. University of Leipzig Library, MS lat. 1359, contains Simon's 'Quaestiones super libros topicorum', and the Biblioteca Ambrosiana in Milan, and the library of Merton College, Oxford, add the following unpublished treatises to the catalogue of Simon's works: his various 'dictata' on the 'Metaphysics', on 'De spiritu et anima', on 'De intellectu et intelligibili', and on 'De somno et vigilia', and his many collections of 'quaestiones', on the 'Physics' (reported by Robert Clothall), on 'De longitudine et brevitate vitae', 'De iuventute et senectute', 'De inspiratione et respiratione', 'De caelo et mundo', 'De generatione et corruptione', 'De motu animalium', and 'De meteorologicis'. 
The sources for his thought whom Faversham names are Albert the Great, Thomas Aquinas, and Giles of Rome (Egidio Romano). In his 'Quaestiones super tertium 'De anima'', he refers to Proclus and to a host of ancient and medieval commentators, including Theophrastus, Themistius, Alexander, Avicenna, Averroes, and al-Gazali. Faversham affirms that Averroes's position on the unique possible intellect in all men should not be held, yet he seems to excuse him by noting that what Averroes said on this issue was not in the form of an assertion. His knowledge of the Aristotelian commentators, however, seems to derive less from their own writings than from Albert, and from Aquinas's 'Summa contra Gentiles'. In regard to Albert and Thomas, Simon cites them, and the sources they provide, yet neither influences his judgment. In forging his own positions, Faversham evaluates his many sources. If any of them seems to have a special appeal, it is Giles of Rome, who often influences the direction of Simon's thought in his treatment of fallacies, and who in the latter's 'Quaestiones super libros Elenchorum' is styled the 'Expositor'. Another unnamed author, quite likely Pierre d'Auvergne, is frequently followed by Faversham in his logical works. Yet Simon's own thought was taken seriously enough for him to become one of the chief opponents of Rudolphus Brito, who was one of the most prolific and influential developers of modal logic at Paris at the end of the thirteenth century. The edition of Faversham's questions on Porphyry's 'Isagoge', and on Aristotle's 'Praedicamenta' and 'Perihermeneias', published by P. Mazzarella in 1957, was intended to be the first volume of his 'Opera omnia', but no other volumes have followed. 


@@@@@


doc= 25573


Appulby, Simon (d. 1537), religious recluse and author, was the last anchorite to be attached to the church of All Hallows, London Wall. An ordained priest, Simon made his anchoritic profession at the nearby priory of the Holy Trinity in June 1513. In choosing the solitary life, he was following in a long parish tradition: All Hallows had hosted an 'anker' since at least the early fifteenth century, and probably rather longer. Their reputation for piety meant that anchorites frequently benefited from devotional gifts, and 'Syr Symon' could evidently afford to be a generous benefactor of his church. The accounts kept by the churchwardens record a number of donations made by the recluse. Appulby is first mentioned in a fragmentary account, undated but from early in Henry VIII's reign, when he gave a 'stande of ale' which yielded 4's'. 61/2died for the parish. When All Hallows was building a new aisle in 1528/9, he contributed 32's'. in cash and a further 8's'. for the scaffolding poles. He also donated a chalice weighing 8 ounces, and a sum of 9's'. 3died that he had personally received in offerings. The accounts further reveal that he employed a servant, who was on one occasion paid 4died for 'playstrynge of the cherche wall'. 
But Appulby's fame was not restricted to the parish of All Hallows. In 1514 Wynkyn de Worde published 'The Fruyte of Redempcyon', a series of thirty-one short English prayers and meditations on the life of Christ in the form of a devotional treatise. This book was based upon a popular but anonymous Latin text, 'Meditationes de vita et beneficiis Jesu Christi, sive, Gratiarum actiones', which was first published in Cologne about 1488. Although the 'Fruyte' has sometimes been attributed to Richard Whitford, it plainly states that it was written by 'the Anker of London wall wretched Symon'. Its principal theme is the redemptive value of the passion, and the physical sufferings of Christ are graphically described. The text is illustrated by nineteen intricate woodcuts depicting, among other subjects, the Trinity, the annunciation, and the temptation in the wilderness. The book explains that it was written in English 'for your ghostly conforte that understande no latyn', and it was commended to the reader by the conservative bishop of London, Richard Fitzjames. William Bonde, a Syon monk, also expressed his approval of Appulby's treatise in the first edition of his own 'Pylgrimage of Perfection'. The 'Fruyte' clearly sold well, since five editions are known to have been printed in all, the last of these in 1532. Appulby died five years later, having made a will bequeathing his books and vestments to his successor as anchorite, should one be found. He requested that his burial be attended by the priests of the Pappey, a fraternity for elderly and indigent clerics where he had served as one of the two wardens between 1505 and 1507. He also made provision for the poor, and asked that 8's'. 4died be spent on a feast of ale, cheese, and buns at his funeral. He was interred in a tomb that he had prepared in his anchorage. 


@@@@@


doc= 25574


Simon, Abraham (bap. 1617, d. c.1692), medallist, was baptized on 27 April 1617 at the French protestant church in Threadneedle Street, London. He was the third son of Peter (or Pierre) Simon, a merchant, and his wife, Anne ('b'. 'c'.1588), the daughter and heir of Gilles Germain, a merchant of St Peter Port, Guernsey, and the brother of the medallist and seal engraver Thomas Simon (bap. 1618, d. 1665); his other siblings were Peter ('b'. 'c'.1612x14), Hannah, William ('bap'. 1616), Samuel ('bap'. 1619), Nathaniel, and Laurence. Abraham matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 8 May 1635, and was created MA in 1646. He studied law for seven years, being admitted a student of Gray's Inn in 1640 and again in 1642. 
By 1645 Simon was making medals and wax models of leading parliamentarians and others, working both independently and in collaboration with his brother Thomas. Abraham's medals, a number of which bear his signature, 'AS', were cast and chased. Signed examples include those of John Campbell, first earl of Loudoun (1645), William Pope (1645), the ambassador Albert Joachim (1646), Sir Sydenham Poyntz (1646), John Maitland, second earl of Lauderdale (1646), and Charles Seton, second earl of Dunfermline (1646). 
Simon's movements after the late 1640s are unclear. He may possibly have visited the Netherlands, before or after travelling to Sweden. John Evelyn met him in London in June 1653, and in 1654 Simon was also in England as he produced a medal of Henry Cromwell. However, that same year he was in Sweden, where he made the coronation medal for Queen Hedvig (unsigned), for which he was paid the sum of 800 dalar in October 1654. Unusually for Simon, the medal die was engraved rather than cast using a wax model. Vertue claimed that Simon travelled with Queen Kristina on a visit to Louis XIII of France, and that the queen was in love with him. In fact Kristina visited the court of Louis XIV in 1656 (following her abdication in 1654), and as the Swedish royal household did not pay Simon that year it is probable that he accompanied Kristina. Vertue records that during this visit Simon was nearly arrested when taking a wax portrait of the king from the gallery of the royal chapel on account of his peculiar appearance. He was 'a man of small stature; of a primitive philosophic aspect, always wearing his hair and beard, according to the mode of his ancestors' (Vertue, 'Medals, Coins, Great Seals', 58). Court accounts record that Simon was in the service of Karl X Gustav and Hedvig between 1655 and 1660, although no medals from this period are known. He probably left Sweden for good in 1658, and possibly settled in the Netherlands for a few years. It is unclear whether it was during this or an earlier visit that he was in the company of the diplomat Sir William Temple. 
After the Restoration, Simon returned to England, where he found favour at court. He modelled the portrait of Charles II at the price of 100 broad-pieces. The duke of York afterwards had his portrait done, but proposed to pay him only 50 broad-pieces: Simon then took up the wax model, and in the duke's presence deliberately defaced it. This act lost him favour at court, and other sitters often complained of his impatience when they offered any criticism of his work. Vertue records that his unconventional appearance, 'constantly wearing boots and spurs, with his long sword 'en cavalier', made him everywhere remarkable' (Vertue, 'Medals, Coins, Great Seals', 58). He was also in considerable demand as a model because 'His hirsute picturesque was of a kind, exploited by Van Dyck in his studies of apostles's heads, that remained very popular throughout the seventeenth century' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.124). Indeed, he was painted three times by Sir Godfrey Kneller, once as a hermit. Sir Peter Lely also painted Simon's portrait. 
In later life Simon seems to have encountered difficulty attracting patronage, and he died in obscurity about 1692. He left two daughters, Anne and Judith. 


@@@@@


doc= 25575


Simon, John (1675-1751), mezzotint engraver, was born into a Huguenot family in Normandy and is said to have belonged to an artist family connected with the protestant church at Charenton, near Paris. After training in Paris as a line engraver he moved to England and rapidly adapted to the medium of mezzotint. His earliest prints were published from Cross Lane, Long Acre, during the middle years of Queen Anne's reign. Their spare and powerful style soon attracted the notice of Sir Godfrey Kneller, who about 1708-9 had quarrelled with his principal engraver, John Smith, and in the period before the dispute was settled Simon obtained several of Kneller's commissions. This assured his reputation, and Simon became a founding subscriber to the Academy for Artists in Great Queen Street, set up under Kneller's patronage in 1711. 
Simon was a prolific engraver, particularly noted for his portraits, of which Chaloner Smith (in 'British Mezzotinto Portraits') details 170 examples, above all after Kneller and Dahl, but also after Gibson, Murray, Mercier, and Seeman. His subjects represented all points of the political spectrum. Thus, while engraving three separate portraits each of the duke of Marlborough (nos. 93, 94, 96) and of Sir Robert Walpole (nos. 158-60), he also engraved Jacobites, including Francis Atterbury, bishop of Rochester (no. 19), George Keith, the Earl Marischal (no. 92), Lord North and Grey (no. 112), and the duke of Ormond (no. 115). Simon's numerous portraits of members of the Hanoverian royal family were similarly balanced by portraits dating from 'c'.1730 of the exiled Stuart king James III (no. 143), with Queen Clementina (no. 144) and the young princes Charles Edward (no. 145) and Henry Benedict (no. 146). Hardly surprisingly, these last were untitled and unsigned, but Chaloner Smith considered the attribution as 'certain' (p. 1118) on stylistic grounds. Simon also engraved a notable sequence of twenty-four 'Poets and Philosophers of England', published on six plates ('c'.1727), and many religious and decorative subjects, such as 'Christ Restoring the Blind Man's Sight', after Laguerre, 'Four Elements', after Amiconi, and 'Four Seasons', after Rosalba. Particularly notable was a version of the 'Raphael Cartoons' at Hampton Court (no. 173), engraved in the early years of his career and published by Edward Cooper, for whom Simon worked extensively until 'c'.1720. Thereafter he mostly published his own prints from a series of addresses in the vicinity of Covent Garden, including King Street (the Seven Stars), Villiers Street (the Golden Eagle), and New Street, before retiring from active engraving about 1742. He died in London on 22 September 1751, and his remaining stock of plates was sold in November 1761. 


@@@@@


doc= 25576


Simon, Sir John (1818-1897), serjeant-at-law, was born at Montego Bay, Jamaica, on 9 December 1818, the only son of Isaac Simon, a Jewish merchant, and his wife, Rebecca, only daughter of Jacob Orobio Furtado. Rebecca Simon was descended from Balthasar Orobio, who, on account of his adherence to the Jewish faith, spent three years (1655 to 1658) in the prison of the Spanish Inquisition, and whose father, Caesar Orobio, was burnt at the stake. Simon was educated at a public school in Jamaica, and a private school in Liverpool. He went on to study at University College, London, and graduated LLB in 1841 at London University. He entered the Middle Temple on 29 October 1839 and on 4 November 1842 he was called to the bar, the second Jew to be admitted. In 1843 he married Rachel, fifth daughter of Simeon Kensington Salaman of Portman Square, London, and sister of Charles Kensington Salaman, the composer. Rachel Simon was a writer. Together they had five surviving children -- two sons, Charles Moncrieffe Simon and Oswald John Simon, and three daughters. 
After practising for two years in Jamaica, Simon returned to England in 1845, and became a leader on the common-law side on the northern circuit. In April 1858 he successfully defended Simon Bernard from the accusation of complicity with Orsini in the attempt to assassinate Napoleon III. On 15 April 1864 he was appointed a serjeant-at-law, and in February 1868 he received a patent of precedence, which gave him the privileges of queen's counsel, with the right of holding briefs against the crown. On 27 November 1868 he was returned to parliament as a Liberal for the borough of Dewsbury in Yorkshire. In the House of Commons it was said that he swiftly commanded attention as an authority on legal questions. He made significant speeches on the 'Oaths Bill' (1880-83), which he had introduced, allowing for an affirmation to be given by those who objected to taking an oath. He also spoke extensively on the government of Jamaica in 1884 and played an important part in the restoration of representative government. 
In parliament and outside Simon was an untiring advocate of Jewish interests. Besides organizing the Mansion House meeting in 1870 to protest against the persecution of the Jews in Romania and Serbia, he entered a vigorous protest in parliament against the pogroms in Russia in 1882. He was one of the founders of the Anglo-Jewish Association in 1871. On 24 August 1886 he was knighted and in 1888 he retired from parliament. He was a member of the Reform Club. He died at his London residence, 36 Tavistock Square, on 24 June 1897, and was buried that month at Golders Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 25577


Simon, Thomas (bap. 1618, d. 1665), medallist and seal-engraver, was baptized on 26 April 1618 at the French protestant church in Threadneedle Street, London. He was the fourth son of Peter (or Pierre) Simon, a merchant, a native of London but of French descent, and his wife, Anne ('b'. 'c'.1588), the daughter and heir of Gilles Germain, a merchant of St Peter Port, Guernsey, and the brother of the wax modeller and engraver Abraham Simon (bap. 1617, d. c.1692). His other siblings were Peter ('b'. 'c'.1612x14), Hannah, William ('bap'. 1616), Samuel ('bap'. 1619), Nathaniel, and Laurence. On 30 August 1633 Thomas was apprenticed for eight years to a London goldsmith, George Crompton. However, in 1635, probably through the commendation of Sir Edward Harley, he began a seven-year apprenticeship to Edward Greene, also a goldsmith, and chief engraver at the mint. Greene was himself subject to the direction of Nicholas Briot, whose artistry undoubtedly influenced Simon. Simon's first attributed work was the Scottish rebellion medal of 1639 commemorating the treaty of Berwick. 
The apprenticeship ended during the civil war, when Simon's French protestantism ensured his loyalty to parliament. Although he was not yet a member of the mint establishment he continued to work there, making, on the order of parliament, a new great seal, for $100 (which had been taken to the king at York in 1642). After the death of Edward Greene in 1644, Thomas Simon and Edward Wade were appointed joint chief engravers on 4 April 1645. The quality of the coinage during the latter half of the 1640s is not impressive: it is assumed that Wade did this work and Simon the medals. On 15 February 1649 Simon married Elizabeth, the daughter of Cardin Fautrart. They were married at All Saints', Maidstone, Kent, though his wife's family originated from Guernsey. They had three sons and two daughters, of whom Samuel ('b'. 1 April 1653), Elizabeth, and Ann survived into adulthood. 
Simon became a freeman of the Goldsmiths' Company on 12 June 1646: his first apprentice was his brother Laurence. From that time he produced portrait medals of eminent contemporaries, often working in collaboration with his brother Abraham, who produced many of the wax models from which they were cast. Examples include 'Sir James Harrington' (1653), 'John Thurloe' (1653; British Museum), and 'Edward Hyde, First Earl of Clarendon' (1662). 
Wade died in 1648 and, in the appointments that followed the execution of Charles I, Simon was appointed chief engraver. He engraved a great seal bearing the arms of the Commonwealth, but the haste in which it was required is evident in the artistry. His second great seal of the Commonwealth produced in 1651 was of much greater complexity and of magnificent craftsmanship. In 1650 the committee of the army sent Simon to Edinburgh to sketch Oliver Cromwell for the medal to commemorate the battle of Dunbar. The lord-general in his reply declared that his own portrait should not appear: gratitude to the army might better be expressed by having 'Parliament on one side, and on the other an Army.' In the same letter Cromwell asked the committee to confer upon Simon 'the imployment in your service which Nicholas Briott had before him, indeed the man is ingenious and worthie of encouragement' (Farquhar, 'Thomas Simon', 274). On 27 November 1656 Simon was ordered by the council at Whitehall to produce portrait coinage of Oliver Cromwell, for 5's'. in silver and 20's'. in gold -- the obverse showing the protector in profile and of bust length, and the reverse showing the heraldic arms of the Cromwell family. These were struck on the newly designed mill and screw press of Pierre Blondeau. 
Simon made many seals for the public service, including, in 1655-6, the great seals for Scotland and for Ireland, and seals for the English, Scottish, and Irish councils, the English law courts, and the admiralty. On 14 January 1657 he laid before the council his account for making medals, badges, silver boxes for treaties, and presses for seals amounting to $1728 5's'. 8died In the following year he was still asking that the debt be honoured. 'I beg you', he writes, 'to consider that I and my servants have wrought five years without recompense, and that the interest I have to pay for gold and silver eats up my profit.' In 1658 he was employed to model the face of the effigy of Cromwell, carried in the protector's funeral procession on 23 November 1658. 
At the Restoration Simon petitioned Charles II 'for the employment as Chief Engraver to His Majesty and the Mint... and for Pardon because by order of Parliament he made their Seal in 1643.' He was refused, as the title was restored to Thomas Rawlins, who had held it under Charles I. None the less, it was Simon who was instructed to prepare the patterns for the new coinage of 1660. On 31 May 1661 he obtained the grant of the office of one of the gravers of the king's arms, shields, and stamps; and on 2 June 1661 he was made by patent one of the king's chief gravers of the mint and seals, with the salary of $50. At this time he prepared the great privy seal, the great seal of Ireland, the great seal of Jamaica, and seals for the Order of the Garter, the lord high admiral, the council in the marches of Wales, and the Royal Society. In 1661 he visited Paris on official business of the mint. 
In January 1662 Simon and John Roettiers were ordered to engrave dies for the new 'milled' coinage. However, they could not agree 'by reason of a contest in art between them' (Farquhar, 'Thomas Simon', 297), and so on 7 February they were each instructed to submit to the king a trial piece for a silver crown. Charles decided in favour of Roettiers. The following year Simon engraved the Petition Crown, so called because of its two-line edge inscription: 'Thomas Simon most humbly prays your Majesty to compare that his tryll piece with the Dutch and if more truly drawn and embossed more gracefully ordered and more accurately engraven to relieve him' (ibid., 298). This was a magnificent example of Simon's abilities, but his petition went unheeded. A specimen is in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. 
Nevertheless, the king continued during 1662 to employ Simon as 'one of Our Cheife Gravers'. He was granted warrants to make the great seal of Charles II and the seal of the court of exchequer; on 25 August the king's silver and gold coinage; on 18 September an angel golde showing St George slaying the dragon and, on the reverse, a man-of-war; and the Scottish coinage, of which only two silver coins were completed. His last known work is the dominion of the seas medal commemorating the English naval victory over the Dutch in June 1665. He died, possibly of the plague, that same year and was buried on 26 July at the parish church of All Saints, Maidstone, Kent. His body was probably later reinterred at St Clement Danes, in accordance with his will, proved on 23 August 1665. He left his son, Samuel, a farm at Shorne, Kent, together with paintings, drawings, and medals. To his nephew William, the son of his brother Nathaniel (deceased), he left his punches and graving tools. Simon's widow petitioned the king about 1669 for the sum of $2164, claimed by her as arrears of payment due to her husband. 
Simon's outstanding achievement was to bring together exquisite artistry and technology at the mint: this received national recognition in 1753, when the publisher Vertue was instructed by act of parliament to produce a major account of his work. Simon's sketchbooks containing figure, portrait, and animal studies, and the designs for his seals and coinage, which passed into the possession of his daughter Mrs Hibberd, were sold at Christies, London, on 14 July 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 25578


Simpson, Christopher (c.1602-1669), composer and musician, was the eldest son of Dorothy Pearson (died 1628) and Christopher Sympson ('b'. 'c'.1580, died in or after 1616). Originally from Nottinghamshire, the family had settled in Yorkshire by the mid-sixteenth century. Simpson was probably born at Egton in the North Riding, where his parents moved after their marriage. In official documents his father is described as a 'cordwainer' (shoemaker), but he was also actor-manager of a theatre company patronized by wealthy Catholic families in the area. This duality may be explained by the need for Catholic recusants, such as the Simpsons were, to maintain a discreet profile during a period of religious and political turbulence. 
That nothing is known of Simpson's education, formidable as it was, or his early career, probably reflects such considerations. Indeed, a tantalizing theory has been propounded (Urquart, 'Was Christopher Simpson a Jesuit?') that Simpson may have led a double life and is to be identified with a contemporary named Simpson (or Sampson) who received a Jesuit education on the continent, leading to ordination in 1629. Many features of the career of this Yorkshire-born priest, who finally returned to the Jesuit college of St John at Durham in 1649, are not entirely incompatible with the composer's known activities. The evidence for the musician's death in 1669, however, is at odds, at least on the face of it, with the notification from London to the Jesuit authorities in Rome of the priest's death on 3 March 1674. 
Simpson first emerges from obscurity about 1642 during the civil war, when he enlisted in the royalist army under William Cavendish, duke of Newcastle, at York, where Charles I had established a base in response to the threat from Scotland. In the summer of 1643 Newcastle's forces were in Lincolnshire, and it was probably there that Simpson came into contact with Sir Robert Bolles, a noted patron of music, of Scampton manor, just north of Lincoln. Some time between 1645 and 1649 Simpson became resident musician and tutor to Sir Robert's son John. Simpson had earlier inherited from his father Hunt House, a smallholding at Pickering, but he settled this property on his nephew Christopher, and continued to reside with the Bolles family, either at Scampton or in London, until the end of his life. 
As a theorist, Simpson first contributed to Playford's 'A Brief Introduction to the Skill of Musick' (2nd edn, 1655), providing annotations to a chapter based on a short treatise by Thomas Campion (1613). He established a national reputation with 'The Division-Violist' (1659), a viol tutor culminating in a comprehensive elucidation of the art of spontaneous extemporization over a repeated bass theme, then a widely practised and highly esteemed art. He dedicated the first edition to Sir Robert Bolles, under whose roof 'the work had both its conception and production' (dedication), and the second (1665) to his highly talented son, for whose use the treatise was written. With a view to exploiting the continental market, the latter edition incorporated a translation into Latin. Roger L'Estrange, himself an accomplished amateur violist, wrote in his foreword: 'Whoever has this book by him, has one of the best tutors in the world'. 
In 1665 Simpson published a modest primer on the rudiments of music, 'The Principles of Practical Musick', dedicated to another young pupil, Sir John St Barbe, whom he had begun to teach in 1663. A much enlarged treatise, 'A Compendium of Practical Musick', followed in 1667, dedicated to the duke of Newcastle. The first part is based on 'The Principles' and is followed by four additional sections devoted to composition, discords, figurate descant, and canon respectively. By 1775 the 'Compendium' had reached its ninth edition and even Burney, who was sceptical of the efficacy of such publications, acknowledged 'the considerable merit of its clearness and simplicity' (Burney, 'Hist. mus.', 3.473). 
Simpson's compositions were written almost exclusively for consorts of viols, or mixed consorts, in various combinations with continuo, or for solo viol. They were widely disseminated in manuscript copies, but none was printed in his lifetime, apart from those included in his treatises for illustrative purposes. Reflecting the growing ascendancy of the violin family during the seventeenth century, it is evident that the treble parts in consort pieces, including those ostensibly for viols, were increasingly played by, and sometimes even conceived for, the violin. Furthermore, two divisions on a ground specifically for violin were attributed to Simpson and published posthumously by John Playford in 'The Division-Violin' (1684). 
In his treatise on the making of divisions Simpson affirmed that it was essentially an improvisatory art; at the same time, in the sets of divisions he wrote down, a remarkable inventiveness, melodic gift, structural grasp, and delight in instrumental display are evident. His 'Twenty 4-Part Ayres' are grouped by key into suite-like sets, each one containing one or two airs interspersed within a succession of dances -- pavans, galliards, courantes, and sarabands -- and written for the relatively uncommon combination of two trebles and two basses. These pieces, with their subtle varieties of texture, may well have been inspired by the similarly scored works of Simpson's distinguished colleague and friend John Jenkins. 
Many important sources for Simpson's music are now preserved at the British Library, the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and the Henry Watson Library, Manchester. Modern editions of his works include four fantasia-suites in 'The Seasons', twelve virtuoso fantasias in 'The Months', 'A Little Consort' for lyra viol, treble viol, and bass viol, 'Six Sets of Divisions' for treble and bass viol, and 'Twenty-Two 3-Part Airs', in which a tendency towards a polarity between the two upper parts and the bass suggests the pervasive influence of the Italian trio sonata. 
Simpson made his will at Lincoln on 5 May 1669, and it was proved in London on 29 July. He died at a house of Sir John Bolles, probably that in Holborn, but possibly Scampton Hall in Lincolnshire; exactly when is not known. Simpson was widely recognized as one of the most accomplished musicians of his generation. Thomas Mace placed him alongside Jenkins and William Lawes at the pinnacle of their profession: 'These three famous men... by their most singular and rare works 'they live'; and may so easily be distinguished, the one from the other, and as exactly known, which is which, as if they were present in person, and should speak words. (Mace, 151)' Matthew Locke, the most prominent English composer immediately after the Restoration, praised Simpson as 'a person whose memory is precious among good, and knowing men, for his exemplary life and excellent skill' (Locke, 32). 


@@@@@


doc= 25579


Simpson, David (1745-1799), Church of England clergyman and author, was born on 12 October 1745 at Ingleby Arncliffe, near Northallerton, Yorkshire, the son of Ralph Simpson, a farmer. His father expected his son to follow the same occupation, but, according to Simpson's own account, while he was still a boy he heard one evening during family prayers a voice within him calling him to go to be instructed for the ministry. His father, though initially sceptical, eventually gave way and Simpson received a classical education, first from the Revd Mr Dawson of Northallerton and then at Scorton grammar school. He was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, on 19 June 1765 and graduated BA in 1769 and MA in 1772. Simpson's sense of calling led him to take seriously his preparation for ministry, and early in his university career he visited Theophilus Lindsey, then vicar of Catterick (but later a Unitarian minister), who directed him to a close study of the scriptures. This, together with a terrifying encounter with a highwayman, led him to serious religion, and although at first afraid of being identified as a 'Methodist' he began to associate with a group of evangelical undergraduates, particularly Rowland Hill, who was a member of his own college. 
Simpson was ordained deacon in September 1769 and served an initial curacy at Ramsden Bellhouse, Essex. Thereafter, his early career was characterized by a turbulence not untypical of clergymen associated with Methodism. In 1771 he was ordained priest and became curate of Buckingham, but was forced to leave within twelve months because of opposition to his evangelical preaching. In 1772 he moved to Macclesfield at the invitation of Charles Roe, a leading evangelical manufacturer, and became assistant curate at St Michael's Church. In the following year, on 27 May 1773 he married Ann Yaldy, who died after only fifteen months, leaving one daughter, also named Ann. He remarried in October 1776; his new wife was Mrs Elizabeth Davy, with whom he had three children. Simpson's activity at Macclesfield, especially his close friendship with John Wesley, did nothing to decrease his reputation for Methodism and a group of parishioners induced Dr Markham, the bishop of Chester, to deprive him of his curacy. Shortly afterwards he was offered the prime curacy at St Michael's by a friend, who had the right of presentation. However, his opponents continued their protests and at this juncture Roe again intervened, offering to build a new church for Simpson. Christ Church, Macclesfield, was consecrated and Simpson licensed by the new bishop of Chester, Beilby Porteus, in December 1779; he continued as minister there until his death. 
Although Simpson was an evangelical Arminian in his theology and associated most naturally with clergy of similar views, he maintained a wide acquaintance among evangelicals and was a regular correspondent of Rowland Hill, Thomas Robinson, and several others with whom he engaged in a concert of prayer. At Macclesfield he combined a regular ministry to a settled congregation with itinerant preaching in the surrounding area. He was a popular preacher and an energetic pastor, who visited regularly throughout his parish, ministered to the legal and medical needs of the poor, and founded friendly societies, charity schools, and Sunday schools. As a consequence, he attracted large congregations and often had six or seven hundred communicants. He was an early pioneer of congregational hymn singing, and a collection of hymns formed one of his earliest publications in 1776. Simpson was a prolific author and published more than thirty works including sermons, tracts, essays, and more substantial volumes of apologetic. Particularly interesting is 'A Plea for Religion and the Sacred Writings etc' (1799), which included an appendix announcing his intention to secede from the church, partly because of conscientious objections to the damnatory clauses in the Athanasian creed (although Simpson himself was an orthodox Trinitarian) and partly because of corrupt practices within the church -- an issue rendered more urgent by a lively sense of impending divine judgment. Only twelve days before the planned formal announcement of this decision Simpson died at Macclesfield after a brief illness on Easter Sunday, 24 March 1799; his second wife had died eleven days earlier. He was buried on 26 March at Christ Church, Macclesfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 25580


Simpson, Edward (1578-1651), Church of England clergyman and author, was born at High Cross, Tottenham, Middlesex, on 9 May 1578, the son of Edward Simpson, rector of the parish. He was educated first at Westminster School and then at Trinity College, Cambridge. Admitted in 1596, he was a scholar of the college in 1597 and elected a fellow in 1601, graduating BA the same year and proceeding MA in 1604, BD in 1611, and DD in 1624. Between 1611 and 1614 he acted as chaplain to Sir Moyle Finch of Eastwell, Kent, known for his puritanism and militant anti-popery, and on 2 January 1617 was presented by Finch's widow, Lady Elizabeth Finch, to the rectory of Eastling, valued at $129 per annum; he did not resign his fellowship until 1628. On 4 August that year Simpson was collated to the prebend of Corringham in the diocese of Lincoln, and installed by proxy on 13 August. He was married twice, first to a daughter of Sir Richard Barham; of his second wife, nothing at all is known. 
In 1636 Simpson issued a chronology of the Christian religion, 'Chronicon historiam catholicam complectens', which appeared in expanded form in 1652. The Leiden edition of 1729 contains a miniature portrait of Simpson, with a white beard and skull-cap, the miniature being born aloft by cherubim and seraphim in a larger scene depicting the banishment of superstition, and the progress of light and learning, during the days of the Christian emperors of Rome. Simpson's biographer Thomas Jones, whose account of his life prefaced the 1652 edition, credited him with other publications, but there is no evidence for this. 
Simpson remained at Eastling through the 1640s but at some point after September 1643 replaced the intruded minister, one S. Jemmatt, at Pluckley in the same county. He had resigned by 1649, when he was succeeded by Israel Tonge. Simpson died in 1651 and was buried on 9 June at Eastling. Administration of his estate was granted on 27 June to the guardian of his only child, Jane, who subsequently married Tonge. 


@@@@@


doc= 25581


Simpson, Sir George (1786/7?-1860), governor of the Hudson's Bay Company, was born in the parish of Lochbroom in the Scottish highlands, son of George Simpson. An illegitimate child, he was brought up by his father's family, particularly by his aunt Mary Simpson. After attending the parish school he seems to have gone to London about 1800 where he was found employment by his uncle Geddes Mackenzie Simpson, partner in the London sugar brokers Graham and Simpson. This partnership merged with Wedderburn & Co. in 1812 and, through Andrew Wedderburn, Simpson was brought into contact with the Hudson's Bay Company. 
In the first twenty years of the nineteenth century, the Hudson's Bay Company fought a bitter battle with the rival Canadian-based North West Company, a battle which was increasingly inimical to the successful prosecution of trade. Wedderburn -- who by now had changed his name to Colville and was on the governing body of the Hudson's Bay Company -- successfully urged the appointment of Simpson as locum governor-in-chief in 1820, hoping that his unemotive business sense and bargaining ability would put the area's trade on a steadier and more rational footing. Surprised by the appointment to a part of the world of which he knew little, Simpson immediately sailed for North America, arriving in Montreal in 1820. He at once began negotiations for an end to hostilities with the North West Company, ever ready to use the expertise and experience of Hudson's Bay officers, and quick to perceive that what was needed was a business accommodation, not a battle treaty in the style of the earlier, rather theatrical, dealings between the two companies. In March 1821 the companies amalgamated: Simpson was appointed one of two governors and, unexpectedly, found himself in charge of the northern department, the more promising of the two areas into which the companies' territories had been divided. 
Simpson proved an able if autocratic governor, adept at reconciling officers who had a little earlier been bitter rivals, and shrewd at spotting and rewarding talented fur traders. He was helped by the fact that the fur trade prospered and the men were well rewarded. In 1824 he began the most remarkable of his transcontinental journeys during which he acquired the reputation for keen observation, determination, and great speed of travel. He reached the Pacific Ocean from Hudson Bay in eighty-four days (twenty fewer than the previous record), and, once there, set about plans to expand trade in the face of competition from the Russians and the Americans. His vigour and vision were rewarded in 1839 when he was made governor of both departments of the company. He moved his headquarters from York Factory to Lachine, which was close to Montreal, more accessible from England, and the base for company canoes bound for the west. He continued the rapid journeys across the company's territories, cultivating his reputation for action and enabling him to prepare detailed firsthand reports for the company's London committee on new trading areas and routes. 
In 1829 he visited to England to seek a wife, finding one in his cousin Frances Ramsay Simpson (1812/13-1853), daughter of his uncle Geddes; they married on 24 February 1830. Simpson's earlier relationships with several women of mixed European/Amerindian blood had been formalized as marriages, according to local custom, but, unlike other officers in the same position, he treated the liaisons simply as arrangements for his sexual gratification. He cut all contact with his former partners after his marriage, and, although he continued to provide for his several illegitimate children in Britain and Canada, he kept them at a distance from his wife and their five surviving children. The marriage was not very happy: Simpson was far older than his wife and rather autocratic; she found life in Canada isolated and her health suffered, particularly after the death in infancy of one of their children. 
Simpson became one of the leading figures of the Montreal business community, using his political and business contacts in the company's interests and to promote his own banking, rail, and mining ventures. His position in the company earned him the nickname the Emperor of the Plains. He was knighted in 1841 in recognition of his services to Arctic exploration after having encouraged the journeys of Thomas Simpson, his nephew, and Peter Warren Dease. 
Simpson's position brought him into the world of politics as well as trade. In 1838 he visited St Petersburg and negotiated a treaty by which the Russians leased the Alaskan peninsula to the Hudson's Bay Company. He tried to resist American penetration of the Columbia River territories and helped shape British government policy in the area, although American interests ultimately prevailed. Hoping to observe the situation in the Pacific west and in Alaska, at the same time as realizing a personal ambition, he decided in 1841 to travel round the world, accompanied (because of failing eyesight) by a secretary, Edward Martin Hopkins. Setting out from London in 1841, he reached North America, and then crossed it, riding eleven hours a day to gratify his passion for speed. Travelling up the west coast he decided to rationalize the company's organization by closing all but one of the permanent trading posts. He then pressed on to the Sandwich (later, Hawaiian) Islands, forming the opinion that the company's interests would be best served if they remained independent; an opinion which in 1842 and 1843 he succeeded in persuading the British, French, and Belgian governments to adopt. After a further quick visit to Alaska, he headed for Russia and thence London, where he arrived in October 1842 after a journey remarkable for its speed despite his business engagements 'en route'. He continued his voyages almost to the end of his life, finding canoe travel particularly invigorating, but he became increasingly firmly based in Montreal and in 1849, at his request, relinquished the supervision of the Red River territory. 
In 1857 Simpson successfully resisted plans that control of Rupert's Land pass from the company to Canada, although this was to happen after his death. By 1859 he was physically weakened and announced his intention to retire. In 1860 he suffered attacks of apoplexy, from which he recovered enough to entertain the prince of Wales, who visited Montreal that summer, before a renewed attack rendered him unconscious and led to his death on 7 September 1860 at Lachine, Montreal. He was buried at Mount Royal cemetery, Montreal, next to his wife. He left over $100,000, principally to his surviving son John Henry Pelly Simpson, with substantial grants to his four legitimate daughters and a tiny annuity to one of his illegitimate children. Ruthless and autocratic at times, he served the interests of the Hudson's Bay Company with great devotion and very considerable business acumen. 


@@@@@


doc= 25582


Simpson, James (1781-1853), advocate and author, was born in Edinburgh, the son of William Simpson, minister of the Tron Church, Edinburgh, and his wife, Jean Douglas Balderston. His grandfather James, and great-grandfather John Simpson were also ministers of the Church of Scotland. James was called to the bar in 1801. In early life he was acquainted with Sir Walter Scott, and was among those to whom 'Waverley' was submitted for criticism before publication. 
In 1815 Simpson visited Waterloo immediately after the defeat of the French, and then proceeded to Paris, at that time in the hands of the allies. In the same year he published a vivid description of the scenes in the neighbourhood of the battlefield, entitled 'A Visit to Flanders and the Field of Waterloo' (1815), which rapidly went through nine editions. In 1853 he published an account of his experiences in Paris, under the title 'Paris after Waterloo', which included a tenth edition of his earlier work. His impressions of Paris are interesting, and include some recollections of Sir Walter Scott. In 1823 Simpson was associated with George Combe and his brother in establishing the 'Phrenological Journal', to which he was a constant contributor until it ceased to appear in 1847. 
Simpson took a deep interest in the movement for better elementary education. He was one of the founders of the Edinburgh modern infant school, in which he attempted to solve the problem of religious education by allowing parents to select religious instructors themselves. Failing to receive adequate support, however, the school was ultimately sold to the kirk session of New Greyfriars. Simpson continued devoted to the cause of non-sectarian education, and lectured on the subject throughout Britain. In 1837 he appeared as a witness before the House of Commons select committee on education, and his examination lasted seven days. He expressed his views on the need for educational reform in several publications including 'The Necessity of Popular Education as a National Object' (1834), and 'The Philosophy of Education' (1836). He also wrote 'Hints on the Principles of a Constitutional Police' (1822), and 'The State of the Representation of Edinburgh in Parliament' (1824). Simpson died on 2 September 1853, at his house, 33 Northumberland Avenue, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 25583


Simpson, Sir James (1792-1868), army officer, born in Edinburgh, was the son of David Simpson of Teviotbank, Roxburghshire, and his wife, Mary, daughter of John Eliott of Borthwickbrae and grandson of the Revd James Simpson, minister of Wilton, Scotland. Educated at the University of Edinburgh ('c'.1808-1810), he was commissioned as ensign and lieutenant in the 1st (Grenadier) guards on 3 April 1811. Throughout his career he was the tallest officer in the British army. In 1812 he was sent to Spain, and served there in the 3rd battalion from May 1812 to May 1813. He took part in the defence of Cadiz and relief of Seville, and, joining Wellington's army in the autumn at Salamanca, shared in the retreat from Burgos. He subsequently served with the 2nd battalion in the campaign of 1815, and was severely wounded at Quatre Bras. 
Simpson became lieutenant and captain on 25 December 1813, and was made adjutant on 8 February 1821. He was promoted captain and lieutenant-colonel on 28 April 1825, went on half pay soon afterwards, and was made lieutenant-colonel of the 29th regiment on 10 June 1826. He took his regiment to Mauritius, and remained there with it until 1837, when it returned to England. On 28 June 1838 he became colonel in the army. In 1839 he married Elizabeth, second daughter of Sir Robert Dundas, bt, of Beechwood, Midlothian. She died in 1840. 
Simpson exchanged to half pay in 1839, but returned to the command of the 29th in 1842, and took the regiment to Bengal. He was soon appointed to take charge of the Benares division, and in 1845 was sent to Sind to act as second in command to Sir Charles Napier in his operations against the hillmen of Kachhi. He led the column which advanced up the Teyaga to Dera, and, when the whole force had united there, took part in the movements which led to the final submission of the tribes. He was 'an officer peculiarly exact in following his instructions' (Napier, 202). 
Simpson returned to England in 1846, went on half pay from the 29th on 8 December, and was made commandant at Chatham. He was promoted major-general on 11 November 1851 and to the command of the south-west district. In February 1855 he was sent out to the Crimea, with the local rank of lieutenant-general, as chief of the staff. The new war minister, Lord Panmure, especially ordered him to report on the standard of the officers in the Eastern Army. He landed at Balaklava on 15 March, and on 26 April he reported that, though he had come out with some degree of prejudice, he found that there was none he would want removed, and did not think a better selection of staff officers could be made. 
On Lord Raglan's death on 28 June 1855, Simpson succeeded to the command of the British troops as senior officer, and was confirmed in that post. He was given the rank of lieutenant-general, and of local general, from that date. The feeling in the army was that he was 'a good man, a long-headed Scotchman', but hardly equal to so great a responsibility. On 8 September the final assault on Sevastopol was delivered by the French on the Malakhov, and by the British on the Redan. The arrangements for the latter were unsatisfactory. Simpson had chosen the second and light divisions, but these contained many raw recruits. The assaulting column of 1000 men, preceded by a covering party of 200 and a ladder party of 320, and followed by an armed working party of 200, reached the Redan, but the men lost all cohesion in their advance, and many in their confusion would not follow their officers inside the work. The first supports, amounting to 1500, joined them, but did not press the attack. Further supports from the remainder of the two divisions and other troops did not come forward. Simpson afterwards wrote that, because the trenches were so crowded after this attack, he was unable to organize a second assault using the highlanders. The French capture of the Malakhov secured the fall of Sevastopol. Pelissier, in his joy, embraced Simpson and kissed him. 'It was a great occasion,' Simpson said, 'and I couldna' resist him.' Simpson was promoted general from 8 September 1855, received the GCB on 16 October, and was given the colonelcy of the 87th regiment. 
In October further successes were obtained at Kinburn and Eupatoria, but the main Russian army remained strongly posted to the north of the Chernaya and the harbour. The British government was impatient to see it driven out of the Crimea, but the allied commanders were finding it difficult to agree on concerted action. Simpson determined to resign a command which he had accepted with hesitation and for which he felt ill-equipped. On 10 November 1855 he handed it over to Sir William Codrington. He received the grand cross of the Legion d'honneur and of the military order of Savoy, and the Mejidiye (first class). 
Simpson was made colonel of his former regiment, the 29th, instead of the 87th, on 27 July 1863. He passed the rest of his life in retirement, and died at his home at Horringer, near Bury St Edmunds, on 18 April 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 25584


Simpson, Sir James Young, first baronet (1811-1870), physician and obstetrician, born on 7 June 1811 at Bathgate, Linlithgowshire, was the seventh son and youngest of eight children of the village bakers, David Simpson (1760-1830) and his wife, Mary (died 1820), daughter of John Jarvey. Both his mother, who was of Huguenot descent, and his father came from families long established as small farmers in east central Scotland. 
Simpson's mother died when he was nine and his sister, Mary, played a substantial role in his upbringing. He attended the local parish school, where he was taught by a Mr Taylor, who had a reputation as an exceptional teacher. Simpson was soon identified as a promising scholar and his father and brothers committed themselves to providing him with the financial support necessary for a college education. Simpson enrolled as an arts student at Edinburgh University in 1825, aged fourteen, and began his medical studies two years later. He supplemented the official medical course by attending extramural classes, notably those in surgery offered by Robert Liston. Simpson became a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1830 and graduated MD in 1832. The quality of his MD thesis (on inflammation) attracted the attention of John Thomson, professor of pathology, who appointed Simpson as his assistant. Simpson was elected senior president of the Royal Medical Society of Edinburgh in 1835, in which year he also embarked upon a European tour, visiting the Paris hospitals. In 1836, while teaching pathology, Simpson secured an appointment to the City Lying-in Hospital in Edinburgh and began to practise midwifery on his own behalf. He undertook research into the diseases of the placenta, and in 1839 began to give extramural lectures on obstetrics. Later that same year he was appointed to Edinburgh University's chair of midwifery. From then on his practice grew rapidly, both in obstetrics and in general medicine. 
Since his days as a medical student Simpson had been greatly concerned with the problem of surgical pain. Following earlier experiments in the United States, the first trial of ether as a surgical anaesthetic in a major British centre was undertaken by Robert Liston in University College Hospital, London, on 21 December 1846. Simpson was fired with enthusiasm by Liston's success. On 19 January 1847 he tried ether in a labour complicated by a deformation of the pelvis. Immediately convinced of the utility of anaesthesia he enthusiastically advocated its general adoption. He was using ether routinely within his obstetric practice by the end of 1847, employing an inhaler of his own design. Ether, however, had several disadvantages as an anaesthetic, particularly in domiciliary practice, and Simpson sought to find a substitute. David Waldie, chemist to the Liverpool Apothecaries' Company, suggested that the properties of chloroform might be worth investigating. On 4 November 1847 Simpson and his assistants, George Keith and James Matthews Duncan, tried inhaling a sample, probably supplied by the Edinburgh pharmaceutical company Duncan and Flockhart. In a very short time they collapsed, unconscious, dramatically displaying the substance's efficacy as an anaesthetic. Chloroform was first employed on an obstetric case on 8 November and its first public trial in surgery was successfully undertaken, by Professor James Miller, on 10 November in the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary. On 20 November 1847, a preliminary report was published in 'The Lancet'. 
As the leading advocate of obstetric anaesthesia Simpson met with much opposition and prejudice. Whereas the incorporation of anaesthesia within operative obstetrical procedures was relatively uncontroversial, Simpson's extension of its use to alleviate the pains of normal labour excited considerable criticism. A number of medical, clerical, and lay commentators took the view that parturition pains were either salutary or divinely sanctioned or both. But Simpson's advocacy prevailed and anaesthesia, generally with chloroform, quickly became standard obstetric practice. However, though in many ways more convenient than ether, chloroform had its own dangers, and there were deaths from overdosage or adverse reactions before safer anaesthetic agents were found. Nevertheless, credit must go to Simpson for establishing that the relief of pain should be central to an obstetrician's professional concerns. 
The introduction of chloroform anaesthesia made Simpson internationally famous. He also made a considerable number of other major contributions, including several technical advances in the practice of obstetrics. He improved the technique of version -- manual turning of the foetus -- in cases of deformed pelvis; he refined the design of the obstetric forceps; and he pioneered the development of the vacuum extractor. Despite his interest in technological aids Simpson's obstetric practice was significantly, and influentially, more patient and less interventionist than that of many of his colleagues. He was a vigorous champion of breastfeeding and understood the importance of what was later termed as 'bonding' between mother and baby. 
Simpson's introduction of a better uterine sound and his invention of the sponge tent technique to produce dilation of the cervix greatly improved the scope of gynaecological diagnosis, even if it required the introduction of aseptic methods for the full potential of these innovations to be realized. Simpson encouraged the development of the operation of ovariotomy and of the surgical repair of vaginal fistula. A study on hermaphroditism was a detailed and influential exposition of a complex subject. Simpson believed that the hermaphrodite was the only true representative of a species: 'the natural characters of any species of animal are certainly not to be sought for solely either in the system of the male or in that of the female; but... they are to be found in those properties which are common to both sexes, and which we have seen combined together by nature upon the bodies of an unnatural hermaphrodite, or evolved from the interference of art upon the castrated male or spayed female. (Moscucci, 21)' Simpson's innovation of acupressure, a technique for controlling arterial haemorrhage after surgery by pinning the ends of the damaged vessels against the underlying tissue, failed to attain the success he predicted. Nevertheless, his book on the subject, 'Acupressure' (1864), constituted a major study of wound healing and of the effects of the occlusion of blood vessels. Throughout his career, Simpson was a prolific author of clinical and scientific papers, and for a time he was the proprietor and principal editor of the 'Monthly Journal of Medical Sciences'. 
Some of the most important work of the later part of Simpson's career concerned the complex problems of hospital infection and surgical sepsis. In 1850 Simpson argued that puerperal fever and surgical fever were identical and that both were contagious. He believed that victims of puerperal fever had been 'inoculated with a materia morbi... and this materia morbi is liable to be inoculated by the fingers of the attendant' (J. Y. Simpson, 414), in a manner analogous to smallpox inoculation. This was still an unpopular idea as late as the 1860s. Simpson advocated that the preventive methods which obstetricians had developed against puerperal fever, which principally entailed careful cleansing of hands and instruments, should be adopted by surgeons against wound sepsis. 
Simpson also held post-operative surgical infection to be closely related to defects in the design, ventilation, and management of large hospitals, coining the term 'hospitalism' to describe the morbid conditions so caused. He collected a mass of statistical data to substantiate this relationship, noting in particular that the frequency of death after amputation was highest in large hospitals and lowest where the operation had taken place at home or in a cottage hospital. He also remarked upon a similar pattern in puerperal fever, the incidence of which was much higher in large lying-in hospitals. Simpson put forward a number of innovative ideas on hospital design, maintaining that alterations in layout and management, in particular the housing of patients in small isolated units, could improve the hospital environment to such an extent that the incidence of septic disorders would be greatly diminished. He first articulated this position in 1849 and his views were influential upon many later commentators on hospital conditions, including Florence Nightingale. 
Despite his support for a theory of contagion, Simpson, like many of his contemporaries, opposed the Listerian reforms and the Pasteurian germ theory of disease. He held that the answer to surgical sepsis lay not in carbolic wound dressings (which in any case were not, as he pointedly noted, original to Lister) but in the improved design and management of hospitals. He also felt that Lister's sterile catgut ligature was an unnecessary innovation since his own invention of acupressure provided, in his opinion, a better and safer means of controlling post-operative bleeding. 
Simpson was formidable in debate and controversy. His sustained opposition to homoeopathy, which he regarded as mere quackery and self-delusion, is noteworthy. He was a major advocate of the importance of science for medical education and practice and was closely involved in the mid-century campaign for medical reform legislation. He was also engaged in the medical planning for the Crimean War and was particularly interested in Isambard Kingdom Brunel's prefabricated pavilion hospital, aspects of which coincided with some of his own principles of hospital design. Less creditably perhaps, Simpson played a full and active role in the internecine quarrelling between the professors which was so characteristic of the Edinburgh medical faculty at this time. The mutual antipathy between Simpson and James Syme, professor of clinical surgery, was particularly bitter and long-lasting. Professional rivalry between the two professors occasioned many disputes, springing largely from what Syme perceived as Simpson's encroachments into what should be considered the rightful sphere of the surgeon. Simpson's proposed innovation of acupressure, for example, received withering criticism from Syme. 
An inspiring and vigorous personality Simpson was a most successful lecturer and practitioner. He was always ready to attend the poor, often neglecting to collect a fee. Liberal in his social attitudes he advanced the cause of foreign students in Edinburgh and supported the medical education of women. Emily Blackwell, younger sister of Elizabeth, worked for a time as one of his assistants. He was also a supporter of the anti-slavery movement. His Edinburgh house was a meeting place for people from many walks of life, and a hospitable lodging for many medical visitors to the city. He enjoyed conviviality and believed in the health-giving virtues of red wine. He was a devout adherent of the Free Church of Scotland, but would not sign the Westminster confession of faith, because of its literal interpretation of the book of 'Genesis'. 
In 1847 Simpson was appointed one of the queen's physicians for Scotland; and he became a foreign associate of the Academy of Medicine, Paris, the members insisting on his election against the appointing commission which had omitted his name. In 1850, at the remarkably young age of thirty-nine, he was elected president of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. In 1856 he was awarded the Monthyon prize by the French Academy of Sciences, for 'most important benefits done to humanity'. He received the order of St Olaf from the king of Sweden, and was made an honorary member of nearly every major medical society in Europe and America. In 1866 he was awarded an honorary DCL degree by Oxford University, and in the same year he received a baronetcy, the first given to a doctor practising in Scotland. In 1868 he was awarded the freedom of the city of Edinburgh. A man of wide interests Simpson also devoted much time and energy to archaeological and literary studies. He published work on antiquarian subjects, including leprosy and syphilis in fifteenth- and sixteenth-century Scotland. In 1861 he was elected professor of antiquities by the Royal Scottish Academy. 
Simpson married, on 26 December 1839, his cousin Jessie (died 1870), daughter of Walter Grindlay of Liverpool. Five of their nine children died before him. Having suffered from angina pectoris for a few months, Simpson himself died on 6 May 1870 at his house, Strathavan, 52 Queen Street, Edinburgh. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his son Walter Grindlay (1843-1898). Simpson's family declined the offer of a grave in Westminster Abbey, and he was buried on 13 May in Warriston cemetery, Edinburgh; the city accorded him a public funeral, which was a major civic occasion. His wife survived him by only a few weeks. A statue was erected to him in Princes Street, but the Simpson Memorial Maternity Hospital, built at the expense of his friends, was his principal monument in Edinburgh. He was also honoured by the placing of a bust in Westminster Abbey, on which it is recorded that to Simpson's 'genius and benevolence the world owes the blessings derived from the use of chloroform for the relief of suffering' ('DNB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 25585


Simpson, Jane Cross (1811-1886), hymn writer, daughter of James Bell, advocate (died 1826), and his wife, Janet (1780-1855), daughter of the Revd James Hamilton of Cathcart parish church, Glasgow, was born in Glasgow on 12 November 1811. Educated by her father, she studied the classics as well as those subjects which were conventionally considered appropriate for middle-class girls of the time. In her youth she travelled extensively in Europe. From 1822 onwards, Bell was assessor and town clerk of Greenock; his daughter contributed frequently to the 'Greenock Advertiser' under the pseudonym Gertrude. In 1831 her hymn on prayer, 'Go where the morning shineth', appeared in the 'Edinburgh Literary Journal', then edited by her brother, Henry Glassford Bell (1803-1874). On 2 July 1837 she married her half-cousin, James Bell Simpson (died 1874), an artist and bibliographer, who was librarian of the Stirling Library, Glasgow, from 1851 to 1860; he published 'Literary and Dramatic Sketches' (1872). 
Throughout her adult life Jane Simpson's work, in both prose and verse, appeared in various literary and religious journals, including the 'Scottish Christian Herald' and 'Good Words'. She published several collections of poems, including 'Linda, and other Poems' (1879), which ran to three editions. Her most popular hymns appeared in a number of widely used Victorian collections, including Charles Roger's 'Lyra Britannica' (1867), James Martineau's 'Hymns of Praise and Prayer' (1874), Ebenezer Prout's 'Psalmist' (1878), and the 'Scottish Evangelical Hymnal' (1878). These hymns, and indeed her writing in general, addressed some characteristic concerns of nineteenth-century protestant evangelical piety: in particular the death of children, but also the bonds of human affection and domesticity, and the benificence of God as demonstrated in the beauty of creation. Her rather sentimental style and 'improving' tone is typically Victorian; thus Jane Cross Simpson's work is significant as representative of its time and 'oeuvre', rather than for any enduring literary or religious value. 
After her husband's death Jane Simpson lived with her daughter, successively in Portobello, Midlothian; Newport, Fife; and Aberdeen. She died in Aberdeen on 17 June 1886. She had eight children, but was survived only by two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 25586


Simpson, John (1746-1812), Presbyterian minister and religious writer, the youngest son of Nathaniel Simpson, dissenting minister, and his wife, Elizabeth, was born at Leicester on 19 March 1746. After attending school at Kibworth, Leicestershire, under John Aikin and at Market Harborough, he entered Warrington Academy in 1760. He was a student there while Joseph Priestley was a tutor, and during this time developed Arian views. In 1765, after finishing his studies at Warrington, he migrated to Glasgow University, where he was a pupil of William Leechman. After leaving Glasgow in 1767 he spent the next five years in private study at his parents' home in Leicester. 
In April 1772 Simpson succeeded Thomas Bruckshaw as junior minister of High Pavement Presbyterian Chapel, Nottingham, and became sole minister on the death of John Milne in the following September. In 1774 George Walker (1735-1807) became his colleague, and together they won back a section of the congregation which had seceded in 1760. In August 1777 Simpson moved to Walthamstow, Essex, to assist Hugh Farmer as afternoon preacher, but resigned this office in 1779 and retired from active duty. He moved to Cottingham, near Hull, where he married in 1780 Frances Watson, daughter of Thomas Woodhouse of Gainsborough and widow of a Mr Watson of Cottingham. From there he moved to Little Woodham, near Leeds, and then to Leeds itself. In 1791 he settled at Bath for the remainder of his days. 
Simpson lived much among his books and made few friends. One of the few was Joseph Stock, bishop of Waterford, the translator of 'Job' and 'Isaiah'. Simpson published a few sermons and a number of essays. Those on topics of biblical criticism were collected as 'Essays on the Language of Scripture' (1806). Of these the most important was 'An essay of the duration of a future state of punishments and rewards' (1803). This argument for universal restoration was commended by Priestley in his last days. Among other publications were 'Thoughts on the Novelty, Excellence and Evidence of the Christian Religion' (1798) and 'Thoughts on the New Testament Doctrine of Atonement' (1802). A collection of his sermons was published posthumously in 1816. 
Simpson died in Bath on 18 August 1812 and was buried on 31 August at Lyncombe Vale, near Bath, in the cemetery belonging to the Bath Unitarian chapel. He was survived by one son, John Woodhouse Simpson of Rearsby, Leicestershire. 


@@@@@


doc= 25587


Simpson, John (bap. 1782, d. 1847), portrait painter, was baptized in Enfield, Middlesex, on 1 September 1782, the son of John and Martha Simpson. In 1800 he enrolled at the Royal Academy Schools, and he was for many years one of Sir Thomas Lawrence's most active assistants, completing several of his unfinished portraits after his death in 1830. Simpson lived and worked in London, where he obtained some success as a portrait painter, and eventually a very large and flourishing practice. From 1807 to his death he was a frequent exhibitor at the London exhibitions, showing 126 works, the vast majority portraits, at the Royal Academy, as well as portraits at the Society of British Artists and figurative subjects including 'Rural Amusement' and 'Itinerant Musician' at the British Institution. Many notable people of his day sat to him, including William IV (NG Ire.; Brighton Art Gallery; United Service Club, London), Admiral Sir Charles Napier MP (Scot. NPG; Porto Museum, Portugal; priv. coll.), Captain Frederick Marryat ('c'.1826; NPG), and Sir Herbert Taylor (1833, exh. RA, 1833; NPG); however, a portrait in the National Portrait Gallery of the engraver John Burnet previously attributed to Simpson is now credited to William Simson. His 'Head of a Negro' is also in a public collection (Tate Collection). 
In 1834 Simpson received a commission to go to Portugal, where he was appointed portrait painter-in-ordinary to Maria II, queen of Portugal, and spent a brief period painting members of the court circle in Lisbon. Simpson was rather a skilful portraitist than an artist. His portraits are not without power, but lack instinct and penetration. Simpson died in London in Carlisle Street, Soho, in 1847. His estate was administered by his son, George. He left two sons, who practised as artists and continued to exhibit from 10 Carlisle Street, Soho, the usual address of their father. Charles Simpson died young in 1848, having contributed several landscapes, coastal, and genre scenes to London exhibitions (1833-47). The other son, Philip Simpson, was a student at the Royal Academy Schools from 1822 and exhibited regularly from 1824 to 1837. He obtained some success for portraits and small domestic subjects, often of children, such as 'I Will Fight' (exh. Society of British Artists, 1824, British Institution, 1827; V&A). 


@@@@@


doc= 25588


Simpson, John Palgrave (1807-1887), playwright and novelist, was born in Norwich on 13 June 1807, the second of the four sons of William Simpson, town clerk of the city of Norwich and treasurer of Norfolk, and his wife, Katherine, daughter of William Palgrave of Coltishall. Both parents descended from old families long resident in the county. His younger brother Palgrave (1815?-1891), a mercantile lawyer of Liverpool, was also a skilled musician and author of 'The Bandmaster's Guide' and 'A Treatise on Harmony'. 
John Palgrave Simpson was educated first at home under private tutors, and afterwards at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he was admitted on 22 November 1824. He graduated BA in 1829 and five years later proceeded MA. On leaving the university he declined to take holy orders in the Church of England, despite his parents' wishes, but travelled at leisure about central Europe, residing principally, during the early part of his tour, in Germany. While at Munich, in 1842, Simpson became a Roman Catholic. Pope Gregory XVI, to mark his approval of the step, enrolled him as a knight of St Gregory. Two years later, while Simpson was still abroad, a bank failure involved his father, and he turned to literature for a livelihood. In 1846 he published a novel, 'Second Love', to which were added two minor tales, 'Pauvrette' and 'The Maiden's Chamber'. In 1847 he published 'Gisella', a romantic, melodramatic novel set in Hungary and dedicated to Hermine, Countess Rasoumoffsky, one of his friends. This was followed immediately by 'Letters from the Danube', a detailed and informative account of Hungarian life, based on his experiences in 1846, when he crossed Hungary 'from its western to its eastern boundaries' (vol. 1, p. 5). 
In the 1840s Simpson was a contributor to 'The Times', 'Blackwood's Magazine', 'Bentley's Miscellany', and possibly to 'Fraser's Magazine'. For the first three of these publications, he wrote, among other things, eye-witness accounts of the 1848 revolution in France, which were later collected in two volumes, 'Pictures from Revolutionary Paris' (1849). In the same year he brought out his third novel, 'The Lily of Paris, or, The King's Nurse', a romance set in 1418, relating to Charles VI of France. In his 'presentation' to Charles Langton Massingberd at the beginning of the book, he wrote that he had followed 'the picturesque and flowery paths of an historical tale' (vol. 1, p. v). 
In 1850 Simpson settled permanently in London. He had already distinguished himself as an amateur actor, and had made himself familiar with English dramatic literature. While living in Europe, he had 'articled himself for a term as a pupil of Eugene Scribe, the popular French dramatist' (Coleman, 'Players and Playwrights', 2.167). He now devoted himself to writing plays, and supplied, within five years, four of the London theatres with eight one-act pieces, principally comediettas. He wrote, singly or in collaboration, some sixty plays between 1850 and 1885, including comedies, melodramas, farces, operettas, and extravaganzas. 'A Scrap of Paper', adapted from Victorien Sardou's 'Pattes de mouche' (first produced at the St James' Theatre on 22 April 1861), and 'Lady Dedlock's Secret', adapted from Dickens's 'Bleak House' (Her Majesty's Opera House, Aberdeen, 3 April 1874), both became stock theatrical pieces. Also held in high regard was 'All for her', written with Herman Merivale and loosely based on the plots of Dickens's 'A Tale of Two Cities' and Thackeray's 'Henry Esmond' (Mirror Theatre, Holborn, 18 October 1875). But at least one critic held that Simpson had 'a facile pen, more remarkable for neatness and elegance than strength' (Coleman, 'Players and Playwrights', 169). Charles Reade, however, declared that 'dear old Pal's lines are written in water, but his plots are engraved in steel' (Coleman, 'Charles Reade', 271). In 1865 Simpson produced a 'Life of Weber', an abbreviated translation of the German memoir written by the son of the composer. The 'Edinburgh Review' considered this version as 'in more respects than one an improvement of the original' ('EdinR', 421). The last book published by Simpson was his fourth novel, 'For Ever and Never' (1884). 
Simpson was a popular and striking figure in society. He was bearded and had a swarthy complexion, and habitually wore a cloak and felt hat. He was a long-standing member of the Garrick and Athenaeum clubs, an assiduous attender of first nights, and the secretary of the Dramatic Authors' Society from 1868 to 1887. He was unmarried, but proud of his adopted son, John Clayton, who held him in deep affection. Simpson died at the age of eighty, on 19 August 1887 at his London residence, 9 Alfred Place West, Thurloe Square, South Kensington, London, and was buried on 23 August in St Thomas's cemetery, Fulham. 


@@@@@


doc= 25589


Simpson, Nathaniel (1599-1642), writer on arithmetic, born at Skipton in Yorkshire, was probably a member of the Simpson family of Havery Park. He entered Trinity College, Oxford, matriculating on 10 May 1616, and graduating BA on 25 November 1619 and MA on 26 May 1623. In 1630 Simpson became a fellow of the college, and in the following year took the degree of BD. He died, unmarried, probably at Oxford, on 23 October 1642 and was buried in Trinity College chapel. In 1623 he published 'Arithmeticae compendium', a very brief arithmetic primer, for the students of the college. The only known copy is in the British Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 25590


Simpson, Richard (1820-1876), Roman Catholic writer and literary scholar, was born at Beddington, Surrey, on 16 September 1820, the second son of the four children of William Simpson and his wife, Emily Cranmer, through whom the manor of Mitcham, Surrey, came into the Simpson family. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School and at Oriel College, Oxford, where he graduated BA on 9 February 1843. In 1844 he became vicar of Mitcham, a family living, which he resigned shortly before his conversion to Roman Catholicism on 1 August 1846. Having married his cousin Elizabeth Mary Cranmer on 29 October 1844, he was unable to pursue his clerical vocation in his new communion. He travelled for more than a year on the continent, learning several languages. After settling at Clapham, Surrey, in 1847, with an inherited income of several hundred pounds, he devoted himself to literary pursuits, particularly archival research in sixteenth-century history. He was also a prolific musical composer. 
In 1850 Simpson began to write for 'The Rambler', a Roman Catholic monthly founded by liberal converts, and in 1856 became its assistant editor; in 1858 he was made editor and a proprietor, Sir John Acton being the principal proprietor. From early on in his participation in 'The Rambler', Simpson came into conflict with members of the Roman Catholic hierarchy, who disapproved of a layman's writing on theology, of his fierce insistence on freedom of scholarship and of philosophic speculation, and of his frequent puckish irreverence towards authority. Simpson's deep faith centred on the dogmatic core of Roman Catholicism, leaving him free to apply his mind (and his sense of humour) to all other subjects. With these views, he joined Acton in making 'The Rambler' the organ of the liberal Catholic movement in England, opposing the trend towards ultramontanism. The bishops forced his resignation as editor in 1859, replacing him briefly with John Henry Newman and then with Acton; but Simpson remained a proprietor of and major contributor to the magazine. He was an admirer of Newman, who sympathized with his views but disapproved of his tactics. In 1862 the magazine was transformed into the quarterly 'Home and Foreign Review', one of the most distinguished periodicals of its day, praised by Matthew Arnold ('The function of criticism at the present time') for 'so much knowledge, so much play of mind'. The review was denounced by Cardinal Wiseman and Bishop Ullathorne; Simpson replied with a spirited pamphlet, 'Bishop Ullathorne and The Rambler' (1862). But the conflict between liberal Catholic principles and the positions taken by church authorities, and eventually by Pope Pius IX himself, forced its conductors to discontinue the review in 1864. 
Simpson participated in other ventures of the Acton circle, 'The Chronicle' newspaper in 1867-8 and the 'North British Review' in 1869-71, both more Gladstonian Liberal than religious. The definition of papal infallibility in 1870 served as the final blow to liberal Catholicism, and Simpson had already diverted his energies elsewhere. He had published numerous studies of recusant history in 'The Rambler', leading to his principal work, 'Edmund Campion: a Biography' (1867), long the standard work on the subject. His studies of the Elizabethan period led him to an interest in Shakespearian studies; he was one of the first to advance the theory that Shakespeare was a Roman Catholic. He was elected a member of the committee of the New Shakspere Society in 1874. His most original work in this field was 'An Introduction to the Philosophy of Shakespeare's Sonnets' (1868). In 1872 he published the first of a series of editions of Elizabethan dramas with which it was believed that Shakespeare had been connected. After his death the whole appeared as 'The School of Shakespeare' (2 vols., 1878). 
Simpson was consulted on some minor points when W. E. Gladstone was preparing his tract 'Vaticanism' late in 1874, but the statement in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' that Simpson 'was constantly at his side' is wrong. Simpson had already made his own adjustment to a minimalist acceptance of the dogma of papal infallibility. Simpson died of cancer on 5 April 1876 at Villa Sciarra, Rome; he was buried in Rome. 


