@@@@@


doc= 25591


Simpson, Robert (1792/1795-1867), minister of the United Presbyterian church and writer, was born in Edinburgh. Authorities differ on the year of his birth but give it as either 1792 or 1795. Details of his parentage remain obscure, and he apparently never spoke about it. At an early age he went to live with his grandparents in the parish of Stobo, Peeblesshire, where he attended the parish school. He went on to study at Edinburgh University with the intention of entering the ministry of the Church of Scotland, but while there his views changed, and he determined to become a Secession minister. To that end he entered the Divinity Hall at Selkirk under Dr George Lawson in 1814. He was ordained as the first minister of a newly established congregation at Sanquhar, Dumfriesshire, in May 1820. At the time of his call to Sanquhar he was also sought by a congregation in Duns, Berwickshire, and Simpson would have preferred the latter charge. However, the synod directed him to Sanquhar, and he remained there for the next forty-seven years. 
Sanquhar had occupied a special position in what had been the heartland of the seventeenth-century covenanting movement. The region, and its turbulent history, became an all-absorbing interest for Simpson. Of his books, 'Traditions of the Covenanters' (1843), 'History of Sanquhar' (1853), and 'Martyrland' (1861) all went to further editions, and the popularity of his work outlived him. During an active ministry he also wrote for religious periodicals and took a keen interest in temperance work. He enjoyed a reputation as a good preacher and a popular minister, and was known widely as simply 'the doctor'. 
Simpson married Jean (died 1879), daughter of Robert Faulds, a banker and manufacturer in Beith. They had two daughters and four sons who predeceased them. Another daughter, Jane, outlived them. In 1853 Simpson was awarded the degree of DD by Princeton University. He died suddenly at Sanquhar on 8 July 1867 and was buried there; a granite obelisk to his memory was erected in front of the North United Presbyterian church at Sanquhar. 


@@@@@


doc= 25592


Simpson, Sidrach (c.1600-1655), Independent minister, was born in Lincolnshire, perhaps at Boston; his parents' names are unknown, but he had at least two brothers -- Joshua (later of Boston) and Robert (later of Bristol). He was admitted sizar at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1616, but migrated the following year to Queens' College, where he graduated BA in 1622 and proceeded MA in 1625. Ordained in 1623, he seems to have first served as preacher at Black Notley in Essex. He became curate and lecturer at St Margaret's, New Fish Street Hill, London, in 1629. In 1635, he was convened, along with John Stoughton and John Goodwin, before the bishop of London for breach of the canons of the church, but upon 'their promised amendment and submission to the Church in all things' ('Works of... William Laud', 5.333) Bishop Juxon took no further action against them. However, Simpson decided to leave his living in London and went into exile in the Netherlands either in late 1637 or early 1638. There he renounced his English ordination and joined at Rotterdam an independent English church with John Ward as pastor and William Bridge as teacher. Discord soon arose between him and Bridge over the issue of prophesying; consequently Simpson withdrew and erected a new church with himself as pastor. In his later answers to the charge of schism Simpson maintained that he had not gathered a church against a church and that the place where his church met was 'in an open street, a noted place, neer the Exchange' (S. Simpson, 'Anatomist Anatomis'd', 1644, 11). With Simpson's church at Rotterdam was also associated Joseph Symonds, another London minister in exile. 
Simpson returned to London in 1641 and lectured at Blackfriars as well as St Margaret's, New Fish Street Hill. According to Thomas Edwards, Simpson used these lectures frequently to propagate the Independent church way, 'pleading strongly for it, and for pretended liberty of conscience and toleration' (Edwards, 215). In the meantime he had gathered an Independent church in the City, which was, again in the words of Edwards, 'a rich and numerous Church, consisting of so many Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, rich Citizens, rich virgins, &c.' (ibid., 222). No record of Simpson's gathered church in London has survived, but it is known that among its members were some prominent civic leaders in the revolutionary era such as Alderman Thomas Andrewes, Alderman Samuel Warner, and Captain John Stone. Henry Dawson, alderman of Newcastle upon Tyne, was also a member. In a sermon Simpson preached in 1642 before a group of MPs at Westminster he spoke candidly against a national church and religious uniformity. 'God gives gifts and graces diversly', he said, and then added 'Christ hath Sonnes of divers sizes' (Simpson, 31). On 26 July 1643 he was invited by the House of Commons to preach a fast sermon, which he published under the title of 'Reformation's Preservation' (1643). In his epistle of dedication he called upon the Commons to save the nation by 'the speedy execution of justice' and 'the vigorous prosecution of the warre'. 
Nominated to the Westminster assembly of divines in June 1643, he appears to have attended its meetings regularly, and he frequently registered his dissent. More important, he joined with Thomas Goodwin, Philip Nye, William Bridge, and Jeremiah Burroughes, all of whom had been in exile in the Netherlands, to form a nucleus of dissent in the assembly. Early in 1644 they published their famous 'Apologeticall Narration', which, though written with studied restraint and moderation, was none the less an open appeal over the assembly to parliament and to the nation for their congregational church way. And in the ensuing two years Simpson took part in all the concerted actions of the dissenting brethren of the assembly in opposition to the establishment of a rigid presbyterianism. In 1647 he became lecturer at St Mary Abchurch, where Joseph Symonds had been chosen minister by the parish, and he succeeded Symonds as minister in 1649. During these years he was apparently associated with more radical men like John Goodwin, John Canne, and Vavasor Powell. In early 1648 he was said to be one of twelve ministers sent for by Cromwell to preach in the army, and on 20 September 1650, not long after Cromwell's victory at Dunbar, he wrote to the lord general and urged him: 'Goe on therefore, my Lord, you are throwing downe what God is throwing downe' (Nickolls, 22-4). Later in the year the parliamentary visitors of Cambridge University appointed him master of Pembroke College. 
It was at this juncture that Simpson became more conservative in his religious views. In April-May 1651 he took action against Captain Robert Norwood, a member of his gathered church, who had apparently harboured pantheistic beliefs, and eventually excommunicated him for blasphemy. On 10 February 1652 he appeared with John Owen and other Independent divines before the House of Commons and presented a petition against the anti-Trinitarian Racovian catechism, and a week later they submitted to a parliamentary committee their proposals for the propagation of the gospel. In 1653, at the commencement of Cambridge University, Simpson preached in defence of learning and university education for the ministry, which provoked William Dell, a former army chaplain and now master of Gonville and Caius College, to publish 'A Plain and Necessary Confutation'. It has been said that Simpson was imprisoned in 1654 for preaching against Cromwell, but this must have been mistaken. All known facts indicate that he supported the Cromwellian protectorate: on 9 January he signed a circular letter denouncing the Fifth Monarchy Men; on 28 February he was one of the Independent divines consulted by Cromwell for a religious settlement; and on 20 March he was appointed a trier. In the meantime he was proffered by the great seal the rectory of St Bartholomew by the Exchange in spite of the fact that the parish had chosen for the place George Hall, the future bishop of Chester. 
Simpson made his will on 2 April 1655, and died shortly afterwards at St Bartholomew by the Exchange, his will being proved on 15 April. He was buried on 18 April at St Bartholomew. He was survived by his wife, Isabella, of whom nothing else is known, and by his children, Sydrach, Katherine (wife of Joseph Denham), and Priscilla; a third daughter (almost certainly deceased) had married James Lane. It appears that Simpson possessed considerable assets at the time of his death, including land and tenements in the parish of Bocking in Essex. Two volumes of Simpson's sermons were published posthumously in 1658 from notes taken in shorthand by Captain Mark Coe, another member of Simpson's gathered church and one of the overseers of his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 25593


Simpson, Thomas (bap. 1582, d. 1628?), violist and composer, was baptized at Milton-next-Sittingbourne, Kent, on 1 April 1582, son of John Simpson. An autograph manuscript volume comprising the bass part of nineteen instrumental 'songes' (Centre for Kentish Studies, Maidstone, U951.z.23) -- 'the first frute of my unskillfull Laboures' -- is dedicated to Sir Norton Knatchbull (1569-1636) of Mersham, Kent, suggesting that Simpson served him before emigrating to Germany. By 1608 he had become a musician at the court of Frederick, elector palatine, at Heidelberg and on 25 June 1609 he married Anna Colin from Jamets, Lorraine, at the Barfusserkirche there. In 1610 at Frankfurt am Main appeared the first of his published collections, 'Opusculum newer Pavanen', comprising mostly pavan-galliard pairs in five parts. Here Simpson describes himself as 'violist'. No doubt he was present in Heidelberg when the elector brought home his bride, Elizabeth, daughter of James I, in 1613, but between about 1615 and 1622 he served in Buckeburg (near Hanover) at the Holstein-Schaumburg court of Count Ernst III. He published another anthology, 'Opus newer Paduanen' (Hamburg, 1617) and single compositions by him are included in collective volumes edited by Hagius (1616) and Oberndorffer (1620). His last publication, 'Taffel-Consort' (1621), contains many works by his Buckeburg colleagues. 
Simpson is among the most important English composers working on the continent. His collections mix English and German works, many newly arranged by himself, and also include his own versions of Italianate forms such as the ricercare and canzona, including a beautiful setting of the English folk-song 'Bonny Sweet Robin'. The 1617 collection is much more varied than that of 1610, extending the paired-dance groupings into longer series or suites. Here and in the 'Taffel-Consort' Simpson employs two equal (and often florid) treble parts which criss-cross and answer each other in dialogue. 'Taffel-Consort' reduces the string texture to four parts (omitting one viola) but includes a continuo -- perhaps the first use of a 'string quartet' layout in Western music. 
The onset of the Thirty Years' War in 1619 and the death of Count Ernst in 1622 caused Simpson to move to Copenhagen, where he served at court between 7 May 1622 and 4 March 1625. The city bailiff of Copenhagen was asked to collect a debt from his heirs on 20 June 1628, so it seems he had recently died there, perhaps earlier in the year. 


@@@@@


doc= 25594


Simpson, Thomas (1710-1761), mathematician, was born on 20 August 1710 at Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, the son of a weaver. It seems that the only formal education he received was from a Richard Smith in a school at Market Bosworth. He moved to Nuneaton, Warwickshire, where he took up the profession of a schoolmaster. He taught himself mathematics, which might seem exceptional but was, however, quite the rule in eighteenth-century Britain: many mathematicians were self-trained. They called themselves 'philomaths' and were often of a provincial background. It is not known exactly which books Simpson read. He was known, because of his reputation as a fortune-teller, as the 'oracle of Nuneaton, Bosworth and the environs'. 
About 1730 Simpson married his landlady at Nuneaton, a widow named Swinfield. They had two children, Elizabeth, born in 1736, and Thomas, born in 1738. From 1725 to 1733 he taught mathematics at Nuneaton. He reportedly had to flee to Derby in 1733 after he or his assistant had frightened a girl by dressing up as a devil during an astrology session. In 1736 he was in London, where he continued to work, as a weaver and as a teacher of mathematics. He resided at Spitalfields where he was a tutor at the famous Mathematical Society. Francis Holliday, and perhaps Francis Blake, were among his pupils. With Blake he corresponded on the foundations of the fluxional method in connection with George Berkeley's 'Analyst' (1734), a pamphlet consisting of logical criticisms of Newton's and Leibniz's calculi. He was a friend of John Landen, with whom he frequently corresponded. In 1737 he published 'A New Treatise of Fluxions'. This was a high-quality textbook devoted to the calculus of fluxions, the Newtonian version of the infinitesimal calculus. The topic was advanced -- it was no trivial exercise to write such a book in the 1730s, when the calculus was mastered by only a few mathematicians in Europe. 
Simpson also gained a broader reputation as a mathematician by answering some questions in the 'Ladies' Diary', a mathematical periodical where the British philomaths proposed and answered problems. His answers were published from 1736 under pseudonyms such as Marmaduke Hodgson, Hurlothrumbo, Kubernetes, Patrick O'Cavannah, and Anthony Shallow. He also contributed to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1736-8, to 'Miscellanea Curiosa Mathematica' in 1745-6, and to the 'Gentleman's Diary' in 1746. From about 1753 to 1760 he was editor of the 'Ladies' Diary', succeeding Robert Heath, with whom he had a squabble after Heath accused him of plagiarism. The control over this periodical was much valued and there were factions that fought against each other. Heath was a friend of another writer of mathematical textbooks, William Emerson, and their respective conduct as editor and main contributor to the 'Ladies' Diary' has been described as contentious. 
In 1743 Simpson was appointed assistant to the chief master of mathematics at the newly formed Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, thanks to the recommendation of Martin Folkes, president of the Royal Society, and perhaps also of William Jones (1675-1749). This remained his position until his death. He was elected FRS in 1745 and in 1758 fellow of the Academy of Sciences in Stockholm. His post in Woolwich led him to consider several problems in engineering, concerning in particular fortifications and the building of bridges. About 1760 he had a controversy with John Muller, chief master of mathematics in Woolwich, on the design for a bridge across the Thames at Blackfriars: Muller defended a project with elliptical arches, while Simpson would have preferred semicircular ones. 
Simpson was a prolific writer. His most important works are the 'Doctrine and Application of Fluxions' (1750), 'Mathematical Dissertations' (1743), and 'Miscellaneous Tracts' (1757), the first of which is one of the best treatises on fluxions written in the eighteenth century. The second contains a remarkable treatment of the attraction of spheroids, the solids obtained by rotating an ellipse around one of its axes, which improves on results earlier obtained by Colin MacLaurin. The third is mainly concerned with physical astronomy -- the precession of the equinoxes, the orbit of the comets, and the motion of the moon. Simpson also contributed several papers to the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society'. 
Simpson's style is quite an exception in the panorama of British eighteenth-century mathematics. Unlike many of his countrymen, he leaned towards symbolical and abstract methods based on algebraical manipulations, and he looked with admiration to the analytical results achieved by continental mathematicians. His model was the French savant Alexis-Claude Clairaut. Simpson's most valuable mathematical achievements include his analytical expression of the so-called Newton-Raphson method of approximation of the root of an equation, his study of the methods for solving 'isoperimetrical problems' (methods in what is now called the calculus of variations), and several works on probability and annuities. This last topic occasioned a polemic over priority with Abraham De Moivre. It is an irony that Simpson is nowadays remembered for 'Simpson's rule' for obtaining the area under a curve, a result which he did not claim as his, and which was well known to Isaac Newton. He was also an accomplished writer of introductory textbooks on algebra, geometry, and trigonometry. His slim volume of 'Select Exercises for Young Proficients in the Mathematicks' (1752) was widely used; it ran to further editions in 1792 and 1810, and was partly translated into French in 1771. 
Simpson died at Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, on 14 May 1761 and was buried at Sutton Cheynell in Leicestershire. After his relatively early death his widow, who died in 1782, was reportedly granted a pension by the crown in recognition of his merit, a rare distinction for a commoner. A tablet was erected on Simpson's grave in 1790 by John Throsby. His papers were given to Henry Watson of the East India Company, who did not publish them. They are now in the library of Columbia University. 


@@@@@


doc= 25595


Simpson, Thomas (1808-1840), Arctic explorer, the elder son of Alexander Simpson (died 1821), schoolmaster of Dingwall in Ross-shire, and his second wife, Mary, was born at Dingwall on 2 July 1808. As a boy he was delicate, with a tendency to consumption. He was destined for the ministry, and at the age of seventeen entered King's College, Aberdeen, whence he graduated MA in 1829. He had developed into a strong, active man, so that, instead of proceeding to the ministry, he took a post with the Hudson's Bay Company. This followed the visit in 1825 of his cousin George Simpson, administrator in the company, whose descriptions of Canadian life inspired Thomas, his brother Alexander, and his half-brother Aemilius all to enter the company's service. 
Simpson arrived in Canada in 1829, but caused trouble among the metis (of mixed French and Indian blood) at Fort Garry (Winnipeg). In July 1836 he was appointed second in command, with particular responsibility for surveying and scientific investigations, of an expedition, sent under chief factor Peter Warren Dease, 'to complete the discovery and survey of the northern shores of America'. While Dease, with the party of twelve men, started for Great Slave Lake, Simpson went to Red River settlement, where he spent some months refreshing and extending his knowledge of astronomy and practice in observations. On 1 December he started out to join Dease, whom, after an interesting and adventurous winter journey, he found at Fort Chipewyan, on the shore of Lake Athabasca. In June 1837 they continued their journey, and leaving a few men at Fort Norman, to prepare winter quarters by Great Bear Lake, reached the sea on 9 July. They then turned west, along the coast until, in longitude 154 degree 23' W, the boats were stopped by the ice. It was determined that Simpson should try to reach Barrow Point on foot, which he succeeded in doing on 4 August and there took possession of his discoveries for Britain. On the 6th he rejoined Dease, and on the same day they started for the Mackenzie River, which they reached without accident on the 17th. Their progress up the river was slow and laborious, and they did not reach Fort Norman until 4 September. On the 25th they arrived at the station on Great Bear Lake, which they named Fort Confidence, and there they wintered. 
On 7 June 1838 the party started up Dease River, but its ascent proved very difficult because of rapids. Then, carrying their baggage and boats over the watershed, they descended the Coppermine River, and endeavoured to examine the coast to the eastward. The season, however, was so bad that they made but little way, and from Point Turnagain returned to their winter quarters at Fort Confidence, which they reached on 14 September. On 15 June 1839 they again started for the Coppermine, where they had left their boats, and with a more favourable season went eastward as far as the Boothia peninsula. They were, however, unable to determine whether there was any passage to the Gulf of Boothia, or to connect their coast navigation with the known King William Sea to the north. They had almost, but not quite, discovered the north-west passage. The advanced season compelled them to return, and by 24 September they were again at Fort Confidence, whence, after a very severe journey, they reached Fort Simpson on the Mackenzie on 14 October. Leaving Dease there, Simpson set out on 2 December, and reached Red River settlement on 2 February 1840. He remained there until the summer, and on 6 June started for the United States and England hoping to ensure that he, not Dease (whom he considered a ditherer), took the credit for their discoveries, and hoping to secure approval for a further expedition. On 14 June he was killed by a gunshot wound in the head. The men of mixed race who were with him deposed that he went mad, killed two of the party, and then committed suicide; others suggested that he was attacked by his own men, two of whom he shot before he was killed. It is clear that he had made himself unpopular because of his petulance and readiness to criticize, although the latter trait makes his writings a rich source of quotations for later historians. In particular, his aversion to those of mixed race, whose 'extravagant and profligate habits' (Simpson, cited in Sampson, 'DCB') he censured, made him a difficult member of an exploring party and would have made him an impossible leader. 
Simpson's 'Narrative of Discoveries on the North Coast of America' was edited by his brother Alexander and published in 1843. Alexander corresponded for two years with the London committee of the Hudson's Bay Company to try to clear Thomas's name and to get a pension paid to his mother as a reward for his brother's services. In 1845 he published 'The Life and Travels of Thomas Simpson' to try to gain public sympathy for his brother. He was largely unsuccessful, partly because the Royal Geographical Society and the establishment in general tended to underestimate the contribution to Arctic exploration of fur traders, preferring to attribute achievements to the Royal Navy, and partly because of Simpson's pushy character and unpleasant death. 


@@@@@


doc= 25596


Simpson, William (1627?-1671), Quaker preacher, was from Sunbricke or Sunbreak in Lancashire, where he 'also received the truth', being convinced of the Quaker message there (Tomkins, 185). Little is known of his early years and background, except that he came of humble origins and was a husbandman. He may have been the William Simpson baptized on 13 June 1627 in the priory church, Cartmel, Lancashire, the son of Thomas Simpson and Ann Ellithorne. He was married to Ann Symson, who died on 6 December 1669 and was buried at Sunbreak. It is likely that Christopher Simpson of Sunbreak, who married Isabel Birkett in 1675, was their son as his father was William. 
Simpson preached in the north at Pardshaw in Cumberland, and along with Thomas Laiton was the first to spread Quakerism in Mitton under Wychwood. He travelled widely and in 1655 is listed as receiving money from the Kendal fund to travel to Scotland and spread the Quaker message. 
Simpson is particularly noted for testifying by signs, a practice which was adopted by some followers of the early Quaker movement but gradually died out in the seventeenth century. George Fox, in a testimony to Simpson, noted how Simpson 'went three years naked and in sackcloth, in the days of Oliver and his parliament, as a sign to them, and to the priests, showing how God would strip them of their power, and that they should be as naked as he was.' Fox also added how Simpson 'was made oftentimes to colour his face black' as a sign of the spiritual darkness of ministers (Fortescue, 13). Simpson went naked in a number of towns and cities, including Colchester, Cambridge, London, and Oxford. In the latter, accompanied by two other Friends who carried his clothes, he passed from the east gate to the middle of the city, where he was whipped, and then continued through to the north gate, where he met with some scholars. Of interest is Simpson's broadside entitled 'Going Naked a Sign' (1660), in which he describes the practice and how he felt moved to testify in this manner. In it he recounts how 'a necessity was laid upon me from the Lord God... to be a sign: but before I was given up to the thing, it was as death unto me, and I had rather, if it had been the Lord's will, have died than gone on in this service.' He was imprisoned with others at Oxford in 1654 for bearing a public testimony against vice and superstition, and in 1655 suffered further incarceration for preaching at Banbury. 
Simpson also encountered opposition elsewhere. He was sent out of Evesham in 1657 for telling the inhabitants 'to repent and fear the Lord' (Besse, 2.60). In April of the same year he was arrested at Chipping Campden in Gloucestershire and sent to Lancaster, charged with being a wandering person. Later, in 1659 he was whipped upon his back and breast for going naked through Evesham 'in a prophetic manner' (ibid., 61), and in the same year went naked at Halsted in Essex, where he was badly beaten by a man named John Folks who, according to Besse, died shortly afterwards. In an entry for 1661, but no doubt referring to an earlier date, George Fox noted in his 'Journal' how Simpson went naked in Cambridge but was protected by the mayor, who 'did nobly to him; he put his gown about him and took him into his house' ('Journal of George Fox', ed. Nickalls, 408). 
Following the Restoration, Simpson suffered considerably in the Quaker cause but appears to have stopped prophesying by signs around this time. In 1663 he was sent to prison with others for refusing the oath of allegiance after his removal from a meeting at Bugbrook, in Northamptonshire. The next year, according to Fox's 'Journal', he was fined for not attending church. In 1670 he was removed for preaching from Westminster and Devonshire House meetings, and suffered a fine of 20's'. for preaching in the street at Ratcliffe after the meeting-house had been barricaded. 
On 8 July 1670 Simpson travelled to Barbados to spread the Quaker message with John Burnyeat, who described his close friend as 'a very innocent man, and full of fear and reverence... very sweet and pleasant', and went on to say how they 'walked in great love and unity together; for he was a humble man, and had very low thoughts of himself' (Burnyeat, 39). 
Simpson's literary output was very small, but of importance for shedding light on early Quaker practices. In 'From one who was Moved of the Lord to Go a Sign' (1659) Simpson wrote with apocalyptic urgency, 'so signs in your streets also must you have, that you may be left without excuse in the day when the Lord will come to reckon with you, that you shall not say you have not been warned, so your blood shall be upon your head if you repent not. (p. 6)' His other writings were generally warnings and reproofs such as 'A Discovery of the Priest and Professors' (1660). In 'A Declaration unto All, both Priests and People' (1655) Simpson criticized ministers for taking tithes from their congregations and for denying 'immediate revelation' which he said he 'and all the saints have', and for denying 'perfection to be obtained while... in this body of clay' (pp. 3-4). 
Not long in Barbados, Simpson was taken ill with 'a violent fever', from which he died on 8 February 1671 (Burnyeat, 39). He is said to have 'departed this life like a lamb', a leaving which it was hoped would 'give content' to his son (Fortescue, 7). He was buried in the garden of Richard Forstal of Bridge-Town, Barbados. 


@@@@@


doc= 25597


Simpson, William (1823-1899), watercolour painter and journalist, was born on 28 October 1823 in a tenement in Carrick Street, Glasgow, the son of James Simpson (1791-1879), a marine engineer and mechanic, and his wife, Ann Johnstone (1786-1854). He spent fifteen months at a writing-school in Perth but thereafter received no regular education. From January 1837 he trained as a lithographer under David Macfarlane in an architect's office in Glasgow. In August or September 1839 he left Macfarlane and from 1840 was apprenticed to the lithographers Allan and Ferguson. Commissioned by David Allan, Simpson sketched the city's old buildings for Robert Stuart's 'Views and Notices of Glasgow in Former Times (Stuart's Glasgow)' (1848). He attended the Glasgow School of Design from 1845 and sold his first watercolour in 1850. In 1851 he moved to London and worked for the lithographers Day & Son. 
During the Crimean War Simpson became a pioneer war artist: dispatched by the printsellers Colnaghi & Son (on Day's recommendation), he recorded the naval battles in the Baltic Sea and then went on to Balaklava in November 1854 to make accurate sketches on the spot. The drawings which he made during that terrible winter were submitted to Lord Raglan, sent home to England, and shown to Queen Victoria by the minister of war, the duke of Newcastle. After the fall of Sevastopol he was attached to the duke's party of exploration in Circassia. Eighty of his Crimean drawings were lithographed in 'The Seat of War in the East' (2 vols., 1855-6), which was dedicated with permission to Queen Victoria. When the original watercolours were exhibited at Colnaghi's gallery, Lord Elcho and other MPs called for them to be bought by the nation as a historic record of the war. On the advice of Sir Charles Eastlake, this proposal was rejected and the watercolours were sold off separately. Simpson returned to England with a brown beard long enough to button into his waistcoat, and he had an audience with the queen: he showed her his sketches and was much impressed by her grasp of every detail of the war. She commissioned 'The Queen Reviewing the Royal Artillery at Woolwich on their Return from the Crimea, 1856', and over the next thirty years was a steady patron for the painter. 
After the Indian mutiny Day & Son sent Simpson to India on a roving commission, to make studies for a large-scale illustrated book. He arrived in October 1859 and joined the party of the governor-general, Lord Canning, on a tour of the area where the mutiny had taken place; he also sketched with Lady Canning. Over three years he visited much of the subcontinent, including Tibet and its Buddhist temples, the Himalayas, Kashmir, and Ceylon. When he returned to England in 1862, he had travelled 22,570 miles. He settled in chambers in London at 64 Lincoln's Inn Fields, worked for four years on Day's project, and completed 250 drawings. However, when the firm of Day & Son went into liquidation, his Indian watercolours were taken over and sold off as bankrupt stock: Simpson received no recompense for seven years of hard work. Finally, fifty paintings were indifferently reproduced in a book with text by Sir John Kaye. 
In 1866, through William Ingram, editor and proprietor of the 'Illustrated London News', Simpson became a special artist for the paper, a role for which he was specially suited. After twenty-five years' service for the 'Illustrated London News' he wrote: 'I have at all times felt that I was not seeing for myself alone, but that others would see through my eyes, and that eyes yet unborn would, in the pages of the 'Illustrated London News', do the same. This feeling has at all times urged on my mind the necessity for accuracy. ('ILN', 14 May 1892, 604)' He covered many royal events for the paper. In the autumn of 1866 he went to Dunrobin in Scotland to record the prince of Wales's visit to the duke of Sutherland. At St Petersburg in November 1866 he illustrated the marriage of the tsarevich (later Alexander III) to Princess Dagmar, sister of the princess of Wales, and he accompanied the prince and princess of Wales to Egypt in 1868. In 1875-6 he covered the visit of the prince of Wales to India for the 'Illustrated London News' and made over 200 sketches, mostly in sepia with some watercolour. The queen and prince acquired a number of these and a collection, 'Shikare and Tamasha: a Souvenir of the Visit of the Prince of Wales to India', was published in 1876; forty-four of Simpson's Indian watercolours are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. His last commission from Queen Victoria was in 1889, but for the prince of Wales he drew scenes relating to the death of the duke of Clarence in 1892. He visited Balmoral and Abergeldie castles and Sandringham and was on friendly terms with both the queen and the prince of Wales; fifty of his works are in the Royal Collection. 
Simpson travelled round the world for the 'Illustrated London News', and his 'Autobiography' (1903) describes his surroundings with clarity and passionate interest. Sketches sent home from abroad were worked up into watercolours on his return. On location he wisely disguised himself by wearing local native costume, a masquerade he obviously enjoyed. As an observer and reporter for over forty years, he had contacts and friends all over the world; he mixed with people of every rank and learned many European and oriental languages and dialects needed on his innumerable travels. In 1868 he accompanied Lord Napier on the Abyssinian expedition: he made archaeological sketches to illustrate the Palestine exploration fund's excavations in the Holy Land, was granted permission to sketch inside the Dome of the Rock, and in 1869 attended the Vatican Council in Rome. He returned to Constantinople to revisit the Crimea, and was present at the opening of the Suez Canal in November 1869. In 1870, at the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War, Simpson travelled to Metz and was briefly imprisoned. (Fortunately he had made his drawings on cigarette paper so that, when he was arrested as a spy, he could smoke them in front of his captors.) During the Paris commune he was under fire, and he witnessed harrowing scenes there before returning to London in June 1871. In 1872-3 he went round the world; he visited China to illustrate the marriage of the emperor Tongzhi and saw the Great Wall and the Ming tombs before travelling on via Japan to San Francisco. He was the only eyewitness reporter on the spot able to cover the rebellion of the Modoc Indians, and he visited Salt Lake City, Kentucky, New York, and Niagara, before returning to Liverpool in June 1873. He describes his travels in 'Meeting the Sun: a Journey All Round the World' (1874). In 1877 he made sketches of the Schliemann excavations at Troy and Ephesus. He also covered the Second Anglo-Afghan War of 1878-80 and was with the Afghan boundary commission in 1884-5. 
Simpson became a good amateur archaeologist, had a profound interest in religions, and was a prolific writer. His published works include 'Picturesque People' (1876), 'The Buddhist Prayer Wheel' (1896), 'The Jonah Legend' (1899), 'Glasgow in the Forties' (1899), and many articles, including papers on freemasonry in the 'Transactions' of that society, into which he was initiated in 1871. Probably because of the peripatetic life he led it was not until 5 January 1881 that he married the miniature painter Maria Eliza Burt, daughter of Thomas Burt, a contractor's agent; about 1884 the couple had one beloved daughter, Ann Penelope. Simpson became an associate of the Institute of Painters in Water Colours in 1874 and a full member in 1879; he exhibited fifty-nine watercolours between 1874 and 1899. An original member of the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours in 1883, he resigned in 1886. He was also an FRGS, an honorary associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects, and a founder member of the Society of Biblical Archaeology. Simpson spent his last years writing his 'Autobiography', which he stipulated should not be published until after his death, which took place on 17 August 1899 at his home, 19 Church Road, Willesden, London. He was buried in Highgate cemetery, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 25598


Sims, James (1741-1820), physician, possibly the son of the Revd Samuel Sims, a dissenting minister, was born in co. Down, Ireland, and after a preliminary education went to study at Leiden, where he proceeded MD in 1764, presenting as his inaugural thesis ''De temperie foeminea et morbis inde oriundis''. He then returned to Ireland, and after practising for nine to ten years in co. Tyrone, moved about 1773 to London, where he was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1778. 
Sims was greatly assisted by John Coakley Lettsom, and soon acquired a lucrative practice. In 1774 Sims was appointed physician to the General Dispensary in Aldersgate Street (established by Lettsom) and also served as physician to the Surrey Dispensary. He was the first chairman and vice-president of the Philanthropic Society. The Humane Society, too, owed much of its early success to his energy. Sims also became an honorary fellow of the New York and Massachusetts medical societies. He joined the Medical Society of London in 1783 and from 1786 he served for twenty-two years as its president. As his presidency progressed he became less popular, but was dislodged only by the strenuous exertions of the younger fellows, such as Astley Cooper and William Babington, some of whom had already left to form the Medical and Chirurgical Society. Sims had a valuable collection of books, which by an unusual arrangement he made over to the Medical Society in 1802, provided that an annuity of $30 be paid to himself and his wife, and $45 annually to the survivor. He made a sufficient fortune to allow himself to retire in 1810 to Bath, where he died in 1820. 
William Wadd described him as 'a good-humoured pleasant man, full of anecdote, an ample reservoir of good things, and for figures and facts a perfect chronicle of other times. He had a most retentive memory; but when that failed, he referred to a book of knowledge, from which he quoted with oracular authority'. 
There is a good portrait of Sims painted by Samuel Medley (1769-1857). It was engraved by Nathan Branwhite, and issued as a folding plate in the third volume of J. C. Lettsom's 'Hints Designed to Promote Beneficence, Temperance, and Medical Science' (1801). 
Sims's works are: 'Observations on Epidemic Disorders, with Remarks on Nervous and Malignant Fevers' (1773), which went into a second edition in 1776 and was translated into both German and French; 'A Discourse on the Best Methods of Prosecuting Medical Enquiries' (1774), a critique of current methods in anatomy, which was translated into French and Italian; and 'Observations on the Scarlatina anginosa, Commonly called the Ulcerated Sore Throat', which appeared in several editions between 1796 and 1803. Sims also completed and corrected Edward Foster's 'Principles and Practice of Midwifery' (1781). 


@@@@@


doc= 25599


Sims, John (1749-1831), physician and botanist, was the son of Robert Courthope Sims, a member of the Society of Friends, who for sixty years practised as a physician at Dunmow, Essex, and was the author of 'An Essay on the Nature and Constitution of Man' (1793), and of 'The Constitution and Economy of Man's Nature' (1807). John Sims was born in Canterbury on 13 October 1749, and was educated partly at the Quaker academy in Burford, Oxfordshire, and partly by his father, who was a good classical scholar. In 1770 he proceeded to the University of Edinburgh, and, after passing the session of 1773-4 at Leiden, graduated MD at Edinburgh in 1774, his inaugural dissertation being 'De usu aquae frigidae interno'. 
Sims settled in London and bought the practice of Thomas Cogan in Paternoster Row; in 1779 he was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians. He had a large practice, with many of his patients coming from the Quaker community. In 1790 he married Ann (died 1835) and with her had six children. Sims was obliged to resign from the Society of Friends in 1790 as his wife was not a Quaker. He became physician to the Surrey Dispensary and to the Charity for Delivering Poor Married Women in their own houses. A renowned accoucheur, in 1814 he examined Joanna Southcott, the religious mystic, who had announced that she was pregnant with the Shiloh. Sims wrote an article in the 'Morning Chronicle' claiming that Southcott was not pregnant but was suffering from mental delusion and diseased internal organs. After her death in 1818 Sims was present at the examination of her body, but no cause of death was ascertained. Sims also acted as physician to Princess Charlotte and attended her labour in 1817, when complications arose. 
Sims edited William Curtis's 'Botanical Magazine' from 1801 to 1826, and the 'Annals of Botany' from 1805 to 1806, in conjunction with Charles Konig. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1814 and was a member of the society's midwifery committee. He was also one of the original fellows of the Linnean Society. In January 1826 Sims gave to the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, a set of objects which he had been given by Thomas Guest, a former army surgeon in the employ of the Sierra Leone Company. Sims's donation to the Ashmolean (now in the Pitt-Rivers Museum, Oxford) comprised a bow, quiver of arrows, a pair of sandals, knife, and a pocket or pouch. They have been traced to the Fula traders who brought goods to Freeport on the Rio Pongo, north of Freetown, and were described by Guest (15 June 1797) as 'the complete Accoutrements of an Inhabitant of the Mandingo Country' (Coote, 154). In this period Sims was resident at 37 Wimpole Street, London. 
Some time after 1826 Sims left the capital and retired to Dorking, Surrey, where he died on 26 February 1831. He was buried on 5 March 1831 in Fittleworth, Sussex, where his son Courthope was a curate. 
Sims was commemorated by Robert Brown in the Mexican genus of Compositae, 'Simsia'. His herbarium was purchased by George Bentham, and was located at Kew. Sims contributed an account of the expansion of Mesembryanthemum under the influence of moisture to the 'Medical and Physical Journal' (vol. 2, 1799), and a 'Description of 'Amomum exscapum'' to the 'Annals of Botany' (vol. 1). 


@@@@@


doc= 25600


Simson, Alexander (1570-1639), Church of Scotland minister, was a younger son of Andrew Simson (c.1526-1591?), minister of Dalkeith, and Violet, sister of Patrick Adamson, archbishop of St Andrews; among his six brothers and three sisters were Patrick Simson (1556-1618), William Simson (b. 1562, d. in or after 1623), and Archibald Simson (1564-1628). He was educated at the University of Glasgow, graduating MA in 1590. Alexander was appointed to 'teach' at Muckhart in November 1591, and was on the exercise at Stirling in the same month. He became minister of Alva and Tillicoultry, Clackmannanshire, in the following year. On 9 June 1596 Alexander (along with his brother Patrick and the 'haill ministars and Reidars' of the presbytery of Stirling) 'maid a new covenant with god' by restating his adherence to the solemn oath contained in the confession of faith of 1581 (Stirling presbytery registers, CH2/722/3). He was admitted to the parish of Mertoun, in the presbytery of Earlston, Berwickshire, in 1597. Nothing is known of his life over the next two decades, except that at some date he married and had a son, Andrew. Following the imposition of episcopacy in 1610 he was probably advised by his brother Patrick not to court a high public profile. 
A convinced presbyterian, Simson was one of a large number of ministers who gathered at Edinburgh in 1621 to organize opposition within parliament to the intended ratification of the five articles of Perth. In a sermon preached at the 'Grayfrier Kirk' on 22 July, he found fault with the bishops and certain 'ministeris [of both England and Scotland], as not being cairfull watchemen and warneris of his majestie of his synis' ('Reg. PCS', 12.545), and for 'omitting to putt [the king] in mind of the breache of the covenant' which the Perth articles represented (Calderwood, 7.470). Such was the sensitivity of the issue that the minister was hauled before the privy council the next day. Simson promptly made matters worse by refusing to recognize the jurisdiction of the council over ecclesiastical affairs, and by denouncing John Spottiswoode, archbishop of St Andrews, and three other 'bishops that were present, [as] belligods, and enemies to the Kirk of Christ in this land' (ibid.). As a consequence of Simson's 'undeutifull speecheis' all ministers except those of the burgh and 'such others as may have special warrant' were ordered to quit Edinburgh, 'and not return while parliament is sitting' ('Reg. PCS', 12.546). Simson was imprisoned at the castle of Dumbarton, at his own expense, to await sentence. On 10 October he was released, and confined to his home parish of Mertoun. 
According to the minister and contemporary church historian John Livingstone, Simson 'knew and cared little for earthly things, was unwearied in prayer, and constantly occupied with the 'Bible'' ('Fasti Scot.', 2.158). Certainly his piety impressed John Stewart, 'Captaine of Dumbartane', who 'beyond all expectation... wold take nothing for [the minister's] interteanement' at the castle (Calderwood, 7.511). Age and infirmity caused Simson to demit his ministry before May 1632, but he remained opposed to the bishops, and was the author of 'The Destruction of Inbred Corruption, or, The Christians Warfare Against the Bosome Enemy' (London, 1644). He died on 17 July 1639 and was buried at Dryburgh, Berwickshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 25601


Simson, Andrew (c.1526-1591?), grammarian and Church of Scotland minister, studied at King's College, Aberdeen, probably under the humanist John Vaus and certainly under his assistant and successor Theophilus Stewart. By late May 1550 he was master of the grammar school at Perth, where he was admitted as a burgess and brother of the guild. It is unclear whether he was the man of that name who studied at St Salvator's College, St Andrews, in 1554, and at St Leonard's College, St Andrews, in 1559. By the mid-1550s Simson had married Violet Adamson (also known as Constyne or Constant), daughter of a Perth baker and sister of Patrick Adamson, the future archbishop of St Andrews (1575-92). They had seven sons (Patrick Simson, William Simson, Archibald Simson, Alexander Simson, Richard, Abraham, and Matthew) and three daughters (Katherine, Violet, and a third, whose name is unknown). A very popular master, Simson taught as many as 300 students at a time, including sons of prominent nobles and gentry. Although normally a stern teacher who was willing to use a leather strap on the students, he sometimes permitted his charges to play games. 
Before his conversion Simson is said by John Row to have been 'a zealous papist' (Row, 1.4), but he became a protestant after reading a book by Sir David Lindsay, probably 'Ane Dialog Betuix Experience and ane Courteour' (1553), at the request of one of his students. Simson continued to teach at Perth until 1560, and about 1562 became minister of Dunning, Perth, with responsibility as well for Cargill. On 28 June 1564 the general assembly approved his transfer to Dunbar, where he was also responsible for some of the surrounding districts and taught in the town's grammar school. On 31 August 1568 the government formally presented Simson with the parsonage at Dunbar, where his stipend was $126 13's'. 4died in 1574. In the meantime, on 4 September 1566 he was a signatory of a letter to Theodore Beza approving the second Helvetic confession, with the exception of the provisions recognizing the holy days associated with Christ's life. In 1570 he persuaded a fellow minister, John Kello of Spott, Haddingtonshire, to confess that he had murdered his wife, and seven years later he reportedly prophesied disaster when he saw a thousand fishing boats casting nets on the sabbath: that night 170 boats were said to have capsized in a storm. 
In August 1572 the general assembly appointed Simson to the committee responsible for reviewing the visitation records of the archbishop of St Andrews, the superintendents, and the commissioners. Two months later he subscribed the articles of the synod of Lothian, which dealt with administrative matters, the importance of the nobility's participation in general assemblies, and the provision of books to clergy with low stipends. In March 1574 the assembly appointed him to a committee that handled requests and complaints which synods could not settle. 
In December 1575 Regent Morton and the privy council named Simson to a committee of grammarians, chaired by George Buchanan and Peter Young, the royal preceptors, whose primary goal was to fashion a national grammar; Simson's task was the preparation of the first and second rudiments. By 1580 he had completed the 'Rudimenta grammatices in gratiam juventutis Scoticae conscripta', which Christophe Plantin published in Antwerp; no copy of this edition is known to have survived. An edition was published at Edinburgh in 1587. Meanwhile Simson resigned as minister at Dunbar before 11 September 1580, perhaps to devote more time to his writing. About October 1582, however, he accepted a position as minister at Dalkeith, with responsibility for the parishes of Lasswade and Glencorse as well. During these years he undoubtedly continued to work on the 'Second rudiments', though this was never published during his lifetime. Indeed, the first recorded licence to print Simson's 'Rudimenta' dates only from 1599, but the work was being used as a textbook in Edinburgh two years earlier. One early edition (published in 1597) combined Simson's 'First rudiments' with the 'Second rudiments' from Andrew Duncan's 'Studiorum puerilium clavis' ('Key to the Studies of Boys'). 
Simson successfully opposed the attempt of the Stirling minister Robert Montgomery, a favourite of the duke of Lennox, to become bishop of Glasgow, attacking him from the pulpit as unfit for the post. In the autumn of 1584 he refused to sign a bond recognizing the crown's spiritual jurisdiction, and he was consequently summoned to appear before James VI and the privy council on 7 December. Rather than subscribe to the official formula Simson was permitted to devise his own words, swearing not to preach heresy or sedition, nor to incite subjects to rebel, and to obey all laws as long as they agreed with the word of God. For unknown reasons his stipend was given to the abbey of Newbattle in 1587, but it was apparently restored to him in 1589. Simson probably died in early 1591. His son Archibald Simson (1564-1628), who had been his assistant at Dalkeith since 1586, was ordained as its minister on 3 June 1591. Altogether six of Simson's sons became ministers, including Patrick Simson, William Simson, and Alexander Simson; the seventh, Matthew, was a professor of humanity at Glasgow University. In February 1586 his daughter Katherine married Alexander Home, minister of Dunbar (where he succeeded Simson), and his daughter Violet married James Carmichael, minister of Haddington and rector of its grammar school from 1572 to 1576. 


@@@@@


doc= 25602


Symson, Andrew (c.1638-1712), Church of Scotland minister and printer, was the youngest son of Andrew Symson ('b'. 'c'.1601), author of a 'Lexicon Anglo-Graeco-Latinum' (1658) and of several Biblical commentaries. Probably born in England, Symson attended the high school of Edinburgh and graduated MA from the University of Edinburgh on 19 July 1661. After teaching as Latin master at the high school of Stirling, he was licensed to preach by the bishop of Edinburgh on 23 January 1663 and dispatched to south-west Scotland to fill one of the numerous vacancies that had arisen following controversial legislation passed in 1662 obliging all established clergy to seek gentry patronage and episcopal collation. 
Although Symson described his own entry to the parish of Kirkinner in Wigtownshire as 'so peaceable, so orderly & so generally assented to' that he encountered little initial opposition (Symson, 'Tripatriarchicon', preface, sig. A4'r'), Galloway remained the geographical focus for sectarian division and presbyterian nonconformist disaffection throughout the Restoration. In 1679, for example, when 'things were come to that hight, that the publick owning of us, was almost look'd on as a crime' (ibid., 6), Symson acknowledged his good fortune in receiving protection from one of his former fellow university students, Alexander Stewart, third earl of Galloway. As civil unrest continued, Symson was also obliged to supply the government with lists of the 'disorderly' in his parish, which in 1684 included the name of Margaret Lauchlinson, one of the notorious 'Wigtown Martyrs'. At the beginning of 1686 he left Kirkinner and was admitted to the parish of Douglas. 
In response to Sir Robert Sibbald's appeal for assistance in the production of a Scottish atlas, Symson had earlier begun work on his 'Large description of Galloway'. Obliged to leave Douglas during the revolution of 1689, Symson settled at Dalclithick, in Glenartney, Perthshire, where he found 'time and leasure enough' in 1692 to revise the work (Symson, 'Large Description', preface), effectively producing a miniature statistical account of the region, recording, 'inter alia', supernatural phenomena alongside traditional farming methods. Although Sibbald later acknowledged his satisfaction with Symson's 'full acount' ('Memoirs', 76), it was not until 1823 that the work was first edited and published. 
Relinquishing the ministry after the re-establishment of presbyterianism, Symson moved to Edinburgh where he set up a printing house in the Cowgate. Acknowledging that books were 'my delight, my heart, worth nectar and ambrosia', he claimed in 1696 that surrounded 'with walls of books on all sides, I dwell safe as in a fortress' (Symson, 'Octupla', preface). In 1699 he arranged the publication of the second edition of Sir George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh's 'Laws and Customs of Scotland in Matters Criminal', having formerly acted as Mackenzie's amanuensis when the work was first published in 1678. In addition to presenting books to the university libraries of Glasgow and Edinburgh, he welcomed the recent foundation of the Faculty of Advocates' library, promising that if he came across volumes of particular interest, he would 'have them transplanted from my obscure Nursery to your more publick and pleasant Garden' (Symson, 'Preface', sig. A2'r'). In 1705 Symson published his 'Tripatriarchicon', an epic poem of over 4000 lines which incorporated an allegorical account of his time in Galloway within its narrative of the lives of the three Jewish patriarchs. Together with the 'Tripatriarchicon', which he hoped would 'pass among the judicious for a tolerably good trotting poem' (Symson, 'Tripatriarchicon', sig. A'v'), Symson also published elegies on notable Galloway personages, including Mrs Janet Dalrymple, Lady Baldone, who later inspired the character of Lucy Ashton in Sir Walter Scott's novel, 'The Bride of Lammermoor', as well as on the murdered Archbishop Sharp, and on the vigorous anti-covenanter Sir George Mackenzie. 
By his marriage to Jane Inglis, Symson had three sons, the second of whom, David, was appointed historiographer royal for Scotland in 1708, while the youngest, Matthias, worked with his father as a printer before becoming successively rector of Moorby and canon of Lincoln, as well as the author of several works on geographical, religious, and historical subjects. Symson died on 20 January 1712 in Edinburgh and was buried in Greyfriars churchyard. Following the publication of a catalogue entitled 'Bibliotheca Symsoniana', his collection of over 4000 books was sold by lottery and auction. 


@@@@@


doc= 25603


Simson, Archibald (1564-1628), Church of Scotland minister, was a younger son of Andrew Simson (c.1526-1591?), minister of Dalkeith, Edinburghshire, and Violet Adamson, sister of Patrick Adamson (1537-1592), archbishop of St Andrews. Of his six brothers, five became ministers, including Patrick Simson (1556-1618), William Simson (b. 1562, d. in or after 1623), and Alexander Simson (1570-1639); he also had three sisters. He was educated at the University of St Andrews, graduating MA in 1585. In the following year he was appointed assistant to his father and was clerk to the presbytery of Dalkeith in 1588. He succeeded to the latter charge in 1590. On 1 February 1604 Archibald married Katherine Crichton; the couple had three daughters, Christian, Elizabeth, and Jean. Following Katherine's death (before 10 February 1607), Archibald married, on 26 September 1607, Elizabeth Stewart. 
A convinced presbyterian, Simson was a constant opponent of James VI's attempts to impose royal authority over the general assembly of the kirk. In 1605 he supported the actions of those ministers who convened at Aberdeen, in defiance of the king's express command. Although their arrival was delayed by inclement weather, he and several other ministers 'finding the Assemblie dissolved... went to the place where the Assemblie was holdin, and... tooke instruments... that were come to have keeped the said Assemblie; and... they did ratifie all the proceedings therof' (Calderwood, 'History', 6.444). Having thus incurred the king's wrath Simson was summoned before the privy council, but was dismissed after promising to moderate his future behaviour. This undertaking, however, was short lived. Simson appeared before the privy council on similar charges in December 1606 after having protested that a convention of ministers at Linlithgow -- 'convocated at his majestie's desire' -- should not be regarded as a lawful substitute for a 'free Generall Assemblie' (ibid., 606-7). 
The issue continued to occupy Simson, and -- in June 1617 -- he objected to the proposal that 'whatever his majestie should determine in the external government of the church, with the advice of the archbishops [and] bishops... should have the force of law' ('Reg. PCS', 11.166). The intended legislation raised presbyterian hackles, since it threatened the institution of a system 'resembl[ing] the convocatioun hous in England' and would inevitably 'prejudice the libertie of our generall assemblies' (Calderwood, 'Trew relatioun', fol. 8'v'). Consequently fifty-five ministers submitted a 'protestatioun' against the scheme, and the proposal was rejected by parliament. The weight of James's resentment fell on the document's principal author, David Calderwood, minister of Crailing, and on Simson, who had acted as 'scribe'. On 12 July, Simson was summoned before the court of high commission, deprived of his charge, and banished to Aberdeen. As before, Simson (probably on the advice of his brother) admitted his offence, and was restored to his parish in December. 
Thus Simson emerged relatively unscathed from his encounters with royal authority. Undoubtedly this was due to the influence of his brother Patrick, who was himself a conspicuous opponent of episcopacy. Nevertheless, it was the latter who prevailed upon his brother to 'tolerate' the bishops (Calderwood, 'History', 7.129) and -- no doubt -- also instilled in him the commonly held belief that an unjust sentence might be admitted, 'howbeit ye do not acknowledge it' (Calderwood, 'Trew relatioun', fol. 4'v'). Archibald's fervent prayer that God might reinforce 'that gift [of toleration] in thir dayes of defection' reflected not only his respect for his brother's advice, but also his determination not to join those of his fellow ministers who 'for fear or gain fall into earthly dispositione' (Wodrow, 125). His own faith can only have been strengthened by the fact that in April 1618 he had to preach Patrick's funeral sermon after dark, 'being silenced and stay[ed] to preach publickly by the persecution of the Prelats' (ibid., 115). But Archibald Simson's principled presbyterianism, tempered by tolerance and common sense, earned him friends in high places. His continued nonconformity attracted the attention of the high commission at Edinburgh in June 1620, but, on the intercession of William, earl of Morton, he was excused. Even after Patrick's death, therefore, he was able to retain both his religious principles and his charge. 
Simson dedicated the last years of his life to writing, and published several sermons, including 'Christes Testament Unfolded, or, Seaven Sermons, on Our Lords Seaven Last Words' (1620), 'Heptameron, the Seven Dayes' (1621), 'Samson's Seaven Lockes of Haire: Allegorically Expounded' (St Andrews, 1621), and 'A Godly and Fruitfull Exposition on the Twenty Five Psalmes' (1622). In the course of his writings Simson remembered those whose help had sustained him through difficult times. His 'Hieroglyphica animalium terrestrium' (1622), for example, contained three Latin poems written by his friend and colleague Patrick Turner, minister of Borthwick and son-in-law of James Law, archbishop of Glasgow, and 'A Sacred Septenarie, or, A Godly and Fruitfill Exposition on the Seven Psalmes of Repentance' (1623), was dedicated to William, earl of Morton. Simson's more tendentious works, 'Historia ecclesiastica Scotorum' and 'Annales ecclesiae Scoticanae' (NL Scot., Adv. MSS), were probably written during this period of Simson's life, but, due to the difficulty of the times, were never published. Simson died, probably at Dalkeith, in December 1628. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25604


Simson, John (1667-1740), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born at Cambaston, Scotland, on 13 July 1667, the eldest son of Patrick Simson (1628-1715), minister of Renfrew, and his second wife, Janet Cullen ('nee' Peadie) ('bap'. 1635, died 1714). After receiving his MA from Edinburgh University in 1692 he studied divinity at Glasgow University, where he was bibliothecary and quaestor by December 1693, and appeared on the divinity rolls of 5 February 1694. In 1695 the burgh of Glasgow reappointed him bibliothecary, but he left for the Netherlands in August 1696 to pursue his theological studies. Since Simson later claimed to have studied under Jan Marck (1656-1731), his destination was presumably Leiden. After returning to Scotland in 1697 he passed his trials, signed the Westminster confession of faith, and received his licence to preach from the presbytery of Paisley on 13 July 1698. Although Simson admitted to scruples about the way the confession dealt with the covenant of works and about some of its wording, he stressed that one must 'be satisfied with the Truth of every Proposition and Consequence contained in it' in order to subscribe ('Letters', 7). 
In September 1698 Simson re-embarked for the Netherlands as tutor to John, son of Francis Montgomery of Giffin. They spent two years in Utrecht, then travelled home slowly via Flanders, France, and England. Back in Scotland, Simson acted as assistant to his father in Renfrew until he received a call to the parish of Troqueer (presbytery of Dumfries) in July 1705. He was ordained at Troqueer on 20 September 1705, and served there for the next three years. On 10 April 1708 the University of Glasgow elected him professor of divinity. The commission of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland agreed to his transportation from Troqueer to Glasgow on 7 July, and his formal admission to the chair took place on 10 November of that year. On 31 October 1710 he married Jean Stirling ('c'.1691-1782), daughter of James Stirling, minister, and niece of Glasgow University's principal, John Stirling, by whom they were married; they had fourteen children born between 1712 and 1735 of whom all but three died in childhood. 
Enlightened in outlook and familiar with reformed theology on the continent, Simson introduced into the Glasgow divinity school the work of Marck, along with that of the contemporary Genevan theologian Benedict Pictet. He expounded the Westminster confession, noting its differences from other reformed systems and its superiority to them. His students were allowed considerable latitude of argument in making presentations, refuting Christian writers from various denominations, and having group discussions on difficult scriptural passages. His teaching was based on a belief in the benevolence of God and an assurance that a loving creator would never deny his creatures the means of salvation, which could be discovered through the exercise of reason. Simson's efforts to make such a God conform to late seventeenth-century Scottish Presbyterian orthodoxy led to confrontation with devout zealots shortly after his arrival in Glasgow. The ensuing debates produced a wealth of polemic writing and became entangled with political rivalries. 
The first suggestions of unsound teaching were made in 1710 by the orthodox Edinburgh minister James Webster. Apparently satisfied by Simson's explanation of his teaching on the imputation of original sin, political differences over the 'Act of Abjuration' (1712) led Webster to a more extreme position. When he charged Simson with unsound doctrine, the 1714 general assembly of the Church of Scotland sent the case to a committee chaired by William Carstares. Webster's publication (1716?) of Simson's correspondence with Robert Rowan, minister of Penningham, added fuel to the flames. There Simson justified his teaching on federal theology as well as his political views on the 'Act of Abjuration'. Simson's opponents were further alarmed by his refutation of Webster's libel, published in 1716, which reflected his sympathy with the possibility of salvation. Simson's views included an insistence on the likelihood of more souls being elect than reprobate and the probable election of deceased infants, an aversion to the contractual nature of federal theology, and a belief that in hell sinning would cease, as well as an interest in current astronomical discussion leading him to suggest that the moon might be inhabited. The presbytery of Glasgow and Simson's academic colleagues stood firm behind him, united in their political allegiance to the squadrone, whereas Webster was an Argathelian, supporting the Campbells of Argyll. The general assembly of 1717 determined that Simson had merely been guilty of imprudent expressions, which he should avoid in future: a mild reprimand and a victory for the squadrone managers. In Glasgow, however, the Argathelians succeeded in securing the transportation of John Anderson to a city church against the wishes of the squadrone's presbytery members, causing Simson, in a sermon in May, to speak of 'breaking the hearts of five honest men to please one man' ('Correspondence of... Wodrow', 2.272). 
In matters of ecclesiastic or academic discipline Simson was authoritarian. His study of Samuel Clarke's work on the Trinity and of patristic writers caused new controversy in the mid-1720s. This enthusiasm for research led to rumours that he had adopted Clarke's semi-Arianism, and that within his strict rules of classroom propriety his divinity students had too much freedom of debate. At about the same time Simson was afflicted with an intestinal disorder which sapped his strength. Ill health limited his ability to teach and to defend himself when in 1726 he was accused by the presbytery of Glasgow of making statements in his lectures which seemed to have an Arian tendency. Simson responded that he had come to believe that the Church of Scotland verged on the modalistic heresy of Sabellianism. He said that he now emphasized in his teaching the personal properties of each person in the Trinity to maintain their individual qualities. He assured his colleagues that he adhered to the 'Bible' and the Westminster confession, using their terminology in his lectures. The matter was taken to the general assembly, which appointed a committee to investigate Simson's teaching in co-operation with the presbytery of Glasgow, full details of which were published by the Church of Scotland. Simson reiterated his orthodoxy, and the depositions of his students were inconclusive. 
A new pamphlet war between ultra-orthodox and liberal presbyterians resulted in deep divisions in the church. Political realities again affected the outcome. The Argathelians, under the earl of Ilay, were now the dominant faction; Simson returned to his family's traditional support of the Campbells. Appreciating that fanatics made ineffective political allies Ilay opposed any increase in power for the ultra-conservative group. Fear of English interference in Scottish ecclesiastical affairs also played a part in the eventual compromise decision (1729) supported by Ilay to suspend, but not depose, Simson. After Simson's supporters failed in 1730 to have his suspension reversed he continued to live in his university house and act as a member of the Glasgow faculty, although not teaching publicly, until his death on 2 February 1740. 
Simson's cases formed a watershed in the development of the Church of Scotland in the eighteenth century. Their significance lies less in the fate of Simson than in the effect they had on the church. The secession of 1733 was partly brought about by the dismay at what the extreme group considered Simson's lenient punishment. Freed from the restrictions imposed by the ultra-orthodox, the church embraced Enlightenment ideals while upholding Calvinist Christianity. 


@@@@@


doc= 25605


Simson, Patrick (1556-1618), Church of Scotland minister, was born at Perth, the eldest of the seven sons of Andrew Simson (c.1526-1591?) and his wife, Violet Adamson, sister of Patrick Adamson, archbishop of St Andrews. His brothers, all but one of whom also became ministers, included William Simson (b. 1562, d. in or after 1623), Archibald Simson (1564-1628), and Alexander Simson (1570-1639). He also had three sisters. His father was schoolmaster at Perth and became minister of Dunning and Cargill shortly after the Reformation, before being translated to Dunbar in 1564. Having been educated in the classics by his father, Patrick entered the University of St Andrews in 1571 and graduated MA in 1575. It was intended that he proceed to Cambridge, but on his way there he met an English gentleman who put the library in his house at Brigstock, Northamptonshire, at Simson's disposal, enabling him to acquire an extensive knowledge of the literary and historical remains of antiquity, both lay and ecclesiastical. His father then fell sick and recalled Simson to Scotland, where he assisted in the school at Dunbar by teaching Greek. In 1577 he was admitted minister of the adjoining parish of Spott, which with Aldhame and the Bass constituted both a prebend in the collegiate church of Dunbar and a free parsonage, and he continued to teach weekly at Dunbar. 
In 1582 Simson became minister of Cramond in the presbytery of Edinburgh; he was provided to the vicarage on 30 August 1586. In 1584 the ministers of the presbytery were ordered to subscribe the so-called 'black acts' in favour of episcopacy, and to promise obedience to their bishop on pain of forfeiting their stipends. Although his diocesan was his maternal uncle, Patrick Adamson, Simson refused, showing himself then as always implacably opposed to the reintroduction of bishops. During his time at Cramond he was himself offered a see, but unsurprisingly declined it. He later also refused a pension. 
In 1590 the general assembly translated Simson to Stirling, a royal residence. He was admitted on 7 August and received the crown's presentation in May 1591. He held the benefice for the rest of his life. He had considerable influence with the king, to whom he was constantly loyal and respectful, and also with John Erskine, second earl of Mar, a leading courtier and Prince Henry's keeper. When James renewed his efforts to reintroduce episcopacy, however, Simson was once more a leading opponent of royal policy. Early in 1606 he attended the trial for treason at Linlithgow of six ministers who had attended an assembly which the king had banned, and was their main supporter; in July that year he drew up and signed the protest against episcopacy presented to the Scottish parliament; and when Andrew Melville was imprisoned in the Tower of London in March 1607 he organized a subscription for him. In the latter year the general assembly nominated him permanent moderator of the presbytery of Stirling, but he refused the appointment, probably because it appeared dangerously similar to episcopal office. However, on 15 June 1608 Simson was elected moderator of the conference at Falkland between bishops and representatives of the kirk, at which the latter called for the maintenance of presbyterianism. He also opposed the liturgical changes which followed the restoration of bishops, regarding them as the deplorable product of English influence and reportedly declaring: 'Alace! I see all the midden (or dunghill) of the muck of the corruption of the Kirk of Ingland comeing on upon us, and it will wrack us, if God send not help in time' (Mullan, 'Scottish Puritanism', 268). 
In spite of his anti-episcopal fervour Simson was by nature moderate, peaceable, and charitable, so much so that he was sometimes blamed for his conciliatory spirit by extremists on his own side. He took a leading part in preventing schism in the church, and urged his brethren to continue to attend synods after the bishops began to preside over them. He attended at least ten general assemblies before 1610 (only one more was held in his lifetime). He continued his studies into his fifties, when he learned Hebrew, and was often consulted by his clerical brethren for his wisdom and learning. A notable preacher and pastor, he was held in considerable affection by his flock, many of whom venerated him as their spiritual father. On his coming to Stirling he found the townspeople disorderly and violent, with merchants and craftsmen apt to engage in bloody combat in the streets, and he restored order to the community. In times of plague he remained in his parish and performed his ministerial duties at the risk of his own life. When he lay dying people of all ranks crowded to his bedside to receive his blessing and brought their children with them. Nearly fifty years afterwards John Livingstone, writing in exile in the Netherlands, looked back to his childhood in Stirling and remembered Simson as 'a man learned, godly, and very faithfull in the cause of God' (Mullan, 'Scottish Puritanism', 35). 
Simson married twice. His first wife was Martha Baron, the daughter of an Edinburgh burgess; they had three sons, all of whom became ministers, and a daughter, Lilias, who married John Gillespie, minister of Alva, and was the mother of George Gillespie and Patrick Gillespie. Following Martha's death Simson married a daughter of Leslie of Kinnaird. He died after many years of ill health on 31 March 1618 at Stirling and was buried in the choir of Stirling parish church. It was claimed that owing to 'the persecution of the Prelats' his funeral sermon had to be delivered at night (Mullan, 'Episcopacy', 130). Between 1609 and 1616 he published four works of church history which were subsequently brought together into a single volume by his brother Archibald as 'The Historie of the Church since the Dayes of our Saviour Jesus Christ untill this Present Age' (1624). It was dedicated by Archibald to the duke of Richmond, but Patrick Simson's own epistle dedicatory was addressed to Mary, countess of Mar, one of several noblewomen who had held him in high regard. 


@@@@@


doc= 25606


Simson, Robert (1687-1768), mathematician, was born on 18 October 1687, probably the eldest of the seventeen children, all male, of John Simson (died 1731), a Glasgow merchant, of Kirktonhall, West Kilbride, Ayrshire, and his wife, Agnes, daughter of Patrick Simson, minister of Renfrew. Thomas Simson was a younger brother. Robert Simson's name appears in the list of students matriculating in the fourth class at Glasgow University on 3 March 1701. Originally intended for the ministry, he studied under his maternal uncle, John Simson, professor of divinity, and first distinguished himself as a classical scholar. His interests then turned to mathematics, a subject which was in decline at Glasgow. Following the enforced resignation of the professor of mathematics, Robert Sinclair, Simson was nominated to this post on 8 March 1711. At that time he was spending a year in London pursuing his mathematical studies but after his return he was examined on 9 November 1711 and admitted to the professorship ten days later, having just graduated MA, on the 16th. About 1728 he became clerk to the university meeting and fulfilled both functions until he retired in 1761. In 1746 the University of St Andrews conferred on him the honorary degree of MD. 
While in London, Simson made the acquaintance of several eminent mathematicians, among them Edmond Halley, whose influence perhaps reinforced his obsession with the works of the Greek geometers. He first directed his attention to Euclid's porisms, which are only known from the short account in the 'Collectiones mathematicae' of Pappus of Alexandria. Although Pierre de Fermat claimed to have restored Euclid's work and Halley had edited the Greek text of the preface to the seventh book of Pappus, Simson was the first to throw real light on the matter. In a paper communicated in 1723 to the Royal Society by James Jurin, Simson restored two general propositions in which Pappus summed up several of the porisms ('PTRS', 32, 1723, 330-40); his further work on the porisms was not published until after his death. In 1735 Simson published 'Sectionum conicarum libri V', which he partly intended as an introduction to the treatise by Apollonius of Perga on the subject; here Simson employed methods of pure geometry rather than algebra. In 1738 he completed the restoration of the 'Loci plani' of Apollonius, a task already attempted by Fermat before 1629 and by Francis Schooten in 1657; his conclusions were published in 1749 in a work entitled 'Apollonii Pergaei locorum planorum libri II, restituti a R. Simson'. He next occupied himself with the restoration of the 'Sectio determinata' of Apollonius, which had already been the subject of some investigations by Alexander Anderson in 1612 and by Willebrord Snel in 1634; Simson's version was published posthumously. His most influential work was probably his definitive edition of Euclid's 'Elements', which he published in 1756. Both his Euclid and his 'Conic Sections' ran through many editions and were translated into several languages. 
In spite of his obsession with Greek geometry Simson was familiar with contemporary mathematics and included the elements of fluxionary calculus in his courses. There is an early manuscript of his dealing with inverse tangent series and their use in calculating greekLetterpi (U. Glas. L., MS. Gen. 1096), and in his paper 'An explication of an obscure passage in Albert Girard's commentary upon Simon Stevin's works' ('PTRS', 48, 1754, 368-77) he used algebraic methods to discuss a limit involving Fibonacci numbers and an iterative process for finding square roots. Among his manuscripts now in Glasgow University Library are sixteen volumes of 'Adversaria on mathematical subjects, 1716-1767' (U. Glas. L., MS Gen. 256-71). 
Simson appears to have been tall and of good stature. In spite of his great scholarship he was a modest, unassuming man who was very cautious in promoting his own work. He enjoyed good company and presided over the weekly meetings of a dining club that he had instituted. In his later years he complained of failing memory which inhibited his work. He had a special interest in botany, in which he was an acknowledged expert. 
Simson never married. He died at the University of Glasgow on 1 October 1768 and was buried in the graveyard of Blackfriars Church. He bequeathed his extensive library to the University of Glasgow where it is still preserved as the Simson Collection. His manuscripts were left to his friend and colleague James Clow, professor of philosophy, with the request that he should put them in order and have them published. With financial support from Philip Stanhope, second Earl Stanhope, Clow published some of them in 1776 as Simson's 'Opera quaedam reliqua'. 


@@@@@


doc= 25607


Simson, Thomas (1696-1764), physician, was born at Kirktonhall in the parish of West Kilbride, Ayrshire, the third son of John Simson (died 1731), a merchant, of Kirktonhall, and his wife, Agnes, daughter of Patrick Simson, minister of Renfrew. The mathematician Robert Simson was his brother, and the theologian John Simson was his uncle. 
In 1721 James Brydges, duke of Chandos, established a medical professorship at the University of St Andrews, and on 10 January 1722 Simson, who had been awarded an MD by Glasgow University in 1720, was admitted as its first incumbent. He was an able and efficient professor who, unusually for the time, taught in the vernacular. 
About 1724 Simson married a daughter of Sir John Preston of Prestonhall, Fife, who was deprived of his estates in 1715. They had four sons and two daughters; their son James was professor of medicine at St Andrews in succession to his father from 1764 to 1770. 
In 1744 Simson was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, and in 1756 he produced 'Regulations for the Degree in Medicine' at St Andrews, but his recommendations were not acted upon. He held the chair of medicine until his death in St Andrews on 30 April 1764. Simson was the author of: 'De re medica' (1726); 'De erroribus circa materiam medicam' (1726); 'System of the Womb' (1729); and 'Enquiry on the Vital and Animal Actions' (1752). 


@@@@@


doc= 25608


Simson, William (b. 1562, d. in or after 1623), Church of Scotland minister and Hebraist, was born on 13 August 1562 in Perth, probably the third son of Andrew Simson (c.1526-1591?), rector of Perth grammar school, and Violet, daughter of Patrick Adamson, a Perth baker, and sister of Patrick Adamson (1537-1592). Among his six brothers were Patrick Simson (1556-1618), Archibald Simson (1564-1628), and Alexander Simson (1570-1639). He matriculated at St Andrews in 1577 and graduated MA in 1581. Thereafter his movements are elusive. He probably fled to England with other presbyterians after the pro-episcopal black acts of May 1584, perhaps with James Carmichael ('c'.1543-1628), who married his sister Violet. Simson contributed a Latin and Greek verse eulogy to Carmichael's 'Grammaticae Latinae', published at Cambridge in 1587. 
In 1593 Simson attended the general assembly at Dundee, probably as an elder, since he was named among those about to enter the ministry. By 1597 he was serving as minister of Burntisland, Fife. Its historic church had been built by the town in 1592, but no provision made for stipend. The assembly of March 1600 therefore agreed that Simson should get a share of stipend for assisting at Ceres in Fife, but also gave him liberty to seek a fresh charge. His attendance at the assembly which convened in Burntisland on 12 May 1601 is not recorded. On 23 June that year he was presented by James VI to Dumbarton. He remained opposed to episcopacy and in July 1607 withdrew from the synod of Clydesdale when it accepted a bishop -- John Spottiswoode -- as moderator. The same year he was chosen master of Dumbarton's grammar school, and in August 1608 was admitted a burgess by the town council. John Skene's 'Regiam majestatem Scotiae' (Edinburgh, 1609) contained a Latin verse tribute by Simson (not in the English version of the same year). 
By October 1614 the Dumbarton council was seeking a replacement minister because of Simson's absence in England, and by the autumn of 1616 William Blair had succeeded him. Meanwhile, on 22 December 1615 Glasgow commissary court issued letters of 'horneing and poynding' against Simson for non-payment of $66 9's'. 6died to a Glasgow tailor. His presence in England is confirmed by his book 'De accentibus Hebraicis', published in London in 1617, the earliest treatise on Hebrew by a Scot. Its preface, dated 1 September 1617, has a dedication to Sir Christopher Hatton ('c'.1581-1619), known for other literary and musical patronage, and was written 'ex Musaeo nostro Vanstedano', which must refer to Wanstead, perhaps to Wanstead House, near Barking, but may possibly indicate Hatton's residence at Clay Hall. It also mentions other Hebrew writings -- an etymological table and a grammatical analysis of 'Genesis' 1 -- which scarcity of Hebrew type left unpublished. 
Further details of Simson's English sojourns remain to be uncovered. He may have married Alice Wakeman, whose name appears English. He is last sighted writing a preface, 'To the Christian Reader', in the second edition of 'The Christian Synagogue' by John Wemyss (died 1636), another Scottish ministerial Hebraist, published at London in 1623. An alleged sighting of him in Edinburgh in November 1624 (Couper, 128) is a case of mistaken identity. It is not known when Simson died. 


@@@@@


doc= 25609


Simson, William (1798/9-1847), painter, second son of Alexander Simson, merchant, was born in Dundee. His father was admitted a burgess of Dundee in 1792, and, though engaged in commerce, was deeply interested in art. Three of his sons became artists: George (1791-1862), a portrait and landscape painter, who became a member of the Royal Scottish Academy; William, the subject of this entry; and David (1803-1874), a successful landscape painter and lithographer. William Simson began his art education in 1818 under the landscape painter Andrew Wilson (1780-1848), master of the Trustees' Academy at Edinburgh. Among his fellow students were Robert Scott Lauder and David Octavius Hill. Simson began exhibiting at the Institution for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts in Scotland in 1821; in 1825 he signed a proposal for the establishment of the Scottish Academy, becoming one of its first academicians. Simson, however, withdrew his membership of the newly established body before the Scottish Academy's first exhibition. It was not until after the union between the institution and the Scottish Academy in 1829 that Simson first exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1831. He presented the haunting 'Solway Moss -- Evening' (1830) as his diploma piece. 
Simson's early works were local landscapes and seapieces. However, Simson also painted a number of works in response to a visit to the Low Countries in 1827: 'A Scene in Holland' (1828; NG Scot.) and 'Passage Boats Becalmed on the Maas at Dort' (NG Scot.) are full of serene light and capture the still, flat countryside and waterways, and reflect the influence of the seventeenth-century Dutch masters Albert Cuyp and William van de Velde II. The success of his elder brother George as a portrait painter encouraged Simson to follow temporarily that branch of art. The Royal Scottish Academy owns two of his cabinet portraits: one of Edmund Thornton Crawford (1806-1885), a contemporary marine painter also influenced by the Dutch school, and the other a portrait of the artist's brother David Simson. These portraits are very finely painted with small, tight brushstrokes and great attention to detail. In 1830 he exhibited his 'Shooting Party Regaling' -- chiefly comprising portraits -- at the Royal Academy in London, and from that time until the year of his death (with the exception of 1833, 1835, and 1836) he was a regular exhibitor there. He also sent seventy-two pictures to the exhibitions of the Royal Scottish Academy. 
Throughout the 1830s Simson closely followed in David Wilkie's footsteps, imitating his Italian journey in 1834. His work there led to his composition 'Cimabue and Giotto', which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1838 and purchased by Sir Robert Peel for 150 guineas. Simson moved to London in 1838, and settled at 97 Dean Street, Soho, afterwards moving to 12 Sloane Street, Chelsea. Wilkie did much to encourage Scottish artists to move south but this was to prove Simson's undoing as he forsook landscape painting for history paintings, for example 'Columbus at the Door of the Convent of La Rabida' (exh. RA, 1839). Simson's genre pieces, for example 'A Goatherd's Cottage' (1832; NG Scot.) and 'Interior of a Cottage, Killin' (1833; NG Scot.), are also indebted to Wilkie in composition, colouring, and chiaroscuro. Simson even copied Wilkie's paintings, including 'The Chelsea Pensioners Reading the Gazette of the Battle of Waterloo'. Such paintings did not meet with critical approval, as Simson did not have the ability to paint interesting and lively historical scenes. 
After 1830 Simson's best work is to be found in his drawings and depictions of hunting scenes. The sportsman William Scrope (1772-1852) employed Simson to record events in the field, including 'The End of the Day: William Scrope on a White Pony with his Keepers and the Day's Bag' (1840s; priv. coll.). Scrope and Simson may have met at the British Institution, where Scrope was the director and Simson exhibited regularly. Simson died at his home, 12 Sloane Street, Chelsea, London, on 29 August 1847, aged forty-eight, having never enjoyed good health. Posthumously his brother David reproduced some of his drawings as lithographs. An album of 205 drawings dating from 1828 to 1847 in the Royal Scottish Academy comprises portrait and animal studies as well as landscapes and seascapes of such diverse locations as Antwerp, Amsterdam, Bridlington, and Dumfries. Collections of Simson's drawings are also in the City of Edinburgh Library Fine Art Department and the National Gallery of Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 25610


Fychan, Simwnt (d. 1606), poet, was one of the last great practitioners of the traditional bardic skills in Wales. He gave his paternal pedigree as Simwnt Fychan ap John ap Jenkin ap Hywel ab Ieuan Fychan. As his forebear was named Ieuan Fychan, it would probably be best to assume that Fychan (small, little) was Simwnt's inherited surname, although Thomas Evans, his nephew and disciple, described him in his elegy as being of small stature. In a rental for 1465 his grandfather Jenkin ap Hywel is listed as a bondman in the commote of Llannerch (which comprised the parishes of Llanfair Dyffryn Clwyd and Llanelidan). 
A long-standing oral tradition claims that Simwnt resided in a house called Ty-brith in Llanfair. There is, however, contemporary evidence that from 1580 onwards he dwelt in a house in Ruthin on the Thelwall estate. Thomas Evans seems to confirm that Simwnt continued to live in Ruthin up to the time of his death. Although he was not of aristocratic stock on his father's side, Simwnt claimed descent on his mother's side from the princes of Powys; his mother was Jonet, daughter of Marfred. He records that his wife was Lowri, widow of Thomas ap Gruffudd of Bodliwydd in the parish of Llanelidan. 
Simwnt is reputed to have been one of the pupils of the bard Gruffudd Hiraethog, and at the second Caerwys eisteddfod (bardic congress), probably held in 1567, he was one of four who gained the highest bardic degree of 'pencerdd' (chief of song). Copies of his graduation certificate have been preserved (for example Thomas, facsimile facing 81). He composed a very large number of poems, most of which were eulogies and elegies to his patrons in the northern half of Wales. His datable poems show that he was a practising poet for over fifty years, from 1551 until 1603-5. 
All of Simwnt's poems were written in the Welsh strict metres. One of the best-known is a biting satire on the contemporary law courts. Another unusual offering from a Welsh bard of the period was a rather free translation of Martial's epigram on the happy life (book X, epigram 47), undertaken at the request, and with the help, of his patron, Simwnt Thelwall. This, according to a current classical scholar, was 'the earliest version of a classical work put into Welsh' (Davies, 67). Simwnt's poem, together with the Latin version and an anonymous English translation, was printed as a broadside in 1571. Another popular poem by Simwnt was his ode to Pirs Mostyn, which is said to have been exhibited at the Caerwys eisteddfod. It contains examples of each of the twenty-four strict metres of Welsh prosody. 
There is ample evidence that Simwnt Fychan had mastered the curriculum of the bardic schools. He left a large collection of genealogical material (Cardiff County Library, MS 4.265, and other MSS). The Cardiff manuscript also contains his version of a medieval treatise on heraldry (edited by E. J. Jones in 'Medieval Heraldry', 1942). Simwnt Fychan's grammar, 'Pum llyfr kerddwriaeth' ('Five books of prosody'), preserved in his autograph in Jesus College MS 15, is the most comprehensive of all the Welsh bardic grammars (reprinted in G. J. Williams and E. J. Jones, 'Gramadegau'r penceirddiaid', 1934, 89-142). At the end of his version of the bardic grammar Simwnt included a copy of William Salesbury's treatise on rhetoric, dated 1551, and this copy was annotated and emended by Salesbury himself. 
Simwnt died on 5 April 1606 and was buried eight days later in the chancel of Llanfair Dyffryn Clwyd church. Each of his three elegists, Sion Phylip, Edward ap Raff, and Thomas Evans, lamented the passing of a major poet and a leading authority on Welsh bardic learning. 


@@@@@


doc= 25611


Sinclair, Andrew (1794-1861), surgeon and naturalist, was born in Paisley, Renfrewshire, on 13 April 1794, the son of John Sinclair and Agnes Renfrew. Between 1814 and 1818 he studied medicine and surgery at the University of Glasgow, at L'hopital de la Charite in Paris, and finally at the University of Edinburgh, from where he graduated MD in 1818. In 1822 he entered the navy as an assistant surgeon, and from 1823 to 1833 he served on the 'Owen Glendower' off the Cape of Good Hope and in the Mediterranean. He also began to collect botanical and zoological specimens which he sent to the British Museum. Sinclair became a surgeon in 1829, and in 1834 was attached to HMS 'Sulphur' on a surveying expedition to the South American coast, under the command of Captain Frederick William Beechey and afterwards of Sir Edward Belcher. Sinclair continued his interest in natural history, collecting plants in 1837 and 1838 in Mexico and Central America. 
After a brief period in Britain to recover his health in 1839, Sinclair was appointed surgeon to a convict ship, and he had opportunities of collecting natural history specimens at several Australian ports. He spent some weeks in New Zealand in 1841 with Joseph Dalton Hooker, then naturalist to James Clark Ross's Antarctic expedition, and in 1843 he accompanied Captain Robert FitzRoy as private secretary, when FitzRoy became governor of New Zealand. On 6 January 1844 a somewhat reluctant Sinclair was made colonial secretary in New Zealand, and he served as such under a succession of governors and acting governors until the establishment of parliamentary government in May 1856. He was efficient rather than inspired in office. 
In 1856 Sinclair retired to Britain on a pension, and he soon met some of the leading scientific figures of the day, having been elected fellow of the Linnean Society in 1857. He returned to New Zealand in 1858 to collect in the middle and south islands material for a supplement to J. D. Hooker's 'Flora'. He made arrangements with Sir John Francis Julius von Haast to explore Mount Cook, but was drowned on 26 March 1861 in endeavouring to cross on foot the River Rangitata, near Canterbury, New Zealand, when it was swollen by flood. He was buried in the nearby Mesopotamia station. Sinclair was unmarried. His zoological specimens, chiefly sponges and zoophytes, were mostly presented to the British Museum, and his plants went to Sir W. J. Hooker and were mainly described in Hooker and Arnott's 'Botany of Beechey's Voyage' (1841), and in George Bentham's 'Botany of the Voyage of HMS Sulphur' (1844). Sinclair himself published only two papers. He is commemorated in the names of sixteen New Zealand plants, as well as Mount Sinclair and Sinclair River. 


@@@@@


doc= 25612


Sinclair, Catherine (1800-1864), novelist and children's writer, was born in Edinburgh on 17 April 1800. She was the fourth daughter and seventh of the thirteen children of Sir John Sinclair, first baronet (1754-1835), of Ulbster, first president of the board of agriculture, and his second wife, Lady Diana MacDonald (1769-1845), daughter of Alexander, first Lord MacDonald of Sleat. Sir George Sinclair, second baronet (1790-1868), Archdeacon John Sinclair (1797-1875), and the Revd William Sinclair (1804-1878) were her brothers. She also had two half-sisters from her father's first marriage. She and her sisters were all very tall, and jokes circulated about Sir John Sinclair's 6-and-30 feet of daughters: the pavement outside their house was known as the 'Giants' Causeway'. S. C. Hall states that she was badly scarred with smallpox. She was educated at home, and, from the age of fourteen, acted as secretary to her father, who maintained an extensive correspondence with agriculturists and politicians in Europe and America. It is said that she wrote from his dictation for five or six hours daily for many years. The family were members of the Scottish Episcopal church, and an evangelical protestantism is promoted throughout Sinclair's fiction. Her sister Julia (died 1868), with whom Sinclair lived in the later part of her life, married in 1824, as his second wife, the fourth earl of Glasgow (1765-1843), and had a son and a daughter, for whom Sinclair's first book, 'Charlie Seymour, or, The Good Aunt and the Bad Aunt' (1832), was written. She had earlier published in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' (25, February 1829, 189-92), one of the horror stories in which the magazine specialized: 'The Murder Hole: an ancient Legend', which is about a murderous innkeeper, based on a rural legend. After her father's death Sinclair's rate of production increased. She began with a novel of fashionable life, of the then popular 'silver fork' school, 'Modern Accomplishments' (1836), which was followed by a sequel, 'Modern Society' (1837). 'Hill and Valley, or, Hours in England and Wales' (1838) was the first of a series of travel books. But her best book and most enduring success was 'Holiday House: a Series of Tales' (1839). Harry and Laura, perhaps based on her nephew and niece, live with their kind grandmother and uncle, and a severe nurse. They are always getting into trouble, unlike their saintly brother Frank, who goes away to sea, returning to die nobly in the last chapter, effecting the conversion of his unregenerate brother and sister. In a preface Sinclair states that Frank's death was based on that of her brother James (died 1826), and that she wanted to describe 'noisy, frolicsome, mischievous children' rather than the paragons of contemporary children's fiction. The book combines an improving religious message with the entertaining account of Harry and Laura's misdeeds, and was both innovative and popular. 'Sir Edward Graham, or, The Railway Speculators' (1849) is a novel for adults, with many of the same characters, in which Harry and Laura both find romance and marriage. Sinclair's other adult fiction, also of markedly evangelical tone, includes the perhaps semi-autobiographical 'Jane Bouverie' (1846), and 'Beatrice' (1852), which came out in the aftermath of the 'papal aggression' crisis, and has a fiercely anti-Catholic message. She also published tracts and devotional works. A late success was the series of picture letters for children published between 1861 and 1864, in which words and hieroglyphic pictures are appealingly mingled. Sinclair devoted herself to charitable works of a practical as well as religious kind. She founded a mission school at Water of Leith, a volunteer corps, and a Sinclair Cooking Depot in Edinburgh, to provide good cheap food for the poor. She also set up public benches and drinking-fountains in that city. She died at Kensington vicarage, London, the home of her brother John, on 6 August 1864, and was buried in the graveyard of St John's Episcopal Church, Edinburgh, ten days later. After her death a meeting was held in Edinburgh to erect a memorial by public subscription, which still stands on the corner of Albyn Place and North Charlotte Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 25613


Sinclair, George, fourth earl of Caithness (b. in or before 1527, d. 1582), magnate, was the second born but eldest surviving son of John Sinclair, third earl of Caithness (died 1529), and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William Sutherland of Duffus. Born before 14 July 1527, his wardship was entrusted at first to Alexander Stewart, bishop of Moray, who died in 1537, and then to James Kirkcaldy of Grange and the courtier Oliver Sinclair. He first sat as a peer in parliament in 1542. In 1544, while the bishop of Caithness was in exile in England, the earl attempted to expand his influence by allying with Donald Mackay, a local chieftain, in order to appropriate some of the landed wealth of the diocese. Caithness took the bishop's castle of Strabister and Mackay took Skibo. When the bishop returned, Caithness and his confederates refused to restore his lands and rents. The earls of Huntly and Sutherland summoned them to appear at Helmsdale where both submitted, but Mackay was imprisoned for a time. On 2 October 1545 Caithness resigned his earldom into the hands of Queen Mary, who granted a charter to his son and heir, John Sinclair, under the usual reservation of a liferent of the earldom to himself. In September 1553 an act was passed resolving a dispute between Caithness and Mackay. Caithness continued to be a volatile influence in the north-east. In July 1555 he refused to convoke his men to appear at the justice ayres summoned by Mary of Guise, the queen regent, during her progress through the north. As a result he was imprisoned, first in Inverness and then in Edinburgh, being released only on payment of a large fine. On 18 December 1556 he was granted a remission for this and many other disorders. 
It was later claimed that Caithness, along with other Catholic nobles, sponsored a mission by John Leslie, official of Aberdeen diocese and later bishop of Ross, to the newly widowed Mary, queen of Scots, in 1561 in the hope of persuading her to ally with the conservative faction among the lords, rather than with the earl of Moray and his protestant confederates. The mission was unsuccessful, but Caithness consistently supported the conservative and Catholic cause in the years following the establishment of the Reformation in 1560. His name is not recorded on the sederunt of the Reformation Parliament of August 1560, but Thomas Randolph, the English ambassador, wrote that only the earls of Caithness and Cassillis opposed the abolition of the mass and papal authority and the adoption of a reformed confession of faith at this parliament. Knox claimed that Caithness was present and dissented along with other lords, while Archbishop Hamilton stated that he was absent in order to avoid voting on the issue. Probably he was present but sometimes left the room. In 1563 Caithness was ordered into custody at Edinburgh for the murder of some servants of the Earl Marischal. In the dispute between the earl of Moray and Queen Mary in 1565 Caithness took the queen's side. In February 1566 he willingly accepted Mary's encouragement to attend mass, and he was present in Edinburgh on the night of the murder of her secretary, David Riccio (9 March), although he left the town along with the earl of Atholl and other conservative lords three days after the event. On 17 April he was created hereditary justiciar in Caithness; the appointment was confirmed on 14 February 1567. 
Caithness hoped to use this position as a platform to carve out a greater area of secure and independent personal rule for himself in the far north which would render him less vulnerable to his Gordon rivals, the earls of Sutherland and Huntly. In the crises of the last years of Queen Mary's personal rule he remained an ally of the queen. After the murder of Darnley, Caithness acted as foreman of the jury at the sham trial which acquitted the earl of Bothwell of the crime. Caithness protested at the time that no crime should be imputed to the jurors since nobody had appeared to accuse Bothwell of the murder or brought any proof in support of the indictment. However, the members of the Lennox family, who would have pressed the charge, were all intimidated from attending by Bothwell's supporters. Although Caithness supported Bothwell's marriage to Queen Mary, after his 'abduction' of the queen, he reluctantly joined the confederate lords in a rebellion intended to free her from Bothwell's control. After the confrontation at Carberry on 15 June 1567, which ended with Bothwell's flight and Mary's imprisonment in Lochleven, Caithness considered his position. Essentially an opportunist, described by a contemporary as 'making always fair weather with those in authority' (Hewitt, 24), he remained aloof from subsequent operations, failing to sign the bonds in support of the queen. He rejoined her before the battle of Langside on 13 May 1568 and after her flight to England remained a staunch member of her party in Scotland, even writing to Queen Elizabeth on Mary's behalf in July 1568. But as the tide turned against the Marian party the earl began to detach himself from his former loyalties, and in September 1571 he consented to the election of the earl of Mar as regent of the kingdom. After Mar's death he attached himself to the earl of Morton until the regent's fortunes began to wane in 1578. 
In 1575 Caithness was granted a yearly pension by the bishop of Caithness for help given in the gathering and protection of episcopal revenues. In 1568 he secured the wardship of Alexander Gordon, twelfth earl of Sutherland, a rival to the Sinclairs in the region. Caithness forcibly married Alexander, aged fifteen, to his 32-year-old daughter Barbara, in order, it was alleged, to secure control over the Sutherland territories. His plan was thwarted by Alexander's escape from his father-in-law's custody and his subsequent divorce after a long struggle to regain his patrimony. Caithness was also accused of involvement in the poisoning in July 1567 of Alexander's father, Earl John, and his wife and of thereafter attempting to destroy the charters and deeds of the house of Sutherland during Alexander's wardship. His plans were frustrated since Earl John had transferred the charters and deeds to the custody of the laird of Carnegie. Caithness traced a violent course in his dealings with his own neighbours. In 1570 he launched an attack on the Murrays during which the cathedral at Dornoch was burnt. He imprisoned John, his own eldest son and heir, in the castle of Girnigoe for plotting against him. John remained in captivity for about seven years before dying, it was said, of starvation and neglect in 1575. 
Caithness died at Edinburgh on 9 September 1582 and was buried in the Sinclair foundation at Roslin, outside the town. His heart was cased in lead and buried in the Sinclair aisle in the church at Wick. It is related that during a raid on the town by the earl of Sutherland in 1588, one of the earl's troops entered the church and found the casket. He opened it in the hope of finding valuables, but simply scattered the contents to the winds. The earl's impressive monument survives, however. Caithness was married to Elizabeth Graham, daughter of the second earl of Montrose. She was dead by 4 April 1576. They had four sons and five daughters: John, master of Caithness, who died in prison; William of Mey, who died without legitimate heirs; George of Mey; David; Barbara, or Beatrix, who married and was divorced from Alexander, earl of Sutherland; Elizabeth, who married first Alexander Sutherland of Duffus, and second Hugh Mackay of Farr; Margaret, married to William Sutherland of Duffus; Barbara, said to have been married to Alexander Innes of Innes; and Agnes who married, as his second wife, Andrew Hay, eighth earl of Erroll. 


@@@@@


doc= 25614


Sinclair, George, fifth earl of Caithness (1566/7-1643), nobleman, was the son of John Sinclair, master of Caithness (died 1575), and Lady Jean or Janet Hepburn, only daughter of Patrick Hepburn, third earl of Bothwell (c.1512-1556), and widow of John Stewart (c.1531-1563), and was half-brother of Francis Stewart, first earl of Bothwell (d. 1612). His father, imprisoned at Castle Girnigoe on the advice of his grandfather George Sinclair, fourth earl of Caithness, died there in 1575, after seven years of 'famine and vermine' (Gordon, 164; Calder, 105). After succeeding to his grandfather's title in 1582, Caithness was, according to one source, known as Wicked Earl George, and he lived up to this by murdering his father's gaolers, Ingram and David Sinclair, shooting the former in the head and killing the latter with his sword. 
Caithness suffered a diminution of his influence in 1584 when, through George Gordon, sixth earl of Huntly, his office of justiciary of Caithness was reduced. He had his grandfather's 'hatred towards the house of Sutherland' (Gordon, 179), and the earls of Sutherland and Caithness were often called to Elgin where, in the presence of Huntly, 'hereditary judge and arbitrator of all debates and controversies' (ibid., 200), they would make bonds and be reconciled, but never for very long. On 29 July 1585 Caithness married Lady Jean, only sister of Huntly and daughter of George Gordon, fifth earl of Huntly (died 1576), and his wife, Lady Anne Hamilton. Caithness received a remission under the great seal for the murders of a David Hume and of the Sinclairs, but in 1594 or 1595 he was revealed to be one of those nobles of Roman Catholic sympathies who had entered a bond with his rebellious stepbrother Bothwell. 
In 1606 Caithness and Sutherland were among a number of nobles suspected of popery, and ordered to confine themselves within the bounds of certain towns and to sign an assurance to keep the peace under pain of rebellion. Caithness then, having mistreated the earl of Orkney's servants, fell into a dispute with him, which came to the attention of the king and the privy council. Under caution of 10,000 marks he was compelled to sign another assurance of peaceable behaviour in 1608 to last until 1610. The two earls were reconciled, and Caithness finally bound himself in future to allow a free and safe passage to all the king's subjects through Caithness to and from Orkney. 
On 12 November 1612 Caithness was appointed to the commission of the peace and in the following year recommended himself to the privy council by delivering up his kinsman Lord Maxwell, who had taken refuge at Castle Sinclair. On 26 May 1614 he received a commission for the pursuit, capture, and punishment of pirates infesting the north-east coast between Peterhead and Shetland, and on 12 July was named one of a commission for the apprehension of 'jesuits, seminary priests' and 'verie dangerous pestis in this commonvele' who frequently visited Caithness ('Reg. PCS', 10.241). On 6 August he was commissioned as king's lieutenant for the suppression of the rebellion of the earl of Orkney, detained in Dumbarton Castle, and his illegitimate son Robert Stewart, who had fortified himself in Kirkwall and openly defied the king's authority. With 100 men he compelled the Kirkwall garrison to surrender, and received a warrant to destroy the castle. 
Later in 1614 Caithness visited the king in London and received remission of his past crimes and a yearly pension of 1000 crowns. He was also made a privy councillor in Scotland. However, all these signs of favour were lost within a short time. In 1615 the corn of Lord Forbes's tenants in Sansett was burnt, and, to remove any suspicion from himself, Caithness spread the rumour that the Mackays had committed the offence. After complaints were made to the privy council Caithness was said to have caused the witnesses to be drowned so that no actual proof could be found against him. Lord Forbes demanded a reset of the incendiaries, and on 11 June Caithness was denounced for not exhibiting them, while later in the year he was denounced a rebel for his 'papistical' opinions. He obtained a remission by resigning the sheriffdom of Caithness and by forfeiting his yearly pension. 
Eventually Caithness got hopelessly into debt and on 1 June 1619 was denounced for trying to defy outlawry. On 25 October 1620 his eldest son, William Sinclair, Lord Berriedale, who had been imprisoned for some of his father's debts, complained to the privy council, and Caithness was obliged to mortgage several portions of his estate to satisfy creditors. After various ineffectual moves against him in 1621, on 19 December 1622 a commission was issued to Sir Robert Gordon to reduce him to obedience. When negotiation failed, Gordon was given on 10 June 1623 sanction to use 'fire and sword' and 'all the lieges of the north' were commanded to assist ('Reg. PCS', 13.281, 283). Caithness fled, first to Orkney and then to Shetland. On 30 March 1624 a proclamation warned all mariners against helping him back to Orkney or Caithness, but on 10 June the proclamation against intercommuning with him was cancelled, and a new protection was granted to him to go to Edinburgh and deal with his creditors. Reaching agreement with them, he obtained an extension of his protection and an allowance from his estates for the remaining years of his life. 
It is accepted that with his wife, Countess Jean, Caithness had three sons and one daughter: his son William was living in 1623, but died before his father; Francis married Elizabeth, daughter of Andrew Fraser, Lord Fraser; John, a lieutenant-colonel in Swedish service, was killed in the Palatinate in 1632; Elizabeth, his daughter, in 1621 married George Lindsay, fourteenth earl of Crawford. He also had two illegitimate sons: Francis, ancestor of the Sinclairs of Sterkoke, and John. He may also have had an illegitimate daughter who married the laird of Dunn. When Caithness died in February 1643 he was succeeded by his great-grandson George Sinclair (died 1676), William's grandson, who, childless and deep in debt, in 1672 made over the lands and titles to Sir John Campbell of Glenorchy. 


@@@@@


doc= 25615


Sinclair, George (d. 1696?), natural philosopher, of unknown birth and parentage, described himself as from the Lothians and possessed property in Haddington, Haddingtonshire. He and his brother John were probably educated at the University of St Andrews. John was for a time regent at St Leonard's College, St Andrews, then from 1647 minister of Ormiston in Haddingtonshire; he left in 1683 for Delft, in the Low Countries, where he died in 1687. 
George Sinclair taught at St Andrews before moving to Glasgow in 1655, where he was admitted master and appointed professor of philosophy. In 1656 he gave 100 marks towards the building of Glasgow College, and lent a larger sum which was repaid with interest in 1659. During this time the marquess of Argyll obtained rights to the wreck of the Spanish vessel 'Florida', which had foundered in Tobermory Bay after the defeat of the Armada. Sinclair, 'almost the only cultivator of physics during this age' as Stevenson generously described him (Stevenson, xi), assisted when a diving bell was brought to the site, possibly by Archibald Millar of Greenock. Several pieces of ordnance were recovered before stormy weather ended the exercise. Sinclair subsequently devised his own diving bell and described its use in a stylized classical debate in his 'Ars nova et magna gravitatis et levitatis' (1669, pp. 220-44). 
Sinclair's four-volume 'Tyrocinia mathematica' (1661) was prepared for his students; it was reissued in London as 'Principia mathematica' in 1672. When the professors were required to submit to the episcopal form of government, Sinclair, who had been allocated a university house in 1665, declined to do so and resigned his post in 1667. He then found employment in the mines of southern Scotland as a mineral surveyor and engineer, and was the first to suggest a practical method of draining coalmines. He was also among the first in Britain to measure heights and mine depths with a barometer: using a sealed tube and a bottle of mercury he assembled the barometer to take readings at the base and summit of a hill, first on Hartfell, near Moffat, and later on Arthur's Seat, in Edinburgh, and at Leadhills and Tinto. His 'Hydrostaticks' (1672) was a gallimaufry of practical and theoretical physics, drawing on his experiences with the diving bell and barometer. His claims to innovation were immediately attacked in a series of anonymous letters ridiculing the novelty of his ideas, which had long been taught at St Andrews. A long satirical attack, under a pseudonym but known to be from James Gregory, professor of mathematics at St Andrews, was published in 1672. Sinclair penned a riposte, the manuscript of which he presented to the University of Glasgow in 1692. 
In 1673-4 Sinclair, then a schoolmaster at Leith, was employed by the Edinburgh magistrates to superintend the bringing of the city's first supply of drinking-water from Comiston, for which he was paid $66 13's'. 4died His 'Hydrostaticks' was reissued as 'Natural Philosophy...' in 1683, now dedicated to the provost and council of Edinburgh. His 'Principles of Astronomy and Navigation' followed in 1688. Besides his practical science, Sinclair was interested in aspects of religion, which led him to issue under his own name 'Truth's Victory over Error', a translation of the Latin lectures on the confession of faith delivered by David Dickson, professor of divinity at Glasgow. The book for which Sinclair was best-known was 'Satan's Invisible World Discovered' (1685), a compilation of numerous 'authentic' manifestations of witches, devils, spirits, and other apparitions, in which he defended the popular belief in witchcraft as essential to orthodoxy. 
Following the revolution of 1688 Sinclair declared himself willing to swear the oath of allegiance. He was recalled to the University of Glasgow as a regent, and in 1692 became professor of mathematics and experimental philosophy. He is last heard of in April 1696 and probably died later that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 25616


Sinclair, George (1786-1834), gardener and writer on horticulture, was born at Mellerstain in Berwickshire into a Scottish family which had long been devoted to gardening. His father, George Sinclair (1750-1833), gardener to the Hon. G. Baillie of Jerviswood, was in his earlier years considered to be one of the best horticulturists in the south of Scotland, and his uncle was superintendent of the grounds, gardens, and farms at Bonnington, near Lanark. Sinclair was himself originally in the service of the Gordon family, and became, on the duke's marriage with Lady Georgiana Gordon in 1803, gardener to John Russell, sixth duke of Bedford, at Woburn Abbey. 
On instructions from the duke, and under the direction of Sir Humphry Davy, Sinclair conducted an extensive series of experiments on the nutritive qualities of various types of animal fodder. The results were published in 1816 in 'Hortus gramineus Woburnensis', an expensive folio volume containing dried specimens of the grasses. These were replaced by plates in cheaper editions published in 1825, 1826, and 1829, and in a German translation of 1826. The nutritional value of the grasses described in 'Hortus' was assessed through comparison of their water-soluble constituents, the theory being that these formed the bulk of the feeding material. As a comparative guide the technique did have some value. 
After having superintended the gardens at Woburn Abbey for seventeen years, Sinclair left the service of the duke and entered into partnership about 1824 with Cormack & Son, nurserymen and seedsmen of New Cross. On 26 March 1824 he became a fellow of the Linnean Society, and he was also a fellow of the Horticultural Society and of other botanical organizations. He remained a partner of the firm of seedsmen for some nine or ten years, until his death at New Cross Nursery, Deptford, on 13 March 1834. In addition to producing the 'Hortus gramineus' and a subsequent 'Hortus ericaeus Woburnensis' (1825), Sinclair edited the 'Hortus Cantabrigiensis' of James Donn, the 'Essay on Weeds' of Benjamin Holdich (1825), and a 'Treatise on Useful and Ornamental Planting', published by the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. 


@@@@@


doc= 25617


Sinclair, Sir George, second baronet (1790-1868), politician, was the eldest son of Sir John Sinclair, first baronet (1754-1835), of Ulbster, Caithness, and his second wife, Diana (1769-1845), daughter of Alexander MacDonald, first Baron MacDonald of Sleat. He was born in Edinburgh on 28 August 1790; he was the brother of John Sinclair (1797-1875), William Sinclair (1804-1878), and Catherine Sinclair. He was sent to Harrow School, aged ten; Byron and Robert Peel were among his contemporaries. Byron described Sinclair as 'the prodigy of our schooldays. He made exercises for half the school (literally), verses at will, and themes without it. He was a friend of mine, and in the same remove.' He had, his father's biographer notes, 'a touch of the prig' (Mitchison, 99). Sinclair left Harrow at sixteen, and went to Gottingen University. He was arrested as a spy near Jena, and was brought before Napoleon, who examined him and ordered his release; Sinclair issued a privately printed 'Narrative' of the interview in 1826. He returned to Britain, and in 1811 succeeded his father as MP for Caithness, which he represented at intervals for many years, sitting as an independent whig. In 1812 he presented a Caithness petition for parliamentary reform, and supported Catholic relief; he was out of the Commons from 1812 to 1818. In 1816 he married, on 1 May, Lady Catherine Camilla, daughter of John Manners of Grantham Grange, and his wife, Louisa, daughter of Sir William Manners, first baronet. They had three sons, and three daughters. Sinclair and his family made their home in Thurso Castle, which he modernized. 
Sinclair was re-elected to parliament in 1818. In the Commons he formed a close friendship with Joseph Hume and Sir Francis Burdett. He strenuously advocated Catholic emancipation and the emancipation of the West Indian slaves, and he severely criticized the pension list. While a member of parliament Sinclair found time to attend lectures at Edinburgh University on chemistry, anatomy, and botany. He took a great interest in the misfortunes of Charles X, and had numerous interviews with the royal exile when he was resident in Holyrood. One of these he described in a racy pamphlet, 'Comme Charles X' (1848). In 1831 he was again elected for Caithness and sat continuously until 1841, being re-elected in 1833, 1835, and 1837. He became known for his religion. He supported the 'Reform Bill' of 1832, and in the same year he attracted public attention by refusing William IV's invitation to dine with him on a Sunday. In 1835 he joined the new 'constitutional' party of Lord Stanley and Sir James Graham, who had seceded in 1834 from the government of Earl Grey. On 21 December 1835 he succeeded his father as second baronet. He took an active part, as chairman of Burdett's committee, in the famous Westminster election of 1837; a writer in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' characterized him as 'one of the manliest and most uncompromising of the constitutional members of the House of Commons; a friend to the church, the king, and the people'. He retired from parliament in 1841. 
Sinclair was a faithful supporter of the anti-patronage society with reference to the Church of Scotland; he afterwards joined the Free Church. His last years were passed in seclusion at Thurso Castle and Torquay. His wife died on 17 March 1863. He spent the winter of 1867 at Cannes, and died in Edinburgh on 23 October 1868; he was buried at Harold's Tower, Thurso. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his eldest son, John George Tollemache Sinclair, who also held the Caithness seat. 
Sinclair, as heir to the family estates, was placed in difficulty by his father's bankruptcy, but even so $2000 p.a. was settled on him. He was a voluminous writer for the press and author of many pamphlets. His earliest work, 'Travels in Germany' in two volumes, describing his visits to the continent, was printed for private circulation; only one copy is known to exist. He published a number of pamphlets on popery and on the Disruption, and also 'Observations on the New Scottish Poor Law' (1849). 


@@@@@


doc= 25618


Sir Henry Sinclair (d. c.1330) swore fealty to Edward I in 1292, but, like his father, joined the patriotic side in 1296 and was duly captured at Dunbar. In 1299 he was released from St Briavels Castle, as part of a prisoner exchange, in return for Sir William Fitzwarin. In September 1305 he was appointed sheriff of Lanark, an office which had until then been held by the earl of Carrick. On 22 June 1306, together with Sir Robert Keith and Sir Adam Gordon, both prominent members of the patriotic government before 1304, he acted as surety for the good behaviour of William Lamberton, bishop of St Andrews. Between 1308 and 1309 Sinclair was paid by the English government for keeping the truce with the king of Scots and 'for going to Robert Bruce on behalf of the King's council in those parts' (TNA: PRO, E101/373/24, f. 41). But he had joined Bruce's side by October 1313 and perhaps fought at Bannockburn in 1314. He sealed the declaration of Arbroath in 1320 with the designation of 'panetarius'. In 1328 he was granted a pension of 40 merks to himself and his heirs, until lands of that value could be granted; this was perhaps the repayment of a loan made to the king. He died about 1330. Sir Henry married Alicia Fenton and they had a son, another Sir William Sinclair ['see under 'Sinclair family], who was killed in 1330 in Spain with Sir James Douglas who carried King Robert's heart. 


@@@@@


doc= 25619


Henry Sinclair (d. 1400), as the eldest of Malise's grandsons from his second marriage, did obtain a share of the lands. However, Alexander's government was apparently unsatisfactory, and in 1379, following a meeting with Haakon VI ('r'. 1363-80) at Marstrand in Norway, Sinclair was granted the title of earl of Orkney, as well, probably, as royal lands and rights. A letter survives, issued by the new earl in September 1379, in which he announces that he has promised the Norwegian king not to alienate or pledge any lands or islands of his earldom of Orkney. 
The Sinclairs were entering an unfamiliar, essentially Scandinavian, world, but they took on the challenges of their new position with energy and determination. A struggle for power with Malise Sperra, another of Henry Sinclair's cousins, who had probably been given authority in Shetland by Haakon VI, lasted until 1391, when Malise was killed. Sinclair may have had more widespread ambitions in the north Atlantic. The interpretation of the so-called Zeno narrative, relating the voyages in Atlantic waters of two Venetian sailors in association with a local magnate called Zichmni, who is usually identified with Henry Sinclair, is fraught with difficulties and continues to generate controversy. Yet none of the adventures described is impossible, and it is not unlikely that this ambitious and successful overlord of an island dominion might wish to retrace the steps of his Norse ancestors across the northern seas, even though there is no supporting evidence to confirm either the apparent attempt to dominate the Faeroe Islands, or the supposed discovery of North America. 
Although the Zeno narrative gives the clear impression that Zichmni was at enmity with the king of Norway, it is known that Earl Henry was in Norway or Denmark in 1389 to acknowledge Erik of Pomerania's claim to the Norwegian throne, and there survives a letter of Richard II of England to Queen Margrethe of Denmark, regent of Norway (written between February 1389 and April 1391) showing that Henry enjoyed cordial relations with her. This letter refers in particular to Earl Henry's complaints to Queen Margrethe of 'the intolerable and extreme hurt committed against him' by Richard's subjects (Perroy, no. 130). The king comments that the same earl and his subjects, together with French and Scots, have notoriously made war against him, and that he does not therefore feel inclined to give the safe conduct to him which Queen Margret is requesting. However, by 1392 Richard had granted a safe conduct to the earl and twenty-four companions to pass through his dominions -- presumably to go to Denmark on some royal business. Where exactly the earl had been making war against King Richard is not clear, whether within his own territories or elsewhere, but his reference to attacks against him by English subjects is likely to be connected with fishing disputes in water round the northern isles. 
It is this situation of violence in northern waters which was probably responsible for the death of Earl Henry, which is reported in the fifteenth-century 'Genealogy' of the earls as having taken place in Orkney, when 'for the defence of the cuntrie [he] was sclane thair crowellie be his innimiis' ('Genealogy', 81). This may have been the occasion in 1400 when an English fleet landed in the Orkneys, as recorded by Walsingham. The first earl had at least ten children with his wife, Jean, daughter of Walter Haliburton of Dirleton. However, according to the 'Genealogy', at his death Henry's mother, Isabella, ensconced herself in Orkney, outliving all her sisters and their children, and (perhaps in accordance with Norwegian legal custom) succeeding to nearly all their lands. She held these until her grandson succeeded her, about 1416, which might help to explain why the second earl appears to have had very little to do with his northern earldom. It is doubtful whether this 


@@@@@


doc= 25620


Henry Sinclair (c.1375-1420) ever visited his Norwegian overlord to receive a grant of the earldom title, although he used it from the date of his succession to his father. 
Another reason for the second earl's distancing himself from his Orcadian inheritance must have been his involvement in the affairs of central and southern Scotland, presumably from Roslin, where he probably resided during the 1390s. He fought at Homildon Hill on 14 September 1402, and was one of the numerous prisoners taken by the victorious English, but must have been quickly ransomed. The battle created a power vacuum in Lothian, which Sinclair, thanks both to his landed interests in the region and to his marriage to Egidia Douglas, a granddaughter of Robert II, aspired to fill. He became very close to the court, witnessing important royal charters from August 1404, and in 1405 leading Scottish troops to Berwick in support of the earl of Northumberland, in revolt against Henry IV. He became one of the guardians of Robert III's young son, Prince James, and was on his way to France with the prince when both were captured by English pirates on 22 March 1406. 
Thereafter Sinclair was in and out of custody for some years. But his recorded movements during the decade after 1406 were all southwards; in 1416, for instance, he had a safe conduct with twenty persons to come from and return to Scotland. However, from this same year there is also evidence that he as well as his brother John were becoming more active in the administration of the northern isles, suggesting that their grandmother Isabella died about this time. In a letter of 11 December 1416, Henry Sinclair, styling himself earl of Orkney, appointed his brother-in-law, David Menzies of Weem, to be tutor testamentary of his son and heir, William, and other children, and governor of all the earl's men, lands, rents, possessions, and goods in Orkney until his heirs attained their majority. Then eighteen months later, on 21 September 1418, John Sinclair received the very important grant of Shetland as a life fief with all royal rights, which made him the 'foud' (royal official, from Danish 'foged') and provides the first clear evidence that the Sinclair family had acquired control of Shetland. Earl Henry was one of the magnates who died of 'le qwhew', possibly whooping cough, recorded by Bower in 1420. 
Although the second Earl Henry's son and heir, 


@@@@@


doc= 25621


Sinclair, Henry (1507/8-1565), judge and bishop of Ross, was the son of Sir Oliver Sinclair of Roslin, Edinburghshire (died 1513), and his second wife, Isabella Livingstone, and grandson of William Sinclair, third earl of Orkney and first earl of Caithness (b. after 1407, d. 1480) ['see under 'Sinclair family (per. 1280-c.1500)]. Nothing is known of his early life except for his studies at St Andrews, where he matriculated at St Leonard's College in 1524 and determined in 1524-5. As his areas of study were theology, philosophy, and letters, he very probably went on to take a law degree elsewhere and practised law in some way. On 13 November 1537, on the king's instructions, he was sworn in as an ordinary lord of session. In February 1539 he acted as a commissioner of parliament. 
Sinclair sat as a spiritual lord and for the next ten years appears in public records merely as holding various benefices. He is possibly the Henry Sinclair found briefly about this time as official of Moray diocese or the treasurer of Brechin diocese of that name. More probably he is the Master Henry Sinclair presented to the parsonage of Polwarth in 1538. In December 1538, when presented by the archbishop to be parson of Glasgow (Glasgow 'primo', which constituted a cathedral prebend), he was styled cleric of St Andrews diocese. He had been allowed by Rome to remain without taking holy orders for some years, and in April 1539 the king supported his petition for a further respite of seven years and permission to hold three incompatible benefices. There was a legal difficulty over the Glasgow prebend, as a previous incumbent had resigned it in favour of an Italian cardinal who refused to give up his right. The king, for two years and more, insisted to Rome on Sinclair's appointment being accepted. Sinclair resigned the prebend in 1550 but held the liferent until his death. 
In February 1541 the king nominated Sinclair to Rome as perpetual commendator of Kilwinning Abbey (the nomination was repeated in December) and on 1 May 1542 bulls for this were issued, but with the incumbent abbot retaining his position and the abbatial revenues. Sinclair was in practical terms his successor. He received a five-year tack (lease) of Kilwinning in 1545 and became commendator in reality on the abbot's death in 1547 or 1548. He was also in 1548 tacksman of Currie church, near Edinburgh. Then, in April 1550, on resigning Kilwinning in exchange for the office of dean in Glasgow diocese, he received a pension for life from Kilwinning revenues. 
In August 1550 Sinclair was an envoy to England and Flanders to deal with terms of peace, and in 1554 he is recorded as returning from France, though it is not known how long he had been abroad. Then, perhaps in 1555 and certainly in May 1559, he was one of those empowered to treat with English commissioners over terms of peace. 
Having been for some years vice-president of the college of justice, in 1558 Sinclair succeeded Bishop Robert Reid as its president. Then in November that year, following the death of Bishop Panter of Ross, the crown granted to Sinclair the temporalities of the diocese and nominated him to Rome as bishop, but his provision was delayed as Rome at this juncture wanted a guarantee of orthodoxy. Eventually, by bulls of 2 June 1561, he was provided to Ross, with the stipulation that he should resign as dean of Glasgow. After Queen Mary's return to Scotland he sat on the privy council, and he remained in Edinburgh, where the college of justice sat. In 1563 and early 1564 he was involved in arrangements for administering justice throughout the land. Already in September 1562, however, his health was poor, and in July 1563 he went to France for treatment. He travelled through England to France at some point in 1564, was operated on for a kidney stone in September, and died in Paris on 1 or 2 January 1565, in his fifty-eighth year. 
A man of distinguished ancestry, Sinclair was related to royal Stewarts and noble Hamiltons, with whom he had property dealings. He also purchased the lands of Stevinstoun, Haddingtonshire, which he granted shortly after, in 1537, to his brother James. To all appearances he made very competent use of church revenues to support himself. As late as 1563, being a lord of session, he remained exempt from the one-third tax on his income from Ross diocese, the Glasgow deanship, and his Kilwinning pension. His career was in the law, with church benefices providing the necessary financial support. In 1549, although a commendator-abbot, he did not attend the provincial church council. 
In addition to his many years on the bench, Sinclair made permanent contributions to Scots law. In 1554 he was responsible for introducing improvements in the course of justice, while 'Sinclair's practicks', a compilation of judgments and precedents, proved invaluable (though the credit for this, formerly given to him, is probably due rather to his brother John Sinclair (c.1510-1566), whose career closely paralleled his own). Henry Sinclair was also known for his erudition beyond the law, and indeed the remains of his quite outstanding library show the width of his scholarly interests, embracing Renaissance humanism as well as scholastic theology. Alongside printed texts by classical authors including Plutarch, Cicero, and Horace, the collection contained the writings of such contemporary luminaries as Erasmus, Paolo Giovio, and Juan Luis Vives. 
There can be little doubt that Sinclair remained a Catholic after the Reformation Parliament of 1560, though he has been described as indifferent in matters of church allegiance. All indications point to this: his support of Catholics, his relations with France, the hostility of Thomas Randolph (English agent in Scotland), the outright condemnations by John Knox. This commitment to Catholicism, however, was combined with his upholding of the law and his outstanding integrity as a senior judge, exemplified in his personal conduct. This explains his advice that laws against Catholic practice had to be observed, his declaring Knox to be innocent of a treasonable act, his refusal in 1562 to meet the Jesuit Nicholas Goudanus on a clandestine mission to Scotland, his supplying bread and wine (in his capacity of life-renter of Glasgow parsonage) for protestant communion. Even Randolph praised his public-spiritedness. A contemporary writer declared that never before had two such honest and erudite men as Henry and John Sinclair come from the same family. 


@@@@@


doc= 25622


Sinclair, James (1687/8-1762), army officer, was the second son of Henry Sinclair or St Clair, tenth Lord Sinclair ('bap'. 1660, died 1723), and Barbara ('b'. 1660), daughter of Sir James Cockburn, first baronet. James Sinclair's father was the only Scottish peer to object to the act settling the crown on William and Mary, and his elder brother, John Sinclair, master of Sinclair, styled eleventh Lord Sinclair (bap. 1683, d. 1750), remained true to the Jacobite cause. 
James (then a child of about six) was entered in the army in 1694 with an ensign's commission, dated 22 May 1694, in the Royal Scots regiment (1st foot). His active service began during Marlborough's campaigns in Flanders. He was promoted captain in the Royal Scots on 2 November 1708. After the treaty of Utrecht in 1713 he was placed on half pay. However, on 19 May 1714 he joined the 3rd regiment of guards (the Scots guards) with the rank of captain and lieutenant-colonel. In 1722 he was made a brevet colonel (a non-regimental rank) and second major in the Scots guards; he became first major in 1723. He was colonel of the 22nd foot (later the Cheshire regiment) between 1722 and 1734, and was made lieutenant-governor of Berwick and Holy Island in 1733. 
Sinclair married Janet (1698-1766), youngest daughter of Sir David Dalrymple of Hailes, first baronet, and widow of Sir John Baird of Newbyth, second baronet. In 1735 he purchased the estates of Roslin Castle, Ravenscraig, and Dysart, which he entailed on the male heirs of his sisters, he and his wife having had no children. In 1723 he had inherited the family estates on the death of his father; however, when his brother obtained an act allowing him to inherit property, Sinclair conveyed the estate to him. On 26 June 1737 Sinclair transferred to the colonelcy of his old regiment, the Royal Scots, which he held until his death. On 2 July 1739 he was promoted brigadier-general; he was named major-general on 15 August 1741 and lieutenant-general and quartermaster-general of the British forces in Flanders on 4 June 1745. 
In 1746 he was appointed to command an expedition against Quebec, but the fleet's having been delayed in the channel too long to permit its sailing that season it was decided to mount a diversionary attack on the coast of Brittany. Port Lorient, where the French East India Company had its depot of stores and ships, was chosen as the target. With reinforcements bringing the number of troops to 8000 men (many were, however, suffering from sickness due to the crowded conditions on the transports) and a detachment of artillery the expedition sailed from Portsmouth on 15 September 1746. A successful landing was made at Quimperle. Upon reaching Lorient, Sinclair rejected an offer of surrender on good terms from the French governor and a siege was begun. The French had been able to bring reinforcements into the town and the attempt to bring about a surrender by force of arms was soon abandoned. The expeditionary force was re-embarked for England on 17 October, having destroyed the forts in Quiberon Bay. 
The comparative failure of the Lorient expedition has not been treated lightly by later historians. Fortescue wrote: 'Anything more pointless than the design or more contemptible than the execution of this project can hardly be conceived, for it simply employed regiments which were badly needed in Flanders and America in useless operations, which did not amount to a diversion (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 2.156)' Among his contemporaries Sinclair's conduct was defended by a kinsman, the historian David Hume, who was employed as his secretary and held a commission as judge-advocate to the forces on the expedition. Regarding the expedition Hume stated that Sinclair, 'neither proposed it, nor planned it, nor approved it, nor answered for its success' (Hill Burton, 1.455). When Sinclair informed the authorities at Whitehall of his complete lack of knowledge of the French coast or the disposition of French forces he was answered that 'nothing was expected of him but to land where he pleased in France, to produce an alarm and to return safe' (ibid., 440). According to Hume, Sinclair's rejection of the French governor's terms for surrender was based upon the need to make a show of force together with poor advice from his artillery officers regarding the likelihood of a short and successful siege. In fact it soon proved the case that the town could not be invested from all sides, the French were able to bring in reinforcements of militia, and the French batteries proved too strong. Hume thus concluded: 'By his prudence in timely desisting from a fruitless enterprise the misfortune was confined merely to a disappointment without loss or dishonour to British arms' (ibid., 455). 
Sinclair endured criticism, but his career did not suffer greatly from the Lorient expedition. In 1748 he was sent on a military mission to the courts of Vienna and Turin. His official purpose was to continue the work of his predecessor, Lieutenant-General Thomas Wentworth, in restoring Austro-Sardinian relations. His secret purpose was to discover whether the smaller allies in receipt of British subsidies were maintaining their quota of troops in the field. Once again David Hume was employed as his secretary and aide-de-camp and left a series of letters to his brother describing the lands through which they travelled. 
In 1750 Sinclair's elder brother John died without leaving issue and the family estates once more passed into his possession; and but for the attainder of 1715 he would have become the twelfth Lord Sinclair. By now he was reputed to be a man of considerable wealth, garnered in the main from his collieries. Between 1756 and 1758 the Scottish architect George Paterson (died 1789) designed a new building for Sinclair at Dysart House in Fife. Sinclair sat for many years in the House of Commons and, though the brother of a Jacobite, supported successive whig administrations as an ally of Archibald Campbell, earl of Ilay and later third duke of Argyll. From 1722 to 1734 he sat for the Dysart burghs and from 1736 to 1747 he represented Sutherland. He was defeated at Sutherland in 1747 following criticism of the Lorient expedition, but thereafter sat once again for Dysart burghs until 1754. From then until 1762 he represented Fife. He was the political patron of his nephew Sir Henry Erskine, whom he made heir to his unentailed estates. 
William Pitt the elder pressed Sinclair's claims to succeed as commander-in-chief of the armed forces in 1760, which the duke of Newcastle rejected on grounds of age and deafness, as well as Sinclair's friendship with John Stuart, third earl of Bute, then in opposition. However, following the accession of Bute's pupil, George III, on 10 March 1761, he was promoted general. He died at Dysart House on 30 November 1762, aged seventy-four, being then governor of Cork and a major-general on the staff in Ireland. He was survived by his wife, Janet, who died at Greek Street, in Soho, on 8 January 1766. As the Sinclairs had no children, and the family's entailed estates passed to his nephew Colonel James Paterson Sinclair, the claim to the title of Lord Sinclair passed to a kinsman, Charles St Clair. 


@@@@@


doc= 25623


Sinclair, James, fourteenth earl of Caithness (1821-1881), scientific dilettante, son of Alexander Sinclair, thirteenth earl (1790-1855), and Frances Harriet (died 1854), daughter and coheir of William Leigh of Rushall Hall, Staffordshire, dean of Hereford, was born on 16 December 1821 at Edinburgh. In 1856-8 and 1859-66 he was a lord-in-waiting, and he sat as a Scottish representative peer from 1858 to 1866 when he was raised to the peerage of the United Kingdom as Baron Barrogill of Barrogill Castle, Caithness. His first wife, whom he married on 17 July 1847, was Louisa Georgina, youngest daughter and coheir of Sir George Richard Phillips, bt, of Weston, Warwickshire. She died on 31 July 1870, having had a son and a daughter. He married, secondly, on 6 March 1872, Marie ['see below'], widow of General the count of Medina Pomar, and daughter of Don Jose de Mariategui, from which marriage there were no children. 
Caithness devoted much time to scientific pursuits, was a fellow of the Royal Society of London, and the inventor of a steam carriage for travelling on macadamized roads, a gravitating compass which came into general use, and a tape-loom which enabled a weaver to stop one shuttle without interrupting the action of the others. In 1877 he published 'Lectures on Popular and Scientific Subjects', which achieved some modest success. He died suddenly, from a heart attack in the Fifth Avenue Hotel, New York, on 28 March 1881, and was buried in the Chapel Royal, Holyroodhouse, Edinburgh. 




@@@@@


doc= 25624


Sinclair, John (c.1510-1566), lawyer and jurist, was the fourth son of Sir Oliver Sinclair of Roslin (died 1513) and Isabella Livingstone, his wife. He was a younger brother of Henry Sinclair (1507/8-1565), bishop of Ross: 'Sik tua honest and cunning letterit men as thir wes will be seindill or rather never seen to come of ane hous and familie of this realme' (Thomson, 98). He is probably identifiable with the person of the same name who graduated at St Andrews in 1527, and was certainly at the University of Paris, where he graduated in arts in 1531 and was proctor of the German nation the following year. He returned to Scotland, and was incorporated at St Andrews as licentiate in civil law in 1537. He lectured in canon law at King's College, Aberdeen, holding the parsonage of Snow (St Mary 'ad nives'), the prebend of the canonist, as well as the vicarage of Alford. 
Sinclair was admitted as a senator of the college of justice and ordinary lord of session on 23 April 1540, but retained his Aberdeen prebend until 1542, when he was presented by James V to the deanery of the collegiate church of Restalrig. Despite resigning the benefice in the curia in favour of James Lauder in April 1547, he retained possession of it for the rest of his life. He began to preach at Restalrig in 1558 when, according to John Knox, many thought him 'not far from the Kingdom of God', but, as the friars and other Catholics began to whisper against him, not only 'gainsaid he the doctrine of justification and of prayer which before he had taught, but also he set up and maintained the Papistry to the utmost prick' ('Knox's History', 1.131). Knox includes him among those instigating the French to send an army against the Scottish protestants, who in December 1560 ordered the kirk of Restalrig to be cast down as a monument of idolatry. 
Depositions sent to Rome in 1565 in support of his becoming a bishop declared that Sinclair had suffered for his defence of the Catholic church, had been impoverished by the heretics, and obliged to flee to France. There he resumed his connection with the University of Paris, acquiring a doctorate in civil and canon law. Although granted a safe conduct to pass through England in September 1564, he remained in France until after his brother's death on 1 or 2 January 1565, when he took back to Scotland the materials which Henry had gathered for a continuation of Boece's history. He officiated at the marriage of Mary and Darnley at Holyrood on 29 July 1565 and was nominated by the queen to the bishopric of Brechin. Although he received papal provision on 7 September 1565, it is doubtful whether he was ever consecrated. Having resumed his judicial duties on 10 April 1565, he sat as president of the college of justice in succession to his brother from November onwards. He died at the house of James Mosman in Forrester's Wynd, Edinburgh, on 9 April 1566, following an attack of fever. Knox, who dismissed him as 'blind of one eye in the body but of both in his soul', nevertheless acknowledged that he and Henry were 'learned in the laws' ('Knox's History', 1.112-13, 2.185). 
Another contemporary noted Sinclair's 'singulare intelligence had in theologie, and in lykwis the laws' (Thomson, 98). Authorship of 'Sinclair's Practicks' is attributed by some manuscripts to Henry Sinclair but internal evidence points strongly towards John. The earliest collection of decisions of the court of session (1540-49), it is written in an idiosyncratic mixture of Scots and Latin, with some personal comments by the author. His main concern is the relationship between Scots law and the 'jus commune', for which he draws upon a wide range of civilian and canonist authorities. The work is said to resemble similar contemporary European collections. The text survives in a number of defective late sixteenth- and seventeenth-century copies but remains unpublished. 


@@@@@


doc= 25625


Sinclair, John, ninth Lord Sinclair (bap. 1610, d. 1674), nobleman and army officer, was baptized at Edinburgh on 29 October 1610, the son of Patrick, eighth Lord Sinclair (died 'c'.1615), and his wife, Margaret, a daughter of Sir John Cockburn of Ormiston. Sinclair had a charter for the baronies of Ravenscraig and Newburgh and, with his wife, for other lands in Fife granted to him on his marriage to Mary Wemyss (died 1657), daughter of John, first earl of Wemyss, in July 1631. They had one daughter, Catherine. During Charles I's 1633 visit to Scotland for his coronation Sinclair attended the first of the fifteen parliaments he would attend. A supporter of the emerging covenanter movement, he attended the general assembly of 1638 and was on the committee there which judged on the legitimacy of the general assemblies held from 1606 to 1618. In 1639 he accompanied Balmerino's horse and the earls of Home, Lothian, and Rothes, and Lord Yester in the forced removal of the regalia from the king's house at Dalkeith to Edinburgh. His association with the earl of Rothes continued in their shared command of a regiment, with Lord Lindsay, in the first bishops' war. 
In the second bishops' war Sinclair had sole command of a regiment of foot raised from Caithness and Orkney in September 1640 which occupied Aberdeen from the end of October until February 1642. Sinclair himself did not remain with his troops throughout, but made repeated trips to Edinburgh because of his duties in parliament, and on the committee of estates and the privy council, to both of which he had been appointed in 1641. His troops' behaviour while occupying Aberdeen was considered unreasonable by the inhabitants, but that does not necessarily reflect directly on Sinclair, who castigated his lieutenant-colonel for executing a deserter, and discharged the lieutenant-colonel for cruelty in 1641. 
In early 1642 Sinclair's regiment was one of those sent to Ulster as part of the Scottish government's response to the 1641 rising. It crossed to Ireland from April 1642 and garrisoned Newry. Sinclair served in Ireland from August 1642 until 1643, when he fell ill. Suffering hardships his regiment abandoned Ireland in February 1644, creating disturbances on its arrival in Scotland. It was attached to the army sent to England that year to fulfil Scotland's military obligations to the English parliament. Again Sinclair was not with his regiment for the whole of their service. He was absent at the beginning of their participation in England, acting as colonel of the College of Justice regiment of foot. In 1645 Sinclair was again on the committee of estates. In England he appears to have made contact with agents of Charles I and, in 1646, was called before the estates to answer charges that he had been communicating with royalists, but was acquitted of the accusations. His regiment returned to Scotland in 1647 and, though there was talk of returning it to Ireland, it was disbanded after further disturbances. 
Sinclair was a supporter of the engagement agreed between Charles I and some of the more accommodating of the covenanters in December 1647. He raised a horse troop for the engager army which entered England in the king's cause in 1648 and served with it himself. With the collapse of the engager cause and the execution of Charles I, Sinclair, at some point, joined the exiled Charles II at The Hague. He advised Charles to launch his cause in Ireland rather than treat with the kirk party in power in Edinburgh by 1650. When Charles in fact accepted Scottish offers of support, Sinclair was among those barred from returning to Scotland or having access to the king until he reconciled himself to the Scottish parliament. In defiance of this Sinclair accompanied Charles II's invasion of England in 1651, and was taken prisoner at the battle of Worcester. He was imprisoned, first in the Tower, and later in Windsor Castle, until the Restoration, though account was taken of his ill health, and he was granted liberty at various times. He was also granted a pension in 1656 because of poverty demonstrated by the fact that his forfeited estates had been valued at $906 17's'. 4died, and his debts at $1660 10's'. 6died In 1654, while imprisoned, he was excluded from pardon under the 'Act of Grace and Pardon'. In 1659 he was again granted liberty for illness. 
After the Restoration, Sinclair was released from his imprisonment, and he was made a privy councillor again in 1661. In that same year parliament made him a commissioner for excise for Fife and Kinross. The last fifteen years of his life were uneventful in comparison to the two preceding decades, and there is little note of him after 1661. In 1666 his daughter, Catherine, who had married John St Clair the younger of Herdmanston, Haddingtonshire, died giving birth to the third of their sons. Their elder son, Henry, succeeded his grandfather as the tenth Lord Sinclair after the ninth lord's death on 10 November 1674 at Edinburgh. He was buried at Greyfriars, Edinburgh, later that month. 


@@@@@


doc= 25626


Sinclair, John, styled eleventh Lord Sinclair (bap. 1683, d. 1750), Jacobite army officer and writer, the eldest son of Henry, tenth Lord Sinclair ('bap'. 1660, died 1723) -- a new creation under the great seal, in June 1677, with the former precedency -- and Barbara Cockburn, daughter of Sir James Cockburn of Cockburn, was baptized on 5 December 1683. Entering the army at an early age, John held a captain-lieutenant's rank in Preston's regiment, under the duke of Marlborough. Having been accused by Ensign Hugh Schaw of cowardice during the battle of Wynendaal, Sinclair and Schaw fought with swords in 1708. Schaw was mortally wounded during the encounter. His brother, Captain Alexander Schaw of the Royals, thereupon asserted that Sinclair had previously protected his breast with paper. Resenting this reflection on his courage and honour, Sinclair encountered Schaw at the head of his regiment and, failing to obtain a denial or apology, shot him dead. It was found that Schaw's hand had been laid on his pistol while Sinclair shot him, and it may have been that Sinclair fired either in self-defence or after due warning, but with 'no seconds at either encounter' (GEC, 'Peerage', 11.744) his fights with the Schaws could hardly be called duels. On his being tried by court martial in the camp on 17 October 1708, his acts were declared to be a breach of the tenth article of war, and he was sentenced to death. Through the duke of Marlborough the case was recommended to the consideration of the queen's privy council, who pronounced the act to be wilful murder; but before the sentence could be carried out Sinclair escaped, probably with Marlborough's connivance, from the camp to the Prussian dominions, and he remained abroad until he received a pardon in 1712. 
In 1708 Sinclair was chosen member of parliament for the county of Fife, but, even if the election had not been declared void by reason of his being the eldest son of a peer, it would have been rendered void by the sentence of death. On his return to Scotland, after receiving pardon, he continued to reside at Dysart, Fife, until he was summoned to join the standard under the earl of Mar in 1715. He obeyed the summons with reluctance, not because of lukewarmness as a Jacobite, for indeed he was a passionate patriot and opponent of union, but because he had little or no faith in Mar's ability. Still, to him belongs the credit of one of the brilliant Jacobite achievements of the campaign. Sinclair learned that a vessel with arms and stores from the castle of Edinburgh, intended for the retainers of the earl of Sutherland in the north of Scotland, had been brought to anchor near Burntisland. He set out from Perth with 400 horse and reached Burntisland at midnight. Without losing a moment, a detachment of his soldiers seized some boats in the harbour, boarded the vessel without resistance, and thus obtained 420 complete stand of arms. However, at the battle of Sheriffmuir his action was not at all in keeping with this daring exploit. In command of the Fife and Aberdeenshire horse, he was attached to the division which advanced towards Dunblane. This division met the left wing of Argyll's army and was victorious; but Sinclair, though he writes in high praise of the incredible vigour and rapidity of the Jacobite attack, himself did nothing to turn it to account. 
On the return of Mar's forces to Perth, Sinclair left the camp and went north to Strathbogie, and thence to Orkney, where he at last found a vessel to take him to the continent. He was associated with the marquess of Huntly's party, which sought to make peace with the government, an action which led to Jacobite scorn for Sinclair: '
The Master with the bully-face, 

And with the coward's heart, man, 

Who never missed, to his disgrace, 

To act the traitor's part, man. 
(Sinclair, xix)' Being attainted for his share in the rising, Sinclair remained abroad until 1726, when he received a pardon as regards his life, but without remission of the other consequences of the attainder. On his return to Scotland he received back the estates at the hands of his younger brother, General James Sinclair, in accordance with the legal formula drawn up to evade the 'consequences of the attainder' (Sinclair, xiii). In 1736 he gained an act of parliament enabling him to inherit property but not the title. He married first, on 16 August 1733, Lady Margaret Stewart, eldest daughter of James, fifth earl of Galloway, and Catherine Montgomerie, dowager of James, fifth earl of Southesk. Lady Margaret died at Edinburgh on 22 July 1747 and was buried at Dysart. On 24 April 1750 he married Amelia (1732-1777), eldest daughter of Lord George Murray and sister of John, third duke of Atholl. Neither marriage produced children. Sinclair died at Dysart on 2 November 1750. 
Sinclair's 'Memoirs of the Rebellion', published by the Roxburghe Club in 1858, are curiously cynical and sarcastic, highly critical of the earl of Mar, graphic and clever, and of great value for the light they throw on the inner history of the Jacobite rising. Sinclair has also been credited with the authorship of 'A True Account of the Proceedings at Perth' (1716), which provided an account of the debates over and decision to end the Jacobite rising; however, Sinclair's authorship is doubtful as he had left the camp before these debates commenced. 


@@@@@


doc= 25627


Sinclair, Sir John, first baronet (1754-1835), agricultural improver, politician, and codifier of 'useful knowledge', was born at Thurso Castle, Caithness, on 10 May 1754, the third but only surviving son of George Sinclair (died 1770) of Ulbster and his wife, Lady Janet Sutherland (1720-1795), sister of the seventeenth earl of Sutherland. Three sisters also survived to adult life. This branch of the Caithness Sinclairs was not in line for the earldom of Caithness, but owned about a quarter of the county, including much of the land that had belonged to the earldom and also much of its feudal superiorities on which voting in county parliamentary elections was based. 
Sinclair was educated at the Edinburgh high school, the universities of Edinburgh (1765-7 and 1768-9) and Glasgow (1767-8), and also as a gentleman-commoner at Trinity College, Oxford (1775-6). He became a member of Lincoln's Inn in 1774, a member of the Faculty of Advocates in 1775, and was called to the English bar in 1782, but he never practised either Scots or English law. 
On 31 August 1770, aged sixteen, he had inherited on his father's death estates in Caithness yielding approximately $3000 a year, and the superiority of Wick and of much of the county. On 26 March 1776 he married Sarah Maitland (died 1785), the daughter of a London merchant, Alexander Maitland, who brought him a dowry of $9000. The marriage produced two daughters. 
Sinclair entered parliament for Caithness at the general election of 1780. Caithness had a parliamentary seat only in alternate elections, a handicap to the prospect of a political career. Sinclair's politics alternated between supporting and advising governments and, when his advice was consistently ignored, moving to independency and trying to organize other independents into a party. He had an exaggerated sense of his own political importance, but since no government could survive without the support of a considerable number of independents, an organizer of such members could affect the outcome of important divisions. 
Sinclair started his political career as a supporter of Lord North's ministry, and brashly offered to second the address at the opening of parliament, an offer tactfully declined. In 1782 he began what was to become a vast list of publications with a book, 'Thoughts on the Naval Strength of the British Empire', and also 'Lucubrations during a Short Recess', the latter a theoretical support of the idea of parliamentary reform which did not confront the electoral system by which he had entered parliament. He followed these with a disorganized collection of Scottish verbal usages, 'Observations on the Scottish Dialect' (1783), the result of studying to speak the English of the English. Altogether Sinclair was to publish massive volumes on agriculture, political economy, and health, as well as over 350 pamphlets and reprints from newspaper articles: the quality of these productions is very varied. 
By the winter of 1782-3 Sinclair was moving to independence and trying to organize other independent MPs in a loose association nicknamed the St Alban's Club because they frequented the St Alban's tavern. In the various divisions which eventually brought down the ministry these men voted in every possible different way, so to call these twenty-three members a club is to overstate their degree of agreement. Under the coalition of Charles Fox and Lord North, which replaced the North ministry, he was able to persuade the government to intervene and dispatch resources valued at $15,000 to the north of Scotland to prevent famine following the failed harvest of 1782. Although he voted for the ministry's 'East India Bill', he became an enthusiastic supporter of the younger Pitt when he became chief minister in 1784, and was involved in Pitt's approaches to past members of the St Alban's Club. He sent a list of forty names to Pitt with advice about negotiating for their support. 
When Pitt dissolved parliament in 1784 Sinclair had to find a seat, since Caithness did not have one. His attempt to use his dominance of Wick to gain the Tain burghs was defeated by Fox. He was allowed by the ministry to purchase a seat in Lostwithiel, one of Lord Edgecumbe's Cornish pocket boroughs, for $3000. Once in parliament he sent the government various letters of unasked-for advice, and on 14 February 1786 was rewarded with a baronetcy with special remainder to his daughters. 
Though he was useful to Pitt at various times, and a nuisance at others, Sinclair never became an intimate. Pitt's style of life was aristocratic and expensive, while Sinclair lived as a family man of middling-rank expenditure, using much of his own resources for public ends. Because of his political career he had to have a house in London, but he soon established a family home in Edinburgh and spent half the year there. His mother lived in his home until her death in 1795. 
Sinclair became increasingly interested in political economy and the financing of government. In 1784 he produced his 'History of the Public Revenue of Great Britain' (2 vols; a further part was added in 1789). This is a useful analysis, once it abandons the medieval period, not only showing financial development but indicating Sinclair's appreciation of the possibilities of government promotion of economic growth. It was unfortunate for Sinclair's political career that he and Pitt had very different ideas of the proper role of government. 
Sinclair's wife died on 15 May 1785, leaving him devastated. He withdrew from politics and considered leaving parliament: he offered to vacate his seat if Pitt needed its vote. To distract himself from loneliness he went abroad, first on a short visit to France, later on a carefully worked out assiduous tour of seven months over northern Europe, timed to fit mostly within the parliamentary recess. Given by Pitt the inexplicit title of commercial negotiator to the northern courts, he went through Denmark, Sweden, Russia, Poland, Prussia, Austria, Hanover, the Netherlands, Flanders, and France, meeting the leading political figures and making links that he was to use later with the network of scientific contacts built up by Sir Joseph Banks. 
The tour developed Sinclair's enthusiasm for 'useful knowledge' in a wide range of topics. He published papers on the political systems of Denmark, Sweden, and Russia. He was interested in the financial organization of the governments of Russia and Prussia. His permanent interest in the development of agriculture and fisheries dates from this journey, and the journey provided him with a network of correspondents with similar interests. In the long run his new concern for economic development was to widen the gulf between his conception of the function of government and that of Pitt. 
Sinclair distanced himself from Pitt over the latter's support for the impeachment of Warren Hastings, with whom he subsequently became friendly, but this was not regarded as a serious deviation by the minister. It was the regency crisis of 1788 that produced the breach. Sinclair again attempted to organize a group of independents, which called itself 'armed neutrality'. It included Lord Moira, Bishop Watson of Llandaff, and Henry Adam. 
On 6 March 1788 Sinclair married Lady Diana MacDonald (1769-1845), daughter of Lord MacDonald of Sleat and possessor of a dowry of $4000. Her family were government supporters, but the restitution of family life for Sinclair weakened his political significance, since it removed him to Edinburgh for half the year. Lady Diana provided him with seven sons and a further six daughters, almost all of whom survived him. Their third son was John Sinclair (1797-1875), author, among other works, of a biography of his father. 
The response of the ministry to Sinclair's desertion over the regency issue was an attempt by Henry Dundas to unseat him for Caithness in the general election of 1789 and add that county to the long list of seats controlled by Dundas. For once Dundas failed, and Sinclair continued certain of a seat at every other election. His good relations with Dundas were quickly re-established, and in 1792 Sinclair promised Dundas the vote of Wick in the Tain burghs election. The men were natural allies: both saw ways in which government action could benefit Scotland, and were ready to end the legislative inertia which had hung over the country since the Union. 
The 1790s were Sinclair's happiest and most creative years. In 1790, as an elder in the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, he launched the idea of a survey of the state of the country, which was to become the twenty-one volumes of the 'Statistical Account of Scotland'. It is a detailed account of the geography, history, economy, and society of every parish. He had gathered the word 'statistical' from Germany on his northern tour. He used it to mean information which was desirable for legislative purposes, though not necessarily numerical in form. 'Statistics', he said, 'should reveal the quantum of happiness in a population', as well as 'the means of further improvement'. He saw the proper function of government as intervention or legislative action to promote welfare and economic growth, and recognized that detailed information was necessary for such intervention to be effective. He was not the first to move towards the collecting of detailed local information. In particular, for Scotland Sir Robert Sibbald had made various county reports; Sir James Steuart had recommended such action. Alexander Webster's Scottish census of 1755 was an interpretation of the same idea, as were Macfarlane's 'Geographical Collections' of the early eighteenth century. There were the various parish studies made by the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland and published in 1782. The survey idea was taken further in the census of 1801. The important features of Sinclair's survey were its comprehensive range of topics and the fact that it was fully carried through. All 936 parishes were reported on in the following nine years, and the book as a whole is the most frequently quoted of all Scottish historical sources. There have been two subsequent 'statistical accounts' of Scotland, compiled in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; they follow the original one and are useful bodies of local information, but they lack the variety and buoyancy of tone of Sinclair's. 
Sinclair sent out a basic questionnaire of 160 items in May 1790: he followed this up with a further six queries almost at once, and another five in June 1791, these last covering education which he had, surprisingly, ignored in 1790. Altogether the questions covered geography, history, wages, prices, population, industry, agriculture, fisheries, farm size, the progress of enclosure, poor relief, and the general topic of the manners of the people. Some replies came in very promptly and Sinclair sent copies of the four of these he judged best as samples to the ministers who had not yet responded. Initially he had intended to summarize all the reports, but appreciating their variety and individual flavour he instead put in some minor editorial work, including Webster's figures for the population of the parishes in 1755, tidied up the format, and published the whole. 
By June 1792, 525 parish reports had come in and were being edited in Sinclair's London house by a team of young men for publication by William Creech in Edinburgh. It was the extraction of the remaining 400-odd that was the great achievement. In all Sinclair sent out over twenty circulars to goad the clergy into action. Some delayed for laziness, some out of a desire for a full report, some out of general disapproval; Sinclair wrote the report for Thurso himself, his publisher, Creech, covered Edinburgh, and the final twelve recalcitrant parishes were covered by the editorial staff. As an incentive for the clergy he had obtained through Dundas in 1792 a gift from the crown of $2000 for the Society for the Benefit of the Sons of the Clergy, and the profits from the sales of the 'Statistical Account' and the copyright were also given to the society. The whole project had depended for its feasibility on the privilege of franking mail enjoyed by Sinclair as a member of parliament. 
The practical effects of the whole venture cannot be decisively identified but it seems likely that it influenced legislation. Dundas at the heart of government was prepared to note needs, and some complaints made by many reports were met. These were the burden of the tax on coals carried coastwise, the high level of some multures, and the need for increases in the stipends of schoolmasters and ministers. On all these there was legislative change between 1793 and 1810. 
The 'Statistical Account' might have been expected to use all Sinclair's energies, but at the same time he was involved in meetings of the Edinburgh Highland Society, from which in 1791 he launched the British Wool Society. This was aimed at developing a better breed of sheep than was usually to be found in the highlands, but Sinclair also wanted to encourage the creation of small sheep farms which would prevent the displacement of the existing tenantry. His new society did not succeed in influencing farming in England, where the breeds and problems were completely different from those in Scotland, and in Scotland the society fell into inanition because Sinclair's agricultural interest had a new focus. 
Sinclair wanted an institution such as the board of agriculture as a means of publicizing agricultural developments, advising the government, spreading information, conducting experiments, and promoting legislation. In the minor liquidity crisis of 1793, caused by the start of the war with France, he used his links with bankers to expedite the transfer of $70,000 of small exchequer bills to firms in the north to stave off bankruptcies. In return Pitt agreed to the setting up of the board on an annual grant of $3000, with Sinclair as its unpaid president and Arthur Young as salaried secretary. 
The board was nearer to a voluntary society than to a branch of government. Its main element was a core of thirty-one 'ordinary' members chosen from both houses of parliament, who included the leading agricultural publicists. These formed a closed corporation electing their own successors. To these were added 'official' members, nineteen in all, including the great officers of state, the leading bishops, the mayor of London, and the president of the Royal Society. The board met once a week during the parliamentary session and Sinclair conducted business in its name for the rest of the year. The meetings were like those of a debating society; practical decisions were made by the president. To make the grant go as far as possible Sinclair kept the board in his own London house. 
Sinclair had hoped that the board would conduct a survey of England similar to the 'Statistical Account', but this was frustrated by the archbishop of Canterbury, who would not allow an investigation which would lay emphasis on the topic of tithe. Instead Sinclair set on foot a series of county reports for the whole of Britain, the 'General Views' series. These surveys were conducted and published in two groups, between 1794 and 1798, and between 1805 and 1814. The first series was hurriedly drawn up and received much criticism, but the second set is a valuable source. 
The board also promoted experimental work on field drainage, advertised the merits of the plans of Macadam for road making, gave advice -- largely ignored -- on the management of the food shortage of 1795, conducted experiments on farm equipment, and in 1796 unsuccessfully tried to get a bill through parliament for the general enclosure of English agriculture, instead of the dilatory and expensive system of single acts for each parish. On this last topic the board found itself in opposition to powerful interests, particularly those of lawyers and the Church of England, and achieved only a simplification in the procedure for enclosure acts in the 'Enclosure Consolidation Act' of 1801. 
Sinclair found time in 1794 to raise a regiment of fencibles from Caithness with himself as colonel; this was a voluntary militia for home defence, called the Rothesay and Caithness fencibles -- Rothesay being a tribute to the prince of Wales's Scottish title. He spent six months in camp with the men, a period which gave him a long-term interest in public health. 
In 1795 Sinclair was close enough to the ministers to suggest the loyalty loan, a relatively unremunerative patriotic investment. It did not bring him close enough to government to help with his election problem in 1796, when Caithness did not send. He stood unsuccessfully for Orkney, and in January 1797 had to buy himself in for Petersfield. By this time the military, naval, and financial situation of the country appeared disastrous, and in February the government's heavy borrowing led the Bank of England to suspend cash payments. Both as a political economist and as a politician Sinclair was appalled and moved into opposition, where he attempted to organize a peace party. In 1798 he publicized his views in two pamphlets, 'Letters on the State of the Nation' and 'Hints on the Present Alarming Crisis'. He also opposed Pitt's new scheme of taxation, the increase of the assessed taxes, the conversion of the land tax, and, later, the creation of income tax, and issued a pamphlet calling for a 'broad-bottomed' ministry. 'The Times' called him 'the Great Scotch Rat', and Pitt called up the official members to get him deposed from the presidency of the board in 1798. Under its new president the board acquired its own house, but had, as a result, less money for projects, and in any case took some time to recover from Sinclair's inroads on its future grant. It became largely inactive. 
For a time Sinclair continued to oppose the government, but he came to support the ministry of Addington over the making of the short-lived peace of Amiens. He also supported the union with Ireland. He had strengthened his electoral position by buying up some more superiorities. 
Sinclair was also carrying through reorganization on his Caithness estate, and his dismissal from the presidency of the board led to closer attention to Scottish affairs, including the business of the Highland Society. He carried through the division of joint farms, the enclosure of fields, the creation of new small farms, and the setting up of model villages. He bought the estate of Langwell and attempted on part of it to turn moorland into good pasture. The experiment was a failure, but his general management of the estate sent up its value. He was an enthusiast for the spread of the Cheviot sheep, which became the common flock in the highlands. He held to most of the standard views of improving landowners -- their enthusiasm for enclosure, for instance, hostility to commons, and readiness to experiment with new crops. He planned the new town of Thurso, an attractive Georgian suburb. He also persuaded the British Fisheries Society to make Wick into one of its stations, with special arrangements for the availability of customs-free salt. Wick was enlarged by the building of a suburb and proved the only lasting success of the society. As with most improvers many of his experiments were expensive failures, but he was unworried by his considerable level of debt because he had been promised a legacy of $61,000 by an investor in the racket of the debts of the nawab of Arcot. 
Sinclair proposed a scheme to codify existing useful knowledge under five heads: agriculture, health, political economy, finance, and religion. In 1807 he produced a massive four-volume 'Code of Health', and in 1817 a 'Code of Agriculture'. The former book cannot be considered a success, since he failed to take advantage of statistical methods in analysing the impact of disease, but the latter was used as a convenient textbook. He never completed the other planned codes. An effective publication of this period was his 'Account of the Systems of Husbandry Adopted in the More Improved Districts of Scotland' of 1812. 
The relative inactivity of the board of agriculture when Sinclair was not directing it drove him to reconsider his political position. In 1804, when the war with France restarted, he used his influence with other independents to support Pitt's bid for a return to power. He also voted against the impeachment of Dundas. In 1806 he was allowed re-election as president of the board. At once he set to work to spend the money it had accumulated by inactivity, producing the second set of county reports in the series of 'General Views', and a further 'General Report on the Agricultural State and Political Circumstances of Scotland' (5 vols., 1804), a very miscellaneous collection of information which he put together himself. He made several unsuccessful attempts at a general enclosure act. When in 1813 he finally retired from the presidency the board had used up all available money and had to suspend publications for a while, but he had not run it into debt or confused its finances with his own. In the post-war years the board became a mouthpiece for the agricultural and protectionist lobby until the government stopped its grant in 1821, thereby killing it. 
In the unexpected general election of 1806 Sinclair found himself without a seat. His attempt to get that of the Tain burghs would have succeeded only if the Kirkwall representative had failed to get to the meeting. The unexpected dissolution of the next year restored him to the Caithness seat. In this parliament he supported the Portland ministry, except for its ban on distilling. When Spencer Perceval took over he gave him steady support, and in return was made a member of the privy council in 1810. 
In that same year Sinclair gave useful support to the government over the bullion issue, the debate which arose from the publication of the report on the currency position by a committee dominated by monetarist economists. This report pointed out that since the suspension of cash payments by the Bank of England the pound had depreciated by some 15 per cent against gold. The committee held that it should be brought back to its former position in two years, ignoring the discomfort and distress that drastic deflation would bring. Perceval declared that this was impossible if the war was to continue. Sinclair wrote a hurried and bulky pamphlet, 'Observations on the Report of the Bullion Committee' (1810), and followed this up with another, 'Cursory Hints Regarding Paper Currency'. Having in 1797 opposed the use of paper money he had now come to appreciate its flexibility and convenience, and was groping his way towards the concept of the need for an expanded circulation in an expanded economy. The resulting controversy with the authors of the bullion report, who were backed by Ricardo, was inconclusive, since neither side could appreciate the point of view of the other: in this the 'Quarterly Review' (1810 and 1811) contributed an entirely personal attack on Sinclair, ranging up and down his writings for unguarded remarks. The post-war deflation showed that Sinclair's recognition of the discomfort it caused was sound. 
Sinclair's political life ended abruptly in 1811 because he faced bankruptcy. The legacy on the debts of the nawab was disallowed by the Carnatic commissioners. Sinclair had been spending beyond his income for many years to support his various enterprises. He claimed that he had spent over $1000 a year on the affairs of the board; like many agricultural improvers he had been over-optimistic on the returns from development, and keeping up houses in both Edinburgh and London had been costly. He sold off the lands and superiorities that he had bought and put the core of his inherited estate into the hands of trustees. Perceval granted him a government sinecure, the cashiership of excise for Scotland, recently reduced in value to $2000 a year, and incompatible with a seat in parliament. So he stood down from Caithness and secured the seat instead for his eldest son, George. In 1815, in an effort to raise further funds, he opened a public subscription to himself: it brought in very little, and led to much mockery and a breach with his old friend and ally Sir Joseph Banks. 
By then Sinclair had given up living in two houses. At first he brought the family to London but in 1819 he returned it to Edinburgh. He continued to write on various topics. In 1807 he had brought out the Highland Society's edition of the poems attributed to Ossian, with a dissertation on their authenticity, an unfortunate excursion into unfamiliar territory which reveals that he did not fully understand the reasons for the scepticism held by many about the authorship. His last important work was the 'Analysis of the 'Statistical Account'', long promised but produced only in 1825. In 1831 he published his 'Correspondence', two volumes of letters sent to him by various people of note in Britain and abroad. He was still working on his proposed codes of religion and of political economy, but now in old age he could not keep to his earlier schedule of twelve hours' work a day and had to settle for six. Many of his friends had advised him against writing the 'Code of religion'. 
Sinclair was a tall but spare man: he stood 6 feet 2 inches and weighed 111/2 stone. His physique is clearly shown in the full-length portrait by Raeburn in the National Gallery of Scotland. He was a man of iron constitution and enormous energy, public spirit, and optimism; abstemious and conscientious, with wide interests in practical matters, he had a very limited sense of humour and a total lack of self-criticism. All through his life he had shown a remarkable talent for hard and sustained work. He had strong family affection and trained his children to act as his secretaries. He engaged in many philanthropic activities and promoted the careers of numerous young men. He was religious in a conventional sense, but immune to the trend towards evangelicalism, except that under its influence he held daily family prayers. His genuine philanthropy is shown in his concern that improvement should not mean the displacement of the small tenantry, and a long letter that he wrote to Dundas in 1804, urging him to do something to reduce highland emigration, may have contributed to the government's programme of highland roads. The village of Hallkirk which he planned was an attempt to create smallholdings. His public spirit is shown in his willingness to serve on tiring committees which might promote development, and in his readiness to use his own money for public ends. 
Sinclair died peacefully at his home, 133 George Street, Edinburgh, on 21 December 1835 after a short illness. He was buried on 30 December in Holyroodhouse; Lady Diana, who survived him until 22 April 1845, lies beside him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25628


Sinclair, John (1791-1857), singer, was born on 9 December 1791 near Edinburgh, the son of David Sinclair, a cotton spinner. He joined the band of Campbell of Shawfield's regiment as a clarinettist, and went to Aberdeen. There he taught singing until he was able to buy his discharge. As he liked the stage and had a fine tenor voice, he went to London to look for work, and on 7 September 1810 appeared at the Haymarket Theatre as Captain Cheerly in William Shield's 'Lock and Key'. After this he became a pupil of Thomas Welsh and was engaged for seven years at Covent Garden, where he created the tenor roles in Henry Bishop's 'Guy Mannering' (1816) and 'The Slave' (1816), John Davy's 'Rob Roy' (1818), and other works. He was the first to sing Bishop's song 'The Pilgrim of Love', and he was very popular as Apollo in 'Midas'. In 1816 Sinclair married a daughter of Captain Norton. One of his daughters, Caroline, was married to the American tragedian Edwin Forrest. 
Sinclair went to Paris in 1819 and had lessons from Giulio Pellegrini, then travelled to Milan, where he studied with Davidde Banderali at the conservatory. In May 1821 he sang to Rossini at Naples, and had some lessons from him, and in 1822-3 appeared in opera at Pisa, Bologna, Genoa, Modena, Florence, and elsewhere. At Venice in 1823 Rossini wrote for him the part of Idreno in 'Semiramide'. 
By the time Sinclair returned from Italy to England, his voice had greatly improved, and he appeared at Covent Garden on 19 November 1823 as Prince Orlando in T. J. Dibdin's comic opera 'The Cabinet'. From 1828 to 1829 he was engaged at the Adelphi, and from 1829 to 1830 at Drury Lane, and after a short visit to America in 1830-1, where he sang in New York and Philadelphia, he retired to Margate. He was director of the Tivoli Gardens there until his death, in Margate, on 23 September 1857. 
Sinclair's voice was a pure tenor, with an unusually fine falsetto, but his style was a little effeminate, and he was known as 'the leddies' bonnie Sinclair'. He was one of the earliest performers of Scottish song. He composed a number of songs, including 'Come, sit ye doon', 'The Bonnie Breast Knots', 'The Mountain Maid', 'Johnny Sands', and others in the Scottish style, all of which were very popular. 


@@@@@


doc= 25629


Sinclair, John (1797-1875), Church of England clergyman, third son of Sir John Sinclair, first baronet (1754-1835), and his second wife, Diana (1769-1845), daughter of the first Baron MacDonald of Sleat, was born on 20 August 1797, and educated at Edinburgh University. In 1815 he entered Pembroke College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1819 and MA in 1822. At Edinburgh he was a founder member of the Rhetorical Society, and at Oxford he helped to lay the foundations of the Union Society. Ordained deacon in 1819 and priest in 1820, he worked at Sutterby, Lincolnshire, at Hackney, and at Edinburgh, before being appointed in 1839 to the secretaryship of the National Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor. As secretary, and subsequently treasurer, of the society he exercised a powerful influence on its activities for more than thirty years, waging a vigorous campaign against government attempts to encroach on the church's monopoly of education. In 1839 he organized the society's successful resistance to the proposal by Sir James Kay-Shuttleworth to give the privy council the right to appoint school inspectors. His policy of non-co-operation forced the government's hand, and produced the concordat of 1840 whereby such appointments were made subject to approval by the provincial archbishops. Bishop Blomfield unreservedly supported Sinclair, whom he made in 1839 one of his examining chaplains, in 1843 vicar of Kensington, and in 1844 archdeacon of Middlesex. He held the last two offices until the end of his life. At Kensington he subdivided the huge parish, and built the new parish church of St Mary Abbots. He acted also as secretary of the Diocesan Church Building Society, which became, under Bishop Tait, the Bishop of London's Fund. Sinclair died, unmarried, at the vicarage in Kensington, after a short illness, on 22 May 1875. He was the author of a biography of his father (1837), and of many minor religious works. 


@@@@@


doc= 25630


Sinclair, Oliver (d. in or before 1576), courtier, was a younger son of Sir Oliver Sinclair ('fl'. 1476-1523) of Roslin and one of his three wives. He had at least seven brothers, of whom William succeeded to the family estates, while Henry Sinclair (1507/8-1565) became a judge and bishop of Ross and John Sinclair a judge, and also one sister. The younger Oliver made a career as a 'familiar servant' of James V, being first recorded as receiving his livery in 1536, when he accompanied the king to France, apparently keeping the accounts of expenditure from the royal purse. In June 1537 his services were rewarded with the barony of Pitcairn in Perthshire; contemporary documents often refer to him under this territorial designation, although in January 1545 he sold Pitcairn to Henry Drummond of Riccarton. In 1538 he became a royal cup-bearer, and with the treasurer, James Kirkcaldy of Grange, was jointly granted the ward of the earldom of Caithness, the third earl, Oliver's first cousin, having been killed at the battle of Summerdale in 1529. He acquired the barony of Whitekirk in Haddingtonshire from Holyrood Abbey in 1539; the old barn adjacent to the parish church may incorporate the remains of Sinclair's tower house. In 1540 he was granted Tantallon Castle in feu-ferme. Tantallon, an important castle on the coast of Haddingtonshire, was a seat of the earl of Angus, who was then in exile in England. Sinclair was required to supervise building works there. In 1541 he was given a three-year tack of Orkney and Shetland, extended to 1547, along with the keeping of Kirkwall Castle and justiciary powers. 
Sinclair is represented in contemporary accounts as a great favourite of James V, one of a small group (which included some senior churchmen) responsible for persuading the king not to meet Henry VIII at York in the summer of 1541, but rather to pursue war against England. Scottish historians writing from a protestant viewpoint see him as an unworthy councillor, pursuing policies in support of the old church. When war with England came late in 1542, Sinclair was apparently appointed to lead the army which came to grief at Solway Moss. Sinclair's role as army commander has given rise to some controversy, and it has been argued that he was not leader at all, but that the story of his appointment was developed after the battle to blacken James's character and discredit ecclesiastical influence on royal policies. There are only one or two indications that Sinclair had previously acted in a military capacity on the king's behalf, taking the English prisoners captured at the battle of Hadden Rigg near Kelso (24 August 1542) back to Edinburgh, and going to Hume Castle in Berwickshire in November 1542, apparently to discuss military tactics with the gentlemen of the region. It was certainly unusual for anyone but a magnate, or the king himself, to lead an army, but Sinclair is described as chief captain of the army, and as having lost the king's banner at Solway Moss, in a letter which was written only a few days after the battle by Sir George Douglas, the earl of Angus's younger brother. Early Scottish historians are consistent in their agreement. Contemporary English sources, notably the full report given by Sir William Musgrave, who was one of the English leaders, do not comment on the Scottish command structure. It is true that the imperial and Venetian ambassadors in London believed that Lord Maxwell was commander, but the latter, at least, were keen to present Maxwell as a heretic deliberately engineering the defeat out of spite against the policies of a government led by Cardinal Beaton. 
It is clear that James V did not intend to lead his forces into England, and therefore command must have been delegated to others. If Sir George Douglas is to be believed about Sinclair having the king's banner at Solway Moss, this must be seen as a sign that he was in overall charge of the men there, even if Maxwell was more experienced and on home territory as warden of the Scottish west march. The Scottish forces called out in late November for a raid against the English, perhaps 14,000 men in all, were not marshalled as a single army. On the evidence of the reports of English spies, the Scots had two armies in the field, and it was probably only one of these -- the smaller of the two -- which advanced into England on 24 November. They were caught at Solway Moss, just inside Cumberland, by an English force about 2000-3000 strong, and were soundly beaten. Sinclair himself was taken prisoner, as were his brothers Alexander and James and a number of Scottish nobles, including the earls of Glencairn and Cassillis and lords Maxwell, Somerville, and Oliphant. As with many battles, accounts of what happened are rather confused, but perhaps the most plausible explanation is that the Scots allowed themselves to be manoeuvred by the English light horse into a tight space flanked by marshy ground and with the River Esk behind them. 
Contemporary English accounts, though jubilant about the outcome of the engagement, do not make much of the disparity in size between the opposing armies, as they surely would have done had it been notable. From their point of view it was fitting revenge for the earlier Scottish victory at Hadden Rigg, not a turning point or major achievement. Scottish historians have accused the Scottish nobles at Solway Moss of giving up without a fight, since they were so disgusted at Sinclair's appointment over them, but the report by Sir William Musgrave specifically states that Lord Maxwell with many other noblemen and courtiers fought valiantly. Once captured, Maxwell requested permission to speak with Sinclair -- was this a subordinate looking for a lead from his superior? James V is said to have been devastated by Sinclair's capture but did not live to receive a firsthand report from him on the debacle, dying before Sinclair was released from captivity early in 1543. 
Sinclair seems to have played little part in national affairs for the rest of his life, though he is referred to as involved in border skirmishing in 1543, and seems to have remained on good terms with Cardinal Beaton, receiving a charter from him in 1546. Sinclair married twice. His first wife, apparently married by 1542, was Katherine Bellenden, sister of Sir Thomas Bellenden of Auchnoull and previously the wife of Adam Hopper, provost of Edinburgh, and of Francis Bothwell, provost of Edinburgh and lord of session. They had three children, Henry, who succeeded to Whitekirk, Oliver, and Isabella. Katherine had died by January 1568, and Sinclair later married Beatrice Rollo or Rollock, probably a daughter of Robert Rollo of Duncrub. He also had a natural son named James, who was legitimated in January 1539. Sinclair was presumably dead by 20 April 1576, when Beatrice was granted the life rent of the mains of Whitekirk with the advice of the curators of her stepson Henry. 


@@@@@


doc= 25631


Sinclair, Sir Robert, of Stevenson, third baronet, Lord Stevenson (1643-1713), politician, was born on 15 October 1643, the younger son of Mr John Sinclair, fiar of Stevenson, Haddingtonshire, and Isabel, daughter of Robert Boyd, sixth Lord Boyd. He succeeded his grandfather and his elder brother John as third baronet on 5 July 1652. His lands of Stevenson were ratified to him by parliament on 4 June 1663, and he obtained a further charter of the lands of Carfrae, Haddingtonshire, on 28 June 1670. 
Sinclair was one of the counsel for the defence at the trial of the marquess of Argyll in 1661. He was appointed a commissioner of excise and a justice of the peace for Haddingtonshire on 1 March 1670. In the same year he seems to have aspired to the office of lord advocate, but in this hope he was disappointed. On 29 July 1680 Sinclair was 'pannelled' and rebuked before the privy council 'for seditiously and factiously opposing, at least obstructing his Majesty's service in putting the act of Privy Council to execution for levying 5,500 men out of the militia' (Lauder, 1.111). He was a commissioner of supply for Haddingtonshire in 1678, 1685, 1689, 1690, and 1704. 
At the revolution Sinclair represented Haddington constabulary in the convention of estates and subsequent parliament, serving in this capacity from 1689 to 1702. In March 1689 he subscribed both the act declaring the convention to be a free and lawful meeting of the estates, and the letter of congratulation to King William. He was appointed to a number of parliamentary committees, and appears to have regularly attended, apparently supporting Melville's party in its struggle with the 'Club' (Melville, 194, 202). On 7 December 1689 he was appointed sheriff of Haddingtonshire, a privy councillor in May following, and one of the lords of exchequer. He was also named a lord of session as Lord Stevenson, but through his 'uncommon modesty' (Brunton and Haig, 441), he never took his seat, although he remained some years in the nomination, and at his final resignation of this office was succeeded by Sir William Hamilton of Whitelaw, on 29 December 1693. On 17 July 1695 he was granted the right to hold two yearly fairs and a weekly market at Pencaitland Wester. Following the accession of Queen Anne, in 1703 he was again nominated a privy councillor. 
Stevenson was twice married: first, at the palace of Holyroodhouse, on 10 September 1663, to Lady Helen, daughter of John Lindsay, seventeenth earl of Crawford, with whom he had six sons and three daughters, and second, to Anne, daughter of Sir William Scott of Ardross, widow of Sir Daniel Carmichael of Mauldslie; they had no children. His daughter Margaret married Robert Dundas, second Lord Arniston, and was mother and grandmother to two successive lord presidents of the court of session who bore that title. Stevenson died in July 1713, and was succeeded by his son Sir John, as fourth baronet, his testament being confirmed at Edinburgh in December. 


@@@@@


doc= 25632


Sinclair, Sir William (d. 1299x1303), baron, was descended from the Anglo-Norman William de Sancto Claro, who received the barony of Roslin from David I. His father, another William, died about 1270 and either he or his son was sheriff of Haddington in 1264 and of Linlithgow and Edinburgh in 1266. In 1279 and 1281 the younger Sinclair was described as guardian of Alexander, prince of Scotland (died 1284), and in 1284 he attended the meeting which accepted Margaret, the Maid of Norway, as heir presumptive should Alexander die without male heirs. Shortly afterwards he was sent to France with two other ambassadors to find a new wife for the king, choosing Yolande of Dreux. Sir William was also given custody of the royal castles of Dumfries and Edinburgh; these many positions of responsibility suggest that he was indeed 'closer to Alexander III than any other Scot' (Duncan, 588). 
After King Alexander's death Sir William served the guardians as sheriff of Dumfries and justiciar of Galloway and attended the parliament at Birgham in 1290 which arranged for the marriage of the Maid of Norway with Edward I's eldest son. After Margaret's death, Sir William supported John de Balliol's claim to the throne of Scotland, acting as one of his auditors; he was present at all the main events of the Great Cause, attesting King John's fealty to Edward I on 20 November 1292. But despite receiving a grant of lands worth 100 merks per annum, Sir William took part in depriving King John of power at a parliament held at Stirling in 1295; he was probably one of the governing council of twelve then appointed. 
On the outbreak of war in 1296, Sir William was captured with other members of the Scottish nobility at Dunbar, and was imprisoned in Gloucester Castle. Although his son Henry was released in a prisoner exchange in 1299, Sir William was not set free; however, he escaped some time before 1302, since Walter Beauchamp, who died in that year, was posthumously pardoned for failing to stop him. This suggests that Sinclair had refused to perform homage to Edward I, which would undoubtedly have been a condition for release. There is no mention of him thereafter and he probably died between 1300 and 1303. He is said to have married Agnes, daughter of Patrick, earl of Dunbar, but this is unlikely. One Amicia was described as his widow as early as 1299; the couple had three sons: Henry, William Sinclair (d. 1337), bishop of Dunkeld, and Gregory; and a daughter, Annabel. 




@@@@@


doc= 25633


Sir William Sinclair (d. 1330), who was slain, possibly with his brother John alongside him, in battle at Tebas de Ardales in Granada on 25 March 1330, as they were accompanying Sir James Douglas to Palestine with the heart of Robert I. William's heir, another William Sinclair (died after 1358), was a minor at his father's death. He married Isabella Strathearn, eldest daughter of the second marriage of Malise, earl of Strathearn, Caithness, and Orkney (died 'c'.1350), whose heir she had been designated in 1344. By 1364 Thomas Sinclair, probably another son of Sir William's, was called 'baillie of the king of Norway' in Kirkwall, when he witnessed a charter of resignation of land to Hugh Ross, with whose family he had come to be closely associated. The Ross family dominated events in the whole north of Scotland, including Orkney, in the 1350s and 1360s, by reason of the vacuum left by the death of Earl Malise 'c'.1350 without a male heir, and it was evidently through Ross patronage, as well as by marriage and inheritance, that the Sinclairs were raised to a position of power in the north. 
Establishing their position in the far north was not a simple matter for the Sinclairs. Earl Malise had had five daughters altogether, from two marriages. The process of dividing his lands among them was a lengthy one, complicated by the differences in inheritance customs in force in Caithness and Orkney. In the former Scottish law prevailed, and though the lands were divided, the title went to the son of Malise's eldest daughter (from his first marriage), Alexander de Ard. In Orkney the earldom rights, though not the title of earl, were also granted to Alexander de Ard, though 


@@@@@


doc= 25634


Sinclair, William (d. 1337), bishop of Dunkeld, was the second son of Sir William Sinclair (d. 1299x1303), lord of Roslin. Sir Henry Sinclair (d. c.1330) ['see under 'Sinclair, Sir William] was his brother. He was an early opponent of the English domination of Scotland, being captured with other members of his family in Dunbar Castle in 1296 and imprisoned for a while thereafter. In 1309, when he was already a canon of Dunkeld, a university graduate, and in possession of the church of Kinross, Sinclair was elected bishop of Dunkeld by the cathedral chapter on the death of Matthew Crambeth and travelled to the curia to seek consecration. The election was disputed by John Leek, a nominee of Edward II, but following unfinished litigation at the curia Leek's promotion to the archbishopric of Dublin left the path open for papal confirmation of Sinclair's election in May 1312. Although he had made his peace with the English king, he seems to have been treated with some suspicion by Edward II, who, in giving him a safe conduct to Berwick in 1313 (presumably on his return from the curia), made it conditional upon his not proceeding further into Scotland, nor communicating with 'the enemy'. 
Sinclair certainly supported Robert I after Bannockburn. He attended several parliaments from 1314 onwards, and the frequency of his appearances in the witness lists of King Robert's 'acta' suggests that he was regarded as a favourite of the king. Bower recounts how Sinclair endeared himself to Robert I by personally leading a small force to defeat an attempted English invasion of Fife. He none the less joined the political majority in 1332, adhering to the pro-Balliol faction. On 24 September 1332 he crowned Edward Balliol at Scone, and he was present at Balliol's parliament of February 1334. Later, however, the English appear again to have mistrusted him, for in 1335-6 he was reported as acting contrary to his allegiance, and therefore, although he witnessed none of David II's royal acts, his loyalties may have reverted to the Bruce kingship before his death on 27 June 1337. Apparently active in his diocese as well as at court, Sinclair is credited with achieving significant building work on his cathedral church, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 25635


William Sinclair, third earl of Orkney and first earl of Caithness (b. after 1407, d. 1480), appears to have been under age for a few years after his father's death, he was none the less proposed as a hostage for James I in 1421, and received safe conducts in 1423 and 1424. He met James I at Berwick on his return to Scotland in spring 1424, and was one of the assize which condemned the duke of Albany and his sons to death in 1425. By then he had put forward his claim to the earldom of Orkney which had been controlled by the bishop, Thomas Tulloch, for a period since his father's death, followed by David Menzies. The remarkable 'Complaint of the people of Orkney' sent to Queen Philippa of Norway in 1425, along with a letter asking that the young earl be appointed their governor, shows clearly that there had been much disturbance in the islands between the followers of David Menzies and of Thomas Sinclair, a member of the earl's family established in Orkney. William was not, however, formally invested as earl by King Erik until 1434. 
By this date Earl William had married Elizabeth Douglas, sister of Archibald Douglas, fifth earl of Douglas (c.1391-1439), and the widow successively of Sir Thomas Stewart (a son of the earl of Mar) and John Stewart, earl of Buchan. A papal dispensation was granted in 1432 licensing them to remain in matrimony. William was involved in protracted legal battles to assure her legal rights in her second husband's property, and in 1437, just after the murder of James I, she was given a grant of the fruits of the lordship of Garioch, as countess of Buchan and of Orkney. At the time her brother was lieutenant-general of the kingdom; this marriage had brought Earl William into close contact with the royal court, and in 1436 he had been chosen, as admiral of the fleet, to accompany the king's daughter on her journey to France for her wedding to the dauphin. 
Sinclair's grip on power strengthened during the minority of James II when his relatives the Douglases were in control, nor did it diminish when the king came of age: he acted as steward at the young king's marriage with Mary of Gueldres in 1449, and in 1454 was appointed chancellor. By this date his wife had died and he had broken with the Douglases. Sinclair was active in the campaign against the Douglas castle of Threave in 1455, and it was to his custody at Roslin that Sir James Hamilton of Cadzow, previously a leading supporter of the Douglases, was entrusted after his submission to James II in the same year. Also in 1455 he was granted the earldom of Caithness, thus succeeding in reuniting the two ancient northern earldoms which had been separated since the death of Earl Malise 'c'.1350: it was made in compensation for the lordship of Nithsdale, to which he had a claim through his mother, Egidia Douglas. His southern seat at Roslin was also being developed in a manner commensurate with the standing of a magnate of Earl William's importance. The remarkable church of St Matthew, probably begun in 1446, and given a collegiate constitution in the early 1450s, though never completed beyond the chancel, bears witness through its exotic and elaborate carved stonework to the wealth and taste of its founder. Roslin itself was erected into a burgh of barony in 1456. 
From this position of power in the kingdom of Scotland, Earl William's star waned rapidly. He ceased to be chancellor in the later months of 1456, and along with Bishop James Kennedy moved to the sidelines as the young James II took a more aggressive line in both internal and external politics. In foreign matters the question of the 'annual' of Norway (the tribute payable by the Scots since 1266 in return for the cession by Norway of the Scottish Western Isles) loomed large, and inevitably meant strained relations with the king of Denmark and Norway (who should have been Earl William's acknowledged overlord for his earldom of Orkney, but there is no evidence that he had gone to do homage since 1434, although he had been summoned in 1446). Negotiations over the 'annual' took place in the late 1450s, and at a meeting of Danish and Scottish envoys in Paris in 1460 it became clear that James aspired to take control of Orkney and Shetland. Earl William, who must have been aware of royal ambitions regarding his earldom, may have attempted to implement delaying tactics. He certainly embarked on an expensive policy of purchasing 'odal' lands (that is, lands not held of any superior lord) in Orkney at this time, apparently with the intention of acquiring an estate which could not be encroached upon by the king. The death of James II in 1460 allowed the earl a breathing space to prepare himself better for the time when royal ambitions would once again focus on his rich northern possessions. Once more he was called upon to guide the kingdom in a period of difficulty, and he acted as one of the seven regents for the minority of James III, which provided him with an excuse for not answering a summons from King Christian ('r'. 1448-81) to attend the Danish court. 
With the rise of the Boyds to power in 1466, Earl William faced once more the prospect of aggressive policies directed by the crown towards the northern isles. The situation of tension over the 'annual' was used as a means to achieve royal ambitions, in the marriage negotiations which were conducted at Copenhagen in the summer of 1468. The earl refused all attempts by King Christian to summon him, undoubtedly realizing that his position as vassal of both kings made it exceedingly difficult for him to be involved in the negotiations. These resulted in the extraordinary acquiescence by King Christian in the demands of the Scottish envoys that Orkney be handed over as part of the dowry of the young Princess Margaret. Desperately short of cash, and desperate for a good marriage for his daughter, he agreed to pledge the islands as part payment for the dowry; in the following year he agreed to pledge Shetland for most of the rest. There is little doubt that his transfer included all of the islands, and not just the royal estates. It remained for the ambitious councillors of James III to prevail upon the earl to give up all his rights in his earldom, which he did in 1470, thus ensuring permanent possessions for the Scottish crown in the islands, even if the Danish monarchy should ever succeed in redeeming them. The impression that the earl came out very badly from the 'excambion' of 1470 is probably unjustified, since in exchange for his right in the earldom he received the very fine royal castle of Ravenscraig in Fife, a number of valuable privileges and confirmations which he must himself have stipulated, and a handsome annual pension of 400 merks. 
From 1470 Earl William was known as earl of Caithness until 1476, when he resigned his earldom in favour of William, the eldest son of his second marriage; thereafter he was only Lord Sinclair. His latter years were occupied with family affairs, although he was named as an envoy to England once or twice. Family matters were problematical, although his second marriage, to Marjory Sutherland, the (possibly illegitimate) daughter of Alexander Sutherland of Dunbeath, was apparently very successful -- at least there were fourteen children of it. Alexander Sutherland's will, dated 1456, may indicate that Earl William's liaison with Marjory had not at that time been regularized, although it later was. Such a marriage, to a daughter of a member of the Sutherland family with no standing in the north, is very surprising. However, Alexander's will indicates that he had been a source of credit for the earl, perhaps to help with the land-purchasing policy in Orkney. The children of this marriage clearly took precedence over Earl William's son of his first marriage, William the Waster, who was not considered suitable to be his father's main heir, although he did succeed in getting possession of the Fife estates after his father's death. 
In 1476 the old earl did his best to ensure that his main estates went to the elder sons of his second marriage, the earldom of Caithness to William, Roslin and Ravenscraig to Oliver. None the less, shortly after his death, in the early months of 1480, there was serious conflict between the half-brothers, attested by several bonds and agreements. A verdict of idiotry was procured against the elder William in 1482, but the latter's interests were well represented by his own eldest son, Henry, who eventually restored the fortunes of the family in the northern isles, based on the 'conquest' estates which were acquired by the last earl of Orkney, and which did not escheat to the crown along with the earldom lands. He achieved this in conjunction with his uncle, Sir David Sinclair of Sumburgh, an illegitimate son of the old earl who pursued a successful career in the service of both the kings of Scots and of Norway, and who built up a personal estate based on the conquest lands in Shetland, which he prevailed upon all his half-brothers and -sisters to resign to him in 1498. The old earl's foresight had ensured the survival of a large and powerful Sinclair presence in Orkney and Shetland, as well as in Caithness. 


@@@@@


doc= 25636


Sinclair, William (1804-1878), Church of England clergyman, the fifth son of Sir John Sinclair, first baronet (1754-1835), of Ulbster, Caithness, and his second wife, Diana MacDonald (1769-1845), daughter of Alexander, first Baron MacDonald of Sleat, was born in Edinburgh on 4 September 1804. He was a brother of Catherine Sinclair (1800-1864), author, of Sir George Sinclair (1790-1868), and of Archdeacon John Sinclair (1797-1875). On leaving Winchester College he obtained, at the age of sixteen, a commission as captain in the Madras cavalry, and distinguished himself by leading a forlorn hope at the siege of Kittur. After returning to England he matriculated from St Mary's Hall, Oxford, in 1832 and graduated BA with fourth-class honours in classics in 1835 and MA in 1837. At Oxford he became president of the union when its members included Archibald Tait, Roundell Palmer, Edward Cardwell, and Robert Lowe. Thomas Jackson, in his preface to the Oxford squib 'Uniomachia: a Greek-Latin Macaronic Poem' (5th edn, 1877), states that while engaged on it he had a visit from Sinclair, his college friend, who, he says, 'entered heartily into the scheme, and composed many of the best lines and notes'. 
Sinclair married in 1837 Helen (died October 1842), daughter of William Ellice and niece of Edward Ellice the elder. In the same year he was ordained, and he became vicar of St George's, Leeds, in 1839, where his liberal evangelical views are said to have brought him into conflict with W. F. Hook, vicar of Leeds. In 1846, following the death of his first wife, he married Sophia Mary Georgiana, daughter of the Revd James Tripp. Parochial work, such as serving on a committee to consider proposals for tackling the unchurched masses, undermined Sinclair's health, and in 1857 he accepted the rectory of Pulborough, Sussex, where he rebuilt the church and rectory, and started schools and chapels in different parts of the parish. In 1874 he was appointed by Dr Durnford to a prebendal stall in Chichester Cathedral. Sinclair published a manual of prayers and edited his brother's archidiaconal charges as well as books on a military theme. He died at Pulborough on 8 July 1878. There were two sons from his first marriage; the two daughters and three sons from his second marriage included William Macdonald Sinclair (1850-1917), archdeacon of London from 1889 to 1911, and John Stewart Sinclair (1853-1919), archdeacon of Cirencester from 1908 to 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 25637


Sindercombe, Miles (d. 1657), parliamentarian soldier and conspirator, was originally from Kent. He was later reported to have been apprenticed to a surgeon near St Catherine's in the Tower, London, before the civil war, but much of his early life is very obscure. At the time of his death his widowed mother, Elizabeth, and his sister Elizabeth Herring were living in London and had visited him in the Tower. Nothing is known of a wife, although an unnamed 'sweetheart' also visited him in the Tower. 
Sindercombe first comes to notice in 1649, when quartermaster in the New Model Army regiment of John Reynolds the agitator. In May he was involved when the regiment mutinied, and he may have been a ringleader for he had already apparently developed pronounced Leveller convictions. When the mutiny was suppressed Sindercombe escaped, perhaps around this time (or later) lodging with a hat seller on London Bridge. He re-emerged as an enlisted soldier in Colonel Matthew Tomlinson's regiment of horse in Scotland. Here he continued his scheming, and took part in the so-called Overton plot in late 1654 to seize control of the army in Scotland from General George Monck. The intrigue fell through, and Monck dismissed Sindercombe in January 1655 as 'a busy and suspicious person, and one who was forward to promote such ill designs' ('DNB'). By the time Monck discovered that Sindercombe had actually been one of the chief organizers of the plot, he had fled to Flanders. 
In exile Sindercombe fell in with his fellow Leveller Edward Sexby, who encouraged his hostility to the protectorate and eventually engaged him to engineer Cromwell's assassination. Using his Spanish and royalist connections, Sexby was able to provide Sindercombe with $500, weapons, and ammunition. Sindercombe's hope was that with Cromwell's removal the nation could return to the pre-1653 government of the Rump Parliament. However, should the assassination lead to the restoration of the monarchy, he hoped that so much disorder would follow that the people, in whom he placed a great deal of faith, would return Charles II once more into exile or deliver him to a well-deserved death on the scaffold. 
On his secret return to England in 1656 Sindercombe first rented a shop in King Street, Westminster, later abandoned as impractical for an assassination attempt. He recruited others into the plot, notably John Cecil, a former trooper, and William Boyes, about whom the plotters knew very little. It was Boyes who assured his companions of royal assistance if and when Cromwell was assassinated, and he may well have been an 'agent provocateur'. The group also managed to recruit one of Cromwell's life guards, John Toope, to provide information on the lord protector's movements, for by this stage Cromwell, as befitted his dignity, rarely went anywhere in public without a guard. Toope was to prove the weak link in the conspiracy; although lavished with money and tales of the honours and wealth he would obtain under the new regime after the murder, he soon had misgivings and went on to betray the plotters. Numerous warnings also came to the government through the intelligence agents of John Thurloe, the secretary of state, but this did not hamper the group's schemes to assassinate Cromwell. That they did not succeed was not out of any lack of enterprise, but rather because of a failure of nerve at the final hurdle. 
After various attempts to catch the lord protector as he rode in his coach to Hampton Court Palace, the assassins finally thought to kill him as he was taking the air in Hyde Park. They had broken the hinges on the gates of the park in order to make a quick escape after the murder, and while Cecil lurked on the fringes of the protector's retinue, Sindercombe waited for the call outside the gates. Unfortunately for them Oliver, with his eye for good horseflesh, noticed Cecil's horse and called him over to enquire about the animal. Faced with the great man himself Cecil lost his nerve and later claimed that he would have shot Cromwell there and then, but that the horse Oliver was admiring so much was in fact ill with a cold. 
The next scheme involved Sindercombe, under the alias John Fish, hiring a house next to Westminster Abbey. From its backyard, the assassins could shoot Cromwell as he proceeded from the abbey to parliament. They began to erect scaffolding under the pretence of building work to cover their real business. On the day parliament was due to meet, Cecil, Sindercombe, and Boyes armed themselves with pistols and waited in the yard. Unfortunately for the murderers some people came into the yard at this point. Boyes immediately decamped into the crowded street and the scheme was abandoned. In order to prove to Sexby that they were not wasting his time, the next scheme followed quickly. This was a design to fire Whitehall Palace by using a special incendiary device planted in the chapel. The plotters managed to break into the chapel and lay the device, but Toope's nerve finally broke and he betrayed the scheme to the regime, subsequently becoming an agent of Thurloe. Cecil and Sindercombe were captured and Boyes escaped. Sindercombe initially fought off the guard sent to seize him, submitting only when one of the guards cut off part of his nose in the struggle. Both he and Cecil were imprisoned in the Tower of London, where Cecil immediately confessed all he knew to Thurloe. As he had with Toope, Thurloe decided to use him as a double agent. The confessions of Cecil and Toope allowed Thurloe to reveal to parliament and the nation Edward Sexby's part in the plot. Sindercombe, however, refused to confess anything and, when tried for treason on 9 February 1657, was found guilty and sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered. Rather than submit to the indignity of the punishment from a state he hated, Sindercombe decided, according to Sexby, to take the Roman way out. Despite being heavily guarded Sindercombe was able to procure some form of poison after a series of visits to his cell by members of his family, and the night before his execution, 13 February 1657, he used it to commit suicide. He died, having first lapsed into a coma some two hours after he had apparently taken the poison. The subsequent inquest could find little evidence of the type of toxin he had actually used, or his means of procuring it. However, Sindercombe had left a suicide note, in which he claimed that 'I do take this course, because I would not have all the open shame of the world executed upon my Body' ('Mercurius Politicus', 349, 12-19 Feb 1657, 7606). As a consequence the body was drawn to Tower Hill on a hurdle four days later and buried in the manner of a suicide: without ceremony, naked, and with an iron stake through its heart. 
Sindercombe's fate made him a martyr to the Good Old Cause, an idea still followed by many in the army and men such as Edward Sexby. Consequently he was given a prominent part in Sexby's pamphlet 'Killing Noe Murder, Briefly Discourst in Three Quaestions' (1657). This justified the slaying of Cromwell on the grounds of the lord protector's tyranny. Sindercombe himself seems to have been motivated less by a clearly expressed ideology than by personal bitterness over the way in which the English republic had been distorted by Cromwell's actions in April 1653 when he expelled the Rump Parliament. Nor as a seasoned mutineer, Leveller, and plotter was Sindercombe reluctant to use violent action to remedy the situation. As it was the Sindercombe plot had one significant outcome: it revived discussions as to whether the lord protector should become king, to protect both himself and the nation from any other attempts on his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 25638


Singer, George John (1786-1817), electrical researcher, was the son of Thomas Singer (died 1793/4), feather and artificial flower maker of 3 Princes Street, Cavendish Square, London, and his wife, Elizabeth Weller. After his father's death Singer helped his mother with the family business, and continued to live at her home, 3 Princes Street. Every spare moment, however, he devoted to scientific study, more particularly to the investigation of electricity and electro-chemistry. He made almost the whole of his apparatus himself, and introduced several improvements, inventing, among other things, the gold leaf electrometer and an electric column comprising 20,000 zinc and silver plates. He also purchased apparatus including a 50 inch diameter electrostatic plate machine that had once belonged to Napoleon, for which he paid $100. 
Singer built, almost unassisted, a large room at the back of his mother's house where from at least 1808 he delivered courses of demonstration lectures on electricity and related subjects. From 1810 he also lectured at the Russell Institution and from 1811 he described himself in his papers as 'Lecturer on Chemistry and Natural Philosophy'. Among his auditors were Michael Faraday and Francis Ronalds. Singer referred to Ronalds as his pupil and communicated to the 'Philosophical Magazine' Ronalds's first paper. He also made the acquaintance of the electrician Andrew Crosse with whom he collaborated, staying frequently at Crosse's seat, Fyne Court, Somerset, and walking with him on the Quantocks. In 1814 Singer published 'Elements of Electricity and Electro-Chemistry', a work of considerable importance, which was translated into French (Paris, 1817), Italian (Milan, 1819), and German (Breslau, 1819). He died, unmarried, of pulmonary consumption on 28 June 1817 at his mother's house. His collection of apparatus was sold at Stewart's auction room in 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 25639


Singer, John (fl. 1583-1603), actor, may have owed money to a Canterbury man in 1571; otherwise his origins are unknown. He was a clown and one of eight experienced actors first chosen in March 1583 to form Queen Elizabeth's Men. At a play of theirs in Norwich on 15 June he was involved in a quarrel that resulted in a murder, for which he apparently escaped punishment. He was with the company in 1588 and probably until 1594, when he joined the Lord Admiral's Men. He was a senior member of the latter and, like others, figures often in the diary of the theatre financier Philip Henslowe. They used the Rose playhouse until summer 1600, the Fortune thereafter. 
Singer lived in Shoreditch from 1593 to 1596, then on Bankside, near the Swan playhouse. There in 1600 he and his wife, Alice, took as tenants John and Frances Downell, who soon accused them of misappropriating money and not repaying it. Five children of John Singer, player, were baptized at St Saviour's, Southwark: Thomas (1 August 1597), William (17 June 1599), John (21 September 1600), Elizabeth (30 August 1601), Jane (1 May 1603). On 13 January 1603 Henslowe paid Singer $5 'at the Apoyntment of the companie... for his playe called 'Syngers vallentarey'' ('Henslowe's Diary', 208), after which Singer disappears from the stage. At the queen's funeral in April he was one of sixteen grooms of the chamber. He probably died before 1608, since Thomas Heywood included him among actors whose 'deserts yet live in the remembrance of many' in his 'Apology for Actors' (p. 43), published in 1612 but written about 1608. In 1609 Thomas Dekker mentioned Singer, Richard Tarlton, and Will Kempe as great clowns of the past. 


@@@@@


doc= 25640


Singer, Joseph Henderson (1786-1866), Church of Ireland bishop of Meath, was born at Annadale, co. Dublin, in October 1786, the youngest son of James Singer, deputy commissary-general in Ireland, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of James Henderson. In 1802 Singer entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he obtained the mathematical and Hebrew prizes. He graduated BA as gold medallist in 1806, became a fellow in 1810, and proceeded MA in 1811, and BD and DD in 1825. In 1822 Singer married Mary, eldest daughter of the Revd Henry Crofton, senior chaplain of Kilmainham, and niece of Sir Hugh Crofton of Mohill in co. Leitrim. They had five sons and four daughters. 
Singer was fellow and tutor at Trinity College for many years before succeeding Charles Richard Elrington as regius professor of divinity after the latter's death in 1850. During his time at the university Singer distinguished himself as a leading member of the evangelical party in the Church of Ireland, his views strongly influencing a number of the students in his charge. He was also actively involved in attempts to revive the church through evangelism among Roman Catholics in Ireland. He became rector of Raymochy in the diocese of Raphoe in 1850 and archdeacon in 1851. He was an able preacher, being for many years chaplain of the Magdalen Asylum, and was a regular contributor to the 'Christian Examiner'. On the death of Thomas Stewart Townsend in September 1852 Singer was appointed by Lord Derby to the premier bishopric of Meath, and was sworn of the Irish privy council. Much to the disappointment of the evangelical party, however, he was an inactive member and exerted little influence. Singer occupied the see until his death on 16 July 1866 at Dundrum House, co. Dublin. He was buried on 21 July at Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 25641


Singer, Samuel Weller (1783-1858), literary scholar, born in London, was the son of Thomas Singer (died 1793/4), a maker of artificial flowers and feathers, and Elizabeth Weller. George John Singer (1786-1817), natural philosopher and inventor, was his younger brother. His father died when Samuel was ten years old, and his mother continued the feather and flower business in Princes Street, Cavendish Square. 
Samuel received a limited education at a day school kept by a Frenchwoman. There he learned French, but was mainly self-taught, reading widely and acquiring Italian through frequent visits to the opera. At an early age he was apprenticed to a hatter near Cavendish Square, but he soon returned to work for his mother; and about 1808 he set up for himself in the same trade in Duke Street, St James's. In the same year he married Harriet Robinson; they had a son, Alfred (1816-1898), and three daughters. 
Singer's growing absorption in literature soon prompted him to change his profession and open a bookseller's shop in St James's Street. Book collectors such as Richard Heber, Richard Grenville, and Francis Douce were among his customers, and Douce became a lifelong friend. A tenacious autodidact, Singer quickly began to develop the skills of a literary editor, and in 1811 he prepared for private circulation a limited-edition reprint of Fenelon's 'Deux dialogues sur la peinture', with a preface in French. There followed similar editions of works in both French and Italian. 
In 1812 Singer entered into literary controversy for the first time by printing for private distribution fifty copies of 'Some account of the book printed at Oxford in MCCCCLXVIII' under the title 'Exposicio sancti Jeronimi in simbolo apostolorum'. Singer's argument in this work, that Rufinus's Latin treatise on the apostles' creed was published in 1468 rather than 1478, promised to have important implications for the history of printing in England. It was, however, wholly mistaken, and the author subsequently attempted to recall as many copies as he could (Madan, 22-3). He later made a frank admission of his error in a letter published in Sotheby's 'Principia typographica' (3.19). 
In 1815 Singer abandoned his bookseller's shop and embarked on a fully-fledged literary career. Retiring from London, he settled first at Bushey, Hertfordshire, and afterwards at Box Hall, Hertfordshire (BM Add. MS 28654, fols. 135-7). In 1816 he produced his best-known original composition, 'Some researches into the history of playing cards: with illustrations of the origin of printing and engraving on wood' (250 copies). This lavishly illustrated work won high praise from Thomas Dibdin, the bibliographer and antiquary (Allibone, 'Dict.', 2.2113). About this time Singer first gained employment as a literary editor from Robert Triphook, an antiquarian publisher whose shop was close to Singer's old establishment in St James's Street. Triphook introduced him to Charles Whittingham, proprietor of the Chiswick Press, in 1814, with the result that Singer secured from Whittingham the editorship of a series entitled 'Early English Poets': it included Marlowe and Chapman's 'Hero and Leander' (1821), and Lodge's 'Glaucus and Silla' (1819), as well as works by Chalkhill, Marmion, and Lovelace. Among other editorial projects Singer prepared the first complete edition of Cavendish's 'Life of Wolsey' (2 vols., 1825-7); the first edition of Philip Sidney's paraphrase of the 'Psalms' (1828); the first full transcript of the 'Anecdotes' of Joseph Spence (1820, 1859); and the correspondence and diaries of Henry Hyde, earl of Clarendon, and Lawrence Hyde, earl of Rochester (1828), collated from the manuscripts of his friend William Upcott. 
Singer's burgeoning reputation as an Elizabethan scholar was consolidated in 1826, when he prepared a ten-volume edition of Shakespeare's 'Dramatic Works' for the Chiswick Press. Singer was responsible for the collation and annotation of the text, while Charles Symmons provided a biographical introduction. The work was illustrated with wood-engravings after the designs of Stothard and others, and went through a further two English editions (1856, 1875), as well as an American edition (1834), which proved particularly successful. 
Meanwhile Singer had extended his linguistic studies to Old English and Norman-French, and began the compilation of an Old English dictionary. He abandoned the project on learning that Joseph Bosworth was engaged on a similar undertaking, but turned his researches to some use in his critical 'Remarks on the Glossary '(by Sir Frederic Madden)' of Havelock the Dane' (1829), to which Madden replied. He also printed, with an English translation, 'The Departing Soul's Address to the Body', a semi-Saxon poetic fragment (1845, 100 copies). 
Singer was elected FSA in 1825, but in 1827 his literary activities were checked by his acceptance of the office of librarian to the Royal Institution in Albemarle Street, which he retained until 1835. In 1834 his friend Francis Douce died and, to Singer's surprise, left him a competency. Relieved of the necessity of earning a livelihood, Singer finally retired in 1835 to Mickleham, near Dorking, Surrey, and devoted the rest of his life to leisurely study. He edited Herrick's 'Poetical Works' (1846), Bacon's 'Essays' (1856), and Selden's 'Table Talk' (1847); and translated Luther's 'Einfaltige Weise zu beten' (as 'Way to Prayer', 1846), and in 1847 (with original additions) Depping and Michel's 'Veland le Forgeron: dissertation sur une tradition du moyen age' (as 'Waylard Smith'). 
While Singer was remembered by contemporaries as both amiable and modest, his rivalry with the well-known Shakespeare scholar John Payne Collier led him late in his life into bitter controversy over the notorious 'Perkins folio', on which Collier based his 'Notes and Emendations to the Text of Shakespeare's Plays from Early Manuscript Corrections' (1853). A courteous exchange between the two in 'Notes and Queries' was followed by Singer's vituperative 'Text of Shakespeare Vindicated' (1853), a work which stopped just short of accusing Collier of forgery and which shocked reviewers (Ganzel, 163-4; 'The Athenaeum', 28 May 1853). He nevertheless retained his reputation as an unassuming, yet shrewd and incisive student of Elizabethan literature. 
Singer died suddenly at his residence, Manor Place, Wandsworth Road, Mickleham, on 20 December 1858, and was buried at Mickleham. His library, which included many valuable Italian books, was sold by auction in 1860, along with his small collection of manuscripts, consisting chiefly of the papers of Joseph Spence ('N&Q', 2nd ser., 4.120). 


@@@@@


doc= 25642


Singleton, Henry (1766-1839), painter, was born in London into an artistic family on 19 October 1766. He lost his father before the age of two, and was brought up by his uncle, William Singleton (died 1793), a pupil of Ozias Humphry (whom Henry painted: exh. Society of Artists, 1797), and painter of portraits, fancy heads, and miniatures. Another uncle, Joseph Singleton, exhibited miniatures at the Royal Academy between 1777 and 1783. 
Henry Singleton was precocious: he worked as a professional portraitist from the age of sixteen, and exhibited at the Society of Artists in Spring Gardens in 1780 'A Soldier Returned to his Family', a pen drawing, by 'Master H. Singleton, aged ten years'. He attended the Royal Academy Schools from 1783, winning the silver medal in 1784 and the gold medal in 1788 for a painting from Dryden's ode 'Alexander's Feast'. He exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1784 until his death, at the British Institution between 1806 and 1839, and at the Society of British Artists from its foundation in 1824. 
A measure of Singleton's early promise was the commission he received from the Royal Academy in 1793 to paint a large portrait group of the academicians under their president, Benjamin West, 'The Royal Academicians assembled in their council chamber to adjudge the medals to the successful students in painting, sculpture, architecture, and drawing' (RA). This complex and impressive composition contains forty portraits, with some evidently being added as late as 1798, and was engraved in 1802 by C. Bestland. However, Singleton never became an academician himself, and was unsuccessful in gaining an associateship, first in 1807 and again in 1811. 
Singleton was first noted for large historical compositions from the 'Bible', Shakespeare, or contemporary historical events. Many were engraved in mezzotint on a suitably large scale by Gillbank and Charles Turner and published by James Daniell. Two of the best, 'Paul I Granting Liberty to Kosciuszko' (1797) and 'The Death of Captain Alexander Hood after Capturing the French 74 'L'Hercule', 21 April 1798', were engraved, the latter in colours, by Daniell himself (BM). Although Singleton remained a popular artist, whose works were always in demand, he never fulfilled his original promise as a history painter. His figures, compositions, and colour became relatively weak, and most of his sentimental and genre scenes, painted in a manner that blended the styles of George Morland and Francis Wheatley, were designed for stipple engravers such as W. Bond, Thomas Burke, James Godby, and Anthony Cardon. Singleton also provided book illustrations, and those done for Sharpe's classics and other serials have charm. He completed a series of cabinet pictures to illustrate Shakespeare shortly before his death. 
Singleton remained an effective portrait painter, in a style somewhat influenced by Romney, and those of, for example, Lord Nelson and Admiral Vernon were engraved. A small but vigorous portrait by him of Lord Howe is in the National Portrait Gallery, London; a portrait group of James Boswell with his wife and family was lent by Ralph Dundas to the Edinburgh loan exhibition of Scottish national portraits in 1884. 
In 1807 Singleton married William Singleton's only daughter (died 1811). His sisters Maria and Sarah Macklarinan Singleton were also artists: the former exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1808 and 1820; the latter was a miniaturist who exhibited portraits at the Royal Academy between 1788 and 1813 and lived with Henry for twenty or thirty years, latterly at 4 Haymarket, London. He lived during the latter part of his life in Charles Street, St James's, London, in comfortable circumstances, and for some years was the oldest living exhibitor at the Royal Academy. He was in Paris briefly in 1813, but otherwise appears not to have travelled save for visits to the country. He died at the house of a friend at 7 Kensington Gore, London, on 15 September 1839, and was buried in the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields. A large collection of sketches is in the British Museum, and other works are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh, the Tate collection, the Ulster Museum, and Brighton Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 25643


Singleton, Robert (d. 1544), clergyman, probably belonged to the Singletons of Single Hall, Lancashire. From 1516 he was vicar of Preston and in 1517 he went up to Oxford, moving thence to Cambridge where he was admitted bachelor of canon law in 1521/2. By 1533 he was in the service of Thomas Cromwell, who was to use him as a preacher against purgatory and monasticism; by 1535 he was a chaplain to Anne Boleyn, and that year he became arch-priest of St Martin's-le-Grand, Dover. A sermon he preached at Paul's Cross in 1536 was subsequently published. Singleton pursued advancement through informing Cromwell of the activities of traditionalist clergy and through ostentatious displays of his learning; he wrote several religious and philosophical treatises, most of which are lost, though a treatise 'De septem ecclesiis' ascribed to him by Bale probably survives in BL, Royal MS 18 A.xl. On 8 July 1543 he abjectly recanted unspecified heresies, calling himself 'an unlearned fantastycall foole' (Guildhall MS 9531/12, fol. 45'r'); this was partly due to his writings, which may also have brought about his execution for treason at Tyburn on 7 March 1544. Bale believed he was condemned for a treatise, since lost, containing an inflammatory exposition of certain prophecies. However, Singleton was involved in murkier matters: about April 1543 he was apparently plotting with Cranmer's agent John Twyne to conceal evidence of heresy in Kent. Bishop Gardiner later reminded Protector Somerset of the threat which 'Singletons conspiracye' had posed ('Letters', ed. Muller, 422). Foxe called him a martyr, but his fellow penitent Robert Wisdom dismissed him as 'more to be pitied, then regarded' (Cambridge, Emmanuel College, MS 261, fol. 93'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 25644


Singleton, Robert Corbet (1810-1881), hymn writer, was born on 9 October 1810, the second son of Francis Corbet of Aclare, co. Meath. His father added Singleton to his name in 1820. After attending a series of schools in Dublin, Robert entered Trinity College, where he graduated BA in 1830 and MA in 1833. After his ordination he was appointed first warden of St Columba's College, Rathfarnham, near Dublin, which was opened in 1843. He then proceeded to St Peter's College, Radley, of which he was the first warden (1847-51), and there inaugurated for the boys a rigorous system of religious discipline. While at Radley he published 'The Psalter Arranged for Chanting' (1846) and discourses entitled 'Uncleanness, the Ruin of Body and Soul' (1850). In 1847 he was admitted 'ad eundem' to Trinity College, Oxford. In 1868 he edited, in conjunction with Dr E. G. Monk, 'The Anglican Hymn-Book', which contained nearly thirty original hymns by him, most notably 'With gladsome feet we press', as well as numerous translations from the German and Latin. He died at Petergate, York, on 7 February 1881, and was buried on the 12th in the Corbet vault, St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 25645


Singleton, Thomas (1783-1842), Church of England clergyman, born on 25 July 1783, was the only son of Thomas Anketell Singleton, of the family of Fort Singleton in Monaghan, and lieutenant-governor of Fort Landguard in Suffolk, and his wife, Catherine Anne Maria ('b'. 1752), daughter of Francis Grose the antiquary. He was educated at Eton College from about 1797 and matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1800, graduating BA in 1804 and MA in 1826. Singleton was ordained deacon in February 1807 and priest in September 1807. At Eton he acquired the friendship of Hugh, Earl Percy (afterwards third duke of Northumberland). Singleton acted as the earl's tutor at Cambridge, and was his private secretary from 1813 onwards. In 1812 the earl presented Singleton to the rectory of Elsdon, and in 1826 he was appointed archdeacon of Northumberland and rector of Howick. In 1829 he became a prebendary of Worcester, and in 1830 received the honorary degree of LLD from Dublin University. 
In 1837 Singleton requested Sydney Smith to give his opinion on the recently appointed ecclesiastical commission, and became the archdeacon to whom Smith addressed his published letters on ecclesiastical reform, denouncing the commission and its works. Singleton was also a friend of Robert Peel, usually spending a week with Peel at Tamworth during his residence as canon of Worcester. Singleton died, unmarried, at Alnwick Castle on 13 March 1842. 


@@@@@


doc= 25646


Sinnich, John (1603-1666), theologian, was born in Cork of Roman Catholic parents, Maurice Sinnich and Eleanor Hogan. He was educated at the University of Louvain, where he matriculated as a 'pauper' on 20 January 1624. The following year he obtained the highest marks in the examinations in the arts, and he proceeded to the study of theology, obtaining his doctorate on 27 September 1639. In 1637 he had been appointed to the secondary chair in theology, attached to a prebend in the collegiate church of St Peter, Louvain. After obtaining his doctorate he was presented to a second prebend, at the collegiate church of Turnhout, which he relinquished in 1640 for a canonry of the cathedral of Bruges. In 1641 he became president of the greater theological college at Louvain, and in 1642 regent of the faculty of theology. Following the death of Cornelius Jansen (Jansenius) he helped edit the 'Augustinus' for publication (1640) and followed it with his own 'Homologia Augustini Hipponensis' (1641), which argued the conformity of Jansen's teaching to that of St Augustine. After the publication of the papal condemnation of 'Augustinus' in the bull 'In eminenti' he was one of two emissaries sent to Rome by the Flemish Jansenists to plead, unsuccessfully, the orthodoxy of the work. He returned to Louvain in 1645 and devoted himself to his academic work. 
Eleven works, several published pseudonymously, are attributed to Sinnich, a number of which were placed on the Roman index. His best-known work, 'Sanctorum patrum... trias' (1648), was used extensively by Pascal, and the French theologian and Jansenist leader Antoine Arnould considered Sinnich the soundest guide on questions of grace after Jansen's death. Sinnich died at Louvain on 8 May 1666, leaving his personal property to the college to found bursaries to maintain students from Ireland at Louvain, Bruges, or Turnhout. He was buried at the collegiate church of St Peter, Louvain. 


@@@@@


doc= 25647


Roberts, John (1749-1817), poet, was born in Chwilog Bach, Llanystumdwy, in the Eifionydd region of Caernarvonshire. Little is known of his parentage and early years, but he spent most of his life as a schoolmaster at Pwllheli, Llyn. 
Approximately 250 of Roberts's poems, mostly in the strict metres, survive in manuscripts, a small proportion of which appeared in print during the course of the nineteenth century in journals and other publications. These serve chiefly to illustrate the nature and scale of the poetical activity which characterized his corner of Wales during the latter part of the eighteenth century. Sion Lleyn competed at local eisteddfodau and at the events organized by the London Gwyneddigion Society. He also addressed in verse several Caernarvonshire poets -- Dafydd Ddu Eryri features prominently here, as does Sion's nephew, Sion Wyn o Eifion, and lesser lights such as Hywel Eryri and Robin yr Aber. That he considered himself a member of the poetic fraternity in a wider sense is evident in his elegies to figures as diverse as Lewis Morris, Ieuan Fardd, Robin Ddu, Sion Rhydderch, Twm o'r Nant, and Elis y Cowper. 
Roberts was instrumental in founding the Calvinistic Methodists' cause at Penmount in Pwllheli, and he commemorated in verse two of the movement's founders, namely Daniel Rowland and William Williams Pantycelyn, as well as local preachers such as Robert Roberts Clynnog. A victim of facial cancer, Roberts died at Penrallt, Pwllheli, on 7 May 1817, and was buried two days later at Deneio, Pwllheli. He had been married twice, his second marriage having taken place by July 1812, but no information is available about either of his wives. 


@@@@@


doc= 25648


Sirr, Henry Charles (1764?-1841), police officer, born in Dublin Castle probably on 25 November 1764, was fifth, but eldest surviving, son of Major Joseph Sirr (1715-1799), who, on retiring from the army after twenty years' service, was appointed to the post of chief of the Dublin police or town-major in 1761, and served as high sheriff of the county in 1771. His mother was Elizabeth, daughter of William Hall of Skelton Castle, Yorkshire. Sirr entered the army on 6 June 1778 as an ensign in the 68th regiment of foot; subsequently he was lieutenant in the same regiment, which he accompanied in 1782 to Gibraltar. In 1791 he quitted the service, and was engaged as a wine merchant in Dublin, where he lived successively in French Street and at 77 Dame Street. In the same year he married Elizabeth, daughter of James D'Arcy of Hyde Park, co. Westmeath. They had two sons and two daughters. 
In 1796, upon the formation of yeomanry in Dublin, Sirr volunteered and was appointed acting town-major or head of the police, and thenceforward was the chief agent of the castle authorities. In 1798 he was promoted to the position of town-major, and received a residence in Dublin Castle. He proved very active in political repression, and organized an extensive system of spies and informers. He successfully arrested Peter Finnerty, the editor of 'The Press', on 31 October 1797, and was concerned in almost every important capture during the troubled years from 1798 to Emmet's insurrection in 1803. During this period his life was often in serious peril; on no fewer than three occasions in 1798 he barely escaped the attacks of the United Irishmen. The part Sirr played in the capture of Lord Edward Fitzgerald on 19 May 1798 brought him most prominently before the public. In the affray on that occasion Sirr, in coming to the aid of Daniel Frederick Ryan, inflicted on Lord Edward the wound from which he died. In 1802, in the case of 'Hevey v. Sirr', he was sued for $5000 damages for false imprisonment, and was held up to execration by Curran, the counsel for the plaintiff. The jury found a verdict against him for $150 and 6died costs, but the government paid Sirr's legal expenses. On 25 August 1803 he was instrumental in the arrest of Robert Emmet and the other insurrectionary leaders. In 1808 Sirr was appointed a police magistrate for the city of Dublin. He continued to discharge his duties as town-major until 1826, when he retired upon full pay, and in consideration of his services was allowed to retain his official residence in Dublin Castle. 
Sirr devoted his leisure to collecting curiosities and antiquities. His collection, which included some five hundred paintings, was of considerable value, and was acquired after his death by the Royal Irish Academy. In 1818 he helped to found the Irish Society for Promoting Scriptural Education in the Irish Language. He was an evangelical and an active freemason, and in 1797 joined the Orange order. He died at Dublin Castle on 7 January 1841, and was buried in the graveyard of St Werburgh's, Dublin, in close proximity to Lord Edward Fitzgerald. Sirr transformed the office of town-major from a sinecure into a vital and efficient cog in the Dublin Castle machinery. The authorities came to rely upon him to an extraordinary degree, and he was highly esteemed by them. Robert Peel testified in the House of Commons that Sirr was unswervingly loyal, religious, and humane. Castlereagh also praised 'the unceasing activity of Major Sirr'. 
Sirr intended to destroy all his correspondence; but a number of documents, many of them of considerable historical interest, were found after his death, and presented by his elder son to the library of Trinity College, Dublin, where they remain. 
Sirr's elder son, 


@@@@@


doc= 25649


Henry Charles Sirr (1807-1872), of Lincoln's Inn, barrister, was successively British vice-consul at Hong Kong (1843) and queen's advocate for the southern circuit of Ceylon; he was the author of two works of interest, 'China and the Chinese: their Religion, Character, Customs, and Manufactures' (1849), which dealt with the evils of the opium trade, and 'Ceylon and the Cingalese: their History, Government, Religion, Antiquities, etc.' (1850). He died at his home, 140 Albany Street, Regent's Park, London, on 23 November 1872 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 25650


Joseph D'Arcy Sirr (1794-1868), a graduate of Trinity College, Dublin, rector of Ringwood, and afterwards (1859) of Morstead in Hampshire, was the author of a 'Memoir of Power le Poer Trench, Last Archbishop of Tuam' (1845), of 'Sacrifices, Past, Present, and Future' (1862), and of a 'Life of Archbishop Usher', prefixed to 'The Religion of the Ancient Irish' (1835), in addition to some minor religious works. He died at Winchester on 5 April 1868. The younger son, 


@@@@@


doc= 25651


Siward (d. 1048), bishop and coadjutor-archbishop, was a monk of Glastonbury, and succeeded AEthelwine as abbot of Abingdon, probably in 1030. An extant grant by Cnut may have been solicited by Siward to finance his plan to rebuild St AEthelwold's church at Abingdon. But he abandoned the plan and gave the money to the poor instead, after St AEthelwold had appeared to him in a dream and forbidden the destruction of the church. 
Eadsige, the archbishop of Canterbury, finding in 1042 that ill health prevented him from discharging the duties of his office, with the consent of the king and Earl Godwine, consecrated Siward as his suffragan, so that he might act as his coadjutor. Eadsige probably intended that Siward should succeed to the archiepiscopal see: he is described as archbishop of Canterbury in the history of the abbots of Abingdon, and as archbishop in the attestations of three charters, where his name has precedence over that of the archbishop of York. However, in another charter he appears simply as bishop, his name coming after that of the archbishop of York. For six years Siward acted in all things in Eadsige's place. The story that he ill-treated the archbishop and was consequently deprived of the succession may be rejected. He retired on account of ill health in 1048, and was carried back sick to Abingdon. He probably died two months after his return to Abingdon, on 23 October, and was honourably buried there, for he was a munificent benefactor to the monastery, to which he gave Wittenham, near Wallingford, and all the furniture of his chapel. There has been continual confusion between him and the Siward who held the bishopric of Rochester from 1058 to 1075. 


@@@@@


doc= 25652


Siward, earl of Northumbria (d. 1055), magnate, first appears witnessing as 'dux' in a charter by King Cnut for Archbishop AElfric of York in 1033. Siward's name (Sigvarthr) suggests that he was of Danish stock, although the names of his parents are unknown. The life of King Edward recorded his nickname as 'Digri', or 'Digara', from the Danish 'Diger' meaning 'the Stout', or 'the Strong'. A legend preserved in the twelfth century noted that Siward was descended from the union of a white bear and a noblewoman. 
Siward succeeded Earl Erik of Hlathir in southern Northumbria between 1023 and 1033, the dates of Erik's last appearance in a charter and Siward's first. Siward was one of those to whom Cnut delegated significant authority in England while he was occupied in his Scandinavian lands. The northern part of Northumbria remained in the hands of the earls of Bamburgh. Eadulf Cudel had succeeded his brother Earl Uhtred 'c'.1016 and was, in turn, succeeded by Uhtred's son Ealdred. Earl Ealdred was himself followed by another Eadulf, who was Uhtred's son by another wife. In 1041, however, Siward killed this Earl Eadulf and assumed control of all Northumbria. Siward played a significant role in the politics of the kingdom of the English during the reigns of Cnut, Harthacnut, and Edward the Confessor, often acting in concert with Earl Leofric of Mercia in opposition to the Godwine family. A measure of his activity may be obtained by examining his attestation of royal charters in this period. For example, he witnessed a lease of land by AElfwine, bishop of Winchester, to Osgod in 1043 or 1044, possibly around the time of the attack on Queen Emma described below. He was also a witness to the endowment of Stow St Mary by Earl Leofric and his wife, Godgifu, between 1053 and 1055. This may reflect his close relationship with the comital house of Mercia. For a time Siward seems to have held the earldom of Huntingdon and there is a semi-legendary account of his slaying of a certain Tostig, earl of Huntingdon. 
In 1041 Siward took part in an attack on the monastery and town of Worcester following the murder there of two of King Harthacnut's tax gatherers, Feader and Thurstan. After Edward the Confessor's coronation, Siward, together with earls Leofric and Godwine, advised the king to ride from Gloucester to Winchester. The earls accompanied him and, on 16 November 1043, they arrested Emma, the queen mother. Emma's wealth was confiscated on the grounds that she had not aided Edward as much as she might have done and that she had been harsh towards him. An account of the translation of St Mildrith added that Emma was accused of inciting King Magnus of Norway to attack Edward's realm. During the crisis of 1051-2, when Earl Godwine and his sons collected their forces and threatened the king near Gloucester, Siward acted together with Earl Leofric of Mercia and Earl Ralph in first opposing Godwine and his family on the king's behalf and then allowing them to regain their positions in 1052. The C and D texts of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' suggest that the earls' hesitancy in attacking Godwine and then allowing his return was born of a fear that civil war would leave the kingdom open to foreign invasion. 
Siward is named by the Norman chronicler William of Poitiers as being one of those magnates of England who swore an oath to secure Duke William of Normandy's succession to the English throne. Siward's rule in Northumbria was seen as particularly harsh but effective by contemporary sources. The life of King Edward describes how before the earl's time parties of even twenty or thirty men were not safe from robbers, but that Siward's policy of killing or mutilating the miscreants, however noble, brought security to the region. Siward may also have expanded his control into Cumbria, as a writ issued in the name of a certain Gospatric, ruler of that area, seems to suggest that he was under Siward's overlordship. Siward reinstated AEthelric, bishop of Durham, who had offered him money after being driven out of his bishopric by the community of St Cuthbert in 1045. In 1054 Siward invaded Scotland on behalf of his nephew, Malcolm Canmore (d. 1093), who claimed the throne of his father, Duncan, in opposition to Macbeth. Soon after Duncan's overthrow in 1040 Malcolm had fled Scotland and found a refuge at his uncle's court in York. According to some sources it was on the order of Edward the Confessor that Siward prepared a land and sea assault against Macbeth. Having routed the Scots and their Norman allies, the earl ravaged the kingdom, so the twelfth-century chronicler Henry of Huntingdon reported. During the decisive battle on the Day of the Seven Sleepers (27 July 1054), fought in Perthshire, north of the River Tay, Siward's son, Osbeorn, was killed together with the earl's nephew, another Siward. 
Earl Siward married first AElfflaed, a daughter of Earl Ealdred of Bamburgh, and they had at least two sons, Osbeorn and Waltheof; it is not known whether the couple had any daughters. A second wife, Godgifu, is recorded as promising to give the two estates of Belmesthorpe and Ryhall near Stamford to Peterborough Abbey on her death. She predeceased Siward and he made an agreement with the abbey whereby he held both estates until his death. According to 'Domesday Book' the manors were held by Waltheof at the time of King Edward's death and by Waltheof's widow, Judith, in 1086. 
Henry of Huntingdon described Earl Siward as a giant of a man 'whose vigour of mind was equal to his bodily strength' (Huntingdon, 'Historia Anglorum' (OMT), 376). During an attack on Scotland, when one of his sons was killed, Siward enquired whether he had received his wound in front or behind. When informed that the wound had been received in front, the earl rejoiced that his son had died a fitting death. This may refer to the death of Osbeorn at the hands of the Scots in 1054. Also according to Henry of Huntingdon, Earl Siward himself died of dysentery. He felt ashamed that he was not going to die in one of his many battles and asked to be dressed in his armour, so that, with shield and battleaxe in his hands, he might die a soldier's death. This was at York, before mid-Lent 1055, when he was buried in the monastery which he had founded at 'Galmanho', dedicated to St Olaf, king and martyr -- which indicates Siward's continued Danish sympathies. Bootham Bar in York was formerly Galmanhithe and the site of the monastery there was given to St Mary's Abbey, York. The earldom was given to Tostig, son of Earl Godwine of Wessex, possibly because Siward's surviving son, Waltheof, was still young in 1055 and the influence of the Godwine faction at court was overwhelming. According to 'Domesday Book', Earl Siward and his son held lands worth around $350. This cannot, however, represent the total value of his estates while in office, as 'Domesday Book' did not survey the lands to the north of the River Tees or the larger part of Cumbria. Siward's recorded lands lay in Derbyshire and in Yorkshire, most notably at Whitby. 


@@@@@


doc= 25653


Siward (d. 1075), bishop of Rochester, was a Benedictine monk who was abbot of Chertsey when he was consecrated bishop by Archbishop Stigand in 1058, after Stigand had received his pallium from the usurping Pope Benedict X. Nothing is known of his episcopate, but it cannot have been unsatisfactory, for when Stigand was deposed at Easter 1070 Siward was allowed to retain his see, and he attended both Archbishop Lanfranc's consecration on 29 August following and a reforming church council in 1072. He died in 1075, probably on 30 October, when his obit was celebrated at Rochester. William of Malmesbury confused him with a namesake whom Archbishop Eadsige appointed as his coadjutor and who died in 1048. 
The see of Rochester was said to be in a miserable condition in 1075, with its cathedral served by only four or five clerks living in abject poverty. To remedy the situation, 


@@@@@


doc= 25654


Skae, David (1814-1873), physician and asylum superintendent, was born in Edinburgh on 5 July 1814, one of the two sons of David Skae, builder and architect, and his wife, Helen Lothian. As both Skae's parents died while he was a child, he moved to St Andrews to live with his maternal uncle, the Reverend William Lothian, who was responsible for his education. At the age of fourteen Skae enrolled as a student in the arts faculty of St Andrews University, leaving at the age of sixteen to work as a clerk in an Edinburgh lawyer's office. He then entered the Edinburgh extra-mural medical school, becoming a licentiate of the College of Surgeons, Edinburgh, in 1835, and a fellow in 1836. After this he became a partner of Dr Davidson, a general practitioner in Edinburgh. In 1836, Skae became lecturer in medical jurisprudence in the extra-mural school, and his lectures proved to be popular. At the same time he became surgeon to the Lock Hospital and held this appointment for ten years. On Christmas day, 1837, he married Sarah, daughter of Major Alexander Macpherson, late of the 2nd West India regiment; they had five sons. Skae was described as a stout figure, with a massive head of brown curly hair, who was jovial and charming in company. 
Skae wrote several original articles on syphilis, and was also appointed as an examiner in medicine at St Andrews University, which led to an honorary degree of MD being conferred on him in 1842. In the same year he succeeded Robert Knox as one of the lecturers on anatomy in the extra-mural school in Edinburgh. In 1846 he was appointed physician superintendent at the Morningside Asylum (later the Royal Edinburgh Asylum), and held this post until his death. In 1863 he was president of the Association of Medical Officers of Asylums, and in 1873 was nominated Morison lecturer in insanity at the Royal College of Physicians in Edinburgh. 
Skae's most significant contribution was in the field of mental disease. He was judged an able and humane superintendent of the asylum, and in his annual reports he emphasized the need for the careful organization of the institution, and for a healthy and active regime for the inmates. During his period of office the asylum doubled in size, and Skae brought about improvements in the accommodation by providing cottages for small groups of patients. The reputation of Morningside was also enhanced, and several assistant physicians, such as John Batty Tuke, David Yellowlees, and Thomas Clouston, who went on to achieve eminence in the field of lunacy, trained under him. Skae was also an enthusiastic teacher, who set up a regular course of lectures and demonstrations for students. 
In his published work Skae was interested in the classification of mental disease, general paralysis, alcoholism, and the legal aspects of lunacy. He was a somaticist in his approach to insanity, defining it as a disease of the brain affecting the mind. Skae made an ambitious attempt at the classification of insanity based on aetiology, which he outlined in his 1863 paper in the 'Journal of Mental Science', and, further, in his series of 1873 Morison lectures, which were completed after his death by his pupil, Thomas Clouston. Skae's classification was not adopted outside Edinburgh and was heavily criticized by his contemporaries. Other important publications by Skae include his 1857 article on 'Mental diseases' in the eighth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', his discussions of 'Dipsomania' (1858) and 'General paralysis' (1860), and his two papers on 'The legal relations of insanity' (1861, 1867). 
Skae's last years were overshadowed by illness, and he died at his home, Tipperlinn House, Morningside Place, Edinburgh, on 18 April 1873 from cancer of the oesophagus. He was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 25655


Skeffington, Clotworthy, second earl of Massereene (1742-1805), landowner and debtor, was the son of Clotworthy Skeffington, sixth viscount and first earl of Massereene (died 1757), and his second wife, Anne, daughter of Henry Eyre of Rowter, Derbyshire. He was born on 28 January 1742 in Antrim and was educated at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. From 1756 he was known as Lord Loughneagh, until 1757, when he succeeded to his father's title. The Skeffingtons were a notable Irish political family, of old protestant lineage, with major landholdings in Antrim, which included the manor of Moylinny. They had a group allegiance in parliament, based on the Antrim town borough seats, although Massereene's financial difficulties meant that control of the borough was temporarily devolved upon Lord Antrim. As a group they were generally unsympathetic towards patriotism, particularly after the viceroy, Lord Harcourt, rewarded them in 1775. 
It appears that Massereene's mental capacity had been damaged by a fall from a horse. This may have contributed to his willingness to become involved in disastrous financial speculations, which resulted in his imprisonment in France in 1770. His mother refused to send money to pay for his release, in the mistaken belief that this would force Massereene, who had a reputation as an extravagant man of fashion, to manage his financial affairs more carefully. While in the debtors' prison of Fort-l'Eveque he continued to spend lavishly, and after an early attempt to escape -- foiled by the bad faith of a turnkey -- he settled down to live his prison life in luxury. However, his own depiction of life in La Force, to which he had been transferred in 1780, was much more melancholy. He complained that he was shut up in solitude 'save for the vermin and a mouse which I taught to come for food'. He described himself as 'imprisoned abroad, robbed at home, misrepresented everywhere' ('Leeds MSS', 22.56). On 13 July 1789, the eve of the fall of the Bastille, he was liberated by the Paris crowd, and he left the prison accompanied by Marie Anne Barcier, the daughter of the prison governor, whom he subsequently married. After presenting himself at the British embassy, Massereene took refuge in the precincts of the Temple, a privileged spot for debtors. But on finding himself in no danger of rearrest, he proceeded to Calais. After narrowly escaping detention he made his way back to England, and then travelled onwards to Ireland. Ironically Lord Massereene's motto on his coat of arms was 'through difficulties to honour'. 
At St Peter Cornhill, London, Massereene formally married Marie Anne Barcier, on 19 August 1789, although he was said to have already married her twice while in France. She died in 1800 and he subsequently married Elizabeth Lane (died 1838). He also formed a relationship with a servant in London, whose discretion was purchased at great cost after his death. None of these unions produced children. He died on 28 February 1805 at Antrim Castle. 
Massereene's descendants included 


@@@@@


doc= 25656


Skeffington, John, second Viscount Massereene (bap. 1632, d. 1695), nobleman, was baptized on 27 December 1632, the eldest son of Sir Richard Skeffington (died 1647) of Fisherwick, near Lichfield, and Anne Newdigate (1607-1637). His father died in 1647 and in 1652 he succeeded his cousin as fourth baronet at the age of nineteen. As a substantial landowner in both Staffordshire and Warwickshire it was not long before Skeffington arranged a lucrative marriage, on 20 July 1654, to Mary, the only daughter of Sir John Clotworthy of co. Antrim, who later became first Viscount Massereene. It was his father-in-law's influence which secured him a seat in Richard Cromwell's 1659 parliament as MP for Antrim, Down, and Armagh. He was also elected MP for co. Antrim in the Irish parliament of 1661. 
By the death of his father-in-law in 1665, Skeffington became Viscount Massereene and baron of Loughneagh by special remainder and succeeded to a great Irish estate in his wife's right. Thereafter he extended his political influence, as 'custos rotulorum' of co. Londonderry (from 1666) and an Irish privy councillor (from 1667). He was also able to secure compensation for lands lost by the Clotworthys at the Restoration. His support for presbyterianism, however, brought him into conflict with the duke of Ormond by the 1670s, and his involvement in the exclusion crisis caused Ormond to target his local power base. The tightening of restrictions against nonconformist JPs and militia officers after the exclusion crisis was partly aimed at Massereene, and in 1682 the earl of Arran announced his intention 'to turn out of all employments the peer himself' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 6.375). In 1683 Ormond threatened to remove Massereene from the privy council, and presented him for nonconformity. 
Despite fears of James II's intentions after 1685, Massereene was nevertheless reappointed to his governorship and sworn of the privy council. But it was not long before he was actively supporting a Williamite invasion. When the citizens of Londonderry determined to stand on their defence Massereene helped them with a large sum of money. He was one of those to whom the Enniskilleners specially appealed for help; it was at Antrim Castle that the protestants of the county met under Massereene's presidency, and his only surviving son, Clotworthy, was chosen to command them in the field. Massereene himself withdrew to England soon afterwards. In Tyrconnel's proclamation of 7 March 1689 both father and son were among the ten persons excepted by name from mercy as 'principal actors in the rebellion' ('Ormonde MSS', old ser., 2.396). 
Massereene was in London in November 1689, being one of the Irish committee chosen to confer with William III. He returned to Ireland after the battle of the Boyne, and resumed his seat on the privy council, sat in the parliament which met on 5 October 1692, and was active in the business of the House of Lords. He died on 21 June 1695 and was buried at Antrim. Clotworthy succeeded him as third viscount, and was ancestor of Clotworthy Skeffington, second earl of Massereene. Of Massereene's three daughters, the youngest, Mary, married Edward Smyth, bishop of Down and Connor. 


@@@@@


doc= 25657


John Skeffington Foster Skeffington, tenth Viscount Massereene and third Viscount Ferrard (1812-1863), poet, the son of Thomas Foster, second Viscount Ferrard, and Harriet, daughter of Chichester Skeffington, ninth Viscount Massereene. He was born in Dublin on 30 November 1812 and was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford. He succeeded his mother as Viscount Massereene, and his father as Viscount Ferrard in 1834, at the same time assuming Skeffington as an additional surname. He was created knight of St Patrick on 3 July 1851. He married on 1 August 1835 Olivia, fourth daughter of Henry Deane Grady of Stillorgan Castle, co. Dublin; they had four sons and four daughters. He was the author of 'O'Sullivan, the Bandit Chief: a Romantic Poem' (4 vols., 1844), 'Church Melodies' (8 vols., 1847), 'A Metrical Version of the Psalms' (8 vols., 1865), and 'The Love of God: a Poem' (8 vols., 1868). He died at Antrim Castle on 28 April 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 25658


Skeffington, Sir Lumley St George, second baronet (1771-1850), fop and playwright, younger but only surviving son of Sir William Charles Farrell Skeffington, first baronet (1742-1815), and Catherine Josepha ('c'.1743-1811), daughter of Michael Hubbert of Tenerife, merchant, was born in the parish of St Pancras, London, on 23 March 1771. He was educated at Newcome's school at Hackney, and, by taking part in the plays for which the institution was famous, acquired a taste for drama. On leaving school he was admitted into the select circle at Carlton House and soon set the fashions for the youth of the day: he was consulted on the subject of attire by the prince regent, and invented a new colour, known as 'Skeffington brown'. His features were large, and he had a sharp, sallow face, with dark curly hair and whiskers. For many years his dress was 'a dark blue coat with gilt buttons, a yellow waistcoat, white cord inexpressibles, with large bunches of white ribbons at the knees, and short top boots'. Among his friends were the actors John Kemble, Mrs Siddons, and 'Romeo' Coates; he never missed a first night or a debut, and often visited four theatres on the same evening. Between 1802 and 1813 Skeffington himself wrote a number of dramatic works, trying his hand at comedy, melodrama, and opera, and produced some of them in the theatre; none met with lasting success. Widely ridiculed, he was a natural target for the satirical cartoonist Gillray, who depicted him a number of times. 
Skeffington succeeded to the baronetcy and family property on his father's death in January 1815; but he had permitted his father to cut off the entail of their large estates, and his reckless extravagance had wasted the rest of his resources. His debts caused him to spend several years within the rules of the king's bench prison, living near the Surrey Theatre in Southwark. Some time before his death he recovered a hereditary estate producing about $800 per annum; but he failed in his action in 1838 to obtain possession of the Hubbert property at Rotherhithe. He still continued to live in the southern suburbs, and it was at that time that Henry Vizetelly made his acquaintance. He was 'a quiet, courteous, aristocratic-looking old gentleman, an ancient fop... wore false hair, and rouged his cheeks' ('Glances Back', 111). He entertained, and had a great store of anecdotes. It was his boast that the secret of life lay in 'never stirring out of doors during the cold damp winter months, and in living in a suite of rooms', so that he could constantly shift from one to another (Vizetelly, 'Glances Back', 112). He died, unmarried, on 10 November 1850 in lodgings near the Indigent Blind School, St George's Fields, Southwark, close to the king's bench prison, of which he had again lately been an inmate; he was buried at Norwood cemetery on 15 November. The title became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 25659


Skeffington, Sir William (d. 1535), lord deputy of Ireland, was the eldest son of Thomas and Mary Skeffington of Skeffington in Leicestershire. Having been knighted by Henry VII, he served as sheriff of the counties of Warwick and Leicester and as a justice of the peace for Leicestershire in 1509. In 1510 he was issued with a royal pardon and was subsequently reappointed to the commission of the peace for Leicestershire, a post that he intermittently held throughout his career, even during his service in Ireland. By 1512 he was a captain with responsibility for receipt of ordnance, and in the mid-1510s he again held the position of sheriff of the counties of Warwick and Leicester. In May 1515 Skeffington was appointed master of the ordnance for which he was paid 2's'. a day. He continued to hold that position until 1529. In 1520 he was listed among those chosen to attend on Henry VIII at the Field of Cloth of Gold. Throughout the 1520s, in his capacity as master of the ordnance, Skeffington was actively involved in strengthening the fortifications of the English pale in Calais and Guines. In 1525 he was granted a commission for conducting searches in specific quarters of London. He was knight of the shire for Leicestershire in 1529. By then he had been married twice. By his first marriage, to Margaret, daughter of Sir Everard Digby of Tilton, he had a son and heir, Thomas. He and his second wife, Anne, daughter of Sir John Digby of Kettleby in Leicestershire, had among other children, one son, Leonard, who served as a lieutenant of the Tower of London, as a soldier in Ireland, and as a messenger who regularly represented his father at court. 
In a new departure in the governance of Ireland a secret council of three officials acted as deputy to the nominal lieutenant, Henry Fitzroy, duke of Richmond, in June 1529. Skeffington arrived in Ireland the following August, having been dispatched as the king's counsellor and commissioner, charged with the task of compiling a report on the military situation in the lordship. He was involved in negotiating a settlement between Piers, earl of Ossory, and the earl of Desmond and in making arrangements for the governance of the midlands. Early in 1530 Skeffington submitted a detailed report in which he asserted that the secret council lacked the money and men to govern effectively. He returned to England, but following the fall of Cardinal Wolsey, the architect of the conciliar scheme, in the summer of 1529, he was appointed lord deputy of Ireland in June 1530. Skeffington duly arrived in Dublin in August along with Gerald Fitzgerald, earl of Kildare, and was received in a solemn procession at St Mary's Abbey with great applause from the citizens. He was instructed to promote good relations between the earls of Kildare, Ormond, and Desmond, and to secure their co-operation against Gaelic resistance. He was to enjoy the active assistance of the earl of Kildare, convene a parliament, and act only with the approval of the council. He unsuccessfully endeavoured to negotiate for a retroactive extra-parliamentary grant of taxation for the period 1529-30. 
Late in 1530 Skeffington led a campaign into the territory of Leix (Laois) against O'More and O'Connor, whom he subdued. Following an inactive winter he and the earl of Kildare made inroads into Ulster early in 1531, capturing and demolishing O'Neill's castle at Kinard and destroying neighbouring territories and villages. In May he was granted a commission to convene a parliament. Later that month he received an indenture of submission to Henry VIII on behalf of Odo O'Donnell at Drogheda. While initially Skeffington and the earl of Kildare maintained amicable relations, by July both men were sending messengers to the court with reports of the other's malpractice, and Kildare was apparently treating the deputy less as the king's representative than as a mere commoner. In an effort to secure greater freedom of action from Kildare's influence Skeffington encouraged the feud between Ossory and Kildare. His critics accused him of supporting Kildare's kinsmen against the earl and of having built up alliances with Gaelic lords bordering on the pale in opposition to Kildare. Skeffington's problems were further compounded by parliament's refusal to grant a subsidy when it met in September and October 1531, thereby forcing him to resort to levying scutage on the king's tenants by knight service. 
In May 1532 John Rawson and Chief Justice Patrick Bermingham, both former members of the secret council, presented the English council at Greenwich with a list of accusations of maladministration directed against Skeffington, notably that he had deliberately rekindled the Ossory-Kildare feud and had exhibited partiality towards Ossory. Early in July the earl of Kildare visited the court and was reappointed deputy lieutenant. Soon after he assumed office in mid-August, Kildare set about settling the score with Skeffington by humiliating the former deputy publicly during a muster of his troops. Skeffington was then obliged to wait on Kildare until he received instructions regarding the storage of a sizeable consignment of ordnance and military stores which had been in his custody. In mid-October 1532 he finally entrusted the armaments to the charge of the Irish council. Kildare was summoned to court in September 1533, and by October Skeffington had retired to England to lend weight to the mounting campaign instigated by the Butlers with a view to securing Kildare's recall to court. To that end, in December 1533 he submitted his own indictment of Kildare. While Skeffington was 'scantily beloved' in English government circles, Maguire, lord of Fermanagh, bemoaned his absence from Ireland early in 1534, alleging that he had 'gained the esteem of all' and had 'showed himself most just and indifferent' ('LP Henry VIII', 7, 1883, no. 1014; Brewer and Bullen, 1.53). 
Before May 1534 the decision had been taken to reappoint Skeffington as lord deputy. His instructions, the 'Ordinances for the government of Ireland', served as a manifesto for administrative reform of the lordship. These also stipulated that he was to lead a campaign against the pope, to resist the pope's provisions and jurisdiction, and to enact both measures at the next parliament. Late in May Ossory formally undertook to assist the new deputy. Skeffington appears to have been virtually the only candidate for the post: the imperial ambassador, Eustace Chapuys, expressed surprise at Henry's choice of incumbent since he regarded Skeffington as the most unfit candidate for governing Ireland that could be chosen. In June 1534 Kildare's son and deputy, Thomas, Lord Offaly, repudiated his allegiance to Henry VIII. In late July preparations were still in progress for Skeffington's dispatch with a modest company of just 150 men, but the situation in Ireland deteriorated when Offaly besieged Dublin Castle in August. The lord deputy dallied in Wales for the months of August and September, blaming desertions, a lack of reinforcements, and poor weather conditions for his failure to sail for Ireland. He sent his son, Leonard, to court to impress upon Henry VIII the dangers of undertaking the crossing without a good company. 
By late September 1534 Henry had grown impatient with Skeffington and ordered his immediate departure. On 14 October the deputy and his company finally set sail from Graycott. Skeffington brought heavy artillery with him to Ireland which his forces used to good effect during the siege of Kildare's fortress at Maynooth. Wary of reports that Dublin city and castle had been taken by Offaly, Skeffington opted to land at Waterford. He subsequently changed his itinerary and on 24 October he and his force of approximately 2300 men arrived in Dublin. He was immediately sworn into office. Three days later a friar from Drogheda informed the deputy that Offaly intended laying siege to that town. The following day he set out for Drogheda where he remained stationed for a week. He had Thomas Fitzgerald proclaimed a traitor at the high cross in the town. Having summoned the gentlemen of Louth and Meath to affirm their allegiance Skeffington returned to Dublin via Trim where his son, Leonard, served in skirmishes against Fitzgerald. Immediately upon his return to Dublin Skeffington, along with many of his troops, fell ill. Advanced in age, with a choleric temperament and prone to occasional dysentery, he was prostrated with sickness for much of the winter; he garrisoned the chief pale towns while he lapsed into lethargy, proving both unable and unwilling to control the army. Skeffington used orthodox military tactics in his handling of Lord Offaly, seeing no need to bring the rebel's forces to an engagement, a strategy that frustrated many members of the Dublin government. In December John Alen remarked that 'the deputy is old, and cannot take pains by reason of sickness' ('LP Henry VIII', 7, no. 1573). 
Early in 1535 Skeffington allowed William Brereton and other captains to divide their companies and to burn many Geraldine villages, including Maynooth, Lord Offaly's base. By mid-March the deputy had recovered, and besieged Maynooth Castle which surrendered to him on the 23rd of that month. He authorized the immediate execution of the garrison in what was known as 'the pardon of Maynooth'. Skeffington subsequently made Maynooth his base and campaigned throughout Kildare to suppress Geraldine insurgence. In mid-June Skeffington was informed that O'Neill and O'Donnell were conspiring against him, but while the deputy contemplated an expedition into Ulster, O'Neill pre-emptively sought a parley and in July 1535 signed an agreement with Skeffington at Drogheda, following the example of O'More and MacMurrough. In late July Skeffington was replaced as military commander by Lord Leonard Grey. On 24 August Skeffington notified Henry VIII that Thomas Fitzgerald had surrendered to him and that O'Connor had similarly submitted at Castlejordan following his campaign into the Gaelic lord's territory. Skeffington insisted that no 'condition either of pardon, life, lands or goods' was made with Fitzgerald; yet members of the Irish council admitted that comfortable words were spoken to Thomas 'to allure him to yield' and they interceded with Henry VIII to spare Fitzgerald's life on account of those undertakings (Brewer and Bullen, 1.73, 74). 
The deputy, now known as the Gunner by his Gaelic contemporaries, became ill once again in late summer: John Alen and Gerald Aylmer remarked that Skeffington was 'almost dead' on occasions when he had to be out of his bed before ten or eleven o'clock in the day. A planned expedition against Conor O'Brien into Munster had to be postponed. In September William Brabazon, under-treasurer, recommended the recall of Skeffington who had by then sufficiently recovered to attend the takeover of Dungarvan Castle. The deputy himself requested permission to retire from Ireland on grounds of poor health, but in response Henry issued a qualified thanks to him for securing Fitzgerald's submission and insisted that he remain in office, declaring his unabated confidence in Skeffington's capacity for the post. On 31 December 1535 Skeffington died at Kilmainham in Dublin. He was buried before the steps ascending to the altar in the north wing of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, and a monument to his memory was erected at Skeffington. 
William Brabazon said of Skeffington: 'He was a very good man of war, but not quick enough for Ireland, and somewhat covetous' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 2, pt 3, 279). Several other contemporaries also made the latter observation, and it appears somewhat justified since the deputy died in severe financial difficulties, leaving his widow, Anne, and their children in very precarious circumstances. On 1 January 1536 Lord Leonard Grey was elected justiciar in succession to Skeffington, and in June of that year Thomas Skeffington was granted livery of his late father's property. Skeffington was the first in a long line of exclusively English-born incumbents of the deputyship of Ireland under the Tudor monarchs, and he was also the first military leader to introduce sophisticated weaponry to Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 25660


Skelton, Bevil (c.1641-1696), diplomat and soldier, was the eldest son of the Yorkshire soldier Sir John Skelton (died 1673), lieutenant-governor of Plymouth from 1660, and his wife, Bridget (died 1681), daughter of Sir Peter Prideaux. He later hinted that he served with the tiny royalist army in the 1657 campaign that culminated in the battle of the Dunes. By December 1657 he was a page of honour to the exiled Charles II, and continued in this position briefly after the Restoration, receiving a pension of $120 a year in 1662, the year in which he sold the office. On 11 June 1662 he married Simona Cary (died 1692), the daughter and stepdaughter of prominent soldiers (respectively, Sir Ferdinando Cary and Sir Thomas Blackwell); they had at least three sons, Bevil, Cary, and Charles (1672-1736). The marriage seems to have been happy: in January 1673, while serving in France, Skelton wrote to Simona to assure her 'that I most passionately love thee, being unwilling to express any further discontent and trouble for my being from thee, not questioning you are sufficiently assured of my being, my only joy, thy faithful loving husband' ('Various Collections', 8.67). 
On 27 July 1666 Skelton was commissioned a cornet in the earl of Rochester's horse, and became a captain in Sir Arthur Basset's foot regiment on 13 June 1667. From August the same year he served as quartermaster to Sir George Hamilton's troop in the French army. On 20 November 1668 he was commissioned a captain in the 1st foot guards, and in October 1669 became registrar of the Charterhouse. In 1671 he was with his regiment at York, and received some of the proceeds from the fines on conventicles in Yorkshire. From 1672 to 1674 he served as lieutenant-colonel of the Royal English regiment in France. 
Following his return from military service Skelton embarked upon a long and controversial diplomatic career. From August to November 1674 he undertook a secret mission to France for the king. On 29 December 1675 he was accredited as envoy-extraordinary to the imperial court, with an allowance of $4 a day (soon increased to $5), and remained at Vienna until 1681, despite the fact that his overtly francophile stance (epitomized by a close friendship with the French ambassador) made him unpopular with the emperor's ministers. In 1679 Charles II proposed to transfer him to The Hague, but his sympathies for France made him unacceptable to William of Orange and the states general. From 1681 Skelton was accredited to most of the lesser German courts in a peripatetic role, based usually at Hamburg. He had audiences at Brunswick and Saxony in 1682, and also visited the Netherlands on a number of occasions. In the spring of 1684 he made a diplomatic mission to Denmark, and had an audience in May. 
Skelton's roving commission ended in March 1685, when he journeyed to The Hague to take up the post of ambassador. This was a posthumous insult to his nephew by Charles II, who had been offended by William's support for the duke of Monmouth and knew that the appointment of Skelton would be seen as a personal affront. Indeed the French ambassador in London even thought that this was deliberately intended to provoke William into a rash gesture, and at first Skelton had orders not to speak to the prince. Not surprisingly Skelton's relations with William of Orange and the Dutch authorities were poor almost from the very beginning, with Skelton again making no attempt to conceal his francophile stance. The Dutch authorities ignored his requests to prevent the sailing of the marquess of Argyll's and Monmouth's expeditions, and resented his subsequent attempts to get opponents of James II expelled from the Netherlands. To compound matters Skelton found out that William was having an affair with Elizabeth Villiers; a letter to him from Princess Mary's chaplain, John Covel, was intercepted, and William attempted to use it to get the despised ambassador recalled. Skelton's one success was to secure the return from the Netherlands of the English and Scottish regiments in the Anglo-Dutch brigade, but even this was very much a qualified success, as the political sympathies of the returning troops lay firmly with the opponents of the king. 
Eventually admitting the inevitable James II accredited Skelton as envoy-extraordinary to France on 17 October 1686. In a parting gesture that hardly endeared him to the Dutch, Skelton authorized an attempt to kidnap Sir Robert Peyton, who had been indicted for sedition in the previous year, and to transport him back to England in his diplomatic yacht. However, Peyton had become a citizen of Amsterdam and was rescued by the mob. During his leave in England, Skelton regaled James with exaggerated tales of William's sympathies with the rebels, thereby helping to harden the king's attitude to his nephew. At Versailles, however, Skelton was effectively sidelined, with all serious negotiations being conducted directly through the French ambassador in London, Barillon. His one real initiative, in August 1688, was to advise the presentation of a memorial to the states general threatening French action against the Netherlands if William's preparations against England continued. James took a public position of resenting Skelton's unauthorized initiative and recalled him, committing him to the Tower on his return. This was effectively an attempt by James to convince William and European opinion that he was not in Louis XIV's pocket, but his treatment of Skelton suggests that it was little more than window dressing. The erstwhile ambassador's confinement was brief: on 9 October he was commissioned to command a new foot regiment, and on 6 November succeeded Sir Edward Hales as lieutenant of his so recent prison. He lost this position on 11 December and followed James into exile with two of his sons. Their escape was hair-raising: 'we were pursued by a vessel full of the Dover rabble who had an intent to plunder us, if not to murder us, but after two hours dispute side by side, with matches lighted and pistols cocked expecting who should fire first, they finding nothing was to be had without blows left us, and we sailed on our way. ('Various Collections', 8.68)' In March 1689 Skelton undertook a mission for James to the imperial diet at Regensburg, and subsequently sought an audience of the emperor. The mission also took in Venice and Turin, where he attempted to win over James's kinsman, Duke Victor Amadeus of Savoy. The duke, who was reluctant to offend William III, managed to avoid Skelton, whose known predilection for France again conditioned the response of a government to him. In February 1690 Skelton returned to Versailles as James II's envoy. He was appointed comptroller of the household at St Germain-en-Laye in June 1690 on a salary of 4200 livres a year, and additionally became a commissioner of the household on 24 December 1694. Skelton converted to Catholicism in 1691. 
Following Simona's death on 17 January 1692 Skelton married, on 14 March, Marie (1660/61-1747), daughter of Daniel O'Brien, third Viscount Clare (c.1630-1690). Several children were born in quick succession: James in 1692, Mary (who later married Lord Molyneux) in 1693, and Frances early in 1695. By February 1696 Skelton was dangerously ill, and he died and was buried at St Germain-en-Laye on 28 April, when he was said to be fifty-five. A posthumous son, Daniel Ignatius, was baptized on 31 July (he died in November 1697). In 1701 Skelton's widow petitioned parliament for the recovery of her jointure: disingenuously, she claimed to have married Skelton 'some time before the revolution' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A.253, fol. 131), and made no mention at all of their time at St Germain-en-Laye. She eventually returned there and died on 8 November 1747, aged eighty-six. 
Skelton was a significant hate figure for supporters of the Williamite revolution, especially the whigs, and their demonization of him has shaped the way in which history has treated him. Skelton, a man who always seems to have found it easier to make enemies than friends, made no secret of his contempt for their opinions: in 1684 he wrote to Sir Richard Bulstrode that 'I wish I could convert my relations that are with you from their damn'd Whiggish principles' (BL, Egerton MS 3681, fol. 132). Gilbert Burnet repaid the compliment in no uncertain terms, condemning Skelton to posterity as 'a very weak and passionate man, who neither understands the conduct of affairs, nor can govern his tongue with any sort of temper; for as his passion carries him to fly out on all occasions, so his vanity is so little governed that he discovers all sorts of secrets, even when he can have no other design in it but to let it appear that he knows them. ('Supplement to Burnet's History', 256)' Skelton was undoubtedly incompetent in his dealings over Argyll's and Monmouth's expeditions, reacting too slowly and approaching the wrong authorities. His love of the French was matched only by his rather less enthusiastic attitude to other Europeans: in 1676 he described his time among the high-ranking German and Austrian dignitaries at Regensburg as being 'confined amongst proud jealous brutes, with whom I have no conversation' (BL, Egerton MS 3681, fol. 2). Skelton sought solace with fellow Britons: '[I] was yesterday (being St Benedict's day) entertained by the abbot of the Scotch Benedictines, a very honest gentleman and a good fellow, for which my head now aches' (ibid., fol. 1). Ultimately, the question of whether Colonel Bevil Skelton was or was not a competent diplomat is perhaps less important than the question of why Charles II and James II consistently employed in such high profile positions an ambassador whose sympathy for only one state and one policy was so transparent. In that respect, Skelton's career perhaps reveals more about their competence in foreign affairs than about his own. 


@@@@@


doc= 25661


Skelton, John (c.1460-1529), poet, may have been born about 1460 in the north of England, possibly Yorkshire. His family name may derive from one of the six places called Skelton in Yorkshire (though the name is found elsewhere also) and a number of his early poems are connected with that county. But about his family and early life no records have survived and his poems are silent on these matters. In fact only about two dozen records relating to his life are extant. These are mainly of a technical nature, and while they are useful, it is to his poems that one must turn for details of what mainly concerned him. 
In a poem written in 1527 or 1528 against two Cambridge heretics Skelton refers to the university as 'kind parent' ('alma parens') and says he was once an ''alumnus'' there ('Complete English Poems', 373), and a sidenote to this passage (which was probably written by Skelton) says that he 'first sucked the breast of learning at Cambridge'. There are several references to students called Skelton at this time but none is indisputably to be identified with the poet. The most likely is that which refers to a 'Dominus Skelton questionist' which might indicate that he was about to supplicate for his BA. But there is no record that Skelton did actually take this degree. He may have been at Peterhouse. In a Latin quatrain added to a poem written in 1489 Skelton refers in affectionate terms to Dr William Ruckshaw, 'most excellent of men' (ibid., 35), fellow of Peterhouse until 1474. Among his other contemporaries at Cambridge were John Blythe, who eventually became chancellor of the university, master of the rolls, and bishop of Salisbury, and John Syclyng, who later became master of Godshouse (now Christ's College). In 1495 all three dined together in London while Syclyng was there representing the University of Cambridge against the town in a legal dispute; and in 1501 Skelton and Syclyng ate together on several occasions. 
But it was from the University of Oxford, which Skelton may have attended in some capacity, that his first degree comes: about 1490, in his preface to 'Eneydos', William Caxton refers to him as 'late created poete laureate in the university of Oxford' (A. S. G. Edwards, 43) and Skelton himself refers, in one of his flytings against the courtier Sir Christopher Garnesche [Garneys], to this honour which was conferred 'by hole consent of theyr senate' ('Complete English Poems', 131). About 1492, according to a laudatory Latin poem in his honour by the grammarian Robert Whittinton, Skelton, 'the glory of English poets', was laureated by the University of Louvain (A. S. G. Edwards, 49-53). No record of this has survived. But it does acquire some confirmation from the terms of the laureateship he received from Cambridge in 1493, which refers to his Oxford degree and to another obtained 'in places across the sea' ('in partibus transmarinis'; H. L. R. Edwards, 287). This record also mentions the fact that Skelton could 'use dress given to him by a prince', which evidently meant that he could wear some distinctive apparel, evidently of white and green with the word 'Calliope' embroidered on it. 
These academic distinctions, which others also had, appear to have been given in recognition of Skelton's achievement as a writer, and other evidence confirms his early fame. Caxton, in the preface already quoted, praises him for his classical learning, his skill in translation, and his 'polysshed and ornate termes': 'I suppose he hath dronken of Elycons well'. In 1499 Erasmus, in a letter to the future Henry VIII, mentions that the prince has in his household Skelton, 'a light and glory of English letters' (A. S. G. Edwards, 44). Yet it is impossible to know exactly on what his fame rested, because it is difficult to date his early works and because some of them have undoubtedly been lost. It is fairly certain, though, that, by the time Caxton praised him, he had written the elegy for Henry Percy, fourth earl of Northumberland, killed by a mob of tax rebels on 28 April 1489 at Topcliff, Yorkshire. He had also finished his translation of Diodorus Siculus's 'Bibliotheca historica', the sole surviving manuscript of which (Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 357) was owned by Robert Pen, gentleman of the Chapel Royal. Caxton also mentions that he 'hath late translated' Cicero's letters 'and diverse other werkes out of Latyn in to Englysshe' but none of these have survived in an identifiable form. 
What Skelton did after his years at university is not clear. He was evidently associated at some stage with the Percy household. There is a text of the elegy for the fourth earl in London (BL, Royal MS 18.D.ii) that at some stage belonged to Henry Percy, the fifth earl, and which contains a Percy family chronicle, in verse, written by William Peeris, 'clerke and preiste', which views the death of the fourth earl in very much the same light as Skelton had. And though they are lost, Skelton also claims to have composed 'pajauntis [pageants] that were played at the Joyows Garde' ('Complete English Poems', 351). 'Joyous Garde', Lancelot's castle in 'Morte Darthur', was sometimes considered to be Alnwick and sometimes Bamborough, both of which were Percy castles in Northumberland; and it may well be that Skelton wrote plays which were performed at one or other of them. It seems he was also at Sheriff Hutton Castle as a guest of the Howard family in 1495, when he began to write 'The Garlande of Laurell' in which he describes an embroidery group of Elizabeth Tylney Howard, countess of Surrey, and some of her relatives and friends who embroider a laurel crown in his honour (ibid., 334-43). 
Skelton appears to have entered the Tudor royal service in late October or early November 1488. It is not known what his early duties were, but about 1496 he became tutor to Prince Henry, a post he held until about 1502 or 1503. Skelton entered holy orders in 1498: he was ordained subdeacon on 31 March, deacon on 14 April, and priest on 9 June. He was attached to the abbey of St Mary of Graces, a 'free chapel royal' near the Tower of London. He is recorded as having celebrated mass there on 11 November 1498 before Henry VII, who made him an offering of 20's'. It appears that Skelton involved himself in the ecclesiastical politics of London: Peter Ottey, a royal chaplain, made a complaint against him at the court of requests on 14 May 1501; and on 10 June 1502 he was imprisoned as surety for William Guy, prior of St Bartholomew's, who was delinquent in a debt. But much of Skelton's time must have been spent on his pedagogical duties, which he recalled with pride years later: 'The honor of England I lernyd to spelle' ('Complete English Poems', 132). 
Skelton's writings in this period reflect the multifaceted nature of his situation. Some are panegyrics, such as the 'Epigramma ad sancti principis maiestatem', written to celebrate Prince Henry's being created duke of York on 1 November 1494. Probably similar was the now lost 'Prince Arturis Creacyon' ('Complete English Poems', 345) which may have celebrated Arthur's assumption of the title of prince of Wales in 1489. It is likely too that Skelton wrote or translated a number of pedagogical works, such as the 'New Gramer' (ibid., 346), or moral works such as 'the Boke how Men Shulde Fle Synne' or 'the Boke to Speke Well or Be Styll' (ibid., 345), the second of which may well have been a version of Albertanus de Brescia's 'Tractatus de doctrina dicendi et tacendi'. Both of these are now lost, as are the texts on government Skelton claims to have written such as 'The Boke of Honorous Estate', 'Royall Demenaunce', and 'Soveraynte a noble pamphelet' (ibid., 345-6). One such book of advice, however, has survived -- the brief 'Speculum principis', written in ornate Latin prose for Prince Henry and finished on 28 August 1501. It looks as though Skelton took his duties as royal tutor very seriously. 
But some of Skelton's English poems written in this period give a very different impression of his life. 'Manerly Margery Mylk and Ale', which survives with music for three voices by William Cornish in London, British Library, Add. MS 5465 (Fayrfax MS), is a cynical seduction poem. And a lot of the lyrics in the collections entitled 'Agaynste a Comely Coystrowne' and 'Dyvers Balettys and Dyties Solacyous', both printed by John Rastell about 1527, but written probably in the 1490s, deal with social and sexual competitiveness in London and at court: two are satires on would-be teachers of music at court; another is about a man deceived by a tavern prostitute; and another is about disquiet in a well-to-do knightly household because the wife of a 'ryght jentyll knyght' is having an affair with the servant in charge of the horses: 'He rydyth wel the horse, but he rydyth better the mare' ('Complete English Poems', 43). A number of these themes reappear in 'The Bowge of Courte', probably written in the autumn of 1498 and printed by de Worde in 1499. This is a sombre anti-court satire cast as a traditional medieval dream-vision allegory. Skelton, in the thinly disguised character of Drede, a man of 'vertu' and 'lytterkture', finds himself on a ship, 'The Bowge of Courte', steered by Fortune and resorted to by those hoping to make their way at court. He is told by Desyre: '
Bone aventure may brynge you in suche case 

That ye shall stonde in favoure and in grace. 
(ibid., 49)' The ship is peopled by a sinister assortment of thieves, gamblers, pimps, potential murderers -- a kind of courtly underclass -- who all both flatter and scheme against each other, and try to involve Drede in their plots. The language they use is colloquial and demotic, full of innuendo and threat. It is a poem full of conspiratorial whispering -- 'I have an errande to rounde in your ere' (ibid., 60) -- but the message is never told. It is a depressed analysis, born out of anxiety and insecurity, out of frustration and disappointment, of the milieu in which Skelton had decided to make his career. 
On 29 April 1502 'the duc of Yorks scolemaster' received a gift of 40's'. from Henry VII (H. L. R. Edwards, 288-9). If this person is to be identified with Skelton it was probably the last gift of this sort that he received. Perhaps by 1503, but certainly by 10 April 1504, when he witnessed the will of Margery Cowper, one of his parishioners, Skelton was in Diss, Norfolk, where he was rector of the parish church of St Mary's -- a post he held until his death. Though the rectorship of Diss was quite a lucrative post, Skelton evidently did not enjoy the experience of being a country clergyman very much. He probably lived mainly in Diss until 1512 or 1513. He does not appear, from the official records, to have been anything other than a dutiful clergyman. In, perhaps, 1506 he wrote a Latin couplet rejoicing in the receipt of tithes from his parishioners. Some time after 25 April 1507 he wrote 'Lamentacio urbis Norwicen', on the second disastrous fire in the city. Between 3 December 1509 and 4 February 1510 he was in attendance at the Norwich consistorial court for the interrogation of Thomas Pykerell of Diss 'for the welfare of his soul' -- a heresy trial. On 6 December 1511 he was one of the arbitrators in a dispute between William Dale, rector of Redgrave, Suffolk, and Thomas Revet before Bishop Richard Nykke in Norwich. 
But some poems written in Skelton's period at Diss suggest that he did not get on well with some of his parishioners or some of his fellow clergymen. A pair of macaronic satiric epitaphs, perhaps written in 1506, and copied out by the parish priest of Trumpington, Cambridgeshire, take as their subject 'two knaves sometyme of Dis' ('Complete English Poems', 106): John Clarke, whose will was proved on 14 April 1506, and Adam Uddersall, two of his parishioners. The epitaph's normal laudation of a life well spent is here replaced by vicious personalized invective. Clarke had, it seems, either calumniated or criticized Skelton, his own rector. There is no doubt, however, about what provoked 'Ware the Hawke', which dates from about the same period: a neighbouring cleric, perhaps John Smith, rector of East Wretham (about 15 miles from Diss), had allowed his hawk to chase an injured pigeon into Skelton's church. Skelton remonstrated with him: '
But he sayde that he wolde 

Agaynst my mynde and wyll 

In my church hauke styll. 
(ibid., 64)' Skelton implies that he made a formal complaint about the incident which is recorded in 'the offycallys bokys' (ibid.) but that a bribe caused the matter to be dropped, so that the church is 'abusyd / Reproched and pollutyd' (ibid., 66). A better-tempered poem, probably dating originally from before 1505, is 'Phyllyp Sparowe', a mock elegy on the death of a pet sparrow belonging to Jane Scrope, daughter of the twice widowed Lady Eleanor Wyndham, who, with her unmarried daughters, had gone in 1502 to live in Carrow Abbey, a Benedictine house near Norwich, where the unfortunate bird was killed by the nunnery cat. The poem owes something to Catullus's 'Lugete, O veneres cupidinesque', his lament for Lesbia's dead sparrow, and to other classical poems on the deaths of pets, but it is structured around various offices for the dead from the service books of the medieval church, and Latin phrases from these services intersperse Jane's lament. 
Something about Skelton's poem offended Alexander Barclay -- possibly the parody of the offices for the dead or, more likely, the questionable prurience of some of Skelton's 'commendacions' of Jane -- and he referred to it slightingly in a 'brefe addicion to the syngularyte of some newe folys' which he appended to his translation of Sebastian Brant's 'Shyp of Folys' (1509): '
Wyse men love vertue, wylde people wantones; 

It longeth not to my scyence nor cunnynge 

For Phylyp the Sparowe the 'Dirige' to synge. 

' This is the first known occasion on which Skelton's writings attract unfavourable notice. Subsequently it becomes more frequent and Skelton becomes more of a controversialist. He responded, characteristically, to Barclay with an 'addicyon' of his own (which made its first appearance in print in 'The Garlande of Laurell', 1523, lines 1261-375, and which was included in all subsequent editions of 'Phyllyp Sparowe') defending his poem and accusing his detractors of envy. However, about 1510, Skelton is mentioned in 'The Great Chronicle of London', along with William Cornish and Thomas More, as contemporary satiric 'poettes... of fame' (A. S. G. Edwards, 46-7). 
On the accession of Henry VIII in 1509 Skelton made a determined effort to return to court, hoping that his former pupil might favour him. He wrote 'A Lawde and Prayse made for our Sovereigne Lord the Kyng', perhaps for 24 June when the new king was crowned, praising him for uniting the Lancastrian and Yorkist lines, and confidently expecting him to be 'sage' and 'just', and a protector of the commons. He also sent to Henry VIII a copy of the 'Speculum principis', perhaps for his birthday on 28 June, with the addition of a twelve-line 'palinodium' making many of the same points as the English eulogy. He adds, 'May Jupiter Feretrius grant that I do not pass my time on the banks of the Eurotas' -- alluding, in the last phrase, to the Latin proverb connoting enforced idleness and under-employment ('Latin Writings', no. X). Whether Skelton's bid had any immediate effect is difficult to say. The general pardon roll of 21 November 1509 says that he was 'late of Diss, Norfolk', so perhaps he was living, for at least part of his time, in London or Westminster. He was in Westminster on 15 July 1511 when he dined with Prior Richard Mane, but he was in Norwich in the autumn of that year. 
By 1512, however, Skelton was beginning to write poems very different from the outraged invectives and satires on local issues which characterized his period in Diss. In 1512 and afterwards he frequently used the title 'orator regius' -- which means probably that he saw himself as a spokesman for the king with a range of duties, sometimes diplomatic, sometimes secretarial, and sometimes poetical. It was a title used also by Bernard Andre, Giovanni Gigli, ambassador to the papal curia, and Jean Maillard, French secretary to Henry VIII. Skelton celebrated his new status, characteristically, with two poems of self-praise -- one in Latin, one in English -- dedicating himself to Calliope 'for as long as my life lasts' ('Latin Writings', no. XV, l. 4). And the focus of his poems becomes more national. In this year, at the suggestion of Abbot John Islip, he wrote a Latin epitaph to be displayed on the tomb of Henry VII in Westminster Abbey, celebrating him, among other things, for the fear he instilled in the French and the Scots (ibid., no. XVI, ll. 12-14). He also sent to Henry VIII a copy of the 'Chronique de Rains', a history of the third crusade, written in French prose, which recounts, among other things, the exploits of Richard I. Skelton attached to it a brief dedicatory Latin poem pointing out that the exploits of the English are usually belittled by French writers (ibid., no. XIV, ll. 10-11). The nationalism and latent aggression of these two texts may suggest that Skelton knew that war was coming and that he was in favour of it. 
In May and June 1513 Henry VIII crossed the channel to France with a large and well-equipped army and besieged Therouanne. An attempt by the French to relieve the town on 16 August led to a disastrous defeat at Guinegate, usually called 'the battle of the spurs' because the French ran away so fast. In support of his French ally, with whom he had signed a treaty of mutual aid on 16 March 1512, James IV of Scotland crossed the English border on 22 August. A number of castles fell to the Scots initially, but they were confronted and disastrously defeated at Flodden by an English army under Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey, on 9 September, and James IV was killed. These events provided the material for a number of poems, glorifying the achievements of Henry VIII and belittling his enemies. Where Skelton was during these momentous events -- in France with Henry VIII's army, in Diss, or in Westminster -- is much argued about, but he got speedy information (not always accurate) about what was happening. 
Skelton's 'Chorus de Dys contra Gallos', written on 28 August 1513, celebrates the capitulation of Therouanne, denigrates the French, and praises Henry VIII as Mary's knight who will rule the French nation under her might ('sub ope'; 'Latin Writings', no. XVII). Four poems, however, deal with the battle of Flodden and its aftermath, and Skelton was clearly principally concerned with the Scottish war. The earliest is 'A Ballade of the Scotyshe Kynge', printed as a single leaf by Richard Fakes, evidently hurriedly because it is full of mistakes. Skelton knows that there has been a battle, but, reflecting earlier reports of it, does not know exactly where it took place and is not sure whether James IV is dead or has been taken prisoner. Most of the poem deals with an interview between the Lyon king of arms, James IV's herald, and Henry VIII in France, of which Skelton obviously had a detailed account. In the style of a flyting Skelton denigrates James IV for his treachery and maintains that through his actions he has forfeited the right to be called noble. At some time probably shortly after 22 September, Skelton revised this poem and reissued it as 'Agaynste the Scottes' with a variety of changes: he knew by then that the battle had taken place at Branxton Moor and Flodden Edge, and what had happened to James IV's body. Some of the additions add extra insults to the Scots and their dead. He is also concerned to set the record straight, dismissing derisively the early claims that the Scots had won the battle. He is also clearer about the double intention of the poem: it is to 'angre the Scottes and Irish keterynges' by rejoicing over the death of their king, and to 'comfort with gladnes' the hearts of England ('Complete English Poems', 117). 
To praise the king, celebrate victories in battle, and to denigrate the enemies of England may have represented some of the literary functions of the 'orator regius', but it seems clear that Skelton also had a responsibility to entertain and amuse the court. A number of satires in the form of flytings were written in the years between 1514 and 1518 apparently for this purpose. The most interesting and extensive poems of this sort -- four lengthy English offerings and a Latin couplet -- disparage the ancestry, personal appearance, moral make-up, and career of Sir Christopher Garnesche, a prosperous East Anglian knight, who had seen service in France and had become gentleman usher to Henry VIII in 1509. There were two sides to this poetical contest, but the poems written on behalf of Garnesche have not survived. In the heading to his second poem Skelton refers to Garnesche's helper as 'Gresy, Gorbelyd Godfrey' -- which may refer to Stephen Hawes or to Alexander Barclay ('Complete English Poems', 122). The latter had attacked Skelton in the same year as 'voyde of wisedom'. From 1515-16 come two other flytings: one against George Dundas, in which all Skelton's anti-Scottish feelings are rehearsed; and 'Against Venemous Tongues', an attack on backbiters at court. In 1517 or thereabouts Skelton wrote 'Elynour Rummynge', an anti-feminist diatribe in the guise of describing a tavern, its owner, and its clientele. It was evidently based on a real person: an 'Alianora Romyng' of Leatherhead, Surrey, was described as being a 'common tippellar of ale' and was fined 2died for selling ale 'at excessive price by small measures'. 
The only eulogistic poem to date from these years is the Latin elegy for Lady Margaret Beaufort, mother of Henry VII, which is dated 15 August 1516. Lady Margaret had died in 1509 and the occasion for Skelton's poem was probably the completion of Pietro Torregiano's tomb for her in the south aisle of Henry VII's chapel in Westminster Abbey, where the poem was displayed. But in July 1518, or a little later, he wrote another epitaph -- satiric and vituperative this time -- on William Bedell, Lady Margaret's former treasurer and receiver-general, with whom Skelton would have come into contact when he was in Diss and subsequently in Westminster. Bedell is twice referred to as a hater of priests ('Latin Writings', no. XXI, ll. 6-8), and since Lady Margaret had significant holdings in the parish of Diss, which she discharged through Bedell, the quarrel may have originated there. 
Skelton's most ambitious work from this period is 'Magnyfycence', an elaborate morality play, first performed perhaps in the London Merchant Taylors' Hall ('Complete English Poems', 179). It is set in London and deals with a struggle for power in the household of a 'prynce', and, though it is peopled by allegorical abstractions, it appears to refer to the 'expulsion of the minions' of May 1519, a move by Henry VIII's council to expel from their places in the privy chamber a group of young men, including Sir Nicholas Carew and Sir Francis Bryan, who were thought to be having a deleterious influence on the king. In Skelton's play, irresponsible and scheming vice figures persuade Magnyfycence to dismiss his steward, Measure, and misappropriate and spend the prince's money, leaving him impoverished and degraded until Good Hope, Redresse, Sad Cyrcumspeccyon, and Perseveraunce bring him back to good order -- these last probably a reflection of the 'foure sad and auncient knights, put into the kynges privie chamber' by the council. Skelton, through this play, seeks to persuade Henry VIII to be careful whom he chooses to have as his most intimate advisers, to curb his financial excesses, and to run his household according to the Aristotelian 'golden mean'. 
In 1519 Skelton became involved in the 'grammarians' war', which turned on how it was best to teach Latin -- by rule and precept, or by means of seeking to imitate the best classical authors and giving less attention to formal grammar. Skelton, predictably, took the part of the more formal traditionalists. He was praised in this year by Robert Whittinton, whose traditionally based 'Vulgaria' (1520) was one of the texts at the centre of the quarrel. Skelton, in his turn, attacked William Lyly, headmaster of St Paul's School, London, one of the reformers, in a Latin invective of 64 lines, which has been lost. Lyly wrote a brief but brilliant epigram on Skelton which concludes by describing him as 'neither learned nor a poet' ('doctrinam nec habes, nec es poeta'; A. S. G. Edwards, 48). Skelton returns to this issue in 'Speke Parott' (1521) where he jibes that the modernistic teachers set their minds 'so moche of eloquens' that the complete meaning of things ('hole sentens') is lost ('Complete English Poems', 235). And he widens his attack to include the way Greek, which had recently become available at both Oxford and Cambridge, was taught. Again it is the non-utilitarian focus which offends him. 
'Speke Parott', however, is about rather more than grammar, being for the most part a thinly disguised attack on Cardinal Thomas Wolsey for his high-handedness and his manoeuvrings at the Paris peace conference between 2 August and 24 November 1521, which Skelton took to be to serve his own ambitions for the papacy rather than the interests of Henry VIII and England. Skelton uses the Parott of the title as a mouthpiece and pretends to be repeating what he has heard, 'shredis of sentence', around the court, so distancing himself somewhat from what he writes. The learning and allusiveness of the earlier part of the poem evidently made it difficult to understand: according to 'lenvoy primere' some 'folys' who had read it said that it hung together 'as fethyrs in the wynde' ('Complete English Poems', 239). Skelton rejects this criticism by saying that these cavillers are 'lewdlye... lettyrd' (ibid.). But he responds to the suggestion that he should 'sette asyde all sophysms, and speke now trew and playne' (ibid., 244), and closes off the poem with a set of generalized 'abuses of the age'. And his other poems against Wolsey are simpler and more direct in style. In 'Collyn Clout' (1521-2) Skelton assumes the persona of a poor countryman and abandons the rhyme royal of the previous poem for the simpler short-lined rhyming to which he gave his name -- 'Skeltonics'. But even though his poem is simple, 'ragged / Tattered and jagged', he asserts that it 'hath in it some pyth' (ibid., 248). It is an attack on various aspects of the contemporary church, particularly on the bishops for dereliction of their duties, greediness, worldliness. In 'Why come ye not to courte?' (November 1522) the approach is a lot plainer. This is a question-and-answer poem which deals with contemporary events in an up-to-date manner. 'What news? What news?' and similar questions produce a review of the political issues of the day. But the latter part of the poem is an attack on Wolsey -- direct, trenchant, often highly personal, as in lines 1166-201, where Skelton mentions his eye trouble and suggests he is also syphilitic. But what concerns Skelton principally is the way in which Wolsey, in the council and in Star Chamber, overbears the aristocracy and, he suggests, sets himself up as an equal to Henry VIII: '
Set up a wretche on hye, 

In a trone triumphantlye, 

Make him of great astate 

And he wyll play checke mate 

With ryall majeste. 
(ibid., 293)' It is impossible to tell whether Wolsey was aware of these poems or not: they do not appear to have been printed until after his death, but they may well have circulated in manuscript. 
However, when Skelton's 'Garlande of Laurell' was published by Richard Fakes on 23 October 1523 it contained a double dedication -- to Henry VIII and, surprisingly, to Wolsey. The latter is reminded that he had promised Skelton a prebend ('Complete English Poems', 356). Whether Skelton was bought off by patronage (which is what this suggests) or whether he thought England had worse enemies than Wolsey, is impossible to say. But after 1523 most of his poems appear to have been commissioned by Wolsey. That he could dedicate his poem to the two most powerful men in the kingdom adds something to Skelton's poem, though, because it is very much a summation and justification of his poetic career. Much of the narrative, which relates in a dream-vision how Skelton was accepted into the company of other eminent poets by the Queen of Fame, was probably written in 1495 or a little later. All that he appears to have done in 1522 and 1523, besides write the dedicatory lines, is to update his autobiography (ibid., 346-50). But it is clear that by 1523 Skelton believed that he had achieved distinction in his chosen career and that his position of eminence was assured. The Queen of Fame tells him that 'your place is here reservyd' (ibid., 344). 
After this Skelton wrote only two substantial poems, both commissioned by Wolsey, and both dealing with threats to state and church. In early November 1523 John Stewart, duke of Albany and regent of Scotland, crossed the English border with a large force of Scots and Frenchmen and besieged the castle of Wark, but, after a fierce engagement, failed to take it. Skelton celebrates the failed siege in 'The Douty Duke of Albany', written between 6 and 12 November, using material from Surrey's dispatches and ideas from his earlier anti-Scottish poems. The purpose of the poem appears to have been to counter Albany's propaganda as much as to celebrate his discomfiture, and Skelton, in a predictable and personalized way, stresses his unknightly behaviour: '
This Duke so fell 

Of Albany, 

So cowardly, 

With all his hoost 

Of the Scottyshe coost, 

For all theyr boost, 

Fledde lyke a beest. 
('Complete English Poems', 359)' Several years later, in late 1527 or 1528, Skelton wrote against two heretics who had appeared before Wolsey in November 1527. Thomas Arthur and Thomas Bilney, both Cambridge scholars, made abjurations (though Bilney's was very oddly framed), and both were imprisoned for about a year. On their release Arthur disappeared from heretical circles, but Bilney, after a while, resumed his heterodox preaching and was burnt as a relapsed heretic on 19 August 1531. Skelton was much involved in countering heresy in 1528: he appeared as a witness in the trial of Thomas Bowgas, a fuller from St Leonard's, Colchester, who was cited before Cuthbert Tunstall, bishop of London, on 4 May. Skelton's poem, 'A Replycacion agaynst Certayne Yong Scolers Abjured of Late', published by Pynson probably in 1528, seems to have been part of an orchestrated strategy: it was commissioned by Wolsey, and bears a marked resemblance to Thomas More's 'Dialogue Concerning Heresies' (published in 1529) which was written at Tunstall's request. Skelton accuses the 'recheless yonge heretykes' of overreaching intellectual pride which has taken them 'farther than their wytte wyll reche' (ibid., 374), and advises them to submit to the authority of the 'doctours' of the church (ibid., 381). But though the poem may be unfair in presenting them as bar-room intellectuals, it is also astute in not giving credence to Bilney's abjuration. Skelton asserts that he is 'now as yll... As ye were before' (ibid., 379), and events proved him to be correct. 
On 8 August 1518 Skelton is recorded as living within the sanctuary at Westminster in an apartment 'south of the great Belfrey' and it may be assumed that he lived there for the latter part of his life. He died on 21 June 1529 and was buried before the high altar in St Margaret's, Westminster, to all intents and purposes an honoured churchman. 
But stories which circulated after his death, especially the 'Merie Tales' of 1567, presented him very differently as a scandalous libertine (who kept a concubine with whom he had a child), and an eccentric wit and jester ('Poetical Works', 1.lxxi-xci). Many of the stories turn on clever retorts or pithy sayings, which are not inconsistent with the reputation he had for learning and for being, as Henry Bradshaw termed him, 'inventive' (A. S. G. Edwards, 47). It is worth noting that both More and Erasmus were renowned as wits and jesters, and John Grange, in 'Golden Aphroditis' (1577), links Erasmus and Skelton in this regard: 'by what means could Skelton the Laureat poet, or Erasmus that great and learned clarke have uttered their mindes so well at large, as thorowe clokes of mery conceytes in wryting of toyes and foolish theames?' (ibid., 59). Implicit in such a question is the view that witty jests had serious intentions. 
Skelton was the last great poet of Catholic England, and was a determined and thoroughgoing conservative on religious and political issues. He was also the first notable poet whose career coincided with printing. A number of his texts were circulated in the traditional way in manuscript form, but a good many were printed in his lifetime, and this brought him to the notice of a readership from a wide social spectrum. Since he was essentially a public and occasional poet the availability of print was important: his poems had a propagandist value, which was exploited by him and by his patrons. After his death there appeared numerous editions of his works, both single poems and small collections, culminating in Marsh's extensive collection of 1568, 'Pithy, Pleasaunt and Profitable Works of Maister Skelton, Poete Laureate'. This was prefaced by an adulatory poem by Thomas Churchyard, comparing Skelton to a list of poets both classical and modern, both European and English. He stresses Skelton's talent for satire: 'His terms to taunts did lean' (A. S. G. Edwards, 56-9). And this was very much the way he was seen in the sixteenth century: according to John Bale, he told the truth 'under a mask of laughter' ('sub persona ridentis'; H. L. R. Edwards, 306). His early followers tended to imitate his controversial and polemical works, especially those in 'Skeltonics' -- long leashes of monorhymed short, mainly two-stressed, lines: the earliest is probably William Roy's and Jerome Barlowe's 'Rede me and be nat Wrothe' (1528), a vituperative attack on Wolsey, but several controversial works in this form survive from the 1540s and 1550s. Skelton, however, did not see himself exclusively as a satirist. He had a high view of the worth of poetry and of the dignity of the poet, which is probably why he insists so much on his titles to fame, 'poete laureate', 'orator regius'. In some of the last lines he wrote he asserts that 'God maketh his habytacion' in poets and that it is through 'divyne inspyracion' that poets write. And this, he argues, applies to poetry of all sorts, which are all equally valid, for poets write in all sorts of circumstances: '
Somtyme for affection, 

Sometyme for sadde dyrection, 

Somtyme for correction. 
('Complete English Poems', 384-5)' Praise, advice, blame -- in small compass this is not a bad summary of the nature of his poetry. 


@@@@@


doc= 25662


Skelton, Sir John (1831-1897), writer, was born in Edinburgh on 18 July 1831, the only son of James Skelton of Sandford Newton, writer to the signet and sheriff-substitute at Peterhead, Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Kinnear. He was educated at the universities of St Andrews and Edinburgh, and in 1854 he was admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates. However, his interests lay in literature more than in law and he started contributing essays and reviews to 'Fraser's Magazine' under the pseudonym of Shirley, from Charlotte Bronte's novel of that name. He had previously received a letter from her for his critical notice of 'Jane Eyre'. In 1857 he contributed an essay on 'Early English life in drama' to a volume of 'Edinburgh Essays' and was a regular contributor to 'The Guardian', a short-lived Edinburgh periodical, and formed an acquaintance with the editor of 'Fraser's', James Anthony Froude. In 1862 his first independent publication, 'Nugae criticae', was published, a collection of essays which had appeared in various magazines, and in the same year he attempted a political romance, 'Thalatta, or, The Great Commoner', a sketch of a character combining resemblances to both Canning and Disraeli. With his friend William Ellis Gloag, a Scottish judge, he also edited the second edition of Dickson's 'Treatise on the Law of Evidence' (1864). In 1865 he edited and published, anonymously, a collection of verse entitled 'Spring Songs'. On 30 July 1867 he married Anne Adair Lawrie ('b'. 1846/7), daughter of James Adair Lawrie, professor of surgery at Glasgow. Among their children was the politician Noel Skelton. 
When the Scottish Board of Supervision, which administered the laws respecting the poor and public health, was reconstituted in 1868, Skelton was appointed secretary by Disraeli. It was said that the choice was due to Disraeli's admiration of his literary work. Within a year Skelton published anonymously a sympathetic sketch of his patron, entitled 'Benjamin Disraeli: the Past and the Future... by a Democratic Tory' (1868). His earliest official work had been to administer the 'Public Health Act' of 1867, and to aid its operations he published an edition of the act with notes. In 1876 he published another official work of authority, 'The Boarding-out of Pauper Children in Scotland'. 'The Handbook of Public Health' (1890-91) and 'The Local Government (Scotland) Act in Relation to Public Health' (1890) were valuable contributions to official literature. 
Meanwhile Skelton was confirming his literary reputation. His connection with 'Blackwood's Magazine' started in 1869 and lasted throughout his life. In 1876 he published his first contribution to the controversy concerning Mary Stuart, entitled 'The Impeachment of Mary Stuart', in which he espoused the cause of the unfortunate queen. This was followed by 'Essays in Romance and Studies from Life' (1883), 'Maitland of Lethington and the Scotland of Mary Stuart' (1887-8), his most elaborate historical work, and 'Mary Stuart' (1893), in all of which he defended Mary against her accusers with ability and careful restraint. In his historical work he characteristically displayed something of the spirit of the advocate. His descriptive powers are seen in his graphic rendering of life at Peterhead in 'The Crookit Meg: a Story of One Year' (1880), originally serialized in 'Fraser's Magazine'. Of Skelton's more purely literary works the best-known are the 'Essays of Shirley' (1882) and 'The Table Talk of Shirley' (1895), of which a second series was issued in 1896 under the title 'Summers and Winters at Balmawhapple'. The table talk consisted chiefly of reminiscences of Froude, Dante Rossetti, and other personal friends or literary contemporaries. Quaint, almost eccentric, in treatment, Skelton's essays were popular with authors as different as Carlyle, Thackeray, Huxley, and Rossetti. 
In 1878 Skelton received the honorary degree of LLD from Edinburgh University; he was created CB in 1887, and KCB in 1897. He retained the post of secretary to the Board of Supervision until 1892, when he was elected chairman. In 1894, when the board was replaced by the Scottish Local Government Board, Skelton became vice-president of the new body. He finally retired on 31 March 1897, when the board recorded in a minute its sense of Skelton's services in diminishing pauperism throughout Scotland. Skelton died on 19 July 1897 at his home, Hermitage of Braid, Edinburgh, survived by his wife and several children. 


@@@@@


doc= 25663


Joseph John Skelton (1783-1871), brother of William Skelton, was born in Westminster on 17 June 1783, and became an engraver in the mixed style of topographical and antiquarian subjects. Before 1819 he went to live in Oxford, where he published 'Oxonia antiqua restaurata' (1823), 'Antiquities of Oxfordshire', from drawings by Frederick Mackenzie (1823), 'Pietas Oxoniensis, or, Records of Oxford Founders' (1828), and S. R. Meyrick's 'Engraved Illustrations of Antient Arms and Armour, from the Collection of Llewelyn Meyrick at Goodrich Court, Herefordshire, after the Drawings and with the Descriptions of Dr Meyrick' (2 vols., 1830). He also engraved the heading to the 'Oxford Almanack' for the years 1815 to 1831, from drawings by Mackenzie and Charles Wild, and executed a set of fifty-six etchings for 'The Antiquities of Bristol' from original sketches by Hugh O'Neill (1825-[30]). Later Skelton settled in France, where he engraved many of the plates to C. Gavard's 'Galeries historiques de Versailles' (7 vols., 44, 1839), J. Vatout's 'Le chateau d'Eu' (1844), and P. A. E. Girault's 'Les beautes de la France' (1850). He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1825, but his name disappeared from the lists in 1844. He was married to Mary Ann ('b'. 1784/5), also an artist, with whom he had a daughter, born in Oxford about 1822. By 1851 they were living in London. Widowed, he made applications to the Royal Literary Fund for financial support and, in 1858, through the support of many of his former patrons, he was nominated to a brothership of the Charterhouse, London. He died there, of chronic bronchitis and exhaustion, on 25 March 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 25664


Skelton, Philip (1707-1787), Church of Ireland clergyman and religious controversialist, was born in February 1707 in Derriaghy, co. Antrim, the son of Richard Skelton (died 1718), a farmer who had served an apprenticeship as a gunsmith, and also traded as a tanner. His mother, Arabella Cathcart, was the daughter of a farmer, and the tenancy of the farm at Derriaghy, held under Lord Conway, was her dowry. His paternal grandfather had settled in Ireland during the reign of Charles I. Philip had five brothers, two of whom also became clergymen, and four sisters. He was sent at the age of ten to a Latin school at Lisburn, conducted by a Revd Mr Clarke. He was prompted to be studious there by the suggestion of his father that his alternative to going to university was to be employed as a labourer. His father's death in 1718 curtailed the family's relatively comfortable lifestyle, but Philip continued at Clarke's school. In June 1724 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, as a sizar. Dr Patrick Delany was his tutor, and the two men struck up a lasting friendship. He was elected a scholar in 1726, and graduated BA in July 1728, despite allegations that he was a Jacobite. 
After teaching in the endowed school at Dundalk, Skelton was nominated curate to the physician Samuel Madden at Drummully, co. Fermanagh, and ordained deacon by Bishop Sterne of Clogher in 1729. He lived with Madden for two years as private tutor to his sons, as well as attending to his curacy. It was here that Skelton produced the first in a long line of published pamphlets, a short work in support of Madden's scheme for premiums in Trinity College. He also began a lifelong habit of donating part of his salary to the poor. In 1732 he became a curate at Monaghan, where the rector paid him $40 a year, most of which was spent for the benefit of his family or poor parishioners, and in clearing his still outstanding college debts. He attended assiduously to his clerical duties, paying particular attention to the children of the parish. He also performed many specific acts of kindness and Christian endeavour, including securing a pardon for a condemned felon, and using his substantial physique to impress his values on errant spirits. Additionally he studied medicine, and dispensed medical help within the parish. 
Skelton found time to publish anonymously a series of short discourses against Socinianism, and in 1736 two ironical pamphlets in support of the established church that purported to be a defence of deism and dissent but were couched in such terms as to appear ridiculous. The following year, again anonymously, he addressed the inadequacies of the Irish legal system in a 'Dissertation on the Constitution and Effects of a Petty Jury', while in 1741, inspired by what he witnessed during a period of famine, he produced 'The Necessity of Tillage and Granaries in a Letter to a Member of Parliament'. The latter called for the extension of tillage farming and the erection of public granaries to alleviate future distress. Both works were well received in Ireland. 
In 1742 Skelton became for a short time tutor to the politician James Caulfeild, first earl of Charlemont. A quarrel with Lord Charlemont's stepfather led to his returning to his curacy in Monaghan, though Skelton dedicated 'Truth in a Mask' (1744), a series of parables, to Charlemont. In 1744 he published 'The Candid Reader', a satirical treatment of a number of well-known contemporary figures, including Samuel Johnson. In the same year he issued 'A Letter to the Authors of the 'Divine Analogy' and the 'Minute Philosopher'', another paper in support of the doctrines of the established church. In 1745 he produced 'The Chevalier's Hopes', a hastily written pamphlet condemning the Pretender, James Stuart. 
Skelton travelled to London in 1748 to publish 'Ophimaches, or, Deism Revealed', which he considered too important a text to publish in Dublin. It consisted of eight conversations designed to repudiate the teachings of deists such as John Toland, and bolster again the conventions of reformed Christianity. He received $200 for the manuscript, and was treated in the city as a minor celebrity. He also took the opportunity to preach in several London churches. A second edition appeared in 1751. Though generously commended by Bishop Thomas Sherlock, like most of Skelton's work it lacked a coherent structure, and was largely impenetrable to the ill-informed. His prose was, and remained, excessively rhetorical, and unnecessarily elaborate. 
In 1750 Skelton was given the living of Templecarn, a large parish in the counties of Donegal and Fermanagh. It included St Patrick's Purgatory, then the primary centre of Catholic pilgrimage in Ireland, of which he later wrote a detailed account. The parish was in a somewhat neglected condition. The state of religious knowledge and observance was poor among the protestant community; there was no rectory, and the parish yielded less than $200 a year. Despite this situation, and Skelton's personal dislike for the area, he continued his ministry and good works, as he had in Monaghan. He preached specifically against whiskey drinking, and also continued writing. In 1751 he published 'The Dignity of the Christian Ministry: a Sermon', which addressed the differences between dignity conferred by worldly wealth, and that inherent in the Christian ministry. This was followed in 1753 by 'Consultation, or, A Dialogue of the Gods', an attack on the Arians. He again visited London in 1754, and published 'Discourses Controversial and Practical on Various Subjects', a collection of his sermons and other works. It was not well received, and he returned to Templecarn frustrated and disappointed. During a famine in 1757 he sold all his books to buy oatmeal for distribution to his parishioners, irrespective of their religion, and to supply the women with flax to spin. 
In 1759 Skelton published, as a reply to an Arian pamphlet, 'An Answer to 'An Appeal to the Common Sense of All Christian People''. He was also given the living of Devenish, co. Fermanagh, worth around $300 a year, which allowed him to move to the nearby town of Enniskillen. In Devenish, with a larger congregation, he continued as before. In 1766 he was presented to the more profitable living of Fintona, or Donacavey, co. Tyrone, which proved to be his last. Reputedly he enjoyed some success here in convincing a large number of Presbyterians to conform to the Church of Ireland. In 1770 he published his collected works by subscription, in five volumes; the $500 profit was donated to the Magdalen charity in Dublin. The advent of famine once more in 1778 again saw Skelton sell his library, which he had renewed, in order to provide for the poor. From 1771 he had become non-resident in his parish during the winter months, staying first with a nephew in Drogheda, then in lodgings in Dublin. From 1780 he moved permanently to the capital, while a curate remained at Fintona. In Dublin he continued writing, producing two more volumes to complement his earlier collected works, and a number of hymns and pamphlets. 
Skelton died on 4 May 1787 in Dublin, and was buried there on 8 May near the west door of St Peter's Church. His charitable deeds and constant attendance to his clerical duties, lovingly recorded in a hagiographic biography written by his friend and fellow cleric Samuel Burdy, have led to Skelton's being frequently cited by historians of eighteenth-century Ireland as a model clergyman of the Church of Ireland. His published works provide an insight into the mind of a committed reformer, and a devout Anglican. They also reveal a complete aversion to protestant dissent in any form. Despite his professional and personal attributes, and his abilities as a self-publicist, his ambitions within the church were ultimately frustrated. He was apparently denied sustained preferment both by his lack of a powerful patron, and by his own less redeeming qualities of a short temper and a brusque manner. 


@@@@@


doc= 25665


Skelton, William (1763-1848), engraver, was born in London on 14 June 1763. He entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1781 and was a pupil first of James Basire and later of William Sharp. Sir Richard Worsley, bt, and Charles Towneley were among his earliest patrons. He was employed on the illustrations of many of the most sumptuous literary and learned publications of the day, notably John and Josiah Boydell's 'Shakspeare' (2 vols., 1803); Thomas Macklin's 'Bible' (7 vols., 1800-16); Bowyer's edition of David Hume's 'The History of England'; Sir George Staunton's 'An Authentic Account of an Embassy from the King of Great Britain to the Emperor of China, Taken Chiefly from the Papers of the Earl of Macartney' (1797); 'Plates', a large folio volume of maps and illustrations for which Skelton engraved S. Edwards's 'The Fire-Backed Pheasant of Java' and 'The Pelicanus Sinesis, or, Fishing Cormorant of China'; 'A Description of the Collection of Ancient Marbles in the British Museum' (1812-61); and 'Specimens of Ancient Sculpture' (2 vols., 1809-35), published by the Society of Dilettanti. Skelton is best known, however, for his many fine portraits of famous contemporaries, chiefly from pictures by Sir William Beechey, the majority of which he published himself between 1790 and 1820; these include a series of George III and his sons, which became extremely popular; Robert Markham DD (1790); Thomas Denman MD (1792); Henry, Lord Mulgrave (1808); Spencer Perceval (1813); and Warren Hastings (1817). His 'Wenceslaus Hollar', engraved on steel, was published in Horace Walpole's 'Anecdotes of Painting', ed. J. Dallaway (5 vols., 1826-8). One of his latest plates was a portrait of Charlotte Augusta, the daughter of George IV, then the dowager queen of Wurttemberg, after P. Fischer (1827), which he issued in 1828. He also produced portraits of himself and Beechey in lithography. 
Skelton resided for many years at Stafford Place, Pimlico, London, and afterwards in Upper Ebury Street, where he died on 13 August 1848, having long previously retired from the profession. He was buried in Brompton cemetery. He was a man of great benevolence, and for over fifty years served on the committee of the Asylum for Female Orphans at Lambeth. He was married with one daughter. 




@@@@@


doc= 25666


Skene, Felicia Mary Frances (1821-1899), writer and philanthropist, born on 23 May 1821 at Aix-en-Provence, France, was the youngest child of James Skene (1775-1864), lawyer, of Rubislaw, Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Jane Forbes (1787-1862), daughter of Sir William Forbes of Pitsligo, sixth baronet. She spent much of her early childhood in Paris. When the family moved to Edinburgh, she played with the grandchildren of the exiled Charles X of France at Holyroodhouse and was, on occasion, the preferred companion of her father's friend, the ailing Sir Walter Scott ('he felt unequal to any society but that of his friend's youngest child, who would amuse him with her merry 'bavardage''; 'Glimpses of some vanished celebrities', 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', 158, 1895, 2). The family lived at Athens between 1838 and 1845, where she became acquainted with Greece's Bavarian king, Otho (and was amused by his use of 'broad Scotticisms'). From Athens the family visited Lord Stratford de Redcliffe, British ambassador at Constantinople. Skene's years spent on the continent rendered her an accomplished linguist. After 1845 the Skenes divided their time between Scotland and Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, where they settled after several years. There Skene met Thomas Chamberlain, vicar of St Thomas's, Oxford, and through him his cousin Marian Hughes, the Anglican nun. Skene became drawn to the religious and intellectual life of Oxford and influenced her family's move to 28 Beaumont Street, Oxford, in 1849; they moved to Frewin Hall in the early 1860s. 
It was with Oxford that Skene's subsequent career was most intimately associated. Here she became acquainted with E. B. Pusey and his biographer, Henry Liddon, became a sympathetic proponent of the Oxford Movement, and taught at Marian Hughes's school. She also won the active support and admiration of Sir Henry Acland and Benjamin Jowett, as, during the cholera epidemic in the city in 1854, she organized a band of nurses, some of whom were later sent to the Crimea to work with Florence Nightingale. She maintained a correspondence with Nightingale throughout the Crimean War, admiring 'beyond measure her admirable care and accuracy' ('Some episodes in a long life', 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', 159, 1896, 543). She also supported the antivivisection work of her friend Frances Power Cobbe. Skene took much interest in rescuing girls from prostitution, and from 1878, with Home Office sanction, she dedicated herself to prison-visiting at Oxford gaol. Some of her experiences were described in a series of five unsigned articles published in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' from November 1888 to August 1889 (reprinted in 1889 as 'Scenes from a Silent World, or, Prisons and their Inmates' under the pseudonym Francis Scougal), in her study 'Penitentiaries and Reformatories' (1865), and in her article 'Prison visiting' ('Fraser's Magazine', Dec 1880). Her interest in the 'eminently unsatisfactory existence' of vagrants is evident in her 'Ethics of the tramp' ('Cornhill Magazine', May 1898, 688). 
Skene's earliest published volumes, 'Isles of Greece and other Poems' (1843) and 'Wayfaring Sketches among the Greeks and Turks on the Shores of the Danube' (1849), drew on her seven years' residence in south-east Europe. Her popular devotional work, 'The Divine Master' (1852), which went to several editions, was followed in 1854 by 'The Ministry of Consolation', in 1883 by 'The Shadow of the Holy Week', and by memoirs of her cousin Alexander Penrose Forbes, bishop of Brechin (1876), and of Alexander Lycurgus, archbishop of the Cyclades (1877). She was also the editor of the 'Churchman's Companion' (1862-80). Her first novel, 'Use and Abuse' (1849), follows the careers of two rivals, Raymond and Arabyn. It was succeeded by 'The Tutor's Ward' (1851) and 'Hidden Depths' (1866; repr. 1886), the latter a fictional exposure of prostitution in Oxford ('Greyburgh') which, the author claimed, drew on scenes that she had personally witnessed. Her later fiction includes 'A Strange Inheritance' (1886), the story of a gentlemanly emigrant's return to Scotland, and 'The Lesters: a Family Record' (1887). In the mid-1870s she also serialized novels, in 'The Quiver': 'Still and Deep' in 1875, 'Raymond' in 1876, and 'More than Conqueror' in 1878. Under the pseudonym Erskine Moir she published 'Through the Shadows: a Test of the Truth' (1888) and felt this to be her most important religious work. Apart from her contributions to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' and 'Cornhill Magazine', she also published articles in the 'Dublin University Magazine', 'Macmillan's Magazine', and 'Temple Bar'. Skene died, unmarried, of bronchitis at her home, 34 St Michael Street, Oxford, on 6 October 1899. 


@@@@@


doc= 25667


Sir James Skene of Curriehill, first baronet (1578/9-1633), judge, the eldest son of Sir John Skene, was admitted advocate in 1603 and was joint clerk register with his father from 1604 to 1612 and clerk of the bills between 1608 and 1614. Appointed a lord of session in 1612, he was promoted to lord president in 1626. He was a privy councillor from 1616 to 1626, and was created a baronet of Nova Scotia in 1628. On 7 December 1603 he married Janet, daughter of Sir John Johnston of Hilton and Sheen, who survived him. They had eight sons, six of whom died young, and three daughters. Sir James Skene died on 15 October 1633, aged fifty-four, and was buried beside his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 25668


Skene, James (1775-1864), friend of Sir Walter Scott, was born at Rubislaw, near Aberdeen, on 7 March 1775, the second son and seventh and youngest child of George Skene (1736-1776), advocate, and his wife, Jean Moir (1740/41-1820), daughter of James Moir of Stoneywood, Aberdeenshire. The family was descended from Thomas, brother of Sir George Skene (died 1707), a Danzig merchant and provost of Aberdeen, from whom they inherited the Rubislaw estate. George Skene died in the year after James's birth. In 1783 his widow settled in Edinburgh, for the education of her five surviving children, and James attended the Edinburgh high school. When his elder brother, George, died in 1791, he became heir of Rubislaw, and was sent to Hanau, near Frankfurt, to further his education, becoming an accomplished linguist in due course. Upon returning to Edinburgh, he studied law, and was admitted to the Scottish bar in 1797. 
A mutual friend introduced Skene to Sir Walter Scott, who was eager to learn about German literature from him. They found that they had much in common, and remained firm friends until Scott's death. Scott wrote of Skene that he was 'the only one among my numerous friends who can properly be termed 'amicus omnium horarum'' ('friend of all hours'; 'Journal of Sir Walter Scott', 66-7). That year they founded the Edinburgh light horse infantry, of which Skene became cornet. The dedication to Skene of the introduction to 'Marmion', canto 4, is charged with reminiscences of their common interests, and J. G. Lockhart's 'Memoirs of the Life of Sir Walter Scott' (1837-8) draws heavily on Skene's manuscript memoranda of the friendship. 
In 1802 Skene revisited continental Europe after the peace of Amiens but had returned to Britain by November of the following year (NL Scot., acc. 12092, folder 41). George Bellas Greenough, president of the Geological Society of London, was his travelling companion for a time, and Skene became a member of the society. On 11 September 1806 Skene married Jane (1787-1862), youngest child of Sir William Forbes of Pitsligo, sixth baronet (1739-1806). She was the sister of Sir William, seventh baronet, who in 1797 married Scott's first love, Williamina Stuart. Jane Skene, like her husband, was highly respected by Scott, who wrote of her that she was 'a most excellent person, tenderly fond of Sophia' ('Journal of Sir Walter Scott', 54). Three sons and four daughters of the marriage survived; the second son, William Forbes Skene (1809-1892), was to become a noted antiquary and historian. The youngest daughter, Felicia Mary Frances Skene, became a popular religious writer. They lived in Kincardineshire for ten years, making frequent visits to Scott's home, and to Edinburgh. 
In 1816 the family moved to Edinburgh, and Skene became an active member of various literary and scientific societies including the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland and the Royal Society of Edinburgh, acting for a long time as the curator of its library and museum. He was an original member of the Bannatyne Club, for whom he edited Spalding's 'History of the Troubles in Scotland' (1828). In the following year he was appointed secretary to the board of trustees for manufactures in Scotland. In this capacity Skene promoted fine arts in Scotland and in 1835 obtained for the trust casts of the Elgin marbles from the British Museum for use in the training of young artists. In 1820 he undertook the design of the new Princes Street Gardens. He was also secretary to the Institution for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts in Scotland (founded in 1819), a position he held until his death. 
The Skenes visited France in 1820-21 and the detailed journal he kept -- notably an account of a certain marquis with whom Skene became acquainted and whose chateau in Provence Skene visited -- may have been used by Scott for his fictional aristocrat in 'Quentin Durward' (1823). The content of Skene's journal had a more certain influence on Scott's novel 'Anne of Geierstein' (1829), while the Jewish element in 'Ivanhoe' (1819) also drew on Skene's earlier continental experiences (Lockhart, 4.323; cf. ibid., 7.325). In 1829 he produced a series of sketches to accompany the 'Waverley' novels. Scott had a high opinion of Skene's artistic skill, writing that he was 'for a gentleman the best draughtsman I ever saw' ('Letters of Sir Walter Scott', 1.301). Skene wrote the article on painting which appeared in Sir David Brewster's 'Edinburgh Encyclopaedia'. 
For health reasons the family went to Greece in 1838, staying for several years near Athens, in a villa built to Skene's own design. He busied himself with art, and is said to have left over 500 watercolours of Greek scenery and antiquities; examples of Skene's art are now in the collections of the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh Central Reference Library, and the National Historical Museum, Athens, as well as other museums in that city. Skene and his family returned to Britain probably in mid-1843 after a special audience with King Otho in April (letter to Lord Aberdeen, BL, Add. MS 43241, fols. 165-9). He began his final residency in Athens in October of that year, remaining there until June 1845. According to Skene's granddaughter, Zoe, the family thereafter divided their time between Scotland and Leamington Spa before settling in the latter place after several years. In 1850 Skene moved to 28 Beaumont Street, Oxford, where the census of 1851 records him living with his wife and youngest daughter, Felicia. In the early 1860s they moved to Frewin Hall, Oxford, where he died on 27 November 1864. He was buried at St John's Episcopal Church, Edinburgh, where his wife had been interred two years earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 25669


Skene, Sir John, of Curriehill (c.1540-1617), jurist, was the sixth son of James Skene in Bandodle (killed at Pinkie, 10 September 1547) and his wife, Janet, daughter of Robert Lumsden of Cushnie. His father was the second son of Alexander, ninth laird of Skene (1485-1507), and progenitor of the Skenes of Westercorse and Ramore. Gilbert Skeyne (c.1522-1599), physician, was his brother. He may have been at Aberdeen grammar school in 1549, and was thereafter at King's College, Aberdeen. In 1556 he incorporated at St Mary's College, St Andrews, where he was a regent in 1565. He spent seven years in Europe ('c'.1567-1574), studying law in Paris and visiting Switzerland, Poland, and Scandinavia before settling in Germany, at the University of Wittenberg. It was probably through his travels that he became, according to James VI, fluent in 'the Dutch and Latin tongues, with great acquaintance with sundry princes in Germany, and the chief learned men about the princes there' ('CSP Scot.', '1589-93', 305). 
After returning to Scotland, Skene was admitted as an advocate on 19 March 1575. He was then recruited by Regent Morton to assist with a project for reviewing the laws of Scotland. In 1577 Morton granted him a pension from the revenues of Arbroath Abbey, to compensate for loss of his legal practice, confirmed by James VI in 1578 and 1579. As a 'disciple' of Sir James Balfour, Skene probably assisted in the compilation of the latter's 'Practicks'. When Balfour went into exile in 1579, Skene seems to have expanded his own legal practice, appearing in cases before the privy council. In 1581 the general assembly of the kirk suggested his appointment as procurator for certain ministers and in 1589 he was included in a commission to consult as to measures for 'the weal of the kirk in so dangerous a time' (Calderwood, 5.4). 
James VI initially objected to Skene's inclusion in the embassy to Denmark in 1589 for negotiating his marriage, because 'ther were many better lawers', but was assured by Sir James Melville that Skene 'was best acquanted with the conditions of the Germanes, and culd mak them lang harrangues in Latin, and was a gud trew stout man lyk a Dutche man' (Melville, 366). In 1590 James sent him on an extended diplomatic mission to the Netherlands, Denmark, and Germany, where he tried to interest the rulers in supporting plans for a league against Spain. On his return to Scotland, he resumed his duties as joint lord advocate, to which he had been appointed on 20 August 1590. 
According to Scot of Scotstarvet, Skene owed his appointment as clerk register on 19 September 1594 to his brother-in-law Walter Stewart, Lord Blantyre. Shortly afterwards, on 30 November 1594, he was appointed a lord of session. As clerk register he inventoried the exchequer records and used them to compile a list of crown property rights that had been lost during royal minorities. From January 1596 he was one of the 'Octavians', the eight commissioners of exchequer, given sweeping powers to overhaul the royal finances. When James VI's impatience with financial restraints and their own growing unpopularity forced the Octavians to resign in January 1597, all were reappointed, but the enlarged commission had more limited powers and was effectively controlled by Blantyre as treasurer. An act of parliament of June 1598 prohibiting permanent commissions of exchequer brought an end to this attempt at financial reform. About ten years later Skene set out a similar programme in his 'Proposals anent the order of the Checker', produced for the then lord treasurer, George Home, earl of Dunbar. 
Skene's membership of a commission appointed in 1592 to review and print acts of parliament and other laws resulted in the publication in 1597 of 'The Lawes and Actes of Parliament', containing post-1424 statutes. His 'De verborum significatione' (1597), the first published dictionary of Scots law, drew extensively on earlier and non-statutory sources. A second edition of this rather idiosyncratic compilation appeared in 1599, the only new entry being a dissertation on the names of days of the week. According to his assistant Habakkuk Bisset, Skene also prepared a third, unpublished, edition. 

'De verborum''s full title, 'The exposition of the termes and difficill wordes conteined in the four buikes of 'Regiam majestatem'', indicates that Skene was already engrossed in the task that was to occupy him for the next ten years. However, the citations in 'De verborum' indicate that the text of 'Regiam' he was using differed from the one eventually published. A revised text of 1601-2 bears extensive annotations, some showing his awareness of the relationship between 'Regiam' and 'Glanvill', which also excited interest among English lawyers in the context of proposals for a legal union of England and Scotland after 1603. In later revisions Skene brought in a fuller range of references to 'Glanvill'. By 1607 he was able to lay a finished text before the privy council, which recommended to the king that, as Skene's estate was not equal to his wit, genius, and literature, the work should be printed at public expense, a tax being levied on judges and members of the estates to defray the cost. The volume finally appeared in 1609 in two versions: 'the one in Latyne for the benefyte of strangearis, the uther in Scottishe language for the use of subjectis of the countrey' ('Reg. PCS', 1st ser., 8.358). Both included legal texts or statutes attributed to monarchs from Malcolm II to Robert III. An edition of the Latin version was published in London in 1613, differing only in its title-page. 
Skene's editorial methods have been criticized severely by later writers, notably his uncritical acceptance of the authenticity of 'Regiam', in which he followed legal tradition going back at least two centuries. Its relationship to 'Glanvill' seems to have reinforced his conviction that it was authentic legislation of David I, of which 'Glanvill' was merely a later English adaptation, whereas Sir Thomas Craig dismissed it as the work of a plagiarist. Skene was, however, fully aware of the many serious discrepancies among the manuscript sources available to him, as shown by his comment 'I fell into an Augean stable, that not even the labour of Hercules can cleanse or purge' ('Regiam majestatem', Latin preface). Drastic editing produced texts that were logical by his own standards, while his notes showed awareness of parallels in English and civil law. He deserves credit, at least, for providing lawyers with a printed text that answered contemporary needs. Moreover the English version of 'Regiam' contained two treatises that were genuinely innovative. The first, 'Ane short form of proces presentlie used and observed before the Lords of Counsell and session', was the first published guide to Scottish court procedure, drawing upon Roman law, as well as native sources. Habakkuk Bisset's 'Rolment of Courtis' is a revised and expanded version, using Skene's own emendations of the original. The second, 'Of crimes and judges, in criminall causes, conforme to the lawes of the realme', is a brief, well-planned exposition of different types of crime and the various judges entitled to try them. 
Skene, who had been knighted in 1604, had combined his editorial work with involvement in public business. His appointment as a commissioner for negotiating the proposed union with England in 1604 may be the context for his call to the English bar (Middle Temple) in the following year. He served on several other commissions, including one for visiting the University of St Andrews in 1609. 
According to Scot of Scotstarvet, Skene's editions of the acts of parliament and 'Regiam' brought him 'a great deal of money from the country; for all heritors of land were obliged to buy them, but it did little good; for albeit he lived many years in the place, yet did he purchase but few lands' (Scot, 99). He did not acquire Curriehill, Edinburghshire, until 1604, the year in which he made a first move to ensure his eldest son's succession to the office of clerk register. Although James Skene's ['see below'] commission was not recorded, it evidently involved some form of joint tenure with his father, who also made over to him the minor office of clerk of the bills in 1608. Finally in April 1612 Skene 'being grown in age and infirmity' dispatched James to court 'with a demission of the place but with a charge not to use it unless he found the king willing to admit him'. James, however, 'abused by some politick wits' accepted the lesser position of an ordinary lord of session ('History of the Church', 3.517). This was attributed to the machinations of Sir Thomas Hamilton, the lord advocate, who became clerk register but quickly exchanged the post for that of secretary of state, his real objective. The incident caused an estrangement between father and son, said to have been healed only by the king's personal intervention. Skene's withdrawal from public life ended with his reappointment to the council in February 1614, from which he retired finally in June 1616. 
Skene died on 16 March 1617 and was buried in the Greyfriars' Kirk, Edinburgh. He was survived by his wife, Helen Somerville (died in or after 1625), eldest daughter of Sir John Somerville of Camnethan, whom he had married in 1577. They had four sons and four daughters. He bequeathed her the unsold stocks of 'Regiam' and the rest of his books. His library, including a number of incunabula, survived at Mar Lodge, Braemar, into the 1920s but was subsequently dispersed. 






@@@@@


doc= 25670


John Skene of Hallyards (d. 1644), the second son of Sir John, was appointed by him keeper of the registers of hornings and inhibitions for life, but in August 1612 the privy council found his gift to be invalid. He succeeded his brother as clerk of the bills in 1614 and by 1618 was a principal clerk of session. On 29 June 1603 he married Alison, sister of William Rigg of Aithernie, who predeceased him; they had three sons and six daughters. The Skene manuscript of 1615-35, containing tunes, chiefly Scottish, arranged for the lute, is partly attributed to him. He died in December 1644. 


@@@@@


doc= 25671


Skene, William Forbes (1809-1892), historian and Celtic scholar, the second of seven children of James Skene (1775-1864) of Rubislaw, near Aberdeen, and Jane (1787-1862), daughter of Sir William Forbes, sixth baronet, of Pitsligo, Aberdeenshire, was born on 7 June 1809 at Inverie, Kincardineshire. He was educated at the high school of Edinburgh, and there began on his own account to study Gaelic, of which he had some opportunity of learning the rudiments through his maternal relationship with MacDonell of Glengarry, but still more through his being boarded for a time at Laggan, Inverness-shire, with the parish minister, Mackintosh Mackay, on the recommendation of Sir Walter Scott, a close friend of his father. 
After a session at the University of Edinburgh, Skene went in 1824 with his elder brother, George, to Hanau, near Frankfurt, where he acquired German and a taste for philology, which he afterwards turned to account in Celtic studies. On his return to Scotland he spent a session at St Andrews University (1825-6), then served a legal apprenticeship under his uncle-in-law, Sir Henry Jardine, passing writer to the signet in 1831. He held a post as a clerk in the court of session, becoming depute clerk of session from 1853 to 1867. He also engaged in private practice, and became senior partner of Skene, Edward, and Bilton, writers to the signet, a position which he retained until his death. It was to Skene's firm that Robert Louis Stevenson was attached in 1872 during his brief flirtation with the law. 
While never neglecting his professional duties, Skene had his eye from earliest manhood on highland history and Celtic scholarship. In 1833, with Donald Gregory and others, he founded the Iona Club to promote Celtic history and literature. The club's only publication, 'Collectanea de rebus Albanicis' (1834; repr. 1847), included Skene's earliest transcription and translation of the famous highland genealogical manuscript now known as MS 1467, but there called MS 1450. In 1837 he published, in two volumes, 'The Highlanders of Scotland, their Origin, History, and Antiquities', a landmark in its day, although later research, not least Skene's own, altered many of the views there expressed. In 1862 he contributed an introduction to Thomas M'Lauchlan's pioneering edition of the precious sixteenth-century Gaelic literary manuscript known as the 'Book of the Dean of Lismore'. Skene's rejection there of the chronological scheme of the older school of Irish antiquaries would now be universally accepted; although his defence of James Macpherson's 'Ossian' would not. 
In 1868 Skene published the manuscripts known as 'The Four Ancient Books of Wales' (the 'Black Book of Carmarthen', the 'Book of Aneirin', the 'Book of Taliesin', and the 'Red Book of Hergest') in two volumes, with a commentary on fifth- and sixth-century British history with particular reference to the 'Gwyr y Gogledd', the 'men of the north', and to King Arthur, whom Skene took to be a historical character. This ground was not to be traversed again in such scholarly fashion until the publication in 1949 of H. M. Chadwick's 'Early Scotland'. In 1869 Skene published an 'Essay on the Coronation Stone of Scone', in which he overthrew the Scottish legend that this stone was the 'Lia Fail' on which Irish kings were crowned at Tara. 
In 1867 Skene edited 'The Chronicles of the Picts and the Scots', and in 1871-2 he published for the 'Historians of Scotland' series a critical edition in two volumes of the 'Chronica gentis Scotorum' of the fourteenth-century Scottish historiographer John of Fordun, with a translation by his nephew Felix Skene. In the former work he collected for the first time the earliest fragments of Scottish history from Irish and Welsh sources, as well as the older medieval legends and annals which had not been absorbed into the chronicles of Wyntoun and Fordun. In the latter he put into the crucible the 'Scotichronicon' as published by Walter Goodall in 1759, and by a thorough inspection of the manuscripts distinguished the portion written by Fordun himself from the additions of Walter Bower, and other continuators. He also added several notes, including one on the origins of Scottish thanages. Skene's Fordun has not yet been superseded; and a modern scholarly edition of Bower did not appear until the 1990s. 
With his cousin, Bishop Alexander Penrose Forbes of Brechin, Skene reprinted in 1874, in the 'Historians of Scotland' series, Bishop Reeves's edition of Adomnan's 'Life of St Columba', with translation and rearranged introduction and notes. Felix Skene's edition of the 'Liber pluscardensis' in the same series (2 vols., 1877, 1880) incorporated his uncle's argument that the author was Maurice Buchanan, treasurer of Princess Margaret, daughter of James I of Scotland, who was married to Louis XI when dauphin. Skene also edited for the New Spalding Club in 1887 'Memorials of the Family of Skene of Skene'. 
However, Skene's 'magnum opus', for which he had prepared all his life, was 'Celtic Scotland: a History of Ancient Alban', which appeared in three volumes from 1876 to 1880, taking the story of Scottish history up to 1286. Following in the path indicated by Father Thomas Innes, and with the aid of better and fuller texts, as well as more advanced methods of criticism, both philological and historical, Skene accomplished more for the annals of his native country than any other contemporary writer. He effectively opened out to view a period of more than five centuries, from the reign of Malcolm Canmore back to the time of St Columba. A second edition appeared in 1886-90. 
Shortly after Skene's death Alexander Macbain published a paper severely critical of Skene's methods, 'Mr Skene 'versus' Dr Skene'. Macbain's main purpose in appealing, as he put it, 'from 'Skene Young' to 'Skene Old'' was due to the fact that Skene's 'Highlanders of Scotland' of 1837 was all too often preferred by 'the popular historian and clan controversialist' to his later, more fully considered 'Celtic Scotland'. As Macbain demonstrated, Skene's 'Highlanders' was deeply flawed, and much had been corrected, albeit often silently, in 'Celtic Scotland'. Even in 'Celtic Scotland', Macbain believed that Skene had erred grievously in suggesting that the northern Picts had spoken Gaelic and were the true ancestors of the highland Scots, and in suppressing a century of Dalriadic history before the reign of Kenneth mac Alpin. 
Macbain's 'cri-de-coeur' regarding the reliance of clan historians on Skene's 'Highlanders' has been echoed by many later scholars. Some writers still do not realize that the MS 1450 of 'The Highlanders' and the MS 1467 of 'Celtic Scotland' are one and the same, and that the version in the later book is infinitely preferable to that in the former, despite the fact that Macbain produced a second edition of Skene's 'Highlanders' with valuable corrective notes in 1902. Macbain included in this volume a short memoir of Skene and there made some amends for his earlier harsh criticism: 'The Celts of Scotland owe Dr. Skene a deep debt of gratitude, for he was the first to draw their early history out of the slough into which it had got, and to make it respectable. For this end he lent the weight of his learning and position to the cause of the Scottish Celt at a time when it was sorely needed; and he made writers of Scottish history devote fuller attention to the Celtic side of Scottish affairs. (Macbain, 'Life of Dr Skene', xiii-xiv)' Macbain's later, more generous opinion has been echoed by later historians. A. O. Anderson shrewdly commented of Skene's critics that 'All those that condemn him use his books' (A. O. Anderson, 'Early Sources of Scottish History: AD' 500 to 1286, 1922, 1.lxxxiii). In 1981 Gordon Donaldson, like Skene historiographer royal for Scotland, noted that 'Celtic Scotland', for all its flaws, had not been superseded. Only in the 1990s, one hundred years after his death, is Skene's account of Celtic Scotland gradually being replaced. 
Skene was a keen supporter of St Vincent's Episcopal Church in Edinburgh and was instrumental in the union of that congregation with the Scottish Episcopal church. He wrote a 'Gospel History for the Young' in three volumes (1883-4). He acted as secretary to the relief committee in the highlands, set up because of the potato famine from 1846 to 1850. He was also for many years a director of the Commercial Bank of Scotland. Skene received the honorary degrees of LLD and DCL from the universities of Edinburgh and Oxford respectively. He was appointed historiographer royal for Scotland in 1881 on the death of John Hill Burton. Skene died at his home, 27 Inverleith Row, Edinburgh, on 29 August 1892. He never married, but brought up as a father several members of the family of one of his nieces. 
As Aeneas Mackay rightly concluded, in his 'Dictionary of National Biography' article: 'Skene had many advantages for the task of a Scottish historian: a talented father, an intellectual home, a boyhood spent in the atmosphere of Walter Scott, a thorough knowledge of the Highlands and its inhabitants, a taste for languages and philology, especially Celtic, with opportunities for cultivating it both at home and abroad, ample preparation by the study of Celtic sources at first hand, and a long life. Yet all these would not have sufficed had he not possessed an historic instinct and a patriotic desire to enlarge the boundaries of the history of Scotland and throw new light on its darkest age.' 



@@@@@


doc= 25672


Scarning, Roger of (d. 1278), bishop of Norwich, probably came from Scarning in north Norfolk. He became a monk at Norwich Cathedral priory, where he was elected prior in 1257, probably between 23 June and 9 December. Nothing is known of his life as prior, but he must have found favour with the monks, for on 23 January 1266 they elected him as bishop of the diocese. His election was confirmed by the papal legate, Ottobuono, temporalities were restored on 17 March, and he was consecrated on 4 April, again by the legate. Throughout his life he retained a close interest in the affairs of the priory. His 'acta' show him granting the church of Great Cressingham to the cellarer because that office was overburdened, the church of St Etheldreda was transferred to the refectioner when that official took over the supply of linen for the refectory, and the church of St Gregory was given to the hosteler so that he might better supply those visiting the priory. 
Scarning's episcopate was anything but peaceful. First he was forced to flee Norwich and take refuge in Bury St Edmunds when the city was attacked by the 'disinherited', those remnants from the barons' war holding out in the Isle of Ely. More disturbing was the riot of 11 August 1272, when the cathedral priory was attacked and despoiled by townspeople. The outraged monks appealed to both the secular and the ecclesiastical authorities. It was inevitable that the bishop would side with the priory. Scarning called a meeting of the clergy at Eye, and on 29 August excommunicated the leaders of the riot and put the city under an interdict. A more balanced approach was taken by Henry III who went to Norwich on 14 September. The priory was taken into the king's hands, and the prior was persuaded to resign on 27 September. The interdict, which had been relaxed on the king's coming to Norwich, was reimposed on 18 October, and although it was relaxed again for Christmas, was later renewed. The case was sent to Rome and long negotiations ensued. Matters were not finally settled until 1275, when the interdict, which with sundry relaxations had lasted throughout the proceedings, was finally removed. Scarning may well have played a part in these negotiations. The priory had also to organize an expensive repair and cleaning operation, to which the bishop contributed at least $15. Scarning died on 22 January 1278 at the episcopal manor of South Elmham and was buried in the lady chapel of the cathedral on 28 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 25673


Skevington, Thomas (d. 1533), abbot of Beaulieu and bishop of Bangor, was the son of John Pace of Leicestershire and Margaret, daughter and heir of William Cobley; he is reputed to have been born at Skeffington, Leicestershire, the seat of the family of that name, and to have been related to Richard Pace, dean of St Paul's and Henry VIII's secretary. He entered the Cistercian abbey of Merevale, Warwickshire, and was educated there and at the Cistercian college of St Bernard, Oxford, to which he bequeathed $20 in his will. He took a new name when entering religion -- Skevington, or Skeffington, from his supposed birthplace, where the church window bore the blazon of his arms. He became abbot of Waverley, Surrey, possibly in 1478, and was still there in 1500, when he was dispensed to hold a benefice 'in commendam'. By 1508 he had become abbot of Beaulieu, Hampshire. The last of the pre-Reformation bishops of Bangor, he was papally provided to the see on 23 February 1509 and, like all his predecessors since 1436, he was in religious orders. He was given licence to retain his abbey of Beaulieu 'in commendam'. He was consecrated at Lambeth on 17 June 1509 and had his spiritualities restored to him on the 20th. 
Skevington seems to have spent more of his time in the congenial surroundings of his Hampshire abbey than in his remote north Wales diocese. One of his enemies reported to Thomas Cromwell, with no little exaggeration, that he was the 'richest monk in England' and that he had not set foot for fourteen years in his diocese, which he had set to farm to his vicar-general, William Glyn ('LP Henry VIII', 4/3, no. 5533). Some of his Bangor registers survive, giving details of fifty-eight appointments, about one-third of them to clerics outside the diocese. Among them were John Baddesley, abbot of Merevale, and Richard Pace. During his episcopate Bangor was much troubled by disagreements between Sir Richard Bulkeley and Skevington's confidant, William Glyn, chancellor of Bangor and archdeacon of Anglesey. They came to a head in 1524, when Glyn was appointed archdeacon in preference to Wolsey's nominee, Thomas Runcorn, and again in 1529, when there was conflict between Edward Johns (Wolsey's representative) and Glyn. 
In spite of prolonged absence from Bangor, Skevington was responsible for extensive building work there -- a mark of contrition for past neglect of his church and see, one hostile commentator suggested. In 1529 he rebuilt the previously grass-grown nave, so the priest-poet, Dafydd Trefor, averred; and, according to an inscription over the tower doorway, built the tower and the church ('hoc campanile et ecclesia fieri fecit') in 1533. Trefor maintained that the work cost this 'willing-hearted bishop' a 'goodly chestful of gold' and expressed the wish that he should live as long as St Deiniol and crown his efforts by placing bells high in the steeple (Williams, 'Welsh Church', 310). He is also credited with an inscription over the entrance to the episcopal palace to the effect that 'Thomas Skevington ep'us Bangor fecit', suggesting that he completed the rebuilding begun by Bishop Henry Deane (1496-1500). When Skevington died, on 16 or 17 August 1533, at Beaulieu, he left a will directing that the steeple and loft of the cathedral at Bangor be completed and four bells hung there. He was buried later that month at Beaulieu, but his heart was placed before the picture of St Deiniol on the north wall of his cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 25674


Skey, Frederic Carpenter (1798-1872), surgeon, second of six children of George Skey, a Russia merchant in London, and his wife, was born at Upton upon Severn, Worcestershire, on 1 December 1798. He was educated chiefly at the private school at Normanston in Suffolk of Michael Maurice, father of Frederick Denison Maurice, whose friendship he retained until his death. After a short stay at Plymouth with his cousin, Dr Joseph Skey, then inspector-general of army hospitals, Skey commenced his medical education at Edinburgh University, where he spent two years, followed by a few months in Paris. On 15 April 1816 he was apprenticed to John Abernethy, surgeon at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London, paying the usual premium of 500 guineas. After studying at the hospital he was admitted as a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, London, on 5 April 1822. Abernethy had so high an opinion of his pupil's capacities, that even while he was still an apprentice, Skey was entrusted with the care of some of his master's private patients. 
Thanks to Abernethy's help Skey was appointed demonstrator of anatomy at St Bartholomew's about 1826. He resigned the office after Abernethy's death in 1831, following a dispute with William Lawrence, but retained the post of assistant surgeon, to which he was appointed on 29 August 1827, the same year that he became consulting surgeon at Charterhouse. The direct outcome of Skey's resignation of his teaching post was the revival of the Aldersgate Street school of medicine, which in the hands of James Hope, Robert Todd, Marshall Hall, Jonathan Pereira, and Francis(?) Kiernan, soon became famous as a private teaching establishment. For ten years Skey taught surgery at the Aldersgate Street school, which for some time competed with the neighbouring medical school of St Bartholomew's Hospital. Skey also maintained a growing private practice at 13 Grosvenor Street in central London, attracting an influential clientele. 
Skey was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1837, the same year in which the society published his paper on muscular fibre. He was appointed anatomy lecturer at St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school in 1843, and held this post until 1865. He became full surgeon at the hospital in May 1854 and relinquished the position on 18 January 1864 having reached the official retirement age of sixty-five. He was then elected consulting surgeon, and was presented with a handsome testimonial. 
Skey filled many important positions at the Royal College of Surgeons. Elected an honorary fellow in 1843 and a member of the council in 1848, he was appointed Hunterian orator in 1850, and in 1852 was made professor of human anatomy and surgery. He was elected a member of the court of examiners in 1855, and in 1863 became president. In 1859 Skey served as president of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, and in 1864, at the instigation of his friend and patient Benjamin Disraeli, was appointed chairman of the first parliamentary committee at the Admiralty to inquire into the best way of treating venereal disease in the army and navy. He was created CB in 1868 for his services in this capacity, and the direct outcome of the committee's report was the framing of the 'Contagious Diseases Act' of 1866. 
Skey was a man of genial disposition and great intelligence, and he was known to be fond of animals. He was a good writer, a clear lecturer, and an excellent teacher who concerned himself with the broad principles of his subject rather than with details. An able surgeon, especially when treating exceptional cases, he was extremely skilful in diagnosis and most resourceful when unusual difficulties arose. 
Skey published a number of books, wrote several pamphlets, was a frequent contributor to the periodical press, and wrote letters to 'The Times' on alcoholic diseases and on the harmful physical effects of rowing, especially those caused by the pace of the university boat race. His works include: 'On a New Mode of Treatment in the Cure of Various Forms of Ulcer and Granulating Wounds' (1837), which was followed by 'A Practical Treatise on the Venereal Disease' (1840), based on six lectures given at the Aldersgate Street school of medicine. Willing to use innovative methods in surgery, Skey wrote 'On a New Operation for the Cure of Lateral Curvature of the Spine' (1841); and his 'Operative Surgery' (1850), which was of considerable merit and became a standard student text, explained his opposition to the use of the knife except as a last resort. 'Hysteria' (1867) consisted of a series of lectures in which the advantages of the 'tonic' plan of treatment were extolled; it reached three editions. 
Skey was married and had four sons and two daughters. His wife, Sarah Sophia ('b'. 1809/10), pre-deceased him, as did one son. Skey's own health failed during the last two or three years of his life, and after suffering great pain from intestinal ulceration he died at his home at 24 Mount Street, Grosvenor Square, London, on 15 August 1872. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 19 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 25675


Skeyne, Gilbert (c.1522-1599), physician, born at Bandodle, Aberdeenshire, was the fifth son of James Skeyne or Skene (died 1547), and his wife, Janet Lumsden. The father practised as a notary public at the farm of Bandodle on the Skene estate, near Aberdeen. Sir John Skene of Curriehill (c.1540-1617), jurist, was his younger brother Gilbert was educated at Aberdeen grammar school and at King's College, Aberdeen, where he graduated MA. He then studied medicine, graduated MD, and was appointed mediciner or professor of medicine in King's College in 1556. In 1568 he became one of the ordinary regents of the college. Skeyne married Agnes Lawson, widow of John Uddart, in 1569. It was not a happy marriage. Skeyne was collated to the burse of medicine in King's College in 1571. He moved to Edinburgh in 1575 and bought a house in Niddrie Wynd, where he developed a successful practice. On 16 June 1581 he was appointed doctor of medicine to James VI, with a salary of $200. 
Skeyne wrote 'Ane breve descriptioun of the pest quhair in the causis, signis, and sum speciall preseruatioun and cure thairof ar contenit' (1568). While not dismissing the power of prayer and the need for the repentance of sins, Skeyne considered that the disease arose from 'stench and corruption and filth' (Hamilton, 14). This was the earliest medical work to appear in the vernacular in Scotland. It was reprinted, under the editorship of William Forbes Skene, for the Bannatyne Club (1860). The reprint includes 'Ane breif descriptioun of the qualiteis and effectis of the well of the Woman Hill besyde Abirdene' (1580), published anonymously, but now thought to be the work of Skeyne. In it he discusses the healing powers of the well's waters. 
Skeyne retired from practice in 1593, and died in 1599, leaving neither children nor a will. His widow engaged in a long legal battle with his family over the estate, which was eventually divided among several nephews and nieces. 


@@@@@


doc= 25676


Skinner, James (1778-1841), army officer, born in Bengal, was the son of Hercules Skinner ('b'. 'c'.1735), son of David Skinner, provost of Montrose from 1733 to 1743. Hercules Skinner was a Scot in the East India Company's military service, who became a lieutenant-colonel in 1800 and died at Buragaon, Bengal, on 12 July 1803. When an ensign, he had taken Jeany, the daughter of a Rajput 'zamindar', as a mistress, and they had six children, one of whom was James. She committed suicide in 1790 when her daughters were taken from her, out of purdah, and sent to a school for children of Indian and European parentage. 
James and his younger brother Robert (died 1821) were sent first to a charity school, then in 1794 to a Calcutta boarding-school; and in 1796 James was apprenticed to a printer there, but at once ran away. His godfather, Captain W. Burn, introduced him to De Boigne, the French general who was in the service of Sindhia, the Maratha chieftain, and Sindhia gave him a commission in his army. Skinner did not join the British forces because of a rule barring anyone whose mother was Indian from holding commissioned rank. During the next ten years he took part in various expeditions and forays, in which M. Perron, De Boigne's successor, was perpetually engaged, including the capture of Delhi in May 1798, and the storming of Hansi, the stronghold of George Thomas the Irish adventurer, in 1799. When the Marathas were defeated by General Gerard (afterwards Viscount) Lake in 1803, some of the sons of British officers and Indian mothers who had served the Marathas were imprisoned by the British, but Skinner was offered the command, without a commission, of a body of horsemen who had deserted the Marathas. He accepted with the understanding, it is said, that he would not have to fight his old employer, Sindhia. At the head of his irregular cavalry -- known as the Yellow Boys from their uniforms and soon to be famous as Skinner's Horse, a designation inherited by the 1st Bengal cavalry -- he distinguished himself in the campaign against Holkar (1805) and in the Pindari war (1817-19). In 1825 he was present with his cavalry at the storming of Bharatpur. The Indian government rewarded him by grants of land at Hansi in the newly acquired territory, and, having purchased other properties, including a large house in Delhi, he became master of a large estate. He spent much on irrigation works, was well spoken of by government officials as a good landlord, and was respected by his tenants. Successive governors-general, from the Marquess Wellesley to the earl of Auckland, spoke of him in the highest terms; in recognition of his military services he was given the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the army, and created a CB (1828). In one of his early campaigns with the Marathas, when wounded and hard pressed by the enemy, he had vowed, if his life were spared, to build a Christian church. So he built, at a cost of $20,000, the church of St James at Delhi. The building was consecrated by Bishop Daniel Wilson of Calcutta on 22 November 1836, and Skinner and his three sons were confirmed there on the same day. 
Skinner lived in princely style, and his entertainments were lavish. Like Indian rulers, and some of the early British officials, he was a great patron of artists, employing them to paint portraits of his family and friends. At his parties he often gave pictures to his guests of the dancing girls that had entertained them. He also had pictures painted of the Yellow Boys, and of the many groups connected to Indian armies at the time; these valuable historical records are now in the oriental and India Office collection of the British Library. 
The headquarters of Skinner's corps were at Hansi, and there, following attacks of fever, he died on 4 December 1841, and was buried with military honours, his remains being taken to Delhi two months afterwards and deposited in his own church. He is said to have had sixteen wives and mistresses, and left five sons: Joseph (1796?-1855?); James (1805-1862), a colonel in the Indian army; Hercules (1813-1852), major in the Indian army; Thomas (died 1864); and Alexander (1825-1885). On the death of his youngest son, Alexander Skinner, who had managed the estate for some years, it was divided among Skinner's surviving descendants. 


@@@@@


doc= 25677


Skinner, James (1818-1881), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was born at Forfar, Scotland, on 23 June 1818, the youngest son of John Skinner (1769-1841) ['see under 'Skinner, John (1744-1816)], dean of Dunkeld and Dunblane in the Scottish Episcopal church, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Provost Ure of Forfar. His grandfather was John Skinner (1744-1816), bishop of Aberdeen. In 1832 Skinner entered Marischal College, Aberdeen, and in the following year, when Durham University was first opened, he was admitted as a foundation scholar. He graduated BA in 1836 and MA in 1840, and was a fellow from 1844 to 1849. From 1839 to 1841 he was a master at King William's College, Isle of Man, where he soon gained a reputation as 'a violent 'Oxford Tract' party man'. 
Ordained deacon on 27 June 1841 and priest in the year following, Skinner was successively curate of Burton Agnes in Yorkshire and of Holy Trinity, Windsor (during 1844); chaplain of the district military prison at Southsea Castle (from July 1845); and curate of St Mary's, Reading, from 1846. On 18 July 1848 he married Agnes, daughter of Oliver Raymond, vicar of Middleton, Essex. They had a daughter, Agnes Raymond, who died in 1868. 
As his health was deteriorating, Skinner accepted the post of chaplain to the forces in Corfu, but in 1850 he returned to England. In 1851 he was appointed senior curate of St Barnabas, Pimlico, London, by its vicar, Robert Liddell. Since November 1850 this new church with its then advanced ceremonial practices had been notorious as the target of persistent riots, occasioned by the popular outcry against Tractarians as a result of the 'papal aggression' crisis. As a consequence the church's founding vicar, W. J. E. Bennett, had been forced to resign. Skinner, with the help of Liddell and support from his junior curate, Charles Lowder, persisted with these controversial practices, defending them at length in his sermon 'Why do we Prize Externals in the Service of God?' (1856) and in the law courts. However, in 1856 failing health forced him to resign. 
After an interval in which he was engaged with the organization of the English Church Union, in 1861 Skinner accepted the living of the tiny parish of Newland, near Great Malvern, Worcestershire, and the wardenship of the almshouses for retired agricultural labourers situated there. He quickly increased the frequency with which holy communion was celebrated, built a new parish church in 1864, and steadily developed Newland as a spiritual centre attracting clergy and laity from all over the country for retreats or spiritual and pastoral advice. At this time he also published a number of important works, including 'The Daily Service Hymnal' (1864) and 'A Plea for the Threatened Ritual of the Church of England' (1865) in support of the new generation of ritualists. In 1877 poor health once again obliged him to move, this time to Ascot, where his final years were spent assisting Pusey. He died at Bath on 29 December 1881, and was buried in the churchyard at Newland; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 25678


Skinner, John (1721-1807), songwriter and ecclesiastical historian, was born on 3 October 1721 at Balfour in Birse, Aberdeenshire, the only child of John Skinner ('c'.1696-1776), parochial schoolmaster of Birse, and his wife, Jean Gillanders (died 'c'.1723), widow of Donald Farquharson of Balfour. He received his early education at the parish school of Echt, to which his father had transferred in January 1726, and from 1734 at Marischal College, Aberdeen, graduating AM in 1738. From 1739 he worked as assistant teacher at Monymusk, Aberdeenshire, where some of his early poetry was written. About this time he left the Presbyterian for the Scottish Episcopal church and was baptized in the church at Leith. Through the influence of Bishop Robert Forbes ('c'.1708-1775) he became in 1740 tutor in the family of Robert Sinclair of Scalloway in Shetland. It was here that he met and on 12 November 1741 married Grissel Hunter ('c'.1719-1799), eldest daughter of the Revd John Hunter, the Scottish Episcopal minister of Shetland. They had four sons and five daughters. Skinner was ordained on 15 August 1742 and appointed to the important charge of Longside, near Peterhead, where he was to minister for the following sixty-four years. 
Skinner was not a Jacobite (unlike most of his colleagues), and he tried to prevent members of his congregation from taking part in the rising of 1745. On 19 May 1746 the episcopal chapel at Longside was burned by government soldiers, the action having been set in motion by Elizabeth Ferguson, Lady Kinmundy, who is said to have presided over the chapel's destruction, riding round the blazing building crying, 'Haud in the prayer books!' (Bertie, 3). Skinner's parsonage was plundered on the night of 29 July 1746. His outrage at these acts, and of Lady Kinmundy's hypocrisy (she was not a member of the established Church of Scotland but a recent convert to the Secession church), was expressed in a series of satires lampooning the perpetrators, with Lady Kinmundy portrayed as a shrine-destroying Jezebel. Within a month of its passing Skinner complied with the 'Penal Act' of 1746 permitting Scottish Episcopal ministers to remain in office having sworn allegiance to George II. The Scottish Episcopal church considered compliance to be a sin and in the following year Skinner submitted to his bishop and repented of his action. A further 'Penal Act' in 1748 restricted him to conducting services only to members of his household and four others, under pain of imprisonment or transportation. In May 1753 Skinner was imprisoned for six months in Old Aberdeen for ministering to a larger congregation. The information had probably been lodged by the family of Lady Kinmundy; though she had died three years earlier, Skinner's satires continued to circulate. 
During the 1750s and 1760s Skinner's influence steadily grew, thanks to his learning and ability and a number of published works, chiefly of ecclesiastical controversy, but including a Hutchinsonian essay on Messianic prophecy. In 1765 he was instrumental in overturning the election of the Jacobite bishop Robert Forbes to the diocese of Aberdeen and having a politically safer candidate installed in his place. The closing up of three episcopal chapels in 1770, one of the last overt legal actions against episcopalians in Aberdeenshire, prompted Skinner to compose a satire against the procurator fiscal for Aberdeenshire. Skinner was made dean of Aberdeen in 1774. Resisting pressure to accept the office of bishop himself, he saw his son John become coadjutor bishop of Aberdeen in 1782. One of their first acts was to arrange for the consecration of Samuel Seabury as bishop of Connecticut in 1784, a necessary step since Seabury could not take the oaths of allegiance to the British crown. This ensured that the Scottish liturgy was used in America, and that episcopal succession came down through the Scottish rather than the English line. The younger John Skinner became bishop of Aberdeen in his own right in 1786 and in 1788 primus. Since the main strength of Scottish Episcopalianism lay in the north-east, this left the Skinners effectively masters of the church, and the long struggle between those who continued to owe allegiance to the exiled Stuarts, and those who felt that some accommodation with the Hanoverian state must be reached, was at last resolved. There followed a declaration of severance from the Stuart cause in 1788 upon the death of Charles Edward Stuart and a bill granting relief from the penal statutes in 1792. 
Skinner's main fame is as a writer. His polemical and theological works are now forgotten, but he acted as adviser to Dr George Gleig when the latter was editing the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and his two-volume 'Ecclesiastical History of Scotland' (1788) remains one of the most vigorous and trenchant accounts of its subject, although from a strongly Episcopalian point of view. He was a fluent and nimble verse-maker in Latin, English, and Scots, pioneering the literary use of north-east Scots in poems such as 'The Monymusk Christmas Ba'ing'. Robert Burns greatly admired his work and the two corresponded, Skinner supplying material for 'The Scots Musical Museum'. Burns praised 'The Ewie wi' the Crookit Horn' -- it has been suggested that this song refers to an illicit whisky still, but such references all appear to date from after 1859 -- and 'Tullochgorum' which he declared 'the best Scotch song ever Scotland saw' (Walker, 149): '
Come, gie's a sang, Montgomery cry'd, 

And lay your disputes all aside, 

What signifies't for folks to chide 

For what was done before them? 

Let Whig and Tory all agree, 

Whig and Tory, Whig and Tory, 

Whig and Tory all agree 

To drop their Whig-mig-morum: 

Let Whig and Tory all agree 

To spend the night wi' mirth and glee, 

And cheerfu' sing alang wi' me 

The Reel o' Tullochgorum. 
(Bertie, 108)' Skinner was a genial, gregarious, and witty man and greatly loved. He died in Aberdeen at the house of his son, the bishop, on 16 June 1807 and was buried in the churchyard of Longside, where a monument was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 25679


Skinner, John (1744-1816), Scottish Episcopal bishop of Aberdeen, was born at Longside, Aberdeenshire, on 17 May 1744, the son of Dean John Skinner (1721-1807) of Linshart, Scottish Episcopal clergyman and poet, and his wife, Grissel Hunter ('c'.1719-1799). The elder Skinner was a victim of the harsh anti-episcopalian laws introduced after the Jacobite rising of 1745 and young John shared his father's imprisonment in Old Aberdeen in 1753. After an early education at the parish schools of Longside and Echt (under his grandfather), he entered Marischal College, Aberdeen, in 1757, leaving in 1761 to become private tutor to the grandson of Sir Hugh Paterson, bt, of Bannockburn, Stirlingshire, a Jacobite family. Skinner followed his father into the Scottish Episcopal church. Ordained deacon in 1763 and priest in 1764 by Andrew Gerard, bishop of Aberdeen, he was appointed in 1764 to the two charges of Ellon and Udny, Aberdeenshire. It was a successful ministry. In 1764 a new chapel for the episcopalians at Ellon was built at Bearnie; this was closed in 1776 and replaced by another new chapel at Tillydesk. A new chapel at Udny Green was built in 1764 and replaced with a chapel at Chapelhall four years later. In 1775 Skinner was chosen to succeed William Smith in charge of one of the two Episcopal congregations in Aberdeen, the focal point for nonjuring Anglicanism in north-east Scotland. Increased accommodation was soon required for his people; the upper floor of his new dwelling house in Longacre was converted into a chapel, holding over 500 people. On 25 September 1782 Skinner was consecrated in the chapel of Luthermuir, Kincardineshire, as coadjutor to Robert Kilgour, bishop of Aberdeen. 
The young prelate quickly established himself as a force in the Scottish nonjuring church. Skinner's consecration coincided with the end of the American War of Independence, and the revival of plans for the appointment of a bishop to minister to Anglicans in the new United States. The plan of George Berkeley for the dispatch of a Scottish missionary bishop was dropped in favour of an American candidate, Samuel Seabury from Connecticut. Seabury's inconclusive negotiations with the English hierarchy persuaded him to approach Bishop Kilgour in August 1784. Assured by Berkeley that the archbishop of Canterbury privately had no objection to the proposed consecration, Skinner encouraged Kilgour to make a positive response in order to place the Church of England under an obligation to the Scots and give Episcopalians a renewed national prominence. Seabury was duly consecrated in the upper room of the house at Longacre on 14 November, with Skinner among the participating bishops and causing some consternation with a sermon which contrasted the 'acts of the apostles' with 'acts of the British parliament'. On 15 November the Scottish bishops, with Seabury, met in synod, and drew up eight articles of a 'concordate' or bond of union between 'the catholic remainder of the ancient church of Scotland and the now rising church in Connecticut'. The fifth article recommended to America the use of the Scottish communion office in preference to the service in the 'Book of Common Prayer'. 
On Kilgour's resignation of the see (October 1786), Skinner was appointed bishop of Aberdeen; he was subsequently elected primus in December 1788, on Kilgour's resignation of that office. Not a Jacobite himself, Skinner was anxious to show his church's loyalty to the Hanoverian dynasty at the first opportunity and to achieve its political rehabilitation. He presided at a convocation of bishops, senior clergy, and laity at Aberdeen on 26 April 1788, when it was unanimously resolved that, in consequence of the death of Prince Charles Edward (31 January), the Scottish Episcopal clergy should, from 25 May, pray for George III as king, using the terms of the Anglican prayer book. 
Skinner now bent his efforts to the removal of the penal laws still weighing heavily on his church. In early April 1789 he went to London with two other newly consecrated prelates, William Abernethy Drummond, bishop of Edinburgh, and John Strachan, bishop of Brechin, where they were cordially received by Archbishop Moore. Leading Scottish presbyterian divines, headed by William Robertson, favoured their claims, but Anglican clergy officiating in Scotland resisted the concession. A bill passed the Commons, but was lost in the Lords owing to Lord Chancellor Thurlow's intransigence. After returning to Scotland in July 1789, Skinner tried again. A committee was appointed in London to work for repeal of the penal laws, lobbying was undertaken by high-church sympathizers such as William Stevens, and parliament was petitioned by the royal burghs of Scotland in favour of a second 'Relief Bill', introduced in early 1792. Its success was ensured by Bishop Samuel Horsley's intervention, who had made the bill more acceptable to the Church of England by inserting a requirement of subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' from episcopalian clergy. The bill received the royal assent on 15 June 1792. Under its terms, the laity were left free from all penalties and civil disabilities unless they attended a chapel in which the reigning house was not prayed for; the clergy were bound to take an oath abjuring their past loyalty to the Jacobite cause, but unless ordained by a Church of England bishop they could not officiate south of the border. An episcopalian meeting at Laurencekirk (22 August) approved Skinner's action and agreed on voluntary adoption of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. 
Skinner wanted to unite all the Anglican congregations in Scotland into one body. He hoped to effect this by the appointment of Jonathan Boucher, vicar of Epsom and high-church American exile, as bishop of Edinburgh, but the scheme was abandoned, owing to the disquiet of the Episcopal clergy in the city ordained by English bishops, and the denial of open support from within the English hierarchy. Helped by Skinner's impeccable loyalism during the 1790s, relations between Scottish Anglicans continued to improve and terms of union in six articles were finally proposed on 24 October 1804 at a convocation of the clergy in Laurencekirk. These were gradually accepted (including subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'), with Skinner relieved that the Scottish communion office of 1764 had been retained. 
In his own diocese Skinner was a hard-working prelate. At Aberdeen he built a new chapel in 1792, and laid the foundations of St Andrew's Church in 1816. Diocesan meetings of his clergy were revived from 1784; at first biannual, they were held yearly from 1792. Skinner delivered no fewer than thirty-six Episcopal charges. They 'inter alia' gave expression to the Hutchinsonian views he inherited from his father, and which he shared with such friends as Boucher. He was the commanding presence in his church, and he dominated the college of bishops. Excessively so for some, one church member describing him as a 'dictator' (M. Irvine to G. Ogilvie of Auchiries, 23 Oct 1794, Aberdeen University Library, Ogilvie-Forbes of Boyndlie MSS, 2740). But he revised the code of canons of the church at the 1811 general synod and also secured primary authority for the Scottish communion office, fearing that it would fall into disuse if attempts continued 'to assimilate our divine Service in every the minutest article to that of the Church of England' (Aberdeen University Library, MS 3320/6/87, 'Thoughts on the English liturgy', 40). Yet careful Anglicizer that he was, Bishop Skinner also made sure that congregations preferring the English prayer book office could freely use it. 
Skinner's leadership of the Scottish Episcopal church did not preclude extensive theological activity. Many of his sermons were published in his lifetime including that preached at Bishop Seabury's consecration, which emphasized that the church drew its authority from Christ through the apostolic succession of its ministry. In 1786 he produced 'A Course of Lectures' intended to instruct lay members; the lectures convey Skinner's moderate high-churchmanship and his strong sacramentalism: 'the bread and the cup are made unto us, and do become in power and efficacy, the body and blood of Christ' (p. 133). The primus's concern 'to exact a conformity with the ancient standards of Eucharistic service' (Dowden, 'Scottish Communion Office', 98) endeared him to high Anglicans such as Berkeley, Horsley, and George Horne in England who were warm admirers of the anti-Erastian character of Skinner's church. Skinner defended his church's high regard for apostolicity against his fellow Aberdonian, George Campbell, in 'Primitive Truth and Order Vindicated' (1803). He also contributed to the 'Anti-Jacobin Review', but on theological rather than overtly political matters. 
Skinner married (between 28 August and 12 September 1765) Mary (died 1807), a daughter of the Revd William Robertson. Two of their sons, the eldest, John ['see below'], and William Skinner (1778-1857), his father's successor in the Aberdeen diocese, survived infancy, along with two daughters. Mary Skinner died on 4 March 1807. John died of a hernia on 13 July 1816, and was buried on 19 July in the Spital churchyard, Aberdeen. His record of achievement still makes it hard to quarrel with William Walker's claim that Skinner was 'the greatest Bishop of the Scottish post-revolution episcopal church' (Walker, 253). 




@@@@@


doc= 25680


Skinner, John (1772-1839), diarist and antiquary, was born at the Old Hall, Claverton, near Bath, the son of Russell Skinner of Newtown House, Lymington, and Claverton House, near Bath, and his wife, Mary Page. He was educated at Cheam School and at Trinity College, Oxford, which he entered on 16 November 1790, by which time he was already keeping journals of his travels. Skinner graduated BA in 1794 and proceeded MA in 1797; in 1794 he entered Lincoln's Inn, but soon decided to take holy orders. He was ordained deacon in 1797 and served as curate to Richard Graves, rector of Claverton, who interested him in the study of antiquities. In the same year, he made one of his many tours of southern England, exploring Somerset, Devon, and Cornwall; extracts from his journal were published in 1985. In 1799 Skinner was ordained priest, and took up a new curacy at Brent Knoll, Somerset, but in 1800 his uncle purchased for him the living of Camerton, also in Somerset, which he held until his death. On 17 June 1805 he married Anna (died 1812), eldest daughter of Joseph Holmes of Edmonton. They had three daughters and two sons between 1806 and 1811. 
Skinner's life at Camerton was soon blighted by a succession of deaths in his family. His eldest brother died in 1810 and his two sisters soon after, followed by his youngest daughter in 1811. In 1812 his beloved wife, Anna, died, the greatest blow of all, and Skinner's anguish was renewed in 1820 by the death of Laura, his eldest daughter. 
Skinner found himself increasingly isolated in the midst of his thankless clerical labours. Camerton, a rural parish augmented by a mining community, did not conform to the ideal of an English village, and it provided no intellectual companionship for a man of his scholarly tastes. With the local lady of the manor Skinner was on terms of guarded hostility: he regarded her activities in the parish as meddlesome and was sensitive about her desire to secure the succession of his living for her son-in-law. With local farmers he had periodic feuds over the payment of tithes, one of which culminated in an action for assault being brought against him. Skinner was driven alternately to rage or despair by the church choir, the overseers of the workhouse, teachers at the village school, his own servants, and local miners and publicans. Intolerant of Catholics (except when they were peers), he regarded the local Methodists as canting, illiterate, and hypocritical and was furious when they snatched dying parishioners from the jaws of Anglicanism. As he remarked in July 1821, 'Truly may it be said that Society is out of joint; what with Methodists, Catholics, Colliers, Servants and Attornies, all domestic comfort is estranged' (Skinner, 167). 
Nevertheless, Skinner struggled to perform his duties, showing genuine concern for the spiritual condition of his flock. A conventional clergyman of his day, he was overtly paternalistic and often insensitive to his social inferiors. But he was conscientious in his pastoral duties: he visited the sick and dying regularly, organized a village school, and urged his parishioners to attend communion and to bring their children for baptism. Hard-working but humourless, he was, however, as generous with sententious advice as with port wine and money: it is easy to understand why he found many of his humbler parishioners hardened or insolent. 
Increasingly, Skinner took refuge in his diaries and his antiquarian researches: 'to me indeed study has been a shield and safeguard against the evils of life' (Skinner, 271). Some of his happiest days were spent in the company of fellow antiquaries such as Sir Richard Colt Hoare of Stourhead and William Lisle Bowles. Although Skinner's archaeological explorations of the Camerton area were significant for later local historians, his deductions were highly speculative. He argued stubbornly that Camerton was the Camulodunum of Tacitus, investing the ugly realities of Camerton life with a touch of historical romance. His obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' described his etymological work on Celtic names as 'very wild' ('GM', 662). Skinner's publications amounted to no more than a few articles on antiquarian subjects, which appeared in 'Archaeologia' and the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. 
Skinner's surviving children afforded him little satisfaction: he frequently quarrelled with his sons, Joseph and Fitz-Owen, who were slow to find themselves careers, and his daughter Anna. After one argument, during which Fitz-Owen resorted to breaking the parlour furniture, Skinner recounted the scene in his journal with 'feelings wounded almost to a pitch of madness' (Skinner, 417). The death of Joseph in 1833 was a further blow to the anxious, affectionate, but demanding father. A decline in Skinner's mental health became increasingly apparent (in 1839 his diary recorded with restrained malice the providential bad ends of his Camerton enemies), and on 12 October 1839 he committed suicide, shooting himself through the head in a wood behind his rectory. 
Skinner's will left some 146 volumes of manuscripts, comprising his diaries, tours, and antiquarian notes and essays, to the British Library, with $1000 to fund the publication of his manuscript (never published) 'An analysis of language and symbols of the worship of the sun'. Although his 'Dictionary of National Biography' entry presented him solely as an antiquary, Skinner has proved more significant as diarist than as scholar. In 1930 part of his diary dealing with the years 1822-32 was published, and an evocative and sympathetic essay by Virginia Woolf, comparing Skinner and James Woodforde, appeared in 'The Common Reader' (1932). A further twenty-five volumes of Skinner's papers were discovered in a London bookseller's in 1933, and in 1971 'The Journal of a Somerset Rector' was republished in an enlarged edition covering the years 1803 to 1834. 
Skinner's diaries present a bleak picture of the early nineteenth-century rural English parish, plagued by apathy, immorality, poverty, alcoholism, and dissent. But it is a portrait exaggerated by his own pessimism and inability to empathize with his parishioners, which render his reflections both unintentionally amusing and profoundly moving. Despite his own prickly and suspicious temperament, Skinner emerges as an oddly heroic figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 25681


John Skinner (1769-1841), Scottish Episcopal clergyman, was born on 20 August 1769, educated at Marischal College, Aberdeen, and ordained in 1790. After serving as Episcopal clergyman at Banff he was rector of Forfar for forty-five years and became dean of Dunkeld and Dunblane. Skinner contributed to the 'Anti-Jacobin' in the 1790s. He was a supporter of allowing laymen to assume greater importance in running the church. His 'Annals of Scottish Episcopacy, from the Year 1788 to the Year 1816' (1818) includes a memoir of his father. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Provost Ure of Forfar, with whom he had a son, James Skinner (1818-1881). Skinner died at Forfar on 2 September 1841. 


@@@@@


doc= 25682


Skinner, John Edwin Hilary (1839-1894), author and journalist, the elder son of Allen Maclean Skinner QC, and a descendant of Matthew Skinner, was born in London in January 1839, and educated at London University, where he graduated LLD in 1861. In the same year he was called to the bar from Lincoln's Inn, and went on the northern circuit. A first-rate linguist, he obtained a commission from the 'Daily News' as special correspondent with the Danish army in the war of 1864. He was present during the campaign until the fall of Alsen at the end of June, whereupon Christian IX awarded him the Dannebrog order. A partial success only can be ascribed to his attempt to unravel the Schleswig-Holstein complication in 'The Tale of Danish Heroism' (1865); his opinion as to the superiority of the Prussian breech-loaders, however, was amply vindicated in the following year, when he reported the Austro-Prussian campaign. In the meantime Skinner had visited North America, and on his return wrote two sketchy volumes entitled 'After the Storm' (1866). In 1867 he ran the blockade into Crete, and in 'Roughing it in Crete' (1867) advocated the cession of Crete to Greece. This, he contended, would not only conciliate liberal opinion, but would concentrate the Turkish power. Nine years later, on this same subject he contributed 'Turkish Rule in Crete', denouncing the 'blighting effect' of Turkish misgovernment, to the 'Papers on the Eastern Question' (9, 1877). During the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, Skinner was attached to the crown prince of Prussia's staff, and described the battles from Worth to Sedan. He carried his account of the decisive battle from Donchery, near Sedan, to London, riding neck and neck with W. H. Russell of 'The Times', and crossing from Ostend in the same boat; their narratives appeared simultaneously on 6 September, having been anticipated only in the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. 
For a short time, in the spring of 1881, Skinner was assistant judicial commissioner in Cyprus. In 1885 he unsuccessfully contested the constituency of South Paddington, standing as a Liberal against Lord Randolph Churchill, and in 1886 he contested the Strand division of London against W. H. Smith, equally unsuccessfully. He died at the Hotel de France, rue de Constantine, Setif, Algeria, where he had gone for his health, on 20 November 1894; his wife, Louisa Sarah Skinner, survived him. A 'dapper little man', overflowing with vivacity, he was referred to by Archibald Forbes in 1870 as one of the elite of the profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 25683


Skinner, Sir Matthew (1689-1749), serjeant-at-law, was born on 22 October 1689, son of Robert Skinner (1655-1698) of Welton, Northamptonshire, judge of the Marshalsea court, and his wife, Anne, eldest daughter of William Buckby, serjeant-at-law and recorder of Daventry, Northamptonshire. He was the great-grandson of Robert Skinner, bishop of Oxford, sent to the Tower during the civil war. Skinner was educated at Westminster School, where he was a queen's scholar, and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 18 June 1709. He entered Lincoln's Inn on 20 June 1709, and became a barrister on 21 April 1716, joining the Oxford circuit. In 1719 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Whitfield of Watford Place, Hertfordshire. They had four sons, only one of whom survived him. 
In 1719 Skinner bought the position of one of the four common pleaders of the city of London, thus gaining the right to practise in the lord mayor's court, but he gave this up in 1722 and moved to Oxford, where he had been elected recorder on 30 May 1721, a position he kept until his death. His practice grew rapidly, and he was created serjeant-at-law on 1 February 1724, king's serjeant in 1735, and was first serjeant from 1738. He was knighted in 1735. He served as treasurer of Serjeants' Inn in Chancery Lane, London, from 1737. 
Skinner contested Andover unsuccessfully in the parliamentary election in 1727, but was elected MP for Oxford in 1734, with the support of the earl of Abingdon. He sat until 26 November 1738, when he was appointed chief justice of Chester and of the great sessions for the counties of Flint, Denbigh, and Montgomery. He was a counsel for the crown in the trials of the Jacobite rebels on the northern circuit in July 1746, and led for the crown in the trial of the Jacobite Arthur Elphinstone, sixth Baron Balmerino, captured at Culloden, for high treason in the House of Lords later that month. 
In 1728 Skinner published his father's 'Reports of cases... from the thirty-third year of... Charles the Second, to the ninth year of... William the Third, in the king's bench'. He died in Oxford on 21 October 1749 and was buried in Oxford Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 25684


Skinner, Robert (1591-1670), bishop of Worcester, was born on 10 February 1591 and baptized two days later at St Sepulchre, Northampton, the second son of the vicar, Edmund Skinner ('c'.1554-1628), and his wife, Bridget (died 1630), daughter of Humphrey Radcliffe of Warwickshire. On 6 August 1594 Edmund was instituted rector of Pitsford, also in Northamptonshire, where he spent the remainder of his ministry and where the younger of his seven sons and four daughters were baptized. Robert attended Brixworth grammar school before matriculating on 11 July 1606 as a scholar from Trinity College, Oxford. He graduated BA in June 1610, became a fellow in 1613, proceeded MA on 25 June 1614, and subsequently acted as vice-president of the college under its energetic president, Ralph Kettell. A younger near contemporary was Gilbert Sheldon, the future archbishop; among his own students were the future traveller Henry Blount, the Commonwealth judge Richard Newdigate, and William Laud's godson William Chillingworth. 
Having proceeded BD on 19 April 1621 and been licensed to preach on 14 January 1622, probably about this time, and certainly by 1624, Skinner became lecturer at St Gregory by St Paul's, London. During this period he resigned his fellowship and married Elizabeth (1603-1644), eldest daughter of Bernard Banger (died 1615), late esquire bedell of divinity at Oxford; their eldest son, Matthew, was baptized at St Benet Paul's Wharf on 11 April 1624. Following the death of his father on 21 May 1628 Skinner was the next day instituted as rector of Pitsford, but this did not signal a move into provincial obscurity. Probably on the recommendation of Laud, recently translated to the see of London, on 8 January 1629 Skinner became a royal chaplain-extraordinary, and on 31 October a chaplain-in-ordinary. On 16 July he wrote to the bishop reporting on a visit to Oxford to attend the annual act in terms revealing of their intimacy and their shared perspective on university and ecclesiastical affairs. Dismissing the degree disputations as 'many Arguments about unnecessary Quaestiones, but not a peece of an Answere to any Argument', his scorn was directed especially at notable Calvinist participants and preachers. While he considered that Mr Williamson allowed an excessive freedom to claim the inspiration of the Holy Spirit in the interpretation of prophecy so dangerously attractive to sectaries that 'I doubt not but weavers & shoemakers will challenge the Spirit as much as any', it was regius professor John Prideaux who drew his heaviest fire. Prideaux 'read of the use which Reason hath in points of Divinity... very slackly and very tediously, to litle purpose', inventing an enemy in the papists when they were well able to out-argue the Church of England on the point. Later in the proceedings, in criticizing the performance of the up-and-coming young Laudian Thomas Lawrence, Prideaux 'publiquely [professed] himself an Adversary at once of the authority of the Church and of the Demeans thereof'. To Skinner's evident satisfaction Lawrence's performance earned resounding applause; to Skinner's evident delight his glancing tilt at Bishop John Jewel's reputation provoked Prideaux into 'a rage (for I must tell you, it was a meer rage)' and a betrayal of Calvinist feelings of helplessness at the triumph of Laudianism at court (LPL, MS 943, fol. 133). 
From 24 January 1631 Skinner was also rector of Launton, Oxfordshire, and thus well placed to continue in the role of informant to Laud on university affairs. His own position is clear from his preaching at Whitehall. Too many 'early green heads ingage themselves in preremptorie opinions, in the parlour, in the pulpitt, in the presse, without preparation or provision beside their own thoughts', he observed in his earliest recorded sermon on 6 December 1631 (BL, Add. MS 20065, fol. 22). His was not just a negative distaste for unregulated controversy, however, but a positive preference for Arminianism. As he put it three weeks later, condemning the 'impious and prodigious errors [that] are crept into the church' in the form of absolute predestination as 'a dangerous position; which at once abolisheth the free grace of God to man, and our due thankfulness to God' while 'we rightly conclude we are elected by grace because we are freely elected' (ibid., fol. 4). 'Seditious opinions, and turbulent positions have beene ever first invented and vented in private', he proclaimed in 'A Sermon Preached before the King' (1634). The remedy was public worship undertaken with proper demeanour in a sacred and beautiful place. 'It is not complete worship, without a clear Demonstration of our subjection, without genuflection, or prostration, or some other inclination of the body' (p. 6). The sacraments were to be approached with due reverence, and the very meanings which puritans feared might be read into the prayer book communion service were affirmed as orthodox: 'is it not deepe infidelitie and heresie, to thinke Christ to bee absent from his Body and Blood? Most certainely present he is, though not by his glorious, yet in a singular way, by his gracious presence' (pp. 22-3). The many benefactors who had contributed to the rebuilding fund for St Paul's Cathedral and thus to the removal of 'the abhomination of desolation' (p. 36) from the temple in Israel, earned his approbation; the largest clerical donation to the project came appropriately from Skinner himself. 
Promotion was not long in coming. Early in 1636 Skinner resigned Pitsford. In July he was elected bishop of Bristol, on 13 August he was created DD, and on 17 November the king presented him to the rectory of Greens Norton, Northamptonshire. Consecrated bishop on 15 January 1637 he was enthroned by proxy on 13 February. By the previous October he had already made a careful assessment of episcopal revenues, and both his immediate predecessors, George Coke (translated to Hereford) and Robert Wright (now at Coventry and Lichfield), were called to account for missing income and alienated rights. In his letters to Archbishop Laud explaining this and his dealings with Dean Edward Chetwynd and the chapter of Bristol, he was characteristically confident and robust in promoting the endowment of cathedral and diocese. His visitation articles and his speech accompanying the visitation at Dorchester, Dorset, on 18 September 1637, published the same year as 'The Speech of Dr Robert Skinner', echoed his court sermons in their concern not just for peace and conformity but also for fitting ceremonial and consolatory sacrament. Baptism and the eucharist were not 'mere signs' (p. 20); the clergy were to bring their parishioners to confession and 'fit them for Absolution; for Absolution, I say, wherein is the Life and Soul of all the comforts of the Soul' (p. 22); scripture, oath of allegiance, reason, custom, and charity bound observance of kneeling, of the cross in baptism, and of church vestments. 
With the calling of convocation in 1640 Skinner emerged as a prominent member of its upper house. He was delegated with Matthew Wren to consult with the lord chief justice over the legal implications of the proposed ecclesiastical canons, and with Wren, Walter Curle, and Joseph Hall to consult with the representatives of the House of Commons over the 'etcetera oath'; before the end of September he had introduced it in his own diocese. In April 1641 he was among members of the Lords who met at the bishop of Lincoln's lodging and condemned the doctrinal content of recent publications. Preaching at court on 1 August a sermon much corrected in the surviving copy, his attention turned to the sight of 'greevous wolves [who had] entered in not sparing the flock, when they cannot but behold ungratious children devouring their owne mother that bear them' (BL, Add. MS 20065, fol. 122). Following a 'conge d'elire' of 11 November that year and royal assent on 29 November he was translated to the bishopric of Oxford, also adding nearby Cuddesdon to his livings. Less than three weeks later, on 17 December, he subscribed to the protest of bishops prevented from attendance at the House of Lords and as a result was committed to the Tower, where he spent eighteen weeks before being released on bail. 
The nature and extent of Skinner's episcopal ministry over the next two decades is not entirely clear. On 10 June 1642 his daughter Bridget was baptized at Cuddesdon, and it is possible that he spent time in Oxford once the king made the city his headquarters that autumn; his wife died there on 25 June 1644, according to Anthony Wood within a fortnight of her eighteenth confinement. Skinner was sequestered from Greens Norton on 22 July 1643 for his malignancy, and by 13 June 1646 had suffered the same fate at Cuddesdon, although that summer he and his son Thomas put up a fight, allegedly molesting and obstructing his successor. He kept Launton, despite the Lords' attempt to admit T. South on 17 July 1646, and that December he petitioned to compound. A fire at his house had by this time destroyed the parish register there, and with it any record of his previous residence, but Launton seems to have been his base thereafter. With Ralph Brownrigg alone among the bishops to have been granted a licence, he later claimed to Sheldon that 'for preaching I never failed one Sunday for 15 years together' (Skinner, 10). His ordinations of Ralph Bathurst on 2 March 1644 and of John Martin and others at Trinity College chapel on 21 December 1645 were among the first of many secret ordinations in Oxford and Launton. On his own perhaps inflated reckoning over the 1640s and 1650s these totalled between four and five hundred 'and not one of them all but subscribed to the Articles, and took the oath of allegiance in those days when, upon discovery, I should have had my books, and my bed taken from me, having little else left me'. He recalled that Thomas Lamplugh, vicar of Charlton-on-Otmoor, 'in those dismall dayes rid not fewer than 300 journeys betwixt Oxford and Launton' to help him with confirmation and ordination (Skinner, 9-10); Bathurst assisted under cover of his medical practice. Skinner also later told Sheldon that where he could he had attempted to control what was heard by congregations: 'I took such care for all Scrip[tures] that were commanded to be read in churches, that constantly every clause that tended to the dishonour of the king or church, was branded aforehand with black lead, and this, by my direction, many did, whom I durst to trust. (Skinner, 9-10)' Assessment of Skinner's contribution to the survival of prayer book Anglicanism still depends largely on his own claims, but there is some independent evidence that his judgement and authority were recognized at the time. On 4 August 1647 Sheldon, at that point a royal chaplain and perhaps writing at the king's behest, sought Skinner's opinion on 'whether, upon extreme necessity or any exigence of state' a Christian monarch might lawfully tolerate the exercise of more than one religion within his kingdom. Three days later, his experiences doubtless having taught him to temper with pragmatism his previous conformist idealism, Skinner replied that since Charles was indeed standing under 'extreme necessity', such a course was 'not only lawful, but expedient' (Skinner, 7). Characteristically, he added a reminder of a previous request to put before the king his claim to the reversion of the headship of Gloucester Hall, part of the original endowment of the bishopric, but now all the more necessary after his financial misfortunes. However, over the years such apparent acquisitiveness, together with his inexplicable liberty of preaching, convinced Secretary of State Edward Hyde and others that Skinner had not been as energetic in the underground church as he might have been and that his main goal was his future translation to a richer see. Hyde said as much in a letter to John Barwick of 26 September 1659, and his disapprobation was subsequently considered to be the chief obstacle to Skinner's gaining any swift reward for his labours. 
Following the Restoration, Skinner regained his livings, and according to White Kennett immediately ordained over a hundred clergy at Westminster Abbey. On 31 July 1660 he was named to a commission of visitors of the University of Oxford, and in concert with others locally began a brisk purge of both university and diocese. Alert as ever to the augmentation of church revenues, this time in relation to Shotover Forest, he also had the foresight to arrange in the summer of 1662 ordinations in anticipation of the vacancies likely to result once the 'Act of Uniformity' came into force on 24 August. Yet he still felt the need to defend his interregnum record in the letter to Sheldon of 17 August, pleading that poverty in the form of debt incurred even before he went to Bristol had tied his hands from doing more. Eventually his deserts or his hints were accepted: on 12 October 1663 he was elected bishop of Worcester, being enthroned by proxy on 20 November. 
From Worcester, Skinner retained his close links with Trinity College, of which Bathurst was now president, taking a critical and influential interest in building work and giving generous donations to the library and a new quadrangle. In the mid-1660s he was also in confident form dealing with routine diocesan business and reporting to Sheldon on a dispute over the cathedral organ, but thirty years after he had first become a bishop his age may have been telling. Little evidence survives of his episcopate, and on 28 October 1669 a letter to Secretary of State Joseph Williamson gave erroneous news of his death. Yet when he drew up his will on 2 April 1670 his opinions were as vigorous as ever: he expressed himself 'a true sone of the Church of England' which 'is a true member of the holy Catholique Church'; he had 'ever embraced the liturgie and service of the Church now in use as one of the greatest blessings the heir of Grace ever bestowed upon us of this nation' and implored 'our Lord Jesus Christ lover and author of peace to move all animosities and wilfull opposicons against that most excellent peece of divine service' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/333, sig. 94). On 7 June, Thomas Lamplugh, having commented favourably to Williamson on the loyalty of Worcester itself, where the mayor was 'active and courageous in suppressing conventicles and seditious meetings', wrote that the bishop was 'ill with an issue, but may linger some time, as nature is strong' ('CSP dom.', '1670', 259). Seven days later Skinner died, and was buried in his cathedral. He left four sons and four married daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 25685


Skinner, Stephen (bap. 1623, d. 1667), physician and philologist, baptized on 23 November 1623 at St Martin Pomeroy, London, was the son of John Skinner. He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 6 December 1639, but, the civil war breaking out, he left England and 'served in wars beyond seas'. He was probably the Skinner who was stated by the parliamentary visitors of Oxford to be 'in the service of Ireland'. In 1646 he was again at Oxford, and in consideration of his foreign service was allowed to accumulate both his arts degrees in that same year, BA on 21 October and MA on 10 November. On 22 April 1649 he entered as a medical student at Leiden, on 6 May 1653 at Heidelberg, and on 4 November 1653 again at Leiden. At the beginning of 1654 he graduated MD of Heidelberg, and on 26 May following was incorporated in that degree at Oxford. Wood says that during his absence from England he 'visited France, Italy, Germany, the Netherlands, visited the courts of divers princes, frequented several universities, and obtained the company and friendship of the most learned men of them'. He was made honorary fellow of the College of Physicians in December 1664. Skinner practised in Lincoln, where he died of malignant fever on 5 September 1667 and was buried in the city's cathedral. Administration of his estate was granted to his sister, Elizabeth Bowyer, and his daughter Stephanie Skinner on 7 September 1667. 
Skinner left behind him several philological treatises in manuscript which were enumerated by Wood. These were edited by Thomas Henshaw and published in London in 1671 under the title of 'Etymologicon Linguae Anglicanae'. Samuel Johnson gratefully acknowledged his indebtedness to Skinner in the preface to his 'Dictionary' (1755). 


@@@@@


doc= 25686


Skinner, Thomas (1629/30-1679), physician and biographer, probably the son of Nicholas Skinner, of Brentwood, Essex, was born there, and educated at Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire, before being admitted sizar of St John's College, Cambridge, on 29 May 1646, at the age of sixteen. He graduated BA in 1649 at Cambridge, and DM at St John's College, Oxford, on 17 July 1672, and is described by Foster as sometime of Cambridge University. 
Skinner is thought to have been 'physician to the Duke of Albemarle, when residing at New Hall in Essex' (Skinner, 92). He practised in Colchester, Essex, where he lived in All Saints' parish, and later moved to Lincoln, where he died, in 1679. He was buried at St Mary's, Colchester, on 8 August 1679. 
Skinner is best-known as the author of 'The Life of General Monk, Duke of Albemarle', published in 1723 by William Webster, curate of St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, London, with a preface defending Monck's character, and attributing the manuscript to Skinner. A letter from Skinner to the secretary of state in January 1677 states that he was solicited by the second duke of Albemarle to write a life of his father in Latin, but only this English version of the life has survived. Skinner applied to Samuel Barrow and others for assistance in his task, and claims to have had access to a collection of Monck's papers. 


@@@@@


doc= 25687


Skinner, Thomas (c.1800-1843), army officer and author, was the son of Lieutenant-General John Skinner. He entered the army on 25 January 1816 as an ensign in the 16th foot; he became lieutenant on 6 August 1819, captain on 9 October 1823, and exchanged into the 31st foot on 25 March 1824. He went with his regiment to India shortly before 1826, and was stationed at Hardwar, in the North-Western Provinces, near the foot of the Himalayas. He made expeditions into the little-known mountainous districts of the area, and described the results of his exploration in 'Excursions in India' (1832). After returning home on leave he went back to India in 1833 by the overland route through Egypt, Syria, and Palestine, down the Euphrates, and across the Persian Gulf. He described his journey in 'Adventures during a Journey Overland to India' (1836). On 24 November 1835 he was promoted major, and in 1842 he joined the force assembled at Jalalabad under Sir George Pollock for the relief of Kabul. He commanded the 31st foot in the campaign, and on 26 July 1842 was present at the conflict of Mazina, near Jalalabad. He accompanied Pollock's advance, and was entrusted with the task of clearing the hills on the left of the valley of Tezin in the engagement there on 13 September. He received for his services the CB and was gazetted on 23 December brevet lieutenant-colonel. He died at Landour on 6 May 1843 from the results of privations endured during the campaign. 


@@@@@


doc= 25688


Skinner, Thomas Bridges Boucher (1804-1877), army officer and engineer, born at St John's, Newfoundland, on 22 May 1804, was the son of Lieutenant-Colonel William Thomas Skinner (died 1829), of the Royal Artillery, and his second wife, Mary, daughter of Dr Monier of the Royal Artillery. From 1811 Thomas was at school in England, until in 1818 he went to Ceylon, and obtained a second lieutenancy in the Ceylon Rifles. In 1820 he was employed in road construction. In 1825 he was appointed staff officer of the garrison of Colombo, and on 27 November 1829 deputy assistant quartermaster-general of the forces in Ceylon. In 1832 he opened a road from Arippu, on the western coast of Ceylon, to Anuradhapura. In the following year the public works were transferred to the civil authorities, and Skinner accompanied the surveyor-general over the country to initiate him in his duties. Subsequently Skinner undertook a survey of the mountain zone, the result of which was embodied in a one-inch sketch map of the Kandian provinces and in a general map of Ceylon. In 1836 he was promoted captain, and in the following year was employed to regulate the surveyor-general and civil engineer's department, which had fallen into great confusion. This occupied him until 1840; but as the department became again disorganized when he ceased directing it, he was appointed permanent commissioner for the roads in Ceylon in 1841. He married Georgina, daughter of Lieutenant-General George Burrell CB, on 19 December 1838. One of their children was Monier Williams Skinner, lieutenant-colonel, Royal Engineers. In 1847 he retired from his regiment with the rank of major, and in 1850 the civil engineer's department was amalgamated with his own. In 1859 he was appointed auditor-general, but because of a disagreement with the governor, Sir Henry Ward, on the coast of a railway from Colombo to Kandy, he was superseded in 1861, and returned to his former post of commissioner of public works, which he continued to hold until, in 1865, he resumed the duties of auditor-general. 
Skinner retired to England in 1867, and was made a CMG on 15 February 1869. He resided at Bath. Skinner wrote an autobiography, 'Fifty Years in Ceylon', edited by his daughter Annie Skinner (1891); it contains a history of his branch of the Skinner family. He died at his home, 7 Grosvenor Place, Bath, on 24 July 1877. His services to Ceylon were very great in opening up the country and rendering overland transport possible. 


@@@@@


doc= 25689


Skinner, William (1699/1700-1780), military engineer and army officer, was born at St Christopher (St Kitts), West Indies, the son of Thomas Skinner, a merchant and younger son of William Skynner, mayor of Hull in 1665. Skinner's parents both died while he was a child, and he was adopted by Elizabeth, his father's sister, who married Talbot Edwards, the military engineer, as her second husband. Edwards, related by marriage to Sir Martin Beckman, chief engineer and master gunner of England, bequeathed his large collection of maps and plans, many of which had been Beckman's, to Skinner. Skinner was from a young age exposed to a culture of military engineering to which he willingly inclined himself. 
On 11 May 1719 Skinner was given a warrant as practitioner engineer and the following year was employed at the gun wharf, Devonport. In 1722 he was sent out to Minorca, where the works at St Philip's Castle under William Horneck provided him with practical experience of fortification on a large scale. In the summer of 1724 Skinner was moved to Gibraltar under Jonas Moore. There he participated in the first general survey of the rock and served in its defence during the siege of 1727. He was promoted to sub-engineer on 20 February 1727 and the following year was made barrack-master at Gibraltar in addition to his engineer duties. On 10 March 1730 he was made engineer-extraordinary and acted as chief in Moore's temporary absences in 1736 and 1738. He was promoted engineer-in-ordinary in 1739, and on 1 July 1741, after Moore was killed at Cartagena, Skinner was appointed chief engineer at Gibraltar. 
His promotion was then very rapid, for Skinner was named sub-director on 1 January 1744 and director on 30 September 1746. He was given a new challenge when in 1746 he was recalled to London. The board appointed him chief engineer in Scotland on 31 December 1746, with orders to survey the works at Edinburgh, Stirling, Dumbarton, and Blackness, as well as Fort William and Fort Augustus, following the great damage to the fortifications inflicted by the Jacobite rising. This work he began on arrival in Scotland in January 1747. The captain-general, William Augustus, duke of Cumberland, persuaded his father, George II, that a new fortress was required at Inverness, and had already settled on a plan which he ordered to be followed. Skinner postulated many sound reasons for it not to be pursued, and drew up a project of his own, which Cumberland quickly saw was better. 
The new fort near Inverness was to extend over 42 acres on a specially purchased site. Begun in 1748 Fort George was many years in the building and cost in excess of $200,000. Lieutenant-Colonel James Wolfe, visiting the site in 1751, forecast that when finished it would be 'the most considerable fortress, and the best situated, in Great Britain' (Wright, 178). Skinner had the undiluted responsibility for directing the works and would not allow the smallest deviation from his plan. The principal contractor, with whom Skinner came to be on familiar terms, was John Adam, older brother of the architects Robert and James Adam. 
The summer season of each year found Skinner at the isolated Ardersier Point on the Moray Firth guiding the engineers, overseers, contractors, and soldiery. When absent he insisted on almost daily letters to keep him informed of progress in every detail, firing back trenchant criticisms and detailed instructions, always urging the work forward. Fort George was the culmination of Skinner's ambition, the fulfilment of the professional tradition to which he had been brought up; he called it his 'monument'. 
In 1750 Thomas Lascelles retired and, though an appointment was made for a new surveyor-general, the post of chief engineer was left vacant. This deprived the corps of the most senior post they could aim for. Skinner considered himself in line for the promotion and confided, 'it's all I have been aspiring to this thirty-two years, having been so long constantly employed, which is ten years longer than most of the engineers on the establishment have been in the service' (BL, Add. MS 17500, fol. 35). Some weeks later he wrote: 'It is very hard that after thirty-two years in the Ordnance service with a good character with great trust and a constant attendance I should be put in competition with my junior [Thomas Armstrong, chief engineer at Minorca, had applied] who the whole world knows has never made a design in his life, but has always been employed in the executing of the designs of others. (ibid., fols. 48-9)' Nor was Skinner satisfied with his remuneration, pointing out that while he laboured in Scotland for 20's'. a day, his counterparts in Minorca and North America had 50's'. and 40's'. respectively. Skinner was perhaps too useful in Scotland, and particularly at Fort George, for his appointment as chief engineer to be attractive to the board. With no other plausible candidate, the easiest option was to allow the post of chief engineer of Great Britain to lapse. Skinner was chief engineer in all but name, Cumberland referring to him as 'the King's first engineer' (Cumberland MSS, 48/82-3). Skinner waited seven years until the board eventually appointed him to that post, on 14 May 1757, at which time he was also made colonel, the first military rank he had held. 
While the works at Fort George proceeded Skinner was often employed in other directions by order of the board. He presided over a committee that in 1754 recommended the erection of magazines at Purfleet as a depot for military ammunition and combustibles. In November 1755 Skinner received orders to proceed to Ireland, where, in conjunction with Thomas Eyre, surveyor-general there, he was to survey the fortifications. Their extensive and handsomely illustrated report in the following year gave account of Duncannon Fort, Kinsale, Limerick, Galway, and Athlone, and recommended the building of a new fort at Cork. 
In 1758 Colonel Skinner was called before the bar of the House of Commons in connection with a report he had made on the works carried out at Gibraltar by the governor, James O'Hara, second Baron Tyrawley. Tyrawley had meddled in the fortifications 'with no more economy than governors are apt to do, who think themselves above being responsible', as Horace Walpole put it (Walpole, 3.15). Skinner's report had revealed Tyrawley's defensive innovations as inefficient and lacking in science. Tyrawley, enraged by these insinuations, attended the house and 'leaning on the bar, he browbeat Skinner, his censor, who stood on his left hand, with such arrogant humour, that the very lawyers thought themselves outdone in their own style of worrying a culprit' (ibid.). Skinner presumably allowed such rodomontade to pass over him, while the Commons soon forgot the affair. 
During 1758 Skinner was in Scotland and at Milford Haven, Pembrokeshire, supervising the works. In December, on intelligence of a French-inspired plot to take Gibraltar by surprise, he was abruptly dispatched under direct orders from the secretary of state, William Pitt, to take necessary measures for the defence of the rock. The supposed plot was shown to be of no substance even before Skinner's arrival at Gibraltar. Despite his presence there being quite unnecessary, permission for him to return was long sought by Skinner and by the Board of Ordnance before his eventual arrival home in September 1759. Soon thereafter he was ordered to Plymouth to report on the fortifications. He appears to have suffered intermittent poor health at this time, perhaps due to his heavy workload and frequent travelling. 
On 18 February 1761 Skinner was promoted to major-general and in May he made a flying visit to Portsmouth and the Isle of Wight, before making his habitual summer journey to Scotland. After arriving in early June he was recalled urgently to London by the king's particular command. His orders were to go to Belle Ile, just captured by a British expedition, to report on the defences and draw up plans for accommodating the troops which would garrison the island. Almost certainly he would have been at Belle Ile when news reached him of the death on 27 August of his only son, Captain William Skinner, at Coulehault on the coast of Dominica, while on service with his regiment. 
In the winter of 1761-2 Skinner was again ill with what he referred to as 'my old disorder'. The following winter he wrote to his friend John Adam: 'I begin to think a little rest will be necessary; I grow old and think and hope near fifty years servitude intitles me to a little indulgence; my only view is to see my monument on the Point [Fort George] finished with credit, as it has been so long my nursery, a short time more puts it out of our hands. (BL, Add. MS 17501, fol. 148)' But his illness continued to plague him into the summer, when in June he found it necessary to inform the board that he was for the moment incapable of attending to any business. However, despite his ill health at this time, Skinner was to serve many more years as chief engineer. In 1769 he adjudicated on several projects for improving the defences of Gibraltar submitted by colleagues. On 30 April 1770 he was promoted lieutenant-general in the army, and later the same year, after a long period of neglect by the board, his pay as chief engineer was increased to the same as that of colonels-commandant of the Royal Artillery. Among Skinner's later projects were those for enlarging the gun wharf and erecting new magazines at Plymouth; also for remodelling and augmenting the lines at Chatham. The freedom of several Scottish and Irish cities was conferred upon him. 
Skinner's great talent lay in his thorough understanding of the principles of fortification and his mastery of the technical repertoire of the engineer. He was thus enabled to fulfil to perfection the duties of chief engineer of Great Britain owing to the superiority of his professional knowledge. Virtually every project or estimate from home and abroad was sent to him by the Board of Ordnance for consideration and report, the principal officers of the ordnance depending on his advice. Sometimes at the Office of Ordnance, but more often at home at Croom's Hill, Greenwich, Skinner examined the proposals of his junior colleagues and dispensed his wisdom. 
After sixty-one years' service as an engineer, twenty-three of them as chief engineer of Great Britain, Skinner died at Greenwich on 25 December 1780 in his eighty-first year. He was buried in the churchyard of St Alfege, Greenwich. Margaret Skinner ('nee' Caldwell), his widow, applied for and was granted $100 per annum extra to her widow's pension, on the grounds that her husband had saved little during his working life to provide for her, partly owing to his remuneration not being increased when he could have expected it. 


@@@@@


doc= 25690


Skinner, William (1778-1857), Scottish Episcopal bishop of Aberdeen, the second son of John Skinner (1744-1816), bishop of Aberdeen, and his wife, Mary (died 1807), daughter of the Revd William Robertson, was born at Aberdeen on 24 October 1778, and educated at Marischal College, Aberdeen, and at Oxford University, where he matriculated from Wadham College on 3 March 1798, graduating BA in 1801, and MA, BD, and DD in 1819. Skinner was ordained by Bishop Samuel Horsley of St Asaph in March 1802. After returning to Scotland, he officiated as assistant, and then as colleague, to his father in the incumbency of the Scottish Episcopal church of St Andrew's, Aberdeen. In 1804 he married the youngest daughter of James Brand, cashier of the Aberdeen Banking Company. 
On 11 September 1816 Skinner was elected by the clergy of the diocese as successor to his father in the see of Aberdeen, and was consecrated at Stirling on 27 October. George Gleig, primus of the church, sent a severe but fruitless reproof to the dean and clergy of Aberdeen for electing the son of their late bishop. Skinner was one of the bishops who attended the synod held at Laurencekirk on 18 June 1828 to revise the canons of 1811; thirty canons were adopted and duly signed on 20 June. In 1832 Skinner confirmed as many as 462 persons, and a first effort was made in the same year to circulate Episcopalian religious works in the Gaelic language. On 29 August 1838 he attended another synod held in St Paul's Church, Edinburgh, when the canons were again revised. Upon the death of Bishop James Walker, Skinner was unanimously elected primus by an episcopal synod held in St Andrew's Church, Aberdeen, on 2 June 1841. During his primacy Trinity College, Glenalmond, near Perth, was founded in 1844, and developed by the Episcopalians in Scotland as a place of education for young men studying for the church. In the previous year a serious controversy had sprung out of the refusal of Sir William Dunbar, minister of St Paul's Chapel, Aberdeen, to receive or to administer the sacrament in accordance with the Scottish ritual. Acting with the concurrence of his synod, Skinner excommunicated Dunbar on 13 August 1843. Among the many pamphlets written on this issue were 'A letter to the managers of St Paul's Chapel by Sir W. Dunbar, to which is added Bishop Skinner's declaration' (1843) and 'The Rev. Sir W. Dunbar versus the Right Rev. W. Skinner' (1849). Skinner did much during his primacy to consolidate the Episcopal party in Scotland. He died at 1 Golden Square, Aberdeen, on 15 April 1857, and was buried in the Spital cemetery on 22 April. 


