@@@@@


doc= 25691


Skip, John (d. 1552), bishop of Hereford, was of humble origins. Testamentary and manorial records show that he was the son of Edmund Skip, husbandman, of Irstead, Norfolk, and his wife Alys, and the nephew of Richard Skip who in 1519 was rector of St John de Sepulchre, Ber Street, Norwich. A minor when both his parents died in 1507, by 1515 John Skip was studying at Gonville Hall, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1515 and proceeded successively MA in 1518, BTh in 1533, and DTh in 1535. Between 1519 and 1521 he was president of Physwick Hostel, a dependency of Gonville's. Traditionally linked with the early development of reformed opinions in religion in Cambridge, he has been named in that context as a member of the group that met at the White Horse tavern there. Although the role of these meetings in the dissemination of protestantism is now perceived as largely imaginary, Skip's credentials as an early supporter of reform are none the less well established. In 1530 Stephen Gardiner listed him as one of the supporters at Cambridge of the king's case for a divorce, along with Simon Heynes, Hugh Latimer, Nicholas Shaxton, Nicholas Heath, and Thomas Goodrich. 
In 1534 Skip and Heynes were sent from the court to Cambridge 'for the vindication of the king's supreme authority in his own dominions against the Pope's pretended power' (Strype, 1/1.260). His career prospered, for he was made vicar of Thaxted, Essex, in 1534 and also received an important appointment at court. In 1535, after the elevation of Nicholas Shaxton to be bishop of Salisbury, Skip was made chaplain and almoner to Queen Anne Boleyn; he also succeeded Shaxton as canon of Westminster and prebendary of St Stephen's. (The Dr Skip named as Katherine of Aragon's almoner in 1518 was certainly a different person.) In a position close to a queen with strong evangelical sympathies, he was able to exercise some influence and his well-known friendship with Matthew Parker dated from this time. He served the queen until her death in 1536, and at the time of her fall did what he could in her defence, visiting her frequently in prison and attending her during her final hours: Sir William Kingston, constable of the Tower, wrote to Cromwell in the early hours of 19 May, the day of her execution, 'her Almoner is continewaly with hyr, and has bene syns ii of the clock after midnight' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 10, no. 910). 
Skip's connection with the executed queen did not hinder his subsequent career. He was named master of Gonville Hall in 1536 and retained that position until 1540. He was also archdeacon of Suffolk from 1536 to 1539, rector of Newington, Surrey, in 1538, and archdeacon of Dorset from 1538 to 1539. It is also to this period that one of the more curious of Skip's contributions to posterity can be dated -- a recipe for apple tarts. 
On 7 November 1539 Skip was named bishop of Hereford following the translation of Edmund Bonner to London. Little can be said about his administration of his diocese. He presided over the transfer of the Forest deanery to the newly formed diocese of Gloucester in 1541 and over the dissolution of some seventy-seven chantries and chapels. He also made a 200-year lease of his episcopal residence in London to Lord Clinton -- a lease that was revoked after Queen Mary succeeded to the throne. Perhaps it was to compensate for this loss that in 1551 he obtained a grant of the advowson of St Katherine's Hospital, Ledbury. After he arrived in his see, Skip appears to have taken the opportunity to have released a large number of clergy from his prison at Hereford, where they had been confined for breaches of ecclesiastical discipline. Whether this was a manifestation of reforming tendencies or simply a general amnesty is unknown. 
In fact, although Skip acted in his diocese as the government directed, there is no evidence that he did anything further there to advance the cause of the Reformation. Indeed, his essentially moderate, even conservative, position towards religious change, especially during the reign of Edward VI, seems to indicate a reluctance to advance too far down the protestant road. As early as 1536 Skip was arguing that reform ought not to mean throwing the theological baby out with the bathwater: 'The kynges office is to se thabuses taken awey and not the good thinges themselffes except hit so be that thabuses can nott be taken awey, as Ezechias toke awey the brason serpent when he cowed nott take awey thabuse of hitt. (TNA: PRO, SP 6/1, fol. 10)' For Skip, then and later, reform ought to be cautious and thoughtful or, as he said in a letter to Matthew Parker, 'cold and tardy' (Bruce and Perowne, 9). 
Despite his association with Anne Boleyn and leading reformers, Skip's religious opinions never appear to have been radical and he is probably more correctly seen as a Henrician Catholic than as a protestant. Just before the execution of Anne Boleyn, on Passion Sunday (2 April) 1536, he preached a sermon in the king's chapel that caused considerable disquiet. Basing himself on the text 'Quis ex vobis arguet me de peccato?' ('Which of you convinceth me of sin?' -- 'John' 8: 46), he launched an attack on the wholesale changes that were then occurring in the church. Aware of the tension that existed between the queen and Thomas Cromwell, especially over the impending dissolution of the lesser monasteries and the use to which the proceeds were to be put, the tone and content of Skip's sermon were extremely critical of Cromwell's intentions to reclaim church lands for the crown, and may also have been implicitly critical of the king. Like the queen, Skip would have preferred the money to be devoted to furthering the cause of reform rather than to filling the king's coffers. The sermon was blunt and he went so far as to modify the biblical story of Haman and Ahasuerus to make the point that councillors ought not to deceive the king. 
Although his outburst led to Skip's being interrogated, the case went no further. Subsequently he appears to have maintained a cautiously conservative theological position. In 1536 he was consulted over the issues of justification, purgatory, and the numbering of the ten commandments for the forthcoming 'Bishops' Book'. In 1538 he was named to a commission against Anabaptists. In 1543 he was involved in the heresy trial of John Marbeck and is said by Foxe to have been sympathetic to the musician, of whom he was supportive during his fourth examination, and whom he reassured afterwards that there was no substance to the charges against him (unlike his associates, Marbeck escaped the stake). In the same year, however, he is said to have argued with Cranmer over the doctrine contained in the 'King's Book', and under Edward VI, along with Day and Heath, he was identified by Cranmer as one of the bishops with awkward opinions on the new prayer book of 1549, particularly over the sacraments. The suggestion that he was one of the group of theologians at Windsor that compiled the 1552 prayer book has no foundation. 
Skip's apparently ambiguous religious conservatism was put to no further test. He died in London on 28 March 1552, some fifteen months before the accession of Mary, and was buried at St Mary Mounthaw, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 25692


Skippe, John (1741-1812), wood-engraver, born on 7 July 1741, was the son of John Skipp of Upper Hall, Ledbury, Herefordshire, where the family had long been settled, J. Skipp of that place having supported Sir Henry Lingen in 1646. His mother, Penelope, was the daughter of Thomas Symonds of Pengethley. He matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, in 1760. After leaving the university he travelled in north Italy, and made many drawings, not without merit, from the old masters. A series of careful studies, done in 1773 from the frescoes by Andrea Mantegna in the church of the Eremitani at Padua, is in the print room of the British Museum. He was the pupil of J. B. Malchair and possibly also of John Baptist Jackson. Skippe is chiefly noted for his series of wood-engravings in chiaroscuro, done in imitation of those works of Ugo da Carpi and other early Italian artists. Skippe's engravings are more artistic than Jackson's, and more nearly approach the work of the older masters, including Parmigianino, Correggio, and Raphael. He is also known to have engraved a plate, dated 1809, after Salvator Rosa. A large collection of colour engravings by Skippe after Michaelangelo, Rubens, and others dated between 1770 and 1773 is in the British Museum. Drawings by Skippe of landscape, sacred, and other subjects, executed in bistre with some vigour, are occasionally met with in collections and have sometimes been attributed to the old masters. Skippe died unmarried on 14 October 1812 in Overbury. Further examples of his work are in the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Tate collection, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 25693


Skippon, Philip, appointed Lord Skippon under the protectorate (d. 1660), parliamentarian army officer and politician, was the son of Luke Skippon (died 1638), a minor gentleman of West Lexham, Norfolk, and his wife, Anne. The Skippons had been in Norfolk since the thirteenth century, but Philip at a young age took military service on the continent. He married Maria Comes (died 1656) of Frankenthal, Lower Palatinate, on 14 May 1622, and they had eight children, three of whom died in infancy. Since he was married at Frankenthal he was evidently serving in the Palatinate before that date, under Sir Horace Vere. Skippon was wounded during the siege of Breda in 1625, and again at its recapture by the prince of Orange in October 1637. It was at Breda that he first gained his reputation for courage on the battlefield, reportedly with thirty English soldiers driving off 200 Spaniards 'at push of pike' (Walker, 52). He served also under Lord Vere at the sieges of Bois le Duc and Maastricht in 1629. 
Having attained the rank of captain in the Dutch service, Skippon returned to England, and went to live at Foulsham, where he had inherited a house and property from an uncle, William Skippon, who died in 1634. In 1639, however, the king recommended him to the Honourable Artillery Company of London for election as their captain. According to Clarendon his experience in the Netherlands had made him disaffected to the Church of England and the 'Book of Common Prayer', and for this reason he was 'much caressed and trusted' by the king's enemies in England (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.509). After Charles's attempted arrest of the five members in January 1642 the House of Commons requested a guard from the City, and the common council appointed Skippon to take command of the City-trained bands, and raise a guard for parliament's defence. He was appointed at the rank of sergeant-major-general, and voted a salary of $300 p.a., having been made a freeman of the City only four days prior to his appointment. By 20 January the Commons had also given him responsibility for the trained bands of Westminster, Southwark, and the suburbs. During the tense month that followed the House of Commons ordered him to send out mounted scouts and patrol-boats to gather intelligence, to blockade the Tower, and to attempt to seize it by surprise. In the latter case the removal of Sir John Byron put an end to the supposed danger. On 4 February 1642 parliament praised Skippon for his 'diligence, faithfulness, and sufficiency' ('JHC', 2.412). In a letter of 13 May the king commanded Skippon to attend him at York. But the two houses denounced the order as 'against the law of the land, the liberty of the subject', and 'the privilege of parliament,' and ordered him to continue serving them ('JHC', 2.575). 
When the king's forces threatened London after the battle of Edgehill, Skippon was at the head of the trained bands that marched to Turnham Green to defend the metropolis. As he passed before the ranks of his soldiers he spoke words that echoed his own military motto ('ora et pugna'): 'Come my boys, my brave boys, let us pray heartily and fight heartily; I will run the same fortunes and hazards with you; remember the cause is for God, and for the defence of yourselves, your wives and children: come, my honest brave boys, pray heartily and fight heartily, and God will bless us' (B. Whitelocke, 'Memorials of the English Affairs', 4 vols., 1853, 190-1). 
The commander-in-chief of the parliamentarian forces, the earl of Essex, quickly discerned Skippon's worth, and on 17 November 1642 snatched him away from the London common council to make him sergeant-major-general of the infantry in his army. In April 1643 Skippon took part in the siege of Reading, in August and September he accompanied Essex on his march to relieve Gloucester, and in September he performed notable service at the first battle of Newbury. The following month he occupied Newport Pagnell for parliament, and in December he took Grafton House in Northamptonshire. In the late summer of 1644 Essex allowed himself and his army to be drawn into a trap in Cornwall. While the earl escaped by sea from Lostwithiel, it was left to Skippon to arrange the best terms he could. He convoked a council of war, and urged his field officers to imitate the horse by endeavouring to cut their way through the enemy's ranks. This time, however, Skippon's persuasive oratory failed him and he was obliged to surrender. 
At the second battle of Newbury (27 October 1644) Skippon had his revenge. According to his own account he, Colonel Barclay, and Lord Roberts saw the hottest action, repulsing three violent charges of Prince Rupert's horse. Had night not fallen, opined Skippon, the parliamentarian army would probably have 'utterly defeated their whole army' (Rushworth, 5.723). Yet two weeks later the king returned to relieve Donnington Castle under the noses of the combined armies of Essex, Manchester, and Waller. Obloquy was poured upon the parliamentarian commanders for this episode, and Skippon received his share. In his defence he noted that Essex's whole army had shrivelled to fewer than 2000 men, and that they had had no assistance from Manchester's horse under the command of Oliver Cromwell. 
Skippon's disgrace was only temporary, for with the foundation of the New Model Army in early 1645 he was named sergeant-major-general of the infantry under Sir Thomas Fairfax. The delicate task of condensing the remaining foot from Essex's army into three regiments was entrusted to him. In an 'excellent, pious, and pithy hortatory speech to all his souldiers', he pledged, 'as I have been with you hitherto, so upon all occasion of service to my God and country, I shall by the help of God, be willing to live and die with you' (J. Vicars, 'Magnalia Dei Anglicana, or, England's Parliamentary-Chronicle', 1646, 132; Rushworth, 6.17). His success at this assignment set an example to the others, so that in a short time the balance of Essex's army was merged into the New Model. Skippon took the field with Fairfax in May 1645, and was sent to overrun Borstall House in Buckinghamshire, but he was repulsed with loss. 
It was at Naseby that Skippon's work in training the New Model infantry was triumphantly vindicated. Marshalling the parliamentarian foot, he positioned himself on the left centre. In the wake of Prince Rupert's successful charge against the cavalry on the left wing the parliamentarian soldiers of the foot found themselves sorely pressed. The royalist foot under Lord Astley rolled them back until they fell behind the reserves. The reserves, however, remained steady against the onslaught, not only repelling the king's forces but putting them to flight. In the midst of this intense struggle Skippon was dangerously wounded by a shot in the side. Fairfax asked him to leave the field, 'but the old man answered, he would not stir so long as a man would stand', and stayed until the fighting was over (Rushworth, 6.43). He was lucky to escape with his life. Parliament rushed surgeons and apothecaries to treat him, and then brought him to London for many months of convalescent care, at a cost of several hundred pounds. 
Skippon saw no further action during the first civil war, but was rewarded for his contribution at Naseby with the governorship of Bristol. He rejoined Fairfax at the siege of Oxford where, in May 1646 he undertook the construction and management of the forts and entrenchments for the parliamentarian besiegers. Although he had transferred to the New Model Army, Skippon remained on good terms with the earl of Essex and preserved his reputation as a political moderate. When Essex died in September 1646 Skippon had the high honour of acting as an armour bearer at his funeral. 
In December 1646 the Scots army was preparing to vacate Newcastle and return to its own country. Fairfax recommended, and parliament agreed, that Skippon should be the new governor of Newcastle. He was given command of the convoy of thirty-six carts that hauled the first instalment $200,000 to pay off the Scots and receive the king from them. For his skill in handling this sensitive transaction Skippon won kudos from the parliamentarian commissioners who were with him. 
On 29 March 1647 the House of Commons summoned him to resume his duties with the field army, and a week later the presbyterian majority led by Holles and Stapleton pressed him to accept the command of the projected expedition to Ireland. He wrote back, 'I am so sensible of my own exceeding indisposedness of mind, inability of body, and distractedness of estate and family, that I ingenuously confess myself most unfit, and unable to undertake or undergo such an employment' ('JHL', 9.139). But the presbyterians pressed it on him as his patriotic duty, and in the end he yielded to them. 
On the same day Skippon took his seat in the House of Commons as member for Barnstaple. Three troopers representing eight New Model cavalry regiments who had petitioned against disbandment and the Irish expedition at once approached him to support their cause. On 30 April 1647 he laid a copy of the soldiers' 'Apologie' before the house. The party of Holles and Stapleton now gave him his most difficult assignment to date: to travel to army headquarters at Saffron Walden with Cromwell, Ireton, and Fleetwood, damp down the flames of discontent, and restore peace within the ranks. Skippon did his best to please his parliamentarian masters. For all his powers of diplomacy, however, he could wring no more from his fellow officers than a commitment to consult their regiments. On 16 May Skippon and the other parliamentarian commissioners gathered at Saffron Walden to hear the results of this consultation. There was sharp conflict between the minority who favoured obedience to parliament, and the majority who advocated defiance. In vain Skippon tried to mediate the 'clashings and jarrings', which he found 'a very great pressure to my spiritt', and to encourage enlistment for Ireland (C. H. Firth, ed., 'The Clarke Papers', CS, 1, 1891, 1.58). Warned by the commissioners that the army was near mutiny, the parliamentarian presbyterians tried to sweeten their offer by repealing the declaration of dislike of 30 March, passing an act indemnifying the soldiers against civil prosecution for crimes committed while in arms, and promising to pay more of their arrears. But these appeasing measures came too late. The army drove out its presbyterian officers, banded together in a solemn engagement not to disband until its grievances were met, and erected a general council to oversee its political affairs. When Skippon and the other commissioners met the army at Thriplow Heath on 10 June to announce parliament's latest concessions they were greeted with cries of 'justice, justice' (Rushworth, 6.556). The response in London to army militancy was an attempted counter-revolution. To further their project of overthrowing the New Model Army the allies of Holles and Stapleton in the City offered Skippon the command of the trained bands. He opted, however, to remain with his comrades in the revolutionary army. This marked the beginning of the politically radical phase of his career. His new alignment was signified by his marching with Sir Thomas Fairfax and the other higher officers at the head of the New Model when they entered London on 6 August. 
Political duelling between the army and the City dragged on inconclusively until the outbreak of the second civil war, when both City fathers and citizens made their sympathy for a royalist peace settlement increasingly clear. Although they had previously requested that Skippon be placed in charge of all the forces in London and the environs, by the end of May 1648 they were petitioning for his ouster in favour of the covertly royalist sheriff Richard Browne. Parliament, however, resisted these importunities, and Skippon remained the linchpin of their control over the metropolis. The centrality of his role was underlined by his appointment, in the same month, to the Derby House committee. This committee, now purged of Scots and presbyterians, devised and executed parliament's military strategy in the second civil war. Skippon's seat on the committee furnished him with the power he needed to take charge of the metropolis during the eight months that culminated in the king's trial and execution. Most of the policies affecting London seem to have emanated from him, and he always appears to have got his own way. Free from the supervision of the City militia committee, he was accountable to parliament and the Derby House committee alone. During the summer he searched out and impounded the horses, arms, and men being recruited by royalist agents. He also directed an intelligence effort to uncover the places where men and 'materiel' were being hidden. Even more important was his recruitment of a thousand horse to keep the City secure, and a further 1500 Londoners, chiefly from the suburbs, to assist Fairfax at the siege of Colchester. His military and political effectiveness was such that the common council of London was moved to petition parliament against him. The core of their complaint was that he was raising servants and apprentices 'in a clandestine way at unseasonable times in the night... tending to the raising of tumults, dividing and breaking of the trained bands and auxiliary forces of this City' ('The Humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London... to the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled', 24 July 1648, 1-2). 
While the Lords backed the City, the Commons refused to revoke Skippon's authority. In the midst of this political struggle Skippon discovered a hitherto unsuspected talent and relish for political manoeuvre. Besides mobilizing the Derby House committee, he delivered major speeches in the House of Commons and the London common council. He now discarded the mantle of moderation to reveal an unswerving adherent of the revolution. At the end of June, for example, he addressed the corporation of London, deploring the royalism of the citizenry and calling for recruits to the parliamentarian cause. A few days later in the House of Commons he denounced the City's 'malignant' petition for a personal treaty with the king ('Mercurius Pragmaticus', 4-11 July 1648, sig. P2a.). In November he again addressed the Commons, this speech being on the theme of the soldiers' unpopularity in the streets of London, and the continuing danger from malignants. The following month he promoted the ordinance barring all signers of the petition for a personal treaty with the king from voting in the common council elections. At that same time the men of his own foot regiment in the New Model were billeted in St Paul's Cathedral. They kept themselves warm by tearing down 'the carved timber, scaffolds and other materialls' and making great fires on the cathedral floor (CLRO, repertories of the court of Aldermen, vol. 59, fols. 322-323). More than anyone else it was Skippon who kept a deeply unhappy City in parliament's grip from the outbreak of the second civil war to the time of the king's trial. 
Skippon's radicalism, however, had its limits. Appointed to the high court of justice to try the king, he declined to attend any of its meetings; nor did he put his name to the warrant for Charles's execution. During the Commonwealth and protectorate he continued to hold high office despite his initial refusal to swear the engagement. When Cromwell led the invasion of Scotland in the summer of 1650 Skippon was appointed commander-in-chief of all the forces in and about London. He was also elected to the first, second, third, and fifth councils of state under the Commonwealth. He was not appointed to the council created by the army officers after the expulsion of the Rump; nor was he chosen for Barebone's Parliament in 1653, though a group of gathered churches in Norfolk had nominated him. Yet he was a member of each of the two councils appointed by Cromwell. The protector also commissioned him to command the forces in London in February 1655 to suppress the apprehended rising of the royalists. During the reign of the major-generals (1655-6) Skippon was major-general for the London area. In the parliaments of 1654 and 1656 he represented Lyme, but said little in debate. His one significant intervention came in December 1656 when he repeatedly expressed indignation at the blasphemies of James Naylor. 'The growth of these things', he declared, 'is more dangerous than the most intestine or foreign enemies. I have often been troubled in my thoughts to think of this toleration'. Again, 'if this be liberty, God deliver me from such liberty'; and finally, 'I was always of opinion in the Long Parliament, the more liberty the greater mischief' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 1.24-5, 50, 218). 
Religion was indeed a matter close to Skippon's heart at all times. Judging by his published writings, his regimental flag, his will, and his recorded utterances, he adhered to an uncomplicated, non-sectarian brand of puritanism. He sank substantial sums of his own money into the publication of three books, each several hundred pages long, of pious reflection and devotion. They largely consisted of long strings of biblical quotations linked by commentary. Among his favoured themes were the importance of prayer and sabbath observance, and his conviction that 'the scriptures are the infallible truth of God' ('Christian Centurian's Observations', 1643, 223). He counselled his fellow soldiers not to be intimidated by, but to wear proudly, the labels puritan and roundhead. The emotional power of puritanism for Skippon is reflected in the words he addressed to his troops in early 1644: 'I am almost strucken into a sownd [swoon] for joy, and indeed you have so won my heart... that I... am willing to spend my dearest blood, in this just cause, and amongst you all'. In response, 'the souldiers with loud acclamations cried out that they would lose their lives with him' ('A most Joyfull Declaration'). Bearing witness to his confident providentialism was the flag he designed for his regiment. Beneath the image of a cloud from which an arm extends brandishing an unsheathed sword, it proclaims, 'Pray and fight. Jehovah helps us and help us he will' ('Ora et pugna. Iuvat et iuvabit Iehovah'; BL, Sloane MS 5247, fol. 31'v'). No sectarian, Skippon supported the Cromwellian church settlement of the 1650s. He was a good friend of the Independent divine Philip Nye, who preached at the wedding of his youngest daughter Susanna in 1655. In the will that he dictated at the end of his life he affirmed his belief in the 'unconceivable essence of the trin-une deitie', original sin, the resurrection of his own body after death, and eternal happiness (TNA: PRO, wills, PROB 11/300, fol. 257). 
Yet piety for Skippon was no bar to self-enrichment. Parliament at various times awarded him $500, $1000, and $200 towards his arrears and expenses. In addition he acquired confiscated land in every category: crown, church, and royalist. In Norfolk he bought bishops' lands, including the bishop of Norwich's palace, valued at over $2500; in Norfolk and Kent he obtained dean and chapter land for $356; while in Cornwall he purchased the crown manor of Bonalva for $719. When the so-called delinquent or royalist estates came onto the market in 1651 Skippon purchased the manors of Bletchley, Whaddon, Eaton, and Winslow in Buckinghamshire, but then sold them off in small parcels to the tenants. 
Lord protector Cromwell showed his high respect for Skippon by naming him to the reinstituted House of Lords in 1657. When the protector died Skippon was one of the signatories to the proclamation of Richard as his successor. The following year the restored Rump Parliament reappointed Skippon major-general of the London militia (27 July 1659), and commander-in-chief of all the forces within the weekly bills of mortality (2 August 1659). As the end of his life approached, however, he played no part in the events leading up to the Restoration. His death occurred some time after 26 June 1660, and his will was proved on 25 October of that year. He left his properties in Acton and other parts of Middlesex and Buckinghamshire to Dame Katherine, whom he commended as 'a most Christian like, tender and carefull wife and nurse unto mee...' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/300, fol. 259). This was Katherine Philips, whom he had married after the death of his first wife on 24 January 1656: their marriage settlement was dated 22 August 1657. His Norfolk properties he bequeathed to his son and heir, Philip, and an unspecified sum in cash was granted as a marriage portion to his daughter Mary. He also left generous annuities and cash bequests with a capital value in excess of $156 to the poor in various parishes in Buckinghamshire, Middlesex, and Norfolk. For a largely self-educated man his library was impressive: it included the 'Bible' and a 'Bible' concordance, Josephus's 'History of the Jews', the works of Joseph Hall (2 vols.), Samuel Purchas's 'Purchas his Pilgrimes' (5 vols.), Speed's and Holinshed's chronicles, Plutarch's lives, 'the Turkish historie', and Henry Hexham's 'two greate vollumes of the mapps of the whole world' (ibid., fols. 261'v', 262'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 25694


Skipwith, Sir William (b. c.1320, d. in or before 1398), justice, was probably born about 1320, into an old Yorkshire family that took its name from the village of Skipwith. The second son of William Skipwith and his wife, Margaret, daughter and heir of Ralph Fitzsimon of South Ormsby, Lincolnshire, the younger William entered the legal profession, and became one of the longest-serving justices of the fourteenth century. His career as a lawyer may have begun in York. In 1341 the vicars-choral of St Peter's, York, appointed him their attorney, and in 1348 he represented the city in parliament. By 1345 he had married a Lincolnshire heiress, Alice Hiltoft, who was to inherit the manors of North and South Hiltoft and Ingoldmells from her father Sir William, and the manors of Cawthorpe, Covenham, and Uphall from her mother, Alice Muer, by 1361. At his own father's death (probably before 1361) Skipwith inherited parts of the manors of Skipwith and Menthorpe in Yorkshire, and the Lincolnshire manors of Bigby and Thorpe, his elder brother John having died prematurely. From his mother, he was to acquire by 1369 the manors of South Ormsby and Ketsby in Lincolnshire. 
In Michaelmas term 1344 Skipwith was created a serjeant-at-law, and his arguments in court begin to be reported frequently in the year-books. He was retained as a king's serjeant in 1354, and in 1359 was appointed a justice of the common pleas. Within a few months he was knighted, and in June 1361 became chief baron of the exchequer. In 1344 he had received the first of many appointments to oyer and terminer commissions in the midlands and Yorkshire. He rode the midland circuit on assize from 1347 to 1359, and the northern circuit from 1360 to 1365. Throughout his career he saw continuous service on commissions of the peace and gaol delivery in the midlands and Yorkshire, and was also often appointed to survey dikes and ditches there. For six years after its promulgation in 1350 he heard cases under the 'Statute of Labourers' in several counties. Service on judicial commissions had its perils. At an oyer and terminer session in Louth a defendant drew his sword and seized Skipwith by the throat, causing him to adjourn proceedings. 
A number of wealthy magnates also sought Skipwith's services, including Ralph Stafford, earl of Stafford (died 1372), and John, Lord Willoughby, to whose son and heir, Robert, Skipwith had married his eldest daughter, Alice, by 1370. But his most important private employer was Edward, prince of Wales, who in September 1355 retained him at 50's'. per annum to provide counsel and plead; in 1362 this fee was doubled. At the height of his influence, however, in October 1365 Sir William suddenly fell from grace. The chronicler Knighton reports that he and Henry Green (died 1369), the chief justice of the king's bench, were dismissed from office for 'enormous infidelities', and imprisoned until they had paid large fines to the king. No record of proceedings against them survives, but Sir William and several associates, mostly of Lincolnshire, gave two recognizances to the crown for the sum of 4000 marks in April and May 1366. On 10 February 1370, after half the money had been paid, Sir William was pardoned, and five days later he was appointed chief justice for pleas in Ireland. In 1373 he returned to England and began to serve again on judicial commissions. In 1374 he was appointed justice of north and south Wales by the Black Prince, and by October 1376 his rehabilitation was complete, with his reappointment as justice of the common pleas. In the following year he was back on the midland assize circuit, switching in 1385 to the northern circuit. His rapid restoration to office led earlier historians to invent a second Sir William Skipwith, whose first judicial appointment was to the Irish bench in 1370. 
By April 1377 Skipwith had entered the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, who appointed him his chief justice. Presiding over proceedings brought against William Wykeham (died 1404) at Gaunt's instigation in November 1376, Sir William refused to grant the defendant an adjournment to seek counsel, expressly in retribution for Wykeham's similar treatment of Gaunt's ally, William, Lord Latimer (died 1381), in the Good Parliament earlier that year. The Anonimalle chronicle also reports that Sir William sternly rebutted Wykeham's claim that as chancellor he was not accountable for his office, and Wykeham was fined $64,000. 
His memory of his own dismissal probably loomed large in the only crisis Skipwith faced during Richard II's reign. When summoned to the council at Nottingham in 1387 to give an opinion on the king's assertion of his royal prerogative, he pleaded illness, thereby avoiding the fate that subsequently befell his fellow judges. However, he and his two eldest sons were among the Lincolnshire gentry who swore an oath to uphold the lords appellant in 1388. That year he retired from the bench, although appointed a trier of petitions in parliament, as he had been in every parliament from 1362 to 1365, and from 1376 to 1386. In 1390 his service on judicial commissions also ceased, and he was dead by 15 November 1398. 
Skipwith was survived by five sons and one daughter. He left an estate further enlarged by marriage and purchase. By 1370 his eldest son, William, had married Catherine d'Avranches, heir to the larger parts of the Yorkshire manors of Skipwith and Menthorpe. His second son, John, married Alice, daughter of Sir Frederick Tilney of Boston, represented Lincolnshire in three parliaments, and eventually inherited the bulk of the family estate from his brother's daughter. A third son, Stephen (died 1398), was rector of the church of Ingoldmells, and the youngest sons, Patrick and Thomas, were still alive in 1415, when they and their mother received bequests in the will of the judge's second daughter, Margaret, wife of Sir Henry Vavasour of Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 25773


Anker Smith (1759-1819), printmaker and miniature painter, was born in London, the son of William Smith, a silk merchant in Cheapside, and his wife, Mary, and was baptized at All Hallows, Honey Lane, on 5 March 1759. After a period at the Merchant Taylors' School, in 1777 he was articled to his maternal uncle, the attorney John Hoole, but encouraged by James Heath he turned instead to art. From 1779 to 1782 he studied with the engraver Taylor, and then worked as an assistant to Heath. In 1787 he was commissioned to engrave for Bell's 'British Poets', and from the same date he was employed as a line-engraver for Boydell and contributed ten small plates to the 'Shakspeare Gallery'. In 1794 and from 1796 to 1800 he exhibited engravings and miniatures at the Royal Academy, and in 1797 he was made an associate of the academy. The catalogues record addresses in Chelsea, Old Bond Street, and finally Upper Ranelagh Street. Smith married Charlotte Susannah Snape, at St Andrew by the Wardrobe, on 1 November 1791. They had a daughter, Charlotte ('b'. 5 Nov 1792), and three sons who went on to be artists: 


@@@@@


doc= 25799


Frederick William Smith (bap. 1797, d. 1835), a sculptor and pupil of Chantrey, who died young on 18 January 1835; Edwin Dalton Smith ('bap'. November 1800), a miniature painter; and 


@@@@@


doc= 25814


Herbert Luther Smith (bap. 1809, d. 1870), a painter. He also adopted and trained his nephew the miniature painter William Charles Ross. Anker Smith was one of the original governors of the Society of Engravers, formed in London in 1803, and he produced illustrations after Singleton for editions of 'The Arabian Nights' (1802), 'Gil Blas' (1809), and 'Don Quixote' (1818). He died of apoplexy in London on 23 June 1819, his death being announced at the academy on 5 July that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 26004


Somerset, Charles, first earl of Worcester (c.1460-1526), courtier and magnate, was the illegitimate son of Henry Beaufort, second duke of Somerset (1436-1464), and his mistress Joan Hill. His mother was still alive in 1493, when Henry VII gave her an annuity. He was thus a cousin both of King Henry and of his mother, Lady Margaret Beaufort, and subsequently acted as one of the latter's executors. His childhood was spent in exile, in Flanders and then in France, until in 1485 he returned to England with Henry Tudor, who knighted him at Milford Haven on 7 August 1485, barely a fortnight before the battle of Bosworth. At this time he bore the name Beaufort, but soon afterwards took that of Somerset, presumably to avoid blurring the royal claim to the Beaufort interest. The new king looked after his kinsman and companion in arms. On 1 March 1486 he made Somerset captain of the yeomen of the guard and shortly after appointed him royal cup-bearer. On St George's day 1496 Somerset was made a knight of the Garter. He was present at a meeting between Henry VII and Archduke Philip which took place outside Calais on 9 June 1500, and his close personal connection with the king secured his appointment in 1501 as vice-chamberlain of the household. In this capacity he took part in the ceremonies connected with the reception of Katherine of Aragon in October and November that year. In September 1503 he was made a knight of the body and by early 1505 he was a councillor. 
Although he had no hereditary connections with Wales, Somerset established that country as the principal sphere of his political and economic influence when on 2 June 1492 he married Henry VII's ward Elizabeth (died 1507), sole heir of William Herbert, earl of Huntingdon (died 1490), the son of the king's childhood guardian, and Mary Woodville, the dowager queen's sister. Through his wife Somerset acquired a substantial part of the lordships of Gower, Kilvey, Crickhowell, Tretower, and Raglan. The main authority in Wales was the king's uncle, Jasper Tudor, duke of Bedford, the chief justice of south Wales; and on his death in December 1495 his lands in Wales reverted to the crown. However, Henry, duke of York (the future Henry VIII), was too young to administer Bedford's lands, and the marcher lordship of Glamorgan was leased to Somerset in March 1501. He was responsible for the implementation of justice in this marcher lordship, which operated as a separate judicial system until the 'Act of Union' in 1536. The king, however, had driven a hard bargain, and Somerset claimed in 1502 that the lease was not profitable without the grant of offices. Accordingly in September 1503 he was granted the lordship of Ewyas Lacy and a month later the stewardship of the lordship of Monmouth. Somerset's influence in the south marches was strengthened following the death of his wife's uncle Sir Walter Herbert in September 1507, when he acquired the lordships of Chepstow and Tudenham and the lease and lordship of the castle of Caldicot. The combination of lands, offices, and title made him the most powerful man in south Wales and the crown's principal agent for its government. This was ratified when he was created Baron Herbert in January 1504. 
Henry VII had ensured that no one outside the royal family exerted the sort of authority in Wales exercised by Jasper Tudor. However, within little more than a year of his accession in 1509 Henry VIII had reversed his father's policy of making grants only during pleasure and greatly extended Herbert's influence in the marches. On 19 May 1509 he received the stewardship of the lordship of Ruthin and the constableship of Ruthin Castle, thus extending his authority into north Wales. Two days later he was made steward for life of the lordship of Monmouth and Grosmont and constable of Monmouth Castle, and on 29 May he became sheriff of Glamorgan. In May 1510 he received the reversion for life of the office of chief steward of the lordship of Abergavenny, and in June 1510 all offices previously granted to him (except the stewardship of Monmouth) were included in new grants to be held for life by Herbert and his heir. 
Herbert was also closely involved in national politics and international diplomacy. One of Henry VII's closest advisers, he performed a variety of military and diplomatic offices. When the king attempted to mediate between Brittany and France early in his reign, a fleet was fitted out under the command of Somerset, who was made admiral on 20 February 1488 and given captaincy of a ship called 'Le Soveraigne'. He was commissioned to go to sea on 9 October when Henry was contemplating supporting the late duke of Brittany's daughter Anne against the French king, Charles VIII. In September 1490 Somerset was sent to invest Emperor Maximilian with the Order of the Garter, and after Charles VIII died on 7 April 1498, he was dispatched to France to renew the treaty of Etaples with the new king, Louis XII. Four years later he undertook an embassy to Maximilian to secure the banishment of Yorkist rebels. Discussions in Antwerp resulted on 19 June 1502 in a general treaty of commerce and a promise by the emperor to keep the Yorkists under supervision in return for a payment of $10,000. Somerset was also entrusted with the delicate negotiations arising from suggestions that Henry VII, widowed in 1503, might make a French marriage; and he was at Blois with Louis XII early in June 1505, when the French king gave him a full briefing on his views, including a proposal that Henry VII might marry his niece, Marguerite of Angouleme. 
Baron Herbert remained an influential figure under Henry VIII, who on 30 May 1509 made him lord chamberlain, the nominal head of the entire royal household. He also took part in the expedition to France of 1513. The king's army comprised three divisions, and Herbert had charge of the middle division and was involved in the siege of Therouanne, captured on 23 August. On 1 February 1514 he was rewarded by being created earl of Worcester. In August following he accompanied the king's sister Mary to France for her marriage to Louis XII and also took part in negotiations aiming at the expulsion of Ferdinand of Aragon from Navarre. In 1515 he was chiefly occupied in seeing to the fortifications of Tournai, captured shortly after Therouanne. He was involved in unfruitful negotiations with Maximilian in 1516-17. Worcester eventually had to inform Henry that Maximilian was insincere in his desire to maintain an alliance with England and advised his sovereign to send him no more money. 
England and France were now drawing closer together and Worcester's finest moments came between 1518 and 1520 when he was put in charge of the negotiations for a truce between the two nations. In 1518 he negotiated the surrender of Tournai to the French in return for 600,000 crowns. In December that year he met King Francois I at St Denis and he subsequently acted as an intermediary between Wolsey and the French court in negotiations which culminated in the meeting of Henry and Francois at the Field of Cloth of Gold. This was largely organized by Worcester, who used the occasion to display his ceremonial and organizational skills. Having landed in Calais on 13 April 1520, he and his French counterpart agreed that the meeting should take place at Val d'Or ('Golden Vale') between the English town of Guines, where Henry VIII was based, and the French town of Ardres, where Francois was staying. Guines Castle was deemed too small to entertain the king and queen of France in, and under Worcester's direction commissioners were appointed to construct a private gallery connected to a temporary palace, 'a honorable lodging' erected by several thousand labourers and craftsmen (Russell, 31). Five thousand people were shipped across the channel. Timber was floated down from the Netherlands and Kent and 4000 feet of glass was brought from St Omer. An Italian observer thought that even Leonardo da Vinci could not have improved upon it, and it was described as the eighth wonder of the world. The temporary palace, one of the lost treasures of the reign, is shown in a painting by an unknown artist at Hampton Court. After some argument the French accepted Worcester's proposed location for the feat of arms, on English soil about a mile from Guines between two 'eminences', and the details were then left to him, though with the help of a 'platt' by Henry himself. He organized the building of lists and galleries. The tilting yard had been designed by Henry VIII, but was constructed following Worcester's advice to put the lists closer to the viewing gallery. The jousts, which involved 300 contestants, took place on 11 and 22 June and the earl was one of the judges. In the following year he was present at the reception of Emperor Charles V, attesting the Anglo-imperial treaty of Windsor, on 20 June, while in 1525 he helped negotiate the treaty of the More between France and England. 
Worcester died on 25 April 1526, probably at his preferred residence at Kew. He was buried in St George's Chapel, Windsor, doubtless in accordance with the arrangements he had dictated in his will. He there showed his love of ceremony by requesting that if he died near London, his body was to be taken down the Thames, covered by a black cloth with a white cross, for interment at Windsor next to his first wife. Elizabeth Herbert, the mother of the earl's son and heir, Henry, died on 27 August 1507, and by November 1511 he had married Eleanor, daughter of Edward Sutton, second Baron Dudley, who survived him. They had a son and a daughter. (Claims that Worcester married three times probably derive from an error by Dugdale.) The earl's wealth cannot be quantified, but an account of 1520 shows that his lands in the Welsh marches yielded about $850 per annum. Raised largely by court service to an earldom, he was the ancestor through his eldest son of an important aristocratic dynasty, successively earls and marquesses of Worcester and dukes of Beaufort. 


@@@@@


doc= 26005


Somerset, Edward, fourth earl of Worcester (c.1550-1628), nobleman and courtier, was the only son of William Somerset, third earl of Worcester (1526/7-1589), and his first wife, Christian North ('b'. 1533), daughter of Edward North, first Lord North. The Somersets were a grand marcher family who staunchly supported the Tudors and lived in expansive medieval style at Raglan Castle. In December 1571 Lord Herbert, as Edward was styled, married Elizabeth Hastings (died 1621), fourth daughter of Francis Hastings, second earl of Huntingdon, with whom he had at least five sons and six daughters. Their third surviving son was the traveller and writer Sir Charles Somerset (1587/8-1665). He succeeded his father as earl of Worcester in February 1589 and in May 1590 was sent to congratulate James VI of Scotland on his return from Denmark with his bride, also informing James that he had been nominated a knight of the Garter along with Henri IV. Worcester and James struck up a friendship that later became significant. In December 1590 he became a member of the council in the marches of Wales. He was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1591, created MA by Oxford University in 1592, and elected knight of the Garter in 1593. In December 1597 Worcester was appointed deputy master of the horse in the absence of the earl of Essex, and in June 1600 he was a member of the court of peers who heard the charges against Essex after his return from Ireland. 
On 8 February 1601 Worcester was sent with three senior privy councillors to Essex House to demand why men were assembling there. The four were kept under guard for three hours while Essex attempted to raise London against his enemies at court. Worcester's eyewitness account of events formed part of the indictment of Essex and Southampton; after being sentenced to death Essex asked his pardon for holding him prisoner. In April 1601 Elizabeth appointed Worcester her master of the horse. He was promoted to the privy council in June and made joint commissioner of Essex's former office of earl marshal in December. He became lord lieutenant of Monmouthshire and Glamorgan in July 1602. 
Worcester rose to even greater favour under James VI and I. As earl marshal he oversaw the coronation in July 1603, the baptism of Princess Mary in 1605, and the unique ceremony creating Prince Henry prince of Wales during the parliamentary session of 1610. He became master of the horse for life in January 1604, and was sufficiently competent as a huntsman to accompany the king daily in the field at Royston and Newmarket. However, Worcester tended to weary of the interminable chase and on occasion longed for the summer break when he could retire to Raglan. On these hunting sojourns he frequently acted as one of the royal secretaries, writing to the privy council and particularly to Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury, with details of James's views, mood, and state of health. The king valued Worcester's advice and regarded him as one of his 'honest society' of leading privy councillors, along with Salisbury, Northampton, and Suffolk ('Letters of King James VI and I', 271). In 1610 these trusted four peers debated with James at Theobalds on the last stages of the negotiation of the great contract, and later, in November 1610, they made every effort to obtain parliamentary taxation after the king authorized them to accept any reasonable offer from the House of Commons. 
After the Reformation, generations of the Somerset clan were divided over religion. Worcester was impeccably conformist, taking the oath of allegiance to the royal supremacy and attending sermons at court. He was placed on a commission for the expulsion of the Jesuits in September 1604. In May-June 1605 he was sent to Raglan, after a period of riotous disturbances in the marches, to summon his county neighbours, including the bishop of Hereford, and urge them to greater efforts in establishing true religion and suppressing recusancy. Later in 1605 he was employed in the interrogation of the gunpowder plotters in the Tower. Yet in 1592 he gave shelter at Raglan to the Jesuit superior Robert Jones, and about 1600 granted the order some Welsh lands and farms. His wife was widely regarded as a Catholic. The earl employed as his children's tutor the noted Welsh protestant Thomas Pritchard, but several if not all of them grew up to be crypto-Catholics who revealed their sympathies on their tours of Europe or visits to Spa near Liege, a resort of Catholic emigres. Worcester escorted the Catholic-leaning Anne of Denmark to Bath in 1613, and his younger son Thomas served as her master of the horse. 
After the death in 1612 of his ally Salisbury, whose private funeral he attended, Worcester became one of the six commissioners for the treasury. Thereafter his career stalled, since his access to the king dwindled with the rise after 1611 of the favourite Sir Robert Carr. By 1614 it was rumoured that he would have to forfeit the mastership of the horse; he surrendered it in January 1616 but received an annuity of $1500 as compensation. He was also given the office of lord privy seal for life, and continued to be named to various commissions, including that which examined Ralegh in 1618 after the Guiana voyage. In 1621 he was appointed judge of requests, and though there were frequent rumours that he would relinquish the post of lord privy seal to make way for a client of Buckingham, he retained it until his death. 
Worcester was a cultivated man who supported a theatre company. He completed the suite of grand state rooms at Raglan begun by his father, modernizing the castle's living quarters, and was probably responsible for the recasting of part of the moat into a sunken promenade with shell-lined niches for statues of Roman emperors. His extensive rents benefited from the developing coal industry in Glamorgan, and his tenants were obliged to carry coal to Raglan as part of their leases. Less successful, however, was his patent for the sole making of gunpowder and saltpetre in England, granted in May 1607 and extended to include exports of powder in 1610, but withdrawn in February 1620 after numerous complaints. Worcester's last significant appearance was in February 1626 as lord great chamberlain at the coronation of Charles I. He died at Worcester House in Westminster on 3 March 1628 and was buried on 30 March at Raglan parish church, but his monument there was destroyed in 1646 along with other family tombs. 


@@@@@


doc= 26006


Somerset, Edward, second marquess of Worcester (d. 1667), courtier and scientist, was the first son of Henry Somerset, fifth earl and first marquess of Worcester (1577-1646), and his wife, Anne (died 1639), daughter and heir of John, Lord Russell, and Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Anthony Cook of Gidea Hall, Essex. Styled Lord Herbert from 1628 when his father inherited the earldom, he was educated privately at Raglan Castle, Monmouthshire, and brought up as a Catholic. Granted a pass to travel abroad for three years from 5 August 1619, he visited Germany, France, and Italy. In 1627 the MA degree of Cambridge University was bestowed upon him, although he attended no college. 
During the years of the mid-1620s Lord Herbert was admitted to the circle of courtiers around the new king, Charles I, and began to take an active interest in experimental science: these two developments were to form the most important dimensions of his life. About 1628 he married Elizabeth (died 1635), daughter of Sir William Dormer and his wife, Alice, whose father was Sir Richard Molyneux. They had one son, Henry Somerset, first duke of Beaufort, and two daughters before Elizabeth's death on 31 May 1635. Although he held public office, such as membership of the council in the marches of Wales (12 May 1633) and a deputy lord lieutenancy in Monmouthshire from November 1635, Herbert's principal interests before 1640 were private, and scientific. At Raglan, from the time of his marriage, he employed a Dutch engineer, Caspar Calthoff, to assist him with experiments at the castle. Although no surviving trace of it was ever found during twentieth-century conservation work there, it is possible that a machine employing the propulsive properties of steam was constructed to raise water to the full height of the great tower. Another interest of Lord Herbert was perpetual motion, and he claimed to have devised a machine to demonstrate that principle. In August 1639 he married Margaret (died 1681), second daughter of Henry O'Brien, fourth earl of Thomond; the marriage brought him into contact with members of the Irish peerage. During 1641 he was acting as one of the king's retinue, and on 7 December he was assured by Charles, setting out for the north, that if the king lived, Herbert would 'neither be a loser in, nor repent you for the services you have done me' (Dircks, 33). 
As early as January 1642 the citizens of Gloucester feared the consequences for their city if the Catholic Raglan interest were to be mobilized against them. On the outbreak of civil war the Somerset family was an important financial resource for the king, its estates being valued in December 1641 at between $40,000 and $100,000. The controller of this fabulous wealth was Herbert's father, the fifth earl, created first marquess of Worcester on 2 March 1643 in recognition of his major contribution to Charles's war chest. Herbert acted as agent between the king and his father for some of these advances. As early as 3 September 1642 the House of Commons demanded Herbert's presence as a corollary of the Lords' attempts to disarm his father, and in February 1643 parliament called upon the king to rid himself of the services of both father and son. In the opening months of the war Herbert was busy fortifying Raglan, first moving the Monmouthshire powder magazine from Monmouth to Caerleon, and thence to Raglan; and setting up garrisons in Cardiff, Brecon, Hereford, and at Goodrich Castle. These movements heightened the mood of anxiety among the aldermen of Gloucester, who reported to parliament their interrogation of Herbert's servants. News circulated in November 1642 that a force of 7000 Welsh led by the marquess of Hertford and Herbert had engaged the parliamentarian earl of Stamford near Tewkesbury in a fierce battle. Herbert was supposedly personally prominent, but the reports were propaganda, probably manufactured in Gloucester. Recriminations between Herbert and Hertford developed not as a consequence of military defeat but through personal rivalry exacerbated by Herbert's role as Hertford's paymaster. The king sent a representative to try to repair the breach between them. 
By January 1643 Herbert was substituting for Hertford as a field commander, and he became general of south Wales. In any assessment of regional military objectives the taking of Gloucester was bound to figure strongly. After an incident at Coleford in the Forest of Dean when some villagers killed three of his officers, a force of 1500 foot and 500 horse under Herbert's command camped at Highnam, outside Gloucester, in preparation for an assault on the city. On 24 March 1643 they allowed themselves to be ignominiously taken prisoner by Sir William Waller. Herbert, who was not present, blamed others for the disaster, which marked the end of royalist plans to take Gloucester. Nothing daunted by this setback, which might have called Herbert's competence as a commander into question, on 6 April Charles appointed him lieutenant-general, and added Monmouthshire to his command. At Abergavenny on 15 April royalists from Herbert's associated counties were summoned to Hereford, but there was local reluctance to flock to the standard. The earl of Clarendon, while admitting that 'many men loved and very few hated' Herbert (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.479), recognized that his Roman Catholicism and his habit of keeping away from his own forces were an obstacle to any success he might have had as a field commander. Clarendon dismissed Herbert's hastily assembled 'mushrump [mushroom] army' (ibid., 2.483) as a wasted opportunity, and Herbert failed subsequently to re-establish himself as a general, despite some evidence of successes in small skirmishes in the Welsh border country. His relations with the two other royalist leaders in his region, Prince Rupert and the marquess of Hertford, were never better than polite. The height of his achievement down to the spring of 1645 was thus in quelling local unrest and helping repair garrisons in Monmouthshire. 
Given his disappointing performance as a military leader it may appear odd that Lord Herbert was selected by Charles I in 1644 for a secret mission to Ireland that called for extraordinary personal and persuasive powers. The story of his mission to Ireland has since the nineteenth century exercised the judgements of historians, and has provoked sharply differing responses among them. Herbert's first association with Irish service dates from 1 April 1644, when he was apparently commissioned to take command of troops to be raised in Ireland and shipped to England in the interest of the king. Herbert was to be 'generalissimo' (Dircks, 70) of three armies from England, Ireland, and the continent of Europe. The authenticity of this commission (and that of many other documents produced by Herbert in connection with his later Irish mission) was brought into question as long ago as 1735 by Thomas Carte, biographer of James Butler, duke of Ormond, but modern commentators tend cautiously to consider it genuine. What qualified Herbert for this service were his long association with the king, who liked at least to be considered loyal to his friends, his work in making available the Raglan fortune for the king's cause -- the contribution acknowledged on 12 February 1645 by the king to amount by that time to $250,000 -- and his Irish contacts through his wife. The king's dealings with the Somersets had always been characterized by a noble, perhaps romantically chivalrous generosity on the part of the family, rewarded by Charles with promises that were difficult to keep and usually accompanied by an enjoinder to secrecy. Privileges promised to Herbert in return for this command included the hand of the king's daughter, Elizabeth, for his son Henry, and the dukedom of Somerset. The whole scheme collapsed, however, when in May agents of the Irish Catholic confederation were dismissed from Charles's court at Oxford, and negotiations with the Irish were placed in the hands of the protestant marquess of Ormond. The king wrote to Ormond, lord lieutenant of Ireland, on 27 December 1644, implying that Lord Herbert was to be subordinate to him when the latter was to visit Ireland, primarily on his own business. At this point Charles did everything to confirm to Ormond his confidence in him and his lack of any formal investment of trust in Herbert. To Ormond, he wrote of Herbert: 'His honesty or affection to my service will not deceive you; but I will not answer for his judgment' (Carte, 5.7-8). Nevertheless, from January 1645 onwards, a series of rather oddly worded commissions were issued to Herbert, who from this point was styled earl of Glamorgan. The title itself, along with that of Baron Beaufort of Caldecot Castle which he claimed from the same time, has always been controversial. No patent passed the great seal until 31 January 1646, and even then doubts remain as to whether it was ever more than a titular earldom: it was probably originally conceived by Charles as an inducement, to be bestowed in the event of Herbert's success in Ireland. 
Charles's intention seems to have been that Glamorgan should have full power to negotiate a treaty with the confederates on terms dictated by them, which would have been unacceptable to the protestant Ormond. Most modern assessments of Charles's character have agreed on his principled commitment to the Church of England, so it seems less likely that the king had settled on selling out the Anglican church in Ireland than on allowing the Glamorgan mission to proceed as a dimension in a complex royal game of diplomacy. On 12 February 1645 Charles gave Glamorgan a further warrant for the title of duke of Somerset, and on 12 March the earl received a warrant empowering him to negotiate a secret treaty with the Catholic confederates. On 25 March he sailed for Ireland. After being shipwrecked on the English coast he was inevitably delayed, and did not reach Dublin until late June. By this time the king's need for an injection of more troops and an opening of a new front in the civil war was acute, in the wake of his defeat at Naseby on 14 June. 
Before Glamorgan's arrival in Ireland Ormond had been engaged in peace negotiations with the confederates, in which he had insisted that the Catholic church should not be allowed to retain its property: his refusal to move on this point appeared to be strengthening the hand of the peace party. On 6 August Glamorgan set out for Kilkenny and first appeared to be assisting Ormond in his discussions with the confederates there, but within three weeks he had concluded on 25 August a separate, secret treaty of his own. It went beyond anything previously in the public domain in making concessions to Catholics. All penal laws in Ireland were to be abandoned, Irish Catholics were to be exempt from protestant clerical jurisdiction, and in return the confederates were to provide 10,000 soldiers under Glamorgan's command for use anywhere in the three nations of the British Isles. The principal beneficiaries of the Glamorgan treaty would have been the Irish Catholic clergy, and despite the misgivings of the papal representative, Scarampi, a majority in the Catholic episcopate endorsed it when details leaked out. That Charles himself had not been consulted in detail on the terms of Glamorgan's concessions is suggested by the king's warning of 31 July to Ormond against too readily satisfying Irish Catholic expectations; but the yielding to confederate demands by Glamorgan was not an unreasonable surrender by one who was after all himself a devout Catholic. There is compelling evidence that Glamorgan shared his thinking with others in Ormond's negotiating team, who imposed an oath of their own on Glamorgan to compel him to deploy his promised army only when Charles had expressly given instructions for its use. Between 7 August and 24 December 1645 Glamorgan wrote fourteen letters to Ormond, couched in vague, extravagant terms, but broadly adhering to the line that he had come to help Ormond, not to open rival negotiations: this evidence can be taken to mean that Ormond himself was thus kept in the dark. An alternative reading of the Byzantine correspondence between the two is that Ormond knew of Glamorgan's plans, but had to maintain an official ignorance of them. Glamorgan's 'defeasance', a document he drew up on 26 August, was probably designed as his plan to protect Charles should his scheming fail, rather than as simply an admission by Glamorgan that he had strayed way beyond his commission. 
In the event the details of negotiations in Kilkenny proved harder to conclude than the simplistic Glamorgan predicted, and it was mid-September before he could return to Dublin to rejoin the alternative negotiations pursued by Ormond. A further setback arrived in the shape of the new papal nuncio, Rinuccini, who was sceptical that Glamorgan could through his own dubious authority implement the religious concessions to the confederates at the core of the treaty. Even before Rinuccini's arrival Scarampi had distrusted Glamorgan's insistence that the treaty should be secret. Such secrecy that did prevail was already compromised by the diffusion of details of the treaty among the confederate general assembly and the Catholic episcopate, beyond the confederate treaty committee. Rinuccini appears to have suborned Glamorgan to his own proposals for even greater concessions to the Catholic church than those in the secret treaty. A sympathetic view of Glamorgan in his collapse before the nuncio's demands must stress the immediacy of the need for Irish troops to arrive in Chester before it fell, perhaps for ever, to parliament, and Glamorgan virtually alone among the royalist negotiators saw the virtue of persisting in negotiations with the nuncio. His critics, by contrast, will note this episode as further evidence of Glamorgan's hare-brained and quixotic character. 
On 28 November 1645 Ormond was evidently still not willing to acknowledge the secret treaty, but its terms found their way to the English parliament after 17 October, when a copy was seized from the baggage train of the ambushed Catholic archbishop of Tuam by a Scots raiding party. On 26 December Glamorgan was brought before Ormond and was charged with treason by Lord Digby. After a theatrical demonstration at this meeting by Ormond that he knew nothing of Glamorgan's activities, it was decided to keep the earl in custody. Letters written by Glamorgan during his captivity strongly suggest that he had every confidence that his detention would be brief, and that he believed himself to be carrying out a scheme that the king must approve of. The pressing military considerations that had quickly wrung concessions from Glamorgan by Rinuccini now worked to secure the earl's release, and on 22 January 1646 he was freed on bail of $40,000. Glamorgan continued to play a part in the negotiations with the confederates, unaware that Charles had repudiated his treaty. Rinuccini now refused to accept the earl's credentials, on the grounds that he had never been formally cleared of treason. During February Glamorgan bent his efforts towards bringing the Ormondists and Rinuccini to the negotiating table, and managed to secure the prolongation of the cessation of arms. On 24 February he set out for Waterford to arrange for the ferrying of troops to England. He planned to send 6000 immediately and another 4000 in May. The date of departure from Ireland was fixed for 18 March: three ports of embarkation were identified. But Chester fell to parliament on 3 February, money and ships did not appear in the necessary quantities, and news broke that Charles had repudiated Glamorgan's commission. This marked the virtual collapse of Glamorgan's plans and of his personal credit in Ireland. On 3 February Charles wrote to the earl to distance himself from what had occurred, asserting that none of these misfortunes would have happened if Glamorgan had listened to Ormond. Three Irish regiments raised by Glamorgan for deployment in England were diverted on 8 April by the confederate council for service in co. Clare. When in June 1646 Glamorgan's father threatened the Monmouthshire parliamentarian committee with the forces his sons were bringing from Ireland, they were dismissed by his local opponents as 'jesuitical inventions' ('Letter from the Marquess of Worcester'). 
Until March 1648 Glamorgan remained in Ireland as a member of a new council of the confederates. He was admitted to civic honours in Waterford and Galway, and commanded an army in Munster from September 1646 until June 1647, when he was displaced by Lord Muskerry. He assured the Spanish agent in Ireland that he would send men to serve in Spain under Philip IV, but his offer was politely declined on the grounds that there seemed little substance to the proposals other than as a bargaining ploy with the Spanish. In the aftermath of the collapse of the king's cause Raglan had surrendered on 19 August 1646, and Glamorgan's father and wife were in the castle at the time. The subsequent sequestration of the family estates in south Wales and elsewhere made a return to Monmouthshire impossible for him. He had inherited his patrimonial title of marquess of Worcester in December 1646, on the death of his father, and the new marquess made for France in March 1648, spending most of the remainder of the 1640s in and around Paris. 
On 14 March 1649 the Commonwealth government named Worcester among those royalists who were to suffer banishment and the confiscation of estates, but in practice, the republican government conducted itself towards him with more leniency than his history of plotting with the confederates might have deserved. In April 1651 Oliver Cromwell, the principal beneficiary of the confiscation of the Somerset family's estates, warned his wife of a possible visit from Worcester's son, and was particularly anxious lest receiving a member of the family should be construed as a form of political corruption. Despite the order of banishment Worcester was back in England by 28 July 1652, when a parliamentary order confined him to the Tower of London. With the advent of the Cromwellian protectorate, Worcester was treated with greater leniency. On 5 October 1654 he was released from the Tower on bail, and on 26 June 1655 an order under Cromwell's hand was signed for him to receive a weekly pension of $3. This could do little more than blunt the extremity of his circumstances, but he was free to resume his scientific work, in which the government took some interest. Worcester's former collaborator, Calthoff, had left England for the Netherlands, where he resumed experiments involving the motive power of steam to raise water. The English government wanted in February 1652 to interview Calthoff with a view to sponsoring him, and set aside Vauxhall, south of the Thames in London, as a space for scientific and related experimentation. 
Apart from personal sympathy towards Worcester shown by Cromwell, the intellectual curiosity which marked interregnum regimes may have accounted for Worcester's rehabilitation. By 1655 Worcester's old partnership with Calthoff had resumed, and the marquess wrote a catalogue of his inventions (eventually published in 1663), in the self-justifying mode that was typical of him, and probably designed to attract sponsorship. 'A century of the names and scantlings of... inventions' is an eclectic mixture of detail and the sketchiest of outlines, and even Worcester's most determined apologist, Henry Dircks, writing in 1865, was unable to provide explanatory glosses for all the inventions listed. However, it is the 'water commanding engine' which has excited most interest among historians of science, because its inventor claimed to have found a way to 'drive up water by fire' (Dircks, 475). Although the word 'steam' was not used as a term in science or engineering until after Worcester's death, the water commanding engine appears to have been powered by that means, and thus the marquess has been promoted, most vigorously by Dircks, as an inventor of the steam engine. Victorian commentators, writing in the great age of steam power, were more ready to dismiss Worcester's claims than their successors of a century later. In the continuing absence of any archaeological or other physical evidence, a definitive verdict seems as elusive as ever, but it seems that Calthoff's contribution was probably greater than that of his employer, that steam power was indeed deployed at Vauxhall in a prototype of the water commanding engine, but that it was ultimately unsuccessful. 
In June 1660 Worcester provided the earl of Clarendon with an account of his activities in Ireland, which emphasized his own motives of self-sacrifice in the interests of the late king, and placed his London residence, Worcester House, in the Strand, at his disposal. The same month he petitioned Charles II for the return of his estates, and the House of Lords accordingly ordered their restitution. There was no heaping of rewards on the Somerset family, however, probably because of Clarendon's continuing suspicions of the marquess. His son was imprisoned briefly in 1660, and in September the title of duke of Somerset was removed from him after an investigation by the Lords of its dubious legality. In July 1661 he successfully pleaded parliamentary privilege to stave off his creditors, and on 3 June 1663, the royal assent was given to an act which provided Worcester with a patent for his water commanding engine. 
While his son, Henry, Lord Herbert, was busy reconstructing the Somerset family's political interest, now based at Badminton, across the three counties of Herefordshire, Gloucestershire, and Monmouthshire, the marquess confined himself to scientific experiments at Vauxhall, and to attempts at extricating himself from the debts he estimated at $20,000, which kept him 'not only from a competent maintenance, but even from sleep' (Dircks, 280). He and his wife continued to petition the king for relief from his financial distress. In the final months of his life he wrote for the Lords an autobiographical review of his dealings on behalf of Charles I, inhibited from delivering it verbally through 'prolixity of speech, and a natural defect of utterance' ('Beaufort MSS', 56). Ever inclined to the grand gesture Worcester declared that he would establish a horse troop, build new highways into London, and provide $10,000 for rebuilding St Paul's Cathedral, all presumably from the profits of the water commanding engine. These meaningless announcements were but an ornament to his real motives: to reveal his calculation that he had spent $918,000 in public service, and to declare himself bewildered that he had been unrewarded since the restoration of the king. The marquess died on 3 April 1667. His remains were conveyed to Raglan where he was buried on 19 April. He was survived by his wife, and his son, Henry, succeeded to the title. Calthoff died soon afterwards, and no more is heard of the water commanding engine after the faith in it of its promoters died with them. Dircks cites a letter from a Catholic priest which discouraged the marquess's widow from pursuing the potential benefits of the 'great machine' (Dircks, 304), but the limitations of available technology are more likely to have proved fatal to its survival than the criticisms of any perceived opponents of rational inquiry. 
At first glance Worcester's careers as a scientific entrepreneur, civil war commander in the Welsh marches, and as a diplomat in Ireland appear sharply differentiated. Running through all these activities in the public sphere, however, was a lofty, quixotic ambition which outran his powers of judgement. He was imaginative, perhaps even visionary in his patronage of hydraulic engineering, but was never able wholly to persuade the scientific community in his own age of his achievement. It was left to Victorian commentators to rescue his reputation as an engineer. As a military commander and as a diplomat his dedication to the cause of Charles I was conceived in high-flown terms and was ill-requited by his king. The special status of his family as the king's prime private source of finance did not help Worcester take a realistic view of what he could achieve, nor did it endear him to his military colleagues in the royal cause. Even after 1660 he was genuinely anguished that his commitment and boldness were never properly rewarded, but under the restored monarchy his chivalrous, studious, but enterprising character seemed less suited than ever to the worldly, cynical spirit of the times. 


@@@@@


doc= 26007


Somerset, FitzRoy James Henry, first Baron Raglan (1788-1855), army officer, was the ninth and youngest son of Henry Somerset, fifth duke of Beaufort (1744-1803), and Elizabeth (1747-1828), daughter of Admiral Edward Boscawen (1711-1761). Lord Charles Henry Somerset (1767-1831), Lord (Robert) Edward Henry Somerset (1776-1842), and Lord John Thomas Henry Somerset ['see below'] were older brothers. Born at Badminton, Gloucestershire, on 30 September 1788, Somerset was educated at Goodenough's School, Ealing (1795-1801), and Westminster School (1802-3). 
Somerset was commissioned cornet, by purchase, in the 4th light dragoons on 9 June 1804, and became lieutenant, by purchase, on 30 May 1805. In 1807 he accompanied the mission of Sir Arthur Paget to the Ottoman empire, which sought unsuccessfully to detach the sultan from his alliance with France. Of Somerset, Paget wrote: 'He is a most excellent Lad -- I have the sincerest Regard for him' (Sweetman, 19). Somerset obtained a company as captain in the 6th garrison battalion on 5 May 1808, and on 18 August was transferred to the 43rd foot. Meanwhile, in July 1808, through the duke of Richmond's influence, he went to Portugal with Sir Arthur Wellesley as aide-de-camp, and was at the battles of Rolica (17 August 1808) and Vimeiro (21 August 1808). In action for the first time at Rolica he responded to Wellesley's query 'how do you feel under fire?' with 'better, sir, than I expected' (Sweetman, 23). On 27 August Wellesley wrote: 'Lord FitzRoy has been very useful to me, and I have this day lent him to Sir H. Dalrymple to go to the French headquarters' (Sweetman, 24) to assist peace negotiations. 
After the defeated French had left Portugal, Somerset went home with Wellesley, but returned to the Peninsula with him in the spring of 1809, and served on his staff continuously until the close of the war. He was bearer of the dispatches after Talavera (28 July 1809), and was wounded at Busaco (27 September 1810). Appointed military secretary to the duke of Wellington on 1 January 1811, he established direct relations with the battalion commanders, by means of which he acquired, Sir William Napier observed in his 'History', 'an exact knowledge of the moral state of each regiment, rendered his own office important and gracious with the army, and with such discretion and judgment that the military hierarchy was in no manner weakened' (Sweetman, 32). He secured a brevet majority on 9 June, after Fuentes d'Onoro. 
Somerset distinguished himself at Badajoz, where he helped to persuade the French governor to surrender, and at Wellington's special request he was made brevet lieutenant-colonel on 27 April 1812. During the siege of Pamplona he succeeded in deciphering a message from its governor to Marshal Soult which came into Wellington's hands, leading to allied success. After the victory at Toulouse on 10 April 1814 Somerset went with Wellington to the victory parade in Paris and on to Spain before reaching England. Somerset received the gold cross with five clasps and silver war medal, also with five clasps, for the Peninsula, and was made KCB on 2 January 1815. On 25 July 1814 he was transferred to the 1st guards as captain and lieutenant-colonel. On 6 August 1814 he married Emily Harriet (1792-1881), second daughter of Wellington's brother, William Wellesley-Pole (later third earl of Mornington). 
After Napoleon's first abdication Wellington went to Paris as ambassador, and Somerset accompanied him as secretary to the embassy. He was left in charge of the embassy as minister-plenipotentiary from 18 January 1815, when Wellington went to Vienna, until Napoleon's return. On 14 March -- the day Joseph Fouche made his remarkable prediction that the empire would be restored but would last only three months -- Somerset wrote to Wellington: 'I see no reason why it should be at all expected that Napoleon should not succeed' (Sweetman, 51-2). On the 20th Napoleon reached Paris, and on the 26th Somerset left it to join Wellington in the Netherlands as his military secretary. 
At the battle of Waterloo (18 June 1815), while he was accompanying Wellington, about seven o'clock in the evening, Somerset's right elbow was hit by a bullet from the roof of La Haye-Sainte, and the arm had to be amputated. After the operation Somerset said, 'Hey, bring my arm back. There's a ring my wife gave me on the finger' (Sweetman, 65-6). Wellington wrote to Somerset's brother, the duke of Beaufort, 'You are aware how useful he has always been to me, and how much I shall feel the want of his assistance, and what a regard and affection I feel for him' (Sweetman, 66). He recommended him warmly soon afterwards for the appointment of aide-de-camp to the prince regent. This was given to him with the rank of colonel in the army on 28 August. He was awarded Austrian, Russian, Bavarian, and Portuguese orders. 
Heeding advice from Wellington, Somerset returned to the British embassy at Paris. When the allied armies were withdrawn from France, Wellington was made master-general of the ordnance in London, and, early in 1819, Somerset became his secretary. He accompanied Wellington to the congress of Verona in 1822. In January 1823 he was sent on a special mission to Spain to explain the duke's views upon the constitutional crisis to some of the leading politicians, in the hope of averting French intervention, but spent two months at Madrid ineffectually. Promoted major-general on 27 May 1825, in 1826 he went with Wellington on the accession of Nicholas I to St Petersburg, where negotiations were conducted for common action against Turkey on behalf of Greece. During this period Somerset twice sat in parliament as a tory MP for the corporation borough of Truro on the interest of his first cousin, Edward, fourth Viscount Falmouth -- in 1818-20 and in 1826-9 -- but took no active part in any debate. Somerset demonstrated deep paternal interest in the welfare of his children, and Lady Somerset began to suffer the first of many ailments which thenceforth afflicted her. 
Having resigned from the Ordnance with Wellington in April, shortly after the duke became commander-in-chief on 28 August 1827, Somerset was made military secretary at the Horse Guards, a post that he held until 30 September 1852. He was noted for his quickness and accuracy, for impartiality, and for his tact and urbanity. In those twenty-five years he served Wellington and Rowland, first Viscount Hill, both of whom devolved more and more responsibility due to their increasing infirmity. He exercised considerable influence over military appointments, co-ordinated opposition to the proposal of Lord Howick in 1837 to enhance the powers of the secretary at war to the detriment of the commander-in-chief, and became officially embroiled in the controversial activities of James Thomas Brudenell, seventh earl of Cardigan, which attracted widespread press condemnation. Lady Somerset's health determined that he decline separately the offer of the captaincy of Cowes Castle and the post of governor-in-chief of British North America. Somerset was made colonel of the 53rd foot on 19 November 1830, and became lieutenant-general on 28 June 1838. He was awarded a DCL degree in June 1834 when Wellington was installed as chancellor at Oxford. On Wellington's death (14 September 1852) Lord Hardinge succeeded him as commander-in-chief and a disappointed Somerset became master-general of the ordnance on 30 September 1852. He was made GCB on 24 September 1852, a privy councillor (on 16 October), and Baron Raglan of Raglan, Monmouthshire, on 18 October. As master-general he continued Hardinge's policy of increasing the artillery and arming the horse and field artillery with heavier guns. 
In February 1854, when war against Russia seemed imminent, Raglan was selected to command the expeditionary force sent to the east. Though sixty-five he had the strength and vigour of a much younger man. He had never led troops in the field, but Hardinge pointed to his 'great professional experience under the Duke' (Sweetman, 169). His diplomatic skills, as well as his personal character and charm of manner, marked him out for an expedition with the difficulties of both combined operations and alliance warfare. On 27 March, Britain declared war. Raglan left London on 10 April, his primary task to defend Constantinople but warned by Henry Fiennes Pelham-Clinton, fifth duke of Newcastle, secretary of state for war and the colonies, that 'no blow... would be so effective for this purpose as the taking of Sebastopol' (Sweetman, 179). After spending some days in Paris he reached Constantinople on 29 April. There he resisted attempts by the French commander (Marshal Saint-Arnaud) to assume overall direction of the allied forces, travelled to Schumla to meet the Turkish commander-in-chief (Omar Pasha) and agreed to move troops into Bulgaria, as Russian units were south of the Danube. By the end of June most of the British and French armies were in camp near Varna; but by then the Russian army had recrossed the Danube, and the European provinces of Turkey were no longer threatened. 
On 29 June instructions were sent to Raglan that he should prepare to besiege Sevastopol, 'unless with the information in your possession, but at present unknown in this country, you should be decidedly of opinion that it could not be undertaken with a reasonable prospect of success' (Hibbert, 56). In view of Newcastle's comments in April this could not have completely surprised Raglan, but he and Saint-Arnaud had grave misgivings about the enterprise, and they had no such information as the letter mentioned. However, they regarded the instructions as 'little short of an absolute order', and they acquiesced. The ravages of cholera and the need to concentrate men, equipment, and sea transport caused some delay. Not until 14 September did the first troops land without opposition at Calamita Bay, on the west coast of the Crimea, a beach chosen by Raglan himself. Due to bad weather it took four days more to land the horses and guns, and to collect transport. Eventually, on 19 September, the invaders advanced south. That afternoon only Raglan's vigilance prevented the British cavalry from being attacked by superior enemy forces at the Bulganek River. 
The following day, on 20 September 1854, the battle of the Alma was fought. The allies' right comprised 28,000 French and 7000 Turkish infantry, with sixty-eight guns; the left 23,000 British infantry, 1000 British cavalry, and sixty guns. The bulk of the Russian army -- 21,000 infantry, 3000 cavalry, and eighty-four guns -- were in front of the British; while they had only 12,000 infantry, 400 cavalry, and thirty-six guns to oppose the French, whose advance could be supported by the fire of the fleet. Crucially, twenty-one guns in two redoubts on Kurgan Hill barred the British path. It was agreed, therefore, that the French should begin the battle, and turn (or threaten to turn) the Russian left. But before this movement was sufficiently developed to make itself felt, Raglan, partly because his waiting troops were incurring mounting casualties, but also at the urgent instance of the French commanders, ordered the British infantry to attack the redoubts. He then rode forward with his staff across the stream, through the French skirmishers, and up to a knoll well within the Russian position. He gained an admirable point of view, which enabled him to observe progress of the action, bring up guns and infantry to enfilade the enemy, and evaluate the situation as the Russians withdrew. Paying tribute to Raglan's bravery Saint-Arnaud wrote that in the midst of cannon and musket fire he displayed a calmness which never left him. 
Victory on the Alma raised high hopes of the prompt capture of Sevastopol, both in the armies and at home. The enemy's works on the south side of the fortress were thought to be weak, whereas the strength of those to the north was obvious. The allied armies, therefore, marched east of Sevastopol to occupy upland to the south. Once established there, the commanders determined that a bombardment by siege guns must precede an assault. Already 172 guns were mounted on the works, and the garrison, after the withdrawal of the field army under Prince Menshikov, numbered 30,000, mostly seamen and marines. Trenches were dug and batteries built. The French, on the left, attacked the works of the town, and the British, on the right, those of the Korabelnaya suburb. On 17 October the allies opened fire with 126 guns, but by this time, through the energy of Lieutenant-Colonel Todleben, the enemy's works had been greatly strengthened, and 341 guns were mounted on them, of which 118 bore on the besiegers' batteries. Lack of co-ordination with the naval bombardment that day and early explosion of a French magazine signalled failure. All thoughts of an assault had to be postponed, and the allies needed to look to their own defence against the growing strength of the Russian field army. Raglan had both to protect the allied right flank and to hold his supply port of Balaklava. 
On 25 October came the unsuccessful Russian attack on Balaklava, and the disastrous charge of the light brigade ['see 'Nolan, Lewis Edward]. All agreed that 'some one had blundered'. Raglan, in his dispatch, blamed Lord Lucan: 'From some misconception of the order to advance, the lieutenant-general considered that he was bound to attack at all hazards' (Sweetman, 253). But he himself did not escape blame on the grounds that the wording of the order did not make his intention clear. 
On 5 November the Russians concentrated on the allied right, sending 35,000 men onto the upland while another 22,000 manoeuvred on the plain below, and the battle of Inkerman was fought. Aware of British weakness in this area, Raglan had pleaded in vain for French reinforcements. The main attack, upon the 2nd division under Sir John Lysaght Pennefather, began at 6.30 a.m. Raglan was on the field an hour later, but he did not interfere with Pennefather in his conduct of the fight. However, he decisively ordered up two 18-pounder guns, which did much to reduce the Russian preponderance in artillery. He also sent off for French assistance, showing better judgement than two of his divisional generals, who declined Bosquet's offer of aid. He watched the course of the battle from the ridge which formed the main position, where Strangways, the artillery commander, was killed while talking to him, and Canrobert (Saint-Arnaud's successor) was wounded. 'I am not at all aware of having exposed myself either rashly or unnecessarily, either at Alma or Inkerman', he wrote afterwards in reply to Newcastle's remonstrances. 
Raglan had been gazetted colonel of the Royal Horse Guards (the Blues) on 8 May 1854, and had been promoted general on 20 June. He was made field marshal from 5 November. The notification was accompanied by a letter from the queen, in which she said: 'The queen cannot sufficiently express her high sense of the great services he has rendered and is rendering to her and to the country by the very able manner in which he has led the bravest troops that ever fought. (Martin, 3.154)' It was a last ray of sunshine. 
The allies had narrowly escaped destruction at Inkerman, after which wintering in the Crimea became inevitable, and want of men made it impossible to press actively the siege of Sevastopol. On 14 November a hurricane in the Black Sea wrecked twenty-one vessels laden with urgently needed stores. Next day Raglan informed Newcastle, 'you cannot send us too many supplies of all kinds'. Immediately afterwards the cold weather set in. The sufferings and losses of the troops increased, and criticism at home increased. 
Unaware of Raglan's efforts to secure French reinforcements the 'Times' correspondent, William Howard Russell, resentful of Raglan's ignoring him, had already attributed the absence of trenches covering the allies' right to indolence and overweening confidence. He alleged that if central depots had been established while the fine weather lasted, much, if not all, of the misery and suffering of the men and of the loss of horses would have been averted. Anonymous letters from officers and men added more complaints and before Christmas 'The Times' charged Raglan and his staff with neglect and incompetence. 
The commander of the forces had no direct responsibility for supply and transport. Up to 22 December, when a change was made, the commissariat was a branch, not of the war department, but of the Treasury, and so far as any one cause could be named for the terrible hardships of the troops, it was Treasury failure to comply with the requisitions it received for forage. The horses were starved, and there were inadequate means of transporting stores from Balaklava to the camps. But in face of the rising storm of indignation at home, the government blamed the staff in the Crimea. In an official dispatch of 6 January 1855, as in earlier private letters, the duke of Newcastle censured the administration of the army, and pointed especially to the quartermaster-general, James Bucknall Estcourt, and the adjutant-general, Richard Airey. But Raglan refused to make them scapegoats. 
Raglan knew from his war experience under Wellington the importance of military intelligence. He had been sent to the East in 1854 without any intelligence organization, and it was lack of intelligence which had resulted in the fatal decision not to attack Sevastopol immediately from the south, and the British being surprised at the battle of Balaklava. Thereafter intelligence significantly improved, with the secret intelligence department improvised and run by Charles Cattley (alias Calvert) -- a civilian member of Raglan's staff and formerly British vice-consul at Kerch, who died of cholera in July 1855 -- using largely Tartar agents and Polish deserters. Raglan encouraged and utilized competently Cattley's department, and British military intelligence was largely successful. Concerned to prevent the Russians gaining intelligence, Raglan complained to the government of W. H. Russell's reports which published information which 'must be invaluable to the Russians, and in the same degree detrimental to H. M.'s troops' (Hankinson, 99). In January 1855 he complained, 'The Enemy at least need spend nothing under the head of 'Secret Service'' (Harris, 76). 
On 30 January 1855 the Aberdeen government was defeated upon the motion of J. A. Roebuck for an inquiry into the condition of the army in the Crimea. It fell, and Palmerston formed a ministry, with Lord Panmure as secretary for war. On 12 February Panmure wrote to Raglan: 'It would appear that your visits to the camp were few and far between, and your staff seems to have known as little as yourself of the condition of your gallant men' (Sweetman, 284). He added in a private letter that a radical change of the staff was the least that would satisfy the public. In a long and dignified reply on 3 March, Raglan wrote: 'I have served under the greatest man of the age more than half my life, have enjoyed his confidence, and have, I am proud to say, been ever regarded by him as a man of truth and some judgment as to the qualifications of officers, and yet, having been placed in the most difficult position in which an officer was ever called upon to serve, and having successfully carried out difficult operations, with the entire approbation of the queen, which is now my only solace, I am charged with every species of neglect; and the opinion which it was my solemn duty to give of the merits of the officers, and the assertions which I made in support of it, are set at naught, and your lordship is satisfied that your irresponsible informants are more worthy of credit than I am. (Hibbert, 289-90)' The charge brought against Raglan of not visiting the camps was vigorously rejected by homecoming wounded in press interviews. As regards his staff, Lieutenant-General Simpson (who was sent out to report upon it) declared to Panmure that Raglan was 'the worst used man I have ever heard of', the staff 'very much vilified'. According to Raglan's daughter Charlotte, 'Papa is a good deal annoyed' at the unwarranted slurs on his staff (Sweetman, 289). In 1855 he was awarded the order of the Mejidiye (first class). 
Siege operations were actively resumed at the end of February 1855. The French had been greatly reinforced, and were now much stronger than the British. Still responsible for the allied left, they had also taken over the extreme right, where the battle of Inkerman was fought. On 9 April the second bombardment began, and the assault was fixed for the 28th; but Canrobert drew back on the 25th. An expedition against Kerch, at the entrance to the Sea of Azov, was then arranged, to cut the line of communication of the Russians from the east, but it had no sooner started than Canrobert insisted on its recall. It was successfully carried out, though, at the end of May, when Pelissier had replaced Canrobert. Meanwhile, there had been a third bombardment of Sevastopol, the Mamelon (an advanced work in front of the Malakhov) had been taken by the French, and the Quarries before the Redan by the British. The 18 June, the anniversary of Waterloo, was chosen for the general assault. 
It was to be preceded by two hours' bombardment, but Pelissier decided at the last moment to attack at 3 a.m., and Raglan reluctantly concurred. The result was disastrous. Due to a misunderstanding the French columns for the assault of the Malakhov, numbering in all 25,000 men, attacked piecemeal. They were met by a storm of fire and were driven back with heavy loss. Seeing their plight Raglan ordered the British forward against the Redan, though the chance of success there was much less. He knew that otherwise 'the French would have attributed their non-success to our refusal to participate in the operation' (to Panmure, 19 June). The two leading British columns, about 500 men each, 'had no sooner shown themselves beyond the trenches than they were assailed by a most murderous fire of grape and musketry. Those in advance were either killed or wounded, and the remainder found it impossible to proceed' (official dispatch). 
Raglan described 'the failure' as 'a great affliction to me' and 'a great disappointment' (Sweetman, 315). On the 23rd one of the staff wrote: 'He looks far from well, and has grown very much aged lately'. He was further distressed by the death of Estcourt the following day. Although apparently suffering physically only from mild diarrhoea, Raglan's strength was undermined by all he had endured, and he was very depressed. On the 26th he wrote his last dispatch, and on the evening of the 28th he died, at camp before Sevastopol, 'the victim of England's unreadiness for war', Sir Evelyn Wood remarked. Apparently he died, in Victorian terms, of a broken heart. Raglan's unexpected death caused grief and gloom in the army. Pelissier, in his general order next day, paid tribute to Raglan's courage in battle and greatness of character. In the words of the general order issued from the Horse Guards, 'By his calmness in the hottest moments of battle, and by his quick perception in taking advantage of the ground or the movements of the enemy, he won the confidence of his army, and performed great and brilliant services. In the midst of a winter campaign -- in a severe climate and surrounded by difficulties -- he never despaired.' This last characteristic well deserved emphasis. Saint-Arnaud had often been tiresome, Canrobert despondent, and Omar Pasha frequently at odds with his own government. One of Raglan's divisional commanders -- Sir George de Lacy Evans -- strongly urged him after Inkerman to give up the siege and embark the army. His capacity as a general was questioned, and he had been the object of much undeserved blame; but belatedly the nobility of his character had made itself felt even by those who had been loudest in complaint (for example, 'The Times', 2 July). His successor as British commander in the Crimea, Sir James Simpson, wrote: 'His loss to us here is inexpressible', and the prince consort observed: 'Spite of all that has been said and written against him, an 'irreparable' loss for us!' Florence Nightingale wrote, 'It was impossible not to love him... He was not a very great general, but he was a very good man' (Hibbert, 342). 
The body was embarked on the paddle gunboat 'Caradoc' with full military honours, the 7 miles of road from his headquarters to Kazatch Bay being lined with troops. It reached Bristol on 24 July, and was buried privately at Badminton on the 26th. A pension of $1000 was voted to his widow (who died on 6 March 1881), and $2000 to his heir; $12,500 was subscribed for a memorial to him, and Kefntilla estate, near Usk, was bought and presented to his heir. He left one son, Richard Henry FitzRoy Somerset, second Lord Raglan (1817-1884), and two daughters, Charlotte Caroline Elizabeth and Katherine Anne Emily Cecilia. His eldest son, Major Arthur William FitzRoy Somerset, had died on 25 December 1845 of wounds received four days before at the battle of Ferozeshahr; Frederick John FitzRoy had died in infancy. 
Of 'spotless reputation' (Sweetman, 338), 'the most modest and least vain of men' (Lady Westmorland, his sister-in-law, quoted in Sweetman, 348), with 'too good and kind a heart' (Captain H. Keppel RN, quoted in Sweetman, 348), Raglan was a devout high-church Anglican, socially popular, and an accomplished rider and shot. Of medium height, with, in his younger years distinctive ash blond hair, he was unostentatious and in the Crimea moved with a minimum of military display. With an average annual turnover of $4000 and credit balance of $800, he showed, his bankers noted, 'no sign of his having been embarrassed at any time or in any way'. In the Crimea he was a better general than his critics allowed. Balaklava did not fall on 25 October 1854. Had he lost that battle, either the Alma or Inkerman, the allies would have been faced with ignominious withdrawal from the peninsula. Shortly before his death Raglan referred to having 'served the Crown for above fifty years' (Sweetman, 338). Duty guided his public life, devotion to his family the private part. 
W. H. Russell's and 'The Times''s criticisms were long influential, and for many years Raglan was considered a blundering failure in the Crimea, an image repeated in cinematic portrayal. However, after 1960 revisionist studies -- Christopher Hibbert's 'The Destruction of Lord Raglan' (1961), John Sweetman's 'Raglan' (1993), and Stephen Harris's 'British Military Intelligence in the Crimean War' (1999) -- have provided more balanced and favourable portrayals. 
Raglan's nephew and aide-de-camp, Colonel 
His uncle declared himself 'very much pleased with Poulett', sending him, for example, after Russian withdrawal from Silistria 'to desire' Lord Cardigan to take the light brigade 'as far as he could in order to discover what the enemy's left was about'. Poulett rode for a short distance on that lengthy, painful reconnaissance towards the Danube. Once in the Crimea he lived at British headquarters, was present at Raglan's death, travelled home with his body to take part in the funeral procession through Bristol, and joined family mourners for the burial at Badminton. He had a narrow escape at Inkerman, where a shell burst in the body of his horse. Somerset exchanged into the 7th fusiliers on 2 February 1858, became colonel five years later, and went on half pay on 21 June 1864. He was a JP and Conservative MP for Monmouthshire from 1859 to 1871. 
Somerset was twice married: first, on 15 April 1847, to Barbara Augusta Nora, daughter of John Mytton of Halston, Shropshire, who died on 4 June 1870; second, on 10 September 1870, to Emily, daughter of J. H. Moore of Cherryhill, Cheshire. There were two sons and one daughter from the first marriage, and one daughter from the second. He died at Homestead, Dundrum, near Dublin, on 7 September 1875. 
Raglan's brother, Colonel 


@@@@@


doc= 26008


Somerset, Lord Granville Charles Henry (1792-1848), politician, was born on 27 December 1792, the second of ten children of Henry Charles Somerset, sixth duke of Beaufort (1766-1835), and his wife, Charlotte Sophia (1771-1854), daughter of Granville Leveson-Gower, first marquess of Stafford (1721-1803), and his third wife, Susannah. His mother was an evangelical Methodist known for her piety. The estates and influence of the dukes of Beaufort, whose seat was at Badminton, ranged from the counties and boroughs of Brecon and Glamorgan to Monmouth, Gloucester, Wiltshire, and Oxfordshire. Assured of a parliamentary seat, Somerset was encouraged to become his father's man of business and to pursue a political career. Disfigurement by a riding accident early in life did not impair his prowess as a sportsman and rider after hounds, but to save him embarrassment he was not sent away to school with his elder brother, Henry, marquess of Worcester ['see below']. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 19 January 1811, and graduated BA on 4 November 1813 with the second prize in classics, MA on 29 March 1817, and DCL on 10 June 1834. Nothing is known of Somerset's attachments prior to his marriage on 27 July 1822 to Emily Smith (died 1869), the youngest daughter of Robert Smith, first Baron Carrington (1752-1838), of the Smith family of bankers; $30,000 was settled on her to accompany Somerset's portion of $10,000. 
On 20 May 1816 Somerset succeeded his uncle Lord Arthur Somerset (1780-1816) as MP for Monmouthshire, and he retained the seat for life. A committed tory and opposed to parliamentary reform, he was appointed a junior Treasury lord by Lord Liverpool in March 1819; he resigned when the pro-Catholic Canning became prime minister in April 1827. He dated his lifelong commitment to the cause of the insane, whom he served from August 1828 as a metropolitan lunacy commissioner, to his service on the select committee of 1827 on pauper lunatics. He returned to the Treasury under the duke of Wellington in January 1828, declared with him for Roman Catholic emancipation in January 1829, and chaired Peel's London committee at the ensuing Oxford University by-election. Ousted with Wellington in November 1830, he proposed Peel as their party leader in the House of Commons. 
From 1830 to 1834 Somerset played a leading part in organizing parliamentary and constituency opposition to Lord Grey's reform administration, being involved from the outset in establishing and managing the Charles Street committee and the Carlton Club. His own unopposed election in 1831, after voting against parliamentary reform on 22 March and 19 April, was attributed to his popularity as a hardworking MP attentive to his constituents' interests. He failed on 7 September 1831 to extend Monmouthshire's borough representation under the 'Reform Act', and was incensed at the forfeiture of the county's intended third seat to provide separate representation for Merthyr Tudful from 1832. However, he secured boundary changes favourable to the Beaufort interest in East and West Gloucestershire and Stroud. Perceiving voter registration, active local committees, and suitable, well-funded candidates as the keys to electoral success, from June 1831 onwards he oversaw the establishment and maintenance of networks of agents, attorneys, barristers, and Conservative landowners in constituencies influenced by his aristocratic relations. Undeterred by defeats in Gloucestershire and in the Monmouth district of Boroughs in 1832, he persevered and gained a reputation as an outstanding party manager at the general elections of 1835, 1837, and 1841, when his system was adopted throughout England and Wales. 
From December 1834 to April 1835 Somerset was commissioner of woods and forests in Peel's ministry, with a seat on the privy council. As one of Peel's inner circle he gave advice on election matters, acted with Thomas Francis Fremantle, afterwards Baron Cottesloe (1798-1890), Charles Ross (1800-1860), and Francis Robert Bonham (1785-1863) as a semi-official party whip, and was instrumental in ensuring that the tory veteran William Holmes (1779-1851) resumed that role in 1838. From September 1841 to July 1846 he was chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster in Peel's administration -- passed over for the Irish secretaryship he coveted and for the governor-generalship of India lest caricaturists capitalize on his deformity and burlesque manner. On his appointment to the cabinet on 16 May 1844 Gladstone commended him as an excellent administrator, good tempered and good humoured but scarcely a statesman. Loyalty to Peel over corn-law reform in December 1845 cost Somerset the electoral support of his brother Henry, who spent $20,000 promoting the candidature of their protectionist cousin Captain Arthur Somerset against him at the general election of 1847. Winning by 2235 to 2188 votes, Somerset was none the less broken by the ordeal, and died on 23 February 1848 at his home in Clarges Street, London, attended by his brother. He was buried a few days later at Kensal Green cemetery. His will, which provided for his widow and five children, was proved under $2000 on 26 May 1848 and was executed by his widow and by Lord Sandon. 
Somerset's brother 
Excluding a three-month period, April to July 1831, Worcester was tory MP for Monmouth Boroughs from December 1813 until his defeat by Benjamin Hall, afterwards Baron Llanover (1802-1867), in December 1832. He sat for Gloucestershire West from January to 23 November 1835, when he succeeded his father as seventh duke. Undistinguished as an Admiralty lord from May 1815 to March 1819, his main political contribution, for which on Peel's recommendation he was made KG on 11 April 1842, lay in his sponsorship of his brother's electioneering activities. He died of gout on 17 November 1853 at Badminton and was buried in the chapel there on 24 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 26009


Somerset, Henry, first duke of Beaufort (1629-1700), nobleman, was born at Raglan Castle, Monmouthshire, the only son of Edward Somerset, sixth earl and second marquess of Worcester (d. 1667), and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1635), daughter of Sir William Dormer. His grandfather thought Lord Herbert, as he was styled, 'the only hope' of his Roman Catholic family, and sent him to France and Italy in 1644 with his tutor John Clarke (Badminton muniments, P4/3). He returned in 1650 to find Raglan destroyed, the Somerset estate sequestrated by parliament, and his inheritance wasted largely as a result of wartime loans to the king. He spent the next twenty years trying to restore his family's fortune. In 1651 he negotiated a settlement with Cromwell, confirming the latter's ownership of many south Wales properties in return for the right to compound. Hostile observers later suggested that he became 'a great Favourite' with the lord protector and 'had 2,000'l'. 'per. Ann.' given him, and Lodgings assign'd him at 'Whitehall'' (Rogers, 79-80). 
In 1655 Herbert acquired by devise from his cousin Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Thomas Somerset, Viscount Somerset of Cashel, an estate at Badminton, Gloucestershire. Here he took up residence when, on 17 August 1657, he married, before a Clerkenwell JP, Mary ['see 'Somerset, Mary (bap. 1630, d. 1715)], eldest daughter of the royalist martyr Arthur Capel, Lord Capel of Hadham, and widow of Henry Seymour, Lord Beauchamp. His marriage enhanced his standing among royalists such as Sir Edward Hyde, who later resided at Worcester House in London. It also confirmed his conversion to the protestant faith. Only later did he stand accused of crypto-Catholicism by Monmouthshire natives who could not forget that his grandfather had established a Jesuit mission at Raglan and that his father had tried to raise an Irish Catholic army for Charles I. Herbert's father's wartime activities and his wife Mary's active royalism led to his arrest during the Gloucestershire plot. He spent two months in the Tower before being released on 1 November 1659. He sat in the Convention Parliament and was chosen one of the twelve commissioners from the Commons to attend Charles II at Breda (7 May 1660). 
After the Restoration, Herbert was MP for Monmouthshire from 1660 to 3 April 1667, when he succeeded his father as third marquess of Worcester. In 1660 the king appointed him to serve as constable of St Briavels Castle, warden of the Forest of Dean (18 June), and lord lieutenant of Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, and Monmouthshire (30 July). He spent the next several years seeking out potential rebels and undermining plots against the government. In 1662 he saw to the demolition of the walls and fortifications at Gloucester. The following year he persuaded the king of the importance of maintaining a garrison at Chepstow Castle, describing it as 'the key' to south Wales and as 'a bridle to the ill-affected who abound in those parts' ('CSP dom.', '1663-4', 359). He even paid many of the costs himself. Not surprisingly, Monmouthshire residents claimed that he used it as a private army. When Sir Trevor Williams was returned for parliament in 1667, 'six files of musketeers were sent to Monmouth to awe the town', according to a report by local MPs fourteen years later. They claimed that soldiers who had guarded the marquess's property rights in Wentwood Forest in 1678 had been 'employed to rob the country of their wood'. 
In 1672 Worcester was appointed lord president of the council in the marches of Wales, privy councillor (17 April), and knight of the Garter (29 May). He took his responsibilities seriously, attending nearly half of the privy council meetings during Charles II's reign. His opposition to the 'Exclusion Bill' led the Commons to call for the abolition of the council in the marches and to petition the king for his removal from office in January 1681. Instead, Charles II advanced him to the title of duke of Beaufort (2 December 1682), reminding contemporaries that he was descended, albeit illegitimately, from King Edward III through John de Beaufort, eldest son of John of Gaunt. Beaufort was also given public recognition by Nahum Tate in his second part of 'Absalom and Achitophel' (1682) in which he was characterized as Bezaliel, designer of the Tabernacle ('Exodus' 31:3) '
To Aid the Crown and State his greatest Zeal, 

His Second Care that Service to Conceal. 

' Beaufort played a leading part in the tory reaction of the 1680s, reforming the county and borough magistracies, remodelling militia commands, and encouraging the surrender of corporate charters in Wales and the border counties. To this end, in 1684 he took a month-long ducal progress through Wales which was chronicled by Thomas Dineley in 'Notitia Cambro-Britannica: a Voyage of North and South Wales' (printed eventually in 1864). The progress was marked by considerable pageantry, and onlookers marvelled at the 'splendour of the great man's equippage' (BL, Add. MS 70013, fol. 209). Lord Keeper Guilford, who visited Badminton in the early 1680s, noted the: 'princely way of living, which that noble duke used, above any other, except crowned heads, that I have had notice of in Europe; and, in some respects greater than most of them, to whom he might have been an example. (North, 1.169-73)' During the 1670s Badminton had been rebuilt in the fashionable Palladian style, with formal gardens and landscaped walks that imitated Louis XIV's Versailles. Here, Mary Somerset created a celebrated botanical garden with plants from Africa, Japan, the East Indies, and the Americas. 
Beaufort supported the prince of Denmark as chief mourner at the funeral of Charles II (14 February 1685) and he bore the queen's crown at the coronation of James II (23 April). He was appointed gentleman of the bedchamber (16 May) and colonel of the 11th regiment of foot (20 June). In June he defended Bristol against the duke of Monmouth, raising twenty-one companies of foot and four troops of horse. He praised his Welsh troops as 'another complexion than that of theirs in Somersetshire, and being better disciplined, and more soldier-like than militias usually are' (BL, Add. MS 15892, fol. 214). James II spoke of his service with 'the greatest kindness' and honoured him with a visit to Badminton on 24 September 1685, but he could not command his continued loyalty (Badminton muniments, FmE 4/1/19). When the Chepstow Castle garrison was disbanded at the end of 1685 the duke wrote angrily of the 'great rejoicing it will cause among the factions, that have so often bragged they have got me out from my command there' (BL, Add. MS 15892, fol. 241). In 1688 Beaufort surrendered Bristol to troops led by the earl of Shrewsbury and Sir John Guise, claiming that the city was 'incapable of defense' (BL, Add. MS 41805, fols. 156-7). He tried instead to keep Gloucestershire safe from invading forces, particularly as William, prince of Orange, had threatened to 'lay Badminton in ashes' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 130, fol. 307). Meanwhile, Beaufort's eldest surviving son and heir, Charles Somerset (1660-1698), furnished himself with horses at his father's house in London and joined William at Exeter. 
Beaufort was 'received very coldly' when he tried to transfer his loyalties to William (Singer, 2.227-8). He took the oaths in March 1689 but refused to declare William and Mary his 'right and lawful' sovereigns. He was removed from his lieutenancies in 1689 and thereafter retired from public life. On 7 September 1690 he entertained the king with a 'noble, but not satisfactory' reception at Badminton ('Memoirs of... Ailesbury', 1.268). His refusal to sign the Association caused him to be suspected of conspiratorial activities, and government officials searched his house at Chelsea in 1696. In July 1698 his son died as a result of a coach accident in Wales, leaving Beaufort's fourteen-year-old grandson Henry Somerset (1684-1714) heir to the Somerset estate. Beaufort himself died at Badminton on 21 January 1700 and was buried in the Beaufort chapel in St George's Chapel, Windsor; in 1878 his enormous baroque funeral monument was removed to Badminton. He was survived by his wife, Mary, who died in 1715. Apart from Henry, who had died young, and Charles, they had three younger sons and four daughters, of whom the second, Mary (died 1733), had married, in 1685, James, duke of Ormond; the third, Henrietta (died 1715), had married first, in 1686, Henry, Lord O'Brien, and second, Henry, earl of Suffolk; while the fourth, Anne ['see 'Coventry, Anne, countess of Coventry], had married, on 4 May 1691, Thomas, earl of Coventry. 


@@@@@


doc= 26010


Somerset, Henry, second duke of Beaufort (1684-1714), politician, was born on 2 April 1684 at Monmouth Castle, the son of Charles Somerset, marquess of Worcester (1660-1698), and his wife, Rebecca (1665/6-1712), the daughter of Sir Josiah Child of Wanstead. His father having died in a coach accident in July 1698, Henry became the second duke of Beaufort on the death of his paternal grandfather, Henry Somerset, first duke, on 21 January 1700. He married his first wife, Mary (1683-1705), the daughter of Charles Sackville, earl of Dorset, on 7 July 1702 at Knole, Kent. In the same year he entertained Queen Anne and Prince George at the family's residence at Badminton. As a 'thorough-going tory' Beaufort removed himself from mainstream court politics during the years of the whig junto, establishing instead a high-tory drinking society, the Honourable Board of Loyal Brotherhood, in 1709. 
The collapse of the whig administration in the following year prompted Beaufort to take an active role in the new ministry of Robert Harley. It was only now, as he informed Anne, that he 'could call her Queen in reality'. On 13 December 1710 he was sworn of the privy council, and in the same year he became lord lieutenant of Hampshire (he was made lord lieutenant of Gloucestershire in 1712). Beaufort's wealth, an estimated annual rent roll of $30,000, was directed towards promoting tory fortunes in Monmouthshire, and in the final years of Anne's reign was concentrated on the Bolingbroke/Jacobite interest. His first wife died in childbirth on 18 June 1705, and on 26 February 1706 Beaufort married Rachel Noel (died 1709), the daughter and coheir of Wriothesley, second earl of Gainsborough. She also died in childbirth, on 13 September 1709. His third wife was Mary Osborne (1688-1722), the daughter of Peregrine, second duke of Leeds, whom he married on 14 September 1711. He died at Badminton, Gloucestershire, on 24 May 1714 from an inflammation brought on by having drunk considerable amounts of alcohol after exercise, and was buried there. The title passed first to his son, also Henry Somerset (1707-1745), from his second marriage and then, in February 1745, to the second duke's third but next surviving son, 
Charles Noel Somerset was born on 12 September 1709 and educated at Westminster School and University College, Oxford, where he matriculated in June 1725 and graduated MA (1727) and DCL (1736). A staunch tory like his father, Charles was elected MP for Monmouthshire in 1731 and sat for Monmouth borough between 1734 and 1745, when he assumed the dukedom on his brother's death. A determined critic of the Walpole administration and an advocate of the Jacobite cause, Somerset emerged in 1744 as the head of the parliamentary tory party after Lord Gower's move to join the broad-bottom ministry. Despite his support of the Stuarts, Beaufort's involvement in the planning for French involvement in the 1745 Jacobite rising went unpunished. Towards the close of the decade he was active in securing the support of Frederick, prince of Wales, for the tories, though in these years the duke never matched the dynamic leadership that he achieved in the period immediately after 1744. On 1 May 1740 he had married Elizabeth (1718/19-1799), the daughter of John Symes Berkeley of Stoke Gifford, Gloucestershire, and the sister of the future colonial governor Norborne Berkeley. Beaufort died on 28 October 1756 and was buried at Badminton, whereupon the dukedom passed to his son, Henry Somerset (1744-1803). 


@@@@@


doc= 26011


Henry Somerset, seventh duke of Beaufort (1792-1853), sportsman and courtier, was born on 5 February 1792. He was tutored by the Revd Walter Fletcher of Dalston, Cumberland, and Edward Vernon, archbishop of York, entered Westminster School in 1805, and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 21 October 1809. Styled marquess of Worcester (1803-35), he was renowned for his amorous escapades and as the founder in 1819 of the 'four-in-hand club' and leader of the Badminton and Windsor hunts. He joined the 10th hussars in 1810 and almost immediately began an affair with the courtesan Harriette Wilson, which, as his parents intended and her 'Memoirs' (published in 1825) confirm, languished while he was aide-de-camp to the duke of Wellington in the Iberian peninsula from 1812 to 1814. On 25 July 1814 he married Wellington's niece Georgiana Frederica Fitzroy (1792-1821) at the house of her stepfather, Charles Culling Smith (1775-1853). He was devastated by her death on 11 May 1821 from an inflammation of the lungs, but was soon portrayed in caricature as suitor to the widow of the wealthy banker Thomas Coutts, to the pregnant Miss Calcraft, and to Lady Jane Paget, daughter of the marquess of Anglesey, to whom he was briefly engaged. On 29 June 1822 he married his late wife's half-sister Emily Frances (1800-1889), daughter of Anne and Charles Culling Smith, and went to France. The marriage, although not illegal, was voidable under the consanguinity laws, placing the legitimacy of any issue at risk. Attempts to have their union validated under the act of 1823 failed, and a second ceremony at Constance on 21 October 1823 was not recognized as a foreign marriage because it was conducted under Lutheran rites. In 1825 the couple, on whom over $50,000 had been settled, returned to England with Somerset's two daughters and their only son, Henry Charles Fitzroy Somerset (1824-1899), for whom the sixth duke of Beaufort was godfather. Six daughters were subsequently born to the marriage, which was safeguarded retrospectively under the act of 1835. 


@@@@@


doc= 26012


Somerset, John (d. 1454), physician and courtier, was a Londoner by birth. His origins are obscure, although he may have been related to Robert Somerset, a London draper active during the late fourteenth century. That his sister, Alice, became prioress of Wintney, Hampshire, while he himself attended Oxford University, suggests a comfortable background. Fear of plague led him to move to Cambridge before 1410, when he appears as a fellow of Pembroke College. By 1418 he had graduated as master of arts and bachelor of medicine, qualifications which brought rapid preferment. Thomas Beaufort, duke of Exeter, made him master of the grammar school at Bury St Edmunds; and just five years later he was named as a governor of a proposed joint college of medicine and surgery in London. So also was the eminent royal surgeon, Thomas Morstede (died 1450), who attended Beaufort with him, in December 1426, during the duke's last illness. 
Such connections found Somerset a place in the household of Henry VI, where he served continuously from Easter 1427 until about 1451. Early in 1428, in response to the first of many complaints about poverty, he was promised fees worth $100 a year. By then a doctor of medicine, whose duties included tutoring the young king as well as 'preserving his health' ('CPR', '1429-36', 241), his influence was incalculable. He spent nearly two years with Henry in France between 1430 and 1432, probably then earning the great reputation as a physician about which he was later to boast. A note, in his hand, in the Bedford book of hours, records its presentation to the king in his presence at Rouen on Christmas eve 1430. 
Fur-trimmed robes were regularly assigned to Somerset from the royal wardrobe throughout the 1430s and 1440s, marking his arrival at the pinnacle of his profession. He secured gifts of cash and goods, corrodies, an additional fee of $40 a year, and land in Cambridgeshire and Yorkshire. In 1437 part of his pension was exchanged for the manor of Ruislip in Middlesex, prompting him to acquire an additional estate of over 750 acres and a mansion nearby at Osterley, where he lived as a country gentleman when not at his London residence. Most English physicians took holy orders, but Somerset was twice married, first to Agnes, by the early 1440s, and then, by February 1448, to Alice; and in 1442 he became the first medical practitioner to sit in parliament, as a shire knight for Middlesex. He served on the county bench, discharged many royal commissions, and acted as keeper of various royal properties. The chancellorship of the exchequer and wardenship of the royal mint, awarded in 1439, further increased his authority. 
Medical training made Somerset an expert astrologer; and in 1441, when horoscopes had been used by a group of conspirators to forecast the king's early death, he arranged for counter-propaganda to be produced. Henry's secretary, Thomas Beckington (died 1465), a close friend, enlisted Somerset's support during royal marriage negotiations, one year later, while the king sought his advice on educational projects. Somerset helped to draft the statutes of both King's and Queens' colleges, Cambridge, and was also involved in the running of Eton College, near Windsor. He did not, as has been suggested, compose a manual on 'The Rule of Princes', but he was an avid bibliophile, who wrote and collected medical treatises. Some may have been acquired dishonestly: after the death in suspicious circumstances of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, in 1447, he was made administrator of the duke's estate and incurred considerable opprobrium for failing to hand over part of the ducal library to Oxford University. 
Somerset sold his office as warden of the mint at this time, allegedly under pressure from William de la Pole, duke of Suffolk, who, he maintained in a later petition, held him 'not gretely in luf and affeccion' (TNA: PRO, C1/19/65). But this was after Suffolk's fall and death in 1450, when Somerset himself had been satirized as the duke's creature and parliament had demanded his removal, as an undesirable influence, from the royal presence. His claim in the same petition never to have taken 'brybes for forderaunce of men' (ibid.), is belied by the fact that in 1445 the rulers of London assigned $66 in cash and a substantial lifetime annuity to him for 'labour with the king' (CLRO, Journal 4, fol. 84'r') on their behalf. Yet protestations that he spent much of his wealth on charity ring true. In 1446 Henry VI permitted him to found a hospital and religious fraternity at Brentwood; and a fulsome eulogy then addressed to him by an anonymous chronicler dwells upon his concern for the poor. 
Although he was not immediately expelled from court, as parliament wished, Somerset's last years were clouded with bitterness. His sense of grievance towards King's College (which had already deprived him of the manor of Ruislip) led him to compose a 'Queremonia', itemizing his woes in Latin hexameters. Nevertheless, he retained substantial holdings in Middlesex and made generous provision for his elderly mother. He died intestate on 4 June 1454, leaving no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 26013


Poulett George Henry Somerset (1822-1875), was the fourth son of General Lord Charles Henry Somerset (1767-1831), colonial governor and second son of the fifth duke of Beaufort, and Mary (died 1860), daughter of the fourth Earl Poulett. He was born on 19 June 1822, was educated at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, was commissioned as ensign in the 33rd foot on 20 March 1839, exchanged into the Coldstream Guards on 1 May 1840, and became captain and lieutenant-colonel on 3 March 1854. He acted as aide-de-camp to Lord Raglan in the Crimean War, received the order of the Mejidiye (fourth class), and was made CB on 5 July 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 26014


Somerset, Lord (Robert) Edward Henry (1776-1842), army officer, usually known as Lord Edward Somerset, was born on 19 December 1776, the fourth surviving son of the thirteen children (nine boys and four girls) of Henry Somerset, fifth duke of Beaufort (1744-1803), and his wife, Elizabeth (1747-1828), the daughter of Admiral Edward Boscawen; Lord Charles Henry Somerset was his elder brother; Lord FitzRoy James Henry Somerset, first Baron Raglan, and Lord John Thomas Henry Somerset ['see under 'Somerset, FitzRoy James Henry] were his younger brothers. Following his education at Westminster School, on 4 February 1793 he became a cornet in the 10th light dragoons, advancing to lieutenant in December 1793 and captain on 28 August 1794. After having been made aide-de-camp to the duke of York, commander of the expedition to the Helder peninsula, he took part in actions on 19 September and 2 and 6 October 1799. On 21 November 1799 Somerset was promoted major in the 12th light dragoons, and the following year moved to the 28th light dragoons. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 25 December 1800, and transferred to the 4th dragoons in that rank on 3 September 1801. He sat as MP for Monmouth (1799-1802) and Gloucestershire (1803-29), and defended his brother Lord Charles Henry in the House of Commons in 1826 and 1827 against charges of professional misconduct as governor of the Cape of Good Hope. Two years later, after initially opposing it, he supported Roman Catholic emancipation. 
Meanwhile, the 4th dragoons had gone to Portugal in April 1809, where Somerset commanded it at Talavera (27-8 July 1809) and Busaco (27 September 1810), having been promoted colonel and appointed aide-de-camp to the king on 25 July 1810. At Usagre (25 May 1811) the 4th dragoons, with the 3rd dragoon guards, rode down two French cavalry regiments, causing 170 casualties and taking ninety-five prisoners. Somerset led the regiment in the charge of Le Marchant's heavy brigade at Salamanca (22 July 1812), breaking through three columns of infantry and capturing five guns, for which he earned special mention in Wellington's victory dispatch. 
On 4 June 1813, on Wellington's recommendation, Somerset was promoted major-general and presented with a sword of honour by the officers of his regiment. He was given command of the hussar brigade (7th, 10th, and 15th), with which he fought at Vitoria (21 June 1813), the Pyrenees (28-30 July 1813), Orthez (27 February 1814), and Toulouse (10 April 1814). At Orthez his brigade decisively charged the retreating French infantry, securing a large number of prisoners, and once more he was praised in Wellington's post-battle dispatch. He received the thanks of parliament (26 June 1814) and the Peninsular gold cross with one clasp for his services at Talavera, Salamanca, Vitoria, Orthez, and Toulouse. He was also made KCB in January 1815. 
At the battle of Waterloo Somerset commanded the household brigade of cavalry, consisting of the 1st and 2nd Life Guards, the Royal Horse Guards (Blue), and the 1st dragoon guards, totalling 1135 rank and file. Shortly after 2 p.m., led by Lord Uxbridge, the brigade charged downhill against d'Erlon's corps of massed infantry, which had attacked Wellington's left, east of the Charleroi-Brussels road. It swept through Dubois's brigade of Milhaud's cuirassiers, which was on d'Erlon's left, but, imprudently, pursued the broken enemy across the valley until attacked by lancers and by a fresh brigade of cuirassiers, losing heavily as it retired. Somerset had a horse killed under him and a flap of his collar struck by a cannon ball, but he was otherwise unscathed. Despite incurring heavy loss in this action, the brigade acquitted itself well later that afternoon as French cavalry and infantry probed in strength west of the Brussels road. During the early evening it was joined by the Union brigade, which had charged d'Erlon on Somerset's left and suffered even more severely, and guarded the part of the British line immediately to the west of La Haye-Sainte. Here the two brigades suffered such further loss from the enemy's fire that their seven regiments ultimately formed only one squadron of about fifty files. The fire was so severe that Uxbridge, the overall cavalry commander, urged Somerset to withdraw his men, who were extended in single rank to show a larger front; but Somerset feared that, if he moved, the Dutch cavalry behind him would not stand firm. 
To his brother Beaufort, Somerset referred to 'so dreadful a battle', adding that 'fine alarm and confusion' had reigned in Brussels on 18 June with many families fleeing to Antwerp. Lord FitzRoy, who had lost his right arm, was 'doing as well as possible' (Badminton Muniments, Fm 3/4/1), and he solicitously informed his mother that her youngest son 'mends wonderfully' (Raglan MSS, RPP 1/28). In his dispatch Wellington recommended Somerset's 'highly distinguished' conduct for the prince regent's 'approbation' ('Dispatches', 12.482-3); Somerset received the thanks of parliament (29 April 1816) as well as the orders of Maria Theresa (Austria), St Vladimir (Russia), and the Tower and Sword (Portugal). 
Somerset was appointed to command the 1st brigade of cavalry in the army of occupation in France on 30 November 1815, and he held this command until the army was withdrawn at the end of 1818. He afterwards held the post of inspecting-general of cavalry until his promotion to the rank of lieutenant-general on 27 May 1825. Having been appointed colonel of the 21st light dragoons on 15 January 1818, on its disbandment he became colonel of the 17th lancers (9 September 1822), then of the 1st dragoons (23 November 1829). On 31 March 1836 he was appointed colonel of his old regiment, now the 4th light dragoons. He served as lieutenant-general of the ordnance in 1829-30 and as surveyor-general of the ordnance for a short time in 1835. Somerset was made GCB in 1834 and became general on 23 November 1841. He died in London on 1 September 1842 from a long-standing heart complaint after a recent 'violent' attack in Geneva, and was buried a week later, on 8 September. He had married, on 17 October 1805, Louisa Augusta (died 1823), the twelfth daughter of William, second Viscount Courtenay. They had two sons, Edward Arthur and Augustus Charles Stapleton, both commissioned into the army, and five daughters, three of whom were unmarried at their father's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 26015


Somerset, William, third earl of Worcester (1526/7-1589), nobleman, was the eldest of the four sons of Henry Somerset, second earl of Worcester (1495/6-1549), and his second wife, Elizabeth ('c'.1502-1565), daughter of Sir Anthony Browne (died 1506), and sister of the courtier Sir Anthony Browne. William's grandfather Charles Somerset, the first earl of Worcester (c.1460-1526) of the Somerset creation, acquired extensive lands in south Wales through his marriage with a Herbert heiress, and his influence as Henry VIII's lord chamberlain ensured that his heir, Henry, was granted life tenure of many royal offices in the marches of Wales. Lord Herbert, as he was styled, probably spent his unrecorded early years mainly on his father's lands in Monmouthshire. In 1544 he served with his father in the English army in France, carrying the king's helm and spear at Calais on 25 July, and in December 1545 he attended the king at Westminster. In May 1546 he was among those who 'brake their staves and did very honestly' in a skirmish near Boulogne, but he was too diffident to revenge an insult when visiting Fontainebleau in July 1546 with the English embassy. In 1546 he appears as a member of the privy chamber and was bequeathed $200 in Henry VIII's will. He attended Henry VIII's funeral and was knighted by Edward VI at his coronation. 
Following his father's death on 26 November 1549, the young Earl William, who was then twenty-two, failed to secure appointment to his father's valuable offices in Wales. His landed income was smaller than that of most contemporary earls, and in the 1550s family and other expenses led to land sales and debts. These were relieved by royal pardons in 1552 and 1558 and by assistance from his father-in-law, Sir Edward North, created Lord North in 1554, who was later credited with disbursing $2000 or $3000 for his relief. His marriage to North's daughter Christian ('b'. 1533) probably took place late in 1549. They had three children, Edward Somerset, fourth earl of Worcester, Elizabeth, and Lucy. In November 1563 Worcester's disagreement with his wife came to the queen's notice, and in December 1563 they separated on terms which required Worcester to pay the countess $100 a year, rising to $133 6's'. 8died after his mother's death. Three illegitimate children are also recorded for Worcester. 
In May 1551 Worcester accompanied the marquess of Northampton's embassy to the French court. He was one of many signatories of the letters patent of 21 June 1553 settling the crown on Lady Jane Grey, but was present at the proclamation of Queen Mary on 19 July 1553 and served as carver at her coronation. In February 1554 the Spanish ambassador reported that when Wyatt's rebellion threatened London, Worcester had fled the court crying all was lost. Soon afterwards, possibly to counter suspicions that his action at that time reflected opposition to the queen's marriage, he sought leave to visit Spain and was one of those who escorted Prince Philip from Spain to his wedding with the queen. In 1557 he showed his commitment to the reigning monarchs by serving in the army in France commanded by the earl of Pembroke. 
In Elizabeth's reign Worcester continued to undertake public duties and regularly attended parliament. He was reputed to be a Catholic and this probably explains his omission until about 1577 from the Elizabethan commissions appointing the council in the marches of Wales, of which he had been a member since 1551. Until his reappointment to that council he was also omitted from all Elizabethan commissions of the peace except those for Monmouthshire, despite his importance as a landowner in Glamorgan, Brecknockshire, and Gloucestershire. His Catholic sympathies were shown in 1566 by his opposition to the bill affirming the validity of the consecration of bishops appointed since Elizabeth's accession. In 1569 the northern insurgents spread unfounded rumours that he was raising men in Wales, but his nomination as a knight of the Garter on 23 April 1570 may be seen as recognition of his loyalty. 
On 16 January 1572 Worcester was appointed one of the peers for the trial of the duke of Norfolk. In January 1573 he was sent to France to be proxy for Queen Elizabeth at the christening of Charles IX's daughter, and when in Paris demonstrated his loyalty to the queen by refusing to meet his sister Anne ['see 'Percy, Anne, countess of Northumberland], the widow of the attainted earl of Northumberland. In October 1586 he was one of the commissioners at Fotheringhay for the trial of Mary, queen of Scots, and in July 1588 he undertook to bring into the field six lances and twenty-four light horse for the queen's defence. He died at his house at St John's, in or near the parish of Clerkenwell, Middlesex, on 21 February 1589, and was buried in Raglan parish church, having directed in his will that he was 'there to lye alone'. 
After 1551 Worcester was the only peer who mainly resided in Wales. In the 1560s he moved his permanent residence from Chepstow Castle to Raglan Castle, where in the 1580s he undertook extensive rebuilding reflecting the recovery of his finances. The long gallery built at that time incorporates caryatids based on illustrations in a French architectural book in his possession, which he probably acquired in France in 1573. His local influence was shown in the election of his brothers as members of parliament for Monmouthshire: Thomas in 1553 and 1554, Francis in 1558, and Charles in 1571 and 1572. His letters show him on sociable terms with several peerage and gentry families. He was patron of a company of players which performed widely in the provinces from 1556 until 1585, and also of the poets Lewys Morgannwg (Llywelyn ap Rhisiart) and Dafydd Benwyn. 


@@@@@


doc= 26016


Somerville, Alexander (1811-1885), journalist and soldier, was born on 15 March 1811, at Springfield, Oldhamstocks, East Lothian, the youngest of eleven children of James Somerville, a farm labourer, and Mary Orkney, who before marriage had been a servant in a farmer's house. Somerville grew up in poverty. His father lacked the 1's'. required to register his birth, and his mother sewed rags together to clothe him. At the age of eight he was put to work herding, cleaning stables, loading corn sheaves, and ploughing; later he harvested hay, broke stones in a quarry, drained land, and worked in a garden nursery. His parents, who were members of the Anti-Burghers, or General Associate Presbyterian Synod, conducted religious worship each day, and Somerville's religious convictions remained unshaken throughout his life. 
Somerville learned to read at home, where he was exposed to religious books, the only kind his father possessed. His formal education was limited to at the most six years, and his attendance at school was irregular as it had to be combined with paid employment. He had anything but fond memories of school, where he was thrashed frequently. He was an avid reader and acquired considerable knowledge, but essentially he was self-taught. 
Somerville joined the army in December 1831 and within seven months had become a celebrity and a hero to the many supporters of parliamentary reform. With part of his regiment, the Scots Greys, he was at Birmingham, the site of the largest public meetings in support of the 'Reform Bill', to aid the civil authorities in the event of disturbances. In May 1832 the fate of the bill was uncertain: there were rumours that an anti-reform tory ministry under Wellington would be appointed, in the event of which large numbers of Birmingham citizens might march to Westminster to present a petition for reform. There were also rumours that in the event of a clash between the civil authorities and the people, the Scots Greys would support the populace. In the midst of this turmoil Somerville wrote to a newspaper asserting that the soldiers would protect property but would not prevent citizens from exercising their liberties, nor would they lend their support to a military government. 
Somerville had not violated military regulations, but his officers were outraged and were determined to punish him. Circumstances were contrived to provoke him to be disobedient. At the riding school he was ordered to ride an unfamiliar and difficult horse: after he had dismounted and refused to remount, he was court-martialled and punished with 100 lashes. It became a 'cause celebre': there were protests in newspapers and in parliament, for many assumed that Somerville had suffered punishment for having written the letter. A court of inquiry was convened which exonerated the commanding officer, but through Somerville's interrogation of several officers the suspicion grew that he had been punished for his political action. The publicity surrounding his case contributed to demands for the abolition of flogging in the army. 
A subscription was raised to purchase Somerville's discharge from the army, and with his name widely known he had an opportunity to carve out a career that already had attracted him: he acknowledged being 'filled with ambition to be an author' (Somerville, 'Autobiography', 1st edn, 429). Initially this desire led to his becoming a soldier again, as he served in a British mercenary force in Spain for two years in search of adventures that would allow him to write a book. After his return in 1837 he published newspaper accounts of his war experiences and subsequently a 700 page volume, 'History of the British Legion, and War in Spain' (1839). This was followed by two somewhat autobiographical novels, 'Memoirs of Serjeant Paul Swanston, being a Narrative of a Soldier's Life' (1840) and 'Life of Roger Mowbray' (1853). He also wrote pamphlets and numerous articles for various newspapers. He was pleased to describe himself as engaged in 'political authorship' (Somerville, 'Cobdenic Policy the Internal Enemy of England', 17) and to say, 'I am a literary man' (ibid., 14). 
A major theme in Somerville's writing harkened back to his experience during the 'Reform Bill' crisis -- the relationship of the army to the government and to the people in circumstances of popular uprising. Somerville argued that the populace, lacking training, organization, and adequate arms, would be helpless in any conflict against a disciplined body of soldiers. He insisted, moreover, that it was fantasy to assume that soldiers engaged in such conflicts would support working-class political movements. He applied this analysis to the Chartist agitations in 1839, 1842, and 1848, and he was especially worried that the tactics of 'physical-force' Chartists would lead to the repression of all working-class political activity. Somerville warned working people about leaders who encouraged street violence, and he severely criticized working-class leaders who used revolutionary rhetoric. His abhorrence of civil conflict and fear of revolution led him to develop what he called a 'conservative science of nations', based on a 'logic of revolutions', according to which revolution led to despotism and the end of civil liberty (Somerville, 'Conservative Science of Nations', 9). This historical theory, which had a long provenance, underpinned Somerville's opposition to revolutionary activity, but it did not lead him to oppose gradualist parliamentary reform that would extend the franchise to increasing numbers of the populace. 
Interpreting his own conduct in light of this understanding of working-class political agitation, Somerville developed an image of himself as a saviour of his country. Looking back to 1832 he claimed that his letter 'gave the gathered storm that direction which conducted it to peaceful serenity, and saved the unwilling aristocracy from... the irretrievable disaster of revolution' (Somerville, 'Conservative Science', 13), and thereby saved the country from what would have become Wellington's military despotism. In 1834, when he was in touch with those organizing trade unions, he warned the home secretary of a conspiracy to seize government offices, and ever after he claimed that he had forestalled a revolutionary conspiracy by some of the union leaders. In 1839 he published 'Dissuasive Warnings to the People on Street Warfare' and claimed that it undermined the efforts of the physical-force Chartists. He also fantasized about preventing the assassination of Queen Victoria at the Great Exhibition of 1851, a theme he included in his novel, 'Life of Roger Mowbray'. His exaggerated sense of his own significance rested upon an assumption that revolution originated in conspiracy. 
Somerville was employed by the Anti-Corn Law League in August 1842, after Richard Cobden read his articles signed 'One who has whistled at the plough' and was 'struck with the graphic force' of his writing (Cobden to Parkes, 12 Jan 1854, Parkes MSS). He was hired to promote the cause of free trade in agricultural districts where protectionist sentiment was especially strong. To this end Somerville became an itinerant journalist and travelled over the entire country for much of four years, writing a prodigious number of articles for newspapers. In the spirit of a social anthropologist he described farming communities -- work habits, the condition of the soil, crops, prices, rents, wages, the state of the roads, diets, dwellings, crime, discontents, religious beliefs -- all laced with arguments for free trade. He also included accounts of actual conversations on these topics: one, revealing strong resentments against the clergy among farm labourers, was quoted by Engels in 'The Condition of the Working Class in England' (1845). Somerville's reports have been compared to William Cobbett's 'Rural Rides' (1830), and there are patterns of resemblance in the courses of their lives. Many of these writings were published in Somerville's 'Whistler at the Plough and Free Trade' (1852-3), a three-volume work that included biographies of notable figures in the free-trade movement and those, such as Adam Smith, who had anticipated their efforts. Somerville served the Anti-Corn Law League well and was kept on in spite of periods when he was incapacitated by heavy drinking. He was also sent to Ireland in 1847 to report on the effects of the famine. Later he quarrelled with Cobden and published 'Cobdenic Policy the Internal Enemy of England' (1854), in which he accused Cobden of unscrupulous tactics and of supporting policies such as pacifism that weakened the country. 
From the late 1840s Somerville's journalism became desultory, and he faced financial ruin. In 1857 he suffered a psychiatric episode in which he had delusions of persecution, and the following year he emigrated to Canada. With him travelled his wife, Emma, 'nee' Binks (1825-1859), daughter of a London cabinet-maker, whom he had married on 10 January 1841, and their six children, but he was left a widower only a year later. His journalism revived and was based largely in Hamilton; he wrote about Canada for several English papers and edited the 'Canadian Illustrated News' from 1862 to 1864. In 1866 he reported on the Fenian disturbances and published his 'Narrative of the Fenian Invasion of Canada', having lost much of his sympathy for the cause of reform in Ireland in the process. 
Somerville had hoped to return to England in 1868, but the assassination of Thomas D'Arcy McGee prevented this; Somerville had been counting on payment from McGee for an 'emigrant's handbook'. He went on to edit the 'Church Herald', from 1873 to 1875, and continued to report on the Fenian disturbances. The Canadian government commissioned articles from him to encourage immigration, and awarded him a pension in 1876. During the last decade of Somerville's life, however, he was isolated, impoverished, and became increasingly eccentric. 
Somerville's politics cannot be encompassed with a single label. He had a good deal of class feeling -- he had shown 'the martinets of the Scots Greys that, although my parents were poor... and their parents rich... yet I was a man, and that they were, if quite as much, nothing more' ('Political Soldier', 7 Dec 1833, 1). Throughout his life he sympathized with the working classes and was eager for a democratic suffrage. At the same time he upheld established authority and feared civil conflict, defended the monarchy, and regarded atheists with abhorrence. He also criticized unbridled commerce, and, in spite of his support for free trade, he wished to rescue political economy from the 'soulless materialism which had made it... odious to the People' (Somerville, 'Conservative Science of Nations', 22). He felt great national pride that Britain had achieved reform without sacrificing either order or liberty. His political sentiments reflected his love of 'dear old rural England' (Somerville, 'Cobdenic Policy', 18), and he acknowledged that his 'mental constitution sympathises with a reasoning conservatism' (ibid., 38-9). 
Somerville was distinguished by his broad Scottish accent and his mountainous size, and Cobden described how 'the doorway was literally darkened with the huge awkward hulking figure that came lumbering head-foremost into the room' (Cobden to Parkes, 12 Jan 1854, Parkes MSS). In old age he weighed more than 20 stone. He was capable of immense physical stamina. There were times when he went on drinking sprees, but they were followed by 'fits of penitential remorse' (ibid.). He was fiercely independent, and throughout his adult life he was obsessively concerned with issues of loyalty and betrayal as they related to social order and revolution. For all his flaws Somerville is memorable for being a self-educated working man who, in spite of great poverty and an unpromising start in life, conducted himself in difficult circumstances with moral seriousness and a sense of honour, and who wrote prodigiously and thoughtfully with a clear and forceful prose style on important economic and political subjects. 
Somerville died on 17 June 1885 at his home in York Street, Toronto, Canada, and was buried in the cemetery of the St Andrew's Society at Toronto. 


@@@@@


doc= 26017


Somerville, Alexander Neil (1813-1889), Free Church of Scotland minister and evangelist, was born in Edinburgh on 29 January 1813, the eldest of eight children of Alexander Somerville, a wine merchant and his wife, Eliza Munro. He was educated at Edinburgh high school and Edinburgh University, where Robert Murray McCheyne became an inseparable friend. Licensed by the presbytery of Jedburgh in December 1835, he worked as a missionary at Stockbridge, Edinburgh, before succeeding McCheyne as assistant to Dr John Bonar of Larbert and Dunipace. In November 1837 he was ordained as minister of Anderston, a 'quoad sacra' charge in Glasgow. His connection with this congregation was to last in various forms for the next fifty-two years. On 6 June 1841 he married Isabella Mirrlees Ewing (died 1900); they had two daughters and three sons. 
In 1843, at the Disruption of the Church of Scotland, Somerville joined the Free Church and his congregation built a new church in Cadogan Street. Like McCheyne he had felt a missionary impulse early in life, but he channelled it instead into revivals and home-mission work. There was much to do in Anderston, where drunkenness and prostitution were rife. He became home secretary of the Glasgow African Missionary Society and a director of the Glasgow Bible Society. His interest in the latter led him to become one of the founders of the National Bible Society of Scotland. His urge to travel and his skills as a propagandist were exploited by the Free Church, which sent him to Canada on its behalf in 1845. In 1848-9 he went on a visit to the Holy Land. He took a great interest in the cause of protestantism in Spain, where he spent each summer for six years. He drew up a constitution and confession of faith for Spanish protestants in 1870. In the same year the ancient Scottish barony of Somerville fell vacant and Somerville was a claimant. No claim was upheld, however, and the peerage became dormant. 
Somerville's tireless work led to a physical breakdown, but he recovered to be galvanized by the visit of the American revivalists Moody and Sankey to Scotland in 1873. He resolved to become a full-time evangelist, and went on a missionary tour in India in 1874-5. He visited Canada in 1876; in the following year he formally became a missionary there and the Glasgow United Evangelistic Association released him from ministerial duties. In May 1877 he received the honorary degree of DD from Glasgow University. Thereafter he travelled to Australia, New Zealand, France, Italy, Germany, Russia, South Africa, Greece, western Asia, Bohemia, Hungary, Serbia, and Romania. His practice was to preach, when necessary through an interpreter, at meetings where hymns were sung. Although understandably most effective in the English-speaking world, his gatherings in other countries invariably attracted an audience and, less often, some local opposition. Somerville's unorthodox methods and nondenominational approach did not prevent him from being honoured by his own church when, in 1886, he became moderator of the Free Church of Scotland general assembly. He was invited to address the general assembly of the established church on the question of converting the Jews, the last of his enthusiasms, in 1889. He died on 18 September 1889 at 11 South Park Terrace, Hillhead, Glasgow, and was buried nearby at the western necropolis, Maryhill. 
Although hardly orthodox in his missionary methods, which were not confined to one continent, let alone one country, Somerville was an effective missionary who used modern evangelistic techniques. His efforts were helped by his commanding appearance: he had a tall and athletic build, a lofty brow, and a piercing eye, and his hair, bushy and black in youth, turned to a venerable, flowing white. 


@@@@@


doc= 26018


Somerville, Andrew (1808-1834), painter, was born in Edinburgh, the son of a wireworker. He was educated at the Edinburgh high school, and then trained at the Trustees' Academy. He studied under the historical and landscape painter William Simson, whom he subsequently assisted in teaching drawing. He exhibited publicly for the first time at the Institution for Encouragement of Fine Arts in 1826 with a chalk drawing of a young man. In the course of his career with the Royal Scottish Academy he exhibited a total of twenty-seven works, was elected an associate on 9 November 1831, and, on 10 February 1833, a full member. His early death at the age of twenty-six in Edinburgh on 7 January 1834 cut short the promising career: as was stated in the minutes of the academy's general meeting on 10 February 1834, Somerville was 'a most esteemed member of the academy the excellence and quality of whose pictures, exhibited at an early age gave high promise of future eminence in the walk of art'. As he died intestate an inventory of his effects was drawn up and signed on 5 June 1834 by his brother James Somerville, an engraver in Edinburgh. Few examples of Andrew Somerville's work are known; he painted chiefly subjects drawn from border ballads and literary sources such as James Hogg. His 'Cottage Children' and 'Bride of Yarrow' (1833) are in the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh, and portraits by him are in the collection at Balnagown Castle, Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 26019


Somerville, Hugh, fourth Lord Somerville (c.1484-1549), nobleman, was the second son of William, master of Somerville, and his second wife, Janet Douglas of Drumlanrig. His father died in 1491, a few months before his grandfather John, second Lord Somerville, who died in November. His elder brother, also John, thus succeeded, but died childless in 1522, and so Hugh took his seat in parliament as the fourth lord on 16 November 1524. He married twice. His first wife, Anna, an illegitimate daughter of James Hamilton, first earl of Arran, whom he married on 20 December 1510, died of smallpox with their two young sons in 1516. In July 1517 he married Janet, daughter of William Maitland of Lethington, with whom he had six sons and three daughters. 
A major landowner in Lanarkshire, Somerville was often entangled in territorial disputes. In August 1525 his cousin John Somerville of Cambusnethan sought to usurp the lands of Carnwath, at the centre of Hugh's inheritance. Cambusnethan had the support of the sixth earl of Angus, the effective head of the government, and eventually Lord Somerville had to give way. Instead he took up residence in Cowthally, an ancient family strength, which he largely rebuilt. On 4 September 1526 he was involved in the fight at Linlithgow in which the twelfth earl of Lennox was killed, following an unsuccessful attempt to remove the young James V from Augus's custody. That in 1531 Somerville was declared innocent of any complicity in Lennox's death, faring better than others who had to pay substantial fines, was probably owing to royal favour. In 1528 he had supported James V at Stirling when the king finally broke free of Angus's control, and he subsequently became something of an intimate with James, who in 1532 resolved his dispute with Cambusnethan. 
Somerville frequently entertained James V at Cowthally, where in July 1532 the king attended the marriage of Hugh's daughter Agnes. Royal friendship brought few visible rewards, but some sort of warmth clearly existed: Somerville was on Leith docks when the king returned from France with his first wife, Madeleine, on 19 May 1537, having spent lavishly to bedeck himself and his retainers in new liveries for the occasion: according to family tradition it was to pay for this that he sold rents worth $60 from Carnwath to St Mary Magdalene hospital, Edinburgh, and indeed two charters from 1540 record just such a sale. In 1540 he served the king by sitting on the assize which condemned Hamilton of Finnart for treason; he may also have served his own interests, since Finnart's accumulation of estates was making him a potential rival in Lanarkshire. On 30 December 1540 James granted Somerville the bailiary of the lands and barony of Carstairs, forfeited by Finnart. Somerville was not just a courtier, however, for he fought in James V's army at Solway Moss on 24 November 1542 and was among the many Scottish nobles captured by the English. Taken to London considerably more slowly than his fellows (he did not arrive until about 19 December), there he became one of the Assured Scots, pledged to press for the marriage of the infant Mary, queen of Scots, to Henry VIII's son, Prince Edward, and to promote the English cause in Scotland. His ransom, assessed on lands valued at $800 and goods worth $1000 Scots, was accordingly reduced and he was promised a pension. But like his fellows he had to hand over his eldest son as a hostage. 
Back in Scotland early in 1543, Somerville participated in that year's confused manoeuvring, as an opponent of Cardinal David Beaton and his policy of alliance with France. Instead he collaborated with the earl of Angus, at this time pro-English, and even went to Douglas on 8 September to subscribe a band contracting to support the English marriage. Assigned with the fifth Lord Maxwell to represent the views of his associates to Henry VIII, he ill-advisedly went via Edinburgh, where he was arrested on 1 November, to be briefly imprisoned there before being taken to Blackness Castle on the 6th. Although his dispatches were used by Beaton as evidence for the treason of his enemies, the services implicit in Somerville's captivity secured the release from England of his eldest son. He was himself freed from Blackness by 2 April 1544. 
Somerville's political position remained ambivalent for the rest of his life. He was present in the Scottish army at Coldingham in December 1544 and at Ancrum Moor on 27 February 1545, while on 10 June 1546 he attended the convention at Stirling which made provision for the government of Scotland after the murder of Beaton. But on 21 March 1549 he was once more presenting himself as a supporter of England and an enemy of the governor, the second earl of Arran. His stance at this point may have been influenced by his protestantism in religion, or may have resulted from one of his son's being an English prisoner. Somerville died later that year, sometime before 11 November, and was buried at Carnwath. His wife, who died sometime after 19 August 1559, was interred beside him. 
The fourth lord's eldest son from his second marriage, 


@@@@@


doc= 26020


James Somerville (c.1519-1569), succeeded as fifth Lord Somerville, having sasine of Carnwath by 19 February 1550. Like his father he married twice. His first wife, Jean Hamilton, whom he had married by 26 March 1529, was another illegitimate daughter of the first earl of Arran. They had no children, and the marriage may have been ended by divorce. Then, some time after 8 April 1536, James married Agnes, daughter of Sir James Hamilton of Finnart, with whom he had two sons and two daughters; he probably also had an illegitimate son. In the late 1550s the fifth lord, like his father in the previous decade, seems to have favoured a Scottish alliance with England, but unlike his father he remained a Catholic. In 1560 he signed the treaty of Berwick of 22 February and the Leith bond of 27 April, and he supported proposals that Queen Elizabeth should marry the earl of Arran, but according to Knox he was one of three peers who voted against the reformed confession of faith in August, declaring 'We will believe as our fathers believed' ('History of the Reformation', 1.339). Later he was a firm supporter of Mary, queen of Scots, whom he entertained at Cowthally from 24 to 26 August 1563. He took part in the suppression of the chaseabout raid in 1565, and fought for Mary at Langside on 13 May 1568, when he was wounded. He died at Cowthally in December 1569 and was buried at Carnwath, as was his wife, who was still alive in August 1597. His heir was his elder son, Hugh. 


@@@@@


doc= 26021


Somerville, James (bap. 1632, d. 1693), family historian, was baptized on 24 January 1632 at Newhall, Lanarkshire, the eldest son of James Somerville (1596-1677) of Drum and his wife, Lilias Bannatyne (1607/8-1675). The elder Somerville, who was by right the ninth Lord Somerville but never assumed the title as he felt that he lacked the wealth to support it, travelled widely and gained martial experience with the French and Venetian forces. Returning to Scotland, he sided with the presbyterian covenanters against Charles I, serving under General Leslie. He was made a major and held a command at the siege of Edinburgh Castle in 1640. James Somerville was with his father at that siege, although he was only nine. In 1645 he was in the cavalry muster held by David Leslie on Gladsmuir to deal with the royalist threat from Montrose. 
In 1647 smallpox and consumption killed Somerville's two brothers, leaving him the only surviving male heir of the house of Somerville. His father became more reluctant to risk his son's life and resolved that he should never leave Scotland. In 1648 Somerville senior was persuaded by his relations to purchase the decayed family barony of Cambusnethan in Lanarkshire; he moved there with his family at Easter in that year. 
The elder Somerville's political views changed with the execution of Charles I and the Cromwellian threat to Scotland. Despite his concern for his son's safety he took him to Edinburgh, where royalist forces were gathering, and placed him at the service of Charles II, who had recently (June 1650) arrived in Scotland. Somerville was attached to the retinue of the earl of Eglinton, who commanded the King's horse guards, and saw much of the action that followed Cromwell's march into Scotland, including the Scottish defeat at Dunbar on 3 September 1650. While he was in this service, Somerville met John Bannatyne of Corhouse and his daughter Martha (1633-1679), his future wife. After Dunbar, Somerville returned to Cambusnethan, which was threatened by the forces of the Association, the hard-line presbyterians who, while opposed to Cromwell, were also hostile to the royalists. He clashed with them briefly. 
The next period of Somerville's life was taken up with military concerns. After visiting the court of Charles II at Perth, in November 1650 he joined the cavalry of his cousin Major-General Robert Montgomery, which was charged either to defeat or come to terms with the Association forces of colonels Ker and Strachan. Montgomery entrusted Somerville with the task of negotiating with these forces but by the time Somerville reached Renfrew events had gone too far for negotiations, and he joined the royalist forces on Ruglen, which were mustered to stop Cromwell taking Hamilton. The Cromwellian troops briefly took the town in a night attack but were driven out shortly afterwards. Soon after this Somerville returned to Cambusnethan. 
Cromwell was not long in reoccupying Hamilton, and his forces made life increasingly unsafe for royalists in the area. Somerville and his father moved north to safety, and attended the coronation of Charles II at Scone on 1 January 1651. They then visited, at Struthers in Fife, the duke of Hamilton who offered the elder Somerville a command in the royalist forces. This he declined, but again placed his son in royal service, as a volunteer. He regretted this when Charles II decided to invade England, and wrote to his son, telling him to leave the army, but the young Somerville was resolved to go. A stratagem was employed to prevent him: he was lured into the home of his betrothed, Martha Bannatyne, after which the gate was locked and kept so until the army had gone. Somerville thus escaped involvement in the Scottish defeat at Worcester, which ended the royalist cause. 
This was the end of Somerville's military career. He spent the years of Cromwellian occupation quietly, and married Martha Bannatyne at Leshamahago church in Lanark on 13 November 1651. His father was involved in the abortive royalist rising of 1653, but Somerville himself took no part in this. His father's death on 3 January 1677 left him the 'de jure' tenth Lord Somerville, but, for the same reasons as his parent, he refused to assume the title. 
Somerville studied family records, and completed his 'Memorie of the Somervilles' by 1679, the year of his wife's death; the work, edited by Walter Scott, was published in 1816. A large portion of the work deals with his father's life, and describes the turbulent mid-century events in Scotland, with a markedly royalist and episcopalian bias; he regarded his father's adherence to the presbyterian covenanter cause as an unfortunate aberration. This royalism did not prevent Somerville from speaking against abuses of power by royal government. In March 1684 he served on a jury in the trial of Campbell of Cessnock for treason and, with two other jurors, protested against royal proceedings in the case. He and his associates were indicted for riot in interrupting the court, but the charge was later dropped. 
Somerville married again on 15 March 1685. His new wife was Margaret Jamieson. On 15 June the next year he was appointed a commissioner of supply for Edinburgh. Despite his loyalty to the Stuarts, he does not seem actively to have opposed the revolution of 1688. He died on 7 February 1693 and was buried in Liberton church, Edinburgh, on 9 February. His eldest son by his first marriage had been accidentally killed in 1682 when trying to separate two friends who were fighting, and he was succeeded as head of the house of Somerville by his grandson, also called James. Margaret Somerville died some time before 19 October 1717. 


@@@@@


doc= 26022


Somerville, John (1560-1583), convicted conspirator, was the son of John Somerville (died in or after 1579), of Edstone, Warwickshire, and Elizabeth Corbett of Lee, Shropshire. After studying at Hart Hall, Oxford, between 1576 and 1579, he married Margaret Arden, the daughter of Edward Arden of Park Hall, Warwickshire. They had two daughters, Elizabeth and Alice. His father died some time after late 1579, leaving his properties in Warwickshire, Gloucestershire, and Worcestershire to his wife, until John should take possession at the age of twenty-four. 
Somerville and his family were members of the Roman Catholic church, and he presumed its restoration if Mary, queen of Scots, should supplant Elizabeth I. In early October 1583 Somerville had been examined regarding an acquaintance imprisoned in the Tower for associating with Mary. On 24 October 1583 he was ill in bed at his father-in-law's home. Yet early the next morning he began to journey alone to London, where he was said to have 'meant to shoot her [Elizabeth] with his dagg [pistol], and hoped to see her head on a pole, for that she was a serpent and a viper' ('CSP dom.', '1581-90', 126). Somerville publicized his intention to fellow guests at an inn, and he was arrested and questioned for the next few days. On 31 October he spoke to Sir John Conway, a relation of the Ardens, regarding 'the trouble of his mind' (ibid., 126). On 7 November Thomas Wilkes, secretary to the privy council, reported to Sir Francis Walsingham that 'nothing could be learned except from the confessions' of Somerville and his family (ibid., 129). Some scholars have presumed that this last statement implied the use of torture. In any event Somerville, as well as his wife's parents, and Hugh Hall, a priest resident at Park Hall, whom he was said to have implicated as the instigators of this 'conspiracy', were imprisoned in the Tower of London and convicted of high treason on 16 December 1583. On 19 December Somerville and Arden were moved from the Tower to Newgate prison. Within two hours of this move Somerville was found strangled in his cell. It was stated that he had committed suicide. His head was cut off and placed on Tower Bridge, and his body buried in Moorfields outside the city of London. 
Many contemporaries of Somerville believed that he had been the means for Robert Dudley's vengeance for the public contempt with which he was held by Edward Arden. That Somerville was mentally ill seems beyond doubt. Cecil admitted as much in his 'Execution of Justice in England', and William Allen drew attention to this fact in his 'True Defense of English Catholics'. Like other Roman Catholics, he questioned whether John Somerville had died in his cell 'for prevention of the discovery of certain shameful practices about the condemnation' of his father-in-law (Allen, 108-9). 


@@@@@


doc= 26023


Somerville, John Southey, fifteenth Lord Somerville (1765-1819), agriculturist, was born on 21 September 1765 at Fitzhead Court, near Taunton, Somerset, the only child of Hugh Southey Somerville (1729-1795), younger son of James, thirteenth Lord Somerville, head of the Scottish branch of the family, and his first wife, Elizabeth Cannon (died 1765), daughter of Christopher Lethbridge, of Westway, Devon. From his father's second marriage there were four sons and three daughters. In 1730 William Somerville, head of the older (English) branch of the family, granted the reversion of his remaining English estates to the thirteenth Lord Somerville, who therefore united the estates of the two families, the Scottish estate in Roxburgh, and the English estate at Aston-Somerville in Warwickshire. William Somerville died childless in 1742. The family hoped to buy the chateau of Somerville, in Normandy, but this plan was abandoned because of the French Revolution. 
Somerville was educated at Harrow School, and then studied with a private tutor for three years in Peterborough, before entering St John's College, Cambridge, as a fellow-commoner on 28 June 1782. He graduated MA in 1785, and then went on the grand tour, meeting Francis Russell, fifth duke of Bedford, in Nice, and travelling with him to Leghorn and through Italy, Switzerland, and France. His inheritance of some of his mother's property in Somerset was disputed, but during the six years in which the case was in chancery, he improved the one farm of which he had possession. During the Napoleonic wars he became colonel of the West Somerset yeomanry, and continued to serve until a carriage accident forced him to resign. 
Somerville succeeded to the title in 1796, on the death of his uncle, the fourteenth lord, and he was elected a representative peer of Scotland in the House of Lords. He was re-elected to the parliaments of 1802 and 1806. In 1793 he was appointed one of the first members of the board of agriculture, and on 23 March 1798 he was elected president of the board through Pitt's influence, ousting Sir John Sinclair; he remained president until 1800. 
In 1799 Somerville became a lord of the king's bedchamber, and this brought him into close contact with George III, who took a keen interest in agriculture. Apart from the king, who was responsible for introducing merino sheep into England in 1788, Somerville became the largest breeder and owner of merinos in England. In 1802 he visited Spain, and managed to buy a flock of pure merinos. He was one of the leaders of the English merino movement; its members were mainly wealthy landowners, who formed the Merino Society of Great Britain in 1811 with Sir Joseph Banks as president. They wanted to cross the Spanish merino, which produced the best wool in Europe, with British Ryeland and Southdown sheep, to produce a superior animal. But English merino fleeces were inferior to the Spanish; moreover, the new crossbreeds could not compete in carcass quality with the improved English breeds such as the Shorthorns, and with the arrival of wool from Australia there was no future for the English merino. By 1850 there were no merino flocks left in Great Britain. 
Somerville also invented several improved agricultural implements, including a plough. He was a patron of the Smithfield Club, founded in 1799, which was concerned with the fattening of cattle. In 1802 he started an annual show of cattle, sheep, and pigs in London, which he carried on at his own expense for many years, providing the prizes. He also promoted the replacement of horses as work animals with draught oxen. Among his publications were 'The System Followed during the Last Two Years by the Board of Agriculture' (1800) and 'Facts and Observations Relative to Sheep, Wool, Ploughs, Oxen' (1803). 
Somerville spent the winter of 1818 in Italy, and the following summer in France, for the benefit of his health, but while travelling through Switzerland he died of dysentery at Vevey, on 5 October 1819. He was buried at Aston-Somerville, Warwickshire. He was unmarried, and was succeeded by his half-brother. 


@@@@@


doc= 26024


Somerville, Mary (1780-1872), science writer and mathematics expositor, was born on 26 December 1780 at the manse, Jedburgh, Roxburghshire, the fifth of seven children (three of whom died young) of Lieutenant (later Vice Admiral Sir) William George Fairfax (1739-1813) and his second wife, Margaret (1741-1832), daughter of Samuel Charters, solicitor of customs for Scotland. She grew up in the small port town of Burntisland, Fife. Apart from one year at Miss Primrose's boarding-school, Musselburgh (1791-2), she mainly taught herself, using the small family library; her uncle, Thomas Somerville, helped her learn Latin. In her early teens she acquired Euclid's 'Elements of Geometry' and Bonnycastle's 'Algebra' which she studied in secret, her father having forbidden her to read mathematics. Small and shy, but very good-looking, attractive, and sociable, in 1804 Mary married a cousin, Samuel Greig (1777/8-1807). A captain in the Russian navy, he became commissioner for the Russian navy and Russian vice-consul for Britain in London. In the capital she continued to study mathematics (without encouragement from Greig) and took French lessons. She had two sons, Woronzow Greig (1805-1865) and William George Greig (1807-1814). Following Greig's death in 1807 she and her children returned to Burntisland. 
With the independence brought by her status as a widow with a small inheritance, and family connections which gave her access to Edinburgh social and intellectual circles, Mary was able to talk with people who could help her with her studies. John Playfair of Edinburgh University put her in touch with his protege William Wallace, who provided mathematics instruction by correspondence. She was also tutored by Wallace's brother, John. In 1812 she remarried, her second husband being another cousin, William Somerville (1771-1860), an army doctor of liberal outlook who was interested in science and encouraged her studies. With continued guidance from the Wallaces she became familiar with much of the work in advanced mathematics, especially analysis, being pioneered in France. She also assembled a small but good mathematics library. 
In 1816, following a change in William Somerville's army appointment, the Somerville family (which now included two small daughters) moved to London. With introductions from Scottish friends they quickly made their way into scientific society where they came to know several leading figures, including William Wollaston, Henry Kater, Thomas Young, Henry Warburton, and William Blake. Mary's serious enthusiasm for science and obvious talent led to her being accepted as a protegee by these men; the frequent close interaction she had with them, typically at private social gatherings, became her equivalent of formal instruction. She also established connections with several visiting French scientists at this time, connections expanded during a visit to the continent in 1817-18. Somerville's first scientific publication appeared in 1826, a report of her observations on the magnetizing power of sunlight, a topic then of much interest. Although her deductions were incorrect, the paper established her as someone active in scientific work. 
The following year Somerville was asked by Henry Brougham, an influential figure in London educational circles, to prepare for publication in an educational books series a condensed English version of Laplace's 'Mecanique celeste' (1798-1827). This 5 volume treatise in applied mathematical analysis presenting Laplace's nebular hypothesis of the solar system was one of the great guidebooks for nineteenth-century theoretical astronomers -- the completion of the gravitational part of Newton's 'Principia'. The version Brougham envisaged required substantial introduction and explication; his request to Somerville was hardly minor. She worked on the project for three years, consulting often with astronomer Sir John Herschel and mathematicians Augustus De Morgan and Charles Babbage. Her completed work covered the first four of Laplace's volumes. Brougham decided it was too long for his low cost series, but on Herschel's recommendation the publisher John Murray accepted it. 'The Mechanism of the Heavens' appeared in 1831 and was generally well received. The following year the largely non-mathematical introduction, which Somerville considered her most important contribution, was published separately as 'Preliminary Dissertation to the Mechanism of the Heavens'. Sales of the 'Mechanism' were slow, but its adoption in 1837 as an advanced mechanics textbook at Cambridge guaranteed a small but steady demand. Recognition came quickly, the Royal Society commissioning a marble bust of her for its apartments, and Cambridge University entertaining her and her husband as official guests for a week. In 1834 the Royal Irish Academy made her a member and a year later the Royal Astronomical Society elected her and Caroline Herschel its first women honorary members. 
Impressed by the overlap between the branches of science covered in her first project, and anxious to make clear her ideas about the interconnections she saw between the subjects discussed, Somerville started a second book. 'On the Connection of the Physical Sciences' was published by Murray in 1834. Thanks to close consultations with leading scientists in both England and France (including Brougham, Faraday, Lyell, Whewell, Ampere, and Becquerel), the work was an up-to-date account of what would later be classed as astronomy and traditional physics, with, in addition, sections on meteorology and physical geography (then linked with heat). Supplemented with concise introductions to the technical material, it presented all in straightforward prose backed by mathematical notes. It was immensely successful. A pirated American edition and French, German, and Italian translations quickly appeared. Subsequent editions, incorporating the most recent research findings, came out in 1835, 1836, and 1837. Soon an established scientific classic and best-seller, it functioned for a time as an annual progress report for physical science. 
In 1835 Mary was awarded a civil list annual pension of $200, increased to $300 two years later because of her family's financial difficulties. In 1838, William Somerville's health being poor, they went to Rome for the winter, and except for two brief visits Mary never returned to Britain. They had no settled home, but lived for periods in various Italian cities. She continued her writing, nine editions of the 'Connection' appearing during her lifetime and a tenth in 1877; 15,000 copies were sold. In 1848 her third work appeared, her 2 volume 'Physical Geography', the first English language textbook in the field. Although preceded by the first volume of von Humboldt's acclaimed 'Kosmos' (1845), it was an immediate success. Running to seven editions and for long on university textbook lists, it was her most popular work. In geographical writing it was pioneering since it discarded old constraints of political boundaries and anticipated the regional approach. A fourth work, 'On Molecular and Microscopic Science' (1869), though its science was largely out of date, was kindly received out of deference to its author, then in her eighty-ninth year. Her autobiography, 'Personal Recollections, from Early Life to Old Age', finished just before her death, was edited and published by her daughter Martha in 1873. 
In addition to her early honours, Mary Somerville received in 1869 the patron's gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society and the Victor Emmanuel gold medal of the Geographical Society of Florence. She was honoured by one Swiss, two American, and at least twelve Italian scientific societies. At Oxford, Somerville College (founded in 1879 as a non-denominational women's college) and a Somerville scholarship for women commemorate her name. 
Although she was not among those nineteenth-century women who contributed to original work in science, Mary's long sustained and immensely successful scientific writing was unquestionably outstanding. Perhaps no woman of science until Marie Curie was as widely recognized in her own time. Her books were remarkably influential; not only did they bring scientific knowledge in a broad range of fields to a wide audience, but thanks to her exceptional talents for analysis, organization, and presentation, they provided definition and shape for an impressive spread of scientific work. She died at 66 Riviera-di-Chiaja, Naples, on 29 November 1872 and was buried in the English cemetery there. 


@@@@@


doc= 26025


Somerville, Thomas (1741-1830), Church of Scotland minister and historian, was born at Hawick, Roxburghshire, on 15 February 1741, the fifth child and only son of the parish minister, William Somerville (1691-1757), and Janet Grierson (died 1749), daughter of John Grierson, the minister of Queensferry. He left behind a valuable autobiographical memoir, written in 1813-14 and published posthumously in 1861 as 'My Own Life and Times, 1741-1814', which documents the first seventy-three years of his life and contains perceptive observations on the cultural, social, and ecclesiastical history of the Scottish lowlands, especially the borders, during the late eighteenth century. According to that account, Somerville attended local schools in Hawick and then the school in Duns, Berwickshire, where his education was supervised by the local minister, his relative Adam Dickson, the agricultural historian. From November 1756 he studied arts and subsequently divinity at the University of Edinburgh, benefiting particularly from participation in two student clubs, the Theological Society and the Belles Lettres Society. The unexpected death of his father during his first year at university caused him to move to Edinburgh with his sisters, relying largely on the support of his father's friends and relations, including his father's patron, Lord Somerville. George Burges, the latter's son-in-law, brought young Thomas to Somerville House from 1759 to 1767 as the tutor of his son, James Bland Burges. During this difficult period Thomas and his three surviving siblings petitioned the courts to recover 6000 merks allegedly owed to their father's second wife, Isabel Scott, who had died in 1759. 
Having been licensed by the presbytery of Edinburgh on 28 November 1764, Somerville gained clerical experience substituting for George Wishart at the Tron Church, Edinburgh, for a period of nine months, as we know from a joint recommendation letter of 28 April 1766 sent to Sir Gilbert Elliot of Minto, in Roxburghshire, by Wishart and his colleague at the Tron, John Jardine (Minto MS 11016, fols. 72-3). In December 1766 Elliot presented Somerville to the little parish of Minto, where he was ordained on 24 April 1767. During his six years there he tutored Elliot's two sons (one of whom would become the first earl of Minto), met David Hume and many of Sir Gilbert's other friends, made the first of his five visits to London in 1769, and married on 5 June 1770 Martha Charters (died 1809), daughter of the solicitor of customs Samuel Charters and cousin of Somerville's closest friend, the Revd Samuel Charters of Wilton. The couple had five surviving children, including William Somerville (1771-1860), an eminent physician and traveller, whose wife, the mathematician Mary Somerville, was Thomas Somerville's niece by marriage and received her earliest intellectual encouragement from him. On 13 August 1771 Samuel Charters senior wrote to Elliot to promote the placement of his son-in-law in Jedburgh, 'one of the best Livings being above $100 besides the Gleeb and Manse', which was formally in the gift of the crown but actually at the disposal of the marquess of Lothian (Minto MS 11019, fol. 1). Elliot accordingly wrote to Lothian, who gave him a promise of support on 14 September 1771 (ibid., fol. 3), and on 27 July 1772 Somerville was presented to Jedburgh, where he would remain for the rest of his life, though the parishioners' opposition to ecclesiastical patronage delayed his admission until 1 July 1773. 
Somerville was affiliated with the politically conservative 'moderate' party, which supported ecclesiastical patronage and the British policy in the American War of Independence. In 1781 he published a pamphlet, 'Candid Thoughts, or, An Enquiry into the Causes of National Discontents', which supported the policies of Lord North against the colonists and was answered the following year by Thomas Tod's 'Consolatory Thoughts on American Independence'. But he disappointed moderate leaders, and cost himself a chance to be moderator of the general assembly, by increasingly refusing to toe the party line. For example, he backed the 'popular' party candidate for moderator in 1783 and campaigned aggressively for repeal of the 'Test Act' in 1790-91. He initially supported the French Revolution, though he eventually changed course and in 1793 published two pamphlets against the revolution and its feared consequences in Britain: 'The Effects of the French Revolution' and 'Observations on the Constitution and Present State of Britain'. In regard to the slave trade, which the moderates also opposed, he stirred up controversy simply by being so zealous, as his memoir relates, concerning his published sermon 'A discourse on our obligation to thanksgiving, for the prospect of the abolition of the African slave-trade' (1792). 
Somerville was a diligent pastor and a well-respected preacher. Two of his sermons were selected for inclusion in the 'Scotch Preacher' (vol. 2, 1776, and vol. 3, 1779), and a volume of his sermons was published at Edinburgh in 1813. He wrote the accounts of two parishes, Jedburgh and Ancrum, in Sir John Sinclair's 'Statistical Account of Scotland' (1791-9). His greatest accomplishment as an author, however, was the publication of two large quarto histories: 'The history of political transactions, and of parties, from the Restoration of King Charles the Second, to the death of King William', published in London in early spring 1792 by Andrew Strahan and Thomas Cadell, and its sequel, 'The History of Great Britain during the Reign of Queen Anne', published in 1798 by Strahan along with the firm of Cadell and Davies. Based on extensive research in London and Edinburgh, these volumes contained much new information and analysis, including a discussion of the Union of 1707 that dealt frankly with its initial unpopularity in Scotland. There were good reviews, and William Robertson praised the first work and encouraged the second. Yet neither book sold well, and both have been largely neglected by scholars of British and Scottish historiography. Somerville was indignant at being branded a tory historian by Charles James Fox, and he defended his whig credentials in an updated pamphlet, 'Observations on a passage in the preface to Mr Fox's historical work, relative to the character of Dr Somerville as an historian'. Having been motivated to become a historian by 'pecuniary embarrassments', as he wrote in his memoir (T. Somerville, 205), Somerville was disappointed to receive only $300 for his first history and attributed its failure to reach a second edition (which would have brought him an additional $200) to the 'horrors of the French Revolution' (ibid., 256). His second experience was still more frustrating, for he turned down an initial offer of $300 for 'Queen Anne' in hopes of getting more, but ended up earning far less when the 200 copies of the book that he finally received as compensation proved more difficult to sell by subscription than he had anticipated. 
Somerville received an honorary DD degree from the University of St Andrews on 17 July 1789. The publication of his first history, along with his political pamphlets, gained him a $50-a-year sinecure in 1793 as one of his majesty's chaplains-in-ordinary, which was upgraded to a more prestigious chaplaincy in 1798 and finally, in 1800, to a pension worth $100 per annum. One week after preaching an animated sermon and dispensing the Lord's supper to his congregation, he died 'Father of the Church' aged eighty-nine on 16 May 1830, and was buried in Jedburgh Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 26026


Somervile, William (1675-1742), poet, was born on 2 September 1675 and was baptized the next day at Colwich, Staffordshire, the eldest son of Robert Somervile (1647-1705) of Edstone, Warwickshire, and Elizabeth (1644-1742), eldest daughter of Anne (died 1704) and Sir Charles Wolseley (d. 1714). He was first educated at Stratford upon Avon and then admitted to Winchester College on 8 August 1690 as founder's kin, his grandmother Anne Fiennes being descended from the sister of William of Wykeham. In 1694 he entered New College, Oxford, matriculating on 24 August, and later became a fellow. On 3 October 1696 he also became a student of the Middle Temple. 
On the death of his father in early October 1705 Somervile took up residence at the family home at Edstone and spent the rest of his life there. On 1 February 1708 he married Mary (died 1731), daughter of Hugh Bethell of Rise, Yorkshire. His life was taken up with his responsibilities as a country squire both at Edstone and also at Aston Somerville, Gloucestershire, where his family had long had property. Fair, 6 foot tall, and handsome, he established a reputation as a sociable generous man, popular with his neighbours, and skilful and upright as a local magistrate. He observed his commitments as patron to the parishes of Wootton Wawen, near Edstone, and Aston Somerville, and appreciated the loyalty of those who worked for him, as is evident in the plaque to his servant, Thomas Malbone (died July 1718), at Aston Somerville, and in the epitaph at Wootton Wawen to his butler James Boeter who died in January 1719 after a hunting accident. 
Somervile had two major interests, writing poetry and hunting. His first major work written by 1708 was 'The Wicker Chair', a lively recollection by the character of a Vale of Evesham farmer of his exploits at Robert Dover's Cotswold Games. Like the drafts of many of his poems, the text circulated in manuscript before being published, with revisions, as 'Hobbinol, or, The Rural Games', a burlesque dedicated to Hogarth, in 1740. Other early poems reflected his whig sympathies, typical being his 1712 tribute to the duke of Marlborough when the ministers of Queen Anne removed him from all his offices. His first published poem was 'The Two Springs, a Fable' (1725). The title of his second published work, 'Occasional Poems, Translations, Fables, Tales, &c' (1727) indicated the variety of his output. 
Somervile's major poem was 'The Chace', published in 1735 and dedicated to Frederick, prince of Wales. In four books of blank verse he conveyed the excitement and dangers of the chase as well as its place in history. This poem was followed less successfully with 'Field Sports' in 1742. Dr Johnson was grudging in his comments on Somervile as a poet, saying that he 'set a good example to men of his own class' ('British Poets', 36.6), but Somervile was at his best when writing with vitality and enthusiasm about a topic he knew well, especially if it conveyed his love of the countryside. His occasional poems have a genuine but mannered control, whereas in his fables and tales, the moral tends to be laboured. 
Somervile's poetry brought him into contact with other writers. He developed a lengthy literary relationship with Allan Ramsay, the Scottish poet who admired his works. He encouraged William Shenstone and Richard Jago. He exchanged ideas about literature and landscape gardening with Lady Luxborough, Bolingbroke's half-sister, who lived nearby at Barrels, Ullenhall, Warwickshire. 
Somervile's hunting exploits were well known in the locality. He disapproved of coursing, but he took an active part in hunting, his favourite horse Old Ball being used three days a week during the season. His kennels included twelve couples of beagles, six couples of fox-hounds, and five couples of otter-hounds. Such an establishment cost money, and Somervile was beset with financial problems during his years at Edstone. The income from his estates amounted to $1500 a year but he had to provide an annuity of $600 for his widowed mother who lived to the age of ninety-eight and died a month before him. By 1730 he was so much in debt (and had no children to inherit his property), that he arranged that his friend and cousin, James, thirteenth Lord Somerville of the Scottish peerage, would underwrite him financially with a reversion of his estates after his death. 
On 5 September 1731 Somervile's wife died and was buried at Wootton Wawen. 'My House is now a House of Mourning', he wrote to Lord Somerville (BL, Add. MS 44885A). His financial position did not improve, and his kind nature did not help. In September 1734 he was owed more than $1000 by his Aston Somerville tenants. By 1737 he felt he was growing too old for field sports, but he continued to circulate poetic compositions and his translation of Voltaire's 'Alzire' was well received. He was still well-respected locally, two hundred attending a dinner in his honour when he was sixty-five. 
Somervile died at Edstone on 17 July 1742 and was buried on 20 July alongside his wife in the chantry chapel of the church at Wootton Wawen. An epitaph composed by him marks the stone. Shenstone most aptly summarized the feeling of his friends, much of the expression being later used by Dr Johnson: 'Our old friend Somervile is dead! I did not imagine I could have been so sorry... I can now excuse all his foibles; impute them to age, and to distress of circumstances... For a man of high spirit, conscious of having (at least in one production) generally pleased the world, to be plagued and threatened by wretches that are low in every sense; to be forced to drink himself into pains of the body in order to get rid of the pains of the mind, is a misery... I loved him for nothing so much as his flocci-nauci-nihili-pili-fication of money. ('Letters', 55-6)' 



@@@@@


doc= 26027


Somerville, William (1771-1860), military surgeon, eldest son of the Presbyterian minister and historian Thomas Somerville (1741-1830) and his wife, Martha, daughter of Samuel Charters, was born at Minto, Roxburghshire, on 22 April 1771. He trained as a surgeon, entered the army as a hospital assistant on 25 March 1795, accompanied the expedition of Sir James Henry Craig to the Cape of Good Hope in 1795, and was appointed garrison surgeon of Cape Town on its capture by the British. He was employed on confidential missions by the government in the negotiation of treaties with the Xhosa peoples, who continued to make inroads on the farms of the Dutch colonists. In the course of his wanderings, he and his native guide were at one time sentenced to death by a chief, and owed their lives to the intercession of the chief's wife. During an interval in his African travels Somerville graduated as doctor of medicine in the University of Aberdeen, on 27 June 1800. His longest and most important journey was undertaken in 1801-2, as co-commissioner with John Truter, member of the court of justice, for the Cape government, to negotiate the purchase of cattle from the tribes of the interior, to replace those lost by the colonists in the Cape Frontier War. The expedition reached Lithako, the kraal of the Batlapin people, 700 miles from their starting point, and 300 from the frontier of the colony, in a region then rarely visited by Europeans. The journey is described in an appendix to Sir John Barrow's 'Voyage to Cochin China' (1806). 
Somerville accompanied Sir James Craig on his expedition to the Mediterranean, part of the operations against Napoleon in 1805. When failing health compelled Craig to resign his command at the end of a year, during which Naples and Sicily had been successively occupied, Somerville returned to England with him, and was again on Craig's staff when his partial recovery enabled the latter to go out to Canada as governor-in-chief in 1807. The post of inspector-general of hospitals in Canada was held by Somerville, together with the comptrollership of the customs in Quebec, until 1811, when he returned to England with his chief, and remained in attendance on him until Craig's death in February 1812. His prospects abroad were renounced for a home appointment on his marriage, in 1812, to his cousin, Mrs Greig, 'nee' Fairfax, who became better known as the scientist and mathematician Mary Somerville (1780-1872); they had two daughters, Martha and Mary. 
After holding for a short time the post of deputy inspector of hospitals at Portsmouth, Somerville became in 1813 head of the army medical department in Scotland, and resided in Edinburgh until his appointment in 1816 as one of the principal inspectors of the army medical board in England, when he moved to London. Admitted LRCP on 27 June 1817, he was elected FRS on 11 December, and, on 13 November 1819, gazetted physician to the Royal Hospital, Chelsea. His serious illness in 1838 compelled his family to winter abroad, and from then to live mainly on the continent. He died suddenly at Casa Capponi, Florence, on 25 June 1860, and was buried in the Protestant cemetery at Florence. A man of considerable endowments, Somerville shared the scientific interests as well as the social success of his wife, and after his marriage seemed to merge all personal ambition in the interest of her career. 


@@@@@


doc= 26028


Somerville, William Meredyth, first Baron Athlumney and first Baron Meredyth (1802-1873), politician, was the son of Sir Marcus Somerville, third baronet (died 1831), and his first wife, Mary Anne, daughter and heir of Sir Richard Meredyth, bt. He was educated at Harrow School and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in February 1822, but did not take a degree. He succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his father in 1831. After a short period in the diplomatic service, on 22 December 1832 Somerville married the Hon. Maria Harriet Conyngham, with whom he had one son and one daughter surviving. His wife died on 3 December 1843. 
In January 1835 Somerville stood unsuccessfully as a Liberal candidate for Wenlock. In August 1837 he was returned for Drogheda, which he represented for fifteen years. From his second session onwards he spoke frequently on Irish questions from the viewpoint of a Liberal landlord. In 1841 (3 June) he made a strong speech in support of Lord Melbourne, whose ministry was overthrown by a vote of one in Peel's motion for a vote of censure. Somerville was of the view that the repeal of the corn laws was the best way to modernize the Irish farming system. Later, in 1846 (30 March), he opposed the postponement of Peel's 'Corn Bill' in favour of the 'Protection of Life in Ireland Bill'. The motion was rejected by 147 to 108 votes. However, when, on 17 April, the repressive measure was introduced, he denounced it as unnecessary and likely to be ineffective. On 8 June he moved its rejection on the second reading, and after six nights' debate succeeded, with the aid of the protectionists, in defeating the bill and overthrowing the tory government. 
In Lord John Russell's new whig government Somerville became under-secretary for the Home department. In July 1847 he was appointed chief secretary for Ireland and sworn of the privy council. During his term of office he had to deal with the Irish famine and the Young Ireland movement. He was appointed to the new, separate, Irish poor-law commission in 1847. In September of that year he was alarmed at the prospect that poor-law guardians would have to finance the fever hospitals set up in the wake of the famine 'knowing as I do that the cessation of the accustomed [government] funds even for one day may cause effects the most deplorable and disastrous' (Woodham-Smith, 314). The Treasury eventually agreed to a subsidy. In 1848 he introduced a land bill that would have given a measure of security to tenants in Ireland, but it foundered amid opposition from landlords. Two years later he was more successful in piloting the 'Irish Franchise Act' (13 & 14 Vict. c. 69), 'the single most important legislative influence upon the make up of the electorate and the course of electoral politics in nineteenth century Ireland', according to one authority (Hoppen, 17). The act made voter registration a process of automatic renewal, and established a new franchise on the basis of the occupation, rather than the ownership, of property. 
When Lord John Russell's ministry fell in February 1852, Somerville ceased to be chief secretary, and at the general election in the following July lost his seat for Drogheda. After a two years' absence from parliament, he was returned at a by-election for Canterbury on 18 August 1854. During the next few years he spoke on many topics in the house: favouring the abolition of church rates (1855); considering the bill dealing with dwellings of Irish labourers; supporting Roebuck's motion for the abolition of the Irish viceroyalty 'for imperial as well as Irish reasons'; and bringing in a bill whose aim was to remove legal impediments to Roman Catholics who might wish to become Irish chancellor (1859). The bill received the support of leaders of both parties, but, after reference to a select committee, was withdrawn. On 16 October 1860 in Paris Somerville married Maria Georgiana Elizabeth Jones (1831-1899), with whom he had several daughters and two sons. On 14 December 1863 he was created a peer of Ireland, with the title of Baron Athlumney of Somerville and Dollardstown; on 3 May 1866 he was raised to the peerage of the United Kingdom as Baron Meredyth of Dollardstown, co. Meath, in which county lay his family estates of some 10,000 acres. In his last speech in the House of Commons (21 June 1864) he expressed his opinion against any further interference between landlord and tenant in Ireland. In the House of Lords he supported Lord Clanricarde's bill of 1867 to simplify tenure of Irish land, declaring his preference for emigration over legislative interference. Nevertheless, he supported Gladstone's 'Land Bill' of 1870, taking considerable part in the discussions in committee. He also gave a warm support to the 'Irish Church Bill', having been an early supporter of concurrent endowment. He died at Waterloo Crescent, Dover, on 7 December 1873, and was buried at Kentstones, co. Meath, on 13 December. He was survived by his second wife and was succeeded in the peerage by his son James Herbert Gustavus Meredyth Somerville. 


@@@@@


doc= 26029


Somer, William (d. 1559), court fool, is of unknown parentage and place of origin. According to James Granger, Somer 'was some time a servant in the family of Richard Farmor, esq. of Eston Neston, in Northamptonshire' (Granger, 149), but there is no independent evidence to verify this claim. He was in Henry VIII's service by 28 June 1535, and went on to serve Edward VI, a warrant of whose reign dated 1551 authorized payment of 40's'. to one William Seyton, 'whom his Majestie hath appointed to keape William Somer' (Nichols, 1.xliv-xlv n.c.). Mary Tudor also found a place for Somer in her court, providing him with clothing for both ordinary and ceremonial occasions, including a supply of 'handkerchevers of Holland', presumably intended for wiping nose and mouth to deal with a natural condition or illness. Somer was in attendance at the coronation of Elizabeth on 15 January 1559, but is not known to have served her as court fool. He died later that year, on 15 June, and was buried at St Leonard, Shoreditch, London. 
We know more of his clothes than of Somer the man. Aside from the possibly indicative supply of lesser linen mentioned above, there are numerous records of gifts of clothing, especially for ceremonial and masquing events. He was provided with a royal livery for wear at court, and with sometimes lavish costume for disguisings. At Henry's court he is most often mentioned in connection with the musical 'schola' Henry drew together. Whether his association with these professionals was collaborative or, more likely, in the nature of comic burlesque is not known. 
There are excellent visual sources for Somer's appearance. A psalter prepared for Henry's use by the French artist Jean Mallard in 1540 (BL, Royal MS 2.A.XVI) contains a colour illustration (fol. 63'v') referring to a verse from 'Psalm 52': 'Dixit insipiens in corde suo non est Deus' ('The fool has said in his heart there is no God'). Henry is depicted as the psalmist David, while Somer is shown as a stocky man, dressed in a green knee-length coat and wearing a purse at his belt, with short-cropped hair, hands clasped in front of him, staring anxious eyes, and raised and perhaps slightly deformed shoulders. A second illustration, a fictionalized portrait of Henry's family painted about 1545 by an unknown artist (Royal Collection), confirms Somer's physical characteristics. He occupies an archway at extreme right of the painting, remote from the main tableau but still in the picture. A pet monkey perched on his shoulder may represent one of the animated props associated with the court fool. 
The layout of the family portrait reflects the position of Somer as favoured royal retainer. John Southworth places him in the category of 'innocent', or mental inadequate, rather than professional fool, in accordance with the visual sources and the payment, mentioned above, to his 'keeper'. The familiar account of him as witty adviser and corrector of royal excesses, appearing in plays such as 'Misogonus' (first performed 1564-77?), in Thomas Nashe's 'Summer's Last will and Testament' (1592), and in Samuel Rowley's 'When You See Me, You Know Me' (1605), probably owes more to posthumous myth making than to fact. Nashe's punning use of the proper name with its final 's' may be responsible for fixing in the popular and scholarly mind a usage for which there is no warrant in documents contemporary with Somer. Two jest books offered as biographical histories, Robert Armin's 'Foole upon Foole' (1600, expanded as 'A Nest of Ninnies', 1608) and the anonymous 'A Pleasant History of the Life and Death of Will Summers' (1676), provide numerous anecdotes, many of them representing standard jests. Armin's account of Somer's tendency to fall into sudden sleep in unexpected places may nevertheless reflect a genuine and progressive illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 26030


Somner, William (bap. 1598, d. 1669), antiquary and Anglo-Saxon scholar, was baptized on 5 November 1598 at St Margaret's, Canterbury, one of three sons of William Somner, registrar of the court of Canterbury, and his wife, Anne Winston. His widow and son believed his birth date to be 30 March 1606 (Kennett, 3.119). He was educated by Mr Ludd at the free school of Canterbury. He became a clerk to his father, and was subsequently appointed registrar of the ecclesiastical courts of Canterbury by Archbishop Laud. 
Somner was twice married, first on 12 June 1634 to Elizabeth ('b'. 1599), daughter of William Thurgar of Teversham, Cambridgeshire, and second on 1 December 1659 to Barbara (died 1706), daughter of John Dawson, the chief searcher of Kent. After Somner's death she married Henry Hanningham, vicar of Elham, Kent. His first marriage produced one son and three daughters, the second one daughter and three sons. 
Canterbury was Somner's home throughout his life, and the focus of his antiquarian endeavours. These were encouraged by his colleague Meric Casaubon, whom Somner described as his 'precious friend and ever-honoured Mecoenas' ('Treatise of Gavelkind', 1660, preface). His first publication was 'The antiquities of Canterbury, or, A survey of that ancient citie, with the suburbs and cathedrall, etc.' (1640, reissued 1662; 2nd edn by Nicholas Batteley, 1703). The book was dedicated to his patron Laud, praised for his preservation of antiquities. The text is thoroughly Laudian, describing Becket's shrine as the 'glory' of Canterbury 'cut down' at the Reformation (pp. 245-51), and calling for the restoration 'to each Parochial Church and Chapell the forgotten name and memory of such Saint or Saints, as at their dedication... were given (and are therefore proper) to them' (p. 510). It is said to be the first book published with an appendix containing original records (S. Pegge, 'Anonymiana', 1809, 7). Somner made further collections for a history of Kent. In 1647 he wrote 'A treatise of gavelkind, both name and thing' (1660), noting in the preface his failure to produce a county history since the civil war had necessitated 'other thoughts, chiefly how I might secure my self against the fury... of the present storm'. 
Somner, a keen royalist, attempted to hide the muniments of Canterbury from iconoclastic parliamentary soldiers, and was responsible for preserving the pieces of the cathedral's font, smashed in 1642, for reconstruction in 1660. The loss of patronage after Laud's fall did not deter Somner from promoting the royal cause. Early in 1649 he published a passionate elegy entitled 'The in-securitie of princes, considered in an occasionall meditation upon the kings late sufferings and death', describing Charles as 'a myrror fit for all posterity' and 'three Kingdoms choicest treasure'. This was followed by 'The frontispiece of the kings book opened' (1650?), an exposition of the portrait of Charles I in 'Eikon basilike' and a call to recognize Charles II as king. 
The turbulence of the period hampered Somner's access to libraries, as he complained to Sir Simonds D'Ewes in 1649 (BL, Add. MS 22916, fol. 57). Nevertheless, at Casaubon's suggestion Somner devoted himself to learning Anglo-Saxon. Together with legal skills gained from his employment, this enabled him to complete a Latin commentary and glossary on the laws of Henry I (BL, Harleian MS 684). The work was dedicated to Sir Roger Twysden, who in 1644 had published the Henrician statutes. In 1650 Casaubon published Somner's 'Ad verba vetera Germanica' as an appendix to his 'De quatuor linguis commentationis'. Somner's varied talents were employed by William Dugdale and Roger Dodsworth in the first volume of 'Monasticon Anglicanum' (1655), for which he translated Anglo-Saxon documents into English and provided information on Kent's religious houses. In 1656 he published 'Iulii Caesaris portus Iccius', a reply to J. J. Chifflet on the Roman expeditions to Britain, which survives in E. Gibson's 1694 edition of both works. 
In 1657 Archbishop Ussher persuaded Roger Spelman to present Somner with the Anglo-Saxon lectureship at Cambridge founded by his grandfather Henry Spelman. This provided financial support for his most important work, the magisterial 'Dictionarium Saxonico-Latino-Anglicum, voces, phrasesque praecipuas Anglo-Saxonicas... cum Latina et Anglica vocum interpretatione complectens' (1659). Although, as the author admitted, it was not without errors, the dictionary enabled Anglo-Saxon studies to flourish. Demand for it caused the issue of a second edition in 1701 by Thomas Benson entitled 'Vocabularium Anglo-Saxonicum'. 
In 1659 Somner was imprisoned in Deal Castle after soliciting petitions for a free parliament, but was rewarded at the Restoration with the mastership of St John's Hospital, Canterbury, and the office of auditor of Canterbury Cathedral, a position he occupied until his death. The breadth of Somner's interests, his linguistic abilities, and the disciplined scholarship of his publications, led to a well-deserved reputation. He corresponded with many renowned antiquaries and he was the first port of call for anyone interested in Anglo-Saxon. Some of his Kent collections were published posthumously as 'Chartham news, or, A brief relation of some strange bones there lately digged up, in some grounds of Mr. J. Somner's, of Canterbury' (1669), and 'A Treatise of the Roman Ports and Forts in Kent' (1693) which included a 'Life of Somner' by Bishop Kennett. Somner died in Canterbury on 30 March 1669 and was buried on 2 April at St Margaret's, Canterbury, where a tablet was erected several years later in praise of his scholarship, piety, and royalism. 


@@@@@


doc= 26031


Sondes, George, first earl of Feversham (1599-1677), politician, was born in November 1599 at Lees Court, in the parish of Sheldwich, near Feversham in Kent, the son and heir of Sir Richard Sondes (1571-1645) of Throwley in the same county and afterwards of Lees Court, and his wife, Susan, daughter of Sir Edward Montagu (1532-1602) of Boughton in Weekley, Northamptonshire. He was of an old Kentish family, and his grandfather Sir Michael Sondes lived in Sheldwich from 1576 to 1587. George was educated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he entered in 1615 and where his tutor was Dr Preston, but he does not appear to have proceeded to a degree. On 10 September 1620 he married Jane (1603-1637), daughter and heir of Ralph Freeman of Aspeden, Hertfordshire, lord mayor of London in 1633-4. They had three children -- Freeman, who died in infancy, George, and a younger son, also called Freeman. Sondes was created KB on 1 February 1626 upon Charles I's coronation, and he represented Higham Ferrers in Northamptonshire in the parliament of 1628-9, while as a staunch royalist he was made sheriff of Kent in 1637-8. He sought election as knight of the shire in 1640, but failed. On the outbreak of the civil war he was named a deputy lieutenant for Kent, and was on the royalist committee for the county in 1643, despite having resolved, as he later claimed, 'to sit still, and not do' (Ferris, 457). 
When the parliamentary cause proved triumphant Sondes suffered greatly in his estate, and was imprisoned from 1645, first in Upnor Castle and then in the Tower; he was released in May 1650, but not finally discharged until 25 June following, after compounding for his estate by a payment of $3350. Altogether he computed that he lost not less than $30,000 by the civil war. On his release, however, he began rebuilding Lees Court from the plans of Inigo Jones, but his pursuits were interrupted by a terrible calamity which befell him in 1655. On 7 August in that year his younger son, Freeman, a sullen youth of eighteen or nineteen, apparently actuated by jealousy, killed his elder brother, George, who was asleep in an upper room in Lees Court, by a deadly blow on the back of the head with a cleaver. The murderer, who at once apprised his father of his crime, was taken to Maidstone next day and arraigned at Maidstone assize on 9 August. He pleaded guilty, was sentenced to death, and was hanged at Maidstone on 21 August, meeting his end with resignation. The fratricide proved a fruitful theme for the pulpit, and is still memorable on account of the curious pamphlet literature that it evoked. Robert Boreman at once issued 'A mirrour of mercy and judgment, or, An exact true narrative of the life and death of Freeman Sonds, esq.' (1655). Other ministers and godly men of the vicinity, less compassionate than Boreman, traced the 'visitation' to Sondes's own moral remissness. He had failed (it was said) to continue the endowment of Throwley Free School as purposed by his father, had improperly executed the will of his father-in-law, Sir Ralph Freeman, and had generally mismanaged his sons' education. Sir George answered the charges with humility in a 'Plaine Narrative to the World of All Passages upon the Death of his Two Sonnes' (1655); this is scarcely less steeped in religious sentiment than Robert Boreman's avowedly edifying tract. There followed from other pens 'The devils reign upon earth: being a relation of several sad and bloudy murthers lately committed, especially that of Sir George Sonds his son upon his own brother' (1655) and 'A funeral elegie upon the death of George Sonds, esq.... by William Annand Junior of Throwllgh, whereunto is annexed a prayer compiled by his sorrowful father' (1655). 
On 25 February 1656 Sondes married Mary (died 1688), daughter of Sir William Villiers, bt, of Brooksby. They had two daughters, Mary ('bap'. 1657), who on 19 March 1676 married Louis Duras, Baron Duras of Holdenby, and Katherine ('bap'. 1658), who married Lewis Watson in 1677. On the Restoration, Sondes was again appointed deputy lieutenant for Kent. In a bid to avoid forfeiture of property in consequence of his youngest son's felony, he returned to parliament for the first time in thirty-two years, representing Ashburton, Devon, from 1661 to 1676. An almost entirely inactive parliamentarian, it was due solely to the services of his son-in-law, Lord Duras, favourite and close confidant of the duke of York, that in 1676 he was created baron of Throwley, Viscount Sondes of Lees Court, and earl of Feversham, with remainder to Duras, who succeeded him when he died at Lees Court on 16 April 1677; Sondes was buried at Throwley on 30 April. Thomas Southouse had dedicated his 'Monasticon Favershamiense' to him in 1671. Sondes's second son-in-law, Lewis Watson, in 1689 became Baron Rockingham, and upon the death of the second earl of Feversham was created Baron Throwley, Viscount Sondes of Lees Court, and earl of Rockingham (19 October 1714). 


@@@@@


doc= 26032


Soone, William (fl. 1545-c.1575), civil lawyer and map maker, was of unknown parentage. He graduated BA at Cambridge in 1545 and proceeded MA in 1549. He became a doctor of canon and civil law, probably at a university on the continent. The bursar's accounts at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, show that he was resident at Gonville Hall, probably as a fellow, from 1548 to 1555. In 1561 he became regius professor of civil law and in June he was admitted as a fellow of Trinity Hall. He had probably left Trinity Hall by 1563, when he was succeeded in his professorship by William Clerke. His reason for leaving was that he would not conform to the new protestant service. 
Soone is said to have lived in Paris, Dole, Freiburg, and Padua and was professor of law for some time at Louvain. From there he moved to Antwerp where he probably acted as Abraham Ortelius's assistant, perhaps because of his expertise as a map maker. In 1572 he was at Cologne, where he published 'Gulielmi Sooni Vantesdeni auditor, sive, Pomponius Mela disputator de situ orbis', a copy of which is in the British Library. Ortelius complained to Soone that part of the book, the 'Novi incolae orbis terrarum', was copied from that of Arnold Mylius published by Ortelius in his 1570 version of the 'Theatrum'. Soone wrote to Ortelius from Cologne on 31 August 1572, and offered some rather weak explanations for this. Soone also copied the map of Cambridge drawn by Richard Lyne for Thomas Caius's 'History of the University' (1574) and published it in Braun's and Remigius Hogenberg's 'Civitates orbis terrarum' ('c'.1575) along with a description of the university. He was working as an auditor in Cologne by 1573 but decided that his legal and administrative skills could be put to better use in Rome, where Gregory XIII appointed him 'podesta' of a town within the Papal States. 


@@@@@


doc= 26033


Sopwith, Thomas (1803-1879), surveyor and civil engineer, was born on 3 January 1803 in Pilgrim Street, Newcastle upon Tyne, possibly the only son of Jacob Sopwith (1770-1829), builder and cabinet-maker, and his wife, Isabella, daughter of Matthew Lowes. Sopwith developed early aptitudes for writing, drawing, and the cataloguing of minerals. He was educated privately, but briefly, on Tyneside, before being apprenticed to his father as a cabinet-maker. 
In 1822 Sopwith commenced a diary (which he continued until his death), designed a new gaol for Newcastle, for which he was awarded 10 guineas, and was admitted a free burgess of the corporation of Newcastle. Despite his training as a cabinet-maker, Sopwith was determined to become a land surveyor; accordingly, as soon as his apprenticeship was completed, he joined Joseph Dickinson of Alston in his survey of the Greenwich Hospital's Alston Moor mines, and soon went into partnership with him. By 1824 or 1825, while he was still based at Alston, Sopwith had already undertaken surveys for the Newcastle and Carlisle Railway and the corporation of Newcastle; he also learned to play the organ. In 1826 his 'Account of All Saints Church [Newcastle]' was published. On 2 September 1828 he married Mary Dickenson of Alston, daughter of a principal agent to the Greenwich Hospital; their only child, Jacob, was born on 24 July 1829. Mary died seven days later, and Sopwith's father died in October of the same year. Although concentrating on surveying, Sopwith and his cousin, John Sopwith, continued the cabinet-making business. This was not just out of filial piety, as Sopwith was particularly proud of his 'monocleid writing cabinet' design with its central locking system. 
Sopwith returned to Newcastle in 1830 and surveyed a new line for the Ponteland turnpike. On 1 February in the following year he married Jane Scott ('c'.1807-1855) of Ross, Northumberland; they had three sons and four daughters. In 1832 Sopwith was elected to the Institution of Civil Engineers and took an office in the newly opened Royal Arcade, Newcastle, embarking on a busy life as a consulting surveyor. He published his 'Account of Alston Moor' in 1833, and his 'Treatise on Isometric Drawing' in 1834, the latter following systematic study over two years. He was also to publish about eighteen articles. He undertook many commissions in the years 1832-45, including street improvements in the city of Newcastle, surveys of the minerals in the Forest of Dean (leading to his appointment as crown commissioner for the forest), and work on several railways in England and on the Sambre and Meuse Railway in Belgium. Through all these activities he came to know, and sometimes to work with, engineers such as George and Robert Stephenson, Isambard Kingdom Brunel, William Cubitt, and W. G. Armstrong; and among his friends he included Decimus Burton, Charles Landseer, Charles Barry, Rowland Hill, and professors Sedgwick and Faraday. 
At the 1838 British Association meeting in Newcastle, Sopwith argued for the necessity of preserving mining records. In 1845 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society and became chief agent to the W. B. [Lead] Company centred at Allenheads, whereupon he agreed to give up all other professional interests except that of commissioner for woods and forests. He accepted this radical change because the post at Allenheads offered him an important job for the rest of his life, with the provision of comfort in old age. It would also take him back to an area he had come to love, and it would enable him to make Allenheads his main family home. However, he continued to keep a house in Newcastle, and one in London from about 1845. As agent at Allenheads, Sopwith developed the mines; built schools, libraries, and chapels; improved cottages; and encouraged mutual improvement and benefit societies for the workers and their families. He introduced a system of mine surveying and plan production of considerable intricacy, producing some of the earliest detailed mine plans. The limitations of two-dimensional plans, even when drawn isometrically, led him to develop highly regarded three-dimensional geological models in wood, which were constructed in the cabinet-making works. His only setback, in an otherwise successful professional life, came with the Allenheads strike in 1849, when he insisted on enforcing time clauses in miners' bargains. Some miners, led by local Primitive Methodists, refused to accept these bargains and a strike ensued. It was a time of labour surplus, and while the miners hoped for concessions he made none. Described by a friend as the very soul of order and of exactitude, he was in fact obsessive about punctuality. The strike collapsed after four months, and thereafter work was denied to many: some sixty men, women, and children left the dale on one day in May to seek work in America. 
Sopwith was not vindictive after the strike and helped various Methodist societies, for example; but he remained uneasy about the strike even in his last years. Although not active in politics, he supported universal suffrage and annual elections, and welcomed the entry of working-class MPs into the Commons, believing that they would lead to an extension of liberal views or a new political party. He was able, no doubt, to express such views both among his influential friends and within some of the twenty-six learned societies to which he belonged. 
A dispute with the owner of the Allenheads company, W. B. Beaumont, caused Sopwith to offer his resignation in 1857 (the year in which the University of Durham awarded him an honorary MA), though this was not accepted. He was subsequently allowed to undertake the management from London and returned to Allenheads in 1860. His third marriage, to Anne, daughter of Addison Longhorne Potter of Heaton Hall, took place on 29 September 1858. Sopwith finally retired from his position, and all professional life, in 1871. He died from heart disease at his house, 103 Victoria Street, London, on 16 January 1879, and was buried at Norwood cemetery. His third wife survived him. One of his grandsons was the pioneering aviation engineer Sir Thomas Sopwith (1888-1989). 


@@@@@


doc= 26034


Sorocold, Thomas (1561/2-1617), Church of England clergyman, was born in Lancashire. Of his parents it is known only that his father survived him and must therefore have lived to a very great age indeed. Sorocold may have been related to Ralph Sorocold, a wealthy merchant of Manchester, and have come under the tutorship of Oliver Carter, fellow and subdean of Manchester collegiate church. On 10 December 1579 the executors of the will of Philip Nowell, the educational benefactor, provided 10's'. for 'Thomas Sorrocold, scholare of Manchester, commended by certen gentlemen and Mr Carter' (Grosart, 2.170). Sorocold matriculated on 18 July 1580, aged eighteen, from Brasenose College, Oxford, graduating BA on 6 February 1583 and MA on 8 July 1585. After his ordination he returned to Lancashire and became a preacher there; among his more illustrious hearers was the earl of Derby, at his chapel at Lathom House in July 1587. On 22 October 1590 Sorocold was instituted to the rectory of St Mildred Poultry in London. On 4 August 1592 he was granted a licence to marry Susan, daughter of Richard Smith, a grocer of St Benet Sherehog, with whom he had a daughter, also named Susan, baptized on 12 March 1597. Susan Sorocold was buried in the chancel of St Mildred's on 16 March 1605. 
The work for which Sorocold is chiefly remembered is his 'Supplications of Saints', a devotional aid containing a meditation on Christ's life, death, and passion, aimed at a wide audience. Registered with the Stationers' Company in 1608, it went through nearly fifty editions by 1723; in the third edition of 1617, dedicated to Prince Charles, Sorocold recalled that Princess Elizabeth, before going with her husband to the Palatinate in 1613, had consented to sponsor the work. In his will, dated 7 December 1617, Sorocold requested that he be buried as near as possible to 'my deceased wife' Susan. To Elizabeth, his wife at the time of his death, he bequeathed a little house and garden 'neer the Moorefeildes in the suburbs of London' (LMA, DL/C/360/Thomas Sorocold, X19/5, fol. 313), while her son Thomas Methwold received a gold piece. Sorocold's interest in property in Salford, near Manchester, where his father was still living, went to his daughter Susan. Sorocold was buried at St Mildred Poultry on 12 December 1617. 


@@@@@


doc= 26035


Charles Sotheby (1782/3-1854), William Sotheby's second and eldest surviving son, who succeeded to Sewardstone Manor, entered the Royal Naval Academy in 1795. He was a midshipman at the battle of the Nile in 1798, took part in the operations in Egypt in 1801, and fought against the Turks in 1807. He was appointed to the acting command of the 'Pilot' in March 1809, and confirmed in the rank of commander on 8 January 1810, going on to serve on several vessels. On 15 February 1819 he married the Hon. Jane Hamilton (died 1820), third daughter of William, seventh Lord Belhaven and Stenton. Charles Sotheby was appointed to the 'Seringapatam' in 1824, and was active in suppressing piracy in the Mediterranean. After the death of his first wife, he later married his cousin Mary Anne, daughter of Admiral Thomas Sotheby, and Lady Mary Anne Sotheby, on 18 November 1830. He attained flag rank on 20 March 1848, and died rear-admiral of the red at his home at 38 Lowndes Square on 26 January 1854. Charles's and his first wife's eldest son, Charles William Hamilton Sotheby (1820-1887), high sheriff of Northamptonshire in 1881, succeeded to the Ecton estates in that year on the death of his cousin, Ambrose Isted, and sold Sewardstone in 1884; his half-brother, Major-General Frederick Edward Sotheby, succeeded to Ecton on his death in 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 26036


Samuel Sotheby (1771-1842). He was the eldest of nine children and was born at Woodford in Essex on 14 July 1771. Baker had been his godfather. The firm now changed its style to Leigh, Sotheby & Son. After his uncle's death in 1778 John, who had lived in Charlotte Street, Bloomsbury, inherited Baker's house in Chigwell and moved there. 
For some reason, never fully explained, a serious altercation occurred between the two senior partners in 1804, as a consequence of which George Leigh and young Sam took themselves off to new premises at 145 Strand. John Sotheby remained in the firm's original premises in York Street, Covent Garden; he held two more sales there, then closed the business and retired. He sold his library through another auctioneer and died four years later on 11 November 1807. He was buried in St Paul's churchyard, Covent Garden. 
Samuel Sotheby married Harriet Barton on 13 October 1803, and they lived in Hampstead. Harriet gave birth to two sons and two daughters before she died on 7 July 1808. Nine years later, on 12 May 1818 at Cheltenham, Sotheby married again. His second wife was Laura Smith, daughter of Christmas Smith of Bideford, Devon, and Porto, Portugal. Although she had two children, both died in infancy and she herself died on 30 April 1827. 
Continuing growth forced the firm to move again to 3 Waterloo Bridge Street (later renamed 13 Wellington Street). It was now selling not only libraries, but also increasing numbers of prints, coins, drawings, watercolours, even paintings, as well as other forms of the decorative arts. Soon after George Leigh's death, Samuel Sotheby took into the business his second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 26037


Samuel Leigh Sotheby (1805-1861), who was born on 31 August 1805 in Hampstead; George Leigh had been his godfather. S. L. Sotheby married at St Luke, Chelsea, on 11 May 1843 his first cousin, Julia Emma Pitcher (1818-1898), youngest of the six children of Henry Jones Pitcher (1779-1849) of Northfleet, Kent, a book dealer, and Anne Sotheby. 
Samuel Leigh had a keen analytical mind and soon proved to be an adept partner in the business. It was a happy partnership, for father and son shared many interests, and indeed they became virtually fused into a single personality in the public mind. One of their strongest interests was the study of early printing and typography. They were in a wonderful position to appreciate it, for a constant stream of relevant raw material passed through their rooms and had to be scrutinized very carefully before being catalogued. 
In the troubled economic circumstances after the Napoleonic wars the firm ran into difficulties. According to a notice that appeared in 'The Times' on 25 November 1825, Samuel Sotheby of Wellington Street, Strand, auctioneer, was declared insolvent, and this was followed on 5 December with the dates of the proceedings in the bankruptcy court. It was presumably for this reason that Samuel Leigh began to take a more prominent role; Samuel Sotheby retired from the business, and in 1828 the firm sold its own entire run of bound and annotated copies of its sale catalogues down to that year. Over 700 of these sales -- which included many of the most important libraries in the land -- had taken place since Samuel Sotheby had begun to work in the auction house. Perhaps the most notable catalogue produced by him was that of the library of the first marquess of Lansdowne (died 1805), who had been a passionate collector of state papers and owned 120 folio volumes of the Burleigh papers. The catalogue was in two volumes, the second running to 444 closely set pages. It aroused so much interest that the British Museum stepped in and bought the collection in its entirety for $4925, granted for this purpose by parliament, and thus no auction ever took place. 
Despite his effective retirement, Samuel Sotheby was declared bankrupt a second time, and the 1836 insolvency may have been the cause of the anonymous sale of his huge library on 9 February 1837. Samuel Sotheby died at Cleves Lodge, Chelsea, on 6 January 1842. He was buried alongside Samuel Baker in St Paul's churchyard. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' was clearly aware of these events when its obituarist wrote: 'the character of the late Mr Sotheby was strictly exemplary in all the relations of private life; and though not so happy as he deserved in realising his fortune in a very arduous profession he retired from it with the good wishes and regret of very many who had long known and highly respected him. ('GM', 17, 1842, 444)' In 1837 Samuel Leigh had changed the firm's title to S. L. Sotheby. Although he now faced the world alone, after nearly a hundred years in existence the firm had achieved an enviable reputation. During the following sixty years it consolidated its standing as the premier auctioneer of antiquarian books. For much of that time Sotheby had the able assistance of John Wilkinson (1803-1895), who had originally joined the firm in 1821 as an accountant but became a brilliant auctioneer, and later its sole manager. He retired in 1885. 
Because he was so familiar with their contents, Samuel Leigh completed and published a number of books on which his father had already spent years of research, including 'The Typography of the Fifteenth Century' (1845). The principal bibliographical work begun by Samuel and completed by Samuel Leigh (after sixteen years' further labour) was 'Principia typographica' (3 vols., 1858). This concerned the early forms of book printing, such as block books, but both father and son had also been fascinated by the watermarks used on paper in the early days of printing and devoted much time to their collection and study. This topic was another important part of the book. There was also collaboration with William Young Ottley, a family friend, and Ottley's son over the eventual publication of each family's own book on this subject. 
In 1835 Samuel Leigh's own curiosity was much excited when the firm received from Frankfurt the 5000 volumes of the library of Dr Georg F. B. Kloss (1787-1854), mostly printed before 1536. Many of these volumes contained marginal annotations which Sotheby thought to be in the hand of Philip Melanchthon, the friend of Martin Luther. His deductions (now not regarded as correct) were published in volume form in 1840 under the title 'Unpublished Documents', but they continued to occupy him for many years. 
In a different vein, Sotheby produced 'Ramblings in the Elucidation of the Autograph of Milton' (1861), and for more than thirty years he was at work on an unpublished 'Bibliographical account of the English poets to the period of Restoration'. His widow, Julia Emma, endeavoured to complete the work, but never did so, and the manuscript was eventually sold to Chetham's Library in Manchester, where it remains. 
Samuel Leigh was also something of a collector. In 1859 he staged an exhibition on the firm's premises of his 'cabinet pictures'. They were mostly the work of a wide range of English artists, including Richard Parkes Bonington, George Cattermole, William Collins, John Sell Cotman, John Constable ('A View of Windsor Castle'), Richard Dadd, William Etty, and A. V. Copley Fielding, many of them given by relatives of the artists. On other occasions he bought them at auction, 'paying more than others'. An informative catalogue survives. He also took a great interest in the management of the Crystal Palace, which had been re-erected near his home, Woodlands, in Norwood. 
Samuel Leigh died suddenly and quite unexpectedly on 19 June 1861. He was subject to fainting fits, and during a ramble near Buckfastleigh Abbey he appears to have fallen into the River Dart and drowned. His library, including all his Melanchthon papers, was sold at Wellington Street on 8 February 1862. He was a man of enormous and diverse enthusiasms who had changed the character of the firm's establishment in Wellington Street into an altogether more interesting and wide-ranging business, where scholarship and, above all, accuracy were regarded as of primary importance. In John Wilkinson he was fortunate to have a partner whose solid but intelligent objectivity tempered his own idiosyncrasies and who was also able to consolidate, profitably, the many innovations that the last of the Sothebys had brought about. 
The very different characters of the three generations of the Sotheby family set the seal on the business that survives to this day. They established the essential methodology of successful auctioneering, creating and consolidating sound administration, scholarship, and precision in cataloguing. This was particularly true of Samuel Leigh, whose questing mind gave the firm a new impetus on which his successors were able to build. 


@@@@@


doc= 26038


Sotheby, William (1757-1833), poet and translator, was born in London on 9 November 1757, the eldest son of William Sotheby (died 1766), colonel of the Coldstream Guards, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1790), daughter of Sir William Sloane, of Stoneham, Hampshire. Sotheby's younger brother Thomas (1759-1831) entered the navy, rose to be an admiral of the white, and was captain of the 'Marlborough' when she was wrecked off the Ile de Giouat, France ('GM', 1831). His father died when Sotheby was eight, and his guardians then became Charles Yorke (1722-1770), lord chancellor, and his maternal uncle, Hans Sloane (1739-1827). Sotheby succeeded to the estate of Sewardstone, on the borders of Epping Forest, Essex, which had been the property of the family since 1673. He was educated at Harrow School, but at the age of seventeen purchased a commission as ensign in the 10th dragoons and went to study at the military academy of Angers. He was subsequently stationed with his regiment at Edinburgh, where he made the acquaintance of the young Walter Scott. On 17 July 1780 he increased his financial resources by marrying Mary (1759-1834), youngest daughter of Ambrose Isted of Ecton, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Anne, sister and coheir of Sir Charles Buck, of Hamby Grange, Lincolnshire. They had five sons, William, Charles, George, Hans, and Frederick, and two daughters, Maria and Harriet Louisa. Sotheby then retired from the army; purchasing Bevis Mount, near Southampton, he began to devote himself to literature, and in particular to a close study of the Latin and Greek classics. 
Sotheby's first publication was a volume of 'Poems' (1790), which comprised an account of a walking tour which he and his brother Thomas had made through north and south Wales in 1788, and a number of sonnets and odes with a heroic epistle to a friend, on physiognomy. The volume was reprinted in 1794, with thirteen engravings by J. Smith. 
Meanwhile, in 1791 Sotheby moved to London, and began to divide his time between the City and his property at Sewardstone, where he occupied Fair Mead Lodge. Like previous owners of Sewardstone, he acted as a master keeper of the adjoining Epping forest. 
Sotheby soon became a prominent figure in London literary circles. He joined the Dilettante Society in 1792, and in 1794 was elected fellow of the Royal Society and of the Society of Antiquaries. He entertained the best-known literary figures of the day, and had a benevolent interest in the struggles of young authors. Scott, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Samuel Rogers, Sir George Beaumont, Mrs Siddons, Joanna Baillie, Maria Edgeworth, Byron, Thomas Moore and Southey were numbered among his guests and intimate associates. Scott, who 'ever retained for him a sincere regard', owed to him on his visits to London 'the personal acquaintance of not a few of their most eminent contemporaries in various departments of literature and art' (Lockhart, 1.452). 
Sotheby made extensive corrections to the proofs of 'Richard I', a poem by his friend Sir James Bland Burges, published in 1800, and in 1809 joined another friend, Sir George Beaumont, in encouraging Coleridge to bring out a literary periodical, entitled 'The Friend'. In 1812 Sotheby, with Beaumont and Sir Thomas Barnard, received subscriptions for Coleridge's 'Lectures on the drama' at Willis's Rooms. 
Sotheby's skill in translation secured for him a wide literary reputation. In 1798, after rapidly acquiring a knowledge of German, he published 'Oberon: a Poem', a translation of Christoph Martin Wieland's 'Oberon', which had already achieved popularity in Europe. Wieland, to whom Sotheby sent a copy of his translation, expressed great satisfaction. A second edition, with illustrations by Fuseli, appeared in 1805. In 1802 Sotheby adapted it as a masque in five acts of blank verse called 'Oberon, or, Huon of Bourdeaux', which he dedicated to George Ellis. 
An equally good reception awaited Sotheby's verse translation of Virgil's 'Georgics', which appeared in 1800 with further editions in 1815 and 1830. Jeffrey, in the 'Edinburgh Review', declared it possibly 'the most perfect translation of a classic poet now extant in our language' ('EdinR' 4, 1804, 303). John Wilson (Christopher North) thought it 'stamped' Sotheby 'the best translator in Christendom' (R. S. Mackenzie, ed., 'Noctes Ambrosianae', 5 vols. (1863-6), 3.456-7). It was reprinted in the sumptuous 'Georgica Publii Virgilii Maronis hexaglotta' in London, at the translator's expense, in 1827. Besides Sotheby's English version of the 'Georgics', it included a Spanish version by John de Guzman; a German version by J. H. Voss; an Italian version by Francesco Soave; and a French version by James Delille. Despite Sotheby's appeals, however, Scott refused to review it. 
Although Byron described Sotheby in his 'English Bards and Scotch Reviewers' (1809) as one who wrote poetry with sincerity, Sotheby's large poetic output was not well received. His verse includes 'The Battle of the Nile' (1799), an ode dedicated to Lord Spencer, first lord of the Admiralty, whose second son was involved in the battle; 'A poetical epistle to Sir George Beaumont, bart., on the encouragement of the British school of painting' (1801); 'Saul' (1807), a blank-verse epic written in two parts; and 'Constance de Castille' (1810), a poem in ten cantos in imitation of Scott's 'Lady of the Lake'. 
Sotheby's attempts at writing tragedy also met with little success. His tragedy 'Bertram and Matilda' was acted privately at Winchester by himself and his friends some time before 1790. He subsequently published at least six other historical tragedies, all in five acts and in blank verse. Only one of these plays appeared on the stage. 'Julian and Agnes, or, The Monks of the Great St Bernard', was acted on 25 April 1800 at Drury Lane, with Sarah Siddons and John Philip Kemble in the leading roles. At a memorable point in the play Sarah Siddons accidentally struck the head of a dummy infant she was carrying against a doorpost, and both the audience and the actress herself were convulsed with laughter. There was no second performance. 
Sotheby's other tragedies were offered to Drury Lane, but were rejected by the actors. In 1816 Byron persuaded the management to accept 'Ivan', but after three or four rehearsals it was withdrawn, as Kean felt unable to make anything of the title-role (Genest, 'Eng. stage', 10.233). Sotheby at once republished the piece as 'Ivan, a Tragedy..., Altered and Adapted for Representation' (1816). Byron insisted at the time, in a letter to Samuel Rogers, that Sotheby had been 'capriciously and evilly entreated' (Clayden, 1.239), but afterwards regretted having befriended Sotheby's 'trash' (Clayden, 1.255). With the exception of Byron, Sotheby retained his many literary friendships throughout his life. In 1818 Byron wrote scathingly of Sotheby's 'airs of patronage which [he] affects with young writers, and affected both to me and of me many a good year' (Clayden, 1.255). Others were more tolerant, however. Coleridge spoke on Homer at one of Sotheby's dinner parties in 1828, and Sotheby visited Scott at Abbotsford as late as autumn 1829. 
Sotheby, who had been greatly distressed by the death of his eldest son, William, colonel in the guards, on 1 August 1815, went on a long tour of Italy in May 1816 with his family and two friends, Professor Elmsley and Dr Playfair. They returned via Germany at the end of the following year. Sotheby published his impressions of his journey in 'Farewell to Italy, and Occasional Poems' (1818), most of which he republished with additions in 'Poems' (1825), and in 'Italy and other Poems' (1828). On returning to London, Sotheby mainly devoted himself to a verse translation of Homer. 'The First Book of the 'Iliad', a Specimen of a New Version of Homer' appeared in 1830, and the whole of the 'Iliad' (in heroics) followed in 1831. Christopher North praised the work in five articles in 'Blackwood's Magazine'. The 'Odyssey' followed in 1834, with a new edition of the 'Iliad', and seventy-five illustrations engraved by Henry Moses from Flaxman's designs. As a translator of Homer, Sotheby, who was much influenced by Pope, was considered by Matthew Arnold to have failed to reproduce Homer's directness of style and diction (Arnold, 10-11). 
Sotheby, wrote Byron, 'has imitated everybody, and occasionally surpassed his models.' Although his poems and plays were held in high esteem by his friends, he is chiefly remembered for his translations of Virgil and Wieland, and for his friendships with the distinguished literary figures of his age. Sotheby died at his home in Lower Grosvenor Street, London, on 30 December 1833, and was buried on 6 January 1834 in the family vault in Hackney churchyard, Middlesex. His wife survived him; she died on 14 October 1834. Wordsworth wrote to Rogers of his grief at the death of 'the veteran Sotheby' (Clayden, 2.87). 
Of Sotheby's other sons, George (1787-1817) entered the East India Company's service, and was killed at Nagpur during the Third Anglo-Maratha War, on 27 November 1817. Hans, also in the service of the East India Company, died on 27 April 1827; Frederick was a colonel in the Bengal artillery and CB, and died in 1870. 


William Sotheby's grandson, Hans William Sotheby (1827-1874), the son of Hans, was a man of erudition, referred to in Jeaffreson's 'Recollections' as 'scholarly, fastidious, chivalric Hans Sotheby' (1.189). He was a fellow of Exeter College, Oxford, from 1851 to 1864, and was a contributor to 'Fraser's Magazine' (December 1860 and January 1861), and to the 'Quarterly Review' (July 1875). 


@@@@@


doc= 26039


Sothel, Seth (d. 1693/4), colonial governor, was born in England; his parents' identity is unknown. By 1675, however, he had sufficient status for the Carolina proprietors to identify him as 'a person of considerable estate here in England' (Cheves, 468-9) who intended to acquire 12,000 acres in Carolina, on which he would establish settlers from England. That plan never came to fruition, but Sothel bought the earl of Clarendon's share of the proprietorship in 1677, and because of the political chaos in the Albemarle settlement (North Carolina), which culminated in 'Culpepper's rebellion', he agreed to serve as governor of the area. On the voyage out north African pirates captured and held him for ransom at Algiers, where he spent time at hard labour before being freed two years later. Characteristically, he failed to recompense those who had posted bond for him until forced to do so by legal action. 
In 1682 Sothel arrived at Albemarle, where he governed relatively well at first. He also received land grants for two seignories totalling 24,000 acres, participated in the American Indian trade, and in the second half of 1686 married a wealthy widow, Anna Blount, 'nee' Willix. The marriage remained childless but, behaving as if he had a large family to support, Sothel soon became extraordinarily avaricious. At least, according to the testimony of his enemies, he preyed upon his political opponents and the powerless, imprisoning them and seizing their property. In 1689 Thomas Pollack, whom he had gaoled, led an armed force that overthrew and arrested Sothel. The local assembly then tried and sentenced him to a year's banishment and permanent disbarment from political office in the colony. A Virginian, Philip Ludwell, became governor. 
Sothel went to Charles Town in South Carolina, arriving in 1690 while this settlement was also in the middle of a political crisis. Aligning himself with factional opponents of Governor James Colleton, he maintained that the fundamental constitutions of Carolina gave him the right as a proprietor to claim the governorship. Although the legal status of this document was debatable, Sothel's support was strong enough that the threat of an armed confrontation enabled him to prevail in a bloodless coup. He then called a local parliament which passed several constructive acts. It also, however, banished Colleton and barred him, as well as some of his supporters, from future public office. Simultaneously Sothel resumed his avid and questionable pursuit of wealth. Ordering the survey of 24,000 acres for himself was probably legitimate; apparent preparations for acquiring a monopoly of the West Indian trade were more doubtful; and trafficking with pirates was clearly prohibited. News of these actions prompted the proprietors to disallow all acts passed by Sothel's parliament and in November 1691 remove him from office. Once again, they turned to Philip Ludwell, who on 13 May 1692 officially informed Sothel that he was out. Sothel remained in the area for about a year, futilely claiming the office, but by November 1693 he was back in Albemarle. At some time before 3 February 1694, when his will was proved, he died, apparently in Virginia, where he was presumably buried. Most of his property went to his wife, Anna, but a bequest to his father-in-law, Edward Foster of Albemarle county, indicates that he had been previously married. Final settlement of his extensive and complex estate required prolonged litigation. After his death his widow married John Lear but she died at some time before May 1695. 
Sothel's political career produced significant constitutional changes in Carolina. Partly because his claims to the governorship at Charles Town rested on the fundamental constitutions, the proprietors in 1691 suspended it and restructured the government by reducing membership in the council and permitting the lower house to meet separately. These steps influenced the configuration of local government for the rest of the colonial period and laid the foundation for the rise to power of the assembly. 


@@@@@


doc= 26040


Sothern, Edward Askew (1826-1881), actor, born in Liverpool on 1 April 1826, made his mark playing eccentric comic roles on the British and American stage. The son of a collier, he initially studied for a career in medicine, but claimed to have been disgusted by the dissection work at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London, where he attended operations. In the late 1840s he worked as a clerk in a Liverpool shipping office. However, his personality seemed better suited to the stage, and he soon tried his hand as an amateur at the Theatre Royal, Jersey, in 1848, before moving on to Guernsey, under the stage name of Douglas Stewart. About this time he married Fannie (Frances Emily) Stewart (died 1882), the daughter of an Irish merchant. The couple had four children -- Lytton Edward ['see below'], Edward Hugh ['see below'], George Evelyn Augustus T., and Eva Mary -- all of whom appeared on the stage. 
Sothern worked in theatres at Portsmouth, Wolverhampton, and Birmingham before heading to Boston, Massachusetts, where he was employed by John Lacy at the National Theatre. He first appeared there as Dr Pangloss in 'The Heir-at-Law' -- to miserable reviews. Struggling to establish himself in the United States, he worked at the Howard Athenaeum in Boston and Barnum's Museum in New York. It was in Boston that he met a lifelong friend, the actress Mrs R. H. Vincent. His break finally came when he took on the unlikely role of Armand in 'Camille' opposite Mathilde Heron at Wallack's in New York. Sothern was tall and slender, with blue eyes and wavy brown hair, but despite his good appearance he was not a natural for romantic roles. According to Clement Scott he was 'as handsome a man as ever stood on the stage'; however, Scott continued, 'he had not the voice, the touch, the tone or the persuasiveness requisite for a Romeo, a Ruy Blas, or a Lagardiere' (Scott, 1.392). Despite this early success as Armand, Sothern did not make a stage career as a romantic hero, but as a result he was given a part in Tom Taylor's 'Our American Cousin', staged at Laura Keene's Theatre in New York in October 1858. 
Taylor's farce, now best known as the play President Lincoln was watching when he was assassinated in Ford's Theatre in Washington, DC, provided Sothern with the role that would define him as an actor. The play follows the adventures of an American, Asa Trenchard (first played by the American actor Joseph Jefferson), when he goes to England to claim the family estate. Lord Dundreary was not intended to be a major part in the play -- Sothern claimed that it was originally a scant forty-seven lines -- but Sothern created a notable image of an eccentric, weak-minded fop, featuring an eye-glass, droopy side-whiskers that became known as 'Dundrearys', a lisp, elaborate mannerisms, and verbal nonsense. Lord Dundreary's nonsensical references to the life and wisdom of his 'bwother' Sam delighted audiences. The character launched a craze on both sides of the Atlantic (although it completely puzzled the French, who disdained the 1867 Paris production), and the style of walking, dressing, and speaking displayed by Sothern's Dundreary was much imitated and lampooned. In the USA, in particular, Dundreary became the type of the 'silly ass Englishman' of title or rank. 

'Our American Cousin' was given its premiere at Laura Keene's Theatre on 15 October 1858 and ran for 150 performances; when the play opened in London, at the Haymarket, in 1861, Sothern played the role of Dundreary 196 times. His appearance in this play was also his London debut. The London critics adored his Dundreary: 'his embodiment was a veritable creation, well-proportioned, consistent, finished to the nails' (Towse, 29); 'it is certainly the 'funniest' thing in the world... a vile caricature of a vain nobleman, intensely ignorant, and extremely indolent' ('The Athenaeum', 16 Nov 1861). 
In the minds of audiences in the United States and England, Sothern would eternally be associated with Dundreary: 'Dundreary was Sothern, and Sothern Dundreary afterward, and the identity could never be destroyed' (Reignolds-Winslow, 85). The Dundreary craze did not die quickly, and was to have various dramatic resuscitations in such works as John Oxenford's 'Brother Sam' and H. J. Byron's 'Dundreary Married and Done For'. But Sothern was ready to move on to new roles. His next major part was the title role in T. W. Robertson's 'David Garrick' (Haymarket, 1864); this was a more sentimental, pathetic character, a break from the rather grotesque caricature of Dundreary. 'The critics cut me up root and branch', said Sothern. But the show was a success anyway. The review in 'The Times' noted that the role 'is the first that has really tested Mr Sothern's powers beyond the Dundreary sphere' (6 May 1864); Sothern's performance in the 'drunk scene' of the second act was in fact admired by the critic of 'The Times', who praised 'the most extravagant form of drunkenness... perpetually brought into contact with the real agony of mind which is now on the point of casting aside the mask of debauchery'. Sothern would later claim in 'The Era' to have written some of the best scenes in 'David Garrick' -- and in Robertson's 'Home' -- much to Robertson's disgust. Lester Wallack backed up Sothern in the dispute, but Sothern's contribution to the plays remains unclear. 
Sothern's manic energy had social as well as professional outlets; he was well known as a club man, sportsman, and bon vivant, as often in the press for his hunting activities, jokes, magic tricks, and conversation as for his work on stage. F. G. De Fontaine termed him 'a Prince of Fellows'. He was also a notorious prankster, as befits someone born on 1 April. In London he was known as part of a lively theatrical circle including J. L. Toole, J. B. Buckstone, T. W. Robertson, and H. J. Byron. The group apparently had an endless taste for low jokes and stunts, such as staging mock disputes on public omnibuses, putting fake advertisements in newspapers, paying street urchins to harass passers-by in the streets, and the like. On one occasion Sothern entered an ironmonger's establishment, accompanied by fellow prankster Mrs Vincent, and persistently demanded a copy of the second edition of Macaulay's 'History of England', reducing a clerk to fits. On another occasion Sothern and Toole panicked a waiter by tossing the silver out of a window and hiding under the table; when the waiter, finding the room empty and the silver gone, ran to report the theft, Toole and Sothern restored the settings and resumed their places at table, languidly discussing their meal. 
In the 1860s and 1870s Sothern appeared in London and the provinces in such plays as Westland Marston's 'A Hero of Romance' and T. W. Robertson's 'Home'; he toured the USA in the mid-1870s. His next great role was as the comically 'tragic' actor Fitzaltamont in Byron's 'The Crushed Tragedian' (1878). Of Fitzaltamont, Sothern said, 'I have simply boiled down all the old-school tragedians as I boiled down all the fops I met before I played Dundreary' (Pemberton, 89). If Sothern was not ultimately suited for tragic roles, he could none the less mock them expertly: 'The Era' of 19 May 1878 referred admiringly to 'the sepulchral tones, the glaring eyeballs, the long hair, the wonderful 'stage walk', the melodramatic attitudes'. Despite this favourable report, the production was not a success in London, and the Haymarket soon replaced it with another of Byron's plays, 'The Hornet's Nest', in which Sothern also appeared. In New York, however, 'The Crushed Tragedian' was very warmly received. The Philadelphia 'Inquirer' praised the production: 'With what elaboration of detail does the actor embody his conception! There is not a gesture, not an intonation, not a movement, but seems to illustrate the character portrayed. He strides across the stage and it is as though he were wading through a sea of gore; he mutters to himself 'Ha! ha!' and you know that he is cursing fate with a bitterness loud and deep.... always and in all things poor Altamont is exquisitely, indescribably ludicrous. (Pemberton, 91-2)' Despite these successes in other roles, Sothern continued regularly to play Dundreary in 'Our American Cousin' and its offshoots until his death, at his home, 1 Vere Street, Cavendish Square, London, of a lung inflammation on 20 January 1881. He was buried in Southampton cemetery on 25 January. According to his biographer T. Edgar Pemberton, one role he regretted not having played was that of Cheviot in W. S. Gilbert's 'Engaged' (1877). 
Of Sothern's children, Eva had a brief career, as did George ('b'. 1870) -- who was known professionally as Sam Sothern. He was closely associated with his father's roles (as his choice of stage name indicates), although he later had some success in secondary parts in Henry Arthur Jones's 'The Case of Rebellious Susan' (1894) and 'The Liars' (1897). 
It was 
In the early twentieth century Sothern became a highly popular actor in Shakespearian tragedies, foremost among them 'Hamlet' (1900). It was as a Shakespearian actor that he was associated with the actress Julia Marlowe (1866-1950), and beginning in 1904 the two regularly performed in Shakespeare's plays, including the comedies -- critics considered Benedick and Malvolio to be among Sothern's best roles. But some reviewers were unimpressed by his appearances in Shakespeare. Winter lamented 'his complete lack of weirdness' in playing Hamlet (W. Winter, 'Shakespeare on the Stage', 1911, 392); J. Ranken Towse asserted that 'anxiety over 'points' betrayed him occasionally into violence of speech and gesture and painfully abrupt transitions of mood' (Towse, 393). Sothern and Marlowe were married in 1911 after his first marriage ended in divorce. The two performed in revivals of their favourite plays at the Shubert and Century theatres in 1919 and 1921, but Marlowe's health was failing. During this time Sothern also appeared in early films, including 'The Chattel' (1916) and 'The Man of Mystery' (1917). After repeatedly threatening to retire and move to England, he finally did so in 1927. He died of pneumonia in New York on 28 October 1933. 


@@@@@


doc= 26041


Lytton Edward Sothern (1851-1887), born on 27 June 1851, enjoyed his first prominent appearance on the stage in the role of Captain Vernon in a production of 'Our American Cousin' at Drury Lane in 1872; later that year he made a mark in the USA playing the role of Bertie in H. J. Byron's 'Home' at the Walnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia. With his dark good looks (Lytton was thought the handsomest of the Sothern men), he was considered a promising comedian. But he worked in his father's shadow and often played roles made famous by the elder Sothern; he took on the parts of Dundreary, Brother Sam, and Garrick during tours of Australia (beginning in 1878) and the United States (in 1883). Of his Dundreary, one critic wrote that 'the imitation was exact enough, yet an indescribable 'something' was wanting to make the part what it was in the elder Sothern's hands' ('The Dramatic Calendar', 27 June 1881). He did, however, show some promise in other comic roles, such as Cecil Leighton in G. R. Sims's 'Crutch and Toothpick' (Royalty, 1879) and as Arthur Spoonbill in Byron's 'Fourteen Days' (Criterion, 1882). He died at his home, St James's Chambers, Duke Street, London, on 11 March 1887 of peritonitis, and was buried on 19 March in Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26042


Sotherton, John (1562-1631), judge, born in London, was the son of John Sotherton ('c'.1525-1605), from 16 June 1579 until his death baron of the court of exchequer, and his second wife, Mary or Maria, daughter of Edward Wooton MD. The Sotherton family originally came from the village of Sotherton in Suffolk, and many of its members were mercers in London or Norwich, active in the Merchant Taylors' Company and in political life. 
Sotherton matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 20 November 1580, graduated BA on 22 January 1583, was in the same year incorporated at Cambridge, and proceeded MA in April 1586. He was admitted in November 1587 a member of the Inner Temple, where he was called to the bar in 1597, and elected a bencher in 1610. Appointed receiver-general for the counties of Bedford and Buckingham in July 1604, he was advanced to the post of cursitor baron of the exchequer on 29 October 1610. He sat regularly as one of the commissioners of gaol delivery for the City of London, was joined with Sir Julius Caesar, Sir Francis Bacon, and others in a commission of ways and means in August 1612, and at a later date was one of the assessors of compositions for defective titles and an inspector of nuisances for Middlesex. His first wife was Ann Bray, his second Elizabeth, 'nee' Cook, widow of Sir John Morgan of Chilworth, Surrey. Their son John ('b'. 1599/1600) inherited the manor of Wadenhall, Kent, which Sotherton had purchased from the crown in 1600. Sotherton died in 1631, administration of his estate being granted on 8 October; his successor on the bench, James Pagitt, was appointed on 24 October that year. Sotherton was buried at St Alban, Wood Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 26043


Soulemont, Thomas (b. in or before 1500, d. 1541), administrator, was born in Jersey, the eldest son of the jurat Pierre de Soulemont of St Helier and his wife, Marguerite Messervy. As early as the fourteenth century his family lived in the island parishes of St Helier and Grouville. As a young man Soulemont left the Channel Islands for England; little is known of his education, although Anthony Wood (who confuses him with the cleric and controversialist Thomas Solme) claims that Soulemont studied for a time at Oxford. Despite settling in England, Soulemont retained close ties with his native island. Rector of Grouville from 1533, he was named dean of Jersey by the bishop of Coutances the following year and, although non-resident, he vigorously defended his decanal jurisdiction against encroachment by the states of Jersey. 
By late 1532 Soulemont had entered royal service as one of the king's French secretaries, when he was needed at Calais to prepare for meetings with Francois I. He was one of the senior clerks employed by Thomas Cromwell, whom he served as chief secretary from 1537. Soulemont's fluency in French naturally involved him in a variety of extra duties, in addition to drafting and translating routine diplomatic correspondence. Such special assignments included examining witnesses to assaults upon members of the French ambassador's household, and investigating complaints from French merchants trading in England. In April 1539 he met with the French ambassador to discuss foreign policy developments, in place of his master Cromwell, who was ill. That same year he served as deputy clerk of parliaments, in which position he sought to rationalize and simplify the records. On 21 September 1540 he was appointed clerk of parliaments, and his journal describes the closing of the 1540 parliament in exceptional detail. 
Both Cromwell and the king rewarded their secretary's energetic labours. In April 1537 Soulemont was collated to the prebend of Knaresborough at York, while in July of the same year Cromwell persuaded the bishop of Hereford to collate his clerk to the vacant prebend of Moreton Magna. Having already acquired the Cornish manors of Forwood and Fowey from his friend and colleague Thomas Wriothesley in early 1538, Soulemont subsequently secured from the crown leases of the site of Canonsleigh convent, Devon, as well as property at the London Greyfriars. 
In addition to his administrative work Soulemont was a keen antiquary, collecting and transcribing records (from the royal library and elsewhere) relating to the history of Jersey and the Channel Islands, on which he was an authority. He supplied manuscripts to John Leland, who praised Soulemont's scholarship in his 'Encomia', while John Bale mentioned two unpublished works by Soulemont (now lost): the 'Select antiquities of Great Britain', and a life of Thomas Becket. Thomas Soulemont died, probably in London, on 12 July 1541 and was buried at the Carmelite convent in the city. 


@@@@@


doc= 26044


Soulis, Sir John (d. before 1310), administrator and guardian of Scotland, was the second son of Nicholas de Soulis, lord of Liddesdale and butler of Scotland, and younger brother of William, justiciar of Lothian, who died 'c'.1292-3. John appears from about 1280 in the shadow of his elder brother, but from 1284, by then a knight, as a royal servant on the embassy which arranged the marriage of Yolande de Dreux to Alexander III; by 1289, and perhaps before 1286, he was sheriff of Berwick, and he was among the magnates present in negotiations at Birgham in 1290. In the Great Cause he and William were auditors nominated by Robert (V) de Brus (though William's son, Nicholas, was a claimant). John is found in the two records of King John's parliaments of 1293, including acting as surety for the young Robert Bruce, earl of Carrick, and in 1295 was one of two magnates sent by the government which had taken power from King John to make an alliance with France. He is not named in the Ragman rolls among those submitting to Edward I in 1296, and the charter which he is said to witness at this time is an undated but earlier private charter contained in a royal 'inspeximus' of 1296. There is no trace of him in Scotland or England from 1295, and he seems to have been in France for some five years. He received payments from Philippe IV in February and May 1299 and was reported to be at Damme in July 1299, awaiting passage to Scotland, just at the time when King John had been released from English into papal custody. 
It has been assumed that Soulis returned to Scotland in 1299, but there is no evidence to that effect, and it is more probable that he was left behind by the other ambassadors because the Scottish king could now be contacted, and that he eventually spent time with the king. Fordun states that during the time of John Comyn's guardianship, that is, from 1298, Soulis was associated in office with him by King John, who was then freed from prison and living at Bailleul; King John was released by the pope into French custody some time after September 1300, and was sent to Bailleul at a date which seems to have been late in the summer of 1301. Despite Fordun, the timetable is such that the king must have appointed Soulis guardian before his release to the French and before going to Bailleul, for Soulis is found acting as sole guardian in Scotland in May 1301. He took the remarkable step of issuing charters and other acts in the name of King John, and responded decisively to the evasive arguments deployed at the papal court by Edward I by holding a council and sending two proctors to join Baldred Bisset at the curia with a dossier of cogent counter-arguments. 
The war of deeds was less effective than the war of words, though in the summer of 1301 Soulis and Ingram Umfraville successfully harassed the prince of Wales in the south-west, attacking the stronghold of Lochmaben on 7-8 September 1301 and then mustering at Loudoun in the vain hope of relieving Bothwell Castle, besieged by Edward I. Nevertheless Edward achieved so little that in January 1302 he agreed to a nine-month truce. All now depended upon the involvement of Edward I in France, or on an Anglo-French peace which incorporated Scotland, and in the autumn of 1302 Soulis went again to France with a powerful embassy to try to hold Philippe IV to the Scots' cause. In 1303 they wrote home with a mixture of despair and hope, but the despair alone was justified: Philippe deserted the Scots, and in February 1304 their leaders decided to sue for peace. Soulis, punished with just two years of exile, could have been included, but would have none of it. He remained in France until his death at an unknown date before 1310. He married Margaret, daughter of Merleswain, lord of Ardross in Fife, and widow of Hugh de Perisby, probably before 1295; they had a daughter, Muriella. Fordun had no high opinion of Soulis, but he should be judged as a politician, or statesman, not a commander. For a man of small resources and minor standing he clearly impressed his social betters with his diplomatic skills. 
His nephew, Nicholas de Soulis, lord of Liddesdale, died at the end of 1296, leaving two sons from his marriage to Margaret, daughter of Alexander Comyn, earl of Buchan. The elder, 
Within weeks Soulis was discovered to be involved in a plot against the king, along with others formerly associated with the Balliol camp. According to Barbour, Soulis had 360 esquires in his livery, as well as knights, at Berwick, suggesting that he had recruited a gang of men-at-arms there. When arrested and brought before parliament in August 1320, he confessed and was sent to Dumbarton Castle for life imprisonment. Barbour's claim that the conspirators meant to make Soulis king is to be discounted as an attempt to explain an episode for which his source gave no explanation. The aim may have been to replace Robert I by Edward Balliol, but not to restore English lordship. It is also likely that Barbour has exaggerated Soulis's part and diminished the importance in the conspiracy of Sir David Brechin, who was executed. Each was the son of a daughter of Alexander Comyn, earl of Buchan. Soulis had died by 20 April 1321. He and his wife, whose name is unknown, had two daughters and possibly a son, the man of the same name killed at Boroughbridge on 16 March 1322, according to the Lanercost chronicle. 
Sir William's younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 26045


Sir John Soulis (d. 1318), emerged from obscurity in November 1314 when, already a knight, he came from France to ransom kinsmen taken prisoner at Bannockburn. He gave allegiance to King Robert and in the following year joined Edward Bruce on the Irish adventure, a typical landless younger son seeking endowment in this risky business. He was back in Scotland when Sir Andrew Harclay invaded Eskdale from Carlisle in 1316 and was routed and taken prisoner by a small force under Sir John, an exploit famous in ballad in the fourteenth century. By 1318 Soulis had returned to Ireland, where he took part in the last campaign of Edward Bruce and was killed with him in a foolish battle at Faughart, near Dundalk, on 14 October 1318. He had no known children. 


@@@@@


doc= 26046


South, Sir James (1785-1867), astronomer, born at Southwark, London, in October 1785, was the eldest son in the large family of James South (died 1823), a prosperous dispensing chemist of High Street, Southwark, and his first wife, Sarah. His half-brother, from his father's second marriage, was the surgeon John Flint South. James studied surgery, became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, and embarked on a profitable career; but his friendship with Joseph Huddart aroused his interest in astronomy, and he began observing with a 6 inch Gregorian reflector. His marriage, in 1816, to Charlotte (died 1851), the niece and sole heir of Joseph Ellis of South Lambeth, relieved him of the need to earn a living and allowed him to abandon his large surgical practice. He established an observatory attached to his house in Blackman Street, Borough, London, which he equipped with two equatorials of 5and 7 feet focal length respectively, besides a first-rate transit instrument by Troughton. Here, between 1821 and 1823, he observed, in collaboration with John Frederick William Herschel, 380 double stars. In presenting him with the gold medal of the Astronomical Society in 1826, Francis Baily spoke of his 'princely collection of instruments, such as have never yet fallen to the lot of a private individual' ('Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society', 2, 1826, 547). 
In 1825 South took his 5 foot telescope to Passy, near Paris, where he came to know Humboldt and Arago, and convinced Laplace of the reality of orbiting double stars by visual demonstration. In only a few months there he carried out what Herschel called 'a noble series of measures' on 458 compound stars, of which 160 were new; for this work, together with his paper 'On the discordances between the sun's observed and computed right ascensions', presented to the Royal Society on 8 June 1826, South was awarded the society's Copley medal in 1826. He had been elected a fellow of the society in 1821. 
South was one of the founders of the Astronomical Society; he was elected president in 1829, and the royal charter granted to it in 1831 was made out in his name. By this time he was no longer president, however, and the confusion of formalities that resulted gave his enemy Richard Sheepshanks the opportunity to provoke the irascible South into behaviour that made his position in the society untenable. South withdrew, and became alienated from most of his early scientific friends. 
South was by no means alone in regarding science in England as decadent, and he actively considered emigrating to France. Both governments saw him as a notable prize and competed for his favour, but the knighthood conferred on him on 21 July 1830 by William IV, and the civil-list pension of $300 in aid of his astronomical researches that soon followed, persuaded him to remain in England. 
In 1826 South equipped a splendid observatory on Campden Hill, Kensington, adding to his array of instruments an 8 foot achromatic, the transit circle used by Stephen Groombridge, and a clock presented by the king of Denmark. But he was handicapped in his friendly rivalry with Wilhelm Struve of Dorpat, Estonia, in the study of double stars by his lack of a large object-glass of high quality. Then, in 1829, he heard that a 12 inch object-glass by the great Paris optician Cauchoix was for sale. He hastened to Paris, paid the asking price of about $1000, and returned in triumph with the lens. 
The mounting he entrusted to Troughton, but the work, finished in 1831, proved a failure. South, bitterly disappointed, refused to pay; and Troughton, vigorously encouraged by Sheepshanks, brought an action. The matter was referred to arbitration, and there ensued a trial that involved almost every British astronomer of note. From 1834 to 1838 Sir William Henry Maule presided over the court; John Elliot Drinkwater Bethune acted as counsel for South, while Sheepshanks advised Troughton. In 1838 Maule gave judgment in favour of Troughton, whereupon South smashed the mounting in dispute, and sold the wood and iron by public auction in 1839 and the brass in 1842, on each occasion advertising the sale with scurrilous posters. The first sale resulted in a small loss, and the second in a profit of $11 for South to set against the many thousands of pounds he had spent on the instrument and the ensuing legal costs. His mind had been well-nigh unhinged by the protracted episode. The 12 inch lens that had been the ruin of his astronomical career was eventually presented by him in 1862 to the observatory of Trinity College, Dublin. 
After 1838 South attempted only casual pieces of work, experimenting with clocks and pendulums, and executing at Watford in 1846 a series of observations on the disturbance, by passing railway trains, of star images reflected from mercury. They were reported to the government and presented in 1863 to the Royal Society. South observed Encke's comet in 1828 and 1838, Mauvais's comet in 1844, and Vico's in 1845. He was a friend and confidant of William Parsons, third earl of Rosse, and in February 1845 had the privilege, with Thomas Romney Robinson of Armagh, of trying the performance of Rosse's 6 foot reflector, by far the largest telescope ever built. The impetuous Robinson made exaggerated public claims for the scientific implications of what the instrument revealed, which he regarded as a triumph for Irish astronomy, and South found himself in the unaccustomed role of restraining influence. He was a member of a number of scientific academies, including those of St Petersburg and Brussels, and in 1863 he received an honorary LLD from the University of Cambridge. 
In two papers, presented to the Royal Society on 16 June 1831 and 13 December 1832, South detailed observations of Mars that showed a complete absence of planetary atmospheric effects. He published a number of astronomical papers in later life, but these were of a minor nature. He was a frequent contributor, at times acrimoniously, to the daily and weekly press, and was the author of a number of critical pamphlets. In one, published in 1822, he pointed out defects in the 'Nautical Almanac', and he presided over a committee of the Astronomical Society appointed in 1829 to find ways of bringing the publication up to standard. He took a prominent role in attempts to make the membership of the Royal Society more professional, but his 'Thirty-Six Charges Against the President and Council of the Royal Society', printed as a tract in 1830, were officially ignored, notwithstanding his protest at a stormy meeting of the society. His feud with Sheepshanks led him to join with Charles Babbage, another of Sheepshanks's victims, in 1852 in a successful attempt to embarrass Sheepshanks over a youthful customs deception of his that had come to light. Sheepshanks was defended by his ally the astronomer royal, George Biddell Airy, and when Airy renewed his defence in an obituary, published after Sheepshanks's death in 1855, South defied convention by pursuing his adversary beyond the grave in a printed rejoinder. 
During his later years South became partially blind and deaf. He died at his home at Observatory, Campden Hill, on 19 October 1867. His instruments were sold on 4 August 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 26047


South, John Flint (1797-1882), surgeon, was born on 5 July 1797 in London, probably at Lant Street, Southwark, the son of James South (died 1823), druggist, and his second wife, Mary (died 1865). His half-brother was the astronomer Sir James South. From October 1805 until June 1813 South attended Dr Samuel Hemming's school at Hampton, Middlesex. He then received tuition in the classics from the Revd William Fancourt, and he also attended the lectures of Astley Cooper and practice sessions at St Thomas's Hospital, London. Here in 1813 he met Joseph Henry Green, who became a lifelong friend. On 18 February 1814 South was apprenticed to the surgeon Henry Cline the younger, and in 1815 he started work as a dresser. From 1819 he served as prosector for the anatomy lecturers at St Thomas's, and in 1820 he was appointed conservator of the museum and assistant demonstrator of anatomy for three years on a salary of $100. The next year he established his own practice above a cork shop in St Thomas Street, but he later moved to Adelaide Place, near London Bridge. 
After some ill health, South was appointed in 1823 as joint demonstrator of anatomy with Bransby Cooper (which led to a dispute between Sir Astley Cooper and Green), and he retained this position until he became lecturer on anatomy in 1825. In 1834 he was elected assistant surgeon at St Thomas's, but severe illness caused him to resign his lectureship in January 1841. However, in July of the same year he was made full surgeon at the hospital, and with his health restored was able to lecture again. In 1843 he was appointed surgeon to the Female Orphan Asylum in Westminster Road, and in 1855 he served as a royal commissioner enquiring into the condition and operation of Dublin hospitals. He also acted as surgeon to the South Eastern Railway Company for many years. 
South held many positions at the Royal College of Surgeons, which he joined in 1819. In 1841 he was appointed a member of the council, and in 1843 he became a fellow. The following year he was Hunterian orator, and in 1845 he acted as Arris and Gale professor of human anatomy and surgery. In 1849 he was elected to the court of examiners, and in 1851 and 1860 he served as president of the college. He was also a member of many other learned societies and regularly corresponded with scientists in Germany, France, and Stockholm. 
South married twice. His first wife, whom he married in 1832, was Mrs Annie Wrench (died 1864), second daughter of Thomas Lett of Dulwich House, Surrey. After her death he married, in 1865, Emma Lemme, daughter of John Louis Lemme of Antwerp and London, and niece of his friend Green. There were five children from the first marriage, and two daughters from the second. From 1841 the family lived at Blackheath Park in Kent. 
South wrote several medical works and also revised two editions of 'A Description of the Bones' (1828 and 1837). His 'Household Surgery, or, Hints on Emergencies' (1847) ran to several editions, was hugely popular, and served as an early form of first-aid manual. Fluent in both French and German and realizing the importance of overseas medicine, South published 'A Compendium of Human and Comparative Pathological Anatomy' (1831), translated from the German of A. W. Otto; and 'A System of Surgery' (2 vols., 1847), translated from M. J. Chelius's 'Handbuch der Chirurgie', to which he added many valuable notes and observations of his own surgical experiences. He also wrote a religious tract, as well as articles on zoology and anatomy for the multi-volume 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana' (completed 1845); and, with Joseph Henry Green, he revised 'The Dissector's Manual' (1825). 
In appearance South was thin, with a 'handsome face, bright eyes and smile of unabated intellect' (Feltoe). He was a lifelong diarist, and deeply religious. He carried out church work and was a keen supporter of Sunday schools. Restless and never idle, his many interests included horticulture. In 1831 South helped to establish the Surrey Zoological and Botanical Society's 'Surrey gardens' at Kennington in London, and after a visit to Sweden in 1852 he was awarded the fellowship of the Linnean Society and a medal of the Swedish Horticultural Society for introducing the vegetable marrow to that country. In 1859, largely through South's efforts, the body of the eminent surgeon John Hunter was removed from the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields and reinterred in Westminster Abbey. 
In 1860 South retired from his lectureship at St Thomas's, and in 1863 he also resigned the post of surgeon. He then became a governor of the hospital. The last twenty years of his life were spent collecting material for a history of English surgery. However, 'Memorials of the Craft of Surgery in England', edited by Power, did not appear until 1886, after his death. South died on 8 January 1882 at his home, 7 Morden Road, Blackheath Park, London. He was buried in Charlton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26048


South, Robert (1634-1716), Church of England clergyman and theologian, was born on 4 September 1634 at Hackney, Middlesex, the son of Robert South, a London merchant with roots in Lincolnshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Berry, daughter of Captain John Berry of Lydd, Kent. He attended Westminster School and was elected a king's scholar in 1647. Like his schoolmates John Dryden and John Locke he became a favourite of Dr Richard Busby, its staunchly royalist headmaster. On the morning of King Charles's execution, 30 January 1649, Busby kept his students indoors; according to the memoir prefaced to the 1717 edition of his sermons South read the day's Latin prayers to the school, which would have been an extraordinary favour for a fourteen-year-old pupil. With Busby's blessing, in 1651 South took the closed route laid out for king's scholars between Westminster and Christ Church, Oxford. He was elected head of the list of scholars bound for Christ Church, and matriculated from there on 11 December 1651. A relative, Dr John South of New College, regius professor of Greek, contributed to his studentship of $30. Unlike Locke, who followed him to Christ Church a year later, South bridled under John Owen, its Cromwellian dean. South graduated BA on 24 February 1655 and took his MA in June 1657. 
While an undergraduate South attended illegal services according to the rites of the Church of England which were conducted by three ejected members of Christ Church, Richard Allestree, John Dolben, and John Fell, in rooms above Merton Street in Oxford. Here South secretly entered holy orders, probably in 1658. The royalist episcopal clergy of Oxford were rewarded at the Restoration. While Fell replaced Owen as dean of Christ Church, South's sermons of 1659-60, tastefully furnished with Laudian railings against the presbyterians, had earned him the attention of the newly restored king's commissioners for ecclesiastical appointments: in August 1660 Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, lord chancellor of England and chancellor of Oxford University, made South the university's public orator and his own domestic chaplain. Clarendon disappointed South by not simultaneously granting him a canonship of Christ Church, which had been annexed to the oratorship under the Laudian and Caroline code for the reformation of Oxford in the 1630s. Clarendon, helped by Nathaniel Crew, fellow of Lincoln College and later bishop of Durham, and John Wallis, Savilian professor of mathematics at Oxford, did however see that South gained formal credentials in divinity: despite some grumblings, South was admitted both BD and DD on 1 October 1663. 
The ejections which followed the 1662 'Act of Uniformity' supplied more provisions of pluralism for Laudian avengers such as South. In 1663 he was installed prebendary of Westminster. In 1667 he became vicar of a parish in the diocese of St Asaph, north Wales, perhaps that of Llanrhaeadr, Denbighshire; there is little recorded of his involvement with the parish, but he probably maintained a curate there. On 29 December 1670 South finally received a canonship of Christ Church, and held it along with the university oratorship until 1677, when he resigned the latter. In the same year he travelled to Poland as chaplain to Clarendon's son, Laurence Hyde, the ambassador-extraordinary to John Sobieski, king of Poland; the purpose of the visit was to present gifts to Sobieski's daughter, who was Charles II's goddaughter. South described his travels in Poland in a long letter to Edward Pococke, regius professor of Hebrew at Oxford and a fellow canon of Christ Church. South respected the piety of Polish Catholics, echoing the respect with which high Anglicans were treating the devotional writing of Cardinal Robert Bellarmine by the late seventeenth century. South noted the generous livings of the Polish church and its widespread pluralism, but also pointed out the lack of pastoral care which resulted from absenteeism, avoided in the Church of England by the appointment of curates to deputize for absentee clergy. While South lived comfortably upon the inheritance of his father's estate in Caversham, Oxfordshire, his own will suggests that he provided for his curates well. In 1678 he became rector of Islip in Oxfordshire, a parish in the gift of Westminster School worth $200 p.a. South directed $100 to his curate and the rest towards educating the children of the parish. He rebuilt the chancel of Islip parish church in 1680, founded a school that still survived as a Church of England aided state funded school at the start of the twenty-first century, and in 1689 built a grand rectory which featured an expansive garden walled off from the street. With genuine Laudian sadness South often lamented the dispersal of church property which had followed the Reformation, and he believed that God avenged those who had built houses upon church ruins, houses 'gilded with the name of reformation' (South, 'Twelve Sermons', 339); his sermons mentioned stories of how providence routinely punished the enemies of the church, ranging from Cardinal Thomas Wolsey to the parliamentary defacers of Lichfield Cathedral during the civil wars. The mortar of South's Islip rectory was barely dry by 1695, but White Kennett included an illustration of it in his 'Parochial Antiquities' of that year, perhaps to show the Anglican commitment to rebuilding church infrastructure following the wars. 
South had been appointed a chaplain to James, duke of York, brother of Charles II, in 1667, and remained one through the Popish Plot. The Popish Plot and the exclusion crisis only strengthened South's opinions. In a sermon delivered in July 1678 and printed in 1679 he praised the rigours of a Jesuit education, while attacking Socinians as Epicureans who believed only what pleased them. Throughout his career South feared protestant nonconformity more than Catholicism. His royalist ridicule of the social inversions wrought by the 'sectarian barbarisme' (South, 'Interest Deposed', sig. A4'v') of the interregnum, together with his belief in the divine right of kings, endeared him to both Charles II and James II. Following the accession of James II in 1685 both the younger Hydes became senior ministers. Laurence Hyde, earl of Rochester, was lord high treasurer, and Henry Hyde, second earl of Clarendon, lord lieutenant of Ireland, and with their patronage combining with the king's knowledge of him, South appeared poised to gain what he most wanted, a bishopric. Yet despite his views and his connections South never received one. Between 1681 and 1685 he had apparently been offered several offices which he had declined by citing the burden of his other duties, but there is a strong possibility that South simply was not offered an office that he wanted. He may have been offered an Irish bishopric early in James's reign, for the see of Cashel became vacant in 1685, but if so he declined it. In July 1686 he wrote to William Sancroft, archbishop of Canterbury, imploring him for high office, perhaps the bishopric of Oxford, which South would have preferred above any other. Nothing came of South's request. 
Neither South's professional ambitions nor his scruples were troubled by James's Catholicism, but circumstances eventually forced him to reconsider his sacramental view of kingship. His 1721 biographer claimed that South had promised to 'change his black Gown for a Buff-Coat' ('Memoirs of the Life of the Late Reverend Dr. South', 112) in order to suppress the rising of James Scott, duke of Monmouth, in 1685, and in 1688 he showed no enthusiasm for the proposed invasion of William of Orange. Once William had landed he delayed declaring for either James or William for as long as possible. Flummoxed like many Anglicans by the conflict between legitimacy and orthodoxy he delivered sermons which offered ecumenical jeremiads but conclusively evinced a more passionate hatred of protestant rebels than of Catholics. James might have failed England, but South feared more the consequences of William, who combined military aggression with a Calvinist protestantism alien to South's vision of the established church, ascending the throne. South strained to change his colours, and he took the new oaths of allegiance on 31 July 1689, the last day possible to do so without incurring suspension as a nonjuror. His confidence in divine right grudgingly fell beneath the accommodationist fiction that James had abdicated the throne by failing to protect his subjects, and so was consequently owed no obedience. By 1691-2 South had fully finessed his transition into compliance with William and Mary: England, the chosen nation of God, had replaced the king as God's chosen vicegerent on earth, and the sovereignty of the conscience had displaced that of James II. These were dramatic changes for South, given his fervent espousal of divine right during the Restoration. Yet he retained the Augustinian dismissal of dissenters' consciences, holding that these were merely inferior consciences that needed coercion to improve them into orthodoxy. These changes may account for his redoubled hatred of the dissenters, the 'sly, sanctified sycophants' (South, 'Twelve Sermons', 2.547) of 1689, whom he genuinely believed sought nothing less than the destruction of the church itself. 
South accommodated, but the politics of religion following the revolution of 1688 effectively excluded him from a bishopric for the next two decades, which he spent writing and preaching against the various, but in his mind related, enemies of the high-church position. First and most visible were the heirs of both civil war puritanism and Restoration presbyterianism: these South routinely depicted as unredeemably ignorant, of too low a social station to qualify for the ministry, and made literally insensible in the light of their extemporaneous preaching and their delusional claims to divine inspiration. The royalist memory of the civil wars consistently informed his polemic: such dissenters South frequently compared to the unread shop-hands who in his memory had seized the pulpits at knifepoint during the interregnum. South's attacks upon extemporaneous preaching and divine inspiration made him a royalist, but they did not make him a rationalist. For second among his foes came the dissenters who had embraced rationalism instead: these threatened South's mystical Christianity as the revolution had destroyed his sacramental view of kingship. Just as he blamed a French Dominican for introducing extemporary prayer into England, South blamed the philosophy of Rene Descartes, the 'rational world' (South, 'Tritheism', sig. A2'v') and its dependence on 'impartial reason' (ibid.) for the church's sufferings. For South the introduction of rationalism into theology, such as the Socinians' argument against the Trinity, had caused the church as much trouble as had the puritans and their radical brethren. 
South hated inspired dissenters and rational Socinians with equal intensity, but he is most renowned for his attack upon William Sherlock, a fellow Anglican who sought to defeat the same enemies. Since 1690 Sherlock had been embarked upon a quixotic effort to demonstrate the reality of the Trinity with rationalist methods. This, he hoped, would unhand the Socinians with their own weapons. Yet for South mystery and incomprehensibility were the essence of the Trinity and of Christianity itself: Christianity was manifestly not reasonable. In 1693 and again in 1695 South gleefully dismembered Sherlock's argument in 'Animadversions upon Dr. Sherlock's Book' (1693), and 'Tritheism Charged upon Dr. Sherlock's New Notion of the Trinity' (1695). John Wallis, his old ally from Oxford and a fellow nemesis of Thomas Hobbes, attacked Sherlock as well. Yet the witty invective and genteel irony of South's performances should not conceal his resolute conviction that the end of Anglican orthodoxy could never justify the means of rationalism. His defence of the Trinity against Sherlock may be seen as a Laudian riposte to John Locke's similarly robust attack upon Robert Filmer in the first treatise: Lockean epistemology could dismantle divine right, but rationalism could never comprehend Christian mystery, however much it claimed to support orthodox doctrine. Yet South never took on Locke, whom he admired despite their many differences; Sherlock was dean of St Paul's and thus a dangerous insider, but Locke's Socinianism put him beyond the boundary of toleration itself. 
South's health began to decline after 1698, and during Anne's reign he remained for the most part inactive, living in his house near Westminster Abbey, attending its services, and preparing volumes of his sermons for the press. South urged leniency for Henry Sacheverell during the latter's trial in March 1710, and with the downfall of the ministry of Sidney Godolphin, earl of Godolphin, and John Churchill, duke of Marlborough, later that year, his hopes for a bishopric revived for the first time since the 1688 revolution. When in 1713 he was offered the bishopric of Rochester, made vacant by the death of Thomas Sprat, South declined on the basis of his infirmity. Francis Atterbury, dean of Christ Church, prolocutor of convocation, and high-church champion, took that mitre instead in June 1713, and South fully approved. South died on 8 July 1716. After lying in state at the Jerusalem Chamber and then at the college hall of Westminster, South's corpse was attended by Atterbury to Westminster Abbey, where he was buried on 12 July near the steps of the altar, adjacent to the tomb of his beloved Busby. South's Laudian loyalties survived his accommodation with the revolution, and they ruled beyond the grave: he left $200 in his will for twenty ejected nonjurors, while requiring other beneficiaries to conform to the prayer book worship as decreed by the 1662 'Act of Uniformity'. Such stubbornness earned him the praise of the nonjuror Thomas Hearne, who described South as 'pretty honest, though he was a Complyer' ('Remarks and Collections' of Thomas Hearne, ed. C. E. Doble and others, 5, 1901, 264). 


@@@@@


doc= 26049


Southcote, John (1510/11-1585), judge, was the son of William Southcote and Alice Tregonwell, a niece of the civilian John Tregonwell. The Southcotes were a Devon family. William's father, Nicholas, lived at Chudleigh, and William's brother John (died 1556), clerk of the peace for Devon, lived at Bovey Tracey. There is some evidence that the younger John Southcote lived for a time at Bodmin in Cornwall. He was admitted to the Middle Temple between 1535 and 1537, probably after studying at Lyon's Inn, which sued a John Southcote (possibly his uncle) for dues in 1543. In 1553 he was twice returned to parliament, by Lewes and Steyning respectively. By that time he had settled in London and been appointed one of the under-sheriffs, which made him a judge of the sheriffs' court; and in 1554 he became a justice of the peace for Middlesex. It was about this time that he married Elizabeth, daughter of the London alderman William Robins. In 1556 he was elected autumn reader of the Middle Temple, and only two years later was offered the coif by Queen Mary. The writs for the serjeants' call abated on the queen's death, but Southcote's writ was renewed by Elizabeth and he was created serjeant in April 1559, having read for a second time in Lent as serjeant-elect. 
On 10 February 1563 Southcote was appointed a justice of the queen's bench, and from about that time began to acquire an estate at Witham, Essex, where he lived until his death. In 1575 he purchased Petworth's in Witham, and it is believed that he was responsible for building Witham Place there soon afterwards. He also had a well-furnished house in Carter Lane in the parish of St Gregory by Paul, London. He served as a puisne judge under Sir Robert Catlin and Sir Christopher Wray, and his opinions were noted by Plowden, Dyer, and other Elizabethan reporters. Coke related a story that when Chief Justice Catlin suggested altering a record, Southcote refused to assent, 'and said openly, that he meant not to build a clock-house' (Coke, 'Third Institute', 72), referring to the legend that a fine imposed on Chief Justice Hengham in the time of Edward I was reputedly used to build the clock house of Westminster Palace. He served as an assize judge on the home circuit for twenty years, even though the circuit included Essex. He retired from circuit work in 1582, and was formally discharged from his judicial office on 1 June 1584. Although there was a family tradition that he had resigned to avoid condemning a priest, there is no contemporary evidence of recusancy and he may simply have been allowed to retire on grounds of illness or age. He died on 18 April 1585 and was buried at Witham, where there is a grand monument with his effigy in judicial robes. The inscription gives his age at death as seventy-four and records that he had thirteen children, but only one son, John, and two daughters survived him. He was remembered as 'a good natured man... governed by his wife' (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 3.351). 


@@@@@


doc= 26050


Southcott, Joanna (1750-1814), prophet and writer, was born on 25 April 1750 in Taleford, near Ottery St Mary, Devon, the fourth of six children, and was raised in the village of Gittisham, 16 miles from Exeter. Her father, William Southcott (died 1802), was a tenant farmer, and her mother, Hannah, 'nee' Godfrey (died 'c'.1770), was the daughter of a respectable farmer from Ottery St Mary. William, who continued to be aggrieved over his grandfather's loss of the Southcott family estate in Herefordshire, instilled in his daughter a strong sense of pride in her ancestry and in the quality of her work, however humble. As a girl, Joanna developed a lifelong habit of reading scripture and interpreting everyday events within a spiritual frame. Although inclined when about twenty to high spirits and a taste for pretty clothes and romance, she promised her dying mother that she would commit herself to a life of piety. During her twenties and thirties, Southcott held various positions in different households in and around Exeter, mostly as a farm labourer, maidservant, and upholsterer. Although Southcott did not start publishing her writings until 1801, when she was fifty-one, most of her texts are enlivened by fascinating fragments of village lore and autobiographical detail from her early life in Devon. In 'What manner of communications are these?' (1804) she recalls various encounters with desirable suitors (and at least one impudent footman) in order to elaborate on the intricate progress of her spiritual life; this is evident in the story of her first boyfriend, Noah Bishop, the farmer's son from Sidmouth, whom she teased and rejected for some time, about 1768, before regaining her holy bearings (pp. 27-40; Seymour, 1.143-52). The more dramatic experiences of others could also be turned to similar effect. For example, when questioned on the propriety of including such materials in her books, especially the racy ballad of Lord Burnet's discovery and murder of his wife's lover in their marriage bed (now known as the 'Ballad of Mattie Groves'), Southcott was convinced that even this narrative could be transformed into a spiritual sign that the Lord would return in just fury against the nation that had betrayed him with Satan. 
Southcott's millenarian visions first began in 1792 when she was forty-two years old. Day and night, she was spoken to by a 'voice' predicting what would happen on earth, from the coming war in France to food shortages in the west country. These communications first happened while she was working in the household of the Taylors, who found it to their profit, both materially and spiritually, to heed her providential advice to lay in stores. Along with other Exeter witnesses, Lucy Taylor later corroborated Southcott's claim that a number of her predictions had come true during the 1790s ('The Trial of Joanna Southcott', 1804, 59-60). To prove the authenticity of her mission, Southcott developed the bold stratagem of sealing her prophecies and sending them to clergymen or other dignitaries, so that her predictions could be tested against future events. In her first book, 'The Strange Effects of Faith' (1801), she recounts her persistent efforts (between 1792 and 1800) to have her prophetic role and the truth of her visions examined and accredited by the clergy. She accuses the religious leaders she approached -- including a Methodist (John Eastlake), a Calvinist-Methodist (Henry Tanner), a dissenter (Mr Leach), and an Anglican (Joseph Pomeroy) -- of returning or burning her letters, of belittling her humble station and bad handwriting, and of forbidding her to publish her writings, even though she had been ordered to do so by her 'voice'. Southcott saw herself as appointed to speak for the poor and working classes during a time of war and crisis, when their acute distress was being ignored by the clergy and the privileged classes. Typically, in a letter dated 23 March 1800, she attacks the Revd Pomeroy, vicar of St Kew, Cornwall, who had at first heard her petitions with respect, for his proud indifference: 'I hear the cries of the poor, complaining they are starving to death, for want of food' ('Copies of Letters Sent to the Clergy of Exeter', 1813, 27). Her confidence grew, as did her local fame, when her predictions -- regarding the date of the death of Bishop Buller of Exeter in December 1796, and the crop failures and ensuing famines of 1799 and 1800 -- were fulfilled. 
Finally, in 1801, weary of admonishing the local clergy to no avail, Southcott used up her life savings, supplemented by loans, to print 1000 copies of the first part of her book, 'The Strange Effects of Faith; with Remarkable Prophecies (Made in 1792)', five more parts of which were published by the end of 1802. This first work attracted the attention of some followers of the prophet Richard Brothers, who had been at the height of his influence about 1795, when his extravagant warnings -- for example, that George III must surrender his crown to Brothers as God's chosen one -- led to an eleven-year incarceration for insanity (1795-1806). In December 1801 six followers of Brothers and a seventh man (Peter Morrison, a cotton printer from Liverpool) travelled to Exeter to examine the new prophet's credibility. The seven stars, as Southcott called her judges, included three Anglican clergymen: Stanhope Bruce, vicar of Inglesham; Thomas Webster, a London cleric; and Thomas Philip Foley, rector of Old Swinford near Stourbridge, Worcestershire, who became one of Southcott's most loyal friends. The other four were Morrison; John Wilson, a coach-maker of Kentish town; George Turner, a merchant of Leeds, who became a prominent regional recruiter; and William Sharp (1749-1824), the master engraver, who later created the best-known portrait of Southcott. By the next year, these men had arranged for Southcott to move to London, where they provided her with lodgings and began to promote her work. The Exeter trial of Southcott's claims was followed by two more public trials; one in a house in Paddington rented by Foley, and the third at Neckinger House, Bermondsey, at the home of Elias Carpenter, a wealthy papermill owner, who was, for a time, a tireless promoter of her mission. By 1803 the nucleus of Brothers's followers had declared their convincement. Southcott had been careful not to attack Brothers and seemed to advocate his release, but once she had secured his main followers, she declared the superiority of her mission. After consolidating her following in London during 1803 and 1804, Southcott went on a missionary tour and was particularly successful in Yorkshire and the west country in attracting people to her stunning promise of a redeemed England in which the true heirs would soon come to possess the land. 
One of the most significant of her London converts was Jane Townley, who not only invited Southcott, in April 1804, to become part of her household, but also did all she could to promote Southcott's writings and cause, including providing her maidservant, Ann Underwood, to act as Southcott's accomplished and devoted amanuensis. With the steadfast assistance of Foley, Sharp, and others, the three women became the nerve centre for the Southcottian movement, which generated an astonishing degree of interest, correspondence, and debate regarding Southcott's prophetic claims. Between 1801 and 1814, Southcott published some sixty-five pamphlets, totalling almost 5000 pages; moreover, her unpublished manuscripts amount to twice the number of pages in print. By one conservative estimate, a total of 108,000 copies of her various works were published and circulated from 1801 to 1816, making her one of the most popular writers of her time (Hopkins, 84). One reason for the immediate appeal of her texts is their unique mix of apocalyptic optimism with down-to-earth narratives about everyday life, which she converts to spiritual account. Particularly vivid are her narratives of what it was like to be an unmarried maidservant negotiating the sexual politics of a household. During the early 1780s, she stayed for five years with the Wills family from whom she learned the upholstering trade. Complaining of his adulterous wife, her master Wills had tried to seduce Southcott by declaring his desire to be her Christian lover. She rejected him in no uncertain terms: 'no tongue can paint the horror I felt, to hear of love from a married man' ('Copies and Parts of Copies of Letters and Communications, Written... to Mr W. Sharp', 1804, 18-19). She agreed to stay in his household, however, after Wills arranged to bring a Methodist minister into the house as a lodger to restore moral order. Unfortunately, the lodger turned out to be the charismatic preacher Hugh Saunderson, who violated Wills's trust by seducing the obliging Mrs Wills and by trying to turn the couple's children against their father. Southcott intervened by trying to have the Methodists remove Saunderson from the house without scandal. This ploy proving ineffectual, she was forced to inform Wills directly. Flying into a violent fit, Wills unaccountably accused Southcott of lying and drove her from his household. His malice was so great that he vindictively spread lies to prevent her from obtaining a new position. Her good name being her chief capital, she sued Wills and won the case because, although many false witnesses were paid to defame her, Wills's own son refused to come to bear false witness. Her triumph in going to court and being found trustworthy became a model of success by which her credibility as a prophet could be put to public trial. 
Early on, Southcott developed the practice of sealing as a way to bind her scattered followers into one community of believers. The practice entailed drawing a circle on a piece of paper, within which was written a simple message of acceptance; the believer signed at the top, Southcott signed below; then the paper was folded and sealed with Southcott's special seal, which contained two stars and the initials IC (Iesu Christi). Southcott initially cast her sealing net wide, but soon it became a prerequisite that all those wishing to be sealed read two of her booklets, 'Sound an Alarm in my Holy Mountain' (1804), and 'A Caution and Instruction to the Sealed' (1807), to familiarize themselves with what was required of the heirs to the new Jerusalem. A safe estimate of the total number of sealed followers achieved by 1815 is around 20,000 (Harrison, 109). The practice also left Southcott open to abuse, as can be seen in the notorious case of the fortune-teller and con-artist Mary Bateman (1768-1809), who obtained one of Southcott's seals in order to capitalize on the spirit of the age. In 1806 Bateman charged admission to see her display of three millennial eggs, hatched from a miraculous hen, inscribed with the message 'Christ is Coming'. Bateman defrauded, bullied, and bribed a number of victims from York to Leeds, before being convicted and hanged in 1809 for poisoning one of her clients with arsenic. Southcott eventually denounced not only Bateman, but also the newspapers that malevolently deceived the public by insinuating that Southcott herself was somehow connected to fraud and murder ('A True Picture of the World and a Looking Glass for All Men', 1809?, 7-8; Seymour, 1.243-4). 
One key element of Southcott's sect was its insistence that a female figure would bring about millennial change. Similar to Jane Lead and the Philadelphians of the 1690s, Southcott underlined the significance of such biblical passages as 'Genesis' 3, in which God promises that the woman's seed shall bruise the serpent's head, and 'Revelation' 12, in which the Woman clothed in Sun brings about a new order. This point was reinforced also by several strategic visions. In June 1804, full of self-doubt and wounded by the vicious public attacks on her character, Southcott retreated from London to a house in Bristol. She was pacing up and down when the whole house began to shake with her fury and despair, frightening those living with her; Southcott fell into a frenzy -- 'words flew too fast to utter' -- but then she recomposed herself. Her prophetic 'voice' asserted that, just as the house trembled, the whole earth would tremble, and powerful men and doubting clergy would fall; then the 'voice' re-established Southcott's authority, saying: 'I will conquer in woman's form' ('Copies and Parts of Copies of Letters and Communications, Written... to Mr W. Sharp', 79; Seymour, 1.52). In 1814 Southcott carried the claim to a new level when she announced that she was about to become the mother of Shiloh, the name given to the expected divine incarnation. The revelation was made explicit in 'The Third Book of Wonders, Announcing the Coming of Shiloh' (1814), and 'Prophecies Announcing the Birth of the Prince of Peace' (1814), which collected extractions from earlier writings that seemed to anticipate this new revelation. Public incredulity reached new heights in April of that year when it was rumoured that a number of physicians were being called in to examine Southcott's body, which was said to be showing signs of pregnancy, although, as she freely admitted to her doctors, she was a virgin and sixty-four years old. In fact, for believers, the very absurdity of the situation seemed to confirm its miraculous potential. The popular press exploded with laughter and scorn as can be seen in Thomas Rowlandson's cartoon 'A Medical Inspection, or, Miracles will Never Cease', which shows an obese Joanna lifting her skirts to be examined by leering medical men. By November Southcott was overdue, and she was said to be enduring terrible labour pains. In hope that all that was wanting to effect delivery was a legal father, on 12 November 1814 Southcott married John Smith (1758-1829) of Blockley, a respectable friend of her own age and a former steward to the earl of Darnley, who offered himself in the role of Joseph, the adopted father of the expected Shiloh. 
The marriage was to be annulled if Shiloh did not appear; however, Southcott died on 27 December 1814 at 38 Manchester Street, London. Given the possibility that she was only in a trance, her body was wrapped in flannel and kept warm for four days. At the time, according to Dr Richard Reece, the engraver William Sharp believed that her body could be resuscitated and Shiloh produced. When Reece protested at such a delusion, Sharp retorted, 'Ah, Sir, you take only a 'professional' view of it, but I take a 'spiritual' one' (Seymour, 2.389). Finally on 31 December an autopsy took place at 38 Manchester Street at which were a number of her followers and several medical men, including James Sims, Joseph Adams, and Richard Reece. Southcott was buried at St John's Wood, Middlesex on 1 January 1815. However, her body continued to be the site of conflicting and confusing interpretations. Dr Mathias, who was also present at the autopsy, sought to give physical explanations for the symptoms of pregnancy in his 'The Case of Johanna Southcott' (1815): the body, he argued, was already livid and putrid; he found four inches of fat on the abdomen, and glandular enlargement of the breasts; and he blamed the supposed quickness felt in her abdomen on extreme flatus in the intestines. On dissecting the uterus, no foetus was found. Or, as the believers put it, Shiloh had mysteriously disappeared. 
After Southcott's death the movement splintered and prophets of Shiloh proliferated, among which John Ward's Shilohites and John Wroe's Christian Israelites were the most prominent. A core of her inner circle kept the faith quietly, remaining loyal to Southcott's work, as signified by their protection of the 'great box', which contained the sealed prophecies that were to be opened some time in the unspecified future by the bishops. The box had been made by William Sharp in 1801 to contain Southcott's prophecies and letters, which were opened at her second and third trials. In 1816 the box was passed to Jane Townley, and upon her death in 1825 to Thomas Philip Foley, and finally in 1835 to Foley's son, the Revd Richard Foley (died 1861). In 1839, in order to gain control of Southcott's legacy, Lavinia Taylor Jones (niece of Lucy Taylor, Southcott's Exeter employer) dressed as a man to enter Richard Foley's rectory, where she tried to steal the 'great box'. Sometime after that, rival boxes began to appear. As recently as 1977, the Panacea Society, a twentieth-century millenarian group dedicated to rehabilitating Southcott's reputation, claimed to know the secret whereabouts of the true box (Exell, 55-62). In 1966 interest of a different and scholarly sort was enkindled, when E. P. Thompson, in full appreciation of Southcott's working-class origins and enduring appeal, called her England's 'greatest prophetess of all' (Thompson, 382). 


@@@@@


doc= 26051


Southern, Henry (1799-1853), journalist and diplomatist, was born at York, the son of Richard Southern, a barber. After attending school in York he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a sizar on 31 December 1814, graduated BA in 1819 as twenty-second senior optime, and proceeded MA in 1822. On 23 January 1822 he became a member of the Middle Temple, but he was not called to the bar. Meanwhile, he had founded the 'Retrospective Review', whose first number appeared in January 1820. Dedicated to the promotion of early English literature, most particularly of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the 'Review' provided 'valuable criticisms upon, analyses of, and extracts from curious, valuable, and scarce old books' (Introduction, 'Retrospective Review' 1, 1820). Southern wrote a good deal of the material himself but also managed to recruit a number of talented, and often young, contributors, including Charles Wentworth Dilke, Thomas Noon Talfourd, the Unitarian William Johnson Fox, John Hamilton Reynolds, and Charles Barker, a friend from Trinity College (and possibly a schoolfellow), who acted as his assistant. Southern was sole editor of the 'Review' until 1826, when the antiquary Sir Nicholas Harris Nicolas became his partner. The magazine folded in 1828. 
By this time, however, Southern had been associated with other journals. When Jeremy Bentham founded the 'Westminster Review' in 1824, he invited him to take charge of its literary pages alongside John Bowring, who was the political editor. Charles Barker again agreed to share Southern's duties. By now a confirmed Benthamite and a Unitarian, Southern took a distinctly utilitarian view of contemporary literature, tending to dismiss much of it as irrational, sentimental, and anti-progressive. He especially denigrated fashionable novels and light verse. Nevertheless, he impressed many, including Henry Crabb Robinson who was struck early on by his 'talent and learning'. The two became friends, though it was not an entirely happy relationship, Crabb Robinson often complaining in his diary of Southern's insobriety (which Francis Place also noticed) and his habit of not paying his debts. His friend's unwillingness to pay him for contributions to the 'Westminster', added to Southern's attack in its pages on Crabb Robinson's friend Ayrton, led to a final break. Crabb Robinson declared in exasperation that Southern had become a 'fanatic of reform' and an 'iconoclast'. Southern relinquished his role as co-editor of the 'Westminster' in 1827, though he continued to write for it. 
For nearly three years Southern had been associated with the 'London Magazine', first as associate editor, then from January 1825 as the editor of a new series. He took over the ownership of the magazine in the following September. Under its new proprietor the once celebrated 'London', which had been steadily losing readers, went into an even steeper decline principally because Southern used it as a medium for the social and political concerns of utilitarianism, rather than for promoting the best of contemporary literature. To Charles Lamb, Southern's February number of 1825 was 'all trash'. By the following August, when Lamb's final article appeared, the 'London' had 'fallen'. A drastic loss of readers necessitated Southern's sale of the magazine to Charles Knight in April 1828, by which time he was busily employed as a freelance. He contributed to early issues of 'The Atlas' newspaper and wrote on literature for 'The Spectator' at a reported $5 a week under the sobriquet of O'Higgins, after the former dictator of Chile. 
From September 1828 Southern was a regular contributor to the 'Foreign Quarterly Review', where he evinced a special interest in French politics and literature, and also in the reform of education and prison discipline. He embraced Jean-Joseph Jacotot's system of education which was critical of 'mechanical' learning. He also promoted the American system of prison discipline that relied on solitary, rather than communal, detention, and he approved of the American privatization of prisons. Southern was an opponent of transportation to Australia and forced labour, and he frequently held up Bentham's Panopticon scheme as an ideal. His tastes at this time were 'most miscellaneous', according to a letter he wrote to Macvey Napier, editor of the 'Edinburgh Review', to whom he offered an article on Aboriginal life in Australia and an account of the Belgian communes. His interest in foreign politics had already been reflected in his freelance contributions to the 'Westminster' and when, in August 1830, revolution broke out in Belgium he lost no time in visiting Brussels, talking to politicians and reporting on the trial of De Potter. He later published graphic accounts of his experiences in the 'Foreign Quarterly Review', 'Fraser's Magazine', and the 'Westminster'. At this time Southern was also writing for the 'New Monthly Magazine', the 'United Service Journal', and, like many of his fellow utilitarians, for the radical 'Examiner'. 
In 1833 Southern's former colleague on the 'Westminster', John Bowring, recommended him to Sir George Villiers, ambassador to Spain, as his private secretary. Southern duly accompanied Villiers to Madrid and by the following year had been promoted at the minister's request to an unpaid post as attache to the legation. He was made paid attache in August 1835 when his predecessor, Newton Savile Scott, moved to The Hague. Villiers regarded Southern as his 'right-hand man' and thanked Palmerston for giving him an attache with 'worth and abilities... of no ordinary kind' (Bullen and Strong, 281). He proved invaluable in helping Villiers draw up a trade treaty, and his close contacts with the Spanish, particularly the liberals, enabled him to handle the Cadiz junta effectively in 1836. An attack on Southern in the 'Journal des Debats' of 1 September 1837 alleged that he had taken part in the military insurrection which had made the queen a prisoner, but this was publicly scotched by Villiers and Southern. In April 1838 Southern's intervention on behalf of the gaoled George Borrow contributed to his early release. By 1839 Southern was looking for a post outside diplomacy and Villiers arranged for him to be proposed for the governorship of Mauritius, which had to be taken up immediately. Unfortunately, the resignation of Villiers soon afterwards demanded that Southern, as his deputy, remain behind in Madrid, and the governorship went to another. 
With the arrival of a replacement for Villiers, Southern was appointed secretary of the legation at Lisbon in the autumn of 1839. Here too he felt unfulfilled, and by February 1842 was seeking more active employment from Aberdeen. In the following May he wrote again to Aberdeen requesting to be reconsidered for the vacant governorship of Mauritius, as the 'great object' of his ambition was to have 'the political management and administration of a Colony' (Southern to Aberdeen, BL, Add. MS 43229, fol. 141), but was again unsuccessful. He was an assiduous secretary and ensured that his former master Villiers was kept informed of events in Portugal and elsewhere. One report of forty-four pages on the September 1843 conclave at Chateau d'Eu was based on a confidential communication from Aberdeen himself. During the civil war of 1846-7 in Portugal, Southern's strong sympathy for the Septembrists (in opposition to Howard de Walden's equally fervent support for Queen Isabella) prompted Palmerston to reassure the governments of Spain and France that the Septembrists were not Miguelites. On 31 May 1848 Southern was appointed minister to the Argentine confederation and on 29 August 1851 was promoted to the court of Brazil, having been made a companion of the Bath in the previous March. He died a bachelor on 28 January 1853 at Rio de Janeiro. 


@@@@@


doc= 26052


Southern, John (fl. 1584), poet, is known primarily for his translations and imitations of the poetry of the Pleiade. It has been speculated that he was either born or educated in France; however, contemporary courtly references and his own identification as an exemplary English poet, 'a well learned voice' in 'our England', suggest an English nationality, perhaps connected to the Shropshire family of Southern. 
In 1584 Southern published his only volume of verse, 'Pandora, the Musyque of the Beautie, of his Mistresse Diana', dedicated to Edward de Vere, seventeenth earl of Oxford. This collection of lyrics largely consists of acknowledged and unacknowledged translations of the poetry of Pierre de Ronsard and Philippe Desportes, and is characterized by distinct technical anomalies for the period -- the use of arrhythmic metres, idiosyncratic principles of rhyming, and abbreviated forms of proper nouns. This unconventional style also characterizes four sonnets and two sestets attributed in the text to the countess of Oxford, Anne Cecil de Vere, epitaphs written 'after the death of her young sonne the Lord Bulbecke', as well as a single sonnet attributed in the text to Elizabeth I, an epitaph for the martial protestant princess of the Netherlands, Philippine-Christine de Lalaing. The sonnets attributed to both women contain substantial sections of translation from Desportes's 'Cartels et masquarades, epitaphes', but the stylistic eccentricities of these sonnets, coupled with their presence in a volume of similar translations, suggest that the women's texts are both examples of prosopopoeia written by Southern. 
Southern's methods of translation attracted Puttenham's criticism in 'The Arte of English Poesie' (1589). Although the entry for Southern opens with his description as one 'of reasonable good facilitie in translation', Puttenham's criticism centres upon Southern's use of French terms in the place of English words, seen as a corruption of the vernacular with 'no maner of conformitie with our language either by custome or derivation which may make them tollerable'. Puttenham takes exception to Southern's claim to be the first to imitate Pindar -- not because of the claim itself but because of its phrasing as an exact translation of Ronsard's identical claim, and uses him as an example of the vice of unattributed translation: 'for in deede as I would wish every inventour which is the very Poet to receave the prayses of his invention, so would I not have a translatour be ashamed to be acknowen of his translation' (Puttenham, 252-3). Informed by a particularized opposition to the admonitory protestant politics of Southern's text and its unauthorized appropriation of Elizabeth's poetic voice, Puttenham's criticisms are countered by Drayton's qualified praise in 'Southerne an English Lyrick' in 'Poemes Lyrick and Pastorall' (1603): '
Southern, I long thee spare, 

Yet wish thee well to fare, 

Who me pleased'st greatly, 

As first, therefore more rare, 

Handling thy harpe neatly. 

' Two copies of 'Pandora' survive: one in the Huntington Library, which belonged to Richard Heber, and a second in the British Museum, which belonged to George Steevens and which contains copious annotations in his hand. 


@@@@@


doc= 26053


Southerne, Thomas (1660-1746), playwright, was born at Oxmantown, near Dublin, the third son of Francis Southerne (died 1678), a brewer. His mother's name is not known. He attended the grammar school of Edward Wetenhall in Dublin, then Trinity College, Dublin, though there is no record of his having been awarded a BA degree. He was, however, awarded an MA degree in 1696. 
Southerne left Dublin for London in 1680 and on 15 July of that year was admitted to the Middle Temple. Right from the start his chief interest was not the law but the theatre, and in 1682 he prevailed on the management of Drury Lane to stage his first play, 'The Loyal Brother', with tory-leaning prologue and epilogue supplied by Dryden. The play, like many others of that time, pillories Shaftesbury and exalts the reputation of James, duke of York, as 'the loyal brother' -- all this in the most transparent and facile political allegory, written partly in prose and partly in blank verse. It was well received in its day and was followed two years later by 'The Disappointment, or, The Mother in Fashion' (1684), also acted at Drury Lane, with a special command performance for Charles II and his queen given only two weeks before the king's death. This play, a typical enough imitation of the Restoration intrigue play, shows also some signs of the new tendency towards sentimentalism which was to reach its full flowering in the work of Cibber, Steele, and the eighteenth-century writers generally. 
Southerne's next play suffered a violent and lengthy interruption, as he himself explains in its preface: 'This tragedy was begun a year before the Revolution [that is, in 1687] and near four acts written... Many things interfering with those times, I laid by what I had written for seventeen years.' The play was called 'The Spartan Dame' and it did not reach the stage until 1719. Southerne had joined the army in June 1685 and, making profitable use of his good standing with the duke of York, later James II (accruing from the flattery lavished on the duke in 'The Loyal Brother'), had climbed from ensign to lieutenant between 1685 and 1688. After 1688 Thomas Southerne was not moved, either by his enthusiasm for his former patron or by his general sympathy with the tory faction, to continue actively in the Jacobite cause and by December 1690 he was back in the theatre with his first comedy, 'Sir Anthony Love, or, The Rambling Lady'. Gerard Langbaine, in 'An Account of the English Dramatic Poets', said of it: 'This play was acted with extraordinary applause, the part of Sir Anthony being most masterly play'd by Mrs. Montfort: and certainly, whoever reads it, will find it fraught with true wit and humour' (Langbaine, 184). The 'extraordinary applause' apparently encouraged Southerne. During the next five years he produced four plays, all presented at Drury Lane: 'The Wives' Excuse, or, Cuckolds Make Themselves' (1692), 'The Maid's Last Prayer, or, Any Rather than Fail' (1692), 'The Fatal Marriage, or, The Innocent Adultery' (1694), and 'Oroonoko, or, The Royal Slave' (1696). The first was not a success at the time and failed to secure its place in repertory, despite having a potent advocate in Dryden, who wrote a ludicrously complimentary verse epistle to accompany its publication in 1692. Its reputation revived somewhat in the twentieth century, however, and it was staged by the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1994-5. The last two, both tragedies and both adapted (rather freely) from novels by Aphra Behn, were particularly successful with audiences and both remained in the standard repertory well into the nineteenth century. 
After the sudden spate of plays from 1690 to 1695 there was a gap of five years in Southerne's writing before 'The Fate of Capua' appeared in 1700: a run-of-the-mill 'heroic tragedy' of a mediocre kind, there has never been, either in its own time or since, any critical debate about its undoubted mediocrity. Nineteen years elapsed before another new Southerne play appeared, and even then it was not really a new play but the resuscitated 'The Spartan Dame', long suppressed for political reasons but finally revised, sanitized, completed, and produced in 1719. And for the whole of that long interval there is very little solid information about Southerne's life and activities. There are occasional passing mentions of him -- always kindly, always admiring: he seems to have been, uniquely among the public figures of the age, quite free from either malice or envy. Especially was he known for being ready to help other playwrights, particularly the young and as yet untried, with their plans and ambitions. It was he, for example, who recommended Colley Cibber's first play -- 'Love's Last Shift' -- in 1696 to Christopher Rich, the manager of Drury Lane. 
From an anonymous satire written in 1703 it appears that about that time Southerne married: '
For since the Marriage-Yoke he has put on, 

He drinks 'Champaign' and quits the Helycon. 
('Religio poetae, or, A Satyr on the Poets', 1703, 9)' Whether married or not, Southerne certainly had a daughter because his will, dated 6 November 1731, makes 'my dear daughter Agnes' sole executrix, responsible for paying 'all my Just and lawfull debts' (Dodds, 'Appendix', 218). 
Increasingly Southerne became a welcome guest and a trusted friend of the rich and famous. Dryden had long been his close acquaintance: as early as 1691 the elder poet, who fell ill while struggling to complete his play 'Cleomenes', had asked his young colleague to complete the last act for him, and this Southerne has successfully achieved. Through his middle years Southerne is frequently mentioned -- and never other than kindly -- in the 'vers de societe' with which poets and poetasters alike littered literary London in the early eighteenth century. And in his old age he remained, still, quite literally the toast of the town. For the greater part of that time he lived with Mr Whyte, an oilman, in Tothill Street, against Dartmouth Street, until he moved to his final home in Smith Street, also in Westminster. On his eighty-first birthday he was invited to dine with Lord Orrery where he received a graceful verse panegyric from Pope. 
Southerne, almost alone among Restoration dramatists, made playwriting pay. 'Oroonoko' and 'The Fatal Marriage', in particular, made him quite wealthy. But whatever the magic touch was, it deserted him finally: his last play, 'Money the Mistress', a comedy written when he was sixty-six, was hissed off the stage, but by then (1725) he was secure enough financially to absorb the loss without its threatening his lifestyle. In 1733 Swift wrote from Dublin to Pope in London: 'Our old friend Southern ['sic'], who has just left us, was invited to dinner once or twice by a judge, a bishop, or a commissioner of revenue, but most frequented a few particular friends, and chiefly the Doctor, who is so easy in his fortune, and very hospitable.('Correspondence of Jonathan Swift', ed. H. Williams, 1965, 4.170; the 'Doctor' referred to is Dr Delaney)' John Boyle, earl of Orrery was one of Southerne's especial friends. In the summer of 1733, for example, he wrote to Southerne from Ireland with genuine warmth and affection. Addressing him as 'dear Brother poet' he begged Southerne not to risk another journey to Ireland but instead to 'go and regale thyself amongst my Ancestours at Marston. Pillard shall open my Cellars, and Marston shall be your own house as long as you will think it worth making it so' (Dodds, 17). 
Another of Southerne's distinguished friends in later life was the poet Thomas Gray, who in 1737 wrote to Horace Walpole: 'We have old Mr. Southern ['sic'] at a gentleman's house a little way off, who often comes to see us; he is now seventy-seven years old and has almost wholly lost his memory; but is as agreeable as an old man can be, at least I persuade myself so when I look at him and think of Isabella [in 'The Fatal Marriage'] and Oronooko.' Gray was by no means the only one to remember Southerne's career chiefly for these two plays, both of which remained in the English theatre repertory throughout the eighteenth century and one of which continued to hold the stage much longer than that: Garrick played Oronooko in 1759, Kean played it in 1817 (Hazlitt thought it 'one of his best parts' (see 'Works', ed. A. R. Waller and A. Glover, 12 vols., 1902-4, 11.301)), Junius Brutus Booth played the first American performance of it in New York in 1832 -- and Ralph Richardson played it at the Malvern festival in 1932. 
Thomas Southerne died in London, aged eighty-six, on 26 May 1746. He was buried on 29 May at St Margaret's, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 26054


Southey, Caroline Anne Bowles (1786-1854), poet and writer, was born on 6 December 1786 at Buckland Manor near Lymington, Hampshire, the daughter of Captain Charles Bowles (1737-1801), who had retired from the East India Company, and Anne Burrard (1753-1817), the sister of Lieutenant-General Sir Harry Burrard (bap. 1755, d. 1813). Some sources give Caroline Bowles's birth date as 1787, and she herself in later life claimed not to know which was correct; the confusion arose because she was not christened until January 1787 as the weather was too severe earlier to take an infant to church. The Burrard family were powerful local dignitaries, and had provided shire councillors and mayors for Lymington as early as the sixteenth century. Charles Bowles was initially backed by the Burrard family (he served as mayor three times), but proved ineffectual as a country squire and later subsided into melancholia, moving his family from the extensive manor farm to the much more modest Buckland Cottage while his daughter was very young. She grew up as an only child in a largely female household (her mother's mother and Jersey grandmother lived with them) in idyllic rural surroundings on the edge of the New Forest, with summers spent by the sea at her uncle Harry's home at Calshot Castle. She learned to read and write very early, and relished parental encouragement for her efforts at verse and also at drawing and painting, for which she also had a gift. This was developed through lessons she received from the local vicar at Boldre church, who happened to be the celebrated 'picturesque' author and artist William Gilpin (1724-1804). Some of her later paintings survive: they are held by the Wordsworth Trust and owned by Keswick School. 
Devoted to her family, Caroline Bowles was devastated by her parents' deaths. Most of her Burrard boy cousins, too, were killed very young on active service. By 1817 she was left to live alone with only her faithful old nurse for company. Threatened with loss of her home in 1818, owing to mismanagement by a guardian, she sought advice about publication of her 'metrical verse tale' first from the poet laureate Robert Southey, whose publisher John Murray admired it but feared it would not sell; next from the poet and editor James Montgomery. At this point one Colonel Bruce, a mysterious adopted son of her father's, made his appearance from India, coming to the rescue by settling on his 'sister' an annuity of $150. She went ahead with (anonymous) publication of her verse tale, and 'Ellen Fitzarthur: a Poem in Five Cantos' went through two editions (1820, 1822) when eventually brought out by Longmans. 

Robert Southey (1774-1843) became Caroline Bowles's mentor and friend first by correspondence, later in person: they met in London in 1820, and she visited him at home with his family in the Lake District in 1823. Their correspondence and friendship continued, and finally, after his first wife died, he became her husband: they married on 4 June 1839 when she was fifty-two and he was sixty-five, thinking to spend their declining years working side by side. Before her marriage she had published five volumes of poetry, two of prose sketches, 'Chapters on Churchyards' (2 vols., 1829), and one of mixed prose and verse, 'Solitary Hours' (1826). Most of her work was published initially in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' -- where she built a wide reputation as the author of the 'Chapters' in particular -- followed by volume publication with the same firm. She felt a strong kinship with William Blackwood senior whose brand of old-fashioned toryism matched her own (her lively letters to Blackwood are preserved in the National Library of Scotland). Gradually she learned to assert herself as a professional writer, although, disliking publicity, she clung to anonymity until 1836 when she brought out over her own name her major work, an (unfinished) autobiography, 'The Birth-Day'. Written in blank verse of suppleness, authority, and conversational ease (though with moments of diffidence), it brought her mixed censure and praise; John Wilson (Christopher North) being one of her major champions. It recounts the story of her solitary childhood among a loving family and a menagerie of animal friends, as well as (more mutedly) her frustration with an anti-intellectual environment and limited educational opportunities. The sombreness of the poet's viewpoint as a lonely and bereaved adult provides throughout a constant counterpoint to the often humorous narrative of the child's experiences. 
Unlike many of her female contemporaries, Caroline Southey rarely made romantic love the subject of her writings: the beauties of the natural world seemed to hold more charm for her, although she disliked sentimentality. Her work varied in genre from prose fiction (more popular than her verse during her lifetime), through verse satire ('The Cat's Tail', 1830), dramatic monologue ('Tales of the Factories', 1833), and verse narrative ('Ellen Fitzarthur', 'The Birth-Day') to lyric poetry. Although physically tiny and often plagued by ill health, she possessed great personal courage, ready to repel intruders with her father's pistols while living alone at Buckland during the threshing-machine riots of the early 1830s, and never hesitating to speak out against injustice. Her 'Tales of the Factories' were among the earliest of that kind of protest poetry, preceding both Caroline Norton's and Elizabeth Barrett's works in the genre. Her surviving correspondence gives the salty flavour of her character, with her gift for expressing herself with down-to-earth immediacy and pungent turns of phrase: 'It is no use to stand shivering and 'shilly shallying' under the shower Bath -- Best pull the string, and get the shock over...' (this to her aunt, about her own forthcoming marriage; see Blain, 200). Her correspondence with Southey was published in 1881. 
Possessing a fine ear equally for metre and for natural speech rhythms, Caroline Southey mastered the traditional difficulties of blank verse in 'The Birth-Day' (more than 3000 lines long), as well as a variety of lyric forms in her shorter poems. Robert Southey recognized her genius long before he came to love her. However, she was never able to fulfil his dearest wish that they should jointly write an epic on Robin Hood: mainly because she could not abide the ungainly metre he insisted upon (the same as for his 'Thalaba', which Coleridge once described as a kind of dumb-bell exercise). 'Robin Hood' remained unfinished at Southey's death, and in 1847 Caroline Southey published the fragment in a jointly authored volume of that name, the bulk of which however, consisted of her own work, including her fine, sad sonnets on the marriage. Invariably, however, the volume is catalogued as his. 
'The last three years have done on me the work of twenty', Caroline Southey wrote to Lydia Sigourney (Sigourney, 39) shortly before her husband's death, and indeed she never fully recovered from the emotional trauma of finding soon after their marriage that Robert Southey's endearing absent-mindedness was but the first stage of a rapidly advancing senile dementia. She threw herself loyally into full-time caring for him, but her situation as second wife in the household at Greta Hall in Keswick was virtually untenable. Robert Southey's daughter Kate, who was his housekeeper, hugely resented her intrusion, and she fought so bitterly with his son Cuthbert, whom she felt to be neglectful of his father, that he all but obliterated her from his published account of his father's life. The tensions at Greta Hall became the subject of widespread gossip, harming Caroline Southey's literary as well as her personal reputation. Wordsworth, for example, initially an admirer, sided with the children against her. Many assumed incorrectly that Caroline Bowles had married for money -- in fact, she had forfeited Colonel Bruce's annuity on her marriage, and was forced to dip into her own savings to pay the household bills when her husband became very quickly incapacitated. She spent her days by his side in his study, although he could no longer write or even read much: his dependence was total. Her tactless possessiveness did not help the situation with his children, though she made firm friends with his eldest daughter Edith and her husband John Wood Warter, later editor of Southey's letters and of her own 'Poetical Works' (1867). 
After Robert Southey's death from typhus in March 1843, Caroline Southey was obliged to leave Greta Hall immediately and return to Buckland, where she spent her remaining years in increasing ill health, writing no more. In 1852 she was awarded a civil-list pension of $200. She died at Buckland Cottage, Lymington, on 20 July 1854, and was buried among Burrard family members in St Thomas's churchyard, Lymington. 


@@@@@


doc= 26055


Southey, Henry Herbert (1784-1865), physician, son of Robert Southey (1745-1792), linen draper, and Margaret Hill (1752-1802), and younger brother of the poet Robert Southey, was born at Bristol on 17 January 1784. He was educated at private schools in and around Great Yarmouth, and in particular with George Burnett, a Unitarian minister in Great Yarmouth, and with Mr Maurice of Normanstown, near Lowestoft. His older brother Robert wanted to bring him up to his house in London so that he could study anatomy under Sir Anthony Carlisle at Westminster Hospital and go on to university at Edinburgh or in Germany. This plan fell through and Henry studied at Norwich under Philip Meadows Martineau, uncle of Harriet Martineau and a distinguished surgeon. While there he became friendly with William Taylor, a Unitarian, who supervised his extra-professional studies. In November 1803 he entered Edinburgh University to study medicine. There he made lifelong friends with a group of fellow medical students, William Knighton, Lockyer of Plymouth, Fearon of Sunderland, and Robert Gooch; the five of them acquired an unusual facility in colloquial Latin and used to speak it together. Southey also wrote Latin elegantly, a skill highly prized at the time, and rarely travelled without a copy of Horace or Virgil in his pocket. He graduated MD on 24 June 1806, producing an interesting dissertation on the origins and course of syphilis which suggested an American origin for the disease. 
Southey then studied for a year at one of the London hospitals, as was common on graduating from Edinburgh, and in 1807 settled in Durham as a general physician, although the opportunities were limited. In 1812 he moved back to London on the advice of Knighton and became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 22 December 1812. In 1814 he published 'Observations on pulmonary consumption', which may have helped in his attempt to obtain a position in one of the London hospitals. Southey was finally elected physician to the Middlesex Hospital on 17 August 1815, and four days later married his first wife, Louisa Gonne (died 1830), at St Leonard's Church, Streatham. Southey remained at the Middlesex until April 1827. In the meantime, owing to considerable support from Knighton, he was appointed physician-in-ordinary to George IV in 1823, and in 1830 physician-extraordinary to Queen Adelaide. He became FRCP on 25 June 1823 and he took on a variety of roles in the college throughout his life. He was elected FRS on 25 April 1825. In 1828, on the recommendation of Sir Henry Halford, he was appointed a metropolitan lunacy commissioner under the 1828 'Madhouse Act', one of the reasons being that although he had a reputation as a good physician with a knowledge of mental illness he was not 'overwhelmed with private practice'. 
In 1830 Southey's wife, Louisa, died in childbirth, little Louisa being their tenth child. This left him in a desperate position, both financially and in terms of pursuing a career. His role as a metropolitan lunacy commissioner paid only expenses. However, by mid-1833 he had met and married his second wife, Clara (1798-1858), and although they went on to have a further five children his appointment the same year as a lord chancellor's medical visitor in lunacy, with a salary of $1500, gave him the financial security he needed. Writing in July to thank his friend Lord Brougham for appointing him, he commented, this 'will relieve me from pecuniary anxiety for the rest of my life'. Together with John Bright he simultaneously held office in the Lord Chancellor's Department and the metropolitan lunacy commission until 1845. In that year Southey was named as one of the full-time lunacy commissioners under Lord Shaftesbury's 'Lunacy Act', but it was clear that he could not perform the duties of both salaried posts. He promptly resigned from the new commission, preferring to remain a lord chancellor's visitor in lunacy, a post he held until his death. From 1834 to 1865 he was also Gresham professor of medicine, and on 16 June 1847 was created honorary DCL at Oxford. 
As a young man Southey was noted for his good looks, athletic prowess, and fondness for field sports. He was an accomplished society physician, discreet, polite, and with a kind heart. Despite only a short period of practice in the north of England he attracted the support of a number of great aristocratic families there. He was also the grateful recipient of three significant legacies from non-relatives, a testament to his popularity. He was one of a number of London physicians who built up private practices which they extended to the private care of the mentally ill, but most importantly he helped carve out a strong role for the lord chancellor's medical visitors. This body ensured a high degree of privacy for wealthy families with mentally ill relatives, although it came into conflict with Lord Shaftesbury's lunacy commission. Southey was one of those who opposed amalgamation of the two authorities. 
In June 1858 Southey's second wife, Clara, died at their home in Queen Anne Street, Cavendish Square, London. He himself died at 1 Harley Street on 13 June 1865 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26056


Southey, Robert (1774-1843), poet and reviewer, was born in Wine Street, Bristol, on 12 August 1774. He was the second son of Robert Southey (1745-1792), a linen draper descended from a family of Somerset woollen manufacturers and farmers. Robert the elder was not successful in business, and in 1792 became bankrupt. The poet's mother, Margaret (1752-1802), daughter of Edward and Margaret Hill, belonged to a higher social class: minor gentry from Herefordshire and Somerset. Her brother, Herbert Hill, was chaplain to the British factory in Porto, Portugal, and was an important influence on Robert during his adolescence and young manhood. But it was Margaret's half-sister Elizabeth Tyler who took responsibility for Robert in his childhood: he lived with her almost exclusively until the age of seven, and even after that she exerted a dominating authority. She lived in Bath, thus distancing herself from her socially inferior relatives in Bristol, and took pains to keep the boy away from playmates and the usual activities of childhood. In compensation she had a passion for the theatre which she allowed Robert to share: he saw his first play at the age of four, and was early seized with the ambition to write plays himself. 
The informal autobiography that Southey wrote in letters to a friend between 1820 and 1825 vividly conjures up his varied experiences of repression and bullying. The picture he gives of the schools he attended (a dame-school, two grammar schools in Bristol, and a boarding-school at Corston) is one of incompetence and brutality, though he felt that the years at his second grammar school, while unprofitable, were not unhappy. He early took to the writing of poetry, his first effort, at the age of nine or ten, being a sequel to the 'Orlando Furioso'. Subsequent projects included historical epics, heroic epistles, a satire, some translations, and a play about the Trojan war. At the outset he thus displayed the versatility which was to mark the whole of his literary career. His reading, too, was immense. He particularly admired the great romantic epics of Ariosto, Tasso, and Spenser. 
In 1788 Southey's uncle Herbert Hill had him entered at Westminster School, with a view to gaining admission to Oxford University and so to a career in the church. Here again he had to suffer the bullying and brutality of the kind experienced at his earlier schools, but he also made lasting friendships, recorded in a mass of carefully preserved correspondence. One of these friends was Charles Watkin Williams Wynn, who came from a prominent whig family in Wales. In due course he was sufficiently affluent to help Southey with a modest annuity, and in 1808 sufficiently influential to replace this with a government pension. Southey's other close friend, Grosvenor Charles Bedford, lived near London, and his family's collection of modern books was available to Southey when he visited. Voltaire, Rousseau, Gibbon, and Goethe's 'Sorrows of Young Werther' combined to unsettle his religious beliefs, and to produce the subversive state of mind that led to his expulsion from the school. He and his friends produced a periodical after the manner of 'The Spectator' and 'The Rambler', entitled 'The Flagellant', and at the end of March 1792 Southey contributed an attack on corporal punishment as an invention of the devil. This was too much for Dr Vincent, the headmaster, who not only expelled Southey forthwith but also warned Christ Church, the Oxford college where he expected to be enrolled, that he was an undesirable character. 
Although Dr Vincent had done his best to protect Oxford from Southey's malign influence, Balliol College took a more relaxed view, and he matriculated there in November 1792, coming into residence in the following January. In the months after his expulsion from Westminster his state of mind fluctuated between near despair and exhilaration. He was encouraged by the way in which the ideas of Paine and the power of the French Revolution seemed to be triumphing over the corrupt old order, but the political atmosphere changed abruptly at the end of the year with the prospect of war between France and Britain. Southey remained faithful to his radicalism, but it was an anxious fidelity. His insecurity was heightened by his father's bankruptcy and death in the autumn of 1792. 
At Balliol College, Southey found little to stimulate him, apart from some congenial new friends, notably another prospective ordinand, Edmund Seward, whose austere Christian stoicism was to be a lifelong influence. But Southey's own rejection of orthodoxy made him increasingly resistant to the idea of becoming a clergyman, and he evidently put a good deal more energy into his literary projects than into his studies. It was in 1793 that he wrote the first version of 'Joan of Arc', a democratic epic that celebrated a woman who was also an enemy of England. Still, he could not make a living by such outrageous challenges to convention, and by the end of 1793 he decided that he would have to make a career for himself in medicine. (His younger brother Henry Herbert Southey became a physician.) But sessions in the dissecting-room disgusted and disenchanted him, and he then wondered if he might follow Grosvenor Bedford into government service in the exchequer. He soon discovered that his reputation as a republican put this out of the question. 
In despair Southey's thoughts turned to emigration, an idea which was the more attractive since he found himself in love with a Bristol seamstress, Edith Fricker (1774-1837), and wanted to marry her. And then in June 1794 Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772-1834) visited Oxford and was introduced to Southey. They took to each other at once, gave each other confidence in their speculations, and by the following month had devised the scheme of pantisocracy -- the establishment of an egalitarian settlement in North America. Southey was mainly responsible for persuading people to join the enterprise. He recruited members of his family and a number of his friends, including Edith Fricker and her sisters. Coleridge provided most of the theory underpinning the project, and confirmed his commitment by marrying Edith's younger sister Sara. 
Southey had been reading William Godwin's recently published treatise 'Political Justice'. Its faith in the inevitable triumph of a society based on reason attracted him, as did the role which Godwin saw literature playing in this desirable process. Pantisocracy would provide a foretaste of this triumph, and it gave him 'new life, new hope, new energy'. All the faculties of his mind, he said, were dilated (letter of 12 Oct 1794, 'New Letters', 1.81-2). He left Oxford and spent the next year and a quarter in the west of England, much of it in the animating company of Coleridge. While planning emigration the two men gave ingeniously subversive public lectures. Their conversation, too, seems to have been downright audacious. They collaborated in writing a verse play on the death of Robespierre, and Southey composed a similar piece on Wat Tyler, who he supposed (thinking of his aunt) might be one of his forebears. It was at this time that he wrote his 'Botany Bay Eclogues', exposing the injustices of the English legal system, and the experiments in classical metres ('The Soldier's Wife', 'The Widow') so mercilessly parodied by George Canning in 'The Anti-Jacobin'. 
But the exhilaration of this period could not be sustained. Pantisocracy failed because Southey and Coleridge lacked the money even to travel to Pennsylvania, let alone establish their settlement. Southey himself was in increased financial difficulties because Miss Tyler had cast him off when she learned of the emigration plan and the engagement to a seamstress. As time went on, too, Coleridge's flamboyant radicalism, coupled with his less stable temperament, created tensions which led to an estrangement. Southey's uncle in Portugal helpfully invited his nephew to spend some months in that country, and he left Bristol for Lisbon on 19 November 1795, having secretly married Edith Fricker on the 14th. She took up residence in the family of Joseph Cottle, the bookseller who had agreed to publish 'Joan of Arc' and who later proved to be exceedingly generous in his assistance to both Southey and Coleridge. 
Southey's stay in Spain and Portugal lasted from mid-December to early May in the year following. He visited Madrid, but spent most of his time in and around Lisbon. He obtained a good grounding in both Spanish and Portuguese, but was repelled by his encounter with the Roman Catholic church, a repulsion that proved permanent. In spite of this, and his disgust at the lack of cleanliness that he encountered, Southey enjoyed himself on this visit, an enjoyment manifest in 'Letters Written during a Short Residence in Spain and Portugal' (1797), a miscellany of verse and prose which proved quite popular and soon went into a second edition. 
On his return to England, Southey and Edith began their married life in lodgings, and he embarked on his career as a professional writer. He worked on his Spanish and Portuguese 'Letters', wrote poetry for the 'Monthly Magazine', enjoyed the favourable reception that 'Joan of Arc' received in the reviews, and, thus encouraged, went on with his next epic projects, 'Madoc' and (somewhat later, though published first, in 1801) the Arabian tale 'Thalaba the Destroyer'. 'Joan of Arc', though it had been innovative in subject, was traditional in its blank verse form. But 'Thalaba' was written in an irregular metre that Southey had learned from Frank Sayers's 'Dramatic Sketches of Northern Mythology'. It illustrated some aspects of Islam as Southey understood it, commending the virtues of endurance and faithfulness. The poem at its best suggests an irrepressible buoyancy, as in the hero's journey in the little boat downstream, where: '
The flowing current furrow'd round 

The water-lily's floating leaf 
(11.34, 'Poems', 107)' Southey at this time needed all the resilience he could command, as his circumstances remained disquietingly unsettled. The annuity from Wynn had been offered on the understanding that Southey would study law, so when the first instalment was paid early in 1797 he moved to London and was admitted a member of Gray's Inn. But London suited neither Southey nor Edith, and after some intermediate moves they settled for a few months in Burton in Hampshire, where he made another new friend who became important to him in later years. This was John Rickman, soon to become secretary to the speaker of the House of Commons, and organizer of Britain's first census in 1801. In the next two and a half years Southey was often on the move, staying sometimes in London but more often in various parts of the south and west of England, finding indeed some sense of permanence in Martin Hall, the house he rented in Westbury-on-Trym, near Bristol, from mid-1798 to mid-1799. Throughout this time he was studying law, but devoting more and more time to literature. He had a contract to send poetry to the 'Morning Post', which led to his writing some of his most characteristic short lyrics. Here he showed, like Wordsworth, how far the language of the middle and lower classes was adapted to poetry. His work has less vitality, and is more conventional, than that of his rivals, which may account for his notoriously depreciatory assessment of 'Lyrical Ballads' in the 'Critical Review'. 
Although this was a productive period, its unsettled restlessness weakened Southey's health, and made a visit to a warmer climate desirable. Once again help came from his uncle in Portugal, and he and Edith spent over a year there. By now he had conceived an ambitious project to write a history of Portugal, and he took every opportunity to collect materials, forming the nucleus of his remarkable collection of books in Spanish and Portuguese. This became a lifelong preoccupation, though the only part published was his 'History of Brazil' (1810-19). His health much improved, he returned to England in July 1801. 
Southey's friend Rickman now put him in the way of a post in the government of Ireland, recently reorganized under the 'Act of Union'. He accepted the position of secretary to Isaac Corry, the chancellor of the exchequer there, and spent a fortnight in Dublin in October 1801. But there was no work to be done, and no prospect of any apart from serving as a tutor to Corry's son. So he resigned, the more confidently because he could already feel that his literary reputation, even notoriety, was well established. Thus, when the newly founded and instantly influential 'Edinburgh Review' wanted to attack poetic innovation, it was by way of reviewing 'Thalaba' (1801). Then, too, he had some unusual qualifications: in particular, his knowledge of Spanish and Portuguese, which enabled him to undertake moderately well-paid translation work, notably of 'Amadis of Gaul' (1803), after the original by Vasco Lobeira. He was recruited by Arthur Aikin to deal with a wide range of topics for his 'Annual Review', and for several years this periodical was an important source of income for him. 
Southey passed the winter of 1801-2 in London. It was an unhappy time, as his mother died at the beginning of January, and Edith's health was poor. In May he and Edith returned to Bristol, where in August their first child, Margaret, was born. It now became more pressing for them to find a settled residence, and Coleridge, already occupying Greta Hall in Keswick in the Lake District, urged the couple to join him and Sara there. Southey was at first unwilling because he mistrusted the climate, but when Margaret died in her first year he thought it best for Edith to be with her sister, and they moved to Keswick. It was to be the Southey home for forty years. 
Coleridge's marriage had long been under severe strain, and a few months after the Southeys' arrival he left for Malta in quest of a place in the government there. Southey thus had the responsibility of looking after Coleridge's wife and three children as well as his own. In 1803 Southey, with Joseph Cottle, brought out an edition of Chatterton's poems for the benefit of the poet's family. He later performed the same service for Henry Kirke White in 1807. A second daughter, Edith May, was born to the Southeys in 1804, a son, Herbert, in 1806, then four more daughters, Emma, Bertha, Katharine, and Isabel, and, last of all, a second son, Charles Cuthbert. Southey took great pleasure in his family. As he put it in one of his last books, the rambling miscellany published as 'The Doctor', 'a house is never perfectly furnished for enjoyment, unless there is a child in it rising three years old, and a kitten rising six weeks' (chap. 130, 4.328). Few things distressed him more than the mistreatment of children, and in the same work he deplores the wanton, wicked suffering too often inflicted on them out of obduracy, caprice, stupidity, malignity, cupidity, and cruelty. He made sure that Greta Hall was a good place for young people, and the boisterous good humour that is one of the most attractive features of his work was evidently fostered by his home life. It enabled him to compose the one work of his which has proved unquestionably enduring (admittedly now in a range of corrupted texts), his magnificent version of the story of the Three Bears. Perhaps one might also add the flamboyant evocation of the cataract of Lodore: '
curling and whirling and purling and twirling, 

And thumping and plumping and bumping and jumping, 

And dashing and flashing and splashing and clashing. 
('Poems', 349)' Settled in Keswick, Southey came to know the Wordsworths well, at first because of their association with Coleridge, but soon, living as they did not far away in Grasmere, out of neighbourly sympathy. Through the Wordsworths he was introduced to the young Thomas De Quincey, whose vivid memories of the lake poets were later to cause great resentment. In 1805 he met Walter Scott and liked him very much, finding his conservative political outlook increasingly congenial. From the time of Southey's withdrawal from the pantisocracy scheme, his radical enthusiasm had weakened, but there were considerable fluctuations in his political sentiments. Until perhaps 1808 or 1809 he liked to think of himself as a Jacobin. Certainly many of the poems he wrote for the 'Morning Post' in 1798 are emphatically subversive. He always insisted on free and fearless thinking in religious matters. He never modified his disparagement of William Pitt, whose war policy he abominated. In 1807 he and Wordsworth shocked De Quincey with their cheerfully irreverent republican views (De Quincey, 204-5). With the breakdown in 1803 of the brief peace of Amiens, however, he adopted the traditional British hostility to the French with enthusiasm. The hostility reached a climax in 1808 when the French invaded his beloved Spain and Portugal. From then onwards he saw the war as a crusade, and those who opposed it as little better than traitors. His most ambitious publication during this period was 'Madoc' (1805), a long narrative celebrating the civilizing mission of virtuous Europeans in overcoming an inhumane culture in Mexico. He attached particular importance to this poem, regarding his previous work as exercises to prepare him for its composition. 'I looked to this', he wrote in a draft preface (prudently discarded) 'as the monument to perpetuate my memory' (Keswick Museum and Art Gallery, MS 221.1). The indifference of the reading public on this occasion disappointed him. 
Southey's state of mind in his first years at Greta Hall emerges clearly from 'Letters from England' (1807), the supposed work of an imaginary Spanish traveller, Don Manuel Alvarez Espriella. The temper is generally relaxed, but he finds some aspects of English life alarming, particularly in its industrial and commercial expansion. He compares commerce to a witch who has cast a baleful spell on the entire population, tainting every aspect of society. There is too much wealth and too much poverty. Only a taxation policy aimed at breaking down great properties might serve to break the enchantment. The theme of sinister magic is one to which Southey recurs in his poetry, and in this respect he may have spoken to a rather pervasive anxiety at the time. Meanwhile his work as a translator of Portuguese and Spanish came to fruition in 'Palmerin of England' (1807) and 'Chronicle of the Cid' (1808), a skilful fusion of several sources. 
Southey would have given up writing his own poetry altogether had it not been for Walter Savage Landor, whom he met in 1808. Landor offered to subsidize the publication of any future epics, an encouragement which prompted Southey to continue writing his next major poem, 'The Curse of Kehama' (1810). This was a romance, like 'Thalaba' in irregular verse, taking Hinduism as a background to a story of resilient endurance. The invulnerability of the hero, Ladurlad, profoundly gratifies Southey's imagination, as does the eternal punishment inflicted on the aspiring Kehama: '
And while within the burning anguish flows, 

His outward body glows 

Like molten ore, beneath the avenging Eye, 

Doom'd thus to live and burn eternally. 
(24.18, 'Poems', 206)' 


'Kehama' was published some two years after the outbreak of the Peninsular War, and by that time the euphoria attending its first phase was beginning to give way to an anxiety deepening to panic when he contemplated the political scene in Britain. His earlier Jacobinism ceased to appeal once he was forced to recognize that it was allied with opposition to the war. He was eager to take part in producing a new periodical, the 'Quarterly Review', dedicated to countering the influence of the widely read 'Edinburgh Review', which was proving lukewarm in its support of the Spanish patriots. While he had grave suspicions of the new journal's links with government ministers, the war issue took precedence over everything else. Besides, he was glad to strengthen the opposition to the 'Edinburgh' politically since it had been hostile to his poetry. The pay, too, was excellent. 
At the outset the tory management of the 'Quarterly' did not trust Southey with political subjects. His first contribution was a defence of the Baptist Missionary Society, in effect a reply to a scornful article in the 'Edinburgh'. Even here the editor excised any indication of indifference to theological orthodoxy, and Southey was furious when he saw how cruelly his article had been mutilated. He hoped for better things when, in 1811, he reviewed Charles W. Pasley's 'Essay on the Military Policy and Institutions of the British Empire'. Pasley argued for a more aggressive war policy, with fewer scruples about conquest. Southey called in Rickman to help him with economic arguments to support Pasley's views, and although the resulting article contradicts Southey's enduring hostility to the industrial revolution, he was still gratified at the idea that he was establishing a new and less inhibited habit of thinking about the war. But once again the editor intervened: he called in J. W. Croker to tone down the more offensive passages. Southey refused to acknowledge the review as his when he saw the published version. 
Southey had more freedom of expression in another publishing enterprise. This was the 'history of the year' that he contributed to the 'Edinburgh Annual Register', beginning with 1808. What he wrote in the first volume, which occupied him through the winter of 1809-10, illustrates the final phase of his radical commitment. He strongly supported the Spanish patriots, showed goodwill to the British radical reformers, censured government patronage, and admired (with some reservations) Cobbett's vigorous and fearless journalism. While he was, of course, scornful of Samuel Whitbread and the peace campaigners, and disturbed when radicals like Sir Francis Burdett supported them, the continuity with his former views is still unmistakable. But when he came to write the history of the following year, during the winter of 1810-11, he adopted an altogether different tone. He had to record the exposure of the duke of York's corrupt disposal of army commissions through his mistress, and the resulting 'political Saturnalia' which gave the mob an unwelcome taste of power ('Edinburgh Annual Register for 1809', 1.230). As he was writing, the renewed mental illness of George III opened up the prospect of a regency and hence of a change of government, a change which might mean some weakening in the conduct of the war. By the time he had finished he was convinced that what the country needed was above all a strong leader. A regular opposition was absurd, and reform an invitation to anarchy. 
This was Southey's political creed for the next two decades. It gave him little comfort, as increasingly he felt that events were moving inexorably towards a destructive revolution. His fears were reinforced in May 1812 when a failed businessman assassinated the prime minister, Spencer Perceval, and crowds rejoiced in the streets. In a succession of articles in the 'Quarterly' he called for stern measures against agitators coupled with an attempt to reverse the fatal dependence on manufacturing industry. There were now extremes of inequality which undermined social cohesion and were intolerable. It was this revulsion against the commercial spirit that led him to endorse the egalitarian plans of Robert Owen, and to listen sympathetically to the young and fiercely radical poet Shelley when he visited Keswick in 1812. 
In 1813, partly through the efforts of Walter Scott, Southey was offered and accepted the post of poet laureate. His immediate predecessor, Henry James Pye, was extremely undistinguished, but Southey saw the appointment as an opportunity to offer much needed leadership to a nation threatened by catastrophic disruption. Though some of his odes dealt with traditional laureate subjects like a royal marriage, he lost no opportunity of making a (lofty) political point. He denounced the idea of negotiating with Bonaparte, celebrated the victory over France in 1814, commended programmes of emigration, and warned the nation of the dangers of faction and sedition. His last major narrative poem, 'Roderick, the Last of the Goths' (1814), reinforced this martial message, evoking warlike passions strangely at variance with the pacifism implicit in poems like 'The Battle of Blenheim' of some fifteen years earlier. Admittedly the mood is very different in his 'Poet's Pilgrimage to Waterloo' (1816), where a sad visit to the battlefield is followed by an inspiring vision of the future, of a world transformed by beneficent British rule. The 'Life of Nelson' (1813) belongs to this period, a book which continued to find readers long after most of Southey's work was forgotten. This is understandable, for Nelson was congenial to both sides of Southey's character, the kindly and the aggressive, being a war hero who was both indomitable and affectionate. 
Southey was a poet laureate who took his duties as a bulwark of good order very seriously -- duties which inevitably exposed him to ridicule by those who were in opposition to the tory government. Critics accused him of absurd self-importance, and were quick to point out the contrast between his former radicalism and his present role as a courtier. The contrast was underlined in 1817 when a mischievous publisher obtained a copy of Southey's youthful play 'Wat Tyler' and printed it. The publication was enormously successful, and was acutely embarrassing to a poet laureate, although he defended himself forcefully. In his 'Letter to William Smith' (1817) he argued that his basic convictions had never changed. His concern had always been to remove obstacles to human progress. 
The sympathy that Southey felt for Nelson does not inform the more ambitious 'Life of Wesley' (1820), impressive though this is as a conscientious account of the rise and progress of an important religious movement. Southey is stern about Methodism's enthusiasm and extravagance, and hopes that it will see its way to becoming an auxiliary of the established church. 
On one occasion, at least, Southey's standing as a champion of established institutions gained him recognition that gave him unmixed pleasure. In June 1820 his old university awarded him the degree of LLD, and at the ceremony he told his daughters, 'there was a great clapping of hands and huzzaing at my name' (Southey, 'Life and Correspondence', 5.41). But there were few cheers a year later when his laureate career reached an unhappy climax with 'A Vision of Judgement'. This was an elaborate poem in hexameters describing the king's triumphant entry into heaven. His manifest innocence put to shame those who had so troubled him during his lifetime. Rather rashly, Southey identified political opposition with discipleship of Satan, and in the preface further attacked what he called the satanic school of poetry. Lord Byron took this personally, and in his own hugely entertaining 'Vision of Judgment' interpreted the events imagined by Southey in a way far less flattering to the dead king. Southey's reputation has never recovered from Byron's ridicule. 
Southey was unfortunate in coming to the laureate's office at a time of acute social disruption, when political conflicts were savage and apocalyptic hopes and fears all too plausible. The harsh tone of his political writing after 1812, though ugly, was a natural enough reaction to a pervasive sense of insecurity. The insecurity was intensified by distresses nearer home. His much loved son Herbert died in 1816 when only nine years old, and with his death Southey lost something of his hopes for the future. 
In Southey's view the threats to order and good government continued to multiply through the 1820s. The main focus of his concern was the so-called Catholic question. Until 1829 Roman Catholics in Britain and Ireland were excluded from many public offices and were forbidden to sit in parliament. Southey strongly defended these exclusions, mainly on the ground that Ireland, where most of the Catholics lived, was a barbarous country, and Catholicism a characteristic element in the barbarity: inherently, incurably, and restlessly intolerant. Unchecked, it would threaten the whole fabric of the British constitution, and attempts at conciliation served only to whet destructive appetites. Southey's contribution to the defence was to publish 'The Book of the Church' (1824), a history of Christianity in England. It celebrated the emergence of an established church which had shown itself the guardian of religious and political liberty. The book became the focus of fierce controversy, to which Southey responded in 'Vindiciae ecclesiae Anglicanae' (1826), making its political significance explicit. The Catholic claims were, he said, supported by every faction, 'every demagogue, every irreligious and every seditious journalist, every open and every insidious enemy to Monarchy and to Christianity' (p. xvi). One of the most active opponents of concessions, the earl of Radnor, thought so well of Southey's exertions that in 1826 he had him returned as MP for Downton in Wiltshire, a borough he controlled. This happened without Southey's knowledge, and as he had no wish to embark on a career in parliament he declined the honour. Certainly he would have found it painful to witness at close quarters the spectacle, some three years later, of a tory ministry under the duke of Wellington conceding Catholic emancipation. 
None the less, as the pressure towards a major reform of parliament became irresistible, Southey's alarm seems to have decreased. His 'Colloquies of Society' (1829) is a calm exposition of his mature social and political convictions: rejection of the Catholic claims and of constitutional reform, support for high taxation to redistribute wealth, and so on. The conversations are conducted with the ghost of Sir Thomas More, whose 'Utopia' was a remote ancestor of pantisocracy. They are set in the neighbourhood of Keswick, and the beauty of the countryside tempers the generally gloomy tone of the conversation, as does the quiet of his splendid library. 'When I go to the window there is the lake, and the circle of the mountains, and the illimitable sky' ('Colloquies', 2.343). 
This quieter mood is typical of the last phase of Southey's life. It can already be detected in his last published narrative poem, 'A Tale of Paraguay' (1825), which shows him exploring, in greater depth than elsewhere in his work, the insecurity of the human condition, the prolonged suffering to which so many are condemned. But he could still take pleasure in the vigorous ballad mode which he had always found congenial, in such poems as 'All for Love' and 'The Young Dragon' (1829). His edition of Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress' appeared in 1830, and in 1831 he published the poems of an 'old servant', John Jones, with an essay on 'uneducated poets'. His substantial edition of Cowper's works (1835-7) includes a sympathetic biography. 
Byron said that Southey '
had written much blank verse and blanker prose, 

And more of both than anybody knows. 
('The Vision of Judgment', stanza 98)' The conscientious industry needed to write works like the 'History of Brazil' (1810-19) and the 'History of the Peninsular War' (1823-32) is impressive, and the curious reader can still find in them much engaging anecdote and odd information. But they show a poor narrative grasp, and little sense of a broad historical perspective. Southey was more at home with his last assignment, 'Lives of the British Admirals' (1833-7). His last poem to be published was 'Oliver Newman: a New-England Tale' (1845). He had been working on it for many years, but it was never finished. It was a story with an unconventional hero, a near Quaker caught up in a war with Native Americans. It appeared posthumously, as did his 'Commonplace Books' and his various travel journals. 
Vehement feelings were never far from the quiet surface, even in Southey's last years, sometimes bursting out in a startling way. When Thomas Carlyle met him in 1835 something provoked his anger, and his face became ''slaty' almost, like a rattle-snake, or fiery serpent' (Carlyle, 2.284). He came to know Thomas Sadler and Lord Ashley (later Lord Shaftesbury), and was horrified by their accounts of child labour. He was much alarmed by 'the devouring principle of trade' ('Colloquies', 2.253), and one of his last articles for the 'Quarterly' warned his readers of the danger of an appalling social cataclysm if that devouring principle went unchecked ('Quarterly Review', 51/279, March 1834). But checked it could be, by the corn laws and factory legislation. 
Throughout his adult life until his mind failed at the end, Southey followed his vocation as a man of letters with a quiet diligence. He never overworked, never carried on any task until it wore him out, but passed from one assignment to another, from poetry to history to reviewing, with an equable temper. He was a strikingly handsome man, tall with aquiline features. He took regular exercise, was hospitable to visitors, and valued the time he spent with his children. He was conscientious in responding to requests for advice from aspiring writers, most famously in his letters to Charlotte Bronte in 1837. While his concern that she might be neglecting her womanly duties reflected views widely held at the time, it is also evidence of a depressed state of mind, which indeed informs much of his work. 'My days among the Dead are past', he said in a once famous lyric ('Poems', 347), and the fact is often too apparent. 
This was in part a sign of ageing. Southey had much to dispirit him. His youngest daughter, Isabel, died at the age of fourteen in 1826, and his wife was even more severely affected by this loss than he. In 1834 her mental illness became acute, and although treatment at the Quaker hospital in York did some good, she never recovered her sanity, and died in 1837. Two years later, on 4 June 1839, Southey married again. His new wife was Caroline Anne Bowles (1786-1854) ['see 'Southey, Caroline Anne Bowles], whom he had known for some twenty years. He had helped her in finding publishers for her poetry, and had even collaborated with her in writing a poem on Robin Hood. But he was already suffering a loss of his faculties, and the last few years of his life were passed in senility. Robert Southey died on 21 March 1843 at Greta Hall and was buried on 23 March at Crosthwaite church in Keswick. 
Southey's status as a writer has always been uncertain. He never gained from his long narrative poems the reputation he hoped for. The 'Life of Nelson' and a few of his shorter poems were familiar to many readers for up to a century after his death, but by the late twentieth century were familiar no longer. Yet he remains an important figure for students of Romanticism, and his private letters have an enduring value. They provide an unsurpassed insight into the stresses of life in the England of his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 26057


Southgate, Henry (1818-1888), anthologist and auctioneer, was born in London, the son of James Webb Southgate, floor cloth manufacturer and auctioneer. Little is known of his early life or education, but on 4 June 1840 he married Elizabeth Lawson Robertson ('b'. 1819/20). Southgate entered his father's business, and from 1840 to 1866 carried on his practice as an auctioneer of prints and engravings at 22 Fleet Street. The firm was known as Southgate and Barrett from 1845 until 1860, when the partnership was dissolved, and Southgate began gradually to take over the business. He had by this time made a considerable reputation as a compiler of selections in prose and verse from English classics. 
Southgate's works include 'Many thoughts on many things: being a treasury of reference, consisting of selections from the known great and the great unknown', published in London in 1857; the third edition was extensively revised, and published under the title, 'Many Thoughts of Many Minds' in November 1861. It had a large circulation and was frequently reprinted. The first edition was denounced by 'The Athenaeum' in 1857 as 'an enormous book, an enormous blunder'. It did, however, receive commendations from the 'London Examiner' and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (5, 1858, 196), and in the nineteenth century was considered equal to Bartlett's 'Familiar Quotations'. A second series was published in London in 1871. In 1864 appeared 'What Men have said about Woman: a Collection of Choice Thoughts and Sentences', which was reprinted in 1865 and 1866, while 1866 also saw the publication of 'Musings about Men, Compiled and Analytically Arranged from the Writings of the Good and Great', illustrated by Birket Foster and Sir John Gilbert; this was reprinted in 1868. 'Noble thoughts in noble language: a collection of wise and virtuous utterances in prose and verse' appeared in 1871 and was reprinted in 1880. The book was arranged alphabetically from 'Ability' to 'Zeal', and, after 'Many Thoughts of Many Minds', was the most popular of Southgate's compilations. 
More thematic compilations included 'Christus redemptor, being the life, character and teachings of Jesus Christ; illustrated in many passages from the writings of ancient and modern authors' (1874, 1880). Southgate also produced a book dedicated to his daughter Julia, entitled 'Things a Lady would Like to Know Concerning Domestic Management and Expenditure' (1874, 1875); and in 1876 he dedicated 'The Way to Woo and Win a Wife, Illustrated by a Series of Choice Extracts' to his wife, editor of her own anthology, 'The Christian Life: being Thoughts in Prose and Verse from the Best Writers of All Ages' (1883). 
During the last fifteen years of Southgate's life a collection of 'plates, cuttings, and extracts, printed and manuscript', was compiled by him for publication as 'The Wealth and Wisdom of Literature, or, A Dictionary of Suggestive Thought'. A title-page was printed, but Southgate sought in vain to find a publisher for this huge anthology, which eventually extended to forty weighty volumes (with an alphabet from 'Abandoned' to 'Zymotic'). 
From 1870 Southgate lived first at Salcombe and then at Sidmouth in south Devon. He afterwards moved to Ramsgate, Kent, where he died on 5 December 1888 at 32 Hardres Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 26058


Southgate, Richard (1729-1795), numismatist, was born at Alwalton, Huntingdonshire, on 16 March 1729, the eldest of ten children of William Southgate (died 1771), farmer, and his wife, Hannah Wright (died 1772), daughter of Robert Wright, canal engineer. He went to schools in Uppingham and Fotheringhay, where he began to display a retentive memory and taste for study, and to Peterborough grammar school. Thence in 1745 he went as an exhibitioner to St John's College, Cambridge, under Thomas Rutherforth, and graduated BA in 1749. Through great economy he was able to begin collecting books and coins, of the latter only specimens in the finest condition. 
After taking holy orders in 1752, Southgate became curate of Weston, Lincolnshire. He was elected a member of the nearby Spalding Gentlemen's Society on 24 May 1753. From 1754 he held the rectory of Woolley, Huntingdonshire, during the minority of the patron, who was himself intended for the church. Southgate resigned in 1759, although under no obligation to do so. He then served the curacies successively of Upton and Leighton Bromswold, Wootton and Wykeham, Coveney and Maney, Godmanchester, Louth, Raithby, Tathwell and Calkwell, and Doddington and Newnham in Kent; but the want of books and persons of literature in country villages were insurmountable objects to improving his knowledge. In 1763, having been recommended to the rector of St James's, Westminster, he was appointed one of his subcurates, and, on Christmas day 1765, curate of St Giles-in-the-Fields, a post he held until his death. 
As a parish priest Southgate was indefatigable in his attendance on the poor, in the cellars or the garrets of St Giles's, at any hour of the day or night. Occasionally he was imposed upon; but a contemporary observed that the poorest of his Irish parishioners, although Roman Catholics, treated him with good manners which they paid no one else (Reid, 51-2). He inherited an estate in Whitechapel worth $100 p.a., and in addition to St Giles's he was presented by the duke of Ancaster in 1783 to the rectory of Little Steeping, which he exchanged in 1790 for the living of Warsop, worth $1400 p.a. He was thus able to enlarge both his collecting and his charity, and to give away almost double what he received from St Giles's, including on one occasion his last shirt but one. 
Southgate's main areas of collecting were Anglo-Saxon coins, English town pieces and tradesmen's tokens, of which he formed a collection superior to any in the kingdom, and dollars of the world, from which he acquired his knowledge of the history of Europe. On 3 November 1784 he was appointed assistant librarian at the British Museum, succeeding Andrew Gifford in responsibility for the coins and medals. He was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 6 June 1793, and was a member also of the Linnean Society. 
Southgate advised William Hunter on Anglo-Saxon coins. He collected material for a treatise on the history of the Saxons and Danes in England, illustrated by their coins, but his progress in it was retarded by his diffidence (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 6.112). Among the contributions he did make was a plate of coins struck at Leicester, printed in J. Nichols's 'The History and Antiquities of the County of Leicester'. The Revd Rogers Ruding stated that from Southgate's collection he first derived a practical knowledge of the English coinage, that his 'entertaining and instructive conversations' led Ruding to study English coins historically, and that by Southgate's encouragement he was induced to prepare for publication his great 'Annals of the Coinage' (Ruding, 1.xix). Ruding illustrated about 200 Anglo-Saxon coins in Southgate's collection, the importance of which has been discussed by J. S. Martin and H. E. Pagan. 
Southgate was 5 feet 10 inches tall, very upright, latterly corpulent, of a cheerful disposition, active in mind yet slow and inactive in body. He died apparently unmarried, of 'an asthmatical and dropsical complaint' ('GM', 171-2) at his residence in the British Museum on 21 January 1795. He was buried on 3 February in St Giles-in-the-Fields, where a memorial tablet by John Hinchliffe the younger was placed on the south-east pillar. Southgate's 'Sermons Preached to Parochial Congregations', with a biographical preface by George Gaskin, was published in 1798. He left no will, and his property went to five surviving brothers. His 'elegant and valuable library' was sold by Leigh and Sotheby from 27 April to 9 May 1795, for $1,332 12's.', and his small collection of shells and other natural curiosities on 12-13 May. The sale of his coins was planned for May, but the whole collection was purchased by Samuel Tyssen for 1800 guineas before the sale, with the resulting duplicates being auctioned in July. Southgate became thereby a source for the British Museum collection of coins, and the Anglo-Saxon coins from his collection have subsequently been identified by Martin. 


@@@@@


doc= 26059


Southerey, Simon (b. c.1342, d. in or after 1420), Benedictine monk, was born possibly on the Norfolk estates of St Albans Abbey. He probably entered Hertford Priory, a dependency of St Albans, shortly after 1360, because he was ordained priest as a monk of the priory on 28 February 1366. He studied at Gloucester College, Oxford, during the 1370s, and was a doctor of theology by 1388 when, together with other graduates, he was cited to appear in chancery following serious disturbances between northerners and southerners at the university. Bale suggests he was present at the second session of the Blackfriars Council, convened in 1382 to condemn the work of John Wyclif, but may have confused him with his St Albans contemporary Nicholas Radcliffe. In 1389, as 'prior studentium' of Gloucester College, Southerey defended the community against the attempts of William Courtenay, archbishop of Canterbury (died 1396), to subject it to visitation. The St Albans chronicler, Thomas Walsingham, suggests that it was the force of Southerey's arguments that deterred the archbishop. In 1390 he was appointed prior of Belvoir, another dependency of St Albans, and remained there until the death of the abbot, Thomas de la Mare, in 1396. In addition to these responsibilities he was in constant demand as a representative of his order. In 1392 he was the only Benedictine to be present at the trial at Stamford of the suspected Wycliffite Henry Crump, and throughout the 1390s he was involved in the work of the Benedictine general chapters, serving as elector of the presidents in 1393 and as preacher at a chapter meeting 'c'.1396. Soon after the election of Abbot John Moot in 1396, Southerey became prior of St Albans, and remained in office at least until 1401, when he supervised the election of William Heyworth as abbot. From 1396 to 1399 he was in receipt of a royal pension and in 1419 he became a papal chaplain; these were both unusual distinctions for a monk who was not an abbot, and are therefore an indication of Southerey's prestige. 
Southerey was distinguished as a theologian, an opponent of the works of John Wyclif, an astronomer, and a poet whose work perhaps prefigured the humanists of the later fifteenth century. Walsingham wrote that not only were 'many turned away from the errors of John Wyclif as a result of his preaching', but also that Southerey was 'very able in the art of versification, and in astronomy and astrology, and in the study of poetry is considered the most learned in the whole kingdom' ('Annales... Amundesham', 2.305). Southerey may have been the author of several theological works; Bale attributes three texts to him without incipits, 'Super ecclesie auctoritate', 'De sacramento altaris', and 'Contra Wyclevistas', but none of these survives. A fragment of an astrological almanac attributed to Southerey survives in a single manuscript (Bodl. Oxf., MS Digby 98, fol. 32), and it was perhaps for his astrological writing that he attracted the attention of Richard II and received a royal pension. Although none of his literary works is known to survive, he was praised by other writers for his knowledge of grammar, poetry, and classical literature. Walsingham dedicated his 'Archana deorum', a commentary on Ovid's 'Metamorphoses', to Southerey, and praised him for his great knowledge of classical fables. In the same way, the London grammar-master John Seward (died 1435), who wrote a lengthy treatise, the 'Somnium', in Southerey's honour, presents him as a distinguished teacher of the rules of grammar and the art of metre. Through his association with Seward, Southerey may have been linked to other scholars who were also friends of the grammar-master, including Richard Courtenay, bishop of Norwich (died 1415), and John Leyland, another celebrated grammarian. 
Southerey was still alive in September 1420 at the election of Abbot John Whethamstede, although he was then among the sick confined to the infirmary. He probably died soon after; the year is unknown, but the day, 3 November, is recorded in the martyrology of Belvoir Priory. 


@@@@@


doc= 26060


Southwell, Edward (1671-1730), politician and government official, was born on 4 September 1671, the only surviving son of Sir Robert Southwell (1635-1702), diplomat and government official, of King's Weston, in Gloucestershire, and of Kinsale, co. Cork, and his wife, Elizabeth (1649-1682), daughter of Sir Edward Dering of Surrenden Dering in Kent. His father was a career bureaucrat, resident in Westminster, and Edward was sent to schools in Kensington and Bloomsbury before going up to Merton College, Oxford, in 1687. In the previous year he had been admitted to Lincoln's Inn, his father's inn of court, but did not pursue a legal education. Nor did he stay long at Oxford, his father ordering him home in 1688 in alarm at King James's interventions in the government of the university. In any case Sir Robert envisaged a public rather than an academic career for his clever son. At his prompting Edward attended the prince of Orange during the revolution of 1688, observed the military campaign in Ireland in 1690, and accompanied his maternal cousin Lord Nottingham in 1691 to the allied conference at The Hague. Southwell's intellectual precocity received recognition in his election to the Royal Society in 1692. In that same year he took his first step into public service when he was made joint prothonotary of common pleas in Ireland and was elected to the Irish parliament. Then in 1693 he followed in his father's footsteps as a clerk of the privy council. There followed a succession of other posts, but it was in the council offices that Southwell made his mark, as a diligent and skilful administrator. 
His father's death in 1702 seems to have coincided with a sudden flowering of Southwell's career. First he succeeded to the prestigious but largely honorific post that Sir Robert had held, of secretary of state for Ireland. Within a year he had been elected to the Westminster parliament for the cinque port of Rye, on the Ashburnham interest; had concluded a highly advantageous marriage, on 29 October 1703, to Lady Elizabeth Cromwell ('b'. after 1672, died 1709), daughter and heir of Vere Essex, fourth earl of Ardglass (1625-1687); and had been appointed chief secretary to the new lord lieutenant of Ireland, the second duke of Ormond. His Irish background and connections (the family fortune had been made in plantation in Munster) and his father's long association with the Ormond family made him a natural choice, and he served in both Ormond's viceroyalties, in 1703-7 and in 1710-13. Although a highly efficient secretary, and in that respect just the type of servant the indolent Ormond needed, he was not particularly effective in the political aspects of the chief secretary's role and tended to leave parliamentary management in Ireland to local politicians. Inevitably he was associated with the tory policies followed by Ormond, and in British politics too he seems to have been identified as a tory, although a very moderate one, and naturally inclined towards administration, so much so that he was unable to find a constituency willing to return him in the tory landslide of 1710. When he recovered his Westminster seat in the general election of 1713 he sat as a 'Hanoverian tory', and he was continued in all his offices under the incoming dynasty in 1714, though he did not sit in either parliament thereafter. 
Some time after the death of 'Lady Betty' in 1709 Southwell took as his second wife, in 1716, Anne, daughter of another 'civil servant', William Blathwayt (bap. 1650, d. 1717); she died in the following year. Cultivated and pious, Southwell was a keen supporter of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and founded charity schools on his Irish estates. His later years were blighted by ill health, following injuries sustained in a road accident, and he eventually died, of a stroke, on 4 December 1730. He was buried at King's Weston. His cousin Lord Perceval, later first earl of Egmont, commented: 'No man led a more pleasant life. He was beloved by all his acquaintance for his cheering, obliging temper, and esteemed for his experience in business' ('Egmont Diary', 1.119). His namesake, Edward, his eldest son from his first marriage, who shared various Irish patentee offices with him and eventually succeeded him as secretary of state in Ireland, sat as MP for Bristol from 1739 to 1754. 


@@@@@


doc= 26061


Bacon, Nathaniel (1598-1676), Jesuit, was the son of John Bacon, gentleman, and Elizabeth Pannell (died 'c'.1606), his wife, and was the younger brother of Thomas Bacon (c.1592-1637). He was born on 14 August 1598 in Norfolk, probably at Sculthorpe near Walsingham. His brother Thomas studied humanities in King's Lynn before moving on to the English Jesuit college in St Omer. Nathaniel may have followed the same programme before he arrived in St Omer about 1611. He was accepted at the English College, Rome, on 8 October 1617 under the alias of Southwell. Ordained priest on 21 December 1622, he was sent to England on 19 September 1624. On 8 March 1625 he entered the Jesuits. He spent his first year of probation at the noviciate near London then situated either in Edmonton or Camberwell. He moved to Watten for his second year, after which he returned to Rome as minister of the English College in 1627. He was professed of the four vows on 31 July 1634. 
With the exception of a trip to Placentia (Italy) in November 1637 for reasons unexplained in the Jesuit catalogues Bacon remained in Rome for the rest of his life. He worked as minister, procurator, consultor, and confessor at the English College. By 1646 he had moved to the Gesu as secretary to father-general's assistant for Germany. In 1649 he was appointed first pro-secretary and then secretary of the society, a position he held under four successive father-generals until 1667. He later served as personal admonitor to Father-General Gian Paolo Oliva. 
The latter years of Bacon's life were devoted to the compilation of the great biographical work, 'Bibliotheca scriptorum Societatis Iesu' (Rome, 1676). Building on the solid foundations provided by earlier collections made by Pedro de Ribadeneira and Philippe Alegambe, he produced a volume noted for accuracy, elegance, research, and piety. He compiled a collection of Latin meditations in 1649, which apparently circulated in manuscript. Edward Mico SJ published an English translation, 'A Journal of Meditations for every Day in the Year' (1669), with a considerable amount of new material added by the translator. He died at the Gesu on 2 December 1676 and was buried in Rome. 


@@@@@


doc= 26062


Southwell, Sir Richard (1502/3-1564), administrator, came of a family which originated in Suffolk and had recently prospered in government service. He was the eldest son of Francis Southwell (died 1512), an auditor of the exchequer, and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of William Tendring of Little Birch, Essex. The lawyer Sir Robert Southwell was one of his younger brothers. Richard became heir not only to his father, but also to his uncle Sir Robert Southwell, chief butler to Henry VII, who died in 1514 leaving an estate based on the manor of Woodrising, Norfolk. In 1515 Richard became the ward of Sir Robert's widow and William Wootton. Four years later the wardship was acquired by Sir Thomas Wyndham, who married Richard to his stepdaughter Thomasin, the sister of Sir Thomas Darcy. 
The Southwells and the Wyndhams were both clients of the Howards, in whose household Richard may have been brought up, perhaps latterly alongside Henry Howard, from 1524 styled earl of Surrey. There is no record that Southwell attended university, but in 1526 he entered Lincoln's Inn, and he must have been well educated since he became tutor to Thomas Cromwell's son Gregory, who for a time lived with him in Norfolk. Southwell is said to have instructed him in pronunciation and etymology. In 1525, presumably now of age, he had livery of his lands. In 1531 he became a JP for Norfolk and Suffolk, a position he retained until 1554. 
On 20 April 1532, with accomplices who included his brothers Robert and Anthony, Richard killed Sir William Pennington in sanctuary at Westminster. Pennington had married a cousin of Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk, and was the latter's tenant of the manor of Costessey, and the crime may have arisen from a competition for pre-eminence in East Anglia between Brandon and the Howards. The Howards and Cromwell were able to obtain a pardon for Southwell and his followers on 15 June 1532, though his crime cost Richard a fine of $1000, subsequently confirmed by act of parliament. Instead of money he gave the king his Essex manors of Coggeshall and Filolls Hall. The affair did not prevent Southwell from being made sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk in 1534, while in 1536, thanks to Cromwell's patronage, he and his brother Robert were named receivers in the court of augmentations. In this office Southwell dealt with the lands of dissolved monasteries in East Anglia. He himself obtained lands formerly held by several religious houses in Norfolk, but nevertheless displayed his conservative religious sympathies by writing an appeal on behalf of Pentney Priory. He also acquired lands which had belonged to the priory of St John of Jerusalem. During the Pilgrimage of Grace he assisted the duke of Norfolk in raising forces from that county. Knighted in 1540, from 1542 until the death of Henry VIII he was one of the three general surveyors of the king's lands. 
Southwell's parliamentary career may have begun in 1536: the returns for this election are lost, but it is possible that he succeeded Sir James Boleyn as one of the knights of the shire for Norfolk following Anne Boleyn's fall. He was certainly elected in 1539, but only after a fracas with Sir Edmund Knyvet, who also coveted the seat and chose to disregard the king's nomination of Southwell and Edmund Wyndham. He probably sat again in 1542. 
Southwell played a part in the fall of both Sir Thomas More and Thomas Cromwell. Roper's life of More records that Southwell was sent to More's room in the Tower to take away his books. While there he heard the famous exchange between More and Sir Richard Rich in which the former chancellor denied that parliament could make the king head of the church. When asked to give evidence against More, however, he said that he was appointed only to deal with the books and 'gave no ear' to the conversation (Roper, 244-8). In March 1540 Southwell (who was presumably still loyal to Cromwell) was one of six men who took a deposition from one Thomas Molton, who was charged with having said that the world would never be quiet so long as one so base in birth as Cromwell served on the king's council. 
Southwell was several times sent on administrative and diplomatic missions. In 1542 Henry VIII dispatched him, together with Lord Lisle, the deputy of Calais, to view the fortifications at Berwick; they reported that the new works did not conform to the designs approved by the king although 20,000 marks had been spent and much more would be required to complete the project. In January 1543 he was again involved in Scottish affairs, being sent with Bothwell to Darlington, for discussions with Scottish nobles who had recently pledged loyalty to Henry VIII. In the king's war with France he was treasurer of the 'battle' ward and in 1544 received more than $65,000 for wages and other expenses. Shortly before Henry VIII's death Southwell was granted an annuity of $100, and the king's will included a bequest of $200 in token of his 'special love and favour' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 20, pt 2, no. 634). 
Named one of the assistant executors of Henry's will, Southwell was probably hoping to ingratiate himself with the Seymours when he helped bring about the fall of the earl of Surrey, notwithstanding his own previously close relationship with the Howards. It was Southwell who on 2 December 1546 notified the privy council 'that he knew certain things of the Earl that touched his fidelity to the King' (Starkey, 157), leading to Surrey's arrest for treason, and he later gave evidence against the earl. But perhaps because of his religious conservatism he was not made a member of the privy council (as has been claimed) following the king's death, being only one of 'certen of the counsell at large' (Hoak, 49). In October 1549 he was among the conservatives who supported John Dudley, earl of Warwick, and his allies against the protector, and he now briefly became a privy councillor, but once Warwick had gained firm control of government Southwell lost his place on the council and in January 1550 he was sent to the Tower, charged with writing seditious bills. Bishop John Ponet claimed that Southwell had done enough to be hanged for, a charge possibly arising from allegations that in the previous summer he had given royal money to the Norfolk rebels, but he was soon released. He did not, however, sit in either of Edward VI's parliaments. 
In 1553 Southwell at first accepted Lady Jane Grey as Edward VI's heir, but he soon resolved to stand by Princess Mary, and by 12 July brought her 'reinforcements of men, a store of provisions and moreover money... not to mention his own skill in counsel and long experience'; in acting thus he claimed to be mindful of 'the many favours heaped on him by Henry VIII' (MacCulloch, 254). For his services he was rewarded on 4 December with an annuity of $100. He remained loyal to Mary at the time of Wyatt's rising early in 1554, guarding the rear of Whitehall with 500 men. The new queen restored him to the privy council and made him master of the ordnance. Within her administration Southwell served on a number of commissions. A follower of the chancellor, Bishop Stephen Gardiner, he supported the latter in favouring her marriage to Edward Courtenay rather than to Philip of Spain. But though returned to parliament as a knight of the shire for Norfolk in the first three parliaments of Mary's reign (he is said to have announced the queen's supposed pregnancy to the Lords in 1554), he became less active in public affairs after Gardiner's death at the end of 1555. His religious position remained staunchly conservative: according to John Foxe he exclaimed against protestants 'to the rack with them, one of these knaves is able to undo a whole city' (Loach, 177). 
Southwell was not reappointed to the privy council following Elizabeth's accession and in 1559 surrendered his offices in exchange for an annuity of $165. He was too weak to sign his long will, dated 24 July 1561 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/47, fols. 144'r'-152'r'), but did not die until 11 January 1564, probably at Woodrising. His landholdings were substantial and included more than thirty manors in Norfolk alone, together with over 10,000 sheep. Succession to his estates was complicated by the fact that his two sons were illegitimate. He and his first wife, Thomasin Darcy of Danbury, Essex, had a daughter, Elizabeth, who married George Heneage. His second wife was Mary, the daughter of Thomas Darcy of Danbury and a relative of Thomasin. They had two sons, Richard and Thomas, who were born of their adulterous relationship while Mary was still married to the Norwich alderman Robert Leeche, and a daughter, Katherine, born following her marriage to Southwell. Sir Richard had settled land on his elder son (who was the father of Robert Southwell the Jesuit) before his death, and in his will he made no distinction between his legitimate and illegitimate offspring. Should Elizabeth attempt to break the will she was to be disinherited. Southwell left his personal armour to his cousin and friend Sir Henry Bedingfield and other armour to the young fourth duke of Norfolk, whom he named as an executor, together with Sir Thomas Cornwallis and Francis Gawdy. The will records a well-furnished household, containing such items as 'hangings of imagry worke' bought for Woodrising, where they were 'accustomed to hange my hawle at highe and solempe feastes', and 'a tester of cloth of silver tynsell and crimsen vellet enbrodered wheruppon myne armes ar sett'. Sir Richard also disposed of large quantities of plate, including 'one rounde balle wherwith to warme colde handes'. A lengthy codicil provided for payments to a number of servants and friends. Southwell asked to be buried in the chancel of Woodrising church, where the Easter sepulchre once stood, but that was the limit of his religious traditionalism. Though he left $100 to be distributed to the poor and indigent of the village and of 10 miles around, he did not request the beneficiaries of this gift to pray for his soul, and in the preamble to his will he referred to Queen Elizabeth as defender of the faith and entrusted his soul to the Trinity alone. 
A loyal councillor and efficient administrator under Henry VIII, Southwell was never in the top echelon of advisers who made or directed policy. The reasons for his failure to achieve true eminence may be implicit in his portrait by Holbein, which suggests a man both haughty and indecisive. Painted in 1536 when Southwell was thirty-three, the picture formerly belonged to the fourteenth earl of Arundel, who gave it to Cosimo (II) de' Medici, grand duke of Tuscany. It is now in the Uffizi Gallery, Florence. Holbein's drawing of Southwell remains in the Royal Collection at Windsor. 


@@@@@


doc= 26063


Southwell, Sir Robert (c.1506-1559), lawyer and member of parliament, was the second son of Francis Southwell (died 1512) of Norfolk, and Dorothy, daughter and coheir of William Tendring of Little Birch, Essex. He was a younger brother of Sir Richard Southwell (1502/3-1564), the privy councillor. His uncle Sir Robert Southwell (died 1514), of Woodrising, Norfolk, was an auditor of the exchequer and, like Francis, a member of Lincoln's Inn. By coincidence another Robert Southwell died in 1514; he was a bencher of Gray's Inn who lived in Suffolk. Francis Southwell's son was still a boy when these namesakes died. He entered the Middle Temple in the mid-1520s, and as early as 1529, about the time of his call to the bar, he was returned to parliament for Bishop's Lynn, in Norfolk. He was to serve in parliament, representing six different constituencies, for the remainder of his life. In 1535 he became doubly established in the world, both by securing the hand of Margaret, daughter and heir apparent of Sir Thomas Neville (d. 1542), bencher of Gray's Inn and privy councillor, and by obtaining an appointment as common serjeant of London. In 1536 he moved to the less lucrative but more promising position of solicitor-general to the new court of augmentations, set up to handle the revenue arising from the dissolution of the monasteries, and in 1537 he became its attorney-general. 
His marriage, and the death of his father-in-law, provided Southwell with a seat at Mereworth in Kent, and he was added to the commission of the peace for that county (and for Norfolk) in 1538. His office in the augmentations enabled him to acquire numerous parcels of monastic land, much of which he sold at a profit. In 1540 he surrendered that office and was sworn of the privy council, with a stipend of $100, in order to serve as a master or receiver of requests in place of Sir Nicholas Hare. In the same year he delivered the autumn reading at the Middle Temple. The height of his legal career was reached on 1 July 1541, when he was appointed master of the rolls, with a knighthood following in 1542. After sitting in chancery for ten years he resigned in December 1550, though the reason is not apparent. He does not seem to have fallen out with the Edwardian regime, since he continued to serve actively on commissions and in parliament throughout the reign, and indeed through Mary's, proving his religious flexibility by managing to participate in heresy investigations under both monarchs. He died on 26 October 1559 and was buried on 8 November in Kent, presumably at Mereworth. Among other provisions in his will he left to his eldest son, Thomas, the manors of Chickering and Hoxne, in Suffolk, which he had purchased in the 1540s from his profits on land sales, a capital messuage in Bermondsey, Surrey, pieces of plate including 'a greate pott all gilt which Kinge Henrye the eight myne olde master gave me for my last new yeres gift', and hangings embroidered with the family arms and badges. His 'olde frende' Sir Nicholas Bacon was made supervisor of the will jointly with Dame Margaret. 


@@@@@


doc= 26064


Southwell, Robert (1561-1595), writer, Jesuit, and martyr, was born towards the end of 1561, the third son of Richard Southwell (died 1600), gentleman and courtier, of Horsham St Faith, Norfolk, and Bridget (died 1583x7), daughter of Sir Roger Copley of Roughway, Sussex, and his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir William Shelley, judge of the common pleas. Richard Southwell was the illegitimate elder son of Sir Richard Southwell (1502/3-1564) of Woodrising, Norfolk. Sir Richard was married to Thomasine, daughter of Sir Robert Darcy of Danbury, Essex, but his two sons and three of his daughters were born as a result of his liaison with Mary Darcy, Thomasine's cousin, daughter of Thomas Darcy of Danbury. 
As one of the visitors for the suppression of the monasteries in Norfolk, Sir Richard obtained some monastic properties for himself, among them the priory of St Faith, with its surrounding farms, assigned to him outright in 1545. The conveyance bears the note 'To remayne with mistres Leche', a gift to Mary Darcy, who had been married off to a man called Leech from Norwich. From his immense wealth Sir Richard provided for all his children, his one legitimate daughter, Elizabeth, married to Sir George Heneage, and his children with Mary Darcy, whom he may have married before the birth of her third daughter, Katherine. In his will, dated 24 July 1561, she is described as 'Dame Marye Southwell my late wief', and his sons Richard -- 'late of Lincolnes Inne' -- and Thomas are identified as 'Darcy alias Southwell'. 
Richard Southwell inherited the property at Horsham and for the rest of his life was identified with it. Robert probably spent his childhood mainly in the house created from the refectory of the priory. When he returned to England as a mission priest, he spoke of his regret at being unable to visit his father, so that 'banishing myself from the sent of my cradle, in myne owne country, I have lived like a foreyner, findinge emong straungers that which in my neerest bloude I presumed not to seeke' (Stonyhurst College, MS A. v. 27, fol. 4). He also reminded his father that 'even from my infancy yowe were wonte in merimente to call me father R. which is the customary stile nowe allotted to my present estate' (ibid., fol. 7). Robert may also have stayed with his parents at the Copley house at Gatton, Surrey, while Sir Thomas Copley, Bridget's eldest brother, was in exile. In a letter to Burghley in 1583 begging that Bridget Southwell might be allowed to return to the house, Sir Thomas described her as 'her Majestie's ould servant of neer fortie yeeres continuance'. 
In 1576 Robert Southwell set out on the long journey that was to fulfil his father's teasing title for him. On 10 June he arrived at the English College, Douai, accompanied by John Cotton, one of his mother's Catholic cousins. He was admitted to Anchin College, the Jesuit school in the town, while continuing to board at the English College. In a later letter Southwell gives an account of the beginning of his friendship with John Deckers, a Flemish student at the school, whom he saw walking with Leonard Lessius, then on the staff, and later a theologian at the Jesuit college in Rome. The boys' education was interrupted after the summer months by the movement of French and Spanish forces, and Southwell was sent to Paris for greater safety, probably as a student at the College de Clermont under the tutelage of the Jesuit Thomas Darbyshire. He returned to Douai on 15 June 1577, but left again with Deckers early in 1578, travelling to Rome with the intention of joining the Society of Jesus. 
Deckers was sent on to Naples for training in the noviciate, but to Southwell's bitter disappointment he was at first refused entry. His reaction was to write an emotional appeal that his case might be heard again. He wrote in English, but the text survived only in a Latin redaction by Henry More, entitled 'Querimonia', until a section of the original was discovered in a catalogue of the early Jesuits compiled in 1640. In his hurt Southwell pours out his distress: 'How can I but wast in anguish and agony that find myself disjoyned from that company severed from that Society, disunited from that body wherein lyeth all my life my love my whole hart and affection' (Archivum Romanum Societatis Iesu, Anglia 14, fol. 80, under date 1578). His plea was heard, and he was admitted to the probation house of Sant' Andrea on 17 October 1578, when he was almost seventeen. 
During the two years of his noviciate Southwell wrote a series of personal meditations, 'Exercitia et devotiones', which has survived in three early manuscript copies. The brief passages are not collected in their original order. The only dated section, written after he had taken his vows on 18 October 1580, is numbered 21, out of more than 70 passages relating to the course of training: to times of sickness, to self-accusation and doubt, to the reaffirmation of Jesuit teaching regarding obedience, to resolutions taken in the last week of the Ignatian 'Spiritual Exercises'. 
On the completion of the noviciate Southwell started courses in philosophy and theology at the Jesuit college in Rome. He lived at the English College, where he appears to have acted as secretary to the rector, Alphonsus Agazzari. His handwriting is to be found from 1580 in both parts of the 'Liber ruber', the college history. In the first part, he copied the entries of the arrival of students. In the second part, the annual letters are mainly in his hand and perhaps compiled by him until 1585. It is likely also that on behalf of Agazzari he wrote the life of Edward Throckmorton, a childhood friend in England who died at the college on 18 November 1582 and who was received into the society on his deathbed. The account contains details unlikely to have been known to the rector, to whom the work is sometimes ascribed, particularly details concerned with boyhood incidents and later events as a member of the sodality of the Blessed Virgin of which Southwell was prefect. Other letters from this period include a draft of a long narrative written to Deckers in 1580, and a letter to Robert Persons, written in Italian as if to a merchant. A newsletter in Italian dated 3 February 1584, recounting sufferings of priests and lay Catholics in England, addressed to the provincial of Naples, also survives, an early example of the regular reports Southwell later sent from England. 
Southwell completed his course in philosophy, was admitted BA in 1584, appointed 'repetitor' or tutor at the English College for two years, and finally made prefect of studies. His ordination took place in spring 1584, when his title changed from Frater to Pater. Throughout these years in Rome he maintained his habit of keeping small notebooks, some containing student notes, others used for drafts of poems and translations. Some of these are now preserved, bound in a single volume, at Stonyhurst College (MS A. v. 4). The collection, comprising 64 leaves, is all that has survived from a longer sequence, indicated by Southwell's numbering of pages to 256. Included in the group of theological notes and Latin poems and prayers is the beginning of a translation into English of Luigi Tansillo's 'Le lagrime di San Pietro', entitled 'Peeter Playnt'. It is the earliest version of a subject to which he would return at least twice during his work in England, and which would be developed as his longest poem, 'Saint Peters Complaint'. 
The last section of the compilation consists of two attempts to translate into English the medieval homily, then attributed to Origen, known as 'Audivimus Mariam' from its first words. Southwell translated about two-thirds of the sermon, using it as an exercise to regain fluency in English. After this effort he abandoned the translation and started again, this time completing only a few lines. When he was in England he secured another copy of the sermon and incorporated the whole of it into his prose study 'Marie Magdalens Funeral Teares'. 
The holograph manuscript also contains a single page of English prose, beginning 'Alas, why doe I lament his losse that must needes be lost?' Like the 'Querimonia' it is an extremely personal outpouring of emotion. It records the sense of failure that overwhelmed him after a young man rejected his attempts to lead him into greater spiritual awareness, and at the same time Southwell asked himself whether his disappointment was based on the loss of a soul or a 'sensuall lykynge'. The young man who so disturbed him may have been William Cecil, son of Sir Thomas Cecil and grandson of Lord Burghley, who visited Rome without family permission in 1585. Inevitably rumour circulated that he had become a Catholic, but there is no evidence that he had, and Southwell felt it helpful to draw upon their friendly relationship and their shared adventure with a runaway carriage when he wrote to Sir Robert Cecil from the Tower in 1593. It would certainly not have been tactful to have reminded Cecil of this occasion if William Cecil had indeed embraced Catholicism while he was in Rome. 
Another group of small notebooks kept by Southwell during his studies as a scholastic has recently come to light (Bodl. Oxf., MS Arch. F. g. 4). Three are bound together, and one remains unbound, with two leaves uncut. The three bound notebooks are all concerned with his theological training; the unbound notebook, of sixteen leaves, outlines the daily life of a scholastic in Rome. A note, written upside down, is particularly revealing for the way it suggests the strain of the regime. Under the title 'Assequi' he wrote: 'hoc assequi posse diffido hoc efficere non possum eo progredi nequeo' ('here I find it difficult to make progress; I am not able to carry this out; in that I do not know how to go on'). But Southwell, though greatly tested, did not break. 
Southwell's last year in Rome was accompanied by difficulties at the English College. As prefect of studies he wrote to Claudio Acquaviva, general of the society, about the situation, ending the letter with a request that he should be allowed to serve on the English mission: 'in the same way as Your Paternity approves of my present work among the English, so by the inspiration of God may you also approve of my service in England itself, with the highest hope of martyrdom' (Archivum Romanum Societatis Iesu, Fondo Gesuitico 651/648). 
On 8 May 1586 the two Jesuit priests Henry Garnet and Robert Southwell rode out of Rome. Their journey was not without travellers' difficulties, as Southwell recorded in letters to Agazzari and to Acquaviva, but they reached Douai safely and passed on to St Omer. Their route may have taken them through Switzerland, the way Edmund Campion and Persons had travelled, and the way John Gerard and Edmund Oldcorne followed in 1588. One of Southwell's most poignant poems, 'A Vale of Teares', may recall its wild and forbidding landscape, suitable for the torments of a soul conscious of sin and longing for the way of penitence: '
A vale there is enwrapt with dreadfull shades, 

Which thicke of mourning pines shrouds from the sunne, 

Where hanging clifts yeld short and dumpish glades, 

And snowie floud with broken streams doth runne. 
('Poems', 41)' One of Southwell's last letters from the continent was to Deckers. He wrote 'e portu', from Calais or Boulogne, on 15 July, just before the crossing to England. It is a letter full of apprehension, ending once more with the hope of martyrdom. 
The two priests landed on the south coast near Folkestone, and made their way separately to London. Both wrote accounts of their first adventures. Southwell's letters of 25 July to Acquaviva and to Agazzari were intercepted. The letter to Acquaviva gives news of his arrival in London, where he met his first Catholics 'inter gladios' -- under armed guard -- and in prison. He reports their meeting with William Weston, the only Jesuit priest active in England, and their journey with him into the country. The letter is the first of Southwell's reports, written out in his neat Italian hand. Of those that reached Rome four were sent in 1587, seven in 1588, and one in January 1590. A few other letters are preserved in transcripts. Henry More, gathering materials for his 'Historia provinciae Anglicanae Societatis Jesu' (1660), spoke of a collection of 150 letters, but no similar treasure remains. No letters survive after 1590. 
In the aftermath of the Babington plot that burst upon the government a few weeks after Southwell's arrival, Weston was arrested, and Garnet succeeded him as superior. In his organization of the mission Southwell was assigned to the London area, and as he became established there priests arriving from the continent came to him before departing to their posts in various parts of England. In December 1586 he reported that he had made some journeys into the country, and spoke of being in grave danger twice. On one occasion he escaped a search while he was behind panelling for four hours, possibly in the town house of Lord Vaux in Hackney. The house was raided on 5 November 1586, on information given by the spy Anthony Tyrrell, who reported to Justice Young, the Middlesex priest-hunter, that a priest called Sale (possibly a mishearing of the elided form of Southwell) was sheltered there. Two letters signed 'Robertus' were found in the possession of Henry Vaux, starting a rumour that Persons had returned to England, but Tyrrell identified them as Southwell's. A connection with the Vaux family may account for the coincidence that poems of Henry Vaux are bound in with a volume of the first edition of Southwell's poems (Washington, DC, Folger Shakespeare Library, Harmsworth MS). 
During these first months in England it is likely that Southwell wrote the 'Epistle to his Father', pleading with him to return to the Catholic faith. The forceful arguments expressed in the letter made it a most suitable tool to supplement the work of the priests, and it became one of the most widely disseminated of Southwell's writings. It has survived in eight manuscripts and in several others in part; other early copies were made from the printed edition, issued from Garnet's second press. Some copies are dated 22 October 1589, almost certainly an early scribal error for 1586. The central section was printed by Benjamin Fisher as 'The Dutiful Advice of a Loving Sonne to his Aged Father', the second part of 'Sir Walter Raleighs Instructions to his Sonne' (1632). It later appeared in Raleigh's 'Remains' (1657). 
When Robert Southwell approached his father, this man of property had made his peace with the Church of England. The letter has a formality indicating the distance now dividing father and son, separated for ten years, and cut off still further by the danger to which Robert would be exposed if he visited Horsham. His language is more Latinate than in any other prose writing, the phrases more classically turned. Southwell mentions the support he has from his brothers, but there is no mention of his mother, and her death at some time after 1583 is confirmed by the second marriage of his father in 1587, to Margaret, the young daughter of John Style, a well-to-do farmer from Ellingham, Norfolk. If Richard Southwell was moved by his son's persuasiveness he apparently delayed committing himself. Two manuscripts of the 'Epistle' include a short letter making the same passionate plea. In March 1588, however, Richard Southwell, with his son Richard, is listed among recusants in Norfolk. In 1600 Garnet reported to Acquaviva that Richard Southwell had died a Catholic. 
After his narrow escapes Southwell's position in London stabilized. He had been fortunate in obtaining the protection of Anne Howard, countess of Arundel and Surrey. She permitted him the use of a house, probably the house she owned in the enclave of Spitalfields, and there he set up a printing press. He was able to keep up a correspondence with her husband, Philip Howard, who was imprisoned in the Tower, and according to the preface these letters formed the basis of his longest prose work, 'An epistle of comfort, to the reverend priestes, and to the honorable, worshipful, and other of the laye sort, restrayned in durance for the Catholicke fayth'. Although the first edition (1587-8) announces that it was 'Imprinted at Paris', it was printed from the secret press. Its structure of letters is obscured in the final text, which comprises a series of nine 'Comfortes in tribulation', followed by chapters which attempt to strengthen the courage of prisoners facing martyrdom. It is lengthily illustrated with excerpts from the 'Bible' and from the fathers of the church, and enlivened with images from the natural world, sometimes in its most extraordinary manifestations. In the last pages Southwell turns again to the glories obtained through martyrdom: 'And we have God be thanked such martyrquellers now in authoritye, as meane if they may have theyre will, to make Saynctes enough to furnishe all our Churches with treasure when it shall please God to restore them to theyre true honoures. (Southwell, 'Epistle of Comfort', sig. Cc5v)' It was to the earl of Arundel also that Southwell addressed his letter of consolation on the death of the earl's half-sister, Lady Margaret Sackville, in August 1591. He advises against unrestrained grieving, seeing it as the indulgence of 'the seliest women... who make it their happiness to seeme most unhappie, as though they had onely bene left alive, to be perpetuall mapps of dead folkes misfortunes' (Stonyhurst College, MS A. v. 27, fol. 21'v'). He soon turns, however, to a consideration of the fine traits that he acknowledges in the Lady Margaret: 'She was by birth second to none, but to the first in the realme, yet she measured onely greatnes by goodnes, making nobilitye but the mirrhour of vertue' (ibid., fol. 22). It is difficult to determine whether Southwell had known her personally. The splendid qualities he praises are those of which he may have heard from her friends and from those who cared for her. With regard to her husband, Robert Sackville, later Lord Buckhurst and earl of Dorset, he says only 'how dutifully she discharged all the behoofes of a most loving wife' (ibid., fol. 23'v'). Nothing is said of her as a mother except that she would have wished her children to live after her, although her eldest children had already died 'as pledges of her owne comming' (ibid., fol. 28'v'). Four survived her, and in the first printed edition in 1595, when it was given the title 'The Triumphs over Death', the editor, John Trussell, dedicated the work to them. 
In persuading the earl to be reconciled to his sister's death, Southwell was also preparing him for his own death, for Arundel had been impeached in 1589, condemned to death, and his goods confiscated. Southwell believed that the earl was better able to bear his sister's death than she would have been able to bear his. With a delicate play upon her name he reaches his conclusion: 'The base shell of a mortall body, was an unfit roome for so pretious a margarite. And the Jeweller that came into this world to seeke good perles, and gave not onely all he had, but himself also to buy them, thought it nowe tyme to take her into his bargaine, finding her growen to a Margarites full perfection. (Stonyhurst College, MS A. v. 27, fol. 35)' Sheltered in the household of the countess of Arundel as chaplain and confessor, Southwell prepared for her 'A Shorte Rule of Good Life', an outline of conduct suitable for a pious lay woman under continual threat of persecution at the queen's whim. The countess used the work as a spiritual guide for the rest of her life, and copies were made for other aristocratic Catholic families. Of the seven manuscripts now known, some have been revised, some casually copied, and only one contains all the items in the original text. A printed version was issued by Garnet's second press about 1596-7. In the 'Preface to the reader' Garnet speaks of it as 'even amongst the last of his fruitefull labours', referring not to the original text but to a revision that Southwell was working on before his arrest. The changes in the printed version, however, are unlikely to be authoritative. 
In providing the 'Shorte Rule' Southwell acknowledged that the return of Catholicism to England was now a distant hope. It was a faith to be followed in secret, without the support of the traditional structure of the church. In 'Marie Magdalens Funeral Teares' he led the Catholic who felt abandoned and desolate through the agony endured by Mary Magdalen in the hours following the crucifixion. Once more Southwell translated the medieval homily, and greatly expanded the incidents of St John's gospel into a meditation of penetrating exegesis. It becomes a dialogue in which Mary's grief takes her to the very edge of hysteria, and the steady voice of the observer questions and comforts her in an exposition of Christian hope. 
The 'Funeral Teares' was the first of Southwell's writings to be printed commercially. The work was carried out by John Wolfe for Gabriel Cawood in 1591. It is well printed, and Southwell may have read proof on it. The dedication, signed 'S. W.', was addressed to 'Mistres D. A.', who may possibly be identified with Dorothy Arundell, daughter of Sir John Arundell of Lanherne, Cornwall. She was a young woman then living in London, later becoming one of the founding members of the English Benedictine community in Brussels in 1599. The popularity of the 'Funeral Teares' among both Catholics and members of the established church is shown by its reprinting six times before 1609, and by its inclusion in the 'collected' editions of Southwell's work, both Catholic (1616 and 1620) and protestant (1620, 1630, and 1636). It is the culmination of his imaginative writing, and together with 'Saint Peters Complaint' and some of the lyrics it introduced the phenomenon of the 'literature of tears' to England. 
The last complete work that Southwell undertook in the course of his ministry was his only political statement. 'An Humble Supplication to her Majestie' was written in response to the proclamation 'A declaration of great troubles pretended against the realme by a number of seminarie priests and Jesuists', dated 18 October 1591 and published in November. The proclamation was Burghley's work, and he prefaced the penal orders with an attack on the personal qualities of the young men who went overseas to submit themselves to training for the priesthood. The Jesuits had been expressly instructed to avoid all political action, but the abusive diatribe from 'this heavy adversary of our good names' (Inner Temple Library, Petyt MS 538.36, fol. 60) fired Southwell to make a rebuttal. Point by point he responds to the charges. He reiterates the religious nature of their purpose: 'The whole and only intent of our comming into this Realme, is noe other, but to labour for the salvation of soules, and in peaceable and quiet sort to confirme them in the auntient Catholique Faith' (ibid., fol. 61). He answers the specific issue of the Babington plot that may be brought against them, and in a long central section he sets out the details of the way in which the government manipulated the players and destroyed Mary, queen of Scots, claiming that it was 'both plotted, furthered and finished by Sir 'Francis Walsingham' and his other Complices' (ibid., fol. 64). 
Throughout his appeal Southwell addresses the queen with the most formal respect, acknowledging her as an anointed sovereign, and presenting his arguments as if she knew nothing of the barbarous treatment ordered by her ministers. But the plea was in vain, and there is no evidence that the queen ever read the 'Supplication'. Many of the points made in the work are to be found in a report originating with Southwell and sent on by Richard Verstegan in Antwerp (Stonyhurst College, MS Anglia I, 70). 'Caput 2' is made up largely of material that was used in the 'Supplication', including a brief history of the Babington plot. 
The 'Supplication' was a work that was too dangerous to publish. Burghley's fury was to be expected; a year later, on 20 September 1592, he wrote to Archbishop Whitgift of the 'multitude of sclaunders dispersed in Bookes against the State and government' (LPL, Fairhurst MS 2004, fol. 45). Garnet was aware of the danger, and acknowledged in a letter to Persons on 5 May 1602, 'Fa. S. wrote a very good answer to the Proclamation but it could never be set forth' (Stonyhurst College, MS A. iv. 2). Nevertheless it circulated in manuscript, of which four substantive copies remain. Its later history is one of political exploitation. A printed edition, falsely dated 1595, was produced in 1600 by the Appellants, a group of secular priests opposed to the appointment of George Blackwell as arch-priest. Short extracts were translated into Latin and presented to Pope Clement VIII to demonstrate that the over-zealous expressions of loyalty to the queen indicated a willingness on the part of the Jesuits to collude with the government. The passages quoted, however, were ineffective in securing for the complainants the ruling they hoped for. The edition was fiercely suppressed in England, and the three distributors in London were seized and hanged. 
The publication of the proclamation increased the severity of the persecution that had been most rigorous throughout 1591. Garnet and Southwell barely escaped capture at a house in Warwickshire where the Jesuits had met to renew their vows in October. Southwell's physical appearance, with his distinctive auburn hair, was made known to the authorities through the depositions of John Cecil, alias Snowden, a priest from the seminary at Valladolid, captured shortly after his arrival. In a letter of 11 February 1592 Garnet reported that he had taken Southwell's place in London and that Southwell had been sent into the country. By the summer Garnet had returned to Warwickshire, and sent for Southwell to join him. Accompanied by Thomas Bellamy, he set out from London on 25 June 1592 to say mass and to spend the first night of the journey at the Bellamy house at Uxenden, near Harrow. That night, on information given by Anne Bellamy, Thomas's eldest sister, who had become the tool of Richard Topcliffe, the most vicious of priest-hunters, the house was raided and Southwell captured. Topcliffe used Southwell's alias, Cotton, but he knew whom he had found. 
Southwell refused to give his name or to acknowledge that he was a priest, hoping to give the Bellamys time to escape. He was taken first to Topcliffe's house, where he was tortured, and on 28 June he was sent to the Gatehouse nearby. On 28 July he was committed to the Tower. 
After his arrest Southwell's papers were gathered together, probably by Garnet. Fifty-two lyrics were put into order, enclosing groups linked by subject or moral purpose, and prefaced by a prose dedication 'to his loving Cosen' and a verse address 'To the Reader' that had been written for a smaller collection. The same order is followed in the five manuscripts that have survived, and it underlies the printed editions. The long poem, 'Saint Peters Complaint', although still needing revision, was set at the head of the selection of poems made by the first publisher, John Wolfe, in 1595. More poems were added in his second edition, and the same group was included with others in the third edition printed by John Roberts for Gabriel Cawood. Seven further printings appeared before 1615. A second collection, entitled 'Moeoniae', was printed by Valentine Simmes for John Busby in 1595, and twice more (all dated 1595) within five years. Busby chose to head his volume with the sequence on the Virgin and Christ that stood first in the manuscripts. All publishers avoided poems that revealed their Catholic origins. 
As in his prose work, Southwell's poems are an extension of his ministry. He has an unerring sense of word-music and rhythm, and an apparent simplicity that belies the subtlety of meaning. A great deal of his imagery is based on the natural world, frequently with reference to the iconography of the 'Bible'. This polished work is a remarkable development from the stumbling translation of the years in Rome. The versatility with which he uses a commonplace stanza form may be demonstrated in the recounting of Peter's despair after his denial of Christ: '
At sorrowes door I knockt, they crav'de my name; 

I aunswered one, unworthy to be knowne: 

What one? say they, one worthiest of blame. 

But who? a wretch, not Gods, nor yet his owne. 

A man? O no, a beast? much worse, what creature? 

A rocke: how cald? the rocke of scandale, Peter. 
('Poems', 97)' The five lyrics on the nativity are those which are found most frequently in anthologies, and of these 'The Burning Babe' is by far the best known. Its succinct lines present a glowing vision of the suffering Christchild on Christmas morning when, in a series of paradoxes and allegorical figures recalling the play of Petrarchan conceits, the direct speech of the Child creates a luminescence in which the reader sees 'mens defiled soules' within a purifying furnace, looking to the salvation to be achieved at the crucifixion: '
For which, as now on fire I am 

To worke them to their good, 

So will I melt into a bath 

To wash them in my blood. 
('Poems', 16)' Ben Jonson is said to have commented: 'That Southwell was hanged yett so he had written that piece of his 'the burning babe' he would have been content to destroy many of his' (McDonald, 134). The setting of two of the poems in Benjamin Britten's 'Ceremony of Carols' is most sensitive to the imagery of the verse, as in the marching rhythms of 'This little Babe so few dayes olde', whom Southwell represents as a military leader, the final lines echoing Jesuit spirituality, 'My soule with Christ joyne thou in fight' ('Poems', 15). 
Southwell's solitary confinement lasted two and a half years. After eight months in the Tower, when he reckoned that the Bellamys had had time to disappear, he asked for pen and paper to write to Sir Robert Cecil. The letter, dated 6 April 1593, provided Cecil with the necessary information to bring him to trial. He presents his case, arguing that he had returned to England in order to minister to his family: 'I was the childe of a Christian woman, and not the whelpe of a tygar; I could not feare, and foresee, and not forewarne; I had not a crueller harte then a damned caytiffe, to despise their bodies and soules, by whome I received myne. But this was an inveigled zeale, a blinde, and a now abolished faithe; A zeale notwithstanding, and a faithe yt was; and god almightie is my wittnes I came with no other intention into the realme. (Washington, DC, Folger Shakespeare Library, MS V. a. 421, fol. 57'v')' He asks not for condemnation but for leniency: 'I have heere sent you a sharpe sworde, yet, as I suppose, well sheathed' (ibid., fol. 60). The existence of the letter was known to Garnet; he sent an inaccurate report of its contents to Acquaviva in the letter of 7 March 1595. No action was taken by Cecil. 
The long months of imprisonment, called by Garnet 'this blessed solitude', stretched out. In February 1595 Southwell was taken to Newgate, and on the 20th he was brought before the queen's bench for trial for treason under the act of 1585. Details of his last days are contained in the four letters sent by Garnet to Rome, and two eyewitness reports, one by Thomas Leake, a seminary priest (Stonyhurst College, MS Anglia VI, 125-8), and one entitled 'A Brefe Discourse of the Condemnation and Execution of Mr. Robert Southwell' (Stonyhurst College, MS Anglia A. III, 1-11). Sir Edward Coke, attorney-general, conducted the prosecution, and much was made of the Jesuits' advocacy of equivocation. Southwell had written an explanation of this way of avoiding incrimination. It was never published and apparently never widely distributed. Garnet was unable to find a copy when he was asked to give an account of equivocation for the instruction of Catholics in 1598, and he was forced to write his own treatise. 
Southwell was very weak, and he excused any memory lapses as caused by the torture he had had to endure on ten occasions. All his answers were scorned by Topcliffe, who had to be restrained several times. Anne Bellamy alone gave evidence, saying that she had been instructed not to reveal the presence of a priest in the house, an example of equivocation he roundly defended. He was found guilty, and returned to Newgate. The next day, 21 February 1595, he was taken to Tyburn to face the horror of being hanged, drawn, and quartered. All his adult life he had prepared himself for such a death, and those who wrote of his last sufferings spoke of the resignation he showed. For the last time he acknowledged that he was a priest of the Society of Jesus. He prayed for the queen, for the country, and for his soul, asking that he might find perseverance 'unto the end of this my laste conflicte' (Janelle, 89). 
From the moment of his death, Robert Southwell was regarded as a martyr of the Roman Catholic church. He was remembered by his Jesuit fellow-priests with the greatest affection. John Gerard, who occasionally travelled with him, spoke of his success in saving souls: 'He was so wise and good, gentle and loveable' (Gerard, 17). Garnet's letters reveal the distress he felt at the suffering of his friend. In a letter to Rome of 16 July 1592 he spoke of his sense of being bound with him in a mystical union in which all tortures might be endured. Before Garnet's letter arrived Acquaviva wrote to express understanding of his particular sorrow, his 'loneliness and grief of mind and heart' (Caraman, 158). The loneliness never left him. 
What Janelle called 'The Apostolate of Letters' continued, and its influence permeated the religious writing of the last years of the sixteenth century and the work of the metaphysical poets in the first part of the seventeenth. After 1636, however, all publication ceased with the growth of puritan distrust of Catholic and Laudian attitudes. Southwell's reputation was stifled, and with the changing fashion he became no more than a distant outrider in the procession of literary figures. In more recent years a powerfully original body of work has been reassessed with the recovery of texts, the publication of volumes of his work, and perceptive critical comment. 
Robert Southwell was canonized as one of the forty English martyrs in 1970. 
Although it is unlikely that a likeness was made during Southwell's lifetime a portrait painted soon after his death was preserved at the Jesuit house in Fribourg, Switzerland. It survives in a copy, a crayon drawing by Charles Weld, now at Stonyhurst College. It was reproduced in 'The Triumphs over Death', edited by J. W. Trotman (1914), and since that time it has been generally assumed to be an authentic likeness. 


@@@@@


doc= 26065


Southwell, Robert (bap. 1608, d. 1677), administrator and local politician, was baptized on 29 March 1608 in St James, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, the son of Anthony Southwell ('bap'. 1579, died 1623), undertaker in the plantation of Munster, and Margaret, daughter of Sir Ralph Shelton of Norfolk. Nothing is known of his early years or education, and at an unknown date he married Helena (1613-1679), daughter of Major Robert Gore of Shereton, Wiltshire. On 22 July 1631 he was appointed collector of customs for the port of Kinsale, where he remained throughout the Irish rising of 1641, during which time it is said that he 'took his share in the defence of the town against the Irish' ('DNB'). On the conclusion of Ormond's treaty with the Kilkenny confederates Southwell helped to provision the fleet of revolted English ships with which Prince Rupert arrived in the port in January 1649. Although it is said that he suffered for his loyalty to the Stuart cause, the commissioners subsequently appointed for the government of Ireland by the Rump Parliament were evidently reliant upon Southwell for cash loans by June 1652. On 26 November 1653 he was appointed one of the commissioners for surveying lands in the baronies of Kinalea and Kerrykuhirry in co. Cork. On 10 March 1656 he was added to a commission set up for transplanting to Connaught those liable who had not yet vacated co. Cork. At Mallow later that year, during the trial of 'ancient inhabitants of Cork, Kinsale and Youghal', Irish Catholics who laid claim to exemption from the transplantation orders on grounds of constant loyalty to the English interest throughout the rebellion, Southwell gave evidence as to the fidelity and good affection of those many Catholics who had remained in English quarters, and whose loyalty only came in question after their technical disqualification by right of Inchiquin's general defection in 1648. Evidently he was motivated, at least in part, by his ownership of estates purchased from such individuals in the period 1641-52, properties which were themselves liable to confiscation. In 1655 Southwell's daughter Catherine (died 1679) married John Percivall (Perceval), who was knighted by Henry Cromwell in 1658 and elevated to an Irish baronetcy in 1661. Another daughter, Anne, married Ralph Barney of Wyckingham, Norfolk. By 1657 Southwell shared responsibility for provisioning ships of the Commonwealth navy. On 5 October of that year he was elected chief officer, or sovereign, of the corporation of Kinsale. 
After the restoration of Charles II, Southwell received pardon by order of the king on 25 April 1661. He resumed his services to the state in the administration of maritime and naval affairs. In October he petitioned for an award of certain forfeited lands belonging to James Mellefont and Philip Barryoge in satisfaction for a debt incurred supplying the king's fleet at a time apparently unspecified. A grant of Barryoge's property in the liberty of Kinsale, including Ringcurran, was confirmed to Southwell by letters patent on 16 June 1666, and he became governor of the fort erected there in defence against the Dutch; during the Second Anglo-Dutch War he incurred considerable personal expense in dealing with enemy seamen taken prisoner. As of 1 April 1662 he was customer for the port of Kinsale within the establishment for civil affairs in Ireland. By August 1665 he was deputy vice-admiral of Munster, and on 20 September 1670 he was appointed vice-admiral of the province, and admitted as a member of the provincial council. In 1671 he was sovereign of Kinsale once more. In 1675 order was given that the town's new charter incorporate a saving in respect of land from the fee farm rent recently granted to Southwell, on which he had built housing and other accommodation to the advantage of the port and harbour there. He died on 3 April 1677 after a long illness (probably dropsy), during which his second but only surviving son, Sir Robert Southwell, diplomat and future secretary of state for Ireland, took comfort from his stoic discourse, remarking that 'Socrates and Seneca did by the help of Words and Witt, leave greater Monuments of their Firmity when they came to this great experiment; but I believe hee will expire as little concerned as either of them' (Marquis of Lansdowne, 11-12). Southwell was buried alongside his infant son Thomas in the family tomb in the eastern aisle of Kinsale church. His wife and their daughter Catherine, who both died in 1679, were buried next to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26066


Southwell, Sir Robert (1635-1702), diplomat and government official, was born near Kinsale in co. Cork on 31 December 1635, the second but only surviving son and heir of Robert Southwell (bap. 1608, d. 1677) and Helena (1613-1679), daughter of Major Robert Gore, of Shereton, Wiltshire. His father, from the second generation of a family settled in the recently planted province of Munster, had acquired the post of collector of customs in the port of Kinsale in 1631. Even before this Robert Southwell the elder, and his father of the same name, had been accumulating property in and around the town. They continued to add to their holdings in the locality. Southwell the elder, in common with other Munster planters, was endangered by the uprising of 1641 and spent the next decade trying to suppress it. Unlike some protestant leaders in the region, notably Broghill, he looked to the king and his Irish lord lieutenant, Ormond, to end the rebellion. Faithful to the royal cause even after Charles I had been defeated in England, in 1648 Southwell assisted Prince Rupert, who was harrying the victorious parliamentarians at sea. Kinsale was notable as a safe harbour and was also developing as a victualling centre for shipping. Southwell put it at Rupert's disposal, and thereby incurred the hostility of the English authorities. 
Once the formidable army of the new English Commonwealth had disembarked in Ireland in August 1649, royalists among the Irish protestant community were liable to harassment and punishment. It may have been to escape this uncongenial atmosphere that Southwell dispatched his young heir to Christchurch in Hampshire in 1650. Already Robert the younger had received some schooling in the city of Cork. In 1653 the youth matriculated at Queen's College in Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1655. In 1654 Southwell was entered at Lincoln's Inn. Some signs of his versatility were precociously apparent in verses which he wrote between 1654 and 1656. Some celebrated his contemporaries among the undergraduates at Oxford, but one was occasioned by the death of John Selden, 'the grave and famous antiquary' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. poet. f.6, fol. 44). 
The past affiliations of the elder Robert Southwell in 1654 threatened him with the forfeiture of one-fifth of his Irish holdings. However, he ingratiated himself with the new regime. From 1655, with Henry Cromwell as effective governor, prospects for older established settlers in Ireland brightened. Under this friendlier administration Southwell added to his property in Kinsale, attracted government contracts for provisioning ships, and so improved his finances. As a result, his heir was able to undertake an extended foreign tour. One motive for travelling at this juncture may still have been a wish to avoid too close contact with the usurpers; another, to improve links with the exiled royalists. But the principal purpose seems to have been to educate the promising young man who, as yet, had not chosen a career. Between 1659 and 1661 his travels took in France, the Netherlands, parts of central Europe, and Italy. An obvious result was a facility in languages which would soon be applied in foreign embassies. Welcomed by grandees, Southwell developed and exhibited a courtliness which was much admired. In 1660 he had spent three months in Florence, where he was warmly received by the grand duke and his brother, reviving a contact between the Medicis and Southwells which stretched back to the early sixteenth century and which would be extended in the improbable setting of Kinsale in 1669. In Florence and Bologna he frequented the circles of virtuosi, encountered a pupil of Galileo, and met mathematicians, astronomers, and antiquaries. Southwell followed a similar routine in Rome during 1661. There he counted the scientist Father Athanasius Kircher a particular friend and, on behalf of an acquaintance from Munster, Robert Boyle, questioned the Jesuit closely. He conversed with cardinals and English expatriates, exiled on account of religion and political principles. Among the last was the republican Algernon Sidney. The table talk in Rome ranged widely. It even embraced the attributes -- including dissimulation -- needed to thrive in state and diplomatic service, which Southwell seems to have heeded. These peregrinations also allowed the traveller to send back to his friends in Ireland and England rarities, from books and artefacts to a Parmesan cheese. It left him with an enthusiasm for the continent which he not only indulged during his own life but which he passed to his descendants. In successive generations the enlightening effects of the grand tour were appreciated. 
Equipped by this protracted preparation, Southwell returned home, there to consider his future. The Restoration had improved the standing of the family. The gains of recent years were likely to be confirmed, and the possible penalties had been averted. The elder Southwell wanted his heir to find a profitable occupation which would keep him in Ireland. The advent of Ormond to the lord lieutenancy made this a realistic ambition, since Ormond was accounted a friend and patron of the Southwells. However, the younger Southwell, uninterested in a military post, doubted that Ormond had anything in his gift which fitted his qualifications. Moreover, he argued that his knowledge of the wider world was more relevant to possible employments in England than in Ireland. The first office which he acquired, in 1664, was a secretaryship to the commission of prizes. This may have come his way thanks to his family's connections, as owners of the docks at Kinsale, with the naval administrators in London. But it also owed something to support from Ormond and his circle. 
On 26 January 1665 Southwell married Elizabeth (1649-1682), the eldest daughter of Sir Edward Dering, a baronet from Kent. Dering had recently served in Ireland as one of the English commissioners charged with adjudicating on the claims of those who wished to be restored to their confiscated estates. No doubt the opportunity for this alliance arose during Dering's stay in Dublin. With the bride came a portion of $1500. The expectation of the dowry may have enabled Southwell late in 1664 to buy one of the four clerkships of the privy council for $1600 or $2000. The seller was another Irish protestant, Sir George Lane, secretary to Ormond. It was reckoned that a clerk could earn $450 per annum. The office also introduced Southwell into the innermost workings of government. From his vantage point he maintained a watching brief for friends back in Ireland and Dublin University as the new land settlement was drafted. He soon attracted plaudits, being described by Arlington as 'an ingenious young gentleman and very well qualified for the employment' (BL, Add. MS 34336, fols. 1-2). In particular, his linguistic proficiency rapidly brought him more work. In November 1665 he was appointed as emissary to Portugal, with the mission of concluding peace between the Portuguese and Spain. The next month he was knighted. He travelled to Lisbon early in 1666, and helped to bring about the peace of Lisbon, which was signed on 13 February 1668. Soon he was ordered to return to that country, again as envoy. His task was now to negotiate a commercial treaty between England and Portugal. Negotiations detained him for more than a year and left him financially embarrassed. More foreign missions soon followed. In October 1671 he was dispatched to Brussels as ambassador. 
Back in England by 1672, Southwell was elected the next year to parliament for the Cornish borough of Penryn, which he represented until 1679. In 1672 he was reappointed secretary to the commission of prizes, having relinquished the post in 1667. Profitable involvement in maritime affairs increased with his being named as deputy to his father as vice-admiral of the province of Munster: no sinecure, but, with its chances to share in the sale of prizes and wrecks, lucrative to the family. In 1677 Southwell succeeded to the vice-admiralty itself following his father's death on 3 April. Another valuable post, a commissioner for the excise, was gained in 1671: it carried a salary of $500 per annum. Throughout the 1670s Southwell distinguished himself as a diligent and adroit administrator. Loyal to the court, he hardly ventured into partisan politics. For much of the decade his original patron, Ormond, was in eclipse, but this did not slow the protege's steady progress. As a result of his greater prosperity and rank, by 1672 he had acquired a property in Spring Gardens in Westminster. By the 1670s he was enquiring what country estates were on offer. Like other purchasers from southern Ireland, he opted for one in south-western England, at King's Weston outside Bristol, handy for rapid movement between Ireland and England. In 1671 he had revisited his ancestral home; his father's death in 1677 obliged him to return to settle affairs in Kinsale. He drew approximately $1000 annually from Irish property, almost all of which was concentrated in the town, and so watched vigilantly over his own and the port's interests. In particular, he used his official connections to urge on the Treasury and Admiralty the claims of Kinsale as the centre where ships could most expeditiously be provisioned. In 1682 he was prepared to lease his little-used house there as a navy office. In addition, he frequently bestirred himself to place the sons of tenants and kinsfolk from the district in the navy or government service. As such he remained a useful patron even after he had permanently absented himself from Ireland. 
The furore over the Popish Plot embarrassed Southwell. Although a compliant servant of the administration throughout the 1670s, his Irish upbringing and property in Ireland gave him strong reasons for resisting the demands of the Catholics for better treatment. Yet in 1679 he was criticized in the House of Lords. In connection with his duties as clerk to the council he was reputed to have suppressed pertinent information about the conspiracy. He felt it best to leave the sensitive public post. Seemingly with the help of Ormond (since 1677 back in favour), Southwell was allowed to sell his clerkship in December 1679 for $2500. His choice in the spring of 1680 for an embassy to the elector of Brandenburg showed that he was still highly regarded. The mission was connected with a scheme to construct an alliance against France, and it took Southwell to the prince of Orange and the court of Brunswick-Luneburg. But such diplomacy was not to the taste of Charles II, moving in the orbit of France. Southwell was soon recalled. In 1681 his place in the excise commission was terminated. He was returned to the 1685 parliament, this time for another Cornish seat, Lostwithiel. 
Otherwise, without public employments, Southwell busied himself about private and family matters. King's Weston (bought in 1679) was improved; Kinsale, albeit from a distance, was overseen. Almshouses were endowed and the parish church ornamented with a monument to his parents from the workshop of Grinling Gibbons. The education of his heir, Edward Southwell, born on 4 September 1671, preoccupied him, the more so as his wife had died in 1682. He attended also to the upbringing of other young kinsmen, the Percevals, Kings, and Sir Thomas Southwell. All were entrusted to the expert Southwell. Also, the ageing Ormond, who was restored to the Irish viceroyalty and held the post from 1677 to 1685, confided much in him. Probably the honorary doctorate of civil law which Southwell received from Oxford University in 1677 had been prompted by Ormond, the chancellor of the university. The management of his errant grandsons, especially the eldest -- James Butler, future duke of Ormond -- after his father, Lord Ossory, died in 1680, was delegated to Southwell. In 1682, when the duke became embroiled in an acrimonious and potentially damaging controversy with Anglesey, he turned to Southwell to construct a detailed defence of his conduct during the 1640s. The project expanded into an authorized biography. Although Southwell worked on it intermittently between 1682 and 1688, being accorded access to the archives of aristocrats other than Ormond, nothing was published in the lifetime of either the duke or Southwell. The life, eventually published in 1792, showed how the discretion which brought Southwell such respect could be carried to extremes. 
Southwell's preferences, always sedentary, increasingly inclined to the cerebral. In 1662, sponsored by his friend Robert Boyle, he had been elected a fellow of the Royal Society. Absences overseas interfered with his attendance at meetings, but when in London he participated with enthusiasm. Furthermore, a close friendship with the polymath Sir William Petty stimulated an interest in utilitarian improvements and speculations on the natural world. Together they reflected on the demography, topography, and politics of Ireland. It indicated Southwell's tact and self-effacement that he could keep the affection of two such divergent figures as the haughty Ormond and the touchy Petty. 
These same qualities stood Southwell in good stead during the developing crisis of 1688. Edward Southwell acted more impetuously than his cautious father by joining the forces of William of Orange shortly after they had landed in November 1688. Soon, although an uneasy calm descended on England once William and Mary had been accepted, the danger to protestant proprietors in Ireland, such as Southwell, worsened. James II, indeed, landed at Kinsale on 12 March 1689 at the start of his bid to use Ireland to regain his other two kingdoms. The absent, and those from Ireland who had embraced William, stood to forfeit their properties. Southwell had met William during his mission in 1680 and may covertly have kept in touch thereafter. He readily accepted from William appointment as principal secretary for Ireland. In this office, it seemed, Southwell's intimacy with the country was married to his administrative expertise. He accompanied the king to Ireland, and landed with him at Carrickfergus on 14 June 1690. In the field with William he was primarily concerned with the commissariat, not tactics. However, he may have proposed that William repeat the ploy tried by Cromwell in 1650: to seek to detach the humbler Irish Catholics from their leaders with offers of clemency. It did not succeed. Southwell's secretaryship, important while the kingdom had still to be subdued, occupied its holder less once more conventional rule through lords deputy or lords justices was resumed. He was not long detained in Ireland, being back in London by October 1690. High standing with the new order had also been shown in his appointment, on 19 April 1689, as a commissioner for managing the English customs, a post he held until he relinquished it on 12 June 1697. Further acknowledgement of his standing, and perhaps of his skills as organizer and diplomat, was shown in his election in December 1690 as president of the Royal Society. He was re-elected annually until 1695. 
Much in demand for his good sense, Southwell shrewdly advised a nephew, Sir John Percival, about to take possession of his co. Cork estate, how to comport himself. An understanding of men and affairs generally made him treat with equanimity the foibles of his fellows. Yet, having advanced himself largely through his own exertions, he could be sensitive on questions of honour. A Brandenburger, Schwerin, whom -- as a favour -- Southwell had helped in the supervision of his Monmouthshire estate, provoked Southwell's wrath. Schwerin had accused him of malpractices. Southwell insisted that he had acted honourably, and warned Schwerin that he had 'other use of my time and ill health than to serve you and to displease you at once' (R. Southwell to Baron De Schwerin, 9 Feb 1698[9], Cardiff Central Library, MS 4.11/103). For once, the passionless mask had slipped. Southwell, deferential towards superiors and elders in his early years, once he had climbed to some eminence was himself accorded (and expected) respect and trust. He died at King's Weston on 11 September 1702 and was buried near by in Henbury church in Gloucestershire, where his wife had earlier been interred. He had not severed his links with Ireland, not least because it remained a vital source of remittances. Yet he had transformed himself from Irish protestant to English country gentleman in receipt of about $1000 per annum from Irish property. 


@@@@@


doc= 26067


Bacon, Thomas (c.1592-1637), Jesuit, was born at Sculthorpe, near Walsingham, Norfolk, the son of John Bacon, gentleman, and his wife, Elizabeth Pannell (died 'c'.1606); he was the elder brother of Nathaniel Bacon, alias Southwell (1598-1676). He attended school at King's Lynn before going to the Jesuit college at St Omer, where he followed the humanity course. From there he went to the English College, Rome, where he was admitted on 2 October 1610 under the name of Southwell, the name of a well-known Norfolk recusant family. He entered the Society of Jesus in 1615, was ordained priest in July 1620, and was professed of the four vows on 19 April 1626. By that date he had transferred to the Jesuit college in Liege, where he was appointed professor of sacred scripture in 1621; from 1623, he was professor of theology there, and held the post until 1634. He published his 'Regula viva, seu, Analysis fidei in Dei per ecclesiam', a defence of the church's authority, at Antwerp in 1628, and embarked on a commentary (probably based on his own lectures) on the 'Summa' of Thomas Aquinas, the first part of which was prepared for the press but remained unpublished. It was probably to Thomas that Sir Tobie Matthew was referring when, in a letter to Francis Bacon in 1621, he described him as 'The most prodigious wit that I ever knew of any nation and of this side of the sea' ('DNB'). Thomas died at the Jesuit house at Watten on 11 December 1637. 


@@@@@


doc= 26068


Southwell, Thomas, first Baron Southwell (c.1665-1720), politician, was born at 'Glanamorohe Rhaiaile', co. Limerick, Ireland (Foster, 'Alum. Oxon., 1500-1714', 4.1393), the eldest son of Richard Southwell (died before February 1680), politician, and his wife, Lady Elizabeth O'Brien (died 1688). Richard Southwell's father, Thomas Southwell of Castle Mattress (now Castle Matrix), co. Limerick, had been created a baronet in 1662. On his grandfather's death in May 1681, the younger Thomas succeeded him in his title and estates. Responsibility for Sir Thomas's estates and education was placed in the hands of guardians, who requested the advice of his kinsman Sir Robert Southwell, later Irish secretary of state. Sir Thomas landed in England in October 1681, and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, two months later. He left in 1684 without a degree. After finding that he was unable to afford a journey to the continent, and was forbidden to enter the inns of court by his guardians, Southwell probably returned to Ireland. 
In late 1688, anticipating an invasion by James II, Southwell and his brother William ['see below'] raised a troop of one hundred horse in co. Limerick, in an attempt to secure Munster for William III. Facing opposition, Southwell and his party retreated north towards Ulster but were captured by the Jacobite sheriff of Galway, James Power, tried for and found guilty of treason, and imprisoned for fifteen months. The psychological torture and other privations they endured provided material for William King's anti-Catholic 'The State of the Protestants of Ireland under the Late King James's Government' (1691). Although attainted by the Irish parliament in May 1689, Southwell was released from Galway in April 1690 into the custody of the earl of Seaforth, who took him to Scotland and allowed him to return to the government forces. Southwell's colleagues remained imprisoned until after the battle of the Boyne. In 1692 Southwell successfully petitioned William and Mary for $500 to cover the costs he had incurred in maintaining the poorest prisoners and buying reprieves from the death sentences passed upon them. 
Southwell then devoted himself to the Williamite reconstruction of Ireland. In April 1693 he was made a commissioner to inspect and collect arrears on crown lands. More importantly, by August of that year he was already involved in settling continental protestant families in Ireland, initially from France. A Treasury letter of 19 August authorized the provision of victuals for the families for a month, and another of 14 July 1695 a grant to Southwell of $180 7's'. 6died for the cost of transporting the families from London. Most of the protestants were linen manufacturers, the most prominent being Samuel-Louis Crommelin. The majority did not settle in co. Limerick but in Ulster where there was already a substantial protestant population. Southwell remained an active campaigner for the cause of linen manufacturing in Ireland. In correspondence with Charles Montagu from about 1698 (BL, Add. MS 4761, fols. 183-93) he discussed the influence of English legislation encouraging the export of wool from Ireland to England, and suggested further measures to encourage Irish linen and discourage the sale of Irish wool outside the British Isles. One of the consequences was the establishment of the royal corporation, by which the government gave financial support to Crommelin's investment. The correspondence reveals Southwell to have been anxious to promote voluntary co-operation between Ireland and England on economic matters, as the basis for a secure protestant settlement in both countries. 
On 4 April 1696 Southwell married Meliora Coningsby (died 1735), daughter of the first Earl Coningsby; the couple had six sons and five daughters, seven of whom survived infancy. In the previous year he had been elected member of the Irish parliament for co. Limerick which he represented until 1699 and again in the years 1703-13 and 1715-17. As an active whig, Southwell continued to enjoy several administrative positions. From 1697 to 1713 and from 1714 to his death he was a commissioner of the revenue. On 12 February 1701 he was appointed a trustee for the erection of barracks in Ireland, and on 4 December 1702 he became a trustee for the establishment of the linen manufacture, as provided for in the legislation he had supported setting up the royal corporation. He was sworn of the Irish privy council in 1710. The arrival in England of the protestant exiles from the Palatinate, Germany, inspired Southwell to further action; by 1712 he had settled 130 German protestant families in co. Limerick, but encountered difficulty in acquiring compensation for his expenses from the government. It was not until 1718 that George I agreed to discharge Southwell's debts and support the Palatine families on his estates for seven years. Despite Southwell's efforts the settlement was not a success. 
Although Southwell seems to have been out of favour and office at the end of Anne's reign, the accession of George I helped to restore his political fortunes, and he was created an Irish baron, as Baron Southwell of Castle Mattress, co. Limerick, on 4 September 1717. He died suddenly in Dublin on 4 August 1720, and was buried at Rathkeale, co. Limerick. His widow died in London on 22 October 1735. 


Southwell was married to Lucy (died 1733), youngest daughter and coheir of William Bowen of Ballyadams, Queen's county; they had five sons and eight daughters. William Southwell died on 23 January 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 26069


William Southwell (1669-1720), army officer and politician, was the younger brother of the first Baron Southwell. After his release from imprisonment in Galway following the defeat of James II, he continued his military career. He was commissioned in Colonel Hamilton's regiment of foot on 1 September 1693, and was promoted to captain-lieutenant the following August. He was severely wounded at Terra Nova, Namur, but survived and was promoted to captain in September 1695. On half pay after the Nine Years' War, he returned to service for the War of the Spanish Succession. He was made a major in Colonel James Rivers's regiment of foot in February 1702, and a lieutenant-colonel in January 1704. His distinguished leadership during the siege of Barcelona in September 1705 ensured the capture of the fortress of Monjuich; Southwell was the first officer through the breach and he obtained the surrender. He was rewarded with the temporary governorship of the fortress and the colonelcy of his old regiment, Hamilton being reassigned. Ill health prevented him from commanding the regiment at Almanza in April 1707, when he was in England; on 14 June 1708 he sold his regiment to Colonel Harrison for 5000 guineas. The duke of Marlborough obtained his horse as a gift for the duchess (Snyder, 965). He returned to Ireland where he had been elected MP for Kinsale, co. Cork, in 1703, and supported the whigs. He was returned for Castlemartyr, co. Cork, in 1713. In 1714 he was captain of the lord lieutenant of Ireland's honour guard, and from the next year until his death he was MP for Baltimore, co. Cork. 


@@@@@


doc= 26070


Sowerby, George Brettingham, the first (1788-1854), conchologist and natural history dealer, was born at Lambeth, London, on 12 May 1788, the second son among the nine children of James Sowerby (1757-1822), botanical artist and natural history periodical publisher, and his wife, Anne de Carle (1764-1815). His elder brother was James De Carle Sowerby (1787-1871). The first G. B. Sowerby is thought to have been educated at home by private tutors, but, as with all the children, he was soon caught up in the production and publication of the Sowerby natural history works, contributing descriptions to the 'Mineral Conchology' (1812-22). 
On 16 May 1811 G. B. Sowerby the first married Elizabeth Meredith. The couple had nine children, including George Brettingham Sowerby the second and Henry Sowerby ['see below']. It seems likely that an estrangement from his father at about this time, thought by some to be due to business matters (Sowerby, 'Saga', 43; Macdonald, 395) was, instead, due to his marriage. Whatever the cause, the estrangement led to G. B. Sowerby establishing himself as a dealer in natural history objects at King Street, Covent Garden. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1811. An early interest in entomology provided his first paper (1812) but, on being persuaded that the study was cruel, he turned to other subjects. On his father's death in 1822 he became responsible for completing 'The Genera of Recent and Fossil Shells' (1820-22). 
The 'Catalogue of the Shells in the... Tankerville Collection' (1825) influenced the illustration and nomenclature of conchology and helped to establish the first G. B. Sowerby's reputation in that field. His acquisition of the Tankerville collection in the 1820s, followed by the purchase of that of George Humphreys, caused him considerable financial embarrassment when the removal of import duty reduced the resale value of that stock. In a letter to Royer, in Paris, he wrote: 'I am at this moment in the midst of two enormous collections of Shells, Minerals and Fossils that I have purchased and actually know not which way to turn myself. I believe I shall go distracted unless I can find some person to assist me, or dispose of the whole concern together. (12 Oct 1824, G. B. Sowerby MS 208)' These transactions marked the first G. B. Sowerby's entrance into the commercial market, which caused considerable anxiety to other dealers and later led to rivalry over the quality of shells that were used for illustrations. 
Correspondence from 1822-46 indicates the complexity of his dealings in shells, minerals, and fossils, as well as his role as a publisher and/or agent for other European dealers and publishers. His wide knowledge and good reputation meant that his opinion was frequently sought in making valuations. Between 1825 and 1830 he became involved with the 'Zoological Journal', a periodical dealing with new and exotic discoveries produced by a group of zoologists anxious to establish their own society, for which he wrote a succession of short papers on Mollusca. Further contributions were made to its successor, once the Zoological Society had been formed, and to other natural history periodicals. 
In the 1830s, collaborating with his brothers, Sowerby tried numerous subscription schemes to raise finance (including an attempt to dispose of the Yorkshire meteorite in 1835) for a 'Sowerby Museum'. He also founded the 'Malacological and Conchological Magazine' and financed it for twelve months until it failed through lack of support. His own collection of natural history objects and stock of shells had to be sold by Thomas and Stevens on 27 May 1833. 
Through his conchological reputation, Sowerby was involved in the description and illustration of recent and fossil molluscs collected on expeditions made during the late 1830s and 1840s (Beechey, 1839; Darwin, 1844; Strzelecki, 1845; and Adams, 1850). In particular he collaborated with Hugh Cuming in describing and marketing extensive collections from South America, but it was later realized that many 'new species' were created solely as commercial opportunities. 
In a sales leaflet ('c'.1841) 'GBS' observed that his exertions for many years had been devoted to advance natural history, but that owing to ill health and with a numerous family, he now sought assistance from the 'Friends of science' in order to continue. His health had been weakened by an inflammation of the lungs before 1811 and this condition was aggravated by the stress of a dealer's life. He died on 26 July 1854 at Hanley Road, Hornsey, London. Shortly before his own death, Gideon Mantell wrote, in his last journal entry (27 October 1852): 'Called on poor Mr. G. Sowerby, a decrepit and paralytic old man! and I remember my first interview with him at his father's when he was a laughing healthy youth -- life is a sad enigma' (G. Mantell, diary, Lewes, Sussex Archaeological Society). 
The first G. B. Sowerby's oldest son, 
He collaborated with his father in the production of 'The Conchological Illustrations' (1841), a work that was initially intended to be a companion volume of coloured figures to a 'descriptive catalogue' of hitherto unfigured shells described by J. E. Gray. He also published other significant conchological works with various members of the Sowerby family: 'The Conchological Manual' (1839), 'Thesaurus conchyliorum' (1848-87), 'Popular British Conchology' (1854), and 'Illustrated Index of British Shells' (1859). He was persuaded to produce 'The Popular History of the Aquarium' (1857) by Lovell Reeve, but not having the necessary knowledge he was criticized for incorporating material published by other authors and labelled as 'one of the greatest proficients in the art of 'scissors and paste'' ('Annals and Magazine of Natural History', 20, 1857, 139). 
The second G. B. Sowerby is renowned for the illustrations he produced for the works of other specialists. A volume of drawings, 'Palaeontology of the Vicinity of Cheltenham' ('c'.1844), showing fossils in the collection of Charles Fowler, suggests that he ought to be regarded as the most artistically talented of the Sowerbys. Crosse in a review (Crosse, 260) commented that he was a mediocre naturalist, a shocking Latinist, but an excellent draughtsman and concluded 'Faites des planches, faites des planches... mais pour l'amour de Dieu ne decriver point de coquille!' ('Make plates, make plates,... but for the love of God don't describe any shells!'). Sowerby died at Wood Green on 26 July 1884. 




@@@@@


doc= 26071


George Brettingham Sowerby the second (1812-1884), conchologist and artist, was born in Lambeth on 25 March 1812. He was probably educated at Harrow School and then assisted his father with publications and the natural history business. On 25 December 1835 he married Margaret Hitchen, the daughter of the Revd Thomas Hitchen. 


@@@@@


doc= 26072


Henry Sowerby (1825-1891), librarian and draughtsman, the second son of G. B. Sowerby the first, was born in Kensington on 28 March 1825. He was educated at Bickerdike's School, Kentish Town, and then at University College, London. Between 1843 and 1853 he served part-time as assistant librarian to the Linnean Society. Later his carelessness as sub-curator was thought to have been partly responsible for 'serious injury' to the collection of shells (Gage, 128). During that period he published his only work 'Popular Mineralogy' (1850) as one of Reeve's popular handbooks. In his preface, Henry Sowerby claimed that the plates were the first illustrations of minerals to be produced by lithography. On 21 April 1849 he married Annie Faulkner, daughter of Bridges Faulkner, merchant, and they had two children. In 1854 he went to Australia where he became a draughtsman at Melbourne University. After teaching drawing in various state schools he became occupied in gold mining for the last twenty years of his life. He died on 15 September 1891 in Daylesford, Victoria. 


@@@@@


doc= 26073


Sowerby, James (1757-1822), natural history artist, publisher, and collector, was born on 21 March 1757, at 2 Bolt-in-Tun Passage, Fleet Street, London, the son of John Sowerby (1719-1766), a lapidary, and his wife, Arabella Goodreed (1725-1782). He was educated at a day school, where he often made models during his lessons that he could sell. When he was fourteen friends provided $100 to indenture him to Richard Wright, the marine painter, who following a paralytic stroke referred him to a Mr (William?) Hodges. Eventually, despite his diffidence in submitting a work to gain admittance, he became a student at the Royal Academy on 1 December 1777. 
Initially Sowerby supported himself by teaching drawing or by painting portraits and miniatures, but he disliked the inaccuracy involved in pleasing his subjects and decided to try landscape painting. The resulting sketches persuaded William Curtis to employ him as a botanical illustrator for his publications including the 'Flora Londinensis' (1783-8) and, in return, to instruct him in botany. Sowerby illustrated many of the plants featured in the 'Botanical Magazine'. After observing the processes of etching and engraving, he acquired sufficient knowledge to undertake his own publications and began with the abortive 'Flora luxurians' (1789), which was followed by 'An Easy Introduction to Drawing Flowers According to Nature' (1788), and its second edition, 'A Botanical Drawing Book' (1791). When working for William Curtis, he had completed illustrations for several other authors including L'Heritier (1784, 1787, 1788) and Withering (1785). 
While a student Sowerby visited the Norwich home of his friend Robert de Carle, and met Anne de Carle (1764-1815), the subject of a portrait he had once drawn solely from her brother's description. At Norwich, he was introduced to several influential botanists and zoologists, including James Edward Smith and Dawson Turner. Through these connections and by soliciting drawing commissions from members of the nobility attracted to natural history pursuits, he was able to increase his income. Ultimately he co-operated with Smith to produce 'English Botany' (1790-1814) -- the first extensive description of the British flora, which owing to Smith's caution over admitting authorship of this work, became known as 'Sowerby's Botany'. This enterprise ended his association with Curtis. Its success encouraged him to publish a companion work, 'Coloured Figures of English Fungi' (1797-1815), for which he was solely responsible, and to produce a series of models of British fungi for display. After becoming a member of the Linnean Society in 1789 (made fellow in 1793), he became involved with the work of Sir Joseph Banks. 
In order to obtain material for description in 'English Botany', Sowerby requested botanists throughout the country to submit suitable specimens. By appealing to their vanity, or willingness to serve science, he established the network of naturalists that enabled his family to produce a succession of natural history publications. Dawson Turner (1755-1858), an early contributor, joined him on a botanical tour of Cornwall in 1799 -- one of the few occasions that Sowerby carried out fieldwork and did not use pressure of work as an excuse to hide a dislike of travelling. 
Following his marriage to Anne de Carle on 9 February 1786, which produced nine children, among them James De Carle Sowerby and George Brettingham Sowerby the first, and the gift of a house in Lambeth by his father-in-law, Robert Brettingham de Carle, Sowerby started to form his own museum and planned to achieve a complete collection of British natural history. Seeking further publishing outlets, he produced the 'British Miscellany' (1804-6), a work that featured new and rare animal, bird, and insect subjects, many from his own specimens. He then produced a work on crystallography (1805) and, when rheumatism prevented him engraving for a while, published 'A New Elucidation of Colours...' (1809). The acquisition and exploitation of the Yorkshire meteorite in 1804 demonstrates his business acumen, persistence, and resourcefulness, while the complete disregard for his fungi drawings when adapting them to unsuitable copper plates indicates his very thrifty nature. The fashion for geology led to the part publications of 'British Mineralogy' (1802-17), 'Exotic Mineralogy' (1811-20) and to his commencing 'The Mineral Conchology of Great Britain' (1812-46). In 1808, he became a fellow of the Geological Society, formed the previous year. 
In both his publications and correspondence, Sowerby assisted and encouraged naturalists, or advised uninformed collectors of minerals, fossils, plants, birds, and insects; many maintained that they were completely dependent upon him for such information. Specimens were sent for identification, description, and illustration, or as additions to his museum, and in return he sent duplicate specimens or parts of his various publications. He was often used as a clearing house by distant correspondents or asked to conduct other errands. Fully occupied, he wrote 'as one letter &c.... so frequently comes upon another... my avocation will not allow me to answer all' and claimed 'I have been such a recluse that I scarcely know what is doing out of doors!' (Wellington, NZ, Mantell Archive, ATL MS 83, folder 90). The publications became irregular or incomplete, or had errors, which caused widespread criticism and dissatisfaction among subscribers. Apart from the 'Genera of Recent and Fossil Shells' (1820-34), no attempt was made to arrange the contents of his works systematically, but in providing the first scientific description, name, and illustration for many British taxa, they established a framework for several branches of natural history as well as encouraging methodical collection. Sowerby, always fully involved in some aspect of illustration, publication, or communication, regarded pursuits such as the playing of musical instruments, or entertainment, as 'a loss of time' (Simpkins, 'Biographical sketch', 409). 
After the death of his wife in September 1815 Sowerby concentrated on increasing his collections but still directed the various members of the family in the continuation of the serial publications. The following year, he published the first part of Smith's 'Strata Identified by Organized Fossils' (1816-17), a project which had been in hand since 1808. In December 1820 he married the widow of Admiral Reynolds, Maria Catherine, who then upset the rest of the family by trying to interfere with their established publishing procedures. 
In his portrait, James Sowerby appears to be small and slight; for most of his life he enjoyed good health, but in the last few years he suffered from the urinary problems commonly experienced in old age and after an illness of some four months, died at his home, 2 Mead Place, Lambeth, on 25 October 1822. Sowerby had a considerable influence on the development of natural history. Although he did not achieve the goal of acquiring a complete collection of the British flora and fauna, he made a substantial contribution to its scientific description. 'Sowerbaea', an Australian genus known as the 'vanilla lily', was named by J. E. Smith in Sowerby's honour, and the cetacean 'Mesoplodon bidens', first described in the 'British Miscellany', is still commonly known as 'Sowerby's whale'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26074


Sowerby, James De Carle (1787-1871), naturalist and artist, was born in London on 5 June 1787, the eldest of the nine children of James Sowerby (1757-1822), botanical artist, and his wife, Anne de Carle (1764-1815). George Brettingham Sowerby the first was his younger brother. He was educated at home by private tutors, but in science was largely self-taught with the help of his father's scientist contacts. He was attracted to chemistry and mineralogy and conducted his own analytical experiments encouraged by Faraday, Humphry Davy (under whom he studied with Faraday), and Wollaston, in whose house he was a welcome visitor. He is said independently to have proposed the classification of minerals according to their chemical composition and also to have supplied the analyses of many minerals described in his father's mineralogical works. Accompanying his father on field excursions around London, he also acquired a knowledge of natural history. 
James De Carle Sowerby soon became involved in his family's publications. In his teens he was sent to organize and utilize the collections of other naturalists and to teach drawing and etching to their families. His earliest published illustrations appeared in Dawson Turner's 'Muscologiae Hibernicae spicilegium' (1804), and he described many of the fossils illustrated in the 'Mineral Conchology' (1812-46). On 25 September 1813 he married Mary Edwards (1786-1852); all their eight children were born while the family lived in Lambeth. 
Writing to Dawson Turner, James De Carle Sowerby explained the progression of the family's publications: 'we go on in the old plodding way, the vegetables of our country being exhausted, we must live upon the rocks, with a few shells for a treat now and then, or any thing else that comes in our way. (J. de C. Sowerby to D. Turner, 23 Feb 1816, Dawson Turner MSS)' James De Carle Sowerby inherited the family business with his brother Charles Edward on their father's death in 1822, and the two went into partnership. Although solely responsible for 'Mineral Conchology', Sowerby assisted Charles with the other periodicals until the partnership was dissolved in 1831. Even later he was to supply many plates and some text for the supplement to 'English Botany' (1831-49). However, the majority of Sowerby's time was soon devoted to describing and illustrating material for leading geologists, including Sedgwick, Murchison, Buckland, and Fitton, who employed him to deal with their fossils. Between the 1820s and the 1860s he also produced illustrations for monographs, books, and papers on many other subjects, ranging from anatomical plates in veterinary journals to the engravings of turtles in Bell's 'Monograph of the Testudinata' (1836-41). A few descriptive papers in the 'Zoological Journal' and others, or notes in periodicals, were all that he published under his own name. 
In 1838, with his cousin Phillip Barnes, James De Carle Sowerby founded the Royal Botanic Gardens at Regent's Park, becoming its first secretary, a post he held until retirement in 1869. However, the garden, intended to be a public establishment for the general study of the vegetable kingdom, became merely a stage for London's fashionable society and earned the name 'Royal Botanical Humbug' from the 'Gardeners' Gazette'. In 1846 Sowerby was appointed librarian and curator of the Geological Society, on 'partial duty' to enable him to retain his post at Regent's Park. He resigned in 1848 when the salary was limited to $50. He became a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1823 and was a founder member of the Zoological Society in 1826. The Geological Society awarded him the Wollaston fund in 1840. 
A generous nature and financial needs led to James De Carle Sowerby's undertaking too many commitments. His work at the Botanical Society led to considerable delay to every publication with which he was involved. Lindley, Bell, and Darwin were among those who suffered, with the last complaining 'I did not know how dreadfully dilatory he was when I picked him out as most capable of doing the work' (Burkhardt and Smith, 367). Darwin eventually turned to his nephew G. B. Sowerby the second to complete the task. The irregularity of the Sowerbys' 'Mineral Conchology' was a factor that led to the formation of the Palaeontographical Society in 1847, but such was Sowerby's expertise that the society often found itself employing him to illustrate and produce engravings for its monographs, in spite of his reputation. 
In 1861 James De Carle Sowerby sold the Sowerby collection to the British Museum. He stopped working at the Royal Botanic Gardens in 1867 through ill health, declaring 'I feel the effects of age and am growing very feeble' (J. De C. Sowerby, letter, 27 Dec 1867, Sowerby archive, London, Natural History Museum). He retired officially in 1869 and died on 26 August 1871 at his home, 18 St George's Road, Kilburn. 
James De Carle Sowerby was arguably the most prolific and accomplished member of the Sowerby family, and although responsible for the description of many taxa, his main contribution to natural history had been 'the portraits of natural objects he has left behind him... delineated faithfully from... acquaintance with their form and structure' (W. Sowerby, cited in Simpkins, 393), 'which no pencil or burin, but those of a scientific artist could possibly accomplish' (Buckland). An obituarist described him as: 'Gentle, earnest, conscientious, ever ready to help others out of his wealth of knowledge, Mr Sowerby's name will be remembered with affection and reverence by all who knew him. His was a truly blameless and useful life' ('Gardeners' Chronicle'). 


@@@@@


doc= 26075


Sowerby, John Edward (1825-1870), artist and publisher, was born in Lambeth on 17 January 1825, the eldest son of the botanist and publisher Charles Edward Sowerby (1795-1842) and his wife, Judith Ainsley. A grandson of James Sowerby (1757-1822), the natural history artist and publisher of 'English Botany', J. E. Sowerby inherited the family talent for botanical drawing. 
Few details of J. E. Sowerby's early life and education are available, but it would appear that, like the children of each generation of that family, he was soon involved in the preparation of illustrations for its publications. The plates he produced at the age of sixteen for his father's 'Illustrated Catalogue of British Plants' (1841) were his first signed work. On 10 February 1853 he married Elizabeth Dewhurst, the daughter of Roger Dewhurst of Preston, Lancashire. 
J. E. Sowerby collaborated with the botanist Charles Johnson (1791-1880) in 1855-7, and his son Charles Pierpoint Johnson (died 1893) from 1857 to 1862, to provide the illustrations for numerous British works for which they had written the text. These dealt with ferns (1855), fern allies (1856), poisonous plants (1856), grasses (1857-61), wild flowers (1858-60, 1863), and 'useful plants' (1861-2). He provided a supplement on 'Ferns, horsetails and club mosses' for Johnson's 'British Wild Flowers' (1863, 1894). Other illustrations were provided for the second (1850) and third (1863-72) editions of 'English Botany' published by J. T. I. Boswell Syme (1822-1888). 'An Illustrated Key to the Natural Orders of British Wild Flowers', published by Van Voorst (1865), was his only independent work. He used miniature versions of drawings in 'English Botany' as typical plants of the principal orders and borrowed descriptions from Babington's 'Manual of British Botany'. 
All J. E. Sowerby's drawings were on botanical subjects and through publishing economies had a similar multiple arrangement of figures. Among the works he was associated with were those on flowers by Mrs Lankester (1861, 1879) and J. E. Taylor (1878); on ferns -- T. W. Gissing (1862); rusts, smut, mildew, and mould -- M. C. Cooke (1865, 1878); and a flora of Essex by G. S. Stacey (1862). The extent of his botanical knowledge is not clear, but, surprisingly, not one of the authors acknowledged his contribution other than on the title-page. 
Following a short illness, J. E. Sowerby died at his home, Stanley Villa, Poultney Road, Lavender Hill, Clapham, on 28 January 1870, aged forty-five. Shortly after his death an appeal was made through the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' to provide funds for his family and to secure the admission of one of his six children to an infants' orphan asylum. His widow was later granted a civil-list pension in recognition of the scientific value of his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 26076


Soyer, Alexis Benoit (1810-1858), chef, was born on 4 February 1810 at Meaux-en-Brie, near Paris, the youngest of three sons of Emery Roch Alexis Soyer, a shopkeeper, and his wife, Marie Madeleine Francoise, 'nee' Chamberlan; his parents were both thirty-one when he was born. He was sent to the local cathedral with the intention of becoming a priest, but he did not take to this vocation and, after ringing the cathedral bells at night, which brought out the town garrison and the fire brigade, he was expelled. In 1821 he joined his brother Philippe, a chef in Versailles, and was apprenticed as a cook. At the age of seventeen he joined a M. Douix, a restaurateur in the boulevard des Italiens, where he stayed for three years. He then went as second chef to the prince de Polignac, but left Paris in 1831 and moved to England where his brother was then chef to the duke of Cambridge. Soyer worked in several noble households, including those of the duke of Sutherland and the marquess of Waterford, and then for four years with William Lloyd of Aston Hall, near Oswestry. In 1837 he was appointed chef to the newly created Reform Club in Pall Mall. On 12 April in the same year he married, at St George's Hanover Square, Emma Jones ['see 'Soyer, (Elizabeth) Emma (1813-1842)], an artist with a modest reputation for her portraits. 
At the Reform Club Soyer installed modern kitchens: he was one of the first to use gas for cooking, and his culinary domain became a showplace, and the venue for a number of magnificent displays of his art. On the day of Queen Victoria's coronation, 28 June 1838, he prepared a breakfast for two thousand guests. He also prepared a massive dinner for Ibrahim Pasha at the Reform Club on 3 July 1846. In 1842 he was asked to Belgium to meet the king, and left his wife at home although she was expecting a child. Unfortunately during the few days he was away she had a miscarriage and died. Soyer was deeply distressed and never fully recovered from his grief and guilt at having left his wife alone. He became even busier in his work, producing new dishes, such as his 'cotelettes a la Reform', and providing for private banquets. He also wrote a small book entitled 'Delassements culinaires' (1845), followed in 1846 by 'The Gastronomic Regenerator', written primarily for the grander households with a kitchen staff. Soyer was approached by the government in 1847 and asked to go to Ireland to install soup kitchens, in order to help alleviate the famine. This kind of work suited him well, and he set up a kitchen at the Royal Barracks in Dublin capable of feeding a thousand people an hour; the soup was cheap and tasty even if it did not constitute a balanced diet. On his return to London he published 'Soyer's Charitable Cookery, or, The Poor Man's Regenerator' (1848), sold for 6died, 1died being returned to the poor fund. He also continued his soup kitchens by providing for the Huguenot silk weavers of Spitalfields, who were then being affected by a treaty with France that allowed cheap imported silk into this country. 
Soyer was never out of the public eye for long and, apart from his banquets, produced a series of kitchen gadgets that were the forerunners of many modern utensils, as well as selling a range of bottled sauces and relishes. His most ingenious production was the Magic Stove, on which food could be cooked at the table, essentially the same device used in restaurants today. This was not entirely his own invention, but he improved and marketed one that he had been shown. 
Soyer continued to write, and his next book, 'The Modern Housewife' (1849), was aimed at the middle classes. It took the form of letters between two housewives, and gave an interesting insight into domestic life of the time. In 1850 he left the Reform Club and was asked to tender for the catering at the Great Exhibition planned for the following year. He found this to be too restrictive and instead rented Gore House, now the site of the Albert Hall, where he created the Gastronomic Symposium of All Nations. This was not only a restaurant but a place of magical entertainment, the gardens being filled with fountains, statues, and replicas of the seven wonders of the world, and offering much else, including fireworks, music for dancing, and other noisy frolics. Visitors averaged a thousand a day and the food was good and affordable, but Soyer was never very skilful with accounts, and the Symposium closed with a loss of $7000. Also in 1850 a young Frenchman, Alexis Lemain, wrote to Soyer claiming to be his son. Soyer had had an early liaison when a young man in Paris, and in due course he accepted Lemain as his son. 
Shortly after the closure of the Symposium, the Admiralty, well aware of the scandals surrounding the navy rations, asked Soyer to investigate the preservation of food for long voyages. He did this with success and his recommendations were accepted. Soyer also produced at that time a scholarly work entitled 'The Pantropheon' (1853), covering every aspect of food production, preparation, and history. This was in a completely different style from his previous work, and it is now known that it was not written by him, but by a Frenchman, Adolphe Duhart-Fauvet, who sold it to Soyer to translate and complete. This he did, but published it under his own name without acknowledgement to the original author. Soyer was a generous man, but craved publicity and, at that time, money, so it seems likely that, as with the Magic Stove, he considered the additions he made justified him in claiming the work as his own. 'A Shilling Cookery for the People' (1855) followed, designed for the working classes. This contained basic recipes for plain dishes, boiled meats, puddings sweet and savoury, offal, and leftovers though not, oddly, many ideas for soups, the usual standby for cheap eating. 
In 1855 reports of appalling conditions in the war in the Crimea were reaching London, and Soyer offered his service, without payment, to the government. This was accepted and he went out to Scutari to reorganize the catering in the hospitals there. His practical skills were put to good use, and he later went with Florence Nightingale to Balaklava and Sevastopol to continue the work. The field stoves he had devised before leaving London were sent out and installed in the camp kitchens. They proved so efficient and economical that the army used them, in modified form, for at least a century. 
Soyer returned home in 1857 and published 'A Culinary Campaign', mainly about his own adventures in the Crimea and the way he simplified and improved the army catering. It contained a selection of recipes for hospital and invalid diets, as well as hearty dishes, such as salt meat, for large numbers, under the heading of 'Field and barrack cookery'. He also wrote a pamphlet in that year, 'Instructions to Military Cooks'. He was then asked to redesign the kitchens at Wellington Barracks, which were opened in July 1858. 
Alexis Soyer was a flamboyant, warm-hearted man with a strong sense of humour and a love of practical jokes. Ingenious and inventive, with a talent for organization, he was sometimes carried away by his insatiable desire for publicity. He took his work seriously and was very much aware of those less fortunate, and tried to help when he could. He was unbusinesslike in money matters and never patented any of his inventions, so made little from them financially. He was well known and easily recognized, largely because of his unconventional appearance. Portraits show him to be of middle height, bearded, and always wearing a floppy cap, usually made of velvet, which he made his trade mark. His clothes were cut on the bias, or ''a la zoug-zoug'' as he called it (Ray, 12), and designed by himself. Thackeray, an admirer and friend, used him as the model for Mirabolant in 'Pendennis'. Soyer died on 5 August 1858, of a stroke, at his home, 15 Marlborough Road, St John's Wood, and was buried on 11 August at Kensal Green cemetery in the same grave as his beloved Emma. 


@@@@@


doc= 26077


Soyer, (Elizabeth) Emma (1813-1842), portrait and figure painter, was born in London. Little is known of her parents, other than the fact that her father died in 1818 and her mother remarried in 1820 and died in 1839. A precocious child who learned French and Italian and excelled in music, she devoted herself to art after early exclusive instruction from the Flemish painter Francois Simoneau, who married her mother. She first exhibited at the Royal Academy at the age of ten, and two years later she had produced more than one hundred portraits drawn from life. Her crayon portrait sketches were popular with the aristocracy. On 12 April 1837 she married Alexis Benoit Soyer (1810-1858), cook at the Reform Club in London. 
Emma Jones's works comprise portraits and genre paintings depicting the young and very old, sometimes in a French or Italian context, chiefly in oil, and reputedly in the style of the seventeenth-century Spanish painter Murillo. Between 1823 and 1843 fourteen of her pictures were exhibited at the Royal Academy, thirty-eight at the British Institution, fourteen at the Society of British Artists, twenty-five at the Liverpool Academy, and five at the Paris Salon. Her most celebrated works were 'The Young Israelites' ('The Jew Lemon Boys'; exh. British Institution 1837 and at Paris Salon 1841 as 'Jeunes Israelites'), 'The Young Bavarians' (exh. Society of British Artists 1838), 'Une glaneuse anglaise' ('The English Ceres') and 'La centenaire d'Edimbourg' ('The Centenarian'; both exh. Paris Salon 1840 and engraved by Gerard), and 'Savoyards Resting' (exh. British Institution 1842). One of her largest works, 'Italian Boys' ('The Alpine Wanderers'; exh. British Institution 1839), measuring 5 feet 10 inches by 5 feet, was sold in 1839 for 100 guineas. Her work was appreciated in France for its vigour of execution, correct drawing, and lifelike expression, and in Belgium by the king and queen and the duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. 
Although exhibiting occasionally from Canterbury and Ramsgate, Emma Jones lived chiefly in London, at addresses in Fitzroy Square between 1833 and 1837 and at 26 Charing Cross from 1840 to 1842. She died on 29-30 August 1842 after a premature confinement induced by a thunderstorm and was buried on 8 September at Kensal Green cemetery in London, where her husband erected a monument to her memory. Her total output amounted to 403 pictures. In June 1848 Alexis Soyer organized a memorial exhibition -- with an accompanying catalogue -- of 140 of her works, called Soyer's Philanthropic Gallery, at the prince of Wales's bazaar. 


@@@@@


doc= 26078


Spalding, John (b. 1624?, d. in or after 1669), historian, was the son of Alexander Spalding, an Aberdeen lawyer, and possibly of his first wife, Christian Hervie, but in January 1624 Alexander Spalding was disciplined for being the father of a child being carried by Euphame (Effie) Lillie, and for having tried to procure the unborn child's abortion. If John Spalding was this child and was thus born illegitimate, he was subsequently legitimized by his parents' marriage, for Alexander and Euphame were married by 1649. 
Spalding was from the outbreak of the revolt against Charles I in Scotland in 1637 a committed royalist and episcopalian, and signed the king's covenant in October 1638. He entered King's College, Aberdeen, in 1640, just after it had been purged of its royalist staff by the covenanters, and graduated MA there in 1644. He then made his living as a clerk. On the defeat of the engagers' army in England in 1648 Spalding acted as clerk for the remnants of their forces in Scotland in September when they were negotiating terms under which they would disband. 
Spalding is best-known through his 'Memorialls of the Trubles', but the title, inflicted by later editors, misrepresents the nature of the work and its author's intentions. He appears to have begun writing after the outbreak of the 'troubles' in Scotland in 1637, but begins for no obvious reason with entries for 1624. A likely explanation was that this was the year of his birth, and that he thus intended his manuscript to cover events in his own lifetime. The early sections of his work are derivative accounts of occurrences during his childhood, mainly relating to rivalries and feuds in the north-east of Scotland, but after the beginning of rebellion against the king Spalding concentrates on detailing its progress, with a strong emphasis on Aberdeen and the north in general. He was an eyewitness to much of what happened in Aberdeen, but he rarely mentioned this, preferring to remain silent about himself. Thus while he furiously denounces the conduct of William Guild, the covenanting principal imposed on King's College (who even interfered with students' 'naturall eisment' by roofing over the toilets, provoking a dirty protest of indiscriminate easement), he never mentions that he was a student at the university at the time (Spalding, 2.188). This personal reticence may have been based both on his father's notoriety as a repeated adulterer and on the fact that his sisters (or half-sisters) showed an unfortunate taste for enemy soldiers. One was disciplined for fornication with a covenanter, and after the English conquest of Scotland two of them married members of the Cromwellian garrison. The distinctive name of Spalding was perhaps not one to boast of in Aberdeen. 
Spalding provides a detailed account of the impact of civil war in the north-east, unrivalled by surviving sources for any other part of Scotland, and his rough, unpolished chronicle of events compensates for lack of sophistication by giving a sense of immediacy. In general the closer events were to Aberdeen, the more reliable Spalding's accounts of them are, though occasionally he widens his focus by inserting the texts of documents relating to national affairs. The manuscripts that survive end in 1644, but the text originally continued until at least 1647. 
After the Restoration in 1660 Spalding was made a burgess of Edinburgh at the request of the new bishop of Aberdeen, whose servant he was (August 1661), and the following month he became a burgess of Aberdeen. Soon afterwards he was appointed clerk of the commissary court, but he resigned in 1663, having sold the right to the office to his successor. He settled in Edinburgh, and is last heard of there in 1669. His name was subsequently commemorated by three Aberdeen clubs devoted to publishing historical sources, the Spalding, New Spalding, and Third Spalding clubs (active 1839-1960). 


@@@@@


doc= 26079


Spalding, Samuel (1807-1843), philosopher, born in London on 30 May 1807, was the son of Thomas and Ann Spalding. His father was the founder of the firm of Spalding and Hodge, wholesale stationers, in Drury Lane, in which Samuel became a partner. Subsequently he studied for the Congregational ministry at Coward College, and graduated BA from London University in 1839; he proceeded MA in May 1840, with special distinction in mental and moral science. In an attempt to recover from excessive studying he travelled first in Italy, and then to the Cape of Good Hope, where he died on 14 January 1843. 
Spalding's only work, 'The Philosophy of Christian Morals', was published posthumously in London in 1843. Influenced by Sir James Mackintosh's 'Dissertation on the Progress of Ethical Philosophy', Spalding seeks to derive all moral virtue from the supreme 'principle of benevolence', which he identifies with Christian charity and with God's love. What distinguishes his appeal to benevolence from that which is to be found in much eighteenth-century British moral philosophy is his claim that benevolence has to include an element of conscious volition in order to be distinctively moral, so that it is a fusion of intellect and emotion. Spalding uses this account of virtue to sketch a new theology of the atonement, arguing that the atonement cannot be adequately explained as a mere propitiation of God's vengeance for sin, since the demand for justice is a moral principle which is not independent of benevolence but subordinate to it. For Spalding, this new atonement theology implies the forgetting of denominational differences in the common fight against poverty. 


@@@@@


doc= 26080


Spalding, William (1809-1859), author, was born in Aberdeen on 22 May 1809, son of James Spalding, advocate, of Aberdeen, and his wife, Frances Read. He graduated MA at Marischal College, Aberdeen, in 1827 and was afterwards writer to the signet for some years in Edinburgh, where he passed advocate in 1833. In the same year he published a notable 'Letter on Shakespere's Authorship of the Two Noble Kinsmen', which was reissued in 1876 and 1994. He made an extensive study of Shakespearian and Elizabethan drama, and in the 1840s contributed several articles on the subject to the 'Edinburgh Review'. On 22 March 1838 he married Agnes Frier; they had a daughter, Mary, who was his constant literary companion and amanuensis. 
After having failed to get the chair of logic at the University of Edinburgh in 1836, Spalding was elected to the chair of rhetoric and 'belles-lettres' there on 2 November 1840. In 1841 he published 'Italy and the Italian Islands' (3 vols.), the fruits of his earlier travels in Italy. On 22 October 1845 he became professor of logic, rhetoric, and metaphysics at St Andrews, a post he held until his death on 16 November 1859, at South Street, St Andrews, after a long period of delicate health. 
Spalding was short and plain in appearance and he suffered from chest complaints. He was a popular, if exacting, teacher and wrote on numerous literary, biographical, and historical subjects. His most important work, other than those mentioned above, was his 'History of English literature, with an outline of the origin and growth of the English language' (1853) which went to numerous English editions and was translated into German. His work in many subjects was much praised in his lifetime and in the years immediately following his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 26081


Spark, Thomas (bap. 1655, d. 1692), Church of England clergyman and classical scholar, was baptized on 21 June 1655 at Northop, Flintshire, the youngest child of Archibald Spark ('c'.1610-1670), vicar of Northop, and his wife, Katharine Jones. From Westminster School, where he was a king's scholar between 1668 and 1672, Spark hopefully addressed Joseph Williamson with Latin poems on 'Rome and other subjects' ('CSP dom.', '1670', 643). He was elected to Christ Church, Oxford, in May 1672 (matriculating on 17 July), held a Bostock exhibition, and was tutored by Richard Roderick. He graduated BA in 1676 and proceeded MA in 1679. He enjoyed Dean John Fell's generosity but disparaged it in a begging letter sent to his old schoolmaster Richard Busby. Fell nominated him to deliver the first annual Bodleian oration, endowed by John Morris, on 8 November 1682. He was Greek praelector (1682-3) and senior censor (1684). 
Spark's published scholarship is unimpressive. His editions of Herodian (1678) and Zosimus (1679) -- possibly two of the 'New year books' whose publication Fell sponsored -- deserve the same criticism Thomas Hearne makes of his edition of Lactantius (1684): 'a poor Performance, the Text being very uncorrect and the Notes from MSS. very mean, he having taken no pains to collate them accurately' ('Remarks', 2.71). A Latin poem by Spark appears in 'Pietas universitatis Oxoniensis... Caroli II' (1685). Two rather longer ones were printed posthumously in 'Musarum Anglicanarum analecta' (vol. 2, 1699): the first on the restoration of St George's hall, Windsor Castle, with a concluding attack on Shaftesbury and rebellion; the second on Christ Church's newly recast bell Great Tom. 
Wood describes Spark as 'confident and forward without measure' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.893), and, as chaplain to Lord Chancellor George Jeffreys, his advancement in the church may have seemed assured. He became prebendary of Lichfield (9 April 1686), rector of Ewhurst, Surrey (1 March 1687), and of Norton, Leicestershire, and prebendary of Rochester (2 June 1688). However, on 12 September 1687 Oxford's convocation denied Jeffreys's request, by 118 votes to 53, that Spark and his other chaplain, Luke de Beaulieu, receive DD degrees. Spark did become BD on 18 February 1688 and eventually obtained his DD degree in 1691. That year he published in Oxford 'A Sermon Preached at Guildford'. He married Dorothy Blaker at Chidnam, Sussex, on 16 April 1691. Having gone to Bath for his health, he died there on 7 September 1692 and was buried in Bath Abbey four days later. Wood attributes his early death to 'his Excesses and too much Agitation in obtaining Spiritualities' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.893). His widow was granted letters of administration on 31 October 1692. 


@@@@@


doc= 26082


Sparke, Edward (d. 1693), Church of England clergyman, was a native of Kent; the names of his parents are as yet unknown. He matriculated as a sizar at Clare College, Cambridge, in Easter term 1626, graduated BA in 1630, and proceeded MA in 1633. He was created BD in 1640 and was incorporated at Oxford on 12 July 1653. He was created DD in 1660. On 15 September 1641 his first wife, Sarah (1615/16-1641), aged twenty-five, 'dy'dst to give another life!' according to one of Sparke's verses, 'Tears and Flowers Strew'd upon the Hearse of Mrs S.S.' (Sparke, 'Appendix sacra', sig. C4). 
Sparke was preacher at St Mary's, Islington, in January 1638 when he delivered the funeral sermon of the herald Henry Chitting. He was instituted to the rectory of St Martin Pomeroy, Ironmonger Lane, London, on 28 September 1639, but was ejected during the civil war and according to a royalist newsletter was 'plundred by the Rebels' (Newcourt, 1.412). On 1 December 1646 a fifth of the income of the living was granted to his second wife, Martha. On 30 November 1650 the living was declared vacant by his resignation. In 1650 he was vicar of the Isle of Grain, Kent, to which he had been presented by Sir Edward Hales. By 1654 he was minister at St James's, Clerkenwell, where in July he buried a daughter, Elizabeth, and three years later his third wife, Judith. He retained this living until 1665; at the Restoration he also regained St Martin Pomeroy, Ironmonger Lane, and became a chaplain to Charles II. He resigned from St Martin's on 5 June 1661 and was instituted to the vicarage of Walthamstow in December 1662, which he held until he resigned and exchanged it for the vicarage of Tottenham, Middlesex, where he remained for the rest of his life. 
Sparke's most important work was 'Scintillula altaris, or, A pious reflection on primitive devotion, as to the feasts and fasts of the Christian church, orthodoxally revived', first published in 1652 and reprinted seven times between 1660 and 1700. A long work, much of it written in poetic form, it detailed the lives of saints and various feast and fast days. The verses, many of which found the pun on Sparke's name irresistible (and whose authors included Thomas Fuller and Isaak Walton) underlined the work as an assertion of Anglican values in a time of adversity. Henry Delaune lauded the 'Bright shining Sparke of consecrated fire', while Thomas Shirley, mourning the distressed state of the church, proclaimed: '
In her eclipse no Herbert, not a Donne, 

SPARKE only sings her Resurrection. 
(Sparke, 'Scintillula altaris', no pagination)' Sparke's book was a positive celebration of the rites and religious calendar of the Church of England: 'All being done decently and in Order, and tending only to Gods Honour, his Saints Memory, and our Edification', but without these, he warned, '('tis too visible) Religion will soon languish, and even die away be degrees, into Profanenesse, Heresie and Atheisme' (ibid., 5). Later editions of the work contain an engraved portrait of the author. 
Sparke died in 1693, between the making of his will on 2 May 1693 and its proving by his executors on 25 September. He requested to be buried on the site of his old church (which after the great fire had become the churchyard of St Olave Jewry), in a black-marble-topped tomb where the chancel had been. A son, Edward Sparke, a graduate of St John's College, Oxford, had died in 1675, and his will mentions only one child living, a daughter, Sarah Lister, wife of Matthew Lister. Sparke was survived by his (presumably fourth) wife, Ruth. 


@@@@@


doc= 26083


Sparke, Joseph (1682-1740), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, was born at Peterborough on 16 December 1682, the son of John Sparke, a feoffee of the town. He was educated at the town grammar school and in 1699 entered St John's College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1704. He was appointed under-master at his old school in 1704, ordained deacon in 1705, and made a minor canon of the cathedral on 2 September 1706. He was ordained priest on 23 September 1710 and served the curacy of Eye. On 29 June 1710 he married Rebecca Wigmore (1692-1747), a widow, at Peterborough. 
On 22 June 1714 Sparke was appointed registrar, chapter clerk, and master of the works at Peterborough Cathedral, succeeding John Brown, who had got into financial difficulties and to whom Sparke remitted some of the fees attached to the office. His responsibilities included the care of the books belonging to the dean and chapter and the making of a full index of their contexts. He had already entered into correspondence with White Kennett, the antiquarian bishop of Peterborough, and soon began to co-operate with him on the history of the cathedral, correcting the work of Simon Gunton. He remained a close collaborator of Kennett, though they quarrelled over fees due to Sparke in 1720, by which date he had been appointed cathedral librarian, charged with the care of the extensive library presented by the bishop. Sparke had already recatalogued the library of the earl of Cardigan at Deene. In 1723 Sparke published 'Historiae Anglicanae scriptores varii', comprising the chronicles of John of Peterborough, Hugh Candidus, and Robert of Swaffham, and Fitzstephen's life of Becket, though the text owed more to White Kennett's work than was suggested in the volume. The volume was published from a transcript provided by the Northamptonshire historian John Bridges (in whose house he wrote the preface to part two of the volume); despite containing a number of errors, it was a significant contribution to local history. 
Sparke was appointed rector of Paston in 1719, where his wife's former husband had also served, but moved to the valuable capitular living of Northborough on 18 June 1723, continuing as rector until his death. He was a founder member of the Gentlemen's Society of Peterborough, founded by a fellow minor canon and St John's man, Timothy Neve, and also belonged to the more famous society at Spalding in Lincolnshire. In 1726 he was given extended leave of absence from his cathedral duties on account of ill health, and from 1731 these were performed by a more or less permanent deputy. Sparke had proposed a second volume of Peterborough chronicles but it remained unpublished, though almost ready for the press at his death. He died at Peterborough on 20 July 1740 and was buried in the cathedral on 25 July. There is a monument to him in the choir of the cathedral, but perhaps the best epitaph comes from the pen of the Oxford antiquary Thomas Hearne, who described Sparke thus in 1725: 'Mr Sparke is an excellent scholar, of a great memory, admirably well versed in the Editions of Books, that he is mad a quarter of a year together every year... that he is very sober... & that he is always among his Books, wholly delighting in Study. ('Remarks', 8.382)' 



@@@@@


doc= 26084


Sparke, Thomas (1548-1616), Church of England clergyman, is said by Wood to have originated at South Somercotes, Lincolnshire. Elected to a demyship at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1567, he was a fellow there from 1569 to 1572. He graduated BA in October, proceeding MA in January 1574, BTh on 8 July 1575, and DTh on 1 July 1581. Rector of South Somercotes as early as 1571, on 26 January 1576 he was collated archdeacon of Stow by Thomas Cooper, bishop of Lincoln, whose chaplain he had become. In 1578 he was presented to the rectory of Bletchley, Buckinghamshire, by Arthur, fourteenth Baron Grey of Wilton, where he is said to have been 'held in great esteem for his piety' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.189). But on 6 March 1582, conscience-stricken that this living was far removed from the duties of his archdeaconry (apparently the pangs were not about pluralism as such), he resigned the latter office, having already found compensation in presentment to the Lincoln prebend of Sutton in Marisco. 
Although he was a beneficed clergyman, Sparke's sympathies lay with the puritan wing of the Church of England. In December 1584, along with Walter Travers, he represented the interests of the godly in a meeting with Archbishop Whitgift and Bishop Cooper at Lambeth Palace, primarily about subscription to the 'Book of Common Prayer'. The conference was held at the insistence of the earl of Leicester, who was joined by Walsingham, Burghley, and Sparke's patron Grey for two days of deliberations. Though keenly anticipated by the puritans, not least because it tacitly set their ministry on a par with that of the bishops, the meeting was disappointing in its effects. Sparke and Travers confined themselves to matters concerning lectionary readings from the 'Apocrypha', and to certain perceived abuses in the baptismal rite, and refused to engage in debate with Whitgift over matters of polity and the Christian ministry, let alone the large puritan objections to the prayer book 'in toto'. Ultimately the meeting achieved only a further easing of subscription to the prayer book, already limited since the summer, and that seems to have been effected by Walsingham and to have owed little or nothing to the debate. 
Sparke's second appearance as a puritan champion proved even more disappointing for the precisians than that of 1584. On 1 November 1603 he was one of the representatives of the godly cause to appear before James I at the Hampton Court conference. Though still noted as 'a great nonconformist and a pillar of puritanism', who refused to attend in clerical garb but wore 'such that Turkey merchants wear' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.190), he none the less remained silent during the whole of the first day's proceedings. Next day, following a private audience with James (for whose right of succession he had earlier been an advocate), Sparke completely abandoned his nonconformity. His conversion led to the publication in 1607 of 'A Brotherly Perswasion to Unity and Uniformity in Judgement and Practice'. Sparke dedicated it to James I, giving the king credit for his being persuaded 'by your majesties owne most readie and apt answers' and addressing him as 'over all persons, and in all causes Ecclesiasticall as civil in these his dominions' (Sparke, 'Perswasion', sig. A3'r'). Not only is the royal supremacy proclaimed, but Sparke also recants even those marginal scruples he had maintained in 1584, and goes on to allow 'jure divino' status for bishops, for 'in respect of their ministry and spiritual iurisdiction in the Church, they wel may be said to be of God's own ordinance' (ibid., 78). Sparke's treatise was answered by Samuel Hieron in the following year. 
Sparke also published funeral sermons preached for the second earl of Bedford in 1585 and for his patron Lord Grey in 1593, and a rebuttal of Jean d'Albin de Valsergue's 'Discourse Against Heresies', entitled 'An Answere to Master John De Albines, Notable Discourse' (1591). As was customary, Sparke reproduces the entire text of d'Albin's work in his own, replying to it section by section. Dedicated to Lord Grey, the book is more a defence of protestantism in general than of the Church of England in particular. 
Sparke is recorded by Wood as having been so respected at Oxford for his learning and exemplary manner of living 'that the sages of the university thought it fit, after his death, to have his picture painted on the wall in the school-gallery among the English divines of note' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.190). He died at Bletchley on 8 October 1616 and was buried in the chancel of the parish church, where he is commemorated by a monument. With his wife, Rose Inkforbye (died 1615), the youngest daughter of an Ipswich merchant, he had ten children, of whom five survived their parents. Three of Sparke's sons followed him into the ministry of the church, including 


@@@@@


doc= 26085


William Sparke (1587-1641), who was born at Bletchley and followed his father to Magdalen in 1603, becoming first a demy and then a fellow, both in 1606. Graduating in 1607, he proceeded MA in 1609 and BTh in 1629. He resigned his fellowship in 1616 to succeed his father as rector of Bletchley. He also became a chaplain to the duke of Buckingham. He published two treatises, 'Vis naturae et virtus vitae explicatae' (1612) and 'The Mystery of Godlinesse' (1628). He is recorded as living at Bletchley in 1630, but indebtedness forced him to resign the living; on 20 May 1641, however, he became rector of Chenies, also in Buckinghamshire. He died in October that year. He is not known to have married. 


@@@@@


doc= 26086


Sparrow, Anthony (1612-1685), bishop of Norwich, was born in 1612 at Depden, near Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, the son of Samuel Sparrow, and baptized on 7 May at nearby Wickhambrook. He matriculated from Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1625, graduated BA in 1629 and proceeded MA in 1632. He was a junior fellow by 13 February 1633, and was ordained priest at Ely on 22 February 1635. On 24 June 1637 Sparrow preached 'A Sermon Concerning Confession of Sins and the Power of Absolution' (1637), in which he made the typically Laudian claim that priests might hear confession and pronounce absolution, with the proviso that God would actually absolve only the truly penitent. Insisting that the individual must accept responsibility for sin, without blaming God, nature, or the devil, Sparrow's sermon effectively advanced the idea of free will, and was too far distant from Calvinist predestinarian doctrine to be regarded as simply Arminian. It has been persuasively argued that it should be regarded instead as one in a rapidly growing number of frankly papist theological and sacramental pronouncements made from various quarters within the university at this time. Within two weeks of preaching the sermon was in print. Contemporaries were outraged, but Sparrow remained untouched, evidently enjoying at least the tacit protection of Archbishop William Laud's press censors, and perhaps the bishop of London himself, William Juxon. 
Sparrow was Hebrew praelector from 1638 to 1639, with a stipend of $5 per annum, and proceeded BD in 1639. In 1640-41, however, Sparrow and a number of his contemporaries at Cambridge came under the scrutiny of a parliamentary committee set up to investigate religious innovations at the universities. Despite his close association with the scandalous disclosures of popish doctrine and adornments corrupting a number of colleges and their chapels Sparrow remained at Queens'. He was Greek praelector, 1640-41; Hebrew praelector again in 1642-3; bursar, 1640-42; censor theologicus and examinator, 1641-2; and censor philosophicus, 1642-3. But on 8 April 1644 he fell victim to the parliamentarian purge of the university. He was ejected from his fellowship by the orders of Edward Montagu, second earl of Manchester, for non-residence and failure to comply with a summons to return to his college. 
On 1 August 1645 Sparrow married Susanna Orrell (died in or after 1693) at Withersfield, Suffolk. On 30 September 1647 he was instituted to the rectory of Hawkedon, near Depden, but he was ejected within five weeks for using the proscribed 'Book of Common Prayer'. In 1655, shortly after a protectoral proclamation was issued upholding the prohibition of the prayer book, Sparrow published, anonymously, his 'Rationale upon the Book of Common Prayer' which described and justified the liturgy in every detail. Undoubtedly a courageous publication Sparrow's book formed a direct answer to the denigration that had been heaped upon the prayer book and renewed the confidence of the adherents of orthodox usage. Sparrow also formulated a cogent theology of morning prayer in terms of access to the presence of God which gave the daily service a clear purpose and articulated its basic theological structure. The 'Rationale' subsequently went through perhaps as many as eight editions before Sparrow's death, and enjoyed a minor revival in the nineteenth century. 
In 1660 Sparrow was reinstated as rector of Hawkedon, and was also elected to a preachership at Bury St Edmunds. On 7 August he was appointed to the archdeaconry of Sudbury. On 31 August Sparrow, with Thomas Fuller and other eminent loyalists, graduated DD from Cambridge at the express command of the king. On 15 April 1661 he was appointed to the second prebendal stall at Ely. That year he also published 'A Collection of Articles, Injunctions, Canons of the Church of England', constructed broadly to evince that the reform of the church had been, and rightly ought to be 'orderly and synodical' and because Sparrow felt that 'without a definitive and authoritative sentence, controversies will be endless, and the churches peace unavoidably disturbed' (1671 edition, preface). But for Sparrow it seems that there would be little escaping the disturbance of the peace, whether that of the church or of the college to which he had now returned. 
In 1662 Charles II and Clarendon bore down heavily on the majority of fellows at Queens', who had elected Simon Patrick to be their president, preferring Sparrow for the position instead. Patrick took the matter before the court of king's bench. He eventually withdrew from the contest to take up the benefice of St Paul's, Covent Garden, offered him by William Russell, earl of Bedford, but not before the king and his ministers had shown 'the lengths to which [they] were prepared to go to defend the interests of the high churchmen within the university' (Gascoigne, 35). As vice-chancellor of the university in 1664-5 Sparrow himself sought to intervene on behalf of the king's chosen candidate for a fellowship at Trinity Hall. He was also ever vigilant for the spread of religious heterodoxy within the university, showing no interest whatever in the case for latitude or moderation. 
Sparrow's reward for his services at Cambridge came in 1667 with his promotion to the see of Exeter, where he was consecrated on 3 November. From 1668 to 1676 he also held the archdeaconry of Exeter and the sinecure deanery of St Buryan. Sparrow's episcopacy was characterized by deep concern at the growth of dissent. His primary visitation charge, preached in a sermon at Truro, was published in 1669 as 'The Bishop of Exons Caution to his Diocese Against False Doctrines'. The indulgence of 1672 seems to have come as something of a betrayal, Sparrow complaining to Archbishop Gilbert Sheldon: 'I see daily to my heart's grief the poor sheep committed to my trust snatched out of the fold by cunning wolves and I know not how to bring them back' (Spurr, 63). 
In 1676 Sparrow was transferred to the no less difficult, but considerably more valuable, see of Norwich. The city was descending at that time into a period of factional conflict which one contemporary compared with pardonable exaggeration to that between Guelphs and Ghibellines in medieval Italy. Sparrow's appointment probably contributed to the polarization of opinion between the church and crown loyalists who had welcomed the appointment of Lord Yarmouth as lord lieutenant in 1675, and the sizeable nonconformist minority fearful of the rising tide of aggressive Anglicanism. However, before long Sparrow appears to have found himself caught in the crossfire between the extremists of the tory and whig parties. He found 'some clamouring loud against me for prosecuting schismatics, and some who profess great loyalty and zeal for the church, as loud complaining because we do not proceed violently beyond the rule of law' (Spurr, 82). Sparrow died at the episcopal palace at Norwich on 19 May 1685; a monument and inscription mark the spot where he lies buried in the nearby chapel. In his will he left $100 to the rebuilding of St Paul's Cathedral, $100 to Queens' College, and smaller sums to Norwich Cathedral and the widows and orphans of diocesan clergy. His widow and sole executor was still alive in 1693. They had numerous children, three daughters marrying dignitaries of Exeter Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 26087


Sparrow, John (1615-1670), translator and lawyer, was born on 12 May 1615 at Stambourne, Essex, the first son of John Sparrow, a military man. He matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1631 but did not graduate. He was admitted of the Inner Temple in November 1633 and became a barrister. His law career was an active one: he took an interest in legal reform and was a member of the parliamentary civil service. He married Hester ('bap'. 1621), daughter of Joseph Norgate of Norwich, on 8 June 1641. They had six children, the eldest of whom, John, followed his father to Trinity College in 1659. 
Between 1647 and 1662 Sparrow and his cousin John Ellistone translated and published the complete works of the Silesian mystic Jacob Boehme (1575-1624) from German into English; Sparrow took over the project at Ellistone's death in 1652. Boehme's theosophist philosophy blended mystical religious experience based on an understanding of the soul, alchemy, and Paracelsian medicine which found a ready audience of those disaffected by religious factionalism. Boehme's ideas of a personal spiritual relationship with God predated and were similar to those of George Fox; the Behemists eventually amalgamated with the Quakers, who downplayed Boehme's enthusiasm for astrology. The Silesian's hermetic philosophy was also popular among natural philosophers who responded to his vision that science was the way to understand the workings of the universe. Boehme was not an easy author to understand, as Sparrow himself admitted in his preface to his translation, 'XL Questions Concerning the Soule' (1647): 'some will think it so hard to attaine... when they read the answer to the first Question... that they will forbeare to take so much paines as they suppose it requisite' (sig. A3'v'). Sparrow went on to encourage his readers to overcome their hesitation, and provided alternate translations or interpretations in the margins to help with difficult concepts. Boehme himself had provided glossaries to his works which Sparrow included in his translations. 
Sparrow was buried at Gestingthorpe, Essex, on 8 December 1670. 


@@@@@


doc= 26088


Spearman, Robert (bap. 1703, d. 1761), theologian, was baptized at St Mary-le-Bow, Durham, on 4 March 1703, the eldest son of Robert Spearman (1657-1728), attorney, of the city of Durham, and his wife, Hannah (died 1737), daughter of William Webster, merchant, of Stockton-on-Tees. He was educated at Durham School and matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, as a gentleman commoner, on 2 June 1720 but seems to have left in spring 1723 without having taken a degree. 
Spearman lived a retired life on his estate, Old Acres, in the large parish of Sedgefield, co. Durham, where, as his epitaph records, he 'employed the leisure and abilities which God had given him in the study of His Word and His Works'. He was one of the first followers of the physico-theologian John Hutchinson, whose brief life he wrote and whose complete works he co-edited in twelve volumes (published 1748) with his friend the Revd Julius Bate. Spearman's own two books explained his belief that Hutchinson had a unique key to knowledge. His 'Enquiry after Philosophy and Theology', published anonymously in 1755, contained an attack on the perceived contemporary primacy of natural religion that had resulted in Christianity's being in a 'cool and lukewarm state' (p. 402); a repetition of the Hutchinsonian belief that Trinitarian unity is demonstrated in the combination of fire, light, and spirit; and a sustained engagement with some of Sir Isaac Newton's published writings. Spearman concluded with a plea to his readers to look to Hutchinson, where 'they will, to their inexpressible satisfaction, both as Christians and men of sense, find the scriptures made one, uniform, compleat system of theology and philosophy, consistent with themselves and nature' (p. 424). His last major work, 'Letters to a Friend Concerning the Septuagint Translation and the Hebrew Mythology' (1759), was a defence of the Hutchinsonian approach to scripture and a plea for the accuracy and stability of the existing printed Hebrew text of the 'Old Testament' against revisers like Kennicott, for here was 'the original record, the 'Magna Charta', as I may call it, of our eternal inheritance' (R. Spearman, 'Letters to a Friend', 1759, 371). He also made further attacks on natural religion and argued that 'Paganism was nothing else but the 'great truths' of Christianity split and debased into a legend of fables, such as we meet with in their mythology' (ibid., 151). 
Spearman was genuinely learned and had some gift for popularizing and shaping Hutchinsonian thinking. He introduced it to many clergy and laity in the north east of England and was respected both for his adherence to the master's views and his willingness to listen to the reservations held by those who could not enter 'into all the depths of the Hutchinsonian philosophy' (Surtees, 3.398). These included his friend Dr Thomas Sharp, archdeacon of Northumberland, who dedicated his 'Two dissertations concerning etymology & scripture-meaning of the Hebrew words Elohim and Berith' (1751) to Spearman and saluted his 'moderation and candour' (Sharp, iv). 
Spearman married, first, Mary Lewen, who died on 18 March 1748, aged forty-two, and, second, Ann ('b'. 1725/6, died 1821), the daughter of Robert Sharp (or Sharpe), gentleman, of Hawthorn, co. Durham. He died on 20 October 1761 and was buried on 30 October at Sedgefield parish church, leaving five daughters as coheirs. His widow survived him for almost sixty years; she died in Durham, and was buried at Sedgefield on 24 August 1821, aged ninety-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 26089


Spears, Robert (1825-1899), Unitarian minister, was born on 25 September 1825 at Lemington, in Newburn, some 5 miles west of Newcastle, the fifth of six sons and two daughters born to John Spears (1765-1849), who was an ironworker, and his second wife, Mary Glenn (1782/3-1874). He was baptized on 30 September in the Ebenezer Chapel in Swalwell, co. Durham, on the opposite bank of the Tyne. The Presbyterian baptism reflects John Spears's background as a Scottish Calvinist, but Mary Spears was a Methodist and while for a time Robert Spears worshipped in the Newburn parish church, he eventually joined the New Connexion Methodists. He was apprenticed as an engineering smith, and on 1 January 1846, then living in Sugley, Newburn, he married Margaret Kirton (1818-1867), also of Sugley, the daughter of John Kirton, a watchman. Five children were born in the marriage; the youngest daughter, the only one to live past childhood, survived him. 
Disliking his work and having been encouraged in self-education by his mother, Spears discovered a gift for teaching and later in 1846 began teaching at a New Connexion school in Scotswood-on-Tyne, also serving as a local preacher. He was, however, denied formal ministerial enrolment because of heterodox tendencies which he traced to attending a debate in Newcastle the previous year between the Revd William Cooke DD (1806-1884) of the New Connexion and the Revd Joseph Barker (1806-1875), who had been expelled from that denomination and was at the time closely associated with Unitarians. 
By 1849 a friendship with the Revd George Harris (1794-1859) of Newcastle led Spears to avow Unitarianism, but he continued to teach for the New Connexion while supplying Unitarian pulpits. In 1852 he entered the Unitarian ministry at Sunderland, where a successful school compensated for the lack of a stipend. In 1856 he established a monthly magazine, the 'Christian Freeman', which he edited until his death. In 1858 he moved to Stockton-on-Tees at a salary of $65, successfully reviving a declining congregation. The next year he founded a weekly newspaper, the 'Stockton Gazette', which under other names and ownership eventually became a daily paper. 
Spears was invited to become sub-editor and day-to-day manager of the weekly 'Unitarian Herald', established in Manchester in 1861 as a counter, both geographical and theological, to the more advanced views of the London-based 'Inquirer'. The negotiations failed, but he eventually served for a time as the paper's London agent. His move to London that year was encouraged by Robert Brook Aspland (1805-1869), since 1857 secretary of the British and Foreign Unitarian Association (BFUA). The London District Unitarian Association, through the generosity of Sir James Clark Lawrence (1820-1898), assured Spears a salary of $100 as minister at Stamford Street Chapel, Blackfriars. In 1867 he became co-secretary of the BFUA and in 1870, following Aspland's death, general secretary; he revived the publishing programme and nearly quadrupled the association's income. In October 1867 his wife, Margaret, had died, and on 5 January 1869 he married Emily Glover (1835-1917), the daughter of Joseph Glover, a Dorking butcher; the couple had two sons and four daughters. 
Spears's loyalty to an undiluted, biblically based Unitarianism made him an invaluable recruit for Aspland and his allies in their opposition to the transcendentalist reconstruction of Unitarianism identified with James Martineau, who called Spears the orchestrator of sectarian 'bluster' (letter to John Gordon, 28 Dec 1872, Unitarian College MSS, JRL). The 'new school' was making generational progress, however. Spears had successfully republished early Unitarian classics and the works of the eloquent American minister William Ellery Channing (1780-1842), but in 1876 the committee of the BFUA decided to republish the works of the radical American Unitarian Theodore Parker (1810-1860) and Spears resigned; a testimonial subscription of $1800 provided him an income for life. He immediately founded 'Christian Life', a weekly newspaper which, drawing on talented contributors like Samuel Sharpe (1799-1881) and Alexander Gordon (1841-1931), offered a lively alternative to 'The Inquirer' until it was finally merged with its rival in 1929. 
Spears was an irrepressible missionary. At Stamford Street in 1866 he founded the first lay preachers' union. In 1874 he left Stamford Street for his new foundation at College chapel, Stepney, and he encouraged new or revived congregations in the metropolis and elsewhere in the country. He assisted in the founding in 1886, by Florence Hill (1843-1935) and others, of the Central Postal Mission, to cater to Unitarians without ready access to a chapel. A strong supporter of Indian missions, in 1870 he organized the English tour of Keshab Chandra Sen, the leader of Brahmo Samaj, a Westernizing reformist movement within Hinduism. Ecumenical enthusiasm led him in 1881 to organize the Sion College conferences, which brought together eminent representatives of a wide range of faiths. He was an untiring advocate of Sunday schools, and in 1886, with the help of Matilda Sharpe (1830-1916), he founded Channing House School for Girls in Highgate, having moved there the year before from Stepney to establish a new -- and again successful -- congregation. 
Spears was a man of imposing presence and unfailing energy. Despite his lack of formal education, an unpolished style, and the Northumbrian accent which he thought a disadvantage, he charmed and influenced men and women from all walks of life, notably the wealthy Unitarians who subsidized his many initiatives. He had wide contacts among liberal Christians on the continent, and an extended visit to the United States in 1887 brought him a new circle of friends and admirers. He died at home at Arundel House, The Bank, Highgate Hill, from bladder cancer, on 25 February 1899 and was buried on 1 March in Nunhead cemetery in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 26090


Spedding, James (1808-1881), literary editor and biographer, was born on 26 June 1808 in Mirehouse, Cumberland, the son of John Spedding and Sarah Gibson, eldest daughter of Henry Gibson of Newcastle upon Tyne. After attending grammar school at Bury St Edmunds, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1827, where he won a prize for a declamation delivered on commemoration day 1830. Although he was a good classical scholar, and in the second class of the classical tripos of 1831, his greater merits were recognized by his contemporaries. As one of the Apostles at Cambridge, he became a lifelong friend of Lord Houghton, Edward Fitzgerald, Arthur Hallam, Archbishop Trench, W. M. Thackeray, and Alfred Lord Tennyson, who said of Spedding, 'He was the Pope among us young men -- the wisest man I know' (Hallam, Lord Tennyson, 'Alfred Lord Tennyson: a Memoir by his Son', 1867, 1.38). In 1835, in an appointment made by James Stephen, Spedding entered the Colonial Office where he established a reputation with 'quite a genius for business'. The appointment was never made permanent and Spedding left in 1841 and spent the next year in the United States as secretary to the Ashburton commission negotiating a settlement of the boundary dispute between that country and Canada. After that period, Spedding began what was to be his main employment for over thirty years, his edition of the works of Francis Bacon, refusing in 1847 the office of permanent under-secretary of state for the colonies and serving on the civil service commission only when it was first instituted in 1855 and resigning when the office was in working order. The first result of his Bacon studies, 'Evenings with a reviewer, or, A free and particular examination of Mr Macaulay's article on Lord Bacon', written in 1845 but not published until 1848, demonstrates a precise method contrasting the generalized attacks and misrepresentations of Macaulay with quiet humour and a shrewd critical faculty which, to a careful reader, make the book more interesting than its rival. By 1847 Spedding had negotiated with Robert Leslie Ellis and D. D. Heath to bring out a complete edition of Bacon. Ellis, the editor of the philosophical works, was soon disabled by illness, leaving completion of his task to Spedding in 1853. Although Heath edited the legal texts, Spedding took on almost all the other editing of 'The Letters and the Life of Francis Bacon' from 1857 to 1859 and was solely responsible for volumes 8-14 which appeared from 1861 to 1874. As Victorians themselves recognized immediately and all generations have since, Spedding's labour of a lifetime became a model of complete and precise scholarship and editing. If he did not prove Bacon a model hero of the kind Victorians and the nineteenth century tended to worship, he revealed an intelligible Bacon out of careful documentation and critical realism. A new cultural model thus appeared not from the grandeur and dramatic wills the century sought in its heroic models but from unflagging industry (slowed down only about 1863 when Spedding had to take a long rest), familiarity with every possible source of information, and slow but sure-footed judgement based on the most careful balancing of evidence. A new kind of hero thus emerged, the ambiguous and mixed hero of the twentieth century, to which Spedding's scholarship and editing was a clear prelude. Writing to Spedding's close friend the poet and translator Edward Fitzgerald in 1874, Thomas Carlyle, whose heroes tended towards the Victorian ideal, praised the volumes of 'The Letters and the Life' as 'the hugest and faithfullest bit of literary navvy work I have ever met with in this generation' for in these texts, 'Bacon is washed clean down to the natural skin' so that, for Carlyle, 'There is a grim strength in Spedding, quietly, very quietly, invincible, which I did not quite know of before this book' ('Letters', 2.175-7). The result of such labour revealed the human figure behind the cultural and scientific origination the Victorians ascribed to Bacon. In one of his brilliant prefaces, to the philosophical and autobiographical work by Bacon in middle age, 'De interpretatione naturae proemium', Spedding could be exact about one of Bacon's failures and reveal its ironic genesis in his own greatest talents: 'Bacon failed to devise a practicable method for the discovery of the Forms of Nature, because he misconceived the conditions of the case; he expected to find the phenomena of nature more easily separable and distinguishable than they really are; a misconception into which a discursive intellect, an enterprising spirit, and a hopeful nature, would most naturally fall.' This open understanding of human character was found in Spedding's entire life, whether in his personal relationships or his final essays in his 1879 'Reviews and Discussions, Literary, Political, and Historical not Relating to Bacon', where he discusses the authorship of Fletcher and Shakespeare in the play 'Henry VIII' and reveals not only his ardour for the novels of Jane Austen, for example, but also his liberal politics (although rarely roused to enthusiasm after the Hungarian struggle of 1848-9). In the last year of his life Spedding published 'Studies in English History' (1881), a volume co-authored by the historian James Gairdner. A lifelong bachelor, he occupied chambers from 1835 until 1864 at 60 Lincoln's Inn Fields, just around the corner from the Public Record Office and only a short walk from the British Museum and library, his main centres of research. For his friends from the whole spectrum of Victorian intellectual society, Spedding's quiet sense of humour and incisive perceptions of their world always made him a delightful companion. Physically noteworthy (as revealed in the Victorian photograph by Julia Margaret Cameron) for his high-domed bald head, he was a good swimmer, walker, and player of archery and billiards, though not a brilliant performer of either. On the resignation of Charles Kingsley in 1869, Spedding was offered the professorship of modern history at Cambridge; in 1874 the university offered him an honorary degree. He refused both, accepting only an honorary fellowship at his beloved Trinity College. From 1864 on, he lived with a niece at Westbourne Grove. On 1 March 1881 Spedding was knocked down by a hansom cab and taken to St George's Hospital, where he died on 9 March. Tennyson, whose poems Spedding read in manuscript and reviewed in 1842 in the 'Edinburgh Review' and whose early drawing by Spedding appeared in Tennyson's son's biography of the poet, rushed to the hospital but was refused admission. The end of Spedding's life revealed his essential nature. While still conscious, he was characteristically anxious to make it clear that he considered the accident that was killing him due not to the driver, but to his own deafness and carelessness. 


@@@@@


doc= 26091


Speechly, William (1723-1819), agriculturist, was born near Peterborough, Northamptonshire, the son of a farmer. He began work as a gardener at Milton Abbey, Dorset, and after working at Castle Howard in Yorkshire he became head gardener to Sir William St Quintin of Harpham, Yorkshire. In 1767 he became gardener to William Henry Cavendish Cavendish-Bentinck, third duke of Portland, at Welbeck Abbey in Nottinghamshire. In 1771 he visited the Netherlands. He married, and had at least two sons. 
In 1776 the duke asked him to write a description of the method of planting trees on the Nottinghamshire estates for Alexander Hunter's edition of John Evelyn's 'Silva'. This later appeared as an article in Hunter's 'Georgical Essays' (1803). Speechly also contributed a note on the possibility of raising the pineapple without the use of tanner's bark. 
Speechly was mainly known for his skill in growing pineapples and grapes. He revolutionized the cultivation of the pineapple, and was particularly concerned that it should not be kept at too hot a temperature in the winter. He introduced new methods for cultivating grapes. In 1779 he issued a 'Treatise on the Culture of the Pine Apple'; this was followed in 1790 by a 'Treatise on the Culture of the Vine'. Both works were republished, in one volume, in 1820. In 1797 Sir John Sinclair (1754-1835), president of the board of agriculture, thought about bringing out a comprehensive work on agriculture, and, at his request, Speechly prepared the sections on gardening and domestic rural economy. But in 1798 the project was laid aside, and in 1800 Speechly's manuscript was returned to him at his own request. 
In 1801 his younger son died, and Speechly retired from Welbeck Abbey to manage his son's farm. During this time he neglected his manuscript on rural economy, but on his retirement to Great Milton in Oxfordshire he completed and enlarged it, and it was published in 1820, with several other essays appended, under the title 'Practical Hints in Domestic Rural Economy'. This work was devoted to the management of cottage gardens. Speechly died at Great Milton in Oxfordshire on 1 October 1819. 


@@@@@


doc= 26092


Speed, Adolphus (fl. 1647-1659), agriculturist, has been often referred to as 'Adam' Speed from the title-page of his only acknowledged work, 'Adam out of Eden' (1659) where he signs himself 'Ad. Speed'. That this stands for Adolphus, and not Adam, however, is proved by his autograph on an earlier publication. On the same title-page he claims gentle birth. There is nothing to prove it, or the assertion, made later, that he was a descendant of the historiographer John Speed. It is, however, just possible that he was a kinsman of the Chichester minister, William Speed. If so, this helps to explain his contact with, and support from, the intelligencer Samuel Hartlib, for the latter had known William Speed during his brief and unsuccessful attempt to establish an academy in Chichester in 1630. 
The discredit and collapse of the system of patents and monopolies in England during the 1640s left the way open to enterprising 'projectors' to advertise their passports to prosperity. For Speed, 'how excellent and how innocent the art of Husbandry is' needed no demonstration ('Adam out of Eden', 3). That 'calling' offered the prospect of endless prosperity, a Virginia 'within'. He would be the agent for its realization. Already, in 1647, he was retained (through Hartlib) by Sir Cheney Culpeper, the inheritor of the Leeds Castle estate in the Kentish weald, to advise him on rabbit-farming on the Isle of Elmley. Speed appreciated the advantages of Hartlib's scheme for an 'Office of Address' to advertise his skills and, in 1650, 'made hard shift to print some few Pages' ('Hartlib Papers', 46/5/1A) under the title 'Generall Accommodations by Addresse'. The latter extolled the virtues of the proposed agency. At the same time, Speed tempted the public with enticing, risk-free opportunities of dazzling returns on landed investment through implementing his innovations. The pamphlet ended with a somewhat domestic design for a gentlemen's (and gentlewomen's) academy and a retirement home for elderly widows and spinsters. 
It was probably about 1650 that Speed had to ask Hartlib to pay off his debts in order to release him from prison. 'Hartily ashamed' ('Hartlib Papers', 46/5/8A), he retired in poverty from London to the provinces, where he claimed to 'gaine excellent discoveries constantly' to 'make myself famous' (ibid., 46/5/2A). In 1652 the pamphlet 'Cornu copia' appeared. Often ascribed, either in sum or in part, to Hartlib, it was in reality the product of Speed's enterprising imagination. Subtitled 'A miscellanium of lucriferous and most fructiferous experiments, observations, and discoveries, immethodically distributed', it itemized fifty-four diverse schemes. These proposals can only be fully understood in the light of 'Adam out of Eden', which Hartlib helped Speed publish in 1659, but which must have existed in manuscript by at least 1652. Some of them involved new root crops (turnips and potatoes); others offered the potential benefits of new grasses (lucerne, clover-grass, and so on). He was particularly open to the possibilities for cash crops on farms within reach of the London market and commended the development of the industrially orientated products (hops, liquorice, saffron, mustard, teasels, and French furze). He was a strong advocate of liquid manure ('muck-water') and claimed to have devised an engine 'in part like they use in London, when houses are on fire', to spray it on to fields ('Adam out of Eden', 45). He added legitimacy by referring to 'Sir Richard Weston', 'A Gentleman of Richmond', 'An Honourable Knight in Kent' and so on, whose experiments confirmed the veracity of his claims. 
Walter Blith, a sober agronome, distrusted Speed, 'that superlative Improver' (Blith, 174). The second and enlarged edition of his 'The English Improver Improved' (1652) was published in response to Speed's prospectus. Blith ridiculed the latter 'I being once so weake as to come to an agreement with Mr. Speed, who writes such high things, as reason cannot fathom, to discover his particulars to me, which he gave me in writing... all of which (except the Pompion) were as well known before to myselfe as to hym, but not, that from them to raise so great advantages, I never knew nor shall. (ibid., 276)' Speed's exaggerated and naive claims for agricultural innovation risked its protagonists being 'accompted or at least... Scandalized as a projector' (ibid., preface). Despite Blith's scepticism, however, Speed's reliance on empirical observation (including his respect for women's recipes and medicinal cures) was genuine; and his exalted aspirations for innovative husbandry accurately reflect the enthusiasm of a network of agricultural improvers in Commonwealth England. 


@@@@@


doc= 26093


Speed, John (1551/2-1629), historian and cartographer, was born at Farndon, Cheshire. He was the son (born before their marriage) of John Speed (1526-1584x1603), merchant tailor, and Elizabeth Cheynye ('b'. 1530). Speed was made free of the Merchant Taylors' Company on 10 September 1580 through patrimony, with no occupation given; meanwhile, he had married Susanna (1557/8-1628), daughter of Thomas Draper, freeman of the city of London, in 1570 or 1571 and become a father: the couple had twelve sons and six daughters. Both father and son had property in St Paul's Churchyard: by 1567 the father was leasing from the dean and chapter of St Paul's a sizeable house on the north side in St Gregory's parish; by 1602 the son was leasing two houses on the south-east side in St Faith's parish, adjoining the south-east end of the cathedral (possibly the two ruinous tenements Speed leased from the dean and chapter of St Paul's in 1592). In one of these houses seven books tending towards papistry were found in 1584. 
By the late 1580s the younger Speed had theological interests, was associated with Hugh Broughton, and in 1588-9 saw the printing of Broughton's 'Concent of Scripture' through the press. This work contained maps, including one engraved by William Rogers (who was later to engrave Speed's map of Cheshire of 1602-3) and one attributed to Jodocus Hondius (engraver for Speed's 'Theatre'). Shortly afterwards, Broughton fled to the continent, leaving his genealogies of the scriptures with Speed, who had helped to compile them. These 'Genealogies Recorded in the Sacred Scriptures' were published in 1592 and probably formed the basis of those for which Speed was granted the privilege in 1610 to insert in every copy of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible' for ten years. This patent was renewed twice; after much correspondence, the Stationers' Company bought out Speed's son John ['see below'] in 1638 for $700. Speed's theological interests continued: about 1595 he published 'A direction to finde all those names expressed in that large table of genealogies of scripture, lately gathered'. His other main theological publication was 'A Clowd of Witnesses: and they the Holy Genealogies of the Sacred Scriptures' (1616), republished in 1620 and 1628. 
Speed was also developing his historical and cartographic interests. In the 1590s, possibly at the behest of the bookseller Bonham Norton, he went to Ewelme and Wickham to gather genealogical information about Chaucer's descendants and arms, which were assembled round the portrait published in Thomas Speight's edition of Chaucer's works in 1598. In 1595 he published a wall map of biblical Canaan. By 1598 Speed had presented maps to Queen Elizabeth; in that year she appointed him a customs waiter, a position whose duties it is unlikely he carried out himself. Sir Fulke Greville probably recommended Speed for the post; Speed acknowledged his help and that of many others in his publications. 
In 1600 Speed presented three of his maps to the Merchant Taylors' Company, which praised his skill as a map maker and genealogist. He collected material for 'A Description of the Civill Warres of England', published soon after as a broadside with a map dedicated to Sir Oliver St John. A reduction of a manuscript map, a four-sheet version was published in 1603, probably to celebrate the accession of James I. About this time Speed was responsible for three genealogical engravings, in 1605 and 1608 he was paid for making maps for the king, and about 1606 he was granted a coat of arms. He joined the circle which included members of the original Society of Antiquaries, and met scholars such as William Camden, Robert Cotton, and William Smith. These all helped Speed with his researches, being engaged in methodically studying the history of the British people and institutions. Speed participated; through Cotton, he developed an interest in coins, and was responsible for those in Camden's 'Britannia' (1600). Speed was also compiling material for his 'History of Great Britain' with its accompanying atlas volume, 'The Theatre of the Empire of Great Britaine'. As Speed acknowledged, both text and maps were the result of industrious research and reading: from manuscript and printed sources of contemporary topographers such as Christopher Saxton, William Smith, John Norden, Sir Henry Spelman, and others; from Sir Robert Cotton's collection of manuscripts and maps; from records of crown officials in the shires; from field observation; and from illustrations of coins, antiquities, and armorial designs. 

'The Theatre of the Empire of Great Britaine' followed the model of Ortelius's 'Theatrum orbis terrarum' -- first published in English in 1606 -- in its title and its format, with map sheets backed by historical and geographical texts and gazetteers of place names. This was the earliest English attempt at producing an atlas on a grand scale, with the first detailed maps of the provinces of Ireland, the first set of county maps consistently attempting to show the boundaries of territorial divisions, and the first truly comprehensive set of English town plans -- a notable contribution to British topography. Perhaps as many as fifty of the seventy-three towns had not previously been mapped, and about fifty-one of the plans were probably Speed's own work. In 1606 Speed might have been helped by his son John in surveying towns. A balance is struck between the modern and historical, with information placed on the edges of the maps about antiquarian remains, and sites and vignettes of famous battles, together with arms of princes and nobles. This additional information is one of the 'Theatre''s most significant contributions. Scotland is covered in less detail, as Timothy Pont was surveying there. Individual maps for the 'Theatre' were prepared from about 1602, plates were engraved by Jodocus Hondius -- noted for his skills in decoration -- from 1607, George Humble was granted a privilege to print the 'Theatre' for twenty-one years from 1608, and the 'Theatre' and 'History' were published together in 1611-12. They were an immediate success: three new editions and issues of each appeared during Speed's lifetime, and a miniature version was first published about 1619-20. The maps in the 'Theatre' became the basis for subsequent folio atlases until the mid-eighteenth century. 
In 1614 Speed negotiated on behalf of the Merchant Taylors' Company to renew its lease of the Mora prebendal estate from the chapter of St Paul's. In the following year he was granted the renewal of a lease of land at Moorfields, upon which he had built a new house valued at $400, and which had been let in 1594 to George Sotherton. Three years later, in 1618, he secured a lease on adjoining land. 
By 1625 Speed had lost his sight. Nevertheless, in 1627 he published 'A Prospect of the most Famous Parts of the World', which shared a title-page with the 1627 edition of the 'Theatre'. The 'Prospect', the earliest world atlas by an Englishman (though not the first to be published in England), seems to have been primarily a commercial venture, in which Speed was probably not closely involved. It lacks the organization and methodical preparation of his earlier works, with thin and haphazard map coverage. The twenty-one maps are mostly Anglicized versions of examples engraved in Antwerp or Amsterdam; the text on the reverse draws heavily on Peter Heylyn's 'Microcosmus' (1625, 1627). 
Speed's wife died on 28 March 1628 and he followed her on 28 July 1629, aged seventy-seven. His funeral was held in St Giles Cripplegate: the sermon was preached by Josias Shute and a monument was put up in his memory. He left his leaseholds in St Giles Cripplegate and St Faith the Virgin to his sons Samuel, John, and Nathan, the profits from printing his 'Genealogies' to his children in turn, and bequests to his descendants and the poor of the parishes where he held property. 






@@@@@


doc= 26094


John Speed (1595-1640), anatomist, son of John and Susanna Speed, was born in London in January 1595 and entered Merchant Taylors' School in January 1604. He matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, on 30 October 1612, proceeding BA in 1616, MA in 1620, and BM and DM in 1628. In 1624 he resigned his fellowship and married Margaret Warner (died 1685); they had five children, including Samuel Speed (1630/31-1682). In 1632 he renewed the lease of his house in Moorfields, London, from the Merchant Taylors' Company and he became a member of Gray's Inn in 1633. Speed was the first anatomy lecturer in Oxford, and wrote a treatise which relates to two skeletons which he made and gave to his college library. He was also the author of 'Stonehenge: a Pastoral', acted in the college hall in 1635. He died in May 1640 and was buried in the college chapel, leaving a house in London and land in Oxford and its surroundings. 


@@@@@


doc= 26095


John Speed (1628-1711), physician and poet, was the second child and eldest son of John and Margaret Speed, and was born in Oxford on 4 November 1628 and baptized four days later. He attended Merchant Taylors' School, London, in 1640 and was elected a scholar at St John's College, Oxford, in June 1644. He became a fellow there in 1647, proceeded BA on 1 February 1648, but was ejected that May. He was invited to Southampton by Thomas Knollys of Grove Place near Nursling and stayed there until the Restoration, taking his MA in 1660 and BM and DM in 1666. Meanwhile, he had renewed from the Merchant Taylors' Company the lease he had inherited of land in Moorfields, London, in 1652. In 1667 Speed married Elizabeth Barker-Bernard (1628-1678), widow of William Bernard, and moved to Southampton where he established a medical practice. They had four children. In 1680 he married Philadelphia Knollys (died 1725), with whom he had seven children. His satirical poem, 'Batt upon Batt: a poem upon the parts, patience and pains of B.K., clerk, poet, cutler of Holyrood-parish in Southampton... to which is annexed the vision', was published in 1680; another six editions were issued, the last about 1740. He was mayor of Southampton in 1681 and again in 1694 and was granted a coat of arms. Speed died on 21 September 1711 and was buried in Holy Rood Church, Southampton, on the 27th. He left to his widow the tithes of Eling, which he had bought from Lord Henry Sandys, and his house in St Lawrence parish, Southampton, and bequests to her and his six children of $3800, to the poor of the parishes of St Lawrence and Holy Rood, and to his servants. His grandson, John Speed (1703-1781) MD, made extensive manuscript collections relating to Southampton. 


@@@@@


doc= 26096


Speed, Samuel (bap. 1633, d. 1679?), printer and bookseller, was baptized on 23 October 1633 at St Giles Cripplegate, London, the son of Samuel Speed (died before 1661), a citizen and member of the Merchant Taylors' Company -- himself the second surviving son of John Speed, the historian and cartographer -- and his wife, Jane, daughter of Richard Joyner alias Lloyd of Abingdon, Berkshire. He was the cousin of Samuel Speed, the clergyman. Speed was neither (as has been suggested) the son of Daniel Speed, a publisher between 1603 and 1620, nor the father of Thomas Speed, a London bookseller from 1689. On 29 September 1649 young Samuel Speed was bound apprentice to a London stationer, Edward Blackmore, who was probably his uncle, the husband of his father's sister Sarah. He was made free on 5 October 1657 and became a printer and publisher in London. His business was located at St Paul's Churchyard from 1658 to 1662, but moved the following year to the Rainbow, Fleet Street, and after 1669 to Threadneedle Street near the Royal Exchange. The printer was almost certainly the Samuel Speed of St Gregory's, London, a bachelor aged twenty-seven who on 20 February 1661 was granted a licence to marry Rose ('b'. 1642/3), spinster, aged eighteen, daughter of John Underwood, gentleman, of the Middle Temple. 
On 8 May 1666 Speed was arrested on charges of publishing and distributing seditious books; specific mention was made of 'The Power and Practice of Court Leets' by 'Ag Ph' in which was reproduced material originally issued in Cromwell's time. This was thought by a nervous government to encourage the spread of dangerous ideas. He was discharged on 26 May on provision of a bond for $300 against repeating the offence. It seems possible that this brush with the law affected Speed's trade; perhaps he had enemies in the Stationers' Company, but however that may be he was soon in trouble again. On 15 April 1669, company officials testified that he had 'surreptitiously' obtained licences for two books, 'The King's Primer' and its replacement, 'The King's Psalter', from Samuel Parker, chaplain to Archbishop Sheldon ('CSP dom.', '1668-9', 280). On 8 October 1672 Speed wrote to the archbishop himself, outlining his project of revising and updating his grandfather's history; he also complained of his own imprisonment in Newgate, which had arisen partly from losses sustained in the great fire of London and partly through legal actions against him, apparently in respect of 'The King's Psalter' and 'The King's Primer'. 
The appeal to Sheldon was unsuccessful. In 1673 Speed issued 'The prisoners compaint to the king's most excellent majestie, or, The cries of the king's bench. With Advice to the disconsolate gentlemen prisoners in the several prisons of England especially the king's bench' 'By SS a fellow of King's Colledge in Southwark'. There followed the following year 'Fragmenta carceris, or, The King's Bench Scuffle, with the Humours of the Common Side', an account in verse of a prison brawl witnessed by the author, 'Samuel Speed, a member of the Royal Society'. Despite these ironic shafts, his books reveal Speed not as a radical but as an ultra-loyalist cavalier, seeking to inspire in his readers a sense of outrage that gentlemen such as himself should suffer the indignities of 'the common side'. In the frontispiece of 'The King's Psalter' there appears a portrait of Charles II, with the verse, '
First Worship God, and his commands obey, 

And next the King, who doth his sceptre sway: 

Observe his Laws, no innovators trust, 

And to thy neighbour as thyself be just. 

' It appears from his 'Prison-Pietie' (1677) that Speed's financial and legal difficulties had continued unabated: 'London's too late and fatal Judgements, the Plague and Fire, having made me uncapable to manage my Affairs with the like success as formerly, some Creditors forced me to a Confinement in 'Ludgate''; and he observed sadly that 'Many when they grow rich in Temporals, wax poor in Spirituals: As their outward man increaseth, so their inward man decayeth; and as the flesh flourishes, the spirit withers: yet prosperous wickedness is accounted vertue' (sig. A3'r', A6'r'). But his verse, though not of the highest quality, had improved somewhat, and his political loyalty was immovable. In an appended panegyric to Henry Compton, bishop of London, Speed advised: '
But if the many headed beast should rise 

To pluck King's plumes, and peck out prelates eyes, 

Teach them to crumble, like a tottering wall, 

Or Dagon crippled with a second fall; 

Or heads on London bridge, exposed to sight, 

That grin, and shew their teeth, but cannot bite. 
(p. 191)' In 1678 there appeared Speed's translation of 'Romae antiquae descriptio' by Valerius Quintus Maximus, dedicated to Heneage Finch, lord chancellor, and lately attorney-general, from whom Speed had 'lately experienc'd the Influences of your Honours Favours' (sig. A1'r'). This may suggest a recent intervention in his legal difficulties which had led to his release. Nothing further is certainly known of Samuel Speed; but there is some reason to suspect that his death may have occurred the following year. 


