@@@@@


doc= 26097


Speed, Samuel (1630/31-1682), Church of England clergyman, was the eldest son of the anatomist John Speed (1595-1640) ['see under 'Speed, John] and his wife, Margaret Warner (died 1685). He was a grandson of the famous cartographer, historian, and genealogist John Speed. Elected to Christ Church, Oxford, from Westminster School in 1645, Samuel Speed matriculated on 1 February 1647, aged sixteen, graduating BA on 8 July 1649 and proceeding MA on 30 October 1660. On 14 July 1648 he formally refused to submit to the parliamentary visitors, but must have done so later, for in March 1651 it was recorded that he was absent on leave from the university. 
Anthony Wood notes, obscurely, that Speed suffered for his loyalty to the Stuarts. Family tradition had it that he was forced to flee the country for complicity in a plot against Cromwell, and that he sailed to the West Indies and engaged there in piracy against the forces of the protectorate. Perhaps, therefore, he was the same Samuel Speed who was released from the custody of the serjeant-at-arms by an order of the council of state, dated 8 December 1653, on giving his bond not to act for the future to the prejudice of the Commonwealth. At an unknown date, he married Maria, a daughter of Edward Layfield, rector of Chiddingfold, Surrey. There appear to have been no children; after Speed's death his widow was in financial distress and lived at Bishop George Morley's foundation for the widows of clergy at Winchester. 
In 1662, probably through the influence of his elder brother, John Speed of Southampton (1628-1711) ['see under 'Speed, John], Samuel was presented by Richard Baylie, dean of Salisbury, to the vicarage of Godalming, Surrey, after the crown had withdrawn its nominee. He was appointed a naval chaplain in 1666 and served in the Second Dutch War (and possibly also the third if there is any truth in the garbled account that he was shipboard chaplain to the earl of Ossory). He earned himself a reputation as 'the famous and valiant sea-chaplain and seaman' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 2.347) and on 25 April 1670 the bishop of Lincoln urged Secretary Williamson to use 'your influence in behalf of Mr Speed, whom I might call Captain Speed, as he fought as well as those that are so called' ('CSP dom.', '1670', 181). On 27 June he was duly presented by the king to the prebend of Caistor in the diocese of Lincoln and installed by proxy on 20 September 1670. On 6 May 1674 he was installed as a prebendary of Christ Church, Oxford, on the presentation of the crown. In the same month the king wrote to Oxford University, ordering that the degree of DD be conferred upon Speed, since he 'has not had the opportunity of taking it in the usual course, chiefly by reason of his constant adherence to the King's service' ('CSP dom.', '1673-4', 269). On 30 May 1675 a letter from the chancellor of the university to that effect was read in convocation at Oxford, but the degree seems not to have been awarded. Besides his benefice of Godalming, Speed also held the rectory of Whitburn, co. Durham, from 1673 to 1675, and that of Alverstoke, Hampshire, from 1675. 
Speed died on 22 January 1682 in the parish of St Michael Queenhithe, in the City, and was buried on the 25th in the chancel of the parish church. Two published works have commonly been attributed to him, one a translation of the 'Romae antiquae descriptio' of Valerius Maximus (1678), and the other 'Prison-Pietie' (1677). But there is reason to believe that both books, and therefore the biographical facts revealed in the second, were actually the work of his cousin and namesake, the printer and publisher Samuel Speed. 


@@@@@


doc= 26098


Speght, Thomas (d. 1621), literary editor, was probably of a Yorkshire family and may himself have been born in Yorkshire. He matriculated sizar at Peterhouse, Cambridge, at Easter in 1566 and received a scholarship from Lady Mildred Cecil, to whose son, Elizabeth I's secretary of state Robert Cecil, he dedicated his two Chaucer editions. Speght graduated with his BA in 1569-70 and took his MA in 1573. 
After Cambridge, Speght moved to London at an unknown date, where he was involved in the literary world, and at some point became a schoolmaster. He contributed commendatory verses in Latin to two books of instruction, Abraham Fleming's 'A Panoplie of Epistles, or, a Looking Glasse for the Unlearned' (1576), and John Baret's 'An Alvearie, or, Quadruple Dictionarie' (1580). A survey of London made about 1612 shows the house and chapel of St James in the Wall, near Cripplegate, and records Thomas Speght as renting much of the house and using the highest part of the building as a schoolhouse. He was still living there when he drew up his will, on 27 February 1621, requesting burial in the chapel, or, failing that, in St Olave's Church, Silver Street. Probate was granted on 5 June of that year. 
His will shows that Speght had married a woman named Anne (her surname was probably Hill), and had at least three sons and eight daughters. All the former and two of the latter were still unmarried, and their father instructed that they be provided for out of the substantial debt ($1200 in all) owed to him by Sir Henry Beaumont, older brother of his friend Francis Beaumont (not the dramatist but the future master of Charterhouse). His sons-in-law included the book collector Humfrey Dyson. Bequests to friends included a ring to Alexander Gil, the headmaster of St Paul's School, who is referred to as 'my cosen'. The will names a sister and a brother. The latter, James Speght, may have been the rector of St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street, who was father of the writer Rachel Speght, once mistakenly thought to be Thomas's daughter. Among Thomas's sons, James became a freeman of the Clothworkers' Company and the ground landlord of St James in the Wall, while Laurence was employed in the surveyor-general's office in the time of Charles I. Laurence's epitaph, in the church of St Peter at Clopton, Northamptonshire, refers to his father as 'Thomas Speght Schoole-master Paragon' (P. Whalley, ed., 'History and Antiquities of Northamptonshire', 1791, 2.372). 
Speght became interested in Chaucer at Cambridge, an enthusiasm he shared with Francis Beaumont, who later contributed a prefatory letter to Speght's Chaucer edition. It is possible that they formed part of a circle of Chaucerians at Peterhouse and it is perhaps significant that they overlapped with the Cambridge years of another noted Chaucerian, Edmund Spenser (1569-76). After Cambridge, Speght appears to have maintained a private interest in Chaucer. In October 1592 a reprint of Chaucer's works was entered in the Stationers' register and by the time this work appeared under the title 'The Workes of our Antient and Lerned English Poet, Geffrey Chaucer, Newly Printed' early in 1598, Speght was the editor. 
In preparing the edition Speght certainly had the help of the antiquary John Stow and the 1598 edition of Chaucer is in some ways not much more than a revision of Stow's own edition of 1561. Although Speght lists works of Chaucer's which he claims were 'never before imprinted' (Speght, 'Workes', sig. Aiii'v') most of them in fact appeared in Stow's edition, suggesting the extent to which he saw his task as simply presenting anew what Stow had done. Nevertheless, Speght's notes and introductory material are far more elaborate than in any previous edition and he was the first to provide a substantial glossary. While this suggests that Chaucer's language was becoming difficult to read, it is also part of the process whereby the Chaucerian text was dignified by the kind of extensive apparatus a classical author might receive. 
Speght also contributed new annotations to the text of Chaucer, of which the most famous is his comment on a reference to the legendary hero Wade. Speght wrote, 'because the matter is long and fabulous, I passe it over' (Speght, 'Workes', sig. Bbbb.iiii'v'), an unfortunate omission as all knowledge of stories of Wade has subsequently been lost. 
Also among the introductory material was an extensive biography, which informed all subsequent accounts of the poet's life until the 1840s. Several common beliefs about Chaucer were established here, some of them on the basis of texts attributed to the poet, but spurious. Hence, Chaucer was thought (as supposed author of Thomas Usk's 'The Testament of Love') to have spent time in exile in the 1380s and was claimed as a fellow Cantabrian on the basis of 'The Court of Love'. Speght played up Chaucer's links with John of Gaunt and enhanced the image of the poet as a man who 'alwaies held in with the Princes, in whose daies he lived' (Speght, 'Workes', sig. Bvi'v'). He was also the source of the biographical detail that Chaucer was once fined 2's'. for beating a Franciscan friar in Fleet Street. The document supposedly recording this was found in the Inner Temple, leading Speght to suggest that the poet studied law there. 
While the beating of the friar has never been disproved, it is suspiciously convenient evidence of an early and vigorous tendency to anti-clericalism on the poet's part, which, making him appear at odds with the Church of Rome, helped to refashion a Chaucer acceptable to Reformation England. 
Criticisms of the 1598 edition were forthcoming from Francis Thynne, son of the earlier Chaucer editor William Thynne, in his 'Animadversions uppon the Annotacions and Corrections... of Chaucers Workes'. Speght took heed of the criticisms, though they were not always accurate, and in a new edition of Chaucer appearing in 1602 he departed more decisively from Stow. In this work the Chaucerian 'oeuvre' was augmented by the 'ABC', in print for the first time, and the anti-clerical (but non-Chaucerian) 'Jack Upland', which further bolstered the poet's reputation as a Wycliffite. 
In 1687 a reprint of this work with a few alterations appeared, and remained in use even after the publication of John Urry's much reviled Chaucer edition of 1721. Thomas Tyrwhitt, editing the 'Canterbury Tales' in the 1770s, used the 1602 and 1687 editions of Speght, taking the latter as his base text. With a period of influence stretching from the late sixteenth century to the late eighteenth, then, Speght's Chaucer has been the most durable of any Chaucer edition. 


@@@@@


doc= 26099


Speke, George (1623-1689), politician and political activist, was born on 1 May 1623, the eldest son of George Speke (died 1637), landowner, and his wife, Joan, daughter of Sir John Portman, first baronet, of Orchard Portman. Speke's ancestors were Devon knights who came into possession of the manor house at White Lackington parish in Ilminster, Somerset, in the mid-fifteenth century. Through royal service to the Tudors the family had prospered and although they lost their influence at court in the seventeenth century they remained powerful within Somerset. When he was thirteen Speke's father died and his wardship was sold to Sir Robert Pye of Faringdon, Berkshire, for $1800. Speke travelled abroad in 1639, and on 21 May 1641, at St Mary Abbots, Kensington, he married Mary Speke, Sir Robert Pye's eldest daughter. George and Mary Speke had six sons and three daughters. Of their nine children three died young: their eldest son, George; the second youngest son, Thomas; and their youngest daughter, Elizabeth. Their youngest son, William, of Shipton Beauchamp, did not engage in political affairs. Their other children, Philip, John, Hugh, Mary, and Charles all followed their parents' politics. 
During the civil wars Speke supported the king, sending Prince Rupert a thousand broad pieces during the siege of Bridgwater and raising regiments of horse and foot for the royal cause. After the fall of Bridgwater in July 1645, Speke was taken prisoner by Sir Thomas Fairfax and his goods were sequestrated. Through the intervention of his brother-in-law, Colonel Robert Pye, a New Model Army officer, Speke was able to win his freedom although he paid a large fine of $2390. Speke remained under suspicion during the interregnum. He was imprisoned again in 1655 for possible complicity in a royalist conspiracy and two years later was required to rebuild with his own resources a hospital that had been demolished in the 'late troubles' ('Exeter MSS', 279). 
Shortly after the Restoration, Speke became an outspoken critic of Charles II. His conversion to the politics of opposition was undoubtedly influenced by his strong-willed wife, Mary. She, like her parliamentarian brother Colonel Pye, was a presbyterian. In 1663 Mary was arrested at a conventicle. To his dismay Speke soon found that neither his royalist credentials nor his authority as a deputy lieutenant and a JP could protect her. Indeed, having publicly declared that he would not disturb any presbyterian meetings he was dismissed as JP. Speke and his wife supported various dissenting preachers and a conventicle at White Lackington House, which became known as a 'receptacle for all the malcontents' in the heated atmosphere of the 1670s and 1680s ('CSP dom.', 'July-Sept 1683', 8). 
Along with three of his sons, John, Hugh Speke, and Charles, Speke joined the notorious whig Green Ribbon Club. He was elected a knight of shire for Somerset in the second election of 1679 and sat in the short-lived third Exclusion Parliament of 1681. Although he left no traces in the records of his parliamentary activity his obnoxious behaviour in the west, where he and his family were known as 'grand fanatics', left little doubt as to where he stood ('CSP dom.', 'July-Sept 1683', 16). Following his election in 1679 he supposedly declared that he 'would not fight for the Duke of York, who was a Papist, but for the Duke of Monmouth, who was a Protestant' and that he could furnish Monmouth with men and arms. Speke was called before Charles II to answer for his comments. In his defence he reminded the king that he had been a 'great sufferer' in Charles I's cause and that he wished only to defend the protestant religion ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 690-91). Apparently Speke was forgiven but the encounter served only to further embolden him. In May 1680 his son John described his father's behaviour in a letter to his brother Hugh: 'Since his return, notwithstanding the numberless entreaties and advices to be silent and not concern himself with public affairs, he gives himself more liberty, and talks more at random and dangerous than formerly' ('CSP dom.', '1679-80', 471). 
Speke was notorious for his violent talk and the government had no trouble compiling a list of 'abusive and scandalous expressions' uttered by Speke to anyone who would listen. Following the death of the earl of Essex in the Tower in 1683 he told his neighbours the earl had been murdered. When one neighbour argued with Speke he called him a 'Cursed Tory and struck him in the face with a stick'. He also supposedly declared 'that the nation was governed by a company of whores', and that the king 'was no more fit to govern than an ass' ('CSP dom.', 'July-Sept 1683', 430-31). On another occasion Speke asserted that all 'the bishops were popishly affected and the betrayers of their country' ('CSP dom.', '1683-4', 1). Upon the discovery of the Rye House plot in June 1683, 'old Mr. Speke' came under suspicion and was ordered to come to London. A few months later, in October, Speke absconded, possibly to the Netherlands, 'for horrible words' ('CSP dom.', 'Jan-June 1683', 363; '1683-4', 20). His house was searched time and again for arms and papers throughout 1683 and even the house of his mother, 'a rigid sectarian', was searched although little was uncovered ('CSP dom.', 'July-Sept 1683', 212-13). 
By a marriage licence dated 10 November 1682 George Speke married his second daughter, who had the unusual name of Philip [
In early 1685 George Speke was arrested and heavily fined for creating a riot in order to rescue Trenchard from the custody of a messenger. A few months later the Spekes were involved in Monmouth's rebellion. Trenchard was at White Lackington when he received notice of Monmouth's landing at Lyme Regis. Recognizing the dangers ahead he prepared to flee to the continent, urging the Spekes to join him. Instead, George and Mary spread the good news of Monmouth's coming and sent him encouragement and support. But shortly afterwards Speke fled to Utrecht. He, his wife, son John and daughter Mary were all exempted from James II's general pardon of March 1686. Speke eventually obtained a pardon for himself and his family for a fine of $8000 in February 1687. Not surprisingly he joined William of Orange's march to London in November 1688. Speke unsuccessfully petitioned the House of Commons twice in 1689 for financial compensation for the losses his family had incurred under James II. He died in debt on 2 December 1689. Philip and John Trenchard had four sons and three daughters. The only son to survive into adulthood, George, sat for Poole in the House of Commons as a whig from 1713 to 1754. John Trenchard died of consumption in 1695. Philip, who lived until 1743, married Daniel Sadler, esquire, of London, in 1701 although she continued to use Trenchard as her surname. 
Speke's eldest surviving son, 
The Spekes' eldest daughter, 
The Spekes' third son, 


@@@@@


doc= 26100


Speke, Hugh (1656-c.1724), whig agitator, was the second son of George Speke (1623-1689), a civil-war royalist turned whig MP, of White Lackington, near Ilminster, Somerset, and his wife, Mary Speke, daughter of Sir Robert Pye. Speke matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, on 1 July 1672; he did not take a degree and in 1680 entered at Lincoln's Inn. During the era of the Exclusion Crisis (1679-83) Speke, along with his father and brothers, John Speke (1651/2-1728) ['see under 'Speke, George] and Charles Speke (d. 1685) ['see under 'Speke, George], who was later hanged for his part in the Monmouth rebellion, joined the Green Ribbon Club. He was active in London whig politics and associated with such men as William, Lord Russell, Sir Robert Atkyns, and John Trenchard, who later married Speke's sister, Philip. In 1679 Speke was warned by a friend that to go 'so open amongst them' (meaning whigs) was dangerous ('CSP dom.', 21.281). But Speke was impervious to any advice and he led a colourful life in London, making himself not only obnoxious to the court for his outspoken whig politics, but also to his dissenting family in Somerset for his gaming, gambling, and passion for 'half-mad, extravagant, expensive, and drunken' women. 'Keep out of debauched company', Speke's elder brother, John, warned him in 1682, 'though Whigs and great men' (ibid., 23.121-2). In June 1683 an indictment was brought against Speke for proclaiming in the presence of others that Thomas Pilkington's remark of 1679 -- that the duke of York had set fire to London in 1666 and wanted to cut protestant throats -- was true (ibid., 24.338-9). Speke was the author of 'Enquiry into and Detection of the Barbarous Murder of the Late Earl of Essex' (1683), in which he hinted that Essex had been assassinated by partisans of the duke of York. Pilkington had been sued by James for his comments and was still languishing in prison. 
In the summer of 1683 Speke was active in the defence of those accused of conspiring against the royal brothers in the so-called Rye House plot. In July he served as a go-between in the defence of William, Lord Russell, bringing Lady Russell the legal advice of Sir Robert Atkyns. On 18 August he also visited Francis Charlton at the Tower, offering 'the best advice and directions I can' ('CSP dom.', 25.304). Two weeks later a warrant was issued for Speke's arrest. He had finally landed himself in real trouble by agreeing to assist Laurence Braddon in his quest to uncover the truth about the earl of Essex's death. Braddon, a whig lawyer, was interviewing witnesses and collecting evidence, aiming to prove that Essex had been murdered in the Tower. At the time of Braddon's arrest letters of introduction by Speke to persons of quality, including Atkyns, were discovered on him. Speke later claimed he was drinking at the time he wrote the letters and 'knew not well what I writ'. But the letters were plainly incriminating, informing Atkyns that, 'we hope we can bring on the earl of Essex's murder on the stage, before they can any of those [Rye House plotters] in the Tower to a trial' ('State trials', 9.1196, 1162). Speke was arrested in an action of 'scandalum magnatum' at the suit of the duke of York. The charge was later changed to sedition and he was prosecuted along with Braddon before Judge Jeffreys in February 1684. Speke was fined $1000. Unwilling, as he claimed, or simply unable to pay the fine, Speke spent the next four years in the king's bench prison at great expense. There he met the Revd Samuel Johnson, the late Lord Russell's chaplain, who was condemned for seditious libel in 1684 for his notorious attack on the duke of York, 'Julian the Apostate'. Speke had various prison liberties, including access to a printing press which enabled Johnson to continue publishing anti-papist diatribes. In March 1686 Johnson and Speke decided to arouse the consciences of the protestant soldiers serving in James II's army who were encamped outside London on Hounslow Heath. Speke had Johnson's 'A Humble and Hearty Address to All English Protestants in this Present Army' printed and, he later boasted, 20,000 copies were distributed among the soldiers in one night. The tract exhorted the men to abandon their Catholic officers and defend the protestant religion. Although 500 copies of the address were found in Speke's chambers, it was Johnson who paid dearly for their boldness. He was defrocked and whipped from Newgate to Tyburn. He refused to name Speke during his ordeal, and Speke was merely placed under stricter confinement. 
In 1687, when James II began a new policy of courting dissenters, Speke achieved his liberty. He paid $5000 to the exchequer as a pledge of his own and his family's good behaviour and, for a time, he retired to Exeter, where he became a member of the city council. In 1688, as rumours of the prince of Orange's intended invasion began to circulate, Speke headed for London where he appeared daily at 'Whitehall to show myself zealous in James II's cause' (Speke, 'Memoirs', 40). As someone with connections to both the disaffected gentlemen in western England and those gathered about the prince of Orange, Speke was seen as particularly useful to James's court at that critical moment. Soon after Prince William had landed at Torbay, the king himself met with Speke at Chiffinch's lodgings, requesting him to spy on the prince's camp and report back its strength. Speke was given several blank passes, so that he might travel freely, and offered $10,000, which he declined, having no intention of serving the king's interest. He set out on 8 November and proceeded to Exeter, where he came upon an advance guard of the prince of Orange's army. Speke was soon able to arrange a meeting with William and convince him of his loyalty. He gave the prince an account of the king's strength and designs and wrote letters to James, perused by William, magnifying the strength of the prince's army and warning the king that many of his own officers would eventually desert him. The subsequent desertions of the prince of Denmark and the duke of Ormond served to assure James of the reliability of Speke's intelligence. 
Speke may have also had a hand in instigating the anti-papist hysteria that gripped London in early December. Fearing an invasion of French and Irish troops bent on massacring protestants, Londoners set about arming themselves, disarming Catholics, and, in the process, looting some Catholic homes and chapels. Their panic had been fed by rumours and letters sent throughout England warning protestants of their impending demise at the hands of roving papist soldiers. Speke later claimed that he had not only sent those letters on his way to Exeter but that he was also the true author of the spurious 'Third Declaration of the Prince of Orange' (dated 'Sherburn Castle, 28 Nov. 1688'). The 'Third Declaration' fuelled hysteria by stating that armed papists in and around London were going to 'make some desperate attempt' upon the inhabitants 'by fire or sudden massacre' ('Third Declaration', Cobbett, 'Parl. Hist.', 4, 1809, 14). Speke also asserted later that it was he who advised James, with Prince William's consent, to retire to France. How much of Speke's memoirs of the revolution of 1688 (first published in 1707 as 'Some Memoirs of the most Remarkable Passages and Transactions on the Late Happy Revolution', and again in 1715 with some modifications as 'The Secret History of the Happy Revolution in 1688') can be trusted is unclear. It seems likely that he was the author of the 'Third Declaration'. None of the other possible candidates for the job, including Samuel Johnson, who also liked to exaggerate his influence on the revolution, and Robert Ferguson, the notorious plotter and pamphleteer who was certainly capable of the task, ever claimed it. 
Speke's relationship with William and Mary's government is not entirely clear. Unlike so many whigs active on the part of the prince, Speke was not given a public office as a reward for his services. Speke himself claimed that this was because he kept a correspondence with James, with William's knowledge, and wanted to keep up the facade of his loyalty to the exiled monarch. But he was also in dire straits financially and received very little support from the new administration. From 1692 to 1694, during his brother-in-law John Trenchard's term as secretary of state, Speke occupied himself with zealously chasing down suspected Jacobites. But by 1698 he was begging for money, and in 1703 he petitioned parliament for some monetary compensation, considering all that he and his family had suffered and paid in fines before the revolution. He was rewarded with $100. He later solicited George I for $500, but it is unclear if he had any success. In his later years Speke was living at High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire. He died about 1724. 


@@@@@


doc= 26101


Speke, John Hanning (1827-1864), explorer in Africa, was born on 4 May 1827 at Orleigh Court in the parish of Buckland Brewer, near Bideford, Devon, the second son of William Speke (1798-1887), an army captain in the 14th dragoons and landowner, and his wife, Georgina Elizabeth, 'nee' Hanning. The family later moved to Jordans in Somerset. 
Speke attended Barnstaple grammar school and then Blackheath proprietary school. He detested his schooling, possibly partly because of a latent tubercular condition which caused eye troubles, which were to affect him again in 1858. It seems that he had little aptitude for languages; nor, later, was his written English beyond reproach. On the other hand, he had the ability to calculate longitudes from observed lunar distances and was to take the trouble to enhance his understanding of other sciences when preparing for his Nile expedition in 1859. At the age of seventeen, in 1844, he was accepted for a commission in the Indian army and joined the 46th native Bengal infantry. He took part in the First and Second Anglo-Sikh wars of 1845-6 and 1848-9. There is little information on his military career, but he remarked that peacetime soldiering bored him. Consequently, from 1848 onwards, the young lieutenant spent all the time he could on hunting trips in Tibet, combining his avid collecting of trophies to send home with a little geographical enquiry. James Augustus Grant was with him on at least one of these trips and provides some information. 
At the end of his first ten-year commission in 1854 Speke wished to extend his trophy hunting to Africa, and was fortunate in finding that a Bombay presidency expedition under Richard Burton was just leaving Aden for the Somali coast opposite. The plan was to penetrate southwards into east Africa, but the only success was Burton's solo venture westwards to Harar. Given the task of reconnoitring the area south of Bunder Gori, Speke found his inexperience told against him: he became involved in clan disputes he did not understand, although he eventually realized that his guide and 'protector' was using the trip for his own purposes. At least there were some useful lessons about the realities of African travel, but little ground was explored. Speke rejoined the rest of the expedition at Berbera, where they were attacked in April 1855 by the Har Owel tribe. Speke was captured and escaped but had been so badly wounded that he almost died. In the longer run it was even more significant that, at one point in the melee, Burton seemed to accuse him of cowardice. This rankled as the first of the breaches between them which were so greatly to affect the careers of both men. 
Although he was invalided to England in June 1855, Speke almost immediately volunteered for the Crimea, where he was attached to a Turkish regiment just before the war's end. In the midst of his plans for a hunting trip to the Caucasus came news of the chance to rejoin Burton on another east African venture. This was being organized by the Royal Geographical Society (RGS) with limited financial and logistical support from the British and Indian governments. A new era was beginning in Britain's relations with east Africa, this coinciding with important internal developments. The RGS was now powerful and influential enough to contemplate solving the problems of east Africa's geography, about which 'armchair geographers' such as Cooley and McQueen had speculated and upon which the missionary Krapf and his companions based near Mombasa had thrown some limited but confusing light. A large lake or lakes, snow-capped mountains, and, above all, the possible source of the Nile seemed to exist in the interior. Although the Foreign Office said it was simply 'supporting geographical science', with the Suez route in use and the Suez Canal soon to open, the western Indian Ocean region was becoming of much greater concern to both the Indian and British governments, who needed more information on political and economic realities in the region -- not forgetting the slave trade to which David Livingstone was currently drawing attention. Whatever the motives of those involved, the days of solo travels such as those Burton had hitherto undertaken were over; comparatively large and well-equipped expeditions imitating Zanzibar Arab trade caravans seemed appropriate. This was all the more necessary as east Africa itself was becoming more disturbed and prone to violence as Indian-financed Arabs undercut African traders, new forms of political authority based on force developed, and Ngoni groups from the south taught how to live by war and plunder. 
The expedition, with both men now holding captaincies, set off from the coast opposite Zanzibar in June 1857 and reached Lake Tanganyika in February 1858. Both Europeans were ill with the effects of malaria or relapsing fever, and Speke's ophthalmic problems recurred so that he could not properly see the lake. During his attempt to cross it by canoe, Speke also suffered when a beetle entered his ear, causing intense discomfort and longer-term problems of deafness. No boat large enough to examine the lake properly could be secured and so the possibility of an outlet to the north could not be tested, thus leaving scope for Burton later to be able to claim that 'his' Lake Tanganyika was the source of the Nile. By the time the explorers were back in Tabora, the Arab traders' headquarters, Burton remained ill but Speke was sufficiently recovered to want to make a trip northwards to another reported lake. Directly in charge now of his own sub-expedition, Speke reached the southern end of what he christened Lake Victoria on 3 August 1858. He immediately decided that this lake must be the source of the Nile. Local political rivalries prevented him from exploring very extensively in the area and he regained Tabora, whence the whole expedition returned to the coast. Burton's previously tolerant and friendly attitude to Speke began to change; he could not accept the Nile claims, and there were differences of opinion about how much the porters deserved to be paid and about how the deficit in the funding of the whole venture should be made up from their own pockets. Underneath these arguments there lay the problem of incompatibility between the socially unconventional and highly intellectual Burton and the rather unimaginative and certainly unintellectual Speke. The difficulties were compounded when Speke returned to England before Burton in May 1859 and, probably as a result of mischief-making counsel from Laurence Oliphant and the anxiety of Roderick Murchison to have a hero for the RGS, made his Nile claims public. This, in effect, belittled Burton's achievement. Speke published his account of the expedition in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' and the breach with Burton became almost complete. 
Although the RGS offered Burton the chance to return to east Africa, their first priority for an expedition was clearly to send Speke back to prove his Nile claims. They obtained $2500 from the government and raised a public subscription of $1200 to enable the Nile ivory trader John Petherick to meet Speke with supplies at Gondokoro on the upper Nile. J. A. Grant was invited to join Speke. In addition, mules and an escort of Cape mounted riflemen were provided by Sir George Grey, the governor of Cape Colony, although they proved unsuitable and had to be sent back. 
The expedition left the coast in September 1860 with 176 men, including Bombay and Baraka, two former slaves who had learned Hindi and so could act as interpreters and negotiators for Speke. Unfortunately, these two talented men were frequently at loggerheads and their disputes complicated management problems in the caravan and the all-important business of negotiating with local political leaders through whose jurisdictions the expedition had to pass. Most difficult was the situation at Tabora, where the relationship between the Arab traders and the Nyamwezi chiefdom of Unyanyembe had broken down, with the result that Speke found it difficult to recruit porters and get supplies. He was not powerful enough to impose a solution but he did try to arbitrate. However, Manua Sera, the chief whom the Arabs had deposed, wanted unequivocal support, which the explorer could not afford to give knowing that he still needed Arab help. As in many similar situations, Speke had to learn to be patient and act in the light of the advice of Bombay and Baraka. Negotiating a way northwards towards the western shores of Lake Victoria continued difficult, with Speke and Grant forced to separate for long periods, and it took until November 1861 to reach Karagwe and its friendly king, Rumanika. 
The nature of the problems then began to change. The powerful kings of the 'interlacustrine' region could disregard Arabs or petty chiefs and provide an easy passage for the travellers -- if it suited them to do so. In fact, Speke's presence and his petitions for permission to go on northwards presented them with dilemmas. Here was someone representing a power apparently even greater than Zanzibar or Egypt. Would that power be deployed? Speke's constant questions about his friend Petherick and his Nile boats suggested it might be. More immediately, should Rumanika help him to open a Nile route if that diminished his own importance as 'gatekeeper' on the route from the south? Yet he could not risk displeasing Mutesa, the 'kabaka' of the most powerful kingdom, Buganda, by keeping Speke back. Mutesa himself was also worried about the Nile route, since this would enhance the importance of the rival kingdom of Bunyoro. And the rulers of Buganda and Bunyoro were already both worried by the encroachments of the Khartoum-based slave and ivory traders from the north. In short, Speke's presence presented something of a foreign-policy dilemma for all these potentates, and this largely explains the long delays between the arrival of the travellers in Karagwe in November 1861 and their emergence from the lake region in February 1863 to reach Gondokoro, where they expected Petherick to be waiting. For his part, Speke was fascinated by the peoples and especially their rulers. These, surely, were different in race and history from their subjects and from other Africans in east Africa. He encouraged their claims that they were an aristocracy who had come from the north. So was born the 'Hamitic myth' which helped to direct particular European attention to this region as having potential collaborators who would be receptive to European economic, political, or religious initiatives -- initiatives which Speke himself was later to try to develop. 
From November 1861 Speke remained in Karagwe, learning much of the kingdom and hearing Rumanika's testimonies on the geography of the region. Then in February 1862 came Mutesa's peremptory order for him to proceed to Buganda, although Grant had to remain with an ulcerated leg until May. Mutesa presided over a court system which involved constant intrigue and competition between the country's great men. Both consciously and unconsciously, Speke became part of the system, seeking various favours from Mutesa, including permission to go on to the Nile, and sometimes playing off the queen mother's court against her son's. For his part, Mutesa was fascinated by Speke's guns and also by the knowledge Speke imparted to him. He used Speke in his own political ploys, for example, against the priests of certain cults. What Speke learned in Buganda was perhaps as significant a 'discovery' as the source of the Nile. Eventually Speke was allowed to go on to that source -- the point where the Nile issues from Lake Victoria -- which he reached on 28 July 1862 and which he named Ripon Falls. This was the crowning moment of the expedition and of Speke's career. Unfortunately, Grant, who was still suffering with his leg, had been sent off directly north and so did not confirm the discovery, no doubt to his own disappointment and certainly to the detriment of Speke's subsequent reputation. Nor did the party follow the Nile stream closely as they went north to Bunyoro and beyond. Although this left scope for Samuel Baker to discover Lake Albert a few months later, it also allowed critics to question whether Speke's river really was the Nile. In Bunyoro the ruler Kamurasi's distrust of anyone who had come from Buganda and his fears about a rival allied with Nile traders meant further delays, but the expedition reached Gondokoro in February 1863. This was long after the November 1861 target date set with Petherick, who had left supplies but was trading elsewhere. Before he returned, it was Baker who now welcomed Speke and provided material help. Speke reacted to Petherick's absence in a very intemperate and unfair way, subsequently destroying the man's career by his vilification. By May 1863 the explorers, with eighteen remaining 'faithfuls' from the porters, had reached Cairo and let the world know that the Nile was 'settled'. 
Having returned to London, Speke certainly became the 'lion'; windows were broken as crowds tried to get into the special meeting of the RGS, and there was an enthusiastic welcome at his father's home in Somerset. The situation was to change. The 'Journal of the Discovery of the Source of the Nile' was published in December 1863. Speke's draft had been very heavily 'improved' for grammar and bowdlerized of its too sexually explicit passages by John Hill Burton, who also made Speke appear more in charge of situations than had actually been the case. The book was not a literary landmark and ultimately did not sell as well as Blackwood hoped. Its first edition included a large historical error. McQueen, a friend of Petherick's father-in-law, wrote a very hostile review, and Burton began to question the Nile discovery, especially after Speke republished in 1864, as a book entitled 'What Led to the Discovery of the Source of the Nile', his own accounts of the earlier Somali and Lake Tanganyika expeditions. Murchison became lukewarm, partly because of the Petherick affair but mainly because Speke had chosen to publish his account through Blackwood and not the RGS. Murchison's wavering support almost certainly explains why Speke received no honour from the crown and perhaps why Speke's own plans for the 'regeneration' of Africa received no significant institutional support. Even so, it was probably mischievous or worse for Murchison and the RGS to arrange that the geographical section of the British Association's September 1864 meeting include a debate on the Nile question between Burton and Speke. The two men were now completely estranged. On 15 September, the day before the planned debate, Speke left a lunch where Burton was present and went off to shoot partridges at Neston Park, his uncle's nearby estate at Corsham, Wiltshire. In getting over a wall with his gun cocked he shot himself, with fatal result. Ever since 1864 it has continued to be asserted that Speke, knowing that Burton was almost certain to worst him in debate, must have committed suicide. The evidence, although not incontrovertible, is very much against this possibility. The tragic death and the attendant controversy further undermined Speke's credibility. Although Murchison immediately relented, attending the funeral at Dowlish Wake church, near Jordans, on 26 September and later arranging for the erection of a memorial in Kensington Gardens, the doubts about both Speke's geography and his character remained. Even the wording on the memorial is equivocal: Speke is not described as the discoverer of the source of the Nile. 
It was not until about twelve years later that the work of H. M. Stanley and others made it clear that Speke was right about Lake Victoria and the Nile. 
Speke, who was 'the boldest explorer of the age' and than whom no man was 'safer for immortality', according to one of his obituaries ('Blackwood', 514-16), has, nevertheless, not become a household name. By 133 years after his death there had been only one book-length biography. It is true that he burnt many of his personal and exploration papers. It is also arguable that his books have little literary merit and that their cause has not been helped by reprints which are either ill-edited or based on the corrupt 'Everyman' edition of his 'Journal'. Yet there are adequate manuscript records of his correspondence and exploratory activities, and his work was important in the history of discovery and, to some extent, in the history of Africa. The reasons for Speke's comparative eclipse have something to do with the peculiar circumstances of his discoveries and of his death, but perhaps also something to do with his character. It has been said that he was a repressed homosexual with a mother fixation and a death drive, that he was fastidious and priggish and full of egotism and intolerance. Modern observers find his slaughter of animals -- in which there seems to have been something of a ritual element -- especially unattractive. On the other hand, the only substantial evidence on his sexuality is that he fathered a child in Buganda, and there is much contemporary testimony that he was liked by children, respected by adults, whether African or European, and had a genuine scientific interest in the fauna of Africa. 
In retrospect it can be seen that, even if Speke was not altogether a great man, he was a great discoverer whose achievement was a landmark in the systemization of knowledge about the world. The source of the Nile itself became a great focus for European strategic interests twenty-five years after his visit, while his making known the existence of Buganda and its people had even greater implications for both European imperialists and the Ganda themselves. More generally, Speke's accounts of his expeditions remain absolutely vital sources of evidence on the history of east Africa in the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 26102


Spelman, Clement (bap. 1598, d. 1679), judge, was baptized on 4 October 1598 at Sedgeford, Norfolk, the fourth and youngest son of Sir Henry Spelman (1563/4-1641), and his wife, Eleanor (died 1620), daughter and coheir of John L'Estrange of Sedgeford. Sir John Spelman (1594-1643) was his eldest brother. Spelman was admitted to Gray's Inn on 20 March 1614, and to Queens' College, Cambridge, on 16 September 1616. He was called to the bar in 1624. On 16 July 1628 he married Mary, daughter and coheir of Francis Mason of St Leonard's, Shoreditch. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Spelman performed in a masque on 24 February 1635 at the Middle Temple. On 22 August 1638 he was named a member of the commission charged with inquiring into the breach of the statute of 31 Eliz. that required every new cottage to have 4 acres of land attached, and also into usury. He became an ancient of Gray's Inn on 4 May 1638. 
Spelman wrote a preface to the 1646 Oxford edition of his father's 'De non temerandis ecclesiis', and in 1647 he published anonymously 'Reasons why we should admit the king to a personall treaty in parliament, and not treat by commissioners'. In 1648 he wrote 'A letter, to the assembly of divines at Westminster: shewing the conversion of church-lands to lay-uses, to be condemned by Luther, Calvin, Knox, and the whole assemblies of Scotch divines'. Either Spelman or a namesake was named on a list of sequestrated delinquents on 24 April 1648. 
Spelman was elected a bencher of Gray's Inn on 6 July 1660. He may have been the author of 'A Character of the Oliverians' (1660). He was appointed cursitor baron of the exchequer on 9 March 1663. Anthony Wood reported that Spelman had died in Fleet Street after Whitsuntide 1679. He had certainly died by 30 May 1679, when his successor was appointed. Spelman was buried in St Dunstan's Church, Fleet Street. He should not be confused with his second cousin and namesake, Clement, the recorder of Nottingham, whose will was proved in 1680. 


@@@@@


doc= 26103


Spelman, Edward (d. 1767), writer and translator, was the son of Charles Yallop (died 'c'.1736), gentleman, of Bowthorpe Hall, Norfolk, and his wife, Ellen Barkham. Some indication of his reasons for rejecting his father's surname and adopting that of his great-grandfather Clement Spelman (bap. 1598, d. 1679) can be gleaned from a manuscript diary, 'Annales miserarium' (1724). The diary details his incarceration for non-payment of a $5000 mortgage. His exiled father, who had contracted the debt, was forced to send the conveyance for the Yallop estates from Rotterdam. Having cleared the mortgage, Spelman settled $100 a year on Jenny, the mother of his natural daughter, and $150 on his disgraced father, Charles. The diary also records, in salacious Latin, Edward's Boswell-like adventures among the prostitutes and drinking-dens of London, and, in French, his plans to flee to France if the mortgager Naish proceeded with the suit. 
There is no record of Spelman having spent time at university -- his literary executor remembered him once shouting: 'Good God! doth any fellow of a college know anything of Greek?' ('DNB') -- but the classical scholarship for which he is remembered was formidable. In 1742 Spelman published 'The Expedition of Cyrus', his translation of Xenophon's 'Anabasis'. Pope was then making the final revisions of his 'Iliad', and Spelman attacked those 'paraphrasers' who 'find less Difficulty in clothing modern Thoughts in a modern Dress, than in making Those of an Ancient appear graceful'. Edward Gibbon, who had a copy of the 'Expedition' with him in Lausanne, testified to Spelman's own success in this respect, as does the fact of the 'Expedition''s remaining in print until 1849. 
During the following year Spelman published 'A Fragment out of the Sixth Book of Polybius'. He intended to parallel the balanced, tripartite constitution of Rome described by Polybius with that of modern Britain. The 'Fragment' includes an introduction demanding the repeal of the 'Septennial Act', 'the severest Stab the liberties of the People of England ever received', and an appended 'Dissertation' on the constitution (as opposed to the powers) of the Roman senate. An indication of the volume's high reputation is that Nathaniel Hooke condescended to attack its historiography in his 'Observations' (1758). It was thus measured against the writings of Hooke's other authoritative targets: Vertot, Lord Hervey, Thomas Chapman, and Conyers Middleton, whose hugely successful 'Life of Cicero' had originally inspired Spelman's adaptation of Polybius. 
Spelman proved a reluctant controversialist in 'A Short Review of Mr. Hooke's 'Observations'' (1758), which replied to Hooke's main charge: that not one of the above five writers had produced reliable evidence for their shared assumption that the early Roman senates were elected by a democratic vote. Spelman was then completing a translation of 'The Roman Antiquities of Dionysus Halicarnassensis', due to be published in four sumptuous volumes later in 1758. Since Dionysus was the authority that Hooke deemed unreliable and sophistic, both past and future publications required defence. Spelman emphasized the obvious point that Hooke had rejected Dionysus's account 'because his political principles (no more to be concealed than the itch, though very luckily they are not so catching) lead him to look upon the appointment of a senate to be the dismembering of his darling prerogative'. Spelman was in turn answered by William Bowyer the younger, whose 'Apology' for Hooke was published posthumously in 1783. 
Even before his controversy with Hooke, Spelman had settled on the remnants of his family estates near East Acre, Norfolk. He had started building High House, at West Acre, before 1756, and great attention to the details of its construction is evident in his correspondence with Sir William Browne. This project must have exhausted his already diminished income, since Spelman sold the entire estate to Richard Hammond in 1761, on condition of his being allowed to remain at High House. He died there, unmarried, on 12 March 1767, and was buried at the Barkham vault in East Acre church. During his last years Spelman began 'The History of the Civil War between York and Lancaster' (1792), which was completed by G. W. Lemon. The editor's press-copy of this book, interleaved with voluminous manuscript notes and corrections, is in the Bodleian Library. Lemon also published the last fruits of Spelman's scholarship, a tract on Greek accents, in 1773. 


@@@@@


doc= 26104


Spelman, Sir Henry (1563/4-1641), historian and antiquary, was born at Congham, near King's Lynn, Norfolk, the eldest son of Henry Spelman (died 1581) of Congham and his second wife, Frances (died 1622), daughter of William Saunders of Ewell, Surrey. He was educated at Walsingham grammar school, where later tradition had it that he was a poor student. Spelman was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, on 15 September 1580; he matriculated in his seventeenth year on 17 March 1581 at Trinity College, Cambridge, and graduated BA in 1583, despite the interruption to his studies caused by the death of his father in October 1581. He then went to Furnival's Inn, and entered Lincoln's Inn on 14 May 1586 'with a design of studying the law, but disliking the drudgery necessary for attaining to the lucrative part of the profession he applied himself to the history and antiquities of his native land' (Mirrlees, 147). Thus it was about this time that he helped to found the Society of Antiquaries, to which he delivered several extant papers on such topics as the state of the kingdom's coinage. It was through the society that Spelman made the acquaintance of other devoted antiquaries, including Sir Robert Bruce Cotton, first baronet. 
After three years at Lincoln's Inn Spelman returned to Norfolk and on 18 April 1590 he married Eleanor (died 1620), daughter and coheir of John L'Estrange of Sedgeford, Norfolk. They had four sons, two of whom predeceased him, and four daughters: Sir John Spelman (1594-1643), the eldest son, was a royalist author, and Clement Spelman (bap. 1598, d. 1679) was cursitor baron of the exchequer. Most of his wife's inheritance remained with her mother, who married Richard Stubbe, but Spelman secured the wardship of Hamon L'Estrange, son of Sir Nicholas L'Estrange (died 1591), his wife's cousin. This allowed him to live at the L'Estrange property of Hunstanton, Norfolk; its proximity to Castle Rising probably explains his return to parliament for that borough in 1593 and 1597. It was during Spelman's sojourn in Norfolk as a country gentleman that he wrote what may have been his first work, 'Aspilogia', a Latin treatise on coats of armour, which, although probably written before 1595, remained unpublished until 1654. His 1604 tract, 'Of the union', declared support for the general principle of union, but was opposed to proposals which sought a more perfect union through free trade, mutual naturalization, and a common legal system. Spelman was knighted in 1604 and served as sheriff of Norfolk from November 1604 until February 1606 and as justice of the peace until 1616. He transcribed many of the deeds and charters relating to Norfolk and Suffolk monasteries and, according to Thomas Hearne, he wrote the description of Norfolk printed in John Speed's 'Theatre of the Empire of Great Britain' (1611). 
In 1594 Spelman's purchases of the leases of Blackborough and Wormegay abbeys from the crown lessees caused him to be involved in extensive litigation in chancery, which was not settled until 1625 by the lord keeper, Sir Thomas Coventry. When Sir Francis Bacon heard the case, he found against Spelman, which perhaps explains his involvement in petitioning parliament against the lord chancellor. It was in his unhappy tribulations over these former church properties that Spelman 'first discerned the infelicity of meddling with consecrated places' (H. Spelman, 'The History and Fate of Sacrilege', 1853, 247). He was still collecting material on the punishment meted out to those committing sacrilege in 1633, but his work, 'The History and Fate of Sacrilege', although sent to the printers in 1663, was delayed in the press and temporarily lost during the fire of London. It was subsequently recovered by Edmund Gibson, but remained unpublished until 1698. 
The end of Hamon L'Estrange's minority presumably coincided with Spelman's decision in 1612 to move his permanent residence to Tothill Street in London. Within a year of his arrival in the capital he had completed and published 'De non temerandis ecclesiis: a Tract of the Rights and Respect due unto the Churches' (1613), which, according to the title, was written to 'a gentleman [his maternal uncle, Francis Saunders], who, having an appropriate parsonage, employed the church to profane uses, and left the parishioners uncertainly provided of Divine service in a parish near there adjoining'. Spelman had collected numerous cases showing that ill fates awaited those who enjoyed church property; his examples, as presented by his son Clement in the epistle to the reader with which he prefaced the third edition of 1646, included three of William I's children, and the disappearance of King John's plunder from Peterborough and Crowland abbeys, which were lost in quicksand. The book's advocacy was sufficiently powerful, according to Bishop Gibson, to ensure a steady stream of converts willing to return their impropriations to the church. It also helped to stimulate John Selden's response, 'The Historie of Tithes' (1618), which refuted the contention that tithes were justified by both history and constant usage. 
On 2 March 1617 Spelman was named a commissioner to determine unsettled titles to lands and manors in Ireland, business which necessitated three visits to Ireland. In July 1620 he had to recover from the death of his wife, a son, and a grandson all within the space of nine days. That year he became a member of the New England Company, an association which was to last until 1635 and which saw him heavily involved in the legal battles with the rival Virginia Company. In July 1621 the archbishop of Canterbury, George Abbot, accidentally shot and killed a park-keeper with a cross-bow while hunting. Perhaps in response to a request from the resultant commission charged with investigating whether the archbishop was now capable of carrying on his archiepiscopal duties, Spelman undertook an analysis of the case. His views appeared in 'An answer to the foregoing apology', which as the title suggests was a reply to 'A short apology for Archbishop Abbot'. Spelman was critical of Abbot, noting that as he had intended to kill a deer, the death of the keeper was not truly accidental, and dismissing the argument that Abbot was merely hunting for his health. In finding Abbot's conduct irregular he lined up with bishops Williams and Laud, who refused to accept consecration from Abbot. 
Following the agitation in the parliament of 1621 over the reform of the courts of justice, in October 1622 James I appointed a commission to investigate the fees taken in both civil and ecclesiastical courts since 1588. Spelman was an assistant to the privy councillors named in the commission, but he shouldered most of the immediate administrative burden. When the commission was renewed in March 1623 Spelman was named a commissioner, and he became a mainstay of that and the other commissions appointed in 1627, 1630, 1634, and 1637. He wrote most of the reports to the king and council, including 'Considerations touching the suppression of unjust fees' in 1630, and attended as many as ninety meetings a year. In 1625 he was elected to parliament for Worcester, but he relinquished his seat to his son John at the election held in the following year. Indeed by 1628 Spelman was writing to Archbishop James Ussher of Armagh, 'I am no parliament man' (BL, Add. MS 25384, fol. 15). 
Spelman's antiquarian labour increased during his residence in London, where he was part of a community of scholars such as John Selden and Sir Robert Cotton, and where he had the use of Cotton's magnificent library located in Westminster. His study of both the common law and the church forced him to confront the problem of the meaning and definition of the terms used in the past, especially Anglo-Saxon and Latin terms. With the encouragement of foreign scholars, such as Peiresc, to whom he submitted samples of his work, in 1626 he published 'Archaeologus' (which covered the letters A-L). This was the first part of his glossary of 'obsolete and barbaric words in the ecclesiastical and legal vocabularies' (Pocock, 93). It encompassed the study of the usages, offices, ranks, ceremonies, and rules in the medieval church and law in the context of the words used in Europe. However, he had to bear the full cost of its publication. 
In June 1627 Spelman was appointed by letters patent to the Guiana Company and elected as its treasurer. That same year he completed his 'Codex legum veterum'. This work studied the origins of feudalism, in that it discussed the Norman introduction of feudal tenures, while also supporting the traditional view that the Normans had confirmed the laws already in being in Anglo-Saxon England. Spelman designed to publish this material in 1640, possibly as an antidote to the more extreme claims of those who saw parliament's rights as existing from time immemorial. Such a theme ran through his unpublished 'Of parliaments', which was written after 'having seen more parliaments miscarry, yea suffer, shipwreck, within these sixteen years past, than in many hundred heretofore' (probably therefore written about 1630), and 'The original, growth, propagation and condition of feuds and tenures by knight-service in England', which found its way into print in 'Reliquiae Spelmannianae'. 
Simonds D'Ewes described Spelman in 1630 as 'a learned and studious gentleman, now very aged and almost blind' (Cooper, 106), but John Aubrey was less sure of his physical decline, recording a contemporary opinion that he 'wore always his sword till he was about 70 or more' ('Brief Lives', 2.231). In any case Spelman spent most of the 1630s working on another large project, a plan to document all the church councils held in Britain or attended by British representatives. This would show the development of the church in all its facets since Roman times. Assisted by Jeremy Stephens and his own son John Spelman, he published part 1 of the work in 1639 as 'Concilia'. It covered the period before 1066 and was used in evidence before the House of Commons in 1641 to argue against the sole jurisdiction of the bishops. 
In January 1632 Spelman was described by the Norfolk justices in a letter to the privy council as 'a grave person, well knowing the state of their country and well known to their lordships' ('CSP dom.', '1631-3', 258). In November 1636 he was granted $300 by the king in recognition of his extraordinary 'labour and pains taken by him on sundry occasions in his majesty's service' ('CSP dom.', '1636-7', 210). About February 1638 he declined the offer of the mastership of Sutton's Hospital, Charterhouse, preferring to solicit the place for his son John. 
Spelman maintained his contact with Cambridge University and began discussions at some point around 1635 concerning the endowment of a chair in Anglo-Saxon. This was established by 1640 when Abraham Wheelock was professor, although the chair lapsed with his death in 1657. Spelman's scholarly reputation may explain his candidature, at such an advanced age, for the university in the elections to the Long Parliament, when he was defeated. His supporters included some youthful Laudians, attracted no doubt by his works on the church, although it is doubtful if Spelman himself could be characterized as such. The last work published by him before his death appeared in 1641: 'De sepultura' was a result of his appointment to the commission of 1627 into the taking of exorbitant fees. 
On 8 October 1641 Spelman's assistant, John Walden, reported that his master had died on 1 October 1641 at the house in the Barbican of his daughter and her husband, Sir Ralph Whitfield. Walden recorded that Spelman was to be buried on the 14th in Westminster Abbey, although the printed registers indicate that interment took place on the 24th. 
Much of Spelman's work remained unpublished at his death. As well as assisting with 'Concilia', Jeremy Stephens helped other of Spelman's later endeavours. Stephens saw to the publication of 'Tithes too Hot to be Touched' in 1646, republished the following year as 'The Larger Treatise on Tithes'. Another antiquary, William Dugdale, whom he met in 1638, was responsible for the publication after the Restoration of the remainder of the glossary. In 1694 Edmund Gibson gained possession of five bundles of Spelman's papers, which, together with those preserved in the library of Sir Charles Spelman, formed the basis of Gibson's 'Reliquiae Spelmannianae', published in 1698. 
Spelman was known by contemporaries as a scholar and antiquary. His subsequent reputation has been enhanced by the knowledge that his determination to comprehend fully English institutions laid the groundwork for future methodology and understanding. In particular, he managed to link separate pieces of evidence together in order to explain the development of feudalism, rather than merely accumulate and present a series of unrelated facts. For many historians his comparative work on the language and terms of northern Europe led to the 'discovery' that feudalism developed as a consequence of the Norman conquest, and that English institutions had not existed from time immemorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 26105


Spelman, Sir John (c.1480-1546), judge and law reporter, was the fourth son of Henry Spelman (died 1496) and his second wife, Ela, daughter of William Narborough of Narborough, Norfolk, and widow of Thomas Shouldham (died 1472) of Marham. His father was a reader of Gray's Inn, and is portrayed in his robes as recorder of Norwich on a brass at Narborough; his reading was printed in 1951. John Spelman followed his father to Gray's Inn about 1500. On becoming a bencher in Lent 1514 he read on the first five chapters of the 'Statute of Westminster I'. Several cases argued on this occasion survive in manuscript. In Lent 1519 he delivered his celebrated second reading, on the 'Statute of 'Quo warranto''. This was not printed until 1997, but it circulated widely in manuscript, and the disputed cases are also preserved. In Lent 1521 he delivered a third reading, as serjeant-elect; this was on 'Prerogativa regis', and a manuscript text survives in Gray's Inn. 
Spelman was created serjeant on 1 July 1521, elected to his father's old office of recorder of Norwich the following year, and on 28 November 1526 became one of the king's serjeants. On 3 July 1531 he was appointed to the judgeship of the king's bench which had been vacant since the death of Sir John More, the chancellor's father, and on 8 July was sworn in by Sir Thomas More. He was knighted the following year. As a judge of assize he went on the arduous northern circuit until 1537, when he changed to the home. In 1540 he stopped going on circuit, and the cessation of his reports at the same time suggests that he was becoming decrepit. There was indeed a garbled later recollection that he had retired to the country on grounds of age; but he seems in fact to have continued sitting in Westminster Hall until 1545, and died in office on 26 January 1546. Sir Robert Brooke described him as 'valde peritus in lege' ('mightily learned in the law'; Brooke, 1, fol. 182'v'). He was buried at Narborough, where there is a brass depicting him in judicial robes, coloured red, with his wife and children, and a picture of the resurrection. The inscription describes him as 'Secundary Justice of the Kinges Bench' but gives his date of death incorrectly as 26 February. 
Spelman is renowned for his reports of cases, which run from about 1502 until 1540 and were known to Stanford and Coke. The reports begin with the Christmas festivities in Gray's Inn which Spelman attended as a young student, and include readings and moots in the inn as well as cases observed in Westminster Hall. After he became a serjeant in 1521, the reporting emphasis shifted to the common pleas, and when he became a judge in 1531 to the king's bench. He was the first reporter to note legal discussions 'at table' in Serjeants' Inn, Chancery Lane, these being the first indications of a nascent procedure for discussing reserved crown cases. He also reported some private judicial sessions in the exchequer chamber, the most important of which is his account of 'Lord Dacre's case' (1535), the case which enabled Henry VIII to force the 'Statute of Uses' on an unwilling Commons. Among several notes on matters of state are accounts of the fatal proceedings against Wolsey ('home de graund pompe et riches'), the coronation, trial, and execution of Anne Boleyn, and the trials of Fisher and More. The autograph of the reports is lost, but the corpus which remains, rearranged in its original alphabetical format, was published for the first time in 1977. 
On the death of his half-brother Thomas Shouldham in 1514, Spelman obtained the estate at Narborough where he became established. After some litigation with the Shouldhams, his title was perfected by final concord in 1526 and he thereupon built Narborough Hall, where his descendants lived until 1773. The house still displays a stone tablet with the judge's arms, impaling Frowyk, and the date 1528. The impalement commemorated his only marriage, to Elizabeth (died 1556), daughter of Chief Justice Frowyk's brother Henry, with whom he had a remarkable number of offspring. The judge left his law books to his seventh son, Erasmus, with an exhibition to study in Gray's Inn, but none of his children made any mark in the law. His grandson Sir Henry Spelman (1563/4-1641) was the celebrated antiquary, and Sir Henry's son Clement Spelman (bap. 1598, d. 1679), bencher of Gray's Inn and cursitor baron of the exchequer, was the last-known owner of Spelman's autograph reports. Another Clement Spelman (died 1680), the great-grandson of Sir John's second son, John, was a king's counsel and recorder of Nottingham; his standing effigy in robes is in Narborough church, and his library is preserved as a parochial library in Swaffham church. 


@@@@@


doc= 26106


Spelman, Sir John (1594-1643), royalist author, was born in Hunstanton, Norfolk, the eldest son of the historian and antiquary Sir Henry Spelman (1563/4-1641) and Eleanor L'Estrange (died 1620). Clement Spelman was his younger brother. He was admitted at Gray's Inn on 16 February 1608 and entered Trinity College, Cambridge, the following year. About 1620 he married Anne Townshend, daughter of Anne Townshend, Lady Townshend. He represented the City of Worcester in the 1626 parliament. He had inherited his father's literary and antiquarian interests, and he made several trips abroad, including to Paris (1619) and Italy (1628-9), during which he met a number of continental scholars. He also published, from manuscripts in his father's library, 'Psalterium Davidis Latino-Saxonicum vetus' (1640). 
Spelman, who was knighted on 18 December 1641, sat in neither the Short nor Long parliament and in January 1642 Charles I ordered him to remain in Norfolk. However, Spelman was later summoned to Oxford, where he occupied rooms in Brasenose College while he studied there. During 1642-3 he published four tracts which eloquently express moderate royalist political and religious attitudes, and which constitute his principal claim to fame. 
In the earliest of these, 'A Protestants Account of his Orthodox Holding in Matters of Religion' (1642), Spelman presented a sustained defence of existing forms of church government. He attacked the exponents of root-and-branch reform as 'fighters against the Spirit of God' and insisted that 'the liturgy of our Church' had been established 'by the laws of this kingdom' ('A Protestants Account', 23-4). A similar concern for the rule of law loomed equally large in Spelman's other treatises. In 'Certain considerations upon the duties both of prince and people, written by a gentleman of quality, a wel-wisher both to the king and parliament' (1642), he argued, in terms reminiscent of the king's 'Answer to the Nineteen Propositions', that 'the composite forme' was 'the only firme and durable forme', and that 'of the three powers, regall, aristocraticall or popular, any of them prevailing so far as to be wholly free from being qualified or tempered by some operation of the other two, corrupted the legitimate forme into a tyrannicall' ('Certain Considerations', 18). The monarch's authority was therefore not 'without law' but subject to limitations: the laws were 'most sacred and binding even to Kings themselves'. However, this was 'to be understood in safety, in honour, in conscience betweene God and them', and there was no way that 'in their default, the people can become authorised' (ibid., 18-20). 
This last point in turn led Spelman to compose a refutation of Henry Parker's 'Observations', entitled 'A View of a Printed Book Intituled 'Observations upon His Majesties Late Answers and Expresses'' (1642). Spelman began by insisting that although the king and the houses of parliament formed one body, 'yet is the King the head of that body' ('A View of a Printed Book', 8). This was not to claim 'a power to make lawes and lay taxes without the consent of Parliament', but only 'a negative voice, that they without him may not make any lawes, or charge his subjects, but that all be done by the joynt consent of him and his people' (ibid., 23). Although certain powers, such as control over the militia, were 'by the fundamentall law immovably setled in the Crowne' (ibid., sig. F3'r'), Spelman wrote that: 'monarchy... tempered and mixt... is the constitution of government in England, so well poysed and molded by the wisdome of our ancestors as that it gives to this kingdome the conveniences of all [forms] without the inconveniences of any one. (ibid., sig. E2'v')' Spelman developed these points at greater length in his last political work, 'The case of our affaires, in law, religion, and other circumstances briefly examined, and presented to the conscience' (1643). He reiterated that 'even by the declaration of our lawes', the king was 'a supreme head, a soveraigne', whose crown was 'an imperiall crown, the kingdom 'his' kingdom, 'his' realme, 'his' dominion, the people 'his' people, the subject 'his' subject' ('The Case of our Affaires', 1). Hence 'the soveraignity of this State' was 'clearly vested in the King, by law established in him, and inseparably annexed to his person' (ibid., 2). By the same token, the houses of parliament were 'meerly instruments of regulation and qualification of the King's legislative absolutenesse' and 'no sharers with him in the soveraignity'. Royal powers were thus 'not as properly said to be restrained as regulated' (ibid., 5). Here, as in his other writings, Spelman argued that mixed monarchy did not imply shared sovereignty, and that the concept of legally limited monarchy involved a regulation rather than a restriction of the monarch's powers. 
While resident in Oxford, Spelman also compiled 'Alfredi magni Anglorum regis invictissimi vita', published posthumously in 1678. Spelman's abilities won the king's favour and he was about to be appointed secretary of state when he died of camp fever on 25 July 1643, at Brasenose. He was buried in Great St Mary's Church the next day, and James Ussher preached his funeral sermon. 


@@@@@


doc= 26107


Spence, Benjamin Evans (bap. 1823, d. 1866), sculptor, was born probably in Liverpool and was baptized on 3 January 1823 at St Peter's, Church Street, Liverpool, the eldest son of William Spence (1792-1849), sculptor, and his wife, Elizabeth. His father was a partner in Spence and Franceys (monumental masons) and was in the circle of the Liverpool art patron William Roscoe. In 1838 Benjamin attended the Liverpool Academy Schools, exhibiting busts there from 1838 to 1841 and in 1843. In 1844 he showed, at the Westminster Hall exhibition in London as well, 'The Death of the Duke of York at the Battle of Agincourt', which was awarded the Heywood silver medal by the Royal Manchester Institution in 1846. In that year he went to Rome and entered the studio of his father's friend John Gibson, who observed that 'he is sadly behind in art' (23 June 1846, Crouchley papers). Sensing that Gibson's strict neo-classical style was not his metier, Spence joined the studio of Richard James Wyatt, the sculptor of serene nymphs, after whose death in 1850 he completed the works sold at Christies in London on 22 June 1861. 
Spence's initial exhibit at the Royal Academy in 1848, 'Lavinia' (on the London art market 1990), from James Thomson's 'Seasons' (commissioned by the Liverpool builder Samuel Holme), displays the tranquillity characteristic of Wyatt's work. Subjects taken from favourite authors of the day, such as Robert Burns, Shakespeare, or Sir Walter Scott, became a hallmark of Spence's sculpture. 'Highland Mary', a sculpture of Burns's early love, first carved around 1852 for Charles Meigh of Grove House, Shelton, was his most popular work in this vein. Often repeated, a version was given as a birthday present by Prince Albert to Queen Victoria in 1853 (Royal Collection). Similar works include 'The Angel's Whisper' (version 'c'.1857, Musee d'Orsay, Paris), illustrating a lyric by Samuel Laver, and 'The Lady of the Lake' (1861, Royal Collection), from Scott's poem, commissioned by Victoria and Albert as a companion to 'Highland Mary' and 'Oberon and Titania' (1866, Victoria and Albert Museum, London). These figures, while recognizably within Wyatt's classical style, are given precise identity by the addition of realistic details such as a plaid or thistle -- in 'a new and popular character', according to William Bell Scott (Scott, 132). Although Spence showed at the RA six times, most sales came through contacts made in Rome: he did 'a good trade', commented Alfred Gatley, a fellow sculptor, as a result of his 'evening parties' (Gatley MSS). The Liverpool banker Richard Naylor, his most loyal patron, owned a version of 'Highland Mary', 'Dora and Margaret Naylor', 'Mrs Naylor with Rowland and Christopher', and 'The Finding of Moses' (all Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), the last of which was shown at the 1862 International Exhibition in London, and 'The Seasons'. His only public commission, for St George's Hall in Liverpool, was 'Reverend Jonathan Brooks (1775-1855), Rector of Liverpool' ('in situ', St George's Hall); it was delivered in 1858 for $1200. For the Crystal Palace at Sydenham, Kent, he appropriately carved a monumental figure 'Liverpool'. 
After Spence's death from consumption and pulmonary disease at his father-in-law's house in Leghorn, Italy, on 28 October 1866, his widow, Rosina, daughter of G. H. Gower, the British consul there, gave twelve plasters from his studio to Liverpool (three survive in Picton Library, Liverpool). The remaining marbles were sold at Christies on 4 June 1870. Spence was among the last of the British artists who made a living in Rome by selling primarily to their visiting countrymen. His career represents the final phase of Rome's dominance on the visual arts in Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 26108


Spence, Elizabeth Isabella (1768-1832), writer, was born on 12 January 1768 at Dunkeld, Perthshire, the only child of Dr James Spence (died 1786), physician at Dunkeld, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1777), youngest daughter of George Fordyce, provost of Aberdeen (died 1733), and sister of James Fordyce (1720-1796). Losing her parents early, Elizabeth Spence went to live in London with an uncle and aunt, and was by their death left destitute of relatives. She had already begun writing as a pastime, and now carried it on as a livelihood, producing works of fiction and travel narratives. Her first novel, published in 1799, was 'Helen Sinclair'. Her books of travel include 'Summer Excursions through Part of England and Wales', published in 1809, and 'Sketches of the Present Manners, Custom, and Scenery of Scotland', of which the second edition bears the date 1811. The latter work was ridiculed in 'Blackwood's Magazine' (3, 1818, 428-38) in an article entitled 'Miss Spence and the Bagman'. 
Among Elizabeth Spence's friends were Lady Anne Barnard, Elizabeth Ogilvy Benger, the Porters, Laetitia Elizabeth Landon, and Sir Humphry Davy. Her other works include 'Nobility of the Heart' (1804), 'The Wedding Day' (1807), 'The Curate and his Daughter: a Cornish Tale' (1813), 'The Spanish Guitar' (1815), 'Letters from the North Highlands' (1816), 'A Traveller's Tale of Last Century' (1819), and 'How to be Rid of a Wife' (1823). Elizabeth Isabella Spence died, unmarried, at Chelsea on 27 July 1832 of a paralytic stroke. 


@@@@@


doc= 26109


Spence, George (1787-1850), jurist, was the second son of Thomas Richard Spence, surgeon, of Hanover Square, London. Educated at a private school at Richmond, Surrey, he matriculated at the University of Glasgow in 1802 and graduated MA in 1805. He was for a period in the office of a London solicitor before joining the Inner Temple in 1806. He was called to the bar on 28 June 1811. After a pupillage with John Bell (1764-1836), he was in good practice at the chancery bar. In 1819 he married Anne Kelsall, the daughter of a solicitor in Chester. He entered parliament, being elected in the tory interest for Reading (20 June 1826), but was unseated on petition (26 March 1827). He was later returned for Ripon (2 March 1829) and held that seat until the dissolution of December 1832, when he did not seek re-election, having voted for the 'Reform Act' of 1832 against his party. 
Spence took silk in December 1834 but he was not successful as a leading counsel and ceased to retain an active practice. Elected bencher of the Inner Temple in 1835, he became reader in 1845 and treasurer in 1846. He devoted the rest of his life to the cause of law reform and to the study of legal history, particularly the history of the chancery jurisdiction. He had raised the issue of chancery reform on several occasions in parliament and in pamphlets published in 1830 and 1839, and he was an original member of the Society for Promoting the Amendment of the Law, founded in 1844. His interest in legal history was evident as early as 1812 in an essay read to the Society of Clifford's Inn on the origin of English laws and institutions. In 1826 he published 'An Inquiry into the Origin of the Laws and Political Institutions of Modern Europe'. The culmination of his researches was 'The Equitable Jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery, comprising its Rise, Progress and Final Establishment', the first volume of which appeared in the year of his Inner Temple treasurership (1846) and was dedicated to his fellow benchers. In two parts, it included a general historical survey and a historical and analytical account of the equitable jurisdiction. With the aid of Cecil Monro, registrar of the court of chancery, Spence was able to include some original material drawn from the court's records. The second volume (1849) was in the nature of a textbook on the substantive law of the court as it had developed by the middle of the nineteenth century. Spence was a jurist of wide interests, and though time has rendered some of his writing on general history and Roman law parallels somewhat obsolete, this work as a whole continued to serve as an important source of information on the development of equitable jurisdiction in England, surpassing everything previously published in that field. It was also a pioneering work in the field of comparative legal history. 
Spence's health had been affected by his literary labours and in a fit of insanity he took his own life on 12 December 1850 at his home, 42 Hyde Park Square, London. His wife and two sons survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26110


Spence, James (1812-1882), surgeon, son of James Spence, a merchant of Edinburgh, and his third wife ('nee' Edwards), was born on 31 March 1812 in South Bridge Street, Edinburgh. He was educated in Galashiels, at a large boarding-school, and then at the high school, Edinburgh. He entered the University of Edinburgh in 1825, and began to study medicine with the intention of becoming an army surgeon. His medical studies were interrupted, and he was apprenticed to Messrs Scott and Orr, an eminent firm of chemists, of Princes Street, Edinburgh. He completed his medical education at the university and in the extramural school, and in 1832 he received the diploma of the College of Surgeons, Edinburgh, having previously spent some time in Paris studying anatomy and surgery. 
As soon as he was qualified Spence made two voyages to Calcutta in 1833 as surgeon to 'Protector', a ship of the East India Company. He then returned to Edinburgh, where he had a severe attack of typhus fever. There he set up practice at 14 Rankeillor Street and began to teach anatomy as the university demonstrator under Professor Alexander Monro tertius; he held the position for seven years. He resigned his post in 1842 and joined P. D. Handyside and Henry Lonsdale in the extramural school of anatomy at 1 Surgeons' Square, to act as demonstrator in place of Allen Thomson, who had been appointed to the chair of physiology in the university. There Spence (who was nicknamed 'dismal Jemmy') took part in the lecture-room course of demonstrations on regional anatomy, as well as in the dissecting-room teaching. His teaching proved invaluable to the school, at that time the chief school of anatomy in Edinburgh. He was a remarkably dexterous dissector, and some of his beautiful preparations of the vascular system were preserved in the university. 
Spence, who was in surgical practice while teaching anatomy, left the dissecting room in 1846 and began lecturing on surgery. On 13 October 1847 he married Margaret Sarah, the daughter of Thomas Fair of Buenos Aires. They had six sons and three daughters. 
In 1849, on becoming a fellow of the College of Surgeons, Edinburgh he lectured first at High Schools Yards, adjoining the Royal Infirmary, where Robert Liston and James Miller had lectured, and, on the death of Richard Mackenzie in 1854, at the school at Surgeons' Hall. In 1864, on the death of Professor James Miller, he was appointed professor of surgery in the university. He had been appointed assistant surgeon to the Royal Infirmary in 1850, full surgeon in 1854, clinical lecturer in 1856, and he continued, as professor of surgery, to act as surgeon at the infirmary until his death. He also served as surgeon to the Royal Public Dispensary and the Lock Hospital, and as consultant surgeon to the Royal Sick Children's Hospital and the Leith Hospital. He was appointed surgeon-in-ordinary to the queen in Scotland in 1865, fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1866, president of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1867 and 1868, and member of the General Medical Council in 1881, as a representative for the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. 
Spence has been described as one of the great operating surgeons who made Edinburgh famous throughout the world. Like Liston, Fergusson, and Syme, he had an intimate knowledge of anatomy. He specialized in tracheotomy, herniotomy, urinary diseases, and amputations, yet he was essentially a conservative surgeon, and, like his great contemporary Sir William Scovell Savory, he maintained that, in skilled hands, the simple methods of the older school were preferable to, and gave as good results as, the more complicated system adopted by the disciples of the antiseptic school of Lister. After the death of James Syme in 1870 Spence became the leading consulting and operating surgeon at Edinburgh, and he occupied that position until his death. He died at his home, 21 Ainslie Place, Edinburgh, on 6 June 1882, and he was buried in the Grange cemetery, Edinburgh, on 9 June. 
The work upon which Spence's reputation as a writer chiefly rests is his 'Lectures on Surgery' (2 vols., 1868-9, 1871). He also contributed many papers on anatomical and surgical subjects to various Scottish, English, and Irish scientific journals. 


@@@@@


doc= 26111


Spence, Joseph (1699-1768), literary scholar and anecdotist, was born at Kingsclere, north Hampshire, on 28 April 1699. His father, Joseph ('bap'. 1661, died 1715), was rector of Winnal in Winchester and precentor of the cathedral. His mother, Mirabella, 'nee' Collier (1670-1755), was granddaughter of Sir Thomas Lunsford (1610-1653). Joseph was their eldest son; two other boys and a girl survived to adulthood. 
In 1709 Joseph was sent to school in Mortimer, close to his birthplace, after which he was briefly at Eton College before moving to Winchester College in 1715; his early education was paid for by Mrs Fawkener, a relative. He matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 11 April 1717, but did not go up until he was admitted as scholar or probationary fellow at New College on 22 April 1720. He was advanced to full fellowship on 30 April 1722, took his BA on 9 March 1724 and MA on 2 November 1727, and was ordained in the Oxford diocese on 5 June 1726. His early literary friends included fellow Wykehamists Robert Lowth, Christopher Pitt, Glocester Ridley, and Edward Young. 
Spence's 'Essay on Pope's 'Odyssey'' (1726) brought its author the friendship of Pope, who commented upon the manuscript of part two of the 'Essay' (published 1727). Thanks partly to the 'Essay' and partly to Pope's influential friends, Spence was elected to the Oxford chair of poetry (stipend $180 p.a., later increased to $200) on 11 July 1728; he held the post for ten years, the maximum allowed. Also in July 1728 he was presented to the New College living of Birchanger, Essex; but he continued to hold his fellowship and live mostly in Oxford when not travelling abroad. He became a regular visitor to Pope's house and began taking notes of conversations with Pope and other literary and public figures. 
Recommended by Pope, Spence was travelling companion of Charles Sackville, Lord Middlesex (later second duke of Dorset), on a grand tour which lasted from December 1730 to July 1733 and included stays of several months each in Dijon, Lyons, Venice, and Florence. During Spence's absence abroad, his 'Account' of Stephen Duck was published (1731): the first of his studies of 'natural genius'. Back in Oxford he lectured and made unremarkable contributions to poetry collections marking royal weddings, births, and deaths. He wrote 'The Charliad', a feeble imitation of Pope's 'Dunciad', and, in prose, a Scriblerian-satirical 'Life of Charles Magot' (both unpublished). In honour of his first pupil and at Pope's suggestion he published 'An Account of Lord Buckhurst' (1736) and an edition of 'Gorboduc', censured as spurious by the antiquary Thomas Coxeter. 
Between May 1737 and February 1738 Spence was in the Netherlands, Flanders, and France as travelling companion of John Morley Trevor (1717-1743), a distant relative of the duke of Newcastle, and between September 1739 and November 1741 he travelled in Italy with Henry Fiennes Clinton, earl of Lincoln, later second duke of Newcastle under Lyme. During each tour Spence wrote frequent lively, graphic, and amusing letters to his mother, which he later edited for publication but never published. 
Lord Lincoln's powerful relatives brought patronage Spence's way. On 4 June 1742 he became regius professor of modern history at Oxford (worth $400 p.a.), an appointment confirmed under the new reign in 1761. Also in 1742 Spence exchanged Birchanger for the richer New College living of Great Horwood, Buckinghamshire (about $500 p.a.). He did not reside at Horwood, but made annual visits, when he distributed generous charity. He relinquished his New College fellowship and settled with his mother in London about 1742, whence he often visited Pope. 
Spence wrote occasionally for his friend Robert Dodsley's periodical, 'The Museum' (1746); he contributed advice (and one poem) to Dodsley's 'Collection of Poems' (1748-58). His long gestated 'Polymetis' was published as a lavishly illustrated folio in February 1747 and earned him at least $1450 by subscription and sale of copyright. Conceived during Spence's first visit to Italy and with much of its material collected there, 'Polymetis' was intended to show how the works of ancient artists and of Roman poets illustrate and explain one another. It was attacked in Gotthold Ephraim Lessing's 'Laokoon' (1766) and, though new editions appeared in 1755 and 1774, and abridged versions for the use of schools were current until the 1820s, it sank fairly quickly from serious notice. However, it proved an invaluable guide to mythological images for Keats. 
In 1748 Lord Lincoln gave Spence the lifetime use of a house he owned at Byfleet, Surrey. Spence moved there with his mother (aged nearly eighty) and, using profits from 'Polymetis', developed his long-standing interest in landscape gardening. Already he had laid out at Birchanger a small, simple version of Pope's Twickenham garden, he had planted extensively at Great Horwood, and, in London, had provided garden plans and notes for friends. Now at Byfleet he developed his 30 acre estate as a 'ferme ornee' (like nearby Wooburn, home of Philip Southcote), and improved his own views when neighbours asked his advice about landscaping their estates. Though he never completed his gardening treatise, 'Tempe', for which he made many notes, he translated Jean-Denis Attiret's influential account of the emperor of China's gardens, which praises 'beautiful disorder'. This translation was published (1752) as the work of Sir Harry Beaumont, a pen name Spence adopted also for 'Crito' (1752), a slight, genteel, classically inspired work on aesthetics, and 'Moralities' (1753), a miscellany of prose essays, Aesopian fables, and translations, mostly reprinted from Dodsley's 'Museum'. 'Crito', like the 'Essay on Pope's 'Odyssey'' and 'Polymetis', was in dialogue form because the first person singular seemed arrogant to Spence. 
In 1752 Spence procured the living of Byfleet for his friend Stephen Duck. In the next two years he published accounts of two other 'natural geniuses' of humble origin: Robert Hill, the learned tailor, and Thomas Blacklock, the blind poet. Spence promoted a subscription edition of Blacklock's poems and in 1758 travelled with Dodsley to see Blacklock in Scotland, visiting William Shenstone at The Leasowes for a week 'en route'. In the same year he arranged for the printing at Horace Walpole's Strawberry Hill Press of his 'Parallel in the Manner of Plutarch' (1758) between a famously learned Florentine librarian and Robert Hill, in order to raise funds for Hill. Spence also contributed notes to the edition of Virgil (1753) by Joseph Warton and edited the 'Remarks on Virgil' (1768) of another Wykehamist friend, Edward Holdsworth. 
On 24 May 1754 Spence was installed as a prebendary of Durham, a preferment in the gift of the bishop, Richard Trevor. Byfleet continued to be Spence's main home but he spent more than the minimum of three weeks' residence annually at Durham, where he improved the garden of his prebendal estate and those of neighbours, including the bishop and the earl of Darlington at Raby. His travels took him, weeks at a time, to landscape gardens where his advice was solicited. Sometimes Dodsley travelled with him; it was on one of their northern excursions in 1764 that Dodsley died at Spence's Durham house. 
In June 1766 Spence suffered a mild stroke during his annual journey north. He made his will at Sedgefield, Durham, on 4 August 1766, and on 24 March 1767 sold his copyrights (including rights over unpublished works) to James Dodsley for $100. On 20 August 1768 he was found lying on his face in the shallow ornamental waters of his garden at Byfleet, probably drowned in a fit. He was buried at St Mary's, Byfleet, four days later. His wealth at death was more than $1800, not counting the voluminous unpublished writings bequeathed to his executors and residuary legatees (Lowth, Ridley, and the Revd Edward Rolle) with the request that nothing further of his should be printed, unless by their joint judgement and approbation. 
Spence's unpublished writings included edited 'travelling letters', notes for a gardening treatise, notes for a biographical history of English poetry, and valuable 'Anecdotes' noted from conversations with Pope and others. The executors decided that nothing should be printed, and cancelled the agreement with James Dodsley. A handsomely bound transcript of the 'Anecdotes' was presented to Spence's patron the duke of Newcastle (formerly Lord Lincoln); other papers, including a fuller text of the 'Anecdotes' than the Newcastle transcript, were lost to view until they were acquired by a bookseller named Carpenter, who commissioned Samuel Weller Singer to prepare an edition. By the end of the century material from the Newcastle transcript had appeared in Warburton's edition of Pope, Joseph Warton's 'Essay' on Pope, Ruffhead's biography of Pope, Johnson's 'Lives of the Poets', Malone's biography of Dryden, and elsewhere. The copy of much of the Newcastle transcript made by Malone came into the hands of John Murray (1778-1843): he and Carpenter raced to print, and rival editions of the 'Anecdotes' were published in January 1820 on, it was said, the same day. As Singer had very much more material, his version was incomparably better than Murray's. The authoritative edition is by James M. Osborn (1966). 
Spence's 'Anecdotes' is his chief claim to fame. Primarily valuable as a rich biographical source for others, it reflects its scribe: self-effacing, conscientious, discriminating, knowledgeable, and kindly. His friends commended his sweet temper and amiability; he is portrayed as the benevolent Phesoi Ecneps in 'Tales of the Genii' (1764) by James Ridley, son of his friend Glocester. Spence was about 5 feet tall and spindly; he was a valetudinarian; he never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 26112


Spence, Thomas (1750-1814), radical and bookseller, was born on the Quayside of Newcastle upon Tyne on 21 June 1750. His father, Jeremiah Spence, had arrived in Newcastle from Aberdeen about 1739, while his mother, Margaret Flet, his father's second wife, came from the Orkneys. Jeremiah, who fathered nineteen children, was at first a net-maker and later sold hardware goods from a booth on the Sandhill. Always a poor but hard-working man, he was deeply religious and encouraged his children to read the 'Bible' daily. Denied a formal education and forced to work even as a child, Thomas began to read widely, and gradually educated himself enough to advance from being a clerk to becoming a schoolmaster in Haydon Bridge and Newcastle. While at Haydon Bridge he married a Miss Elliott from Hexham in the early 1780s. Although the marriage was apparently not a happy one, a son, William, was born soon afterwards. This son later went to London with his father and there helped him to distribute his radical tracts; he died as a teenager about 1797. Within two years of the death of his first wife in 1792 Spence married a servant girl in London, but this marriage soon broke down irretrievably, though Spence appears to have paid this second wife, about whom further details are unknown, a small weekly allowance after they separated. 
Although in many ways a committed educator, Spence was more interested throughout his life in educating poor adults than children, and he was not a great success as a schoolteacher. Barely 5 feet tall, slightly built, very poorly dressed, and physically unimpressive (a situation made worse by a stroke or attack of palsy which left him with a limp and a speech impediment), he did not immediately command respect. Very enthusiastic in putting over his own point of view, he was not very good at listening to others, and he could be aggressive when faced with disagreement or opposition. Once convinced of the rightness of his opinions, he could be obstinate in their defence and unwilling to countenance any objections. He insisted on speaking his mind freely and fearlessly, a practice which was admired by some and deplored by others. Warm in his attachment to his friends, he could be abrasive and hostile to those not convinced of what he regarded as the obvious rationality, truth, and benefit of his ideas and schemes for reform. Quite early in his career as a teacher he developed ideas on the teaching of English by means of a phonetic alphabet. He published several works explaining the virtue of his new alphabet for both the uneducated poor and foreigners learning the English language. The most important of these was 'The Grand Repository of the English Language', published in 1775. Despite the cool reception which this work received, Spence continued to propagate his phonetic alphabet for the rest of his life. Several of his later radical works were printed in this alphabet as well as in standard English, and modern philologists now treat his efforts seriously. 
Spence's parents' and his own lifelong experience of poverty taught him to sympathize with the plight of the industrious poor and to condemn the idle rich. Influenced also by his wide reading, especially of James Harrington, he developed notions about the natural rights and the natural equality of all men, and he had a strong belief in the power of reason and the idea of progress. There was undoubtedly a secular and enlightened aspect to his thinking as well as a millenarian and religious streak that he gained not only from his father but from the sermons and published works of the Revd James Murray, an extreme Presbyterian who made congregational autonomy an article of faith. Murray was a Scot, educated at the University of Edinburgh, who was invited to establish a meeting-house in Newcastle, where he was an active preacher and writer from 1765 until his death in 1782. Spence became one of Murray's greatest admirers, and was influenced by his use of scriptures and his appeal to reason in order to justify the claim that all men were naturally equal in the sight of God and had an equal claim to the same natural and inalienable rights. In his sermons and his published works Murray taught the benefits of civil and religious liberty, sympathized with John Wilkes's campaigns, and criticized the government's handling of the American crisis. He and Spence combined in the early 1770s in a prolonged and eventually successful campaign to preserve the customary rights of the Newcastle freemen threatened by the town corporation's efforts to make money by enclosing and engrossing parts of the large Town Moor. 
The protracted Newcastle Town Moor affair had a profound effect on Spence and led him to develop his land plan, which was to be the focus of all his later radical political writings. In 1775 he became a member of Newcastle's newly established philosophical society. The society showed an interest in liberal ideas and occasionally debated political questions. On 8 November 1775 Spence created some dissension when he gave a lecture to the society on 'the real rights of man'. This was the first public occasion on which Spence vehemently denounced the evils of private property and proposed that each parish should control the land within its boundaries for the benefit of every inhabitant of the parish. Although his lecture was not well received when it was delivered, Spence proceeded to publish it without the permission of the society and, worse still, to hawk it about the streets of Newcastle. Despite the protests of some members, especially James Murray, Spence was expelled from the society. This did not prevent him from repeating his views in 'The Poor Man's Advocate' (1779) and in 'A Supplement to the History of Robinson Crusoe' (1782), nor from engaging in violent disputes in the several informal clubs and debating societies springing up in Newcastle. 
Increasingly isolated in Newcastle following the death of Murray and, in 1788, of his publisher, Thomas Saint, in an unhappy marriage, and discharged for reasons unknown from his teaching post at St Ann's School in Sandgate, Newcastle, on 17 December 1787, Spence and his son moved permanently to London. Although he is often reputed to have arrived in London in 1792, there is some evidence that he was settled there by early 1788, but that he was unknown as he eked out a living in a series of casual labouring jobs. By 1792 he had emerged as a radical bookseller and author just as popular radicalism was reviving in London because of the excitement generated by the French Revolution. The ideas behind and example of events in France increased Spence's attachment to reason, natural rights, and progress, but also reinforced the millennial streak in his writings. It seems likely that he mixed with the various millenarian, deistical, infidel, and apocalyptic groups then flourishing in parts of the capital. Moreover, although more of a political theorist and propagandist than an activist, Spence also associated with the more extreme political radicals. He allowed the 12th division of the London Corresponding Society (LCS) to meet on his premises, while he was the first member of the 30th division, was elected to the general committee of the society, received subscriptions and collected signatures for petitions, and published the society's 'Report of the Committee of the Constitution' in June 1794. He also signed the first 'Address' of the Society of the Friends of the Liberty of the Press, allowed the militant and shadowy Lambeth Loyal Association to perform military drill in a large room above his bookshop, and in 1796 he acted in concert with Thomas Evans, the secretary of the LCS and also one of the leaders of the more revolutionary Society of United Englishmen. 
From 1792 Spence endeavoured to maintain himself by printing and selling handbills, tracts, periodicals, and pamphlets (many of his own composition), by producing copper coins, tokens, and medallions, and by keeping a bookstall or bookshop. His first stall was at the eastern corner of Chancery Lane and Holborn, from where he also sold saloop (a hot drink of milk, sugar, and powdered sassafras). He later moved to a bookshop, the Hive of Liberty, at 8 Little Turnstile, Holborn, and by early 1797 he was based at 9 Oxford Street and also kept a stall near the Pantheon in Oxford Street. Many of Spence's publications were developments and variations on his land plan. His Newcastle lecture was republished as 'The Real Rights of Man' in 1793 and as 'The Meridian Sun of Liberty' in 1796. Variations on the same theme appeared in many other pamphlets, including 'The End of Oppression' (1795), 'Thomas Spence's Recantation of the End of Oppression' (1795), 'A Letter from Ralph Hodge to his Cousin Thomas Bull' (1795), 'Description of Spensonia' (1795), 'Rights of Infants' (1797), 'The Constitution of a Perfect Commonwealth' (1798) (republished in 1803 as 'The Constitution of Spensonia'), and 'The Restorer of Society to its Natural State' (1801). He also produced between 1793 and 1795 a periodical, 'One Penny Worth of Pig's Meat: Lessons for the Swinish Multitude', later reprinted in three volumes, which reproduced selections from such writers as Harrington, Philip Sydney, John Locke, Richard Price, Joseph Priestley, and William Godwin, as well as a further version of his own 'The Real Rights of Man'. Although somewhat repetitious, all of Spence's works were written in a fresh, vigorous, and direct manner. While he was undoubtedly fixated with his land plan, his writings could be ironic and humorous, and they invariably had attractive titles. His style was deliberately tailored to reach, inspire, and convert poor men, who were his target readers. 
Despite his emphasis on rational argument, his clear and vigorous prose, and his tireless efforts to publicize his land plan, Spence failed to make the details of it clear to his contemporaries or many later historians. Many believed that he advocated the nationalization of land so that it could be placed under the control of the central government, although administered by parish councils. In fact, Spence was always hostile to giving so much power to central government and wished to devolve as much power as possible to the local level. Convinced that political rights alone, however extensive, could never prevent the rich landowners from dominating the poor masses, he wanted to place what he regarded as the source of all power -- land -- into the hands of all citizens, men, women, and children alike. Spence insisted that all private property had been secured by force, fraud, or theft. Its return to the people as a whole was a simple act of justice. All the land should be owned by parish corporations composed of every person who lived within the parish boundaries. At first he suggested that this land would be rented out annually to applicants chosen by lot, but after 1782 he decided that the land should be rented out annually to the highest bidder, who would not be able to pass this leased land on to their heirs or to sell it. Rivers, lakes, mines, forests, and other natural resources would be rented out in a similar fashion. From the rents which it received, each parish corporation would make a contribution to the limited costs of the national government and its courts of justice, would use a proportion of its income for a wide variety of parochial needs, including houses, roads, harbours, and bridges, for such public amenities as a parish hall, school, library, and hospital, and for the care of the sick, aged, and unemployed. On occasion Spence suggested that the national government might maintain a small professional army, but more often he favoured a citizen militia supported by each parish. After all its expenses were met, the rest of the rent collected by the parishes would be divided, every three months, between every man, woman, and child in the parish. Dire poverty would be virtually eliminated, since no one paid taxes and everyone received a proportion of the parish rent. Although Spence planned to eliminate utter destitution, he did not advocate complete economic equality. While he was prepared to see the people confiscate the land and all natural resources from the rich, he was ready to see the latter retain all their movable property, and he accepted that some citizens would be more active, resourceful, and fortunate than others and so their income and personal possessions might well differ. Industry and talent would be rewarded, but land, the true source of political power, would always be communally owned, and the tyranny of the few over the many would be ended for ever. While Spence possessed an inadequate understanding of the social, economic, and demographic complexities of the day and he was far too optimistic about the practicality of his land plan, he did reveal a greater awareness than all his radical contemporaries of the true sources of political power and the desperate plight of the industrious poor. His vision of a welfare state was more extensive even than that outlined by Thomas Paine. 
Aside from his land plan, Spence did not neglect other more overtly political questions. His writings were full of comments on constitutional and political arrangements. He clearly rejected monarchy, aristocracy, and an established state church, and he favoured a democratic republic. He favoured a limited and cheap national government, the complete separation of the executive, legislative, and administrative branches of government, and a system of election for all those in positions of authority. He favoured annual elections, the secret ballot, the abolition of any property qualification for, and the payment of, representatives, and universal suffrage. He was quite prepared to grant the vote to all women as well as all men, though he believed women should be excluded from positions of political responsibility because of what he termed the delicacy of their sex. Although he hoped to achieve his aims by reasoned argument and peaceful means if possible, and he did not personally engage directly in any revolutionary conspiracy, he did realize that the landed elite would probably not tamely surrender their property. In 'The End of Oppression' he suggested that a few thousand men, guided by a leadership of honest, firm, and intelligent officers, who would themselves be inspired by a noble cause (Spence's land plan), would relatively easily overcome the resistance of the landed elite, when the mass of the people clearly supported this cause. 
Spence's radical publications and his involvement in radical politics got him into a great deal of trouble with the authorities. He was arrested three times between December 1792 and December 1793, but was released each time without going to trial. He was again arrested on 20 May 1794, on suspicion of treasonable practices, and was kept in Newgate prison for seven months without trial, an injustice the authorities could perpetrate because habeas corpus had been suspended. He was arrested again in 1798 and released soon afterwards, but was arrested again and this time convicted for publishing 'The Restorer of Society to its Natural State'. Accused of seditious practices and disaffection, he defended himself with great courage and impudence. None the less, he was sentenced to a year in Shrewsbury gaol, where he suffered severely. This punishment did not silence him, because on his release he published 'The Important Trial of Thomas Spence' (1803), complete with a reprint of the offending pamphlet and a reworking of his land plan. 
Spence was not easily intimidated, and he kept his ideas alive and in limited circulation in the inhospitable political climate of the early nineteenth century. In 1805 he published 'The World Turned Upside Down', and this was followed by several political broadsides and volumes of political songs. He reissued some of his earlier pamphlets in 1807 and as late as 1814 he began a new periodical, 'The Giant Killer, or, Anti-Landlord'. Only two issues of this appeared in August before he died of a bowel complaint in Castle Street, off Oxford Street, London, on 1 September 1814. During his last years Spence attracted to him a group of disciples, who met as a Free and Easy Club in local taverns to discuss his ideas and sing his songs. This group included Thomas Evans, Arthur Thistlewood, and Allen Davenport. About forty of his followers attended Spence's funeral procession to the burial-ground of St James's, Hampstead Road, London, on 8 September 1814. 
Although his last years were spent in obscurity compared to the years between 1792 and 1803, Spence's death was noted in many leading newspapers and magazines. After his death his small group of disciples, known as the Spencean Philanthropists, kept alive his ideas and were involved in such revolutionary activity as the Spa Fields riots of 2 December 1816 and the Cato Street conspiracy of 23 February 1820. Supporters of Spence's land plan were active in the 1830s in both the National Union of the Working Classes and the Chartist movement. Later still, he was wrongly acclaimed as an early socialist and as an advocate of the nationalization of land by the state. 


@@@@@


doc= 26113


Spence, William (bap. 1782, d. 1860), political economist and entomologist, was baptized on 1 October 1782 at All Saints, Bishop Burton, Yorkshire, the son of Robert Spence, husbandman, and his wife, Anna. He received his early education in natural history from the Revd Robert Rigby, vicar of St Mary's, Beverley, who instructed him in the Linnaean classification of plants. After attending Beverley grammar school, Spence served as an apprentice to merchants and shipowners, Carlill, Greenwood & Co. at Hull. This combination of a rural upbringing and a commercial apprenticeship influenced his development both as a political economist and as an entomologist. 
A year after taking up residence in the Drypool district of Hull in 1806, Spence produced his 'Radical Cause of the Present Distresses of the West-India Planters Pointed out' (1807) and his 'Britain Independent of Commerce' (1807). An avowed follower of the physiocrats or 'French economists', he proclaimed that agriculture was the most important source of a nation's wealth. Extremely contentious, 'Britain Independent of Commerce' passed through six editions and netted Spence a profit of $230 by late 1808. As one of about three dozen books and pamphlets spawned in reaction to Spence's opinions, James Mill's 'Commerce Defended' (1808) laid the intellectual underpinnings of classical political economy. Moreover, Mill identified Spence's purportedly wartime, nationalistic cant as a critique of capitalism and an 'apologia' for the landed interests. Spence responded with his 'Agriculture the Source of the Wealth of Britain' (1808). 
Inspired by Thomas Marsham's 'Entomologia Britannica' (1802), Spence took up the study of entomology in 1805 and in the same year became acquainted with the Revd William Kirby. In 1808 Spence and Kirby began work on a popular introduction to entomology. About this time, Spence married Elizabeth Blundell (1779/80-1855). In 1811 he entered a commercial partnership with Elizabeth's brother Henry, founding Messrs Blundell, Spence & Co., paint and colour makers and general merchants. Despite these commitments Spence's interest in agriculture continued -- he was elected to the Holderness Agricultural Society in December 1811. The paper that he presented at his first meeting appeared as 'Observations on the Disease in Turnips, Termed in Holderness 'Fingers and Toes'' the following year. He subsequently served as both a vice-president (1814) and president (1815) of the society; and he dedicated his 'Objections Against the Corn Bill Refuted' (1815) to his fellow members. 
Pursuing entomological research, Spence spent the summer of 1812 in London at the library of Sir Joseph Banks. Having been elected a member of the Linnean Society in 1806, Spence published his first entomological paper in the society's 'Transactions' in 1815. The first volume of his and Kirby's 'Introduction to Entomology' appeared in the same year; and, following the battle of Waterloo, he took a four-month tour on the continent. After the publication of volume two of the 'Introduction' in 1817, work on projected further volumes was seriously curtailed by Spence's affliction with severe headaches. With special permission from the commandant, he sought solace through solitary strolls along the ramparts of the citadel at Hull. Continued ill health, however, forced him to submit his unfinished manuscripts to Kirby, and to remove himself and his family to Exmouth, Devon, about 1820. 
With the publication of the final two volumes of the 'Introduction' in 1826, Spence and his family left Devon for the continent, where they enjoyed a semi-peripatetic existence for the next eight years. Summers were generally spent in Geneva, Lausanne, and Bern, and winters were spent in Florence, Pisa, and Rome. Often drawing on his continental experiences, Spence continued to publish articles on natural history. In the early 1830s, for instance, the 'Magazine of Natural History' published his meteorological observations for Switzerland and Italy. In 1834 he read his paper, 'Observations on a mode practised in Italy of excluding the common house-fly from apartments', before the Entomological Society of London. 
Spence and family returned from the continent in 1833, in time for the official launch of the Entomological Society of London. With his two sons, William and Robert Henry, Spence attended the first sitting of the society in November 1833. At Kirby's behest, he was elected honorary English member, in recognition of his contribution to the 'Introduction'. His election marked the beginning of a long association with the society. In addition to serving on the council (1844, 1850, 1852-3), the publication committee (1844-52), and the library committee (1847-9), he was a vice-president (1844-6, 1853), and president (1847-8). On his death, his son, William, presented his library to the society. 
After his return to England, Spence resided briefly at Bristol, and sought improved health through excursions to Leamington. Eventually he settled at 18 Lower Seymour Street, Marylebone, and took a fairly active role in London's scientific life. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1834, and subsequently served on both its council and that of the Linnean Society. He published approximately twenty articles on natural history, his principal interests lying in physiology, economic entomology, and instinct/intelligence disputes. Although admired by Charles Darwin, his liberal, secular interpretation of animal instinct and intelligence had led to his one open disagreement with Hutchinsonian Kirby. 
In late 1842, a sixth edition of volumes one and two of the 'Introduction' appeared. Because of Kirby's age and declining health, Spence had been solely responsible for the necessary revisions. 'The Gardeners' Chronicle' acknowledged it 'as the most entertaining accounts of the habits of insects that has ever been put into popular form' (2, 3 Dec 1842, 808). Perhaps again exhausted, Spence and his wife returned to Italy for 1843. By this time, Spence's many sojourns to Italy had made their mark on his family. In 1833 one of his two daughters, Eliza, married Louis Schmid, the 'charge d'affaires' to the court of Tuscany; two years later, his son, William, married a Florentine woman. 
Although the 'Introduction to Entomology' continued to be popular, Spence's declining health precluded active participation in scientific circles. The death of his wife in April 1855 and the onset of deafness resulted in his increasing reclusiveness. Consequently, by the time of his death, at his home in Lower Seymour Street on 6 January 1860, contemporaries had confused the details of his intellectual career. Perhaps misled by his early work on political economy, a number of obituaries erroneously eulogized him as a former member of parliament for Hull. Spence was buried at Bishop Burton. 


@@@@@


doc= 26114


Spencer, Aubrey George (1795-1872), bishop of Newfoundland, born on 8 February 1795, was the son of William Robert Spencer (1770-1834) author, and his wife, Susan, the widow of Count Spreti and the daughter of Francis Jenison, Count Jenison Walworth. His brother was George Trevor Spencer, bishop of Madras. He was educated at St Albans Abbey School and in Greenwich, and matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 28 March 1817, but did not graduate. After being ordained in 1819 Spencer worked for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Newfoundland and the Bermudas, of which in 1825 he was appointed archdeacon. At about that time he married Eliza Musson, daughter of a rich Bermuda merchant; they had one son and three daughters. 
In 1829 Spencer's devotion to Bermudan welfare and education led him to reject the offer of the archdeaconry of Newfoundland. However, in 1839, when Newfoundland was constituted a separate diocese, with the Bermudas under its care, Spencer was appointed its bishop. He was consecrated in London at Lambeth Palace on 4 August 1839; during his visit to Britain he was created DD of Oxford University. Spencer undertook the organization of his diocese, founded the theological college, and laid the first stone of the cathedral of St John's, besides helping to found twenty other churches. But his health was affected by the severe winters of Newfoundland, and on 28 November 1843 he was relieved to be appointed bishop of Jamaica, which included British Honduras and the Bahamas. Here his health improved a little, though a good deal of travelling was necessary. In October 1848 he visited the Bahamas and some years later he went to Havana. But in 1855 further poor health required him to resign. 
Spencer returned to Britain and retired to Torquay, where he published 'A Brief Account of the Church of England' (1867). He died at Torquay on 24 February 1872, his wife surviving him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26115


Spencer, Sir Augustus Almeric (1807-1893), army officer, was the third son of Francis Almeric Spencer, first Baron Churchill ['see under 'Spencer, George (1739-1817)], and Lady Frances Fitzroy, fifth daughter of Augustus, third duke of Grafton. George Spencer, fourth duke of Marlborough, was his grandfather. He was born on 25 March 1807 at Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire, and was one of the pages when Alexander I visited Blenheim after the peace of 1815. He lived from 1817 at Cornbury, Oxfordshire, the seat of his father in Wychwood Forest, and was privately educated by the Revd Walter Brown, rector of Stonesfield, Oxfordshire, formerly chaplain and librarian at Blenheim. In 1825 he entered the army as ensign of the 43rd light infantry, and was with the regiment at Gibraltar. In 1827 he was under Sir George de Lacy Evans in Portugal. A few years later he accompanied the regiment to Canada, and on 6 February 1836 married, at Fredericton, Helen Maria (died 1899), second daughter of Sir Archibald Campbell, governor of New Brunswick. 
In 1845 Spencer was appointed to the command of the 44th, and served throughout the Crimean War. He was present at the battles of Alma and Inkerman, the occupation of the cemetery and suburbs of Sevastopol (18 June 1855), where he was wounded, and as brigadier-general of the 4th division in the night attack at the fall of Sevastopol (8 September 1855). In October 1855 he commanded the land forces in the expedition to Kinburn, in conjunction with General Bazaine. He was thus with the army from the first landing at Varna until its return to England, was ten times mentioned in dispatches, received the Mejidiye (third class) and was made CB and officer of the Legion d'honneur. 
After his return to England in 1856 Spencer was placed in command of a brigade at Aldershot. In 1860 he was made major-general, and appointed to a division of the Madras army at Bangalore. On 28 March 1865 he was made KCB. In 1866 he was appointed to the command of the western district (Devonport), and in 1869 he was again in India as commander-in-chief of the Bombay army. In this year also he became colonel of his old regiment, the 43rd. Returning from India in 1874, he commanded the 2nd army corps in the manoeuvres on Salisbury Plain in the following year, and was promoted to the rank of general. This was the close of his active service. He was made GCB on 29 May 1875. He died on 28 August 1893 at his home, 51 Ennismore Gardens, London. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26116


Spencer, Sir Brent (1760-1828), army officer, was the son of Conway Spencer of Trumery, co. Antrim. On 18 January 1778 he was commissioned an ensign in the 15th foot, which was sent that year to the West Indies, and took part in the capture of St Lucia. He was promoted lieutenant on 12 November 1779, and was taken prisoner in February 1782, his regiment being part of the small garrison of Brimstone Hill, St Kitts, which had to surrender after nearly a month's siege. 
After returning to England Spencer was given a company in the 99th (or Jamaica) regiment on 29 July 1783, from which he exchanged back to the 15th on 4 September. In 1790 the 15th was again sent out to the West Indies, and on 6 March 1791 Spencer obtained a majority in the 13th, then stationed in Jamaica. He served in the expedition to St Domingo, and distinguished himself at the capture of Port-au-Prince in 1794, but went home soon afterwards to join the 115th, a newly raised unit, in which he had been made lieutenant-colonel on 2 May. 
On 22 July 1795 Spencer exchanged to the 40th (or 2nd Somersetshire) regiment, and went for a third time to the West Indies, landing at St Vincent at the end of September. He commanded the 40th there in the operations against the Caribs, and afterwards at Jamaica and St Domingo. At the latter he was made brigadier on 9 July 1797, and commanded the troops at Grande Anse. In the early part of 1798 he had 8000 British and colonial troops under him, and was actively engaged against Toussaint l'Ouverture until the evacuation of the island. 
Spencer had been made colonel in the army and aide-de-camp to the king on 1 January 1798. At the end of that year he returned with the 40th to England, and in August 1799, when it had been raised to two battalions, he commanded it in the expedition to The Helder under the duke of York. On 10 September he defended the village of St Martin 'with great spirit and judgment', as Abercromby reported, against the Dutch troops which formed the right column of Brune's army. The republicans were attacked in their turn on 19 September, and Spencer with the 40th, forming part of Pulteney's column, drove the Dutch troops through Oudt Carspel, and along the causeway to Alkmaar. The advance had to be made along a dyke swept by artillery fire, and cost the regiment eleven officers and 150 men. Eventually the British troops had to fall back, owing to the defeat of the Russians at Bergen. The duke of York praised Spencer's conduct. The attack on the French positions was renewed on 2 October, but Pulteney's division was not actively engaged. 
The British forces returned to England in November. At the end of March 1800 the 40th embarked for the Mediterranean, Spencer commanding the 2nd battalion. After some months in Minorca, and after the abandonment of the attempt upon Cadiz, it went to Malta; the four flank companies, under Spencer, accompanied Abercromby's expedition to Egypt. They formed part of the reserve under Moore, and in the landing at Abu Qir Bay, on 8 March 1801, they were among the first troops ashore. In front of them was a sandhill from which the fire was very severe. 'With Moore and Spencer at their head, the 23rd and 28th regiments, and the four flank companies of the 40th, breasted the steep sandhill. Without firing a shot they rushed at one burst to the summit of the ridge, driving headlong before them two battalions of the enemy, and capturing four pieces of field artillery. (Bunbury, 95)' Spencer's conduct was praised by Moore and Abercromby. 
Spencer and his men were in the hottest part of the battle of Alexandria (21 March), and helped to disperse the cavalry who were pressing on the 42nd. On 2 April he was sent to Rosetta with 1000 British infantry, accompanied by 4000 Turks. The French evacuated it on his approach, and on 19 April he took Fort St Julien, which commanded the western branch of the Nile. Hutchinson, in his dispatch, praised Spencer's zeal, activity, and military talents. On 17 August, shortly before the fall of Alexandria, he was in command of a detachment of the 30th, under 200 men, which held an advanced post, known as 'the green hill,' on the east side of the city. Six hundred French sortied to cut off this detachment; but by Spencer's order it charged them with the bayonet, and drove them back. 
After his return to England Spencer served on the staff in Sussex, first as brigadier-general, and from 1 January 1805 as major-general. George III, with whom he was a favourite, made him an equerry, and he spent much time at court. He was rumoured to have secretly married the king's daughter, Princess Augusta, known as Puss ['see under 'George III, daughters of (act. 1766-1857)]. In July 1807 he was appointed to the command of a brigade in the expedition to Copenhagen. The expedition returned in October, and shortly afterwards he was sent to the Mediterranean with about 5000 men. Their secret instructions were to co-operate with Moore against the Russian fleet in the Tagus, to take the French fleet at Cadiz, to assault Ceuta, and to attack the Spanish fleet at Port Mahon. Delayed by bad weather, which dispersed his force, he did not reach Gibraltar until March 1808. He went on to Port Mahon, but, on the outbreak of the Spanish insurrection, returned to Cadiz. Spain and England were nominally at war, and the Spaniards refused to let British troops enter Cadiz. Spencer would not risk his small force by advancing inland; but his appearance off the mouth of the Guadiana encouraged the insurgents in the south of Portugal, and prevented the detachment of troops from Junot's army from aiding Dupont in his attempt on Seville. 
The surrender of Dupont at Baylen on 19 July made it unnecessary for Spencer to remain longer near Cadiz, and on 5 August he joined Wellesley's force at the mouth of the Mondego, anticipating an order which Wellesley had sent him. He was present as second in command at the actions of Rolica and Vimeiro. Wellesley acknowledged his assistance in his dispatches, and recommended him for some mark of the king's favour. 'There never was a braver officer, or one who deserved it better' ('Dispatches', 6.124). It was deferred because of the inquiry into the convention of Cintra, but on 26 April 1809 he was made KB. He also received the gold medal. 
Spencer returned to England in October 1808, as his health would not let him share in Moore's campaign in Spain. He was one of the witnesses at the inquiry into the convention. His evidence was in its favour; but he supported Wellesley's contention that more might have been made of the victory of Vimeiro. He had been made colonel of the 9th garrison battalion on 25 November 1806, and transferred to the 2nd West India regiment on 25 June 1808; and on 31 August 1809 he was made colonel-commandant of the 2nd battalion of the 95th (later the Rifle brigade). 
In May 1810 Spencer went back to the Peninsula to succeed Sir John Coape Sherbrooke as second in command under Wellington, but on the understanding that Graham, who was then at Cadiz, would fill that post if summoned to the army, and would be Wellington's successor in case of need. Spencer was given the command of the first division and the local rank of lieutenant-general (5 May 1810). He commanded his division at Busaco, in the lines of Torres Vedras, in the pursuit of Massena, and at Fuentes d' Onoro. Wellington repeatedly mentioned in his dispatches the able and cordial assistance which Spencer afforded him. He was left in command of the British troops in the north of Portugal, when Wellington was with Beresford near Badajoz, in the latter half of April 1811, and again from the middle of May to the middle of June. He had to watch Marmont; and when the latter moved southward to join Soult and relieve Badajoz, Spencer made a corresponding movement and joined Wellington. 
Napier speaks of Spencer as vacillating when left in separate command, and as 'more noted for intrepidity than for military quickness'. He was one of the officers who wrote despairing letters home at the time of the retreat to Torres Vedras, and helped to shake the faith of the government in Wellington's scheme of defence. In July Graham joined the army from Cadiz, superseding Spencer as second in command. The latter obtained leave to go home, and Wellington reported it without expressing regret. Spencer received the Portuguese order of the Tower and Sword. 
Spencer saw no further service, and passed the rest of his life in retirement. He had become lieutenant-general in the army on 4 June 1811, and was made general on 27 May 1825. He was given the colonelcy of the 40th on 2 July 1818. He was appointed a member of the consolidated board of general officers, and was also made governor of Cork. He died at The Lee, near Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire, on 29 December 1828. 


@@@@@


doc= 26117


Spencer, Charles, third earl of Sunderland (1675-1722), politician, was born on 23 April 1675, the second son of Robert Spencer, second earl of Sunderland (1641-1702), and his wife, Lady Anne Digby (1645/6-1715), the youngest daughter of George Digby, second earl of Bristol. He was born into politics and never left that arena from his earliest youth. He was educated at home; his tutor, Charles Trimnell, later bishop of Norwich and bishop of Winchester, remained a close friend and ally throughout his life. The death of his elder brother, Robert, in September 1688, made Spencer the heir to the peerage, and from then until his father's death he was known as Lord Spencer. The elder Sunderland, despised and reviled as the tool of James II, fled to the Netherlands in December 1688, and was followed by his family in April 1689, where Spencer studied at the University of Leiden. This was a formative period of his upbringing, and the political principles he imbibed in the Netherlands had much to do with his early political radicalism. Spencer was a precocious and highly intelligent young man. He mastered a number of foreign languages and developed a passion for learning and books that was to be a notable attribute throughout his life. 
In April 1690, on the family's return to England, Spencer's father re-entered politics as political manager to William III, though his infamy was such that he could not be given office. His father's connections and eminence brought Spencer into contact with virtually all the leading politicians of the age. It also led to two successive marriages which brought him both wealth and important political liaisons. The first, on 12 January 1695, to Lady Arabella Cavendish (1673-1698), the daughter of Henry Cavendish, second duke of Newcastle upon Tyne, brought him a rich dowry of $25,000 and a brother-in-law who was the greatest boroughmongerer of the age -- John Holles, later duke of Newcastle upon Tyne of the second creation. When Arabella died in 1698, his father contracted an even more important marriage for him with Lady Anne Churchill (1683-1716), the second and favourite daughter of his long-time political associate John Churchill, first duke of Marlborough. The marriage took place on 2 January 1700. 
As soon as he came of age in 1695, Spencer entered the House of Commons as member for Tiverton. His strong party loyalty has been commented on so widely by contemporaries that it cannot be questioned. He was characterized as a violent whig of 'a disagreeable impetuosity and ungrateful manner of speaking' ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 508). At the same time he showed a natural talent for politics and quickly mastered the intricacies of parliamentary practice. His father had joined the tories following the death of Mary II in December 1694, but Spencer remained firmly attached to the whig leaders, especially the lord chancellor and their head, John Somers, Baron Somers. 
By 1701 the tide of public opinion was turning against the tories, accelerated by Louis XIV's recognition of the Pretender on the death of James II in September 1701, and the whigs were returned to power. The change of the ministry was short-lived. The death of William in March 1702 and the accession of Anne resulted in her putting herself into the hands of her friends Marlborough and Sidney Godolphin, first Baron Godolphin. The two ministers endeavoured to steer a middle course between the two parties, though the queen's own predilections determined the return of the senior tory leaders to office as well. At this juncture the elder Sunderland died, on 28 September 1702, and Spencer succeeded to his estate and honours and took his seat in the Lords in the new parliament. 
Sunderland, by his intelligence, the strictness of his principles, his record in the Commons, his keenness in debate, and his grasp of foreign and domestic affairs, sharpened by his stay in the Netherlands and his omnivorous reading, was marked out for a position of prominence. Above all he had a claim to membership in the chief counsels of the party because of his relationship with Marlborough. The whig leaders undoubtedly saw him as a means to return to power. Thus the junto, the ruling council of the whig party, gained a fifth member, replacing the defecting Charles Talbot, duke of Shrewsbury ['see also 'Whig junto]. For the next thirteen years this structure of leadership remained unchanged, a powerful testimony to the durability of party even in its embryonic stage. Sunderland was also much in the confidence of Sarah Churchill, duchess of Marlborough, an outspoken whig and the confidante of the queen. Lady Sunderland, too, was the most actively political of the four Churchill daughters, and was widely celebrated and touted as the Little Whig. 
Though the whigs were broken after their brief return to power in the autumn of 1701, they continued to hold the balance of power in the Lords. It was in this body, in which all their leaders were members, that they began to rebuild their party. Sunderland immediately took an active role in the Lords, though, with the conduct of the main business out of the hands of his party, he had little influence. He was active as a manager in the Lords to defeat the 'Occasional Conformity Bill' in February 1703, to the embarrassment of his father-in-law, for the queen had the measure dear to her heart. He incensed the queen even more when he opposed the bill to allow her consort an allowance in the event she predeceased him. In the next session the whigs were presented with a golden opportunity to compromise Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham, the most active tory minister in the cabinet. In the summer of 1703 a French design to raise an army in Scotland to support an uprising was revealed. Dispatches from and to Nottingham were turned over to Sunderland by his former brother-in-law Newcastle, into whose hands they fell. Sunderland arranged a meeting of the junto lords in December to determine how to exploit Nottingham's apparent effort to conceal elements of the plot. A committee of whig lords was formed to investigate and Sunderland was actively involved. Although they were unable to pass a motion of censure, Nottingham was roughly handled and much incensed. 
When the 'Occasional Conformity Bill' was again passed by the Commons, Sunderland was one of the managers who defeated it in the Lords in December 1703. His detailed estimates on the vote testify to his assiduity and care for detail. Finally, when the tory commissioners of accounts put another junto lord, Edward Russell, earl of Orford, under fire, Sunderland unearthed a precedent from the reign of Charles II that encouraged the Lords to alter the panel when it came up for renewal, thus ensuring the bill's rejection and the lapse of the commission. When the session was over in spring 1704, Nottingham and his tory allies demanded the removal of Archbishop Thomas Tenison and Charles Seymour, sixth duke of Somerset, from the cabinet and another whig peer from office for opposing the 'Occasional Conformity Bill'. In response Nottingham's offer of resignation was accepted, his allies dismissed, and the ministry altered. Sunderland was the leading whig candidate for office and was proposed as secretary to succeed Nottingham. But the queen was not ready to accept the whigs and the post went to Robert Harley, laying the grounds for the bitter enmity which later arose between him and Sunderland. In the autumn the whigs tried to install him as comptroller but were no more successful than before. When parliament reassembled in October, Godolphin and his colleagues were in a dilemma. The tory leaders were now bent on their destruction for being evicted from office. The whigs, likewise disappointed in being promoted, joined them in denouncing the queen's servants. At a critical debate in the Lords on 29 November on the state of the nation, principally on the implications of Scotland's 'Security Act', which seemed to ensure the end of the personal union, Godolphin capitulated, the whigs switched sides, and the government was saved. Sunderland was in the chair and helped to steer and temper the debate, which began the process leading to the 'Act of Union' of 1707 and settled the whig-leaning character of the ministry. 
One proof of the rapprochement was the appointment of Sunderland as envoy-extraordinary to the Holy Roman emperor. The embassy was originally intended to mediate, in conjunction with the Dutch, between the insurgents in Hungary and the emperor. It was considered a thankless and unrewarding assignment, and Godolphin had been unable to recruit anyone for it. But with the death of Leopold I and the accession of Joseph I it was combined with a mission of condolences and congratulations. The junto lord Charles Montagu, Baron Halifax, proposed Sunderland as a means of edging him into office, and the queen agreed. The appointment, made on 17 June, gave him valuable insight into foreign affairs and first-hand knowledge of England's principal allies. 
On his return at the beginning of 1706 Sunderland immediately attended parliament, where he was caught up in the debates on the 'Regency Act' and spoke strongly on behalf of the court whig measure, allowing office-holders to retain their seats in the Commons during the six-month period for which parliament was to survive a dead monarch. When the session was over the whigs once more pressed their demands for a seat for Sunderland in the cabinet as secretary, the opening wedge in their return to office. Throughout the summer and autumn the pressure mounted. Godolphin, seeing no other option, advised the queen to capitulate, but secretly advised by Harley she adamantly refused. Harley also worked successfully to detach some of the moderate whigs from the junto, which weakened their efforts. Even when Marlborough returned from the continent he was unable to budge her. It was only resolved when Sir Charles Hedges resigned voluntarily as southern secretary to make way for him. On 3 December 1706 he finally received the seals of office. 
As soon as Sunderland entered office he attacked his new duties with all the energy and enthusiasm that always characterized his activities. The job was demanding, requiring long hours in the office, preparing and often writing fair copies of letters to the English envoys abroad assigned to his department, acting as the queen's and cabinet's conduit to foreign powers and commanders in the field -- especially onerous in wartime -- co-ordinating preparations for expeditions, handling a large flow of domestic correspondence, and attending cabinet meetings. He also had to be in regular attendance on the queen, even when she was out of town at Windsor or elsewhere, and assiduously appear in parliament, where he was a principal government spokesman. On taking office, he was immediately engaged in preparing reinforcements to send to Spain, and it gave him an early exposure to the frustrations of dealing with bureaucrats. Initially he seemed to have moderated his behaviour, to the pleasant surprise of the queen. In the Lords he was a principal manager in the passage of the treaty of union with Scotland in 1707. He also was heavily involved in negotiations for the management of Scotland after the union, though when he was sidetracked for several weeks by illness he and the other whig leaders were outmanoeuvred by Godolphin, who kept control in his own hands. During 1707 Harley, violently opposed to Sunderland's appointment and the admission of more junto members to the cabinet, fought a rearguard action against them. Senior appointments in the church were the most visible battleground. As Harley had the ear of the queen, Godolphin and the junto were on the defensive. Sunderland entered into cabal with his whig colleagues several times during the summer, where they considered ways of forcing the queen's hand. It was not until early 1708 that the crisis was resolved. The espionage of one of Harley's clerks compromised him badly and the whigs took up the attack in parliament. Harley, garnering support from moderate whigs and tories, almost pulled off a coup, removing Godolphin, Sunderland, and their adherents, but it was finally aborted by the intervention of Marlborough. 
The seeds for the destruction of the ministry were sown, however, and the alienation of the queen from the duchess of Marlborough, who was replaced in the queen's confidence by her dresser, Abigail Masham, exacerbated the situation. When parliamentary elections were held in May 1708, the tories and Harley, in disarray following their removal from office and embarrassed by the aborted Jacobite invasion of Scotland in February, were routed. Sunderland, who managed the transfer to London of Scots implicated in the invasion, used their presence to intrigue against Marlborough and Godolphin and elect a whig slate of representative peers for the new parliament. Marlborough and Godolphin triumphed over the whig challenge, returning twelve of the sixteen. The queen was so incensed that she demanded Sunderland's resignation, and only with the greatest difficulty was Godolphin able to persuade her to accept an apology instead. Sunderland was more successful in supporting a whig bill to abolish the Scottish privy council, considered a creature of the treasurer's. Aside from the elections and the Jacobite invasion, Sunderland's main concerns were foreign and military affairs. He had responsibility for France and southern Europe and was heavily engaged in planning and supervising the campaigns in Spain and Italy and an abortive attempt to land an expeditionary force on the Atlantic coast of France. 
Flushed with their victory at the polls, the whigs were now determined to gain admittance for more of their leaders into the cabinet. When James Butler, second duke of Ormond, had resigned as lord lieutenant of Ireland, Godolphin was able to refuse their demands to replace him with Thomas Wharton, earl of Wharton, adding the post to the existing responsibility as lord president of Thomas Herbert, eighth earl of Pembroke. Sunderland now acted as intermediary between the whigs, Marlborough and Godolphin, and the queen. In return for the resignation of the queen's husband, Prince George, as lord high admiral, to be replaced by Pembroke, and the appointment of Somers as lord president and Wharton as lord lieutenant of Ireland, the whigs agreed to support the government's financial legislation. When the queen's obduracy put the whole scheme in jeopardy, it was saved by the death of Prince George on 28 October and the breakdown of her resolve. The appointments were made, Peter King, the whig nominee, was selected for speaker, and the legislative session at least started smoothly. But the contest for power between the treasurer and the court party and the whigs continued unabated. The whigs were able to dominate the hearings on controverted elections in the Commons, nullifying the elections of a number of tories, though Harley escaped their net. They also displaced several nominees of the treasurer in key committee posts. Sunderland continued to try to wrest control of Scotland from the treasurer, but appeals to seat the remaining whig candidates as representative peers failed. He did work actively to relocate the protestant refugees, known as the Palatines after their homeland, driven out of the Rhineland by France, and guided their 'Naturalization Bill' through the house. The majority were sent on to Ireland and ultimately to North America. As his responsibilities extended to those territories, Sunderland also worked closely with Wharton in Dublin and spent long hours planning an expeditionary force to seize French Canada, only to see it held up and abandoned because of the pending peace negotiations. After the success of the allied campaign in 1708 and the bankruptcy of the French treasury, Louis XIV had made overtures for peace. This resulted in another apple of discord between Marlborough and Godolphin and the junto. The whigs wanted to secure Dutch support for the protestant succession and were willing to guarantee a series of Dutch-occupied fortresses in the Spanish Netherlands as a bar against a surprise invasion. The admission of Somers to the cabinet as lord president was especially important to the whigs, as it would give the former chancellor a role in any peace negotiations. Marlborough, who controlled British diplomacy in northern Europe, was wary of a barrier treaty which could be grounds for reprisal by the tories if they regained control of the government. The general found it expedient to accept a co-envoy to avoid sole responsibility. After several candidates were considered for the post, including Sunderland, the choice went to Charles Townshend, second Viscount Townshend. Townshend returned with a barrier treaty, but Louis XIV rejected the peace terms he was offered and the war continued. Meanwhile Sunderland and his junto colleagues were involved in a continuing series of disputes with Godolphin and the queen. They came to a head over the queen's reluctance to replace Pembroke with an Admiralty commission headed by Orford. Orford himself insisted upon certain guarantees that almost sank the scheme until he finally gave way, and the new commission passed the great seal in November. 
When parliament met in autumn 1709, Sunderland and his colleagues had good reason to be pleased. Sunderland finally found the queen easy with him, though Marlborough attributed her co-operativeness to resignation rather than contentment. Sunderland had the pleasure of seeing the queen ratify the barrier treaty, which was essentially a whig project. Though the negotiations had technically lain in the department of Harley's successor, Henry Boyle, as northern secretary, Sunderland and Somers, in conjunction with Godolphin, had been responsible for its direction. Over Marlborough's strenuous objections they did not include a clause binding the Dutch to 'no peace without Spain', and the general, though a co-plenipotentiary, refused to sign. In parliament the spirit of the tories appeared to be broken. Legislation passed so quickly that all the money bills were in by Christmas and the funds voted were the greatest yet given. What finally undid Sunderland and his colleagues was an inflammatory high-church parson. 
Dr Henry Sacheverell delivered a flaming sermon before the lord mayor of London on 9 November 1709. A high-church diatribe, it provoked the ministry into impeaching him to try to put quietus to the tory opposition. Opinion is divided as to whether Godolphin, who was singled out for attack by Sacheverell, or Sunderland was the strongest proponent, although the latter is usually given the responsibility for the debacle that followed. Unquestionably Sunderland was on the attack. He made strenuous efforts to curb the tory press, closing down two short-lived newspapers and arresting Delariviere Manley for her slander against the government in the 'New Atlantis'. Concurrently Harley was building a new coalition to challenge Godolphin and working secretly with the queen to undermine him. The first challenges came early in January, when the queen ignored Marlborough's recommendations in two senior military appointments. In retaliation the incensed Marlborough threatened to resign his commissions if the queen did not dismiss Mrs Masham. The general even proposed an address by the Commons to the queen for Masham's removal and, more audaciously, demanded his appointment as captain-general be made for life. The queen bestirred herself, however, and Sunderland alone among the chief ministers supported the ultimatums, so the duke gave way, and the queen and Harley won the first test. The next contest came over two church appointments, for two bishoprics which fell vacant in February. Sunderland immediately proposed candidates on behalf of the junto, but they were rejected. 
It was the Sacheverell trial which now occupied everyone's attention. The government mobilized a strong team of prosecutors and won the battle but lost the war. For though Sacheverell was found guilty the punishment was so mild as to be without effect. The tories used the occasion of the trial to whip up demonstrations and riots. Sunderland as secretary was responsible for maintaining public order. He marshalled troops to quell the rioters and conducted several months of investigations to try to determine responsibility for the disturbances, but to no avail. Emboldened by her recent successes, the queen now peremptorily informed Godolphin that she was appointing Shrewsbury as lord chamberlain. Soon afterwards she insisted on adding Masham's brother to the list of colonels to be promoted general over Marlborough's objections. Most ominously of all, rumours began to circulate that Sunderland was to be dismissed. As the special object of both Harley's and the queen's hatred, the most vehement of the junto and the son-in-law of Marlborough, he was an ideal wedge to dislodge the government. Anne, acting on the advice of Harley, who in turn had won over Shrewsbury and the difficult Somerset, ordered Sunderland to turn in his seals of office on 13 June 1710. She offered him a pension of $3000 a year, as there was no proper reason for discharging him, which he refused. Godolphin was the next to go, replaced by a commission including Harley, who was also appointed as chancellor of the exchequer. The dissolution of parliament and a call for new elections brought the resignation of the rest of the whig ministers. Marlborough alone, isolated and abroad, remained. 
For the next four years Sunderland now took on the leadership of the whigs in opposition. Godolphin was old and ailing, and died in 1712. Somers, though younger than Godolphin, was also increasingly infirm. The vain Halifax was wooed by Harley (who became earl of Oxford) and his colleague Henry St John, Viscount Bolingbroke, and Orford went into retirement. Only Wharton displayed his usual energy and partisanship. Marlborough, urged by his friends to retain his command, could do so only by remaining detached from politics at home, and he eventually went into exile on the continent in November 1712. Sunderland worked vigorously for the party in the elections that took place in the autumn of 1710. When Marlborough, too, was disgraced, Sunderland was the natural person to reconstitute the alliance between his family and his friends. He seemed to have learned to exercise more self-control. Once out of office he became a frequent and respected speaker in the Lords. He was a consistent and effective debater during the dark days of the whigs from 1710 to 1714. 
The last four years of Anne's reign, dominated by an Oxford-led ministry, were frustrating and even dangerous times for Sunderland and his colleagues. The tories were bent on destroying their opponents, no less vindictive than the whigs had been when in power. In investigations into the Spanish campaign, particularly the defeat at Almanza in 1707, Sunderland, as secretary responsible for Spain, was singled out for criticism. The whig concern for the Palatines and their naturalization also incited tory ire. The repeal of the naturalization was passed in the Commons in autumn 1710 but failed in the Lords, where the whigs possessed a frail majority. The Commons, frustrated by the rejection of the bill, passed condemnatory resolutions on Sunderland as the principal protector of the Palatines and even considered his impeachment. The idea was dropped when it was not supported by the court, as was consideration of an address to the queen asking that Sunderland be excluded from her councils forever. Another reversal of a whig landmark in which Sunderland had been heavily involved came with the repeal of the barrier treaty in 1711. In autumn 1711 Sunderland was one of the leaders in the Lords of the successful effort to pass a 'No peace without Spain' resolution to be sent to the queen as a threat to the tory ministry if they compromised the long-standing British war aims. As a quid pro quo for the support of Nottingham and his relations, Sunderland and the whigs agreed to betray their dissenter allies, and the infamous 'Occasional Conformity Bill' was now passed. Other minor victories were won in parliament in the remaining years of the reign, notably the rejection of the commercial treaty with France proposed as part of the peace settlement, but it was divisions within the tories themselves, notably the competition between Oxford and Bolingbroke, that eventually denied them the support of the queen and prepared the way for the restoration of Marlborough and the whigs to power -- thwarted only by the death of the queen herself before it could be consummated. 
When George I succeeded to the throne in August 1714, Sunderland and Marlborough must have thought that their restoration to favour was at hand, but they soon discovered this was not to be the case. The king was wary of Sunderland's impetuous behaviour and Marlborough's ambition. Both found themselves excluded from the list of lords justices appointed to manage the country until the new king arrived. While the other junto leaders were assigned seats in the cabinet, Sunderland, though sworn of the privy council on 1 October 1714, was sidetracked with an appointment as lord lieutenant of Ireland and the prospect of political exile by having to take up his post in Dublin. The new whig ministry was headed by Townshend as northern secretary, the post to which Sunderland had made his claim, with James Stanhope as southern secretary. Though Townshend and Halifax, first lord of the Treasury, were the senior ministers in terms of influence with the new king, they were joined by the two Hanoverian ministers, Bothmer and Bernstorff, along with Marlborough, to make up the inner circle of advisers. Marlborough's diplomatic skills and personal charm allowed him to extend his influence with George I, which was to Sunderland's benefit. 
When Wharton died in 1715 (in the same year as Somers and Halifax) Sunderland was encouraged by messages sent via the duchess of Marlborough through his wife that a more congenial post would be found him in London. Sunderland never made the voyage to Ireland, on the grounds of poor health, and on 28 August 1715 he succeeded Wharton as lord privy seal. Still frustrated by his exclusion from real power, he began to build a connection of other discontented whigs and some tories. At the same time he shared the distrust of Townshend and others of the prince and princess of Wales and the prince's favourite, John Campbell, second duke of Argyll, long a rival to Marlborough in the army. Sunderland and his father-in-law now worked behind the scenes to oust Townshend and assume control of the ministry. Their machinations were disrupted for a time in the first part of 1716, first by the death of Lady Sunderland, the duke's favourite daughter, on 29 April 1716. The duke in turn was felled by a paralytic stroke on 28 May, and though he made a partial recovery he never regained his health and influence. Nevertheless, the plans had been concerted, the king had been seduced, and after frequent consultation with his former in-laws and General William Cadogan, Marlborough's long-time deputy, Sunderland and Cadogan embarked for the continent. Sunderland travelled ostensibly to Aix-la-Chapelle, to take the waters, but from there went on to Hanover, where the king was in residence. During the king's absence the prince of Wales, as regent, along with his more popular and astute wife, ingratiated themselves with the public and the politicians. Able to converse comfortably in English, and much more social and hospitable than the reclusive king, they were represented by Sunderland as trying to curry favour with the public at the expense of the king. Townshend, who had remained in London in charge of the government, was further represented as being in conspiracy with the prince and princess. Townshend was also accused of working with his brother-in-law Robert Walpole, now first lord of the Treasury, to hold up the signing of a commercial treaty with France, to which the king was committed and for which Stanhope was responsible. Sunderland, following Marlborough's advice, won over the suspicious king and James Stanhope, the secretary in residence, as well. As a result, soon after the king returned Townshend was dismissed and Walpole and their followers resigned. The way was now clear for a wholesale reconstitution of the ministry. Stanhope moved to the Treasury, Sunderland succeeded Townshend as northern secretary on 15 April 1717, and, with Cadogan now the 'de facto' head of the army, Argyll was also deprived of access to power. Stanhope, the son of a diplomatist, had spent a good part of his life abroad and was far more interested and comfortable with responsibility for foreign affairs than finance and patronage. Even though Sunderland had served in this capacity in the previous reign, Stanhope remained the dominant voice in foreign affairs. When the ministers presented to the imperial representative the draft of what became the Quadruple Alliance, in which the emperor, Charles VI, renounced all claims to the crown of Spain, Stanhope joined Sunderland in presenting the draft. As a consequence of Stanhope's clear preference to deal with foreign affairs, within a year he and Sunderland traded posts, on 20 March 1718, four days after Sunderland also assumed the post of lord president of the council. He was now in his element, in charge of patronage, domestic policy, and the management of parliament. 
For the next three years Sunderland and Stanhope, with the king's full confidence, controlled the ministry, both at home and abroad. It is difficult to determine the respective roles and authority of the two senior ministers. Stanhope was fully occupied with foreign affairs, a charge he found congenial. It also permitted him to resume his trips abroad to negotiate directly on behalf of the king. Sunderland, who was also experienced in diplomacy, found domestic politics more to his liking and took the lead mending fences at home, managing patronage, entertaining members of parliament, and acting as the ministry's chief liaison to the parties. As secretary Stanhope had shared that office with Joseph Addison, a weak and ineffectual minister. When Stanhope was elevated to the peerage, on 12 July 1717, this left the leadership of the house in weak hands and unable to withstand the attacks of Walpole and his party. When Sunderland took the Treasury he was replaced by James Craggs the younger, a much more supple and able politician, who shared the management of the Commons with John Aislabie as chancellor of the exchequer. But then the split in the whig ranks was soon followed by a split in the royal family. 
In December 1717 the prince of Wales, in arranging for the christening of his son, decided that the child would have only royal sponsors. But Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, as lord chamberlain, and with the king's support, asserted his prerogative and also stood sponsor at the ceremony, to the prince's dismay. Words were exchanged, the duke misinterpreting the prince's remarks, and the prince was ordered to apologize by the king. Failing to do so, the prince was banished from court, care of his children was assumed by the king, and the prince and princess were isolated from the court and the ministers for more than two years. Walpole, Townshend, and their adherents now rallied around the prince, who thus legitimized their opposition and began a tradition that was to create a precedent repeated in the next two reigns. For Sunderland and Stanhope it left their ministry in a precarious position, as the opposition was joined by the lord chancellor, William, first Earl Cowper, and other politicians loyal to the heir apparent and his supporters. Though Stanhope tried to dissuade Cowper from resigning, it was Sunderland who delivered him the king's ultimatum, that he either absent himself from the prince's court or give up his post. The ministers now planned a series of measures to bolster their position. The 'Septennial Act', passed in 1716, gave the whigs an extra four years to consolidate their power before submitting to elections for the Commons. Early in 1717 the ministers began to sound their supporters among the bishops about plans to repeal the 'Occasional Conformity Act'. They also discussed a plan to reform the two English universities, both tory strongholds, by placing the appointment of all officers, heads of houses, members of colleges, and so on, in the hands of the king. Stanhope even wanted to repeal the 'Test and Corporation Acts' in so far as they affected protestant dissenters, but Cowper was equivocal and Sunderland was opposed. No action was taken at the time. In December 1718 Stanhope, now more confident, introduced a bill repealing both the 'Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts' as well as modifying the 'Test Act'. Sunderland seconded it, but, in its course through the Lords, Cowper, now in opposition, moved to strike the clause affecting the 'Test Act', and Stanhope, under pressure from Sunderland, gave way. In this altered state it passed both houses, though not without vociferous opposition from Walpole. The 'Relief Act' of 1719 clarified provisions of the 'Corporation Act' and, in conjunction with regular 'Indemnity Acts', allowed many protestant dissenters to remain members of corporations without having to conform to the established church. A bill to reform the universities was drawn up but not submitted after other reform schemes were rejected in parliament. But the great 'cause celebre' of the session was the 'Peerage Bill', a measure to limit the number of members in the Lords and convert the sixteen representative peers of Scotland into a hereditary group of twenty-five. The ostensible justification was to forestall a repeat of Oxford's simultaneous creation of twelve peers in 1711 to gain a majority in the Lords. But the real justification had as much to do with the desire of Sunderland and Stanhope to bar the prince of Wales from adopting a similar scheme on his accession with the potential of overturning their base of power in the Lords. It was also a means to prevent the king's German favourites from acquiring peerages. The opposition was so strong that Stanhope withdrew the bill in April. But the ministers were determined to persevere. The 'Peerage Bill', the 'Universities Bill', and even the repeal of the 'Septennial Act' were considered over the summer. In the last-named case this probably meant permitting parliament to sit at the pleasure of the king with a mandatory dissolution only upon the death of the sovereign, which was the practice in Ireland. When the 'Peerage Bill' was reintroduced the following session it passed the Lords but was voted down in the Commons, the victorious opposition once again led by Walpole. With this defeat Sunderland and Stanhope abandoned the rest of their reform measures. Sunderland's attention now turned to consolidating the national debt and reducing the burden of interest, a process begun by Walpole before his departure from the Treasury. At the beginning of 1720 the chancellor of the exchequer, John Aislabie, introduced into the Commons a scheme proposed by the South Sea Company to take over the unfunded national debt, which passed in April, over the strong opposition of the Bank of England, and sent South Sea stock soaring. 
After their setbacks in parliament, Sunderland and his colleagues now realized the danger of their position and the need to bring back the dissident whigs in order to maintain their control of the government. A further issue was the interference of the king's Hanoverian ministers, especially Bernstorff, who it was believed was working to unseat them. For their part Walpole and Townshend recognized that, however effective they were in debate and in thwarting the ministry's measures, it was unlikely they would return to power so long as Sunderland and Stanhope retained the king's confidence. An accommodation was reached. In April Walpole was readmitted as paymaster-general and Townshend as lord president. Though still in lesser roles, they were at least back in office; Stanhope and Sunderland had consolidated the ministry's control of parliament, the Germans were forced to decamp, and the king and his son were reconciled, though barely so. 
The contest for the king's favour and control of the government now was focused in the court rather than in parliament. But a new crisis caused a dramatic change in the political scene. After South Sea stock skyrocketed in price in June 1720, following its assumption of the unfunded national debt, the price began a rapid decline in July ['see 'Promoters of the South Sea Bubble]. By September its bankers ceased payments, a panic ensued, and parliament, which convened in December, was out for blood. Sunderland, as first lord of the Treasury, was especially vulnerable. A series of accidents combined with parliamentary hostility to weaken the ministry. Stanhope died on 5 February 1721, following a stroke while vigorously defending the government in the Lords the previous day, and was succeeded as northern secretary by Townshend. The younger James Craggs died of smallpox on 16 February and was succeeded as southern secretary by a Sunderland ally, John Carteret, second Baron Carteret. Aislabie was expelled from the Commons on 8 March, and the elder James Craggs died (a possible suicide) on 16 March. Though Sunderland was cleared of corruption after a long debate in the Commons on 15 March, thanks to a brilliant defence by Walpole, the price of his deliverance was his resignation. He was succeeded by Walpole. 
Sunderland was now on the defensive, but by taking the post of groom of the stole he retained his access to and also the confidence of the king. For the next year there was a running battle between Sunderland and Walpole for control. Each had supporters in key cabinet posts. The final test came with the dissolution of parliament in March 1722 and the ensuing elections. Sunderland sought support wherever he could find it. Most significant was his concerted effort to win the backing of the tories, even the Jacobites. To do so he resumed negotiations with Bolingbroke, exiled since 1715 in France. Bolingbroke had negotiated with successive ministers for a pardon and in turn offered to bring the Jacobites into the fold and declare allegiance to George I and his successors. The pardon was drafted, and in the election contests Sunderland entered into cabal with the Jacobites and every possible ally to return members of parliament who would follow his lead rather than Walpole's. But the success of his efforts was never to be determined, for Sunderland fell ill and died of pleurisy on 19 April 1722 at his London residence, Sunderland House, Piccadilly, just as the returns began to trickle in. By default Walpole now succeeded as premier minister. Sunderland was buried on 1 May at Brington, Northamptonshire, near his country seat of Althorp. 
Sunderland is a study in contrasts. In his youth a fierce and vehement partisan, in his maturity he became a supple, if not devious, skilled politician, in contrast to Stanhope, who was never at ease in the Commons and never learned to curb his temper. Sunderland's dealings with the Jacobites raises questions about his principles, but he was regarded as personally honest in office, a rare quality in an Augustan politician. Though he was married three times, questions have been raised about both his and Stanhope's sexual preferences. He and his first wife, Lady Arabella Cavendish, had one daughter, Frances (died 1742), who married Henry Howard, afterwards fourth earl of Carlisle (1694-1758) ['see under 'Howard, Charles, third earl of Carlisle]. With his second wife, Lady Anne Churchill, he had three sons and two daughters. His eldest son, Robert ('b'. 1701), succeeded him as fourth earl of Sunderland, but died on 15 September 1729. His second son, Charles Spencer (1706-1758), succeeded his brother as fifth earl of Sunderland, and in 1733 became, in succession to his aunt (Marlborough's eldest daughter, Henrietta), third duke of Marlborough. The third son, John (1708-1746), succeeded to the Althorp estate when Charles became duke of Marlborough, and was father of John Spencer, first Earl Spencer. Sunderland's daughter Anne (died 1769) married William Bateman, first Viscount Bateman, and Diana (died 1735) became the first wife of John Russell, fourth duke of Bedford. His three children with his third wife, Judith Tichborne, whom he had married on 5 December 1717, all predeceased him. After his death Judith married Sir Robert Sutton (1671/2-1746). She died on 17 May 1749. 
Condemned by Jonathan Swift and others for his intemperate and precipitate behaviour, Sunderland became the most subtle and successful of politicians. Although devious and pragmatic, he was a zealous defender of liberty in his youth and eschewed corruption in terms of personal enrichment from government coffers. He was a man of learning and taste, vying with his arch-rival Oxford for the mantle of the greatest book collector and connoisseur in Britain of his time. Because of the confiscation and destruction of his personal papers on the orders of Walpole, and the similar fate of the papers of many of his colleagues, including Somers, Halifax, Cowper, and Walpole himself, the full extent of his management and manoeuvres in the troubled and dangerous political tempests of the early Hanoverian period will never be precisely known. It is safe to say that few equalled him for sheer brilliance, audacity, astuteness, and shrewdness in the politics of his age. 


@@@@@


doc= 26118


Spencer, Charles, third duke of Marlborough (1706-1758), politician and army officer, was born on 22 November 1706, the third of the five children of Charles Spencer, third earl of Sunderland (1675-1722), a politician, and his second wife, Lady Anne Churchill (1683-1716). As the grandson of the first duke, John Churchill, 'stat magni nominis umbra' ('he stands the shadow of a mighty name') would have been an appropriate motto. His path to the Sunderland peerage was blocked by an elder brother, Robert, and to the Marlborough peerage by a cousin, but the first died of fever in 1729 and the second, William Godolphin, marquess of Blandford, died in 1731 after a drinking spree at Oxford. In 1733 Spencer inherited the dukedom on the death of his aunt Henrietta (duchess in her own right), but since the redoubtable dowager duchess Sarah Churchill retained possession of Blenheim Palace during her lifetime, he was dependent upon her precarious favour. 
After schooling at Hampstead and at Eton College Spencer made the conventional grand tour, and on his return adopted a lavish lifestyle, largely on expectations. His grandmother, the dowager duchess, intended to bring him into parliament for Woodstock in 1727 but was warned of a possible petition against him since he was still just under age: she substituted his cousin Lord Blandford, and Charles Spencer never served an apprenticeship in the Commons. He took his seat in the upper house as Lord Sunderland in January 1730. His close associates were the Fox brothers and their friend Lord Hervey, but his grandmother's hatred of Walpole took him into opposition. Although he was neither a ready debater nor a good speaker (his grandmother complained that he spoke through his teeth), his rank made him a valuable recruit and the glory of his grandfather's name lent him a vicarious authority in military matters. In his first session he voted for a place bill, a favourite nostrum of the opposition, and signed a protest, but his interest soon waned: he attended only five days in his first session and eight in 1731. His elevation to the dukedom raised his profile, and after taking his seat again in January 1734 his attendance increased considerably. 
In February 1734, in the aftermath of the excise crisis, during which Walpole had secured the dismissal of several army officers who were opposition MPs, Marlborough was put up to move that the king should be deprived of the power to dismiss officers without recourse to parliament. Lord Hervey, an ally of Walpole, reported to Henry Fox that Marlborough had been 'extremely frightened, said but little, and what he did say was neither remarkably well or ill' ('Lord Hervey and his Friends', 193). Condemned as an unwarrantable encroachment on the royal prerogative, his motion was defeated by 100 votes to 62. Marlborough continued in opposition and was a frequent visitor at the court of Frederick, prince of Wales. In 1737, when the prince had a spectacular quarrel with the king and was turned out of St James's Palace, Marlborough was reported at Carlton House with Chesterfield and Carteret distributing printed copies of the king's forthright message. But his financial position, as a result of gambling, fox-hunting, and building, was becoming desperate, and he had quarrelled violently with his grandmother, who complained that he was stolid and far from entertaining, and whose preference for his younger brother John was marked. A further cause of bad feeling had been his marriage, on 23 May 1732, to Elizabeth (died 1761), the daughter and heir of Thomas Trevor, second Baron Trevor, and his wife, Elizabeth Burrell. She was a granddaughter of an erstwhile enemy of the great duke and one of the tory peers created in 1712 to carry the treaty of Utrecht. In March 1738 Marlborough abandoned opposition, signalling his adherence to Walpole by accepting the colonelcy of the 38th foot, and embarked, belatedly, on a military career. 'The Fox has stolen my goose' (Walpole, 'Reminiscences', 90), was his grandmother's tart comment. She retaliated by changing her will yet again to his disadvantage, and a series of legal actions followed, culminating in her appearance before Lord Hardwicke to declare that she would never trust Marlborough with his grandfather's diamond-studded sword, since he would only pick out the diamonds and pawn them. 
Marlborough's political conversion brought quick rewards. Within six months he was made a lord of the bedchamber; he was appointed lord lieutenant of Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire in 1739 and given the Garter in 1741. He repaid Walpole by defending him against Carteret's motion of dismissal in February 1741, moving that to attempt 'to inflict any kind of Punishment, on any person without allowing him an opportunity of his Defence, or, without proof of crime, is contrary to natural justice, the fundamental laws of this realm, and the ancient, established usage of parliament' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 11, 1739-41, 1218). His motion put the opposition into some disarray, and at length they decided to treat it as a truism, allowing it to pass unopposed. His attendance in parliament improved again, and in the critical session 1741-2, which saw the fall of Walpole, he was present on thirty-four days. His connection with Henry Fox, who described him as 'the most intimate and dear friend from childhood' (Fox-Strangways, 2.106), and whose secret wedding he attended in 1744, brought him into the duke of Cumberland's orbit and improved his career chances. He was promoted brigadier-general in 1743 and fought with some distinction at Dettingen, but in the recriminations after the battle followed his commander-in-chief Lord Stair by resigning his bedchamber place and colonelcy in protest against the conduct of the Hanoverian troops. His motives, however, were mixed. A private reason was to avoid further separation from his wife, to whom he was devoted, explaining to her that he had forced 'a pretext to quit' by demanding a promotion which the king emphatically refused (Rowse, 49-50). He signed a Lords protest against the Hanoverians in December 1743 and in January 1744 seconded Sandwich's motion, arguing that to employ Hanoverians in future would risk the allies turning their arms on each other in 'a scene of slaughter' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 13, 1743-7, 566). Behaviour so pointedly offensive to the king is not easily explained. Horace Walpole thought he was still paying court to the dowager duchess. That scarcely explains Lord Stair's conduct. If true, Marlborough's grandmother was unimpressed, remarking that, like most recruits, her grandson had joined the army when drunk and left it when sober. The step would have ruined Marlborough's prospects, but in February 1744 reports of an imminent Jacobite invasion gave him the opportunity to move a loyal address and to join Stair in an audience with George II, when he pledged his life and fortune (of which there was little left) to the king. Stair was reappointed commander-in-chief, and Marlborough was reinstated and promoted major-general in 1745 and lieutenant-general in 1747. The reconciliation was complete when in 1746 Marlborough moved the Lords' congratulations on Cumberland's victory at Culloden. 
The treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748 brought a change in Marlborough's career, following Henry Fox's political progress. In 1749 he was brought in by the Pelhams as lord steward of the household, a post he held until 1755, when he became a privy councillor. In 1750, 1752, and 1755 he was one of the lords justices who acted as regents during the king's absences in Hanover. This suggests that George II was at last getting over the detestation he had felt in the 1730s, when he seldom referred to Marlborough without some opprobrious epithet -- 'scoundrel, rascal or blackguard' (Hervey, 'Some Materials', 246). His electoral interests were not negligible. In 1754 he was a leader in seizing Oxfordshire for the whigs, and, though the coup could not be repeated, he retained one seat on a compromise. To his two seats at Woodstock, which gave little trouble after 1734, he added an interest in Oxford city and property at Heytesbury, and he also looked after the Spencer interest at St Albans during the minority of his nephew John from 1746 to 1755. In the political reshuffle after Pelham's death in 1754 he became lord privy seal, which post he retained from January to December 1755. When that office was needed for Lord Gower, Marlborough became master of the ordnance, which brought him into prominence at the outbreak of the Seven Years' War in 1756. The following year there was an unpleasant political skirmish, when he was sharply criticized for taking $10 a day in pay and allowances and was obliged to repay the excess on $4. The same year he was appointed with Lord George Sackville and General Waldegrave to investigate the fiasco of the attack upon Rochefort. Their report was highly critical of Sir John Mordaunt, who was subsequently court-martialled but acquitted. It was therefore understandable that Marlborough should be offered the command of a similar expedition against St Malo in 1758, with Sackville as his second in command but widely regarded as director of the enterprise. Despite a major effort involving eighteen ships of the line and 14,000 men, little was achieved, though a number of French ships and stores were burnt. The British withdrawal was so hasty that Marlborough left his silver spoons behind, which the French commander politely returned. As soon as the troops reached home Marlborough was appointed to command the army in Germany, again with Sackville as his immediate subordinate, to collaborate with Prince Ferdinand. Once more his strong dislike for the Hanoverians showed itself, and soon after arriving at Emden he threatened resignation rather than be outranked by the Hanoverian General Spoerchen: he was not prepared, he told Pitt, to be no more than 'cleavers of wood and drawers of water to the Hanoverians' ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 1.337-8). Pitt hastily sorted out the problem, and Marlborough was gazetted 'general over all' on 29 August ('GM', 1st ser., 28, 1758, 379). He died in camp at Munster on 20 October 1758 and was buried at Blenheim in the chapel on 21 November. 
Marlborough's death attracted attention for a bizarre reason. In November 1757 he had received an anonymous letter demanding money and threatening to destroy him without fear of discovery. Clearly poison was hinted at. More letters were received and meetings arranged, and in May 1758 William Barnard, the son of a respectable London merchant, was arrested and put on trial. After producing character witnesses and evidence that his financial affairs were by no means desperate, he was acquitted. Five months later the duke was dead. But the cause of death was almost certainly dysentery, and Calcraft reported to Henry Fox that Marlborough's lungs were so decayed that he could not have survived another year. 
Contemporary references to Marlborough were often disparaging. We do not have to accept the dowager duchess's view of her 'ungrateful and very foolish grandson' (Yorke, 1.219), since admiration did not come easily to her. Lord Shelburne, just beginning his army career when Marlborough commanded in Germany, described him later as: 'an easy-going, good-natured, gallant man, who took a strange fancy for serving, to get rid of the ennui attending a private life, without any military experience or the common habits of a man of business, or indeed capacity for either, and no force of character whatever. ('Life', ed. Fitzmaurice, 1.349)' Horace Walpole thought him personally brave, but inexperienced -- 'capable of giving the most judicious advice and of following the worst... bashfulness and indistinctness in his articulation... confirmed a very mean opinion of his understanding' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 2.114; 3.24). Smollett was kinder: the duke was 'brave beyond all question, generous to profusion, and good-natured to excess' (Smollett, 3.8). The late start to his army career and his comparatively early death meant that Marlborough achieved supreme command only at the end of his life: though the St Malo campaign was hardly a success, no blame fell upon the duke, who was at once appointed to the German command. 
Marlborough was succeeded by his eldest son, George Spencer (1739-1817), as fourth duke. His daughter Diana (1734-1808) became known as an artist ['see 'Beauclerk, Lady Diana]. His younger sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 26119


Lord Charles Spencer (1740-1820) and Lord Robert (1747-1831), both had long political careers. The former, who was born on 31 March 1740 and educated at Eton (1747-54) and Christ Church, Oxford (1756-9), sat for Oxfordshire from 1761 to 1790 and again from 1796 to 1801. He held office as a lord of the Admiralty under Lord North, adhered to the Fox-North coalition, and went over with Portland in 1794 to support Pitt. From 1801 until 1806 he was joint postmaster-general and from 1808 until his death a lord of the bedchamber. He married on 2 October 1762 Mary Beauclerk (died 1812), the daughter and heir of Vere, first Baron Vere, and had two sons. His later life was a desperate effort to find and retain some office that would keep him financially afloat, and he was obliged to flee to the continent in 1818, at the age of seventy-eight, to escape his creditors. He died in Petersham, Surrey, on 16 June 1820. 


@@@@@


doc= 26120


Spencer, Dorothy, countess of Sunderland (1617-1684), subject of poetry, was born early in October 1617 at Syon House, the London seat of her grandfather Henry Percy, earl of Northumberland (1564-1632), and baptized in the nearby village of Isleworth on 5 October 1617. She was the eldest of thirteen children of Robert Sidney, second earl of Leicester (1595-1677), and Dorothy Percy (1598-1659). Her brothers included Philip Sidney, third earl of Leicester (1619-1698), the republican Algernon Sidney (1623-1683), and, her favourite brother, Henry Sidney, earl of Romney (1641-1704). 
Dorothy Sidney spent her youth in the beautiful and peaceful surroundings of Penshurst, the family estate in Kent, eloquently praised in Jonson's 'To Penshurst' as representing a harmonious ideal of natural abundance and social order. During her early years, until her paternal grandfather's death in 1626, Dorothy and her mother resided at Penshurst while her father spent much of his time on military service in the Netherlands. When her father succeeded to the earldom he inherited the estate, and his wife, now countess of Leicester, continued to reside there, occasionally complaining about the 'solitariness' of 'this lonely life' in the country (Cartwright, 42). 
Several letters from the countess to her husband, absent on ambassadorial duties in France between 1636 and 1639, discuss the relative merits of possible suitors for Dorothy's hand. Although in October 1636 she anxiously writes, 'it greeves me ofne to see that our poore Doll is sought by none, and that shee will shortly be called a staile maide', she was soon actively engaged in negotiations with the families of two young noblemen, Lord Lovelace and Lord Devonshire, after conceding that a third, Lord Russell, about whom she had had 'some hopes', was 'disposed on' elsewhere ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 60-61, 68, 92). Lord Lovelace, who had the advantage of an estate of $6000 a year and a mother 'who is rich, and loves him very much' but the disadvantages of a 'breeding' which 'hath not been precisely of the best', with a tendency to keep 'extreame ill company' and to 'drink to distemper himself', was put forward by Lady Leicester's brother Henry Percy. The proposed match foundered on Dorothy's dislike -- 'she abhorred the man' -- and his own 'wildness' and 'idle' nature, which made the countess 'studie how to break off with him' without giving offence (Cartwright, 58, 60-61). Lord Devonshire, the brother of Dorothy's close friend, Lady Anne Cavendish, the 'Amoret' of Waller's poems, was a more plausible candidate. But here Lord Devonshire's mother had other plans for her son: she and her emissaries, the countess complained, were 'so full of desaite as it is inpossible to know what thaie meane by that they saie', while her son, though 'a verie honest man... has no will of his owne' and 'dairs not eat or drinke but as she apoints' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 101, 106). The earl of Holland, who professed to be acting in their interest, was secretly intriguing 'in makeing a Mariage for an other', a wealthy French heiress, and the countess concluded that 'he is so weak, and so unfaithfull, as his Friendship is not worth the least Rushe' (Collins, 2.472). 
The name of Edmund Waller does not appear in the countess of Leicester's list of eligible suitors. Aubrey claims that 'he was passionately in love with Dorothea, the eldest daughter of the Earle of Leicester, who he haz eternized in his Poems' and also that 'the Earle loved him, and would have been contented that he should have had one of the youngest daughters' ('Brief Lives', 308), but there is no supporting evidence that he was considered seriously by the family as a possible husband for Dorothy or her sister Lucy. Waller's poems to and about 'Sacharissa' are characterized by courtly praise, in poems to be circulated among a coterie audience, rather than by burning, unrequited passion. Waller's poetic courtship of Sacharissa began in 1635, before the earl of Leicester's departure for France, when he wrote: '
That beam of beauty, which began 

To warm us so, when thou wert here. 
('Poems of Edmund Waller', 1.xxiv, 48, 57)' These praises continued until 1638, during which time Waller was a regular visitor at Penshurst. As Johnson remarks, the sugary name Dorothy was given is somewhat inappropriate for one described consistently as haughty and remote, the 'cruel fair' of the Petrarchan tradition, 'inviting fruit on too sublime a tree', unmoved by her servants' protestations of love (Johnson, 1.253; 'Poems of Edmund Waller', 1.43, 52). On 20 July 1639 Dorothy Sidney was married to Henry, Lord Spencer (bap. 1620, d. 1643) at Penshurst. Waller wrote a graceful letter of congratulation to Lucy Sidney: 'May she that always affected silence and retiredness, have the house filled with the noise and number of her children, and hereafter of her grandchildren, and then may she arrive at that great curse so much declined by fair ladies, old age; may she live to be very old, and yet seem young. ('Poems of Edmund Waller', 1.xxix)' In autumn 1639 Lord and Lady Spencer, with the countess of Leicester, joined the earl of Leicester in Paris, where two children were born in the next two years. Their daughter, Dorothy, born in 1640, married Sir George Savile, later the marquess of Halifax, in 1656. Their son Robert Spencer, later second earl of Sunderland (1641-1702), like his brother-in-law became an important statesman during the Restoration period. After the return of Lord and Lady Spencer to England in 1641, at which time they took up residence in Althorp, Northamptonshire, two more children were born: Penelope in 1642 and Harry in 1643. In June 1643 Lord Spencer was created earl of Sunderland, possibly as a consequence of a loan of $5000 to Charles I. 
At the outbreak of the civil war the Sidney family was bitterly divided. Dorothy's brothers Philip (Lord Lisle) and Algernon took up arms for the parliament, and the earl of Leicester, 'suspected and distrusted of either side', wrote gloomily from the king's camp, 'we know not what we do, nor what we would have, unless it be our own destruction' (Cartwright, 83-4). Sunderland served in the king's army as a volunteer, and, in spite of 'having no command in the army, attended upon the King's person under the obligation of honour' (Clarendon, 3.177). In a series of letters written to his wife in 1642 and 1643 he expresses a longing for peace and a deep suspicion of the queen's party and the king's advisers, but a loyalty to the royalist cause despite these reservations: 'If there could be an expedient found, to save the punctilio of honour, I would not continue here an hour. The discontent that I, and many other honest men, receive daily, is beyond expression' (Cartwright, 88-9). In September 1643 he was killed, at twenty-three, at the battle of Newbury, 'having often charged the enemy before that fatall shott befell him', and the news of his death caused the pregnant Lady Sunderland to fall 'into a great passion of griefe'; 'Doll thinkes of nothing but her great los[s]e', her mother writes ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 434-5). Sunderland left legacies of $10,000 and $7000 to two of his children, and Lady Sunderland and her father were awarded joint wardship over her son Robert. 
For the next seven years the widowed Lady Sunderland and her children lived with her parents at Penshurst, where in March 1649 her youngest child, Harry Spencer, died at the age of five. After the execution of Charles I, two of the royal children, the duke of Gloucester and Princess Elizabeth, were placed under the care of the earl and countess of Leicester, and after Elizabeth's death in 1650 a diamond necklace and other keepsakes were bequeathed to Lady Sunderland and her mother as a token of the care the princess had received at Penshurst. In 1650 Lady Sunderland and her children left Penshurst, to live at Althorp, where she remained for most of the next twelve years managing her son's estate until he came of age in 1662. One contemporary account says that in the 1650s she provided sanctuary as well as maintenance at Althorp for ejected Anglican clergymen (Cartwright, 126). In 1652 she surprised a number of observers by marrying for a second time; her second husband was Robert Smythe (1613-1664x7) of Boundes, near Penshurst; he was later knighted. The earl of Leicester declined to attend the wedding, though other members of the family were present. Dorothy Osborne, teasing Sir William Temple about his long-standing admiration for Lady Sunderland, whose portrait he owned, remarked caustically: 'My Lady Sunderland is not to bee followed in her marrying fashion... Whoe would ere have dreamt hee should have had my Lady Sunderland, though hee bee a very fine Gentleman... I shall never forgive her one thing she sayed of him, which was that she marryed him out of Pitty... To speak truth 'twas convenient for neither of them... She has lost by it much of the repute she has gained, by keeping herself a widdow. It was then believed that Witt and discretion were to be Reconciled in her personne that have soe seldome bin perswaded to meet in any Body else: but wee are all Mortall. (Osborne, 52-4)' The second marriage appears to have been happy, producing one child, Robert Smythe (1653-1695), who eventually inherited his father's estates at Boundes and Sutton-at-Hone. 
During her second marriage Lady Sunderland lived partly at Althorp and partly at Boundes, and after 1663 spent much of her time at Rufford, the seat of her son-in-law, the marquess of Halifax. She was widowed a second time in the mid-1660s. After the death of her daughter, Lady Halifax, in 1670, she assumed responsibility for the care of her daughter's four children until Halifax's second marriage two years later. She was always on close terms with Halifax, and twelve of her letters to him, all written in 1680, survive. She also remained friendly with 'old Waller'. When she asked him in 1680 when he would write some more 'beautiful verses' to her, he replied, with unsentimental realism, 'When, Madam, your Ladyship is as young and as handsome again' ('Poems of Edmund Waller', 1.lxvii). There are several reports of serious illnesses and injuries: an injured hand in 1666 and a dangerous attack of ague in 1679, about which Halifax reports she 'hath been very ill, and is not yet out of danger' ('Savile Correspondence', 77). 
Lady Sunderland's letters of 1679-81 to Halifax and her brother Henry Sidney provide a detailed commentary on the politics of the 'Exclusion Bill' crisis. Her own views were much closer to Halifax's than to those of her son the earl of Sunderland. In November 1680 she expressed disquiet that her son was in league with Shaftesbury and the whigs against Halifax ('that is the thorn in my side'). She despised Shaftesbury ('this great value he puts on himself is more than anybody else does'), had a low opinion of the duke of Monmouth, and disapproved of her brother Algernon's republican politics, though she remained on friendly terms with him. In writing to Halifax in July 1680 she expressed her hope that 'the moderate, honest people' would prevail, as against those 'who have designs that can never be compassed, but by the whole nation being in a flame' (Cartwright, 255, 281-2, 296). 
Lady Sunderland died in February 1684, three months after the execution of her brother Algernon, and was buried on 25 February 1684 in the chapel of the Spencers at Brington church, Northamptonshire. She left no will, but letters of administration were granted in March 1684 to a creditor, John Benn, rather than to her two surviving children, the earl of Sunderland and Robert Smythe. There are many portraits of Lady Sunderland, including four from 1639-40 by Van Dyck (at Petworth, Althorp, Chatsworth, and Penshurst), two later paintings by Lely and Riley, a miniature by Cooper, and engravings, after Van Dyck, by Lombart, Vertue, and others. 


@@@@@


doc= 26121


Francis Almeric Spencer, first Baron Churchill of Wychwood (1779-1845), politician, born on 26 December 1779, was MP for Oxfordshire from 1801 to 1815, and, during the ministry of Spencer Perceval, a member of the Board of Control (from 13 November 1809 to July 1810), although he was never sworn in. In August 1815 he was created a peer as Baron Churchill of Wychwood. He married, on 25 November 1801, Lady Frances Fitzroy (died 1866), the fifth daughter of Augustus Henry Fitzroy, third duke of Grafton. Sir Augustus Almeric Spencer was their third son. He died in Brighton on 10 March 1845. 


@@@@@


doc= 26122


Frederick Spencer, fourth Earl Spencer (1798-1857), naval officer, born on 14 April 1798, entered the navy on 18 September 1811. After serving as lieutenant under his brother in the 'Owen Glendower', Spencer commanded the brig 'Alacrity' on the South American station. After promotion to captain on 26 August 1826, he was appointed to the frigate 'Talbot'; he commanded her with distinction at the battle of Navarino on 20 October 1827, and in subsequent operations on the coast of the Morea. For these services he was made a CB (13 November 1827) and was decorated by the kings of France and Greece, and by the tsar. On 23 February 1830 he married his second cousin, Elizabeth Georgina (died 10 April 1851), daughter of William Stephen Poyntz MP, of Cowdray Park, Midhurst. They had three children; the only son, John Poyntz Spencer, later became the fifth Earl Spencer. 


@@@@@


doc= 26123


Spencer, George, fourth duke of Marlborough (1739-1817), politician, born on 26 January 1739, was the eldest son of Charles Spencer, third duke of Marlborough and fifth earl of Sunderland (1706-1758), and his wife, Elizabeth Trevor (died 1761), the daughter of Thomas Trevor, second Baron Trevor. The artist Lady Diana Beauclerk was his sister. Following education at Eton College he obtained an ensigncy on 14 June 1755 in the Coldstream Guards, and on 12 June 1756 was gazetted captain of the 20th foot. On succeeding to the peerage two years later he left the army. 
In politics, Marlborough shook off the influence of his father's leader, Henry Fox, and 'flung himself totally on Lord Harcourt to direct his conduct in the County of Oxford' ('Grenville Papers', 1.297-8), of which he was named lord lieutenant on 21 March 1760. At the coronation of George III, on 22 September 1761, he was bearer of the sceptre and cross. On 22 November the following year he was appointed lord chamberlain and sworn of the privy council. On 23 August 1762 he married Lady Caroline Russell (1743-1811), the only daughter of John Russell, fourth duke of Bedford, and his second wife, Gertrude Leveson-Gower. They had three sons and five daughters. Marlborough's marriage ensured that he was an important member of the Bedford faction, and in the Grenville ministry, though still under thirty, he held office as lord privy seal from April 1763 to July 1765. On 27 July, after some delay occasioned by George III's attempts to induce them to stay in -- a delay which was thought 'rather extraordinary' -- he and his brother Lord Charles Spencer ['see under 'Spencer, Charles, third duke of Marlborough] resigned their offices. In November 1766 he assured his uncle and father-in-law, the duke of Bedford, that he should 'not join Lord Temple to oppose your grace' ('Correspondence of John, Fourth Duke of Bedford', 3.357), and for the present did not desire office. He was, however, ambitious of obtaining the Garter, and Bedford obtained from Chatham the promise of it on the next vacancy. But Cumberland was given the next Garter -- in order to spite the Bedfords, according to Horace Walpole -- and Marlborough did not obtain the coveted honour until 12 December 1768 and was not installed until 25 July 1771. 
On 29 January 1779 Walpole wrote to Horace Mann that Marlborough and Lord Pembroke had declared against 'the First Lord of the Admiralty' (the earl of Sandwich) in the celebrated politico-naval dispute that followed Admiral Keppel's action off Ushant. Marlborough even forbade his brother Lord Charles Spencer to attend parliament during Keppel's trial (Walpole, 'Journal', 2.325-6). Marlborough took relatively little part in political affairs after his early years, and for the most part lived quietly at Blenheim, although he remained a figure of some importance in electoral terms on account of his influence in the boroughs of Woodstock, Oxford, and Heytesbury and in the county of Oxfordshire. In 1762 he had purchased most of Zanetti's gems at Venice. From 1764 to 1774 he employed Capability Brown to remodel the grounds at Blenheim. He was created DCL of Oxford University on 6 July 1763 and high steward of Oxford on 23 November 1779. He presented to the university a large reflecting telescope made by James Short in 1742 and fine copies of Raphael's cartoons. In 1766 he was made high steward of Woodstock. He became an elder brother of Trinity House in 1768 and master on 22 May 1769. He was also ranger of Wychwood forest, a governor of the Charterhouse, and FRS (1786), his chief scientific interest being astronomy. He continued the income given by his father to the classical scholar Jacob Bryant. Marlborough was found dead in bed at Blenheim on 29 January 1817, and was buried there on 7 February. On his death Marlborough House, St James's, reverted to the crown, according to the terms of the original grant. 
Of Marlborough's five daughters, Lady Caroline (1763-1813) married Henry, second Lord Mendip; Anne (1773-1865), the Hon. Cropley Ashley, the brother of Lord Shaftesbury; Amelia (1785-1829), Henry Pytches Boyce; Elizabeth (1764-1812), her cousin the Hon. John Spencer; and Charlotte (1769-1802), Edward Nares, regius professor of modern history at Oxford. 
His eldest son, 


Marlborough's youngest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 26124


George Spencer-Churchill, fifth duke of Marlborough (1766-1840), politician and book collector, born George Spencer on 6 March 1766, took the additional name of Churchill by royal licence in May 1817. He was educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford, graduating MA on 9 December 1786 and DCL on 20 June 1792. He was MP for Oxfordshire from 1790 to 1796 and for Tregony from 1802 to 1804, and during the second ministry of William Pitt the younger he was a lord of the Treasury (from 7 August 1804 until 11 February 1806). On 12 March 1806 he was called to the upper house as Baron Spencer of Wormleighton. He married, on 15 September 1791, Lady Susan Stewart (1767-1841), the second daughter of John Stewart, seventh earl of Galloway, and his wife, Anne Dashwood. They had four sons and two daughters; in addition he had a further six children with Matilda Glover ('c'.1802-1876) and one with Mary Anne Sturt (1768-1854). He spent great sums on his gardens and his library at White Knights, near Reading. In 1812 he gave $2260 for Valdarfer's edition of the 'Decameron' at the duke of Roxburghe's sale, and in 1815 he bought from the library of James Edwards the celebrated Bedford missal. Most of his collections were dispersed during his lifetime, and his extravagance compelled his retirement during his later years. He died at Blenheim on 5 March 1840 and was buried there on 13 March. He was succeeded as sixth duke of Marlborough by his eldest son, George Spencer-Churchill (1793-1857). 


@@@@@


doc= 26125


Spencer, George John, second Earl Spencer (1758-1834), politician and book collector, was born at Wimbledon Park in Surrey on 1 September 1758, the only son of John Spencer, first Earl Spencer (1734-1783), politician and landowner, and his wife, (Margaret) Georgiana Spencer (1737-1814), the daughter of Stephen Poyntz of Midgham in Berkshire. When his father was elevated to an earldom in 1765 Spencer took the courtesy title Viscount Althorp. 
From 1765 to 1770 Althorp was privately tutored by the orientalist Sir William Jones, who instilled in him a love of the Greek and Roman classics and an appreciation of fine books that he retained until the end of his life. In 1770 he entered Harrow School, where he remained until 1775. Having been admitted in 1776 to Trinity College, Cambridge, he proceeded to a nobleman's MA degree in 1778. He then went on the grand tour of Europe for nearly two years. Tall and athletic but gentle and reserved in demeanour, he had neither the bearing nor the scintillating personality of his elder sister Georgiana Cavendish, duchess of Devonshire (1757-1806), nor the vivacity of his younger sister Henrietta Ponsonby, countess of Bessborough (1761-1821). He was, however, agreeable, polished in manners, and temperate in conduct. His intellectual acuity was recognized when, on Sir William Jones's recommendation, he was welcomed in 1778 as an active member of Johnson's Literary Club, and in 1780 he became a fellow of the Royal Society. The University of Oxford awarded him the honorary degree of DCL in 1793. 
Althorp married on 6 March 1782 Lady Lavinia Bingham (1762-1831), the eldest daughter of Charles Bingham, first earl of Lucan, and his wife, Margaret Bingham, nee Smith (c.1740-1814), a miniature painter. Lavinia Spencer was a strong-minded and strong-willed woman of great erudition and charm and was perhaps the pre-eminent hostess in London society. Both at Althorp and Spencer House in London the Spencers delighted in entertaining the foremost intellectual and political leaders of their time. Of their eight children, four sons and two daughters reached maturity: John Charles Spencer, Viscount Althorp and third Earl Spencer, politician; Sir Robert Cavendish Spencer and Frederick Spencer, fourth Earl Spencer ['see under 'Spencer, Sir Robert Cavendish], who were both naval officers; the Revd George Spencer; Sarah Lyttelton, Lady Lyttelton, governess to Queen Victoria's children; and Lady Georgiana Charlotte Quin. 
Althorp's family connection was staunchly whig, and in that tradition he began his political career. He was returned to parliament on the family interest for Northampton borough in 1780. After vacating that seat in 1782, he was then returned for Surrey. Never an impressive speaker, he seldom spoke in the Commons but diligently attended to his parliamentary duties. He supported Rockingham's attack on North's government in 1782 and served as a junior lord of the Treasury in the Rockingham administration. Having declined to serve under Shelburne, he supported the Fox-North coalition in 1783 but refused the offer to become lord lieutenant of Ireland. On his father's death, on 31 October 1783, he succeeded to the earldom. He also became high steward of St Albans, where he managed his family's borough interest, as well as at Northampton and Okehampton in Devon. The management of his vast estates, especially the renovation by Henry Holland of his ancestral seat at Althorp in Northamptonshire and the rebuilding of the Spencer villa at Wimbledon Park, diverted his attention from politics. His involvement in political management was also diminished by its demands on his time and the resources of his heavily encumbered estate. The repercussions of the French Revolution on British politics, however, stirred his sense of public duty, and with the duke of Portland and other whig leaders Spencer broke with Fox and Grey and joined the government of William Pitt in 1794. He was sworn of the privy council and became lord keeper of the privy seal on 11 July 1794. Shortly thereafter he was sent as ambassador-extraordinary to Vienna in a futile effort to persuade the Austrians to increase their efforts in the war against France. On his return from Vienna, Pitt shifted his ineffective and lethargic brother, the earl of Chatham, from the Admiralty to the office of privy seal and on 17 December 1794 made Spencer first lord. 
Without any administrative experience or knowledge of the navy, Spencer considered his appointment a patriotic duty for the public benefit. Despite his youth and inexperience, he required his subordinates, especially the professional navy men serving as lords commissioners, to recognize the prerogatives and civilian authority of his office. Finding the office routine of the Admiralty in disarray, he immediately restored order and set an example by being punctual and methodical in the conduct of business. He maintained that in the shaping of overall strategy the views of the first lord be considered by the foreign secretary and the secretary of state for war and the colonies. Strongly opposed to misdirected colonial expeditions, he urged that naval strength be concentrated in European waters. His influence was decisive in appointing capable commanders in major theatres, such as Jervis to the Mediterranean command in 1795 and to the channel in 1800, Duncan to the North Sea in 1795, and Nelson to an independent command that won the battle of the Nile in 1798. For all naval officers, Spencer sought an improved system of promotion and recognition by merit. He was quick to recognize outstanding service, and he recommended Jervis for a peerage in 1797 because of the efficiency and good order of his command. He also demonstrated magnanimity and deference to senior officers, who had rendered many years of distinguished service, by postponing in 1797 for two years his acceptance of the Garter for himself in favour of Lord Howe. While he and Lady Spencer always sought to maintain cordial social relations with naval officers and their wives, he did not hesitate to reprimand Nelson in 1800 for dallying too long with Lady Hamilton at Naples. 
Aware of the corruption and waste in the navy, Spencer was unable in time of war to effect significant reform, though some progress was made in improving dockyard efficiency. He was interested in Samuel Bentham's innovations in the dockyards, and his support of Bentham's work as inspector-general of navy works laid the foundations for reform in later years. Always attracted to any scientific endeavour, especially if it could be made applicable to the dockyards, Spencer was an early patron of the engineer Marc Isambard Brunel. In the naval mutinies of 1797 he acted promptly, decisively, and fairly. By going himself to Spithead, and by enlisting the aid of Lord Howe, he succeeded in persuading the seamen to return to their duty by promising increase in pay and improvement in the conditions of service. At the Nore he was compelled to act with greater severity in quelling the mutiny because he recognized that there was evidence of political incendiarism that had not been present at Spithead. Spencer's six-year tenure at the Admiralty was unprecedented not only in length, but in having been entirely during wartime; during his period there the three great naval victories at St Vincent, Camperdown, and the Nile were won. After leaving the Admiralty, when Pitt went out of office in February 1801, he remained interested in the Royal Navy and its personnel, especially the welfare of destitute seamen. Two of his sons became naval officers with his blessing, and a grandson, the fifth Earl Spencer, served as first lord of the Admiralty at the end of the nineteenth century. 
Although out of office, Spencer continued to voice his opinion on public affairs in the House of Lords, and in 1802 he was one of sixteen peers speaking and voting against the peace of Amiens. He renewed his ties with Fox and Grey and in 1806 was home secretary in the coalition ministry of Grenville and Fox. While in that office he served as a member of the special commission investigating the conduct of Caroline, princess of Wales. When the ministry resigned in 1807, Spencer retired from national politics, though he regularly attended the House of Lords; when his health did not permit attendance he gave Lord Grey his proxy. By 1807 the Spencer family interest at Northampton, Okehampton, and St Albans had ended, and Spencer relinquished his political role to his heir, Viscount Althorp. 
From 1807 until the end of his life Spencer devoted his time mainly to local affairs in Northamptonshire, and to his literary, philanthropic, and scientific interests. For more than thirty years he served as chairman of quarter sessions and as colonel of the Northamptonshire regiment of yeomanry. He supported the establishment of a savings bank in Northampton, helped to found an institution for deaf mute people, and promoted the building of the Northampton Infirmary and an asylum for the insane. From 1820 he was a patron of the peasant poet of Northamptonshire, John Clare, to whom he provided an annuity; the latter was continued after Spencer's death by his son. As a governor of the Charterhouse and as president of the Royal Institution he promoted education and the advancement of scientific knowledge. He was interested in the improvement and safety of navigation and served as an elder brother of Trinity House and as master from 1806 to 1807. A fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, his concern to preserve the national heritage led to his appointment in 1831 as a commissioner of the public records. Spencer was a staunch Anglican and a patron and officer in several evangelical societies, such as the British and Foreign Bible Society. He favoured Catholic emancipation, and when, much to his displeasure, his youngest son became a Roman Catholic priest, he nevertheless provided financial support for him. 
Spencer's chief interest after retiring from public life, and perhaps his pre-eminent achievement, was collecting the greatest private library in Europe. By 1834 the collection consisted of upwards of 40,000 volumes valued at more than $60,000. It was sold in 1892 for $250,000 to become the principal collection of the John Rylands Library at Manchester. The nucleus of the collection was the small ancestral library at Althorp, but the purchase of the Hungarian Count Reviczky's library in 1790 was the first of many valuable acquisitions that Spencer continued to make until about 1830. The library was especially important for books that illustrated the evolution of the art of printing during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The incunabula in the collection, especially books printed by Aldus Manutius, William Caxton, and Christopher Valdarfer, equalled the collections of the greatest public libraries at that time. As the foremost bibliophile of his era, it was fitting that Spencer was one of the founders and the first president of the Roxburghe Club, the first of the great bibliophilic societies. 
Spencer died on 10 November 1834 at Althorp Park and was buried on 19 November in the Spencer chapel in the church of St Mary the Virgin at Great Brington. Ever faithful to his responsibilities as a privileged aristocrat, he willingly performed the duties of public office, both locally and nationally, as a public trust. First lord of the Admiralty at a critical time, he rendered distinguished service to his country as an organizer of naval victory. A philanthropist, patron of arts and letters, and bibliophile, he left his mark on English culture. 


@@@@@


doc= 26126


Spencer, George Trevor (1799-1866), bishop of Madras, India, was born on 11 December 1799 at Curzon Street, Mayfair, Westminster, the third son of the Hon. William Robert Spencer (1770-1834) and his wife, Susan, widow of Count Spreti and daughter of Francis Jenison (known as Jenison Walworth). Aubrey George Spencer (1795-1872), bishop of Newfoundland, was his brother. Having gained prizes for Latin alcaics and an English essay at Charterhouse School, he went to University College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1822. 
In the following year he was ordained deacon, and also married Harriet Theodora, daughter of Sir Benjamin Hobhouse; they had two sons and three daughters. In 1824 he was ordained priest and held the perpetual curacy of Buxton until 1829. From 1829 until 1837 he was rector of Leaden Roding in Essex. 
On 19 November 1837, through the influence of his brother-in-law Sir John Cam Hobhouse, president of the Board of Control, Spencer was consecrated second bishop of Madras, and enthroned in St George's Cathedral, Madras, on 4 November 1838. In 1842 he published a 'Journal of a visitation to the provinces of Travancore and Tinnevelly in the diocese of Madras, 1840-41'. In 1845 he also published 'Journal of a visitation tour, in 1843-4, through part of the western portion of his diocese'. Besides places in his own diocese, he visited during this tour Poona, Ahmednagar, and Bombay. In the autumn of 1845 Spencer visited the missions of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and the Church Missionary Society, and published his 'Journal' in the following year, together with charges delivered at St George's Cathedral, Madras, and at Palamcottai, and appendices containing statistical tables. In 1846 he also published 'A brief account of the C.M.S.'s mission in the district of Kishnagur, in the diocese of Calcutta'. In the diocese of Madras he established three training colleges for Indian converts. 
The whole of Spencer's episcopate was fraught with tensions between himself and the Madras diocesan committee of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts. Relations were equally strained with the Church Missionary Society and its forceful chief secretary, Henry Venn. Spencer's stress upon the authority of the bishop rather than the missionary societies, especially in theological matters, was bound to cause problems in a diocese where many of the missionaries were either German or Danish Lutherans or were influenced by Tractarian beliefs. Dogged by ill health, by 1847 Spencer could no longer cope and returned to England on leave. On 16 June 1847 he was made doctor of divinity, and at some time during the course of his stay in England he decided to resign the episcopate, though this was not carried into effect until 1849. 
On 4 October 1852 Spencer was appointed commissary or assistant to Richard Bagot, bishop of Bath and Wells. Once again he entered an area of theological controversy, this time with the Ven. George Denison, archdeacon of Taunton, examining chaplain to Bagot. They differed strongly over their understanding of the 'real presence' in the eucharist, Denison taking an extreme Tractarian position, and over the extent of Spencer's powers to test whether the beliefs of those presented to him for ordination were in accordance with those sanctioned by the Church of England. The controversy was brief but acrimonious and led to an angry correspondence which ended in Denison's declining 'any further communication by word or writing', and both men's publishing their correspondence in an attempt to vindicate themselves. The result was the resignation of both men, Spencer on 10 May and Denison on 4 June 1853. 
In 1860 Spencer was appointed chancellor of St Paul's Cathedral in London, and in the next year became rector of Walton on the Wolds, Leicestershire. He died of dropsy on 16 July 1866 at his home, Edge Moor, Hartington Upper Quarter, near Buxton, Derbyshire, his wife surviving him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26127


Spencer, Gervase (c.1715-1763), miniature painter, is of unknown parentage. According to Edwards he 'was originally a gentleman's servant, but, having a natural turn to the pursuits of art, amused himself with drawing' (Edwards, 18-19). Spencer apparently suggested that he copy a recently completed miniature of one of his master's family, 'a hint [that] was received with much surprise, but he was indulged with permission to make the attempt' (ibid.). His success meant that he 'acquired the encouragement and patronage of those he served, and by their interest, became a fashionable painter of the day' (ibid.). Spencer's contemporary George Vertue also commented on his training; in July 1749 he noted: 'Lately I was shewn some watercoloured limnings -- womens heads -- done by a young man, Mr Spencer, who a few years ago was in the capacity of a footman to Dr W. -- and now professes limning with some success, which demonstrates a genius pracizing ['sic'] by degrees of himself, -- and really is in a curious neat manner and masterly. (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.51)' In the first half of the eighteenth century it was the norm for British miniaturists to be self-taught rather than to undergo formal apprenticeships. Enamel painting, however, demanded a significant outlay in terms of equipment for firing and involved unpredictable procedures. It is not known if Spencer received formal training in enamel. Samuel Finney noted in his memoirs that, when in 1760 he wanted to try enamel painting, there was 'only one Artist in that Branch, Mr Spencer... and he was excellent, though the knowledge he had gained in that Art was almost purely his own'. Finney believed he was emulating Spencer when he chose to 'attempt this difficult Art too without a Master' (Finney, 'Autobiographical account', 287-313). 
Spencer established his practice in London, presumably through newspaper advertisements and word of mouth; his earliest miniatures date from about 1745. Only late in his career did the first public exhibiting society open, the Society of Artists; he exhibited in 1761 number 111, 'Two Ladies in Enamel', and in 1762 number 106, 'Two Miniatures, in Enamel'. Graves gives Spencer's dates of exhibition as 1761-74 (Graves, 'Artists', 262) and Foskett gives an address for Spencer of 28 Suffolk Street (Foskett, 527). But the Mr Spencer of 28 Suffolk Street who exhibited in 1774, at the same society, number 242, 'An Old Man's Head, Kit-Kat', is clearly another artist. Gervase Spencer's name also appears in 'Mortimer's Universal Director' (1763), an early trade directory advertising the services of artists and others. 
By the 1760s aspiring miniaturists were, in contrast to Spencer's generation, taking lessons with established miniaturists. According to Samuel Redgrave, Henry Spicer (1743-1801) was Spencer's pupil (Redgrave, 'Artists', 408). However, Edwards noted of Spicer, 'Although the author was acquainted with this artist, yet he knows not who was his master' (Edwards, 287-8). Joseph Farington, however, in a note in his diary in 1796 about the Carwardine family, remembered that one of the '3 or 4 daughters... who afterwards married Mr Butler was some time with Spencer the Miniature Painter who taught her that art and she instructed her brother' (Farington, 'Diary', 2.651-2); this was presumably Penelope Carwardine. 
Spencer's standing among his contemporaries is attested to by his fellow miniaturist Samuel Finney. Finney wrote that when he moved to London in 1748/9 to learn more about miniature painting 'There were at that time only two Miniature Painters of Eminence in London, Spencer who was excellent', and another whom Finney despised and identified only as 'T' (Finney, 'Autobiographical account', 267-87). Finney 'admired' Spencer and 'wished to arrive to his excellence, and be his Rival' (ibid.). Spencer also knew Sir Joshua Reynolds, whose oil portrait of Spencer painting a miniature was in the sale of Spencer's effects in 1797; its whereabouts are now unknown though Edwards noted that it was 'late in the possession of [the] artist, Mr Edridge' (Edwards, 18-19). Spencer made a brush drawing in grey wash of this portrait (British Museum) and etched it himself, showing the sitter in reverse to the drawing; a number of impressions are in the British Museum, one lettered, presumably by Spencer, 'Sr I Reynolds pinx... se ipse sculp' and subsequently (and clearly not by the etcher) 'George ['sic'] Spencer Miniature Painter'. 
It is not known when or whom Spencer married but Edwards noted that when Spencer died he left 'a daughter, who married a person of the name of Lloyd... and at his death, Mr. Spencer's remaining collection of neglected miniatures, unfinished performances, together with his painting materials, were sold by auction by Hutchins, Wells, and Fischer [Fisher] in King-street, Covent-garden, in December 1797. (Edwards, 18-19)' (A copy of the catalogue is recorded in the cabinet des estampes of the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris.) The sale catalogue also included a now lost portrait, 'Mrs. Spencer, by Barwell' (presumably Thomas Bardwell). In addition Spencer executed a number of small etchings, including a half-length of a woman in a hood, inscribed 'No. 1 Jan 27 1757 London' and identified in later inscriptions as Mrs Spencer (British Museum). According to Edwards, Spencer died on 30 October 1763 'at his house in Great Marlborough-street, where he had resided some years' (ibid.). 
Spencer was prolific and is represented in many public and private collections. The quality of the work attributed to him is variable and as he often signed his work it is possible that some of the unsigned works attributed to Spencer are by other artists. Some of Spencer's works indicate that he borrowed poses and costumes from the portraits of the French artist Jean-Etienne Liotard (1689-1762), for example, the portrait of Elizabeth Bradshaw at the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut. 


@@@@@


doc= 26128


Spencer, Henry, first earl of Sunderland (bap. 1620, d. 1643), politician and royalist army officer, was born at Althorp and baptized on 23 November 1620 at Brington, Northamptonshire, the eldest son and heir of William Spencer, second Baron Spencer of Wormleighton ('bap'. 1592, died 1636), and his wife, Lady Penelope Wriothesley (1598-1667), daughter of Henry Wriothesley, third earl of Southampton, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Vernon of Hodnet, Shropshire. The family's wealth derived from sheep farming during the Tudor period. Spencer was educated at home at Althorp by private tutors before matriculating from Magdalen College, Oxford, on 8 May 1635. He was created MA on 31 August 1636 on the king's visit to the college and succeeded his father as third Baron Spencer of Wormleighton on 19 December of that year. In what was probably a love match he married the admired Lady Dorothy Sidney ['see 'Spencer, Dorothy (1617-1684)], daughter of Robert Sidney, second earl of Leicester (1595-1677), and Dorothy, daughter of Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland, at Penshurst, Sussex, on 20 July 1639; his wife was the Sacharissa of Edmund Waller's poem. Until late 1641 the couple passed the years with Spencer's father-in-law, then ambassador to France, in Paris, where their eldest children, Dorothy and Robert Spencer (1641-1702), who succeeded him as second earl, were born in July 1640 and September 1641 respectively. The family settled at Althorp in late 1641. 
On his return to England Spencer took his seat in the House of Lords and initially supported parliament's struggle with the king. He was nominated to the lord lieutenancy of Northamptonshire on 5 March 1642 and, with parliament's prompting, reviewed the muster of the county's trained bands in the following month. By the summer of 1642, however, he had clearly aligned himself with the beleaguered peace party in the Lords. Clarendon claims Spencer was 'recovered to a right understanding, of which he was very capable, by his uncle [the earl] of Southampton' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.181), and he had left Westminster by August 1642. 
Spencer may have left parliament to support the king, but he hated the war and ranged himself with those constitutional royalists who were searching for a settlement. Along with Lord Falkland he presented unsuccessful proposals to parliament on 5 September 1642. Weeks later he wrote to his pregnant wife at Penshurst 'How much I am unsatisfied with the Proceedings here' and of his distaste for the 'Insolency of the Papists' who urged hardline policies on Charles. Honour drew him to the king's side and impelled him to stay there: 'Neither is there wanting, Daily, handsome occassion to retire, were it not for Grinning Honour. For let occassion be never so handsome, unless a Man were resolved to fight on the Parliament Side, which, for my part, I had rather be hanged, it will be said without doubt, that a man is afraid to fight. If there be an expedient found, to salve the Punctillio of Honour, I would not continue here an Hour. (Collins, 2.667)' His explanation for his allegiance has attracted historians' interest.Despite his longing for peace, Spencer was a volunteer in the king's guard at the battle of Edgehill (23 October 1642). The following winter he visited Penshurst, where another daughter, Penelope, was later born to him posthumously. On 6 June 1643 he was created earl of Sunderland, partly, it has been suggested, in acknowledgement of a loan to Charles I. He participated in the attack on Bristol in July, and in August he was in the trenches at the siege of Gloucester. From there he wrote to his wife describing how the activity temporarily dispelled thoughts of 'how infinitely more happy I should esteem myself, quietly to enjoy your company at Althorp, than to be troubled with the noises, and engaged in the factions, of the Court, which I shall endeavour to avoid' (Collins, 2.669-70). His solitude was briefly alleviated by dining with friends from the Great Tew circle, Falkland and Chillingworth. 
Sunderland was in the king's horse guard at the first battle of Newbury, on 20 September 1643, when he was fatally wounded by a cannon bullet, shortly before Falkland's fatal charge; he was twenty-three. He was buried at the battlefield, though his heart is supposedly kept in an unmarked lead casket in the Spencer vault at Brington. His will provided a jointure on Wormleighton, Warwickshire, for his wife, and $10,000 and $7000 respectively for his daughters. His two-year-old son was his main heir. 


@@@@@


doc= 26129


Lord Henry John Spencer (1770-1795), diplomatist, the second son of the fourth duke, was born on 20 December 1770 and educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford, where he gave great promise. He entered public life in April 1790, before he came of age, as secretary to Lord Auckland, ambassador at The Hague. He was left from September 1791 to May 1792 in sole charge of the embassy at a critical period, and established so high a reputation for discretion and vigour that he was again appointed minister-plenipotentiary to the Netherlands in May 1793. In July 1793 he went to Sweden as envoy-extraordinary. In 1795 he was appointed envoy-extraordinary and plenipotentiary to Prussia, but he died of fever at Berlin on 3 July, in his twenty-fifth year. 


@@@@@


doc= 26130


Spencer, Sir John (d. 1610), merchant and lord mayor of London, was the son of Richard Spencer of Waldingfield in Suffolk, but details of his family background and early years are not known. There is no record of his London apprenticeship or freedom, but he entered the livery of the Clothworkers' Company in 1570. By that date he was already a successful merchant trading to Spain, importing raisins, oil, iron, and wine. He was among the founder members of the Spanish Company in 1577, and a pioneer, with fellow clothworkers Sir Edward Osborne and Richard Staper, of the Levant trade (chartered from 1582). Dizzying fortunes could be made in the exchange of cloth, rabbit skins, and tin for the spices, dyestuffs, cotton wool, and silks of the Levant, but Spencer was in the forefront of those anxious to limit membership of the company in the 1590s. In 1599 he was one of the leading investors in the East India Company. In later years he seems to have turned to moneylending, counting the crown and the earls of Essex and Northumberland among his creditors. His subsidy assessments ($300 in the 1570s, $410 in 1589) placed him at the pinnacle of the city's pyramid of wealth, and at his death his estate was variously (and implausibly) estimated at between $300,000 and $800,000. His wealth was legendary. An unsubstantiated mid-seventeenth-century account records a plot by Dunkirk pirates to kidnap and ransom him, only foiled by his being detained in the city on business. Although he was regarded as parsimonious (a libel circulating after his death alleged that he 'spent by the dramme and laid up by the pound' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 781, p. 152), he lived in some style. From the sons of William Bond (died 1576) he purchased Crosby Place in Bishopsgate, a late fifteenth-century mansion described by Stow as very large and beautiful. Although Spencer kept his mayoralty at Crosby Place, and spent large amounts on it, he does not seem to have resided there in his later years, and it was regularly used to house visiting foreign dignitaries. His preferred residence was at Canonbury in Islington, purchased from Lord Wentworth for $2000. The surviving long gallery (still 'in situ', with a plaster ceiling dated 1599 decorated with medallions of classical heroes) and three of the chimney-pieces (removed in 1865 to Compton Wynyates and Castle Ashby) show him to have been a man of some taste. 
Spencer was a difficult man who, although attaining the highest offices, clearly lacked enthusiasm for his civic obligations, and he proved a truculent colleague. As a junior liveryman of his company he repeatedly refused to serve as steward for the lord mayor's feast and, unusually for a man of his standing, he never served as master of his livery company, refusing the office when elected in 1580. He was a common councillor for Bishopsgate ward between 1576 and 1583, and was elected to the court of aldermen on 27 June 1583, serving successively in the wards of Bridge Without (1583-7), Langbourn (1587-94), and Bassishaw (1594-1610). He was sheriff of London in 1583-4 (but only after having been nominated three times) and lord mayor in 1594-5. His mayoralty took place in the difficult circumstances of the social distress caused by escalating prices, heavy wartime taxation, and trade disruptions. But the situation seems to have been aggravated by his noxious personality. He was at loggerheads with his fellow aldermen over patronage matters, and rumours of his corruption circulated widely. Unusually for the sixteenth century when the lord mayor usually took a mediatorial role in popular disturbances, his character was an issue in the apprentice riots of June 1595. Libels circulated comparing him unfavourably with another alderman, Sir Richard Martin, and it was rumoured that apprentices had set up a gallows outside his house. So great was his loss of control that martial law was humiliatingly imposed by the privy council on the city in July. Although reports of Spencer's partiality had reached the crown's ministers, they did not endanger the customary knighthood, bestowed on the lord mayor at some point between 27 May and 13 June 1595. 
Spencer married Alice (died 1610), daughter of Thomas Bromfield of London and widow successively of Henry Leake (died 1563), a wealthy Southwark brewer, and of William Cockes, citizen and haberdasher of London (died 1569). Their only surviving offspring was a daughter, Elizabeth (died 1632), who became a target for fortune-hunters such as Spencer's colleague on the aldermanic bench Anthony Ratcliffe. Spencer saw him off with little difficulty but the heavily indebted William Compton, Lord Compton and later earl of Northampton ('c'.1570-1630), proved a more serious challenge. By January 1599 it was widely reported that they were to marry but that Spencer was doing all in his power to hinder the match, hiding Elizabeth and alleging a precontract with Sir Arthur Heveningham. Spencer was committed briefly to the Fleet prison and on his release his daughter was taken out of his care, allegedly because of his cruelty. The marriage took place shortly after 15 March 1599. The bitterness between Spencer and his feckless son-in-law intensified when Compton delivered a spectacular snub to the merchant at a tournament in the queen's presence soon after the wedding. In spite of the efforts of Sir Robert Cecil (and possibly even the queen) to mediate, Spencer 'the hardhead' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.124) remained obdurate, even when his daughter gave birth to a son in 1601. 
Spencer died in the parish of St Helen, Bishopsgate, on 3 March 1610, followed a few weeks later by his wife. He was buried in St Helen's Church on 22 March. Given that there are no indications that he was reconciled with his son-in-law, who continued his improvident lifestyle after the marriage, it is difficult to understand why he died intestate, his estate thereby passing to Compton. This was a stroke of good fortune so extraordinary as to turn Compton's wits. After a brief orgy of conspicuous consumption, he was 'oppressed with the greatnes of his sudaine fortune [and] fell madde' ('Abergavenny MSS', 83-4), apparently necessitating a brief spell in the Tower. It was in fact alleged by Spencer's nephews in a Star Chamber lawsuit that Compton had suppressed the will, and they had the testimony of Sir Henry Montague, the recorder of London, in their favour. The sad episode perhaps contributed to Spencer's reputation for avarice, for there were no charitable bequests. And yet contemporaries were impressed by the extraordinary largess to the poor at his funeral on 22 March 1610 (conscience money from Compton or a sign of Spencer's more conventionally charitable instincts?), and it was rumoured that the suppressed will contained bequests to his poor kindred amounting to $20,000 and as much again to charities. Spencer's was unquestionably one of the most controversial sixteenth-century mercantile careers, but his reputation as the 'old usurer' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/53/107) may have been exploited by his unscrupulous son-in-law to further his own ends. 


@@@@@


doc= 26131


Spencer, John (1600-1671), Jesuit and religious controversialist, was born in Lincolnshire on 10 August 1600. On the basis of Spencer's alias, Foley and Gillow suggest that his mother may have been from the Tyrwhitt family of Ketilby. He matriculated at Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1618 and during his time in Cambridge converted to the Roman Catholic church. He joined the Society of Jesus in Watten on 14 March 1626. From the noviciate he moved to Liege to study theology in either 1628 or 1629. He was ordained priest on 18 March 1632. He completed his final year of Jesuit formation, tertianship, in Ghent in 1634. From 1635 until either 1636 or 1637 he worked in Watten as prefect of the church, catechist, and missionary. In 1637 or 1638 he was sent to England to work in the residence of St Dominic (Lincolnshire). By 1641 he was back in Flanders as professor of moral theology or convener of discussions on controversial theology at Liege. He was professed of the four vows at Liege on 5 August 1641. Sent to Antwerp in 1644 he served there as procurator of the English province until late 1646 when he was transferred to Ghent. From that base he served as a military chaplain until 1655, when he returned to Antwerp as procurator. Between 1655 and 1658 when he reappeared at Antwerp, he is not listed in the official provincial catalogues, but from his involvement in a disputation with the Anglican divines Peter Gunning and John Pearson it is known that he spent some of that time in England. 
Although Spencer had presided over controversial theological discussions at Liege in 1643 he published nothing in the field until 'Scripture Mistaken' (Antwerp, 1655). It is possible that he returned to controversial theology because of proselytizing Anglicans during his years as Roman Catholic chaplain to the English forces in Flanders. Protestants, according to Spencer, conceded that they could not withstand Catholic arguments based on historical succession, tradition, patristics, and so on. But scripture, the word of God, was a more powerful weapon and it was firmly held in protestant hands. However, Spencer argued that protestants tortured scripture to support their arguments which, upon detailed examination, rested on nothing but errors, mistakes, and faulty translations. His work was intended to demonstrate the veracity of traditional Catholic teaching on justification by faith, good works, purgatory, and real presence. Henry Ferne replied with 'An Answer to Mr. Spencer's Book Intituled Scripture Mistaken' (London, 1660). 
For reasons unknown Spencer revived an old debate in his second book, 'Questions propounded for resolution of unlearned pretenders in matters of religion, to the doctors of the prelatical pretended reform'd church of England' (Paris, 1657). It was a reply to William Laud's 'A Relation of the Conference' (2nd edn, London, 1639). 
According to Charles Dodd (that is Hugh Tootell), Spencer 'was an able controvertist: and recommended himself to the world by a controversy, he and doctor [John] Lenthal[l] (formerly a Protestant divine of Cambridge) had with doctor Peter Gunning, and doctor John Pearson, anno 1657' (Dodd 3.312, col. 2). In May 1657 the four disputants argued 'Whether those of the Roman Church, or those of the English Protestant Church be Schismatiques'. Through personal encounters or letters the debate continued until June 1658. At the start all promised that the discussions would be published only with the consent of all, but 'if either Party were guilty of a culpable neglect, or delay, in the prosecution of the business, the other Party should be at liberty to print' (J. Spencer, 'Scisme Unmask't', Paris, 1658). The account, thus named, accused Gunning of procrastination and negligence. Gunning's rejoinder, 'A Contention for Truth' (London, 1658), appeared shortly thereafter. During the reign of James II extracts from 'Scripture Mistaken' on the schismatic state of the Church of England were published separately. 
From 1659 until 1667 Spencer was at the residence of St George (Worcestershire) and from 1659 until 2 August 1666 he was superior. In either 1668 or 1669 he moved to London. During his final illness he was taken into Grafton Manor, a house of the earl of Shrewsbury in the residence of St George, where he died on 17 January 1671. 


@@@@@


doc= 26132


Spencer, John (bap. 1630, d. 1693), college head and Hebraist, was baptized in Boughton under Bleane, Kent, on 31 October 1630, possibly the son of Adam Spencer, fellmonger. He became a king's scholar at King's School, Canterbury. From the age of fourteen he lived mainly in or near Cambridge. Spencer was admitted as a Parker scholar of Corpus on 25 March 1645 and graduated BA in 1648/9, MA in 1652, BD in 1659, and DD in 1665. He was chosen fellow of the college (1655) and master (3 August 1667), and was vice-chancellor of the university in 1673-4. As a young fellow he served the Cambridge parishes of St Giles and St Bene't where he was vicar from 1657 to 1662. Like other masters before him, he was also rector of the college living of Landbeach, near Cambridge (1667-83), and dean of Ely (from 1677); he was also archdeacon of Sudbury, in the Norwich diocese, from 1667. 
Spencer married Hannah (died 1674), daughter of Isaac Puller of Hertford and sister of Timothy Puller, the author of 'The Moderation of the Church of England'. Their children, Elizabeth and John, were baptized on 25 March 1672 and 19 December 1673 respectively. Hannah Spencer was buried in St Bene't's chancel on 21 April 1674. Elizabeth was buried next to her mother on 9 December 1688. Spencer's nephew William Spencer, his curate and successor at Landbeach, also died in 1688. 
Wainscoting attributed to the beginning of Spencer's mastership can be seen in the old master's lodge. The years when he lived there as a widower with his daughter, before her untimely death, form the theme of a college ghost story current by the early nineteenth century. 
Benefaction and writing characterized the last decade of Spencer's life. In 1683-5 he issued at Cambridge the first edition of his great work 'De legibus Hebraeorum ritualibus et earum rationibus', comprising three books 'on the ritual laws of the Hebrews, and the reasons for them'. In 1687 he settled the valuable Elmington estate on Corpus, and gave books to the college library. In 1691-2 he made an entirely new fourth book of 'De legibus' ready for printing, together with revisions of the earlier books. His will of 20 April 1693 details further benefactions to the college, the cathedral (including the singing men and vergers), the three parishes which he had served, the poor of Ely, relations, and servants. The marble font which this will directed to be made for the cathedral is now in Prickwillow parish church. Spencer died on 27 May 1693, and was buried in Corpus Christi College chapel, where a black marble floor stone bears his epitaph. 
Spencer fully accepted the Restoration settlement, but was a friend and benefactor of dissenters. In outlook he resembled his close friend and executor Thomas Tenison, archbishop of Canterbury. Moreover, the Socinian writer Samuel Crell claimed, probably rightly, that Spencer received him when he visited Cambridge. Suspicion of Spencer's latitudinarianism as doctrinally lax will then have sharpened criticism of his writings. 
W. Robertson Smith called Spencer 'one of the greatest English theologians... whose Latin work on the ritual laws of the Hebrews may justly be said to have laid the foundations of the science of Comparative Religion'. Spencer urged that on investigation these laws and customs could be seen in every case to derive from the surrounding paganism, especially that of Egypt. This bold historical conclusion was invaluable theologically, Spencer argued, for even the greatest writers who had contended for the rationality of 'Old Testament' law -- Spencer instanced Maimonides among the Jews and Aquinas among the Christians -- had judged the reasons for many particular laws to be irrecoverable. Now, however, Spencer claimed, the ritual laws could be fully understood as a divine concession to human frailty, and a kind of inoculation against paganism. Spencer noted that such divine concession to ward off idolatry was envisaged by church fathers, including Eusebius, and in the Jewish tradition by Maimonides. He thus integrated his philological and historical work with an argument for the concord of scripture and reason. 
Spencer's argument was not unparalleled in his time on either the historical side, by John Marsham, or the theological, by Edward Stillingfleet; but he united the two with unrivalled learning and insight, and with the cumulative force of a series of detailed inquiries into ancient religion. He had prepared the way by 'Dissertatio de Urim et Thummim' (1669), which elicited the first of many continental and British criticisms of his argument. 'De legibus' was twice reprinted (The Hague, 1686; Leipzig, 1705). The unpublished fourth book was eagerly awaited after Spencer's death (letter of Newton to Otto Mencke, 22 Nov 1693, 'Correspondence', no. 416). Tenison's efforts to issue it were in vain, but he himself left money to provide for editorial work. The second edition, now including the fourth book (ed. L. Chappelow, Cambridge, 1727, with portrait), was also twice reprinted (Tubingen, 1732; Venice, in parts, 1757-67). 


@@@@@


doc= 26133


Spencer, John Charles, Viscount Althorp and third Earl Spencer (1782-1845), politician, agriculturist, and sportsman, was born on 30 May 1782 at Spencer House, St James's Place, London, the eldest child of George John Spencer, second Earl Spencer (1758-1834), and Lavinia Bingham, daughter of the first earl of Lucan. Of his four brothers and three sisters, five survived to adulthood, four being noticed in the 'Oxford Dictionary of National Biography': Sir Robert Cavendish Spencer, captain RN, surveyor-general of the ordnance, who died at sea in 1830; Frederick Spencer, fourth Earl Spencer ['see under 'Spencer, Sir Robert Cavendish], who retired from the navy as a vice-admiral; George Spencer, an Anglican cleric who converted to Rome in 1830; and Sarah Lyttelton, Lady Lyttelton, who served as governess of Queen Victoria's children. 
Spurred to excel by their formidable but controlling mother the Spencer siblings sought to escape her repressive regime quickly. Robert and Frederick fled to sea. Althorp, as he was known, was sent away to school at eight, but not before experiencing a kind of Gothic childhood which included drunken servants, extended periods of parental desertion, and ferocious verbal abuse. Lord Spencer, though an affectionate father, did nothing to protect his son from the singularly unmaternal brutality of his wife. Althorp was permanently maimed: a profound sense of personal inadequacy undermined an otherwise physically robust and intellectually gifted personality. He did not marry until the age of thirty-four, and he did not begin to unleash his exceptional powers as a politician until he was nearly fifty. 
Althorp's years at Harrow School (1790-98) offered him some respite from the terrors of home, but were otherwise undistinguished. His contemporaries there included the future prime ministers Goderich, Peel, Aberdeen, and Palmerston. He was close to his cousin, Viscount Duncannon, a friend and political ally in adulthood. Lord Spencer became dissatisfied with the school's instruction and withdrew Althorp for two years of private tutoring to prepare him for Cambridge. 
Althorp spent several years at Trinity College, Cambridge, under the supervision of Joseph Allen, later bishop of Ely. The torpid intellectual atmosphere of the university left little mark on the young nobleman. His encounter with Allen was of the first importance. The don was sensitive to the fragile nature of Althorp's emotional development. He could do nothing about Althorp's rejection of his mother's cosmopolitan values, but Allen's influence prevented a retreat into country bumpkinism. He succeeded in nurturing Althorp's intellectual curiosity and deepening religious faith, tempering both with a gentle worldliness. 
The peace of Amiens in 1802 allowed Lord Spencer to send his son on a grand tour. The journey became a parody of traditional practice. Althorp hurried from one Italian city to another searching for a bolt-hole to England. But the shock of encountering raw despotism on its home ground was vital to the gestation of his political ideology. 'They have no more idea of a limited monarchy on the Continent', he told his father, 'than a horse has of the Scriptures' (Wasson, 14). 
This fillip to his whiggism helped Althorp emerge from a Pittite chrysalis. Lord Spencer had deserted Fox in 1794 in reaction to the excesses of the French Revolution and only gradually returned to his native party. Althorp had no clear political beliefs until his tour sparked a revulsion towards conservative ideology. However, his entry into parliament for the pocket borough of Okehampton in April 1804 did not presage a dynamic Commons career. Most of Althorp's life for the next fourteen years was devoted to hunting and shooting. By this means he sought to escape his mother and adult responsibility, and to everyone's surprise he found a wife and the will to lead. 
After a few years of preparation Althorp ascended to the mastership of the Pytchley hunt, already something of a national institution. He took office because of his rank. He achieved fame by intelligent, courageous, and innovative leadership. Through unremitting and arduous effort he built the organization into the premier hunt in England just at the moment when the political and social elite were embracing fox-hunting as a core element of English culture. For ten years Althorp provided superb sport not only to local yeomen and gentry, but also to a membership that increasingly encompassed a significant portion of the high aristocracy. Senior statesmen obeyed the commands of this ungainly youth. Nearly a century later an authority judged that although twenty masters had reigned since 'not one more completely realized the idea of what a master of hounds should be' (H. O. Nethercote, 'The Pytchley Hunt: Past and Present', 1888, 40). He brought the Pytchley, another sporting writer declared, to 'the zenith of its glory' (H. H. Dixon, 'Silk and Scarlet', 1895, 73-4). The mastership gave Althorp confidence and experience that neither his nominal service as junior lord of the Treasury in the 'ministry of all the talents' (1806-7) nor his aimless years in the political wilderness of opposition could confer. 
Lord Spencer obliged Althorp to stand as Pitt's successor for the parliamentary seat of Cambridge University in 1806. This absurd project ended in defeat. The Spencers met with more appropriate success later in the year by gaining one of the Northamptonshire seats, where Althorp Park and the Pytchley were located. The brief but vigorous election campaign antagonized many tory squires, but strong support from the whig grandees and potent nonconformist plumpers left Althorp secure until the famous battle of 1831 in the midst of the 'Reform Bill' crisis, which became the last great electoral contest of the 'ancien regime'. He held a county seat (southern division after 1832) until his elevation to the Lords in 1834. 
Althorp's maiden speech came in 1809 during a debate over the extent to which the duke of York's mistress influenced military appointments made by the prince in his capacity as commander-in-chief of the army. The 'York affair' was decisive in binding Althorp to a group of young whig magnates (including lords Milton, Folkestone, Tavistock, Ebrington, Duncannon, and Lyttelton) increasingly attached to the radical 'Mountain', whom the conservative Grenvillites called 'enrages'. The failure of the senior whigs, notably lords Grey and Grenville, to condemn royal malfeasance and, perhaps even more importantly, immorality, radicalized Althorp's political thought. He broke decisively with the established leadership and isolated himself under the tutelage of the radical Samuel Whitbread to the consternation and incomprehension of the older generation. 
In 1814 Althorp fell passionately in love with Esther Acklom, a plump and unsophisticated heiress, daughter of a minor country gentleman, Richard Acklom of Wiseton Hall, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Elizabeth; he married her on 13 April that year. She returned unstinting devotion. Her death at the age of twenty-nine, after giving birth to a stillborn child in June 1818 was a catastrophe Althorp almost did not survive. His devout religious faith wavered. Possibly suicidal, he withdrew into a period of black depression and social isolation. He wore mourning clothes for the rest of his life. As a penance he gave up fox-hunting, by which means he fashioned a psychological hair shirt producing potent and prolonged misery. He found the sound of a hunting horn almost unbearable even in old age. 
Althorp reconciled himself to Esther's death through a belief in their eventual reunion in heaven, which he could earn only by personal atonement. 'I have abstracted myself from all worldly considerations perhaps more than you will think right', he confessed to Lord Milton, 'but my prospects are so completely annihilated in this world that I only wish to make use of it as a stepping stone to the next' (Wasson, 98). His passion for service became the controlling force of his life. Coupled with his courage and skill as a leader, it overcame his diffidence and stimulated his submerged ambition. This explains the paradox of his bumbling, unprepossessing demeanour and his steely drive to excel. 
Oxen replaced foxes as Althorp's chief objects of pursuit in 1818. Agriculture allowed him to devote his wealth and energy to public service and to enjoy animals. By shrewd purchase and careful breeding he quickly built up one of the most important herds of cattle in Britain. He assisted the development of a lighter boned, quicker fattening strain, which launched shorthorns on the road to bovine supremacy in Britain and America. His skill as a breeder was honed with canines, and bloodlines from both his foxhounds and cattle were still being sought a century after his death. Much of his energy, however, was devoted to promoting research and the dissemination of applied science to farming. He founded his first agricultural association the year after Esther's death. In 1825 he took over the moribund Smithfield Club and transformed it into a national association for animal breeders. By the 1840s its shows were attracting 60,000 visitors a year. He became the founder or president of several county societies and spoke regularly at agricultural meetings throughout the country. In 1838 he chaired the organizational meeting and became the first president of the Royal Agricultural Society, and with his close friend, the duke of Richmond, managed its affairs for most of the next decade. He helped to found and edit the society's journal, planned the giant annual shows, established the library, and authored five articles on breeding and feeding. An indication of his stature in the agricultural world came with the request of Thomas Coke of Holkham that he supervise the great Norfolk estate during the minority of the second earl of Leicester. 
Althorp's philanthropic activities in other realms were equally vigorous though less well known. He attended the preliminary discussions in 1825 to establish London University and later took an active part in the meetings of its council. The next year he participated in the foundation of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. Coupled with the mechanics' institutes, the society was strongly Benthamite in cast. It issued publications Althorp called 'works of great Utility', most notably the 'Penny Magazine', under the motto 'Knowledge is Power'. For twenty years he edited publications, sought contributions, suggested series, and censored antisemitism, and in 1840 became managing director. In that year he tried unsuccessfully to replicate his achievement at Smithfield by restoring a declining institution to health, but he failed and it collapsed on his demise. 
After Esther's death Althorp designed a programme for self-improvement the better to prepare himself for life after fox-hunting. He read theology and economic theory in alternate doses. Later he extended his investigations to new works on biology and geology and made himself an expert on current developments in these fields. His focus on God, science, and Mammon served as yet another reason for the Augustans of the whig leadership to find his interests suspicious. Althorp moved on from reading to meeting the classical economists. In 1823 he joined the Political Economy Club, presided over by Malthus, Ricardo, McCulloch, and the Mills, and participated in its debates. 
Althorp's activities in agriculture and education also led to encounters and friendships with an extraordinary array of scientists, engineers, abolitionists, utilitarians, and radicals, with whom few aristocrats consorted. Leigh Hunt, Francis Place, Elizabeth Fry, Joseph Hume, Lyon Playfair, Josiah Parkes, I. K. Brunel, George Grote, Henry Warburton, Daniel O'Connell, Harriet Martineau, Nassau Senior, and both Macaulays numbered among his associates in various projects. They came to understand and trust him, perhaps alone among the great whigs of his day. He in turn honestly and openly listened and learned. 
Althorp devoted much of his political activity in the decade after Esther's death to legal and economic reform. He chaired a number of committees and succeeded in modestly emulating the work that Romilly, Huskisson, and Peel were also accomplishing. 'Committee is my forte', he once bragged, and his dazzling performance during the second readings of the 'Great Reform Bill' confirmed this assessment. However, it was the harsh measures taken by Liverpool's administration to restrain dissent in the difficult years after Waterloo that made Althorp a politician. He believed the ministers were driving a wedge between the people and the ruling class that would provoke further unrest. 
Althorp responded to the crisis in two ways. First, in the Commons he mounted a sustained and vociferous opposition to government measures of repression. Sometimes virtually alone -- for many whigs, even liberal ones, lacked his confidence in the ability of the aristocracy to ride out the storm unaided by suspension of habeas corpus and stronger laws against sedition -- Althorp fought the measures clause by clause trying to limit the application and duration of the legislation. Second, he took the extraordinary step of appearing alongside Burdett and Major Cartwright at an anti-government rally in Covent Garden in December 1819, standing under a banner proclaiming: 'Let us die like men and not be sold like slaves' (Wasson, 89). He spoke against withdrawing from parliament as a means of protest, but he also associated the grand whiggery directly with the radical movement against the six acts. He won respect, even from opponents, for consistency and courage. Walter Bagehot, who was not a sympathetic judge of Althorp's career, noted later that in these years he 'said things that the best of that majority [in favour of repression] understood in a rugged English way, which changed feelings, even if it did not alter votes'. 'He was always there, always saying what was clear, strong, and manly' (N. St J. Staves, ed., 'Bagehot's Historical Essays', 1965, 159). 
Sidmouth's suppression of dissent made Althorp a parliamentary reformer, as it did many of his closest associates. Unlike some colleagues, however, he did not abandon calls for electoral changes after the emergency was over. Among the great whigs only Russell and Althorp sustained this policy throughout the 1820s. The latter came to see a constitutional revolution as the means by which all his other goals could be achieved. For Althorp parliamentary reform became 'the great aim and object of his political life' (Le Marchant, 290). He also came to see that only a strong whig party could achieve office. This realization brought a gradual end to his isolation and the mentality of permanent opposition. Even though he still refused to countenance his own assumption of the leadership of the party in the Commons, a step which others increasingly pressed upon him, his conduct during the next decade, especially from 1827 onwards, led inevitably in that direction. 
In part Althorp's elevation was due to the elimination of all other suitable candidates. Character flaws, ill health, and suicide removed Brougham, Tavistock, Lambton, Milton, Ponsonby, Tierney, Horner, Russell, Romilly, and Whitbread from contention. Althorp's refusal in 1827 to take office in the Canning administration, though initially seen as divisive, ultimately confirmed his claim to the leadership. It also led to his reconciliation with Lord Grey and to the disgrace of Lord Lansdowne, which unified the whig party, as much as its aristocratic nature allowed, and placed its leadership in the hands of the two strongest patrician reformers of their respective generations. This decisively shifted the centre of whiggery leftwards and forged a party capable of seizing power. 
On 3 March 1830 a meeting held in Althorp's rooms in the Albany formally proposed that he should lead the whig party in the Commons. George IV's death and the ensuing election, followed by Wellington's implacable declaration against reform, altered the political landscape. In November William IV summoned Lord Grey to form a government, which Grey could not promise to do until he had secured Althorp as leader of the House of Commons, chancellor of the exchequer, and chief lieutenant. Although in some respects a coalition ministry, on every important occasion Lord Grey's will was decisive during the next four years but only in close consultation and rarely in conflict with the man he called his 'right hand', Lord Althorp. Indeed, Grey tried on several occasions to make Althorp his co-leader through the eccentric device of appointing him first lord of the Treasury while the premier took the Foreign Office. Althorp consistently refused to accept this proposal. The older man groomed the younger one as his successor, not because he agreed with Althorp's radical views, but in the hope of holding a whig-liberal-radical coalition together in the aftermath of reform. 
Althorp's power in the cabinet was demonstrated by his refusal to serve unless the reckless and undisciplined Henry Brougham was removed from the Commons, which was done. And, although both the king and Grey had the final say on what went into the 'Reform Bill', it was Althorp's draft proposal which formed the basis for the legislation. He did not insist on triennial parliaments and universal suffrage, which he advocated but knew the Commons would never swallow, but in other respects the boldness of the plan, with its sweeping disfranchisement of smaller boroughs and uniform $10 householder qualification, were for him a 'sine qua non' and only reluctantly accepted by some members of the cabinet. 
In early 1831 Althorp was well into middle age. A journalist described his expression as 'soft and stupid-like'. He was stout, broad-whiskered, and round-faced. His farmer-like figure dressed in homely, black, rumpled clothes created an impression of placidity and pedestrian dullness. Creevey nicknamed him Clunch. His speaking style was awkward, full of hesitations, and oddly off-key. Moreover, his orations were sometimes bewildering. 'I forget my topics', he confessed (Aspinall, 123). Yet it was this seeming ordinariness and lack of elegance which won the trust of the country gentlemen, and along with his mastership of the Pytchley convinced many of them that the whig government would not commit any irretrievable enormities. 
There was nothing feigned about Althorp's unprepossessing manner. But many contemporaries and subsequent observers failed to look beyond the superficial appearance of squirearchical bonhomie. Althorp observed the world from the pinnacle of wealth and power and as the hereditary custodian of a potent ideology. His sense of personal unworthiness drove him to prodigies of exertion uncharacteristic of most grandees. His able mind gave him mastery in parliamentary debate. Peel understood this, noting: 'he never failed on every question to say a few words entirely to the point, and no argument open to reply escaped him' ('Greville Memoirs', 86). His style of management was loose and unassertive, but this proved useful both in forcing the unreformed Commons to accept its own demise and in bringing as much unity as was likely to be achieved in the house after 1832. His mastery of the job won universal praise during the reform debates, when his knowledge, persuasive candour, and coolness in emergencies secured the passage of the bill virtually intact. Some kind of reform bill would have been passed whoever was in the lead. That a sweeping measure came through almost unscathed was Althorp's personal achievement. He earned the sobriquet 'Honest Jack' because of his disarming truthfulness and the essential Englishness of his character. 
Althorp carried into effect economic reforms to the extent that the whig legislative agenda and Lord Grey would allow. The latter was adamantly opposed to abolition of the corn laws, which meant that free-trade principles could only be introduced in moderate amounts. His first budget in 1831 was a disaster owing to constraints of time and Althorp's inexperience. Subsequent years saw more effective legislation that gradually reduced tariffs. His bills dealing with the East India Company and the Bank of England charter reflected 'laissez faire' tempered by political realism. He was successful in slashing sinecures and streamlined the operation of the Treasury. In the 1840s Peel continued his work and complemented his achievements. 
Under Althorp's leadership in 1833 the reformed House of Commons enacted abolition of slavery in the British empire. His factory reform, called 'Althorp's Act', was too limited for Lord Ashley's taste, but it included two crucial precedents that the chancellor of the exchequer insisted upon and defended vigorously: mandatory provisions for the education of children and the founding of a factory inspectorate. The latter opened the door for even more dramatic state intervention with the new poor law of 1834. Althorp worked with Senior and Chadwick to draft this legislation and carried it through the Commons. Workhouses came to be known as 'Althorp's bastilles'. He was blamed for accepting the harsh principle of 'less eligibility'. On the other hand, he blocked the doctrinaire Edwin Chadwick's appointment as a commissioner of the centralized London bureaucracy set up to manage the system. Althorp advocated an overhaul of the poor law based on Benthamite and classical economic principles, but he also insisted on a balance between efficiency and humanity. He kept Chadwick out of power in order to check dogmatic enforcement. 
The reform ministry came unstuck over the issue of Ireland. In 1833 Althorp enthusiastically introduced legislation to reform the Church of Ireland, and won Daniel O'Connell's praise. He execrated 'ascendancy' arrogance and English misrule, which he once called 'a disgrace to a civilized country' ('Hansard 3', 81, 4 June 1845). Grey's insistence on strong coercive measures to accompany concessions led to internal convulsions from which the ministry did not recover. Stanley and other conservatives resigned, and Grey soon followed them. Althorp was obliged to resign after his father's death on 10 November 1834 translated him to the House of Lords. William IV used the excuse of Russell's inability to compensate for the loss of Althorp from the Commons as an excuse to exercise for the last time the royal prerogative of dismissing a ministry. 
Spencer escaped the premiership after Grey's resignation in 1834 and Peel's failure to gain the confidence of the Commons in 1835 because of the king's repugnance and his own refusal to become the head of a radical-liberal 'movement' party organized by O'Connell, Hume, Warburton, and others. Though ambitious, he knew himself well enough to understand that he lacked the temperament and strategic vision to hold the first place. Many remained ardent for his leadership, but Spencer lay low in order to give no encouragement to his followers. He made 'rare appearances for serious purposes' (J. Morley, 'The Life of William Ewart Gladstone', 1903, 1.292) in the Lords, and a few times he organized a cabal of grandees to moderate Palmerston's aggressive foreign policy. His support for abolition of the corn laws sometimes made it awkward for him to speak before large assemblages of farmers. 
Spencer devoted his retirement to agricultural propaganda, educational philanthropy, and salvaging the Spencer estate, which he was shaken to learn was half a million pounds in debt. Interest payments alone consumed three-quarters of his income. He lived frugally at his deceased wife's modest dwelling at Wiseton Hall, Nottinghamshire, shut up Althorp and Spencer houses, and sold off property not connected with the core of the estate. He sacrificed his comfort and dignity to ensure that his successors would enjoy splendour for at least another couple of centuries. The philistine of the grand tour preserved the glories of the Spencer collections, sacrificing the ease of his old age rather than sending Caxtons and Holbeins to the salerooms. Indeed, in later years Spencer carried on the family tradition of patronage. He sponsored a trip to Rome made by the sculptor William Butlin, funded the poet John Clare, and continued to make additions to his father's great library, which was made available to scholars. 
In the autumn of 1845 Spencer fell ill and died of kidney failure on 1 October at Wiseton. His body was taken by rail to Northamptonshire where he was interred among the glory of the Tudor and Jacobean Spencer tombs at Great Brington near Althorp Park. Queen Victoria noted: 'He will be a great loss, not only to his family, but to the country' (Wasson, 349) His friend Lord Fitzwilliam proposed a subscription for a public monument, but Frederick Spencer demurred at his older brother's instruction. 'On long consideration,' the new earl told his correspondent, 'it was [Althorp's] opinion that for a public man the history of his country would be the best memorial of his character and acts' (ibid.). 
The Victorians grasped the importance of the 'Reform Act' they called 'great'. Later whig historians continued to tout its importance but saw Durham, Brougham, Holland, or Russell as the progenitors of change. Then for a time the reformers' reputations were in eclipse as revisionists struggled to combine sociology with historical analysis. Lively debate continues to surround the origins and implications of parliamentary reform and the great wave of accompanying legislation of the early 1830s. Historians now better understand the complex mixture of Anglicanism, 'laissez faire' economics, confident paternalism, incipient collectivism, radical utilitarianism, Irish nationalism, and developing party consciousness in the making of reform. The 'Reform Act' itself has been successfully rehabilitated as the great political watershed of the first half of the nineteenth century. Among the whig magnates Althorp was the most committed and potent reformer. Bagehot and some later commentators portrayed Althorp as a simpleton or a blundering rustic. On the other hand, most of his contemporaries accorded him respect and affection. His unique mastery of the Commons was greatly admired by both Gladstone and Salisbury. He conveyed to the Victorians a notion of public virtue and moral government that melded whiggery and Liberalism. His life work laid the foundations of the Liberal Party and the modern state. 


@@@@@


doc= 26134


Spencer, Robert, first Baron Spencer (1570-1627), politician and sheep farmer, was the son of Sir John Spencer ('c'.1545-1600) of Althorp, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Mary Catlin (died 1621), daughter of Sir Robert Catlin. He was educated at Oxford University and on 15 February 1588 married Margaret ('c'.1570-1597), daughter of Sir Francis Willoughby of Wollaton, Nottinghamshire. He was knighted in 1601 and created Baron Spencer of Wormleighton on 21 July 1603. He sat as MP for Brackley in 1597 and was a justice of the peace and musters commissioner for Northamptonshire from about 1601. 
The Spencer family's fortunes were founded in the early sixteenth century by Robert's great-great-grandfather Sir John Spencer, who made large profits out of sheep farming in south-west Warwickshire. He was able to purchase two blocks of manors centred on Wormleighton in Warwickshire and Althorp in Northamptonshire which were to remain the family's principal residences. By the time Robert inherited the estate from his father in 1600 it had expanded considerably as a result of advantageous marriages and growing income from the carefully managed sheep flocks. He continued the family tradition and remained first and foremost a sheep farmer. At the time when he received his baronage, he was 'reputed to have by him the most money of any person in the kingdom' (Finch, 38), which presumably referred to reserves of ready money at his disposal. His income was between $6500 and $8000 a year, but there were several contemporary landowners wealthier than him. 
Like other landed families whose wealth had been acquired recently, the Spencers were anxious to present themselves as long established. In 1595 Robert's father acquired a pedigree from the College of Arms which traced their descent back to the Despensers, earls of Gloucester and Winchester. This did not impress some members of the ancient peerage, however, and during the 1621 parliament Spencer's origins were denigrated by the earl of Arundel, who recalled that his own ancestors had suffered 'for doing the king and country good service, and in such time as when perhaps the lord's ancestors that spake last kept sheep' (Gardiner, 4.114). The insult was prompted by Spencer's challenging Arundel over Sir Henry Yelverton's right to a hearing in the Lords, after Yelverton had implicitly compared the duke of Buckingham to Edward II's favourite, Hugh Despenser. Arundel argued that he had said enough to warrant condemnation, but Spencer -- who must have been acquainted with Yelverton, a fellow Northamptonshire landowner and recorder of Northampton -- urged that he be allowed to explain himself. Arundel refused to apologize for the insult and was confined to the Tower. 
This speech was Spencer's most significant intervention in parliament and did much to confirm his image among contemporaries as a 'patriot' peer. Arthur Wilson, writing in the 1650s, described him as someone who: 'made the countrie a vertuous court where his fields and flocks brought him more calm and happy contentment than the various and mutable dispensations of a court can contribute; and when he was called to the Senate was more vigilant to keep the people's liberties from being prey to the incroaching power of monarchy than his harmless and tender lambs from foxes and ravenous creatures. (Wilson, 162-3)' Spencer's record in national politics generally bears out Wilson's verdict. In 1603, soon after he was made a peer, a career at court beckoned when he was sent to Germany as ambassador to invest the duke of Wurttemberg with the Order of the Garter, but nothing came of this. In the Lords he was not a prominent speaker, but he attended assiduously and in his speeches generally supported 'country' causes. In 1621 he urged that the recusancy statutes be vigorously enforced and that the notorious monopolist Sir Giles Mompesson be openly indicted; in 1624 he proposed that Lord Treasurer Cranfield's estates be made liable for the damages he had incurred; and in 1626 he drew attention to criticisms of Buckingham's performance as lord admiral. Where Spencer made his greatest mark, however, was in the local politics of Northamptonshire. 
Spencer's wealth, prestige, and extensive landholdings made him the most influential figure in the western half of the county, if not in the shire as a whole. He used this to good effect in parliamentary elections. In 1603 he campaigned for county seats for himself and Sir Edward Montagu (later first Baron Montagu of Boughton), against opposition from Sir Anthony Mildmay, and seems to have been more or less assured of election at the point when he was granted his peerage. In the election of 1624 he succeeded in overturning the convention that one knight be chosen from each half of the shire by securing election for his puritan friend Richard Knightley, and his son Sir William Spencer. The reason he gave for this to Montagu -- that 'the papists will work hard in this parliament' and it was therefore necessary to support candidates who would staunchly oppose them ('Montagu of Beaulieu MSS', 106) -- revealed much about his political priorities. In the election of 1626 he again clashed with Montagu and the magnates in the east of the shire and again came out on top, using his influence to help secure the election of another puritan, Sir John Pickering. Later in the year he made perhaps his most significant intervention in local politics by resisting the forced loan. During November it was widely reported that he was refusing to co-operate with the levy, along with fifteen other peers, including two of his closest friends, the Leicestershire magnates Henry, Lord Grey of Groby, and Henry Hastings, fifth earl of Huntingdon. He probably shared the views of his son Sir William, who early in 1626 was alleged to have declared at a meeting of the deputy lieutenants that 'the king wanted no money, and if he did he might call a parliament' (BL, Spencer MS A2). His defiance went unpunished and set an example for widespread refusal of the loan in Northamptonshire early in 1627. 
Such evidence of his religious views as survives suggests that Spencer was a staunch Calvinist, although rather less zealous than someone like his friend Knightley. He was described in his funeral sermon, by the Calvinist Richard Parre, as one of 'God's Saints' and was praised for 'the great encouragement and countenance he gave to the ministers of God' (Parre, 21-2). When account is taken of the extent of his patronage, his support of godly ministers was not in fact as conspicuous as it might have been. Nevertheless, as his interventions in county elections demonstrated, there was little doubt that he broadly aligned himself with the godly. 
In other respects, too, Spencer sought to present himself as the archetypal country peer. According to Parre he was renowned for his 'careful frugality'. He did not get caught up in the Jacobean fashion for showy building projects, and in 1618 turned down an earldom when it was offered to him for $10,000. His hospitality was said to be bountiful but not ostentatious, something borne out by his household accounts. He also had a reputation for generously helping the poor, and as a wise master to his tenants and servants and a trusted arbiter of local disputes. When Grey and Huntingdon became locked in a quarrel in the early part of James's reign he intervened to mediate between them. Finally he shared the contemporary passion for genealogy, corresponding with William Camden about tracing his family tree and earning a tribute for his 'singular... skill in antiquities, arms, alliances' (Parre, 24). His funeral elegy described him as 'the pattern of a perfect man' ('The Muses Thankfulness'). 
Spencer did not marry again after his wife, Margaret, died in August 1597 leaving him with four sons and three daughters. He died at Wormleighton on 25 October 1627 and his body was taken back to the family chapel at Great Brington, Northamptonshire, where he was buried on 6 November next to the monument he had erected to his wife. He was succeeded by his second, and eldest surviving, son, Sir William. 


@@@@@


doc= 26135


Spencer, Robert, second earl of Sunderland (1641-1702), politician, son of Henry Spencer, third Baron Spencer (bap. 1620, d. 1643), and his wife, Lady Dorothy Sydney (1617-1684), daughter of the earl of Leicester, was born in Paris on 5 September 1641 'and was christened Robert after his grandfather Leicester' (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 2). Two years after his birth his father was made earl of Sunderland by Charles I, only to die fighting for the king at Newbury in September. Robert therefore succeeded to the earldom as an infant, which was to mean that, unlike many politicians of the period, he never served as a member of the House of Commons. 
Sunderland's widowed mother brought him up as a staunch Anglican, employing an ejected fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, Thomas Pierce, as his tutor. After going together to the continent in 1658 they returned in 1660 when Pierce was restored to his fellowship at Magdalen. Robert possibly accompanied him there as a student, for he was associated with the protest William Penn made at Christ Church against the wearing of the surplice. Certainly he accompanied Penn on a visit to France in 1661. Apart from a brief visit home in 1663 he remained on the continent until April 1665, spending time in Spain, Switzerland, and Italy as well as in France. His interlude in England was spent courting Lady Anne Digby (1645/6-1715), younger daughter of George Digby, earl of Bristol, with whom a marriage was arranged that summer. At the last moment, however, the groom panicked and fled abroad. By the time he got back to England his mind was made up, and he married Lady Anne on 9 June 1665. When they settled at Althorp, their seat in Northamptonshire, they virtually rebuilt it and used it for glittering social gatherings. Among those they entertained were prominent courtiers and politicians, including the dukes of York and Monmouth. This lavish lifestyle, and Robert's penchant for the gaming table, where he gambled for sums as big as $5000 a night, ran them into debt. 
It also brought them into the world of high politics, with which their families were naturally connected. Sunderland and his countess were related to several leading figures, including Algernon Sidney and Henry Sidney, who were his uncles, George Savile, earl of Halifax, who became his brother-in-law, and the Russells, earls of Bedford, of whom the fourth was the countess's maternal grandfather. The most political animal in late Stuart England, Robert Spencer was attracted into this world soon after his marriage, when he attached himself to the earl of Arlington, a friend of his wife's family. As long as the first earl of Clarendon was in power Arlington's influence was not an asset which could further his career, since the secretary of state led those who sought to remove the leading minister. After he succeeded in that task in 1667, however, his protege could be advanced. In 1668 Arlington began to seek for Sunderland a diplomatic post, the usual appointment for an apprentice courtier. In June 1670, following the conclusion of the secret treaty of Dover, Sunderland went to France to convey Charles II's compliments to Louis XIV. Next year he went as envoy-extraordinary to Madrid, briefed with the task of preventing an alliance between the Dutch and the Spanish against the French. Although this was a useful experience of diplomacy it got nowhere, and Sunderland was relieved to be transferred to Paris from Madrid in May 1672. There he replaced Ralph Montagu as English ambassador. After spending time, and money, in Paris to little purpose Sunderland complained that the embassy was costing him too much. Although his complaints brought some financial relief from the Treasury, he was again relieved when, in March 1673, he received instructions to go as envoy to the congress of Cologne. He never got there, however, being prevented by illness, which led him to ask to be discharged from his official duties, and to return to England in September. 
Shortly after his return Sunderland was made gentleman of the bedchamber with a salary of $1000, though this was never paid in full. For an ambitious and spendthrift politician neither the post nor the salary could be satisfactory. Now that his patron, Arlington, had fallen from favour Sunderland looked round for another, and found one in the king's new mistress, Louise de Keroualle, duchess of Portsmouth. 'As I have always found your Lordship knew her better than any,' observed Danby in 1679, 'so I found that nobody knew so well how to manage her' (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 18n.). His ability to manage her got him noticed not only by Danby but also by the king. Charles II used Sunderland as a go-between with the duchess in 1675 when he recognized her son as his and ennobled the child as duke of Richmond. In April 1677 and again in July 1678 Sunderland was employed as an envoy to Louis XIV. Though he failed to persuade the French king to renew his alliance with England, his diplomatic activities apparently impressed Charles II, for in February 1679 Sunderland became secretary of state. 
Sunderland's appointment placed him at the forefront of affairs. John Dryden recognized this when he dedicated his play 'Troilus and Cressida' to the new 'principall Secretary of State'. The playwright claimed that he could: 'say without flattery [that] he had all the depth of understanding that was requisite in any able statesman, and all that honesty which commonly is wanting; that he was brave without vanity, and knowing without positiveness; that he was loyall to his Prince and a lover of his Country; and his principles were full of moderation, and all his Councils such as tended to heal and not to widen the breaches of the Nation. ('Works of John Dryden', 13.220-21)' This was of course, despite Dryden's disclaimer, the grossest court flattery. Sunderland was more renowned for his hypocrisy than for his honesty, while so far were his principles 'full of moderation' that, as his biographer puts it, he 'was nothing if not a man of extremes' (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 332). He was an arrogant, cynical, hard-nosed politician, whose irascibility frequently wounded those who felt the lash of his tongue. 'He wanted not this farther quality to make him universally odious', commented Arthur Onslow ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.412n.). Bishop Burnet agreed that 'he raised many enemies to himself by the contempt with which he treated those who differed from him' (ibid., 2.18) yet acknowledged that 'he had indeed the superior genius to all the men of business that I have yet known' (ibid.). By this he meant a genius for appreciating the big picture rather than for taking pains. For Sunderland was a poor administrator, impatient of detailed application, which he left to subordinates. A hostile observer, of whom there were many, claimed to have been told by one of his underlings that 'he never came to the secretary's office, but they carried the papers to him at his house, where he was usually at cards, and he would sign them without reading, and seldom asked what they were about' (ibid.). Yet even his opponents admired the intellect of the 'Proteus Sunderland': '
The deep Reserves of whose Apostate Mind, 

No Skill can reach, no Principles can bind; 

Whose working Brain does more Disguises bear 

Than ever yet in Vision did appear. 
('Advice to a painter', Lord and others, 18)' Sunderland was 'at the helm', as Dryden put it, for the greatest crisis following the Restoration. The Danby ministry had collapsed under pressure from a country party which accused the minister of systematic bribery and corruption in order to create a court party to pursue policies inimical to England's interests. In particular it charged him with encouraging popery and arbitrary power by aligning England with France. The prospects of the accession of James after the death of his brother, Charles, however, had transcended concerns about Danby's policies following the outbreak of the Popish Plot in 1678. This raised the whole question of the succession of the Catholic duke, and brought on a campaign to exclude him from the throne. The first 'Exclusion Bill' was to be introduced into parliament following the general election, which was under way when Sunderland was appointed secretary. Charles was so concerned at the threat it posed that he sent his brother out of the country to Brussels. 
Sunderland played a major role in other moves made by the king to stave off the crisis. Thus he negotiated with leading opponents of the court a deal which led to the formation of a new privy council including them. Although the scheme was the idea of Sir William Temple, to whom it is usually attributed, Sunderland was responsible for its detailed implementation. His first involvement in high politics was to bring dissident elements, including Shaftesbury, leader of the first whigs, into government in an attempt to buy them off. Although this scheme failed to resolve the exclusion crisis, it gave Sunderland valuable experience in wheeling and dealing with politicians ostensibly opposed to the court. It was of these negotiations that Roger North recorded a curious anecdote about Sunderland's affecting a 'court tune': 'Whaat, my laard, if his Majesty taarn out faarty of us, may not he have faarty athors to saarve him as well? And what maatters who saarves his Majesty, so lang as his Majesty is saarved?' ('DNB'). North used the story to illustrate an affectation of Sunderland's which he claimed was adopted by others at court. It also records a very revealing maxim of Sunderland's, who clearly did not think it mattered who served the king as long as the king was served. It was one he was to apply not only to the circumstances of the exclusion crisis but to other political crises in the next two reigns. 
Over the summer of 1679 Sunderland was associated with the earls of Essex and Halifax in a so-called triumvirate. They tried to sell to the whigs an idea of the king's to obviate exclusion. This was a scheme of limitations, whereby a Catholic successor would have to uphold the Church of England and work with parliament. James himself, who thought the whole whig campaign aimed ultimately at a republic, disliked limitations even more than the 'Exclusion Bill', arguing that they would transform the monarchy into a quasi-republic under the titular kingship of the duke of Monmouth, Charles II's illegitimate son. When the idea failed to stop the 'Exclusion Bill' in its tracks Charles prorogued parliament. Sunderland then persuaded him to dissolve it and hold fresh elections. When the privy council met to discuss this decision on 10 July, Shaftesbury and his cohorts angrily criticized those responsible for it. The dissolution put a strain on the coalition scheme, but it was the return of James from exile in Brussels that September which brought about its collapse. 
Sunderland invited the duke back because the king had become dangerously ill. Although on his recovery Charles ordered his brother to remove himself again, this time to Scotland, he also sent Monmouth out of the country and dismissed Shaftesbury. James was furious at being exiled in Edinburgh, and accused Sunderland of failing to fulfil a promise that he should stay in England. He was prepared to attribute this to inexperience rather than treachery, telling the French ambassador 'that Lord Sunderland, being new to politics, found himself in difficulties, and he lacked the boldness so necessary in these difficult times' (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 32). He nevertheless ensured that Sunderland's influence in the ministry would be counterbalanced by that of his own protege Laurence Hyde, who became first lord of the Treasury in November. Hyde was no more experienced in office than Sunderland. Indeed so green were they and their colleague Sidney Godolphin, with whom they formed the ministry, that they were known as 'the Chits'. Throughout 1680 the ministry laboured to try to offset the results of the parliamentary elections, which had gone again in favour of the exclusionists. They persuaded the king to keep proroguing parliament to avoid an early meeting which would play into the hands of the whigs. This was not mere procrastination as they also made efforts to bring moderate members of both houses to accept the court line. 
Sunderland's role in this strategy was to espouse an anti-French foreign policy, reversing his previous reliance on France and making a treaty with Spain. He even hoped that William of Orange could be persuaded to come to England before parliament met in order to demonstrate the court's commitment to an eventual protestant succession. In June 1680 the Chits held a conference at Sunderland's country house, at which they negotiated a deal with Halifax to lay before the houses when they met. Not only was William to be invited over but a scheme of limitations on a popish successor was to be proposed. When William refused to accept an invitation unless it was issued by the king, Charles obliged and sent one over to the Netherlands. Sunderland sent three letters about this on the same day, 21 July, to his uncle Henry Sidney at The Hague. These document the degree to which he was acting deviously in that tense summer. The first, known only to himself and his close colleague Godolphin, stressed that they alone knew 'the best reasons for this journey', whose aim was to ensure that 'the King and his People must agree at their next meeting, and the King is convinced of it'. As the architect of the new alignment of England with Spain and the Dutch republic against France, Sunderland stressed that the most important point of the imminent session of parliament was to get it 'to support the alliances the King has made for which it will be necessary to let them see that the thing is in earnest that those most concerned think so'. The most concerned, of course, was the prince of Orange. His presence was to show the houses the visible embodiment of the new anti-French foreign policy. 'Another great point', Sunderland continued, 'is to settle Religion without meddling with the Succession'. This apparently referred to the limitations which Charles proposed to place on his brother's prerogative when he became king. The prince's presence was presumably to give his blessing to this scheme. He was also intended to mediate between: 'the king and his people, by whose means all Jealousies may be removed either that the King has any intentions but what are for the good of the people or they any but to support the Government and religion now established. (Kenyon, 'Charles II', 99, 101)' The meaning of many passages in these letters is cryptic, partly because the context in which they were written, and which Sunderland assumed Sidney was aware of, cannot now be reconstructed, and partly because they were meant to be. But it seems that Sunderland wanted William to reconcile Charles with the whigs by showing that the king was not a supporter of popery and arbitrary power, while they were not crypto-republicans intent on making Monmouth a puppet king. 
It was Sunderland's determination to demonstrate his commitment to William and to dish whig support for Monmouth which apparently lay behind his otherwise inexplicable decision to support the second 'Exclusion Bill'. For on the face of things it was to commit political suicide. The king had made it clear on more than one occasion that he would not stand for any alteration in the succession. Though he was persuaded by the privy council, led by Sunderland, to send his brother to Scotland on the eve of the parliamentary session, he did so with an ill grace, and again reiterated that he would not assent to exclusion. The whigs nevertheless eschewed limitations and introduced an exclusion bill in the new parliament. When the bill was first debated in the Commons on 6 November it did not name a successor. But in committee a clause was added to it to provide that the crown should descend as though James had died, which ensured the succession of William's wife, Mary, and scotched Monmouth's chances. Although it cannot be documented it can be deduced that Sunderland had worked hard behind the scenes to carry this clause. He apparently agreed with his uncle Henry Sidney that James 'would never inherit the Crown... and if the succession is not settled somewhere, it will certainly turn to a Commonwealth' ('Diary of... Sidney', 2.129). When the bill went up to the House of Lords, therefore, Sunderland was committed to its passage despite the king's disapproval. As he put it to Temple, who tried to dissuade him, ''twas too late, his honour was engaged, and he could not break it' (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 64). Sunderland duly voted with the minority when the bill was thrown out. The king, who was present in the house, observed that his speech in support of the bill was 'the kiss of Judas' (ibid., 66). Charles marked the secretary down for destruction, but waited until he dissolved parliament on 18 January 1681 before dismissing him on the 24th. Sunderland was mortified, though he went to the third Exclusion Parliament at Oxford 'with as good resolutions as if my usage had been contrary to what it was' ('Diary of... Sidney', 2.180). 
Within two years Sunderland was restored to favour. On 27 July 1682 he was allowed an audience by the king, when he kissed hands. In September he was readmitted to the privy council and on 31 January 1683 he again became secretary of state. This was the first of two returns to power which gave him the reputation of being the indispensable courtier, twice bounding back to the centre of politics after a disgrace. His redemption after being an exclusionist, however, was less spectacular a feat than his becoming the principal adviser to William III, after serving James II in the same capacity. Supporting exclusion could be forgiven even by Charles II, who allowed Godolphin to remain at the Treasury despite his also voting for the second bill. Admittedly the king excused him on the grounds that he had been misled by Sunderland. But if Sunderland's sin was unforgivable by Charles at the time, it was a lesser offence to James than support of limitations. Halifax, the architect of the defeat of the bill in the upper house, was paradoxically less appealing to James because he advocated limitations, even to the point of suggesting the duke's permanent exile in Scotland unless he converted to Anglicanism. When Sunderland cynically justified his vote on the grounds that the bill was bound to fail anyway, and that the alternative was to limit the prerogative, James was prepared to overlook his disloyalty and support his return to office. It was also supported by the duchess of Portsmouth, whose influence with the king had never been greater. 
His acceptance at court meant that Sunderland was identified with the reaction which set in against the whigs. Although he took little part in the proceedings against them, he nevertheless acquiesced in the trials and executions of the Rye House plotters. These included his wife's cousin, Lord William Russell, and his uncle Algernon Sidney, whose death apparently hastened that of his own mother in 1684. This break with former political allies extended to the prince of Orange. When William saw Sunderland after his disgrace in 1681 he expressed appreciation of the earl's efforts on his behalf. On becoming secretary of state, however, Sunderland fell in with the court's rapprochement with France, reversing his previous pro-Dutch foreign policy. Thus along with the French he backed the Danes in their quarrel with the Dutch, a policy which led to the marriage of Princess Anne, James's younger daughter, to Prince George of Denmark in July 1683. 
Sunderland's willingness to fall in with measures of the court he had not supported when in office inevitably makes his motives appear cynical. It could even seem that he missed the emoluments of office at a time when his extravagant social life was running him ever deeper into debt. At the time of his dismissal he had mortgaged estates in two counties to raise the collateral for debts of $16,000. His wife complained 'we are on the point of ruin' ('Diary of... Sidney', 2.185). Yet Sunderland was not in politics for the money. Had he embarked on a political career in order to enjoy its financial rewards he would have made survival a top priority. In fact he was in it for power, and he was prepared to gamble as recklessly in politics as he was at the gaming table. He had staked a lot on the last throw of the dice and had lost. Now he was back at the court casino he was determined to recoup his losses. 
In order to do so Sunderland had to beat a formidable rival, Laurence Hyde, now the earl of Rochester. As first lord of the Treasury, Rochester was high in the king's favour for presiding over a significant improvement in the royal finances, which helped Charles manage without parliament. He was also the confidant of the duke of York, and when James returned from Scotland worked closely with him on the commission for ecclesiastical promotions. At first Sunderland ingratiated himself with his rival, claiming the 'realest friendship imaginable' ('Correspondence of... Clarendon', 1.87). But when the first lord fell foul of the king, following accusations of peculation in the management of the hearth tax, Sunderland distanced himself from him and helped to manoeuvre Rochester out of the Treasury into the post of lord president in August 1684. Godolphin, Sunderland's closest colleague, succeeded as first lord. The following month Judge Jeffreys, whose appointment as lord chief justice Sunderland had procured, was admitted to the cabinet council. In the closing weeks of Charles II's reign, therefore, Sunderland came close to being the chief minister. 
Then, in February 1685, Charles II suddenly died. Once again Sunderland had gambled and lost. Like many politicians of the day he assumed that the king would outlive his brother. He had gone along with Charles when he cooled towards James, even being implicated in the rumours that Monmouth was to be rehabilitated at court. He thus found himself wrong-footed at the outset of the new reign, and had to do some nimble footwork to earn the approval of James II. It seems that his preparations for the elections to parliament found favour with the king, especially when they contributed to the return of the most loyal House of Commons ever to sit under the Stuarts. Whatever the reason, Sunderland was retained in the office of secretary of state. 
Perhaps the main reason why Sunderland survived the crisis of James II's accession and remained at the very centre of his affairs until just before the revolution was that he was more sympathetic to the king's religious aims than other close advisers such as Rochester. Anglican tories were devoted to the hereditary succession and the Church of England, a devotion which would put intolerable pressure on them when they had to choose one or the other. Most chose the church. Sunderland, who had no strong religious beliefs, and was certainly not a staunch Anglican, felt no such dilemma. His loyalty was to the crown. As Bonrepos, a French envoy, observed: 'the King is well aware of Lord Sunderland's character, that he is ambitious and capable of any sacrifice for ambition's sake; but though he has no great confidence in him he makes use of him, because he is more devoted to him than others and because he unhesitatingly falls in with all his plans for the establishment of the Catholic religion -- though for himself he professes no faith at all and speaks very loosely about it. (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 155)' Realizing that the king's attempt to obtain relief for his co-religionists from Anglicans was doomed to failure, he cultivated the Catholics at court. These were divided. Moderate Catholics, like Lord Belasyse, worried that James's zeal would cause a backlash when he died, and his protestant daughter, Mary, and her husband, William of Orange, would succeed. Extreme Catholics, like Father Petre and Tyrconnell, were prepared to push the drive to Rome as fast as they could. Sunderland, perhaps realizing that the latter were more appealing to the king, threw in his lot with them. Thus early in the reign he made approaches to the earl of Tyrconnell and Father Petre. Above all he insinuated himself into the favour of the queen, Mary of Modena. 'The Queen was artificially possessed by this lord' maintained Sir John Reresby: 'that the relations and friends of the King's first wife were in greatest favour, and had the best places, as Rochester, Clarendon, Dartmoth etc., whilst her friends, that was Queen Regent, had none soe considerable, of which nomber were reckned Lord Sunderland, Lord Chancellor, Lord Churchill etc. ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', 401)' Ultimately Sunderland's cabal was to triumph over James's Anglican tory ministers, led by the king's Hyde brothers-in-law, the earls of Rochester and Clarendon. Rochester used the king's mistress, Catherine Sedley, as a counterpoise to the queen. Although it was to take him nearly two years to remove his rivals, Sunderland showed that in the end he had backed the right horse. 
Over the summer of 1685 Sunderland entrenched himself in power. He presided over the suppression of Monmouth's rebellion and rewarded Jeffreys, the judge responsible for the brutal aftermath, by persuading the king to appoint him as lord chancellor. In October a dangerous rival, Halifax, was removed when James dismissed him for refusing to support the repeal of the 'Test and Habeas Corpus Acts'. Sunderland was appointed to the post of lord president made vacant by Halifax's dismissal, a position he held together with the secretaryship. The only serious rival to Sunderland's ascendancy at the end of 1685 was the lord treasurer, Rochester. Although it was to take Sunderland another year to see him off, Rochester dated his decline and fall from the prorogation of parliament that November for not endorsing the commissions given to Catholics by the king, using his prerogative to dispense them from the 'Test Act'. Rochester apparently disapproved of the dispensing power being used for that purpose. While Sunderland later insisted that he too objected to the practice, he does not appear to have registered his objections at the time. Nor does he seem to have done so with regard to the commission for ecclesiastical causes set up in 1686, on which he and Rochester sat, himself apparently accepting its legality, while his rival made clear his unease. It would have been a curious gnat to strain at when that summer Sunderland swallowed the camel of conversion to Catholicism. He finally undermined Rochester's credibility with the king by inducing James to attempt the treasurer's conversion too. Rochester responded by agreeing to hear a disputation between Anglican and Catholic divines, but when he declared that he had not been persuaded by the latter his days at the Treasury were numbered, and he was dismissed in January 1687. Meanwhile Sunderland had engineered the removal of Rochester's brother Clarendon from the lord lieutenancy of Ireland, and his replacement as lord deputy by the Catholic earl of Tyrconnell. 
The breach with the Hydes shifted the balance of power in James's counsels from the Anglicans to the Catholics. Thus the Treasury was put into commission headed by the Roman Catholic peer Lord Belasyse, though the effective business was done by Sunderland's ally Godolphin. Although Sunderland's conversion had not yet been made public, the announcement by his eldest son, Robert, in April 1687 that he had converted to Rome helped to keep him well in with Catholic ministers. At the same time Sunderland was aware that a government which rested solely on Catholic support was too narrowly based to be viable. Having broken with the Anglicans he advised the king to make a conciliatory gesture to protestant dissenters. This was a difficult policy to advocate since James was convinced that most nonconformists were republicans who would disturb the peace of his kingdom. Sunderland had to persuade him that some at least would co-operate with the regime. James had already made an exception of the Quakers, doubtless because he accepted that as pacifists they were scarcely likely to rebel. Thus in 1686 he had released many from gaol, and had sent the Quaker leader, William Penn, to The Hague, but the mission was abortive. The prince and princess would agree to toleration, even for Catholics, but not to doing away with the 'Test Act'. Sunderland capitalized on this concession by persuading the king to make his old acquaintance Penn deputy lieutenant in Buckinghamshire in November. Thus even before the dismissal of the Hydes there were signs of a rapprochement with dissenters. Sunderland was aware that they suffered along with the Catholics from the penal laws and 'Test Act'. He therefore sought to consolidate the alliance with them by pursuing the goal of relieving them from the oppressive statutes. 
Given the intransigence of the Anglicans in parliament to this measure Sunderland declined to advise the reconvening of that body, although he did string James along with the hope that they could be persuaded to change their minds. He did not, however, approve of the king's policy of closeting members. As he himself put it, 'who was to get by closeting I need not say, but it was certainly not I, nor any of my friends' ('Diary of... Sidney', 2.374-5). Nor did he support James's interference in the election of a president of Magdalen College, Oxford. His intervention in that business, which dragged on from April 1687 to the end of the year, was an exercise in damage limitation. Despite these disagreements with James the king still held him in high esteem, installing him as a knight of the Garter in May. This was perhaps because he did approve the king's declaration of indulgence or edict of toleration in April 1687. This concession suspended the penal laws against protestant nonconformists and Catholics alike. Aware that a principal objection to an edict as distinct from a statute was that it depended on the will of the king who issued it, and could be revoked by his successor, Sunderland sought to assuage dissenting scruples on that score by trying to get the heirs apparent, William and his wife, Mary, to agree to support the king in his repudiation of the acts when they came to the throne. To this end he pleaded with the Dutch envoy Dykvelt, but got no further than Penn had done the year before. 
The failure to persuade William and Mary to acquiesce in the king's proposals for religious toleration temporarily lost Sunderland credit at court. He found himself outmanoeuvred by Catholic advisers, who urged James that the only way forward was to dissolve the parliament and to take steps to pack another with members who would support the repeal of the penal laws and 'Test Act'. Sunderland was appalled by this strategy. He was more aware than his Catholic colleagues how damaging a dissolution would be to England's foreign relations. He also was less sanguine, and more realistic, about the prospects of packing a parliament to the extent that would be required. Consequently he held up the decision to dissolve for several weeks, and absented himself from the meeting of the privy council in July which took it. By the end of the month, however, he was back at court. He seems to have decided that, since parliament had been dissolved, then, despite the auspices being unfavourable, everything should be done to try to ensure that a general election would result in a House of Commons more inclined to do the king's bidding. 
Sunderland's hand can be detected behind the preliminary changes in the lord lieutenancies, and the restoration of whigs to London livery companies from which they had been ousted by Charles II. In August he accompanied the king on an electoral tour of the west country. The result as far as Sunderland was concerned was to confirm him in his view that the prospects for a compliant parliament were bleak. Although some dissenters indicated their support, the bulk of the gentry were lukewarm or even hostile. But the king was convinced that his cause was popular. He even devised a crude public opinion poll, in which three questions were put to the magnates in the localities to test their approval of his policies. These began to be circulated by Sunderland in October, though it was to take months to sound out opinion throughout the country. Meanwhile in November a commission for regulation was established to preside over the purging of corporations, with a view to influencing parliamentary elections. Its work was supervised by Sunderland and his ally Jeffreys, together with Catholic regulators including Father Petre. Sunderland went along with this to the point of approving Father Petre's admission to the privy council in November, to the alarm even of moderate Catholics. Then in December Sunderland assured James that he would make his own conversion public whenever it seemed to be advantageous for the king. 
Sunderland's apparent rashness at this point was another calculated gamble. Since the summer he had been concerned that James would not achieve his objectives before he died, and that the king's whole enterprise would collapse, taking him down with it. By December, however, it became known that the queen was pregnant. If she produced a girl, then the effect on the succession would be minimal. But if she gave birth to a boy, he would have precedence over James's daughters with his first wife. In the words of Sunderland's biographer 'he had a fifty-fifty chance: double or quits on the turn of a card' (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 168). 
The campaign to pack parliament led to tensions in the cabinet council early in 1688. James, egged on by the Catholic cabal, was eager to put it to the test of an election as soon as possible. Sunderland, realizing that the outcome would be disastrous, advised postponing the polls as long as possible. In March he persuaded the king to put them off until after the summer. This victory for common sense was soon offset, however, by James's fateful decision, on reissuing the declaration of indulgence in April, to require the clergy to read it from their pulpits: 'of which I most solemnly protest', Sunderland claimed later, 'I never heard one word till the King directed it in Council' ('Diary of... Sidney', 2.375). 
As in the Magdalen College case Sunderland tried to limit the damage that the refusal of the clergy to read the edict produced. Thus, when the issue of the seven bishops who petitioned the king to be excused from the duty was discussed in the cabinet, he argued that they had broken no law and should therefore not be prosecuted. But he was overruled by the Catholic cabal 'and so unanimously that I was just sinking', he observed, adding significantly, 'and I wish I had then sunk' ('Diary of... Sidney', 2.375). He surfaced at the birth of a son to James and his queen, at which he and his wife were present. A few days later he publicly announced his conversion to the Catholic faith. For his pains he was denounced as a 'Popish dog' by the mob as he made his way to give evidence at the trial of the bishops. The acquittal of the seven bishops created a crisis of confidence at court, discrediting those who had insisted on their prosecution. This played into Sunderland's hands. In July a Scottish observer wrote from London that he 'is certainly the premier minister and tho in truth the King is not governed by any body I believe he hath more power with his Majesty than anybody' (NL Scot., Yester MS 7011, James Hays to Tweeddale, 14 July 1688). His renewed influence was felt when the commission for ecclesiastical causes postponed its next meeting from August until December. Because of the revolution it never met again. 
On 27 August, Sunderland wrote to Bevil Skelton in Paris 'I believe there never was in England less thought of a rebellion, and when the parliament meets this will, I doubt not, be evident to all the world' (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 208). The parliament, like the commission for ecclesiastical causes, never met. Sunderland wrote streams of letters in September endorsing some 105 candidates right up to the 16th, when writs were issued for an election. On 21 September, however, the rumours that the prince of Orange planned to invade, which had been circulating all summer, were finally confirmed. On 25 September the writs were recalled. The election was off. Both James and Sunderland panicked, and sought hastily to mend fences with the Anglican tories. 'I laid hold of the opportunity to press the King to do several things which I would have done sooner' Sunderland claimed later: 'the chief of which were to restore Magdalen College and all other ecclesiastical preferments which had been diverted from what they were intended for; to take off my Lord Bishop of London's suspension; to put the counties into the same hands they were in some time before; to annul the Ecclesiastical Court; and to restore entirely all the Corporations of England. ('Diary of... Sidney', 2.376)' When the prince of Orange's task force was turned back by storms in mid-October James resented having made these concessions. 'I see God Almighty continues his Protection to me by bringing the wind westerly again', he told the earl of Dartmouth on 20 October ('Dartmouth MSS', 1.169). His resentment was taken out on Sunderland, whom the Catholic cabal accused of ruining him 'by persuading him to make such shameful condescensions' ('Diary of... Sidney', 2.377). On 27 October, James dismissed him. The dismissal took people by surprise. 'This remove is somewhat misticall' noted Sir John Bramston: 'there are those that say he was not true to the King as he ought, and that the King, when he dismissed him, sayd 'You have your pardon; much good doe it you. I hope you wilbe more faithfull to your next master than you have been to me'. ('Autobiography', 327)' 

Between his dismissal and his flight to the Netherlands in December, Sunderland was swept along in a welter of events over which nobody had any control. At first he seems to have accepted that William's invasion left him with no alternative but to share the same fate as the king. Sensing that James would seek refuge in France for his wife and their infant son, he tried to ingratiate himself with the royal couple and also with Louis XIV. Thus he assured Mary of Modena that he would remain a staunch Catholic, which led the queen to regret his dismissal. He then sought asylum in France, but Louis declined to offer it. That led him to seek refuge in the Dutch republic instead. This sudden shift, while it can be ascribed simply to panic, also admits of a more profound explanation. Whether Sunderland read Hobbes's 'Leviathan' or not, he certainly acted as though he had imbibed Hobbesian maxims. His allegiance was owed to the sovereign only so long as he could protect him. When protection was no longer forthcoming then allegiance was forfeited and could be transferred to another sovereign who could offer it. It was perhaps this philosophical outlook which led Sunderland to be described as 'a second Machiavel' ('Faction display'd', Lord and others, 662). His decision to escape to a protestant country delighted his wife, who put pressure on him to renounce his conversion to Catholicism. They spent much of November in London raising funds for a protracted exile. Quite when they decided to cut and run is uncertain, but early in December they made their way to Rotterdam. 
Sunderland seems to have regretted his flight almost immediately, for his wife went back to England on 19 December. She took with her copies of a manuscript he had written justifying his collaboration with the regime of James II. One of these was left with a printer for publication in England, while Sunderland himself arranged for it to be printed in the Dutch republic. His 'Letter to a friend in London, plainly discovering the designs of the Romish party and others for the subverting of the protestant religion and the laws of the kingdom' was an attempt to gain a sympathetic audience for his version of events. 'I know I cannot justify myself by saying, though it is true', he wrote, 'that I thought to have prevented much mischief' ('Diary of... Sidney', 2.370). He nevertheless sought to demonstrate that he had tried to restrain the more extravagant schemes of the king. Some of his claims were justified, for he did attempt to limit the damage of James's attacks upon the Church of England. He also sought to mend fences with William, praising 'the miracles he has done by his wonderful prudence, conduct and courage, for the greatest thing which has been undertaken these thousand years, or perhaps ever, could not be effected without virtues hardly to be imagined till seen nearer hand' (ibid., 376). 
Soon after his wife returned to Rotterdam in January 1689 Sunderland was arrested, after a tip-off to the authorities from Admiral Herbert, and thrown into prison. The indomitable Lady Sunderland appealed to Princess Mary to help release him, and when Mary got word to William his release was ordered. Sunderland was sycophantic in his gratitude, assuring the prince, who had just been offered the crown by the Convention in England, that he wished he could have been there to vote for it. It was too early, however, even for a chameleon like Sunderland to change his colours to the court of William and Mary. The best he could hope for was to be allowed to return to England undisturbed, which could not be effected until April 1690. Even then he was 'persona non grata' at court, being exempted from the 'Act of Indemnity' given the royal assent on 23 May. The Sunderlands had to retire to Althorp. In April 1691, however, they were summoned from their country house to the king's presence. There were rumours that William was going to appoint Sunderland to office, and these seemed to be confirmed when on 28 April he went to the House of Lords and took the oaths. Nothing came of them immediately, however, and the earl and countess returned to Althorp. There they found themselves in desperate financial circumstances. Their income was largely confined to the rents from their estates. 
Shortly after the Sunderlands' return to England the Treasury sued Sunderland in the court of exchequer for the return of plate he had borrowed from the Jewel House. He wrote to the king to protest that he would have to sell land to pay the sum due, and William obliged by ordering the process to be suspended. In December, however, the commissioners for public accounts brought the matter up in the House of Commons, and also questioned the validity of a pension of $1000 a year which was paid to Sunderland. He went up to take his seat in the Lords in January 1692, presumably to look after his own interests. The king again intervened on his behalf, securing the payment of the pension in February, and waiving the requirement to return the plate in March. 
Sunderland's increasing dependence on William perhaps partly explains why he was exempted from James's proclamation of pardon, which was proclaimed at St Germain in April. This removed the option of reconciliation with the former monarch, and made the earl totally dependent upon the new king. William realized this, and that not all English politicians, even those in office, were as free from Jacobitism. Sunderland's political instincts could be invaluable for the survival of the post-revolution regime, and his advice was increasingly sought from the spring of 1692. He urged William to drop his policy of offsetting tory and whig ministers in order to achieve a balanced ministry, and instead to swing the balance decisively in favour of the whigs. Arthur Onslow recalled many years later having: 'heard from a great personage that when the earl of Sunderland came afterwards to be in king William's confidence, and pressing him very much to trust and rely more upon the whigs than he had done, the king said, he believed the whigs loved him best, but they did not love monarchy; and although the tories did not like him so well as the others, yet as they were zealous for monarchy, he thought they would serve his government best: to which the earl replied, that it was very true that the tories were better friends to monarchy than the whigs were, but then his majesty was to consider that he was not their monarch. ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.5n.)' William resisted Sunderland's advice until 1693. At the beginning of that year he made a partial move towards the whigs by appointing John Somers as lord keeper and Sir John Trenchard as secretary of state. Although Sunderland kept on insisting throughout the spring and summer that this was not enough, and that the other secretary, the earl of Nottingham, should be replaced by a whig too, William kept the tory peer in office, still retaining his penchant for employing ministers of both parties. That summer, however, the policy exploded in his face when a merchant fleet 'en route' for Turkey was captured by the French. The loss of the Smyrna fleet provoked recriminations between Nottingham and the whigs, who blamed the secretary for having forced out of office the whig Admiral Russell, replacing him with incompetent tory cronies. William returned from the continent that autumn determined to get a grip on these divided counsels by following Sunderland's advice. Much to the dismay of Queen Mary, Nottingham was dismissed and the vacant secretaryship given to the whig earl of Shrewsbury. Russell was reinstated as lord admiral. 'But the person that had the king's confidence to the highest degree' observed Bishop Burnet: 'was the earl of Sunderland, who, by his long experience, and his knowledge of men and things, had gained an ascendancy over him, and had more credit with him than any Englishman ever had: he had brought the king to this change of councils, by the prospect he gave him of the ill condition his affairs were in, if he did not entirely both trust and satisfy those, who, in the present conjuncture, were the only party that both could and would support him. ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.222)' Sunderland's scheme paid dividends in the parliamentary session of 1693-4. For, though the king had to accept the 'Triennial Act', after vetoing a bill the previous year, as the price of Shrewsbury's appointment as secretary, he also gave his assent to the bill creating the Bank of England. This whig measure showed William that the party meant business when it claimed to support his war effort more wholeheartedly than did the tories. But they began to demand more ministerial posts as the price of their continued support, and this challenged Sunderland's control. The first indirect attack upon him came in the next session, 1694-5, when his long-time ally Henry Guy, the secretary to the Treasury, was found guilty of accepting a bribe. The whigs began a campaign against corruption which resulted in Guy's being sent to the Tower and dismissed from his post. They then turned their attention to the venal speaker of the Commons, Sir John Trevor, another of Sunderland's allies, who was also found guilty of bribery and expelled the house. Sunderland attempted to retrieve his grip on the government by having the king dissolve parliament in the summer of 1695, hoping to influence the elections to his advantage. The campaign began with a visit from the king to Althorp, a visible sign of Sunderland's support in high places. 
The elections resulted in a whig majority in the Commons, but one which saw a division between court and country whigs. The court whigs supported the whig ministers whom Sunderland had helped to promote, but who now wished to elbow him aside to make room for more of their type. The country whigs were suspicious of the whig ministers, dubbing them the junto, and accusing them of betraying their principles for power. Sunderland apparently saw in the country whigs allies in his own struggle with the junto. Thus in the new session of parliament he went along with their schemes to create a commission of trade nominated by the Commons, rather than a Board of Trade appointed by the crown, and to set up a land bank to offset the Bank of England. Neither scheme succeeded in anything other than irritating the king and the junto. In 1696 these divisions in whig ranks temporarily closed in response to the issues raised by the Jacobite Sir John Fenwick. Fenwick accused members of the government of plotting to restore James II. Sunderland, one whose loyalty to William was undoubted, conducted the government's answer to Fenwick's charges. But where he wanted Fenwick to be repudiated the junto wanted him to be eliminated. They introduced the bill of attainder against him which eventually resulted in his execution, a procedure which Sunderland opposed. 
Once Fenwick was out of the way the rift between Sunderland and the junto re-opened. The earl outmanoeuvred the whig leaders by allying with the duke of Shrewsbury against them. Shrewsbury had been reluctant to be appointed secretary of state in 1693, and, though he had been elevated in the peerage to a dukedom the following year, still was semi-detached from the court. He had been the most alarmed at Fenwick's allegations, even threatening resignation over them until warned that this would make him appear guilty of them. When the affair resulted in exonerating him he felt grateful to Sunderland rather than to the junto. Early in 1697 he went to London, where he and Sunderland were quickly regarded as the two most powerful men in the government. At that time Sunderland held no ministerial post, being regarded as a minister behind the curtain. On 19 April, however, he was appointed to the office of lord chamberlain, which the king had purchased from the earl of Dorset for $10,000 to offer him as a gift. On 22 April, two days before the king's departure from England, he was named as one of the lords justices to govern the country in William's absence. He spent the summer handling the English end of the negotiations which were to result in the treaty of Ryswick in September. 
Sunderland expected trouble when parliament met in December. There had already been murmurings about his appointments as lord chamberlain and lord justice in the fag end of the previous session. The peace strengthened the hands of the country whigs, who came to town determined to attack the government's intention of retaining a large peacetime army, and singled out Sunderland as their chief target. On 11 December a member linked the retention of the army with that of Sunderland as chief minister, 'a man who was the standard bearer of despotism in the last two reigns' (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 297). Similar remarks were made in subsequent debates. They seem to have rattled Sunderland, who tried to hand in his resignation to the king three times in December, but was refused. In desperation he handed his gold key of office to James Vernon, one of the secretaries of state, on 26 December, saying he had the king's permission to resign. This was a subterfuge, for William had made no such commitment. Indeed he still refused to accept Sunderland's resignation, and Vernon kept the key until 1699. But Sunderland never officiated again as lord chamberlain. 
If Sunderland felt that by stepping down he would be removed from the political firing range he was soon to be undeceived. For early in 1698 he found himself caught up in a scandal involving his Jacobite son-in-law, the earl of Clancarty. Clancarty had gone through a marriage ceremony with Elizabeth Spencer, the daughter of the Sunderlands, in 1684. But he had quickly repented of it, and returned to his native Ireland, where he declared himself a Roman Catholic and married again according to the rites of that church. In 1690 he had been captured by the English at the siege of Cork and imprisoned in the Tower. He had escaped in 1694, however, and joined James II as his gentleman of the bedchamber at St Germain. In December 1697 he was in London, where he sought out his first, protestant, wife and was reconciled with her to the point of consummating their marriage. Her brother Charles Spencer, following the death of Robert in 1688 now the eldest son of the Sunderlands, was informed of Clancarty's presence with Elizabeth at Norfolk House. Lord Spencer obtained a warrant for his brother-in-law's arrest, which was promptly executed, confining Clancarty to Newgate prison. 'This heady mixture of sex and treason', writes Sunderland's biographer, 'intoxicated the public, who did not know which to denounce as the greater monster, Clancarty or Spencer' (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 302). Sunderland took his son's side against his son-in-law, though he did ask the king to pardon Clancarty. His daughter then enlisted Godolphin and Lord and Lady Marlborough on her side. The affair thus split the family and threatened to alienate some of Sunderland's political allies. Fortunately for him it ended in March when William pardoned Clancarty and granted the unfortunate couple a pension of $1000 a year, on condition that they lived abroad. In May, therefore, they left England to live in Germany. 
The problems raised by the Clancarty affair occupied Sunderland for the first six months of 1698 to the exclusion of other political concerns. It was not until 8 July that he appeared at court. While in London he announced that he still thought that only the junto could do the king's business, and that 'if he was disagreeable to them, or any way obnoxious, he would return to Althorp and not come to town for seven years' (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 306). In fact they wanted little to do with him, especially as they were planning their campaign in the general election which was held that summer. Sunderland therefore did retire to Althorp, not for seven years but for eighteen months. However, he did not retire completely from politics in Northamptonshire, his advice being frequently given and occasionally sought, so that he was still thought of as a grey eminence behind the turbulent ministerial changes between 1698 and 1700. His next appearance in London in December 1699 was to attend to the final arrangements for the marriage of his son Charles to Lady Anne Churchill, daughter of the earl and countess of Marlborough. Lord Spencer's first wife, Lady Arabella Cavendish, daughter of the duke of Newcastle, had died in June 1698. Where he was said to be inconsolable his mother lost no time in seeking out another desirable match, putting the proposition to Lady Marlborough that July. The negotiations were held up by Lord Marlborough's objections to Spencer's radical whig politics, but eventually the wedding took place in January 1700. 
Sunderland stayed in town for the rest of the parliamentary session. The king apparently asked him to stay to use his skills as a manager to try to persuade Robert Harley, the leader of the country whigs, to enter the government. At this stage Harley was not tempted, though the following year he was to be brought into the administration. Sunderland strengthened his ties with Harley to the extent of voting in the Lords in support of the country bill to resume William's grants in Ireland to courtiers. This so annoyed the king that Sunderland felt it best to stay out of his way after the bill received his reluctant assent. William's difficulties that spring, however, were such that he sought out Sunderland to help bolster his collapsing ministry. On 14 May they had an audience at Hampton Court in which the earl agreed to do his best to bring the duke of Shrewsbury back into business. But when his overtures to Shrewsbury were rebuffed he retired to Althorp at the end of the month. In response to the king's entreaty to return he replied that he would keep 'his resolution of not stirring from Althorp and... by the grace of God that he will meddle no more' (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 317). 
In fact Sunderland was meddling once more by the beginning of August. The death of the duke of Gloucester, Princess Anne's only son and heir, on 30 July reopened the question of the succession. William was determined to settle it in the house of Hanover. Sunderland advised him that the only way to secure that objective was to reconstruct the ministry around Harley, and to dissolve parliament so as to give the reconstructed ministry a majority in the House of Commons. William followed the advice, Sunderland handled the approach to Harley through his old colleague Henry Guy, a largely tory ministry was duly appointed, and early in 1701 a new parliament was convened. When it met it passed the 'Act of Settlement' which provided for the accession of the house of Hanover. The tories, however, used the opportunity to pay off scores with William, for example by inserting clauses forbidding the Hanoverian monarchs from going abroad without the consent of parliament, and prohibiting foreigners from holding office under them or receiving property from them. They also unleashed an attack upon the junto, impeaching them for their part in the negotiation of the partition treaty in 1700, whereby William had attempted to prevent the whole of the Spanish empire from descending to one claimant on the death of Carlos II. Their partisanship was made blatantly obvious when they included the earl of Portland in the impeachment proceedings, but not the tory earl of Jersey who had been as involved in the treaties. Sunderland, though he was on good terms with Portland, had no high opinion of him. Nevertheless he felt that by including the earl in their censures of the junto the tories had overreached themselves. 'O silly, silly -- had they left alone Lord Portland', he protested, 'they might have hanged the other three in a garret' (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 315). 
William was mortally offended at these flagrant attacks upon himself and his favourite, and wrote from the Netherlands to ask Sunderland's advice. He advised him to reinstate the junto. The king did not immediately accept this advice, but when Louis XIV played into whig hands by recognizing James II's son as king of England he determined to make ministerial changes and to dissolve parliament. Somers wrote to Sunderland inviting him to London to help in the reconstruction of the ministry, but he declined, sending a detailed memorandum instead. 
William's death in March 1702 must have reminded Sunderland of his own mortality. For he was clearly suffering from a heart condition which left him short of breath on exertion of any kind. The accession of Queen Anne also brought to power his allies Godolphin and the Marlboroughs. On 11 March he wrote to the earl of Marlborough 'all I wish is to die quietly, with the hopes that my country may not be miserable, which I shall do, if the Queen governs as she says' (Kenyon, 'Sunderland', 326). Sarah, Marlborough's countess, used her influence with the queen to obtain for him a pension of $4000 a year. His wife wrote to Sarah on 1 June to ask if the arrears owing to him from William's reign could also be paid. To the end Sunderland was in financial difficulties. His last letter, written on 26 August, was to thank Sarah for her kindness. Soon afterwards his heart condition confined him to bed at Althorp, where he died on 28 September. He was buried at Brington on 7 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 26136


Spencer, Sir Robert Cavendish (1791-1830), naval officer, born on 24 October 1791, was the third son of George John Spencer, second Earl Spencer (1758-1834), and his wife, Lady Lavinia, eldest daughter of Charles Bingham, first Earl Lucan, and the brother of John Charles Spencer, Viscount Althorp and third Earl Spencer, Frederick Spencer, fourth Earl Spencer ['see below'], George Spencer, and Sarah Lyttelton. He was educated at Harrow School. In August 1804 he entered the navy on the 'Tigre' (Captain Benjamin Hallowell, afterwards Carew), and served continuously with him, in the 'Tigre' and afterwards in the 'Malta' (being promoted lieutenant on 13 December 1810) until appointed to command the brig 'Pelorus' in October 1812. On 22 January 1813 he was promoted commander of the 'Kite', from which he was moved into the 'Espoir', one of the squadron off Marseilles, under the command of Captain Thomas Ussher. He was afterwards appointed to the 'Carron', employed on the coast of North America, served in the operations against New Orleans, and was promoted to post rank by the commander-in-chief, Sir Alexander Inglis Cochrane, on 4 June 1814. In 1815 he commanded the 'Cydnus' on the home station, and from 1817 to 1819 the frigate 'Ganymede' (26 guns) in the Mediterranean, where he successfully negotiated with the bey of Tunis. From 1819 to 1822 he commanded the 'Owen Glendower' on the South American station, and from 1823 to 1826 the frigate 'Naiad' (46 guns) in the Mediterranean, where he took an active part in the operations against Algiers in the summer of 1824, and himself concluded the agreement with the bey. He was later employed on the coast of Greece during the Greek War of Independence. During these years of peace service, and especially in the 'Naiad', Spencer acquired a reputation in the service as a first-rate gunnery officer and disciplinarian. When the 'Naiad' was paid off, she was spoken of as the perfection of a man-of-war. Spencer's reputation in the service ensured that his ships were always crowded with young aristocrats and the sons of senior naval officers. Had he lived, his career, which had been remarkably good under his political opponents, would have prospered. 
From August 1827 to September 1828 Spencer was private secretary and groom of the bedchamber to the duke of Clarence, then lord high admiral. Spencer worked closely with Clarence on important reforms concerning gunnery, steam power, and manning. However, his liberal politics and advanced views ensured that he was widely blamed for the breakdown of relations between Clarence and Sir George Cockburn, the leader of his council. In October 1828 he was nominated a KCH, and he was knighted on 24 November. In September 1828 he was appointed to command the 'Madagascar', again in the Mediterranean. He had just been recalled to England on his appointment as surveyor-general of the ordnance, when he died, off Alexandria, on 4 November 1830, from 'an inflammation of the bowels' ('GM', 82). He was buried at Malta. He never married. 
His younger brother, 
In 1831 Spencer was MP for Worcestershire, and afterwards for Midhurst (between 1832 and 1834, and 1837 and 1841). On the death of his eldest brother, he succeeded as fourth Earl Spencer, on 1 October 1845. From 1846 to 1848 he was lord chamberlain of the queen's household; he was made a KG on 23 March 1849, and in 1854 was appointed lord steward. On 9 August 1854 he married Adelaide Horatia Elizabeth (died 29 Oct 1877), daughter of Sir Horace Beauchamp Seymour. They had two children: Charles Robert became in 1910 the sixth Earl Spencer. A lifelong whig, Spencer was regarded by his children as a serious and reserved man. He died a vice-admiral on the retired list on 27 December 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 26137


Spencer, Thomas (1791-1811), Independent minister, second son of a worsted weaver, was born at Hertford on 21 January 1791. His mother died when he was five. He had to leave school, where he had acquired some Latin, at the age of thirteen 'to twist worsted every day with a heavy heart'. For some months he was apprenticed to a firm of glovers in Poultry, London. Here he was introduced to Thomas Wilson, treasurer of the Hoxton Academy. To prepare him for entry to this ministerial training college he was sent for a year to study with William Hordle at Harwich: here he learnt Hebrew and abridged Parkhurst's 'Hebrew Lexicon'. He entered Hoxton in January 1807 at the age of sixteen, and in June took his first service at Colliers End, near Hertford. He at once became a popular preacher and was in great demand throughout the home counties. On 10 January 1810 he addressed 'an immense congregation' from Rowland Hill's pulpit in Surrey Chapel. He visited Liverpool in the summer of 1810, and on 26 September accepted an offer of the pastorate of Newington Congregational Church, much against his will, as he really wanted a southern church. His Liverpool ministry began in February 1811. 
The 'boy preacher' had a youthful appearance, with a sensitive face and deep-set eyes. His voice was melodious, his memory extraordinary, and his delivery fluent and powerful -- he reminded many of George Whitefield. There was, however, always some concern about his state of health. He at once attracted a vast congregation, far too large for the building. A new chapel was designed for him, to be erected in George Street; the foundation stone was laid on 15 April 1811, with no fewer than 8000 people in attendance. Spencer's promising career was brought to an abrupt end on 5 August 1811 when he was drowned while bathing in the Mersey off the Herculaneum Pottery. He was buried in Liverpool two days later. Thomas Raffles succeeded him in the pastorate of Great George Street. A collection of his sermons was published in 1829 and a volume of his tracts in 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 26138


Spencer, Thomas (1796-1853), writer, son of Matthew Spencer (1762-1831) and his wife, Catherine Taylor (1758-1843), was born on 14 October 1796, at Derby, where his father kept a large school. William George Spencer was his elder brother, and Herbert Spencer was his nephew. For some time Thomas taught at Quorn School, near Derby, and in October 1816 entered St John's College, Cambridge. He graduated as ninth wrangler in 1820, and, after taking pupils for a term, was ordained deacon. While at Cambridge he fell under the influence of Charles Simeon, the evangelical. For eighteen months in 1821-2 he was curate of Anmer in Norfolk, living in the house of the village squire, to whose son he was tutor. For a while he held the college living of Stapleford, near Cambridge. He was also a curate in Penzance, and had sole charge of a church at Clifton for a year or two. He was elected to a fellowship of St John's College in March 1823, which he retained until his marriage in September 1829 to Anna Maria, daughter of Major James Henry Brooke of the Bengal artillery. 
In March 1826 Spencer was presented by George Henry Law, bishop of Bath and Wells and the father of Spencer's college friend Henry Law, later dean of Gloucester, to the perpetual curacy of Hinton Charterhouse, between Bath and Frome. He took pupils, among whom was the Revd Thomas Mozley, whose 'Reminiscences' (1885, 2.174-85) contains anecdotes of Spencer. The population of the parish of Hinton was about 737, and there had been no clergyman and no parsonage since the Reformation. The income was about $80. Spencer built a house, erected cottages, and established a school, a clothing club, a village library, and field gardens. He fought against intemperance and pauperism; through his efforts the rates were reduced from $700 to $200 a year. Wages increased and outdoor relief gradually diminished. He described this achievement in 'The Successful Application of the New Poor Law to the Parish of Hinton Charterhouse' (1836). When Hinton was incorporated in the Bath union, Spencer was elected a guardian, and was the first chairman. 
Spencer's energies were not confined to local claims. He travelled about the country preaching and lecturing, chiefly as a temperance advocate. For Spencer, every teetotaller 'was a policeman engaged in repressing crime'. He was a member of the Anti-Slavery Conference, he said grace at the first as well as at the last banquet of the Anti-Corn Law League, and he was chairman of the Conference of Ministers of Religion. His many pamphlets -- on church reform, the poor law, education, and the corn laws -- had an immense circulation; of some, as many as 27,000 copies were printed. He resigned his curacy in September 1847, moved to London, and devoted himself to the pulpit and platform. In March 1851 he was appointed secretary of the National Temperance Society and editor of the 'National Temperance Chronicle'. 
Spencer died at Notting Hill, Middlesex, on 26 January 1853 and was buried at Hinton. He was, Tom Mozley recalled, a 'decidedly fine-looking man, with a commanding figure, a good voice and a ready utterance' (Mozley, 2.176). 


@@@@@


doc= 26139


Spencer, (William) George (bap. 1790, d. 1866), schoolmaster, was baptized on 8 February 1790 in the parish of St Werburgh, Derby, the son of Wesleyan Methodists, Matthew Spencer (1762-1831), a schoolmaster, and his wife, Catherine Taylor (1758-1843). Spencer was the eldest of five surviving brothers and a sister; he was known as George after the birth of his youngest brother, also William. His brother Thomas Spencer (1796-1853), a Cambridge mathematics wrangler, became notable as a social reformer. Spencer was educated at his father's school, where he also started to follow his father's career, including work from 1807 as a private tutor in the Derby area. 
In his twenties Spencer ran his own private school alongside his private tutoring. He taught a wide range of subjects, including English language, arithmetic, accounts, drawing, algebra, geometry, mechanics, astronomy, and the sciences. Such subjects were not part of the normal classics-based, public-school curriculum and Spencer's teaching business thrived. Further income came from some inherited and purchased property. He advanced his own informal education through political, social, religious, and ethical discussions with his brothers and other acquaintances. In mathematics, the sciences, and medicine he also benefited from the meetings and literature of the Derby Philosophical Society, for which he acted as honorary secretary from his mid-twenties. 
Spencer married Harriet Holmes (1794-1867), the daughter of a plumber and glazier, on 6 January 1819 and they first lived at 12 Exeter Row, Derby. It was not a happy relationship. He commanded attention through his physical presence, being a well-built man about 6 feet tall, his abundant energy and strength of character, displaying independence and originality, and his notable lack of reticence. By contrast, she was gentle, conforming, and conservative. Of nine children only Herbert Spencer (1820-1903), the eldest, survived beyond infancy to become a well-known philosopher and sociologist. 
Pressure of work gradually affected the balance of Spencer's mind and, in 1824, forced him temporarily to give up teaching. The family moved to New Radford, near Nottingham, and Spencer became involved with the then new lace-manufacturing business. This commercial venture failed and, in 1827, the Spencers moved to 8 (later 17) Wilmot Street, Derby, where they remained and Spencer resumed private tutoring. 
Spencer's historical significance rests on two related aspects of his teaching: his seminal contribution to pedagogy; and his influence on his son Herbert's intellectual development. Herbert's autobiography (2 vols., 1904) is permeated with references to his father's contributions to his developing thought and tributes to his father's individuality, inventiveness, and idealism. Spencer's pedagogy was based on respect for pupils, motivation, and active rather than passive learning to promote understanding, as opposed to rote memorizing. This self-help method of teaching through guided discovery was eventually exemplified as 'Inventional geometry: a series of questions, problems, and explanations, intended to familiarize the pupil with geometrical conceptions, to exercise his inventive faculty, and prepare him for Euclid and the higher mathematics' (1860). This small work of thirty-two pages on practical geometry was over thirty years ahead of its time in England; it was first reprinted through his son's efforts in 1892. As early as the 1870s, an American edition made some impact in the USA. The pedagogy gained prominence in England during the 1900s, when the use of editions of Euclid for school geometry was eventually abandoned. 
Spencer also had some artistic talent and his inventiveness extended to the elaboration, over much of his life, of a new system of shorthand. Again through his son's efforts, this work was posthumously published as 'A System of Lucid Shorthand' (1893). Spencer died of a lung infection and an overdose of morphia, on 27 April 1866 at 17 Wilmot Street, Derby. 


@@@@@


doc= 26140


Spencer, William Robert (1770-1834), poet and humorist, was born in Kensington Palace, London, on 9 January 1770, the younger son of Lord Charles Spencer (1740-1820), second son of the third duke of Marlborough ['see under 'Spencer, Charles, third duke of Marlborough] and the Hon. Mary Beauclerk (died 1812), daughter of Lord Vere. He was educated at Harrow School before matriculating on 13 October 1786 from Christ Church, Oxford. He did not take a degree, but had an exceptional memory which he proved while at Oxford by betting that 'he would learn a whole newspaper by heart, and recite it from beginning to end without displacing one word. He won his bet, but said he was never so bored as while preparing himself for this' ('Poems', 11). 
Spencer's wit and accomplishments made him very popular in London society, and he was a frequent guest of the prince of Wales. At his house in Curzon Street Pitt and Fox met, and among his other friends were R. B. Sheridan, Sydney Smith, and Francis Horner. He sought no prominence in public life, but was content with the reputation of a wit and a writer of 'vers de societe'. In 1796 he published a translation of Burger's 'Leonore', which was highly thought of by Scott and others. Byron said of him that 'His was really what your countrymen call an elegant mind, polished, graceful and sentimental' (Staunton, 344). Wilson, in 'Noctes Ambrosianae', has Hogg say, 'That chiel's a poet. Thae verses hae muckle o' the auld ballant pathos and simplicity' (Wilson, 487). 
On 13 December 1791 Spencer married Susan, widow of Count Spreti, and daughter of Count Francis Jenison Walworth, chamberlain to the elector palatine. It was rumoured that 'the countess was first married to an old man, who, perceiving an attachment gradually increasing between her and young Spencer, destroyed himself that he might not be a bar to their union' ('Portion of the Journal', 294). This story was said to have suggested Madame de Souza's tale of 'Adele de Senange', although the husband there dies of apoplexy. 
Spencer had five sons and two daughters; his sons included Aubrey George Spencer (1795-1872) and George Trevor Spencer (1799-1866). His large family caused him to give up his briefly held seat in parliament to become a commissioner of stamps from 1797 until 1826. In 1825, owing to financial difficulties, Spencer withdrew to Paris, where Scott on a visit the following year invited him to breakfast. In a state of poverty and ill health he remained in Paris until his death on 22 or 23 October 1834. He was survived by his wife and six children (one son, Charles, having died in 1793), and was buried in Harrow church. 
Spencer's work also includes 'Urania', a satire on German ghost literature which was performed at Drury Lane in 1802; 'The Year of Sorrow' (1804); a volume of poems (1811); and a prologue to Miss Berry's play 'Fashionable Friends' (1802). 


@@@@@


doc= 26141


Spender, Lily (1835-1895), novelist, was born in London on 22 February 1835, the second daughter of Edward Headland (1803-1869), a well-known physician of Portland Place, London, and his wife, Eliza, a daughter of Ferdinand de Medina, a descendant of the Anglo-Dutch financier Sir Solomon de Medina, who was of Portuguese Jewish origin. Her given name at birth and baptism (at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 20 July 1835) was also Eliza, and she was recorded as such for official purposes during most of her life, though she became more widely known as Lily, a name she adopted as an author. She was educated privately for her first fourteen years and then attended classes at Queen's College, Harley Street, London. As a child she wrote rhymes and started a manuscript magazine with her friends. Until her marriage she studied French, German, and Italian at home and, with her brothers' help, Latin, Greek, and natural science. 
On 28 October 1858 Eliza Headland married John Kent Spender (died 1882), a physician and medical researcher who was attached to the Mineral Water Hospital in Bath, and she moved to Bath. It was then that she started writing -- as the Revd L. Spender -- and she sent essays to magazines, on German poets as well as on social issues such as women's employment and the evils of the imprisonment of children. She was a contributor to the 'London Quarterly Review', the 'Englishwoman's Journal', the 'Dublin University Review', and 'Meliora', a magazine concerned with social work. She worked on several committees for educational and social work in Bath and, for ten years, was the secretary of the Oxford examination for girls. 
Lily Spender's first novel, 'Brothers-in-Law' (1869), was written with a desire to provide an alternative to sensation fiction as well as to supplement the family income for her sons' education (she also sent one daughter to Somerville Hall at Oxford), family holidays, and her husband's early retirement. An early novel, 'Parted Lives' (1873), was reviewed in 'The Spectator' as the best novel of the year after George Eliot's 'Middlemarch', and most of her other novels received very favourable criticism. She wrote some twenty-one novels -- about one every year until her death -- in between housekeeping, raising her eight children, and various social service interests. 'The Recollections of a Country Doctor' (1885) was based on her early experiences with her father. Later works such as 'A Strange Temptation' (1893) and 'A Modern Quixote' (1894) have leading characters of committed ideals, socialistic or otherwise, whose loyalty to friends leads them into serious difficulties in forming love relationships. Although intelligently written, her novels often have endings which fall into banal romance. They were, however, very popular and most went into several editions. 
Lily Spender died at her home at 17 The Circus, Bath, on 4 May 1895. Two of her seven surviving children, John Alfred Spender (1862-1942) and (Edward) Harold Spender (1864-1926), were well-known London journalists. The poet Stephen Spender (1909-1995) was her grandson. 


@@@@@


doc= 26142


Spens, James, of Wormiston, Baron Spens in the Swedish nobility (d. 1632), diplomat and army officer in the Swedish service, was the eldest son of three known children of David Spens, laird of Wormiston (died 1571), and his wife, Margaret Lermonth (died in or after 1574), daughter of the laird of Dairsie, Fife. He was probably born during the 1560s, but little is known of his early years and education. His father, a leading supporter of Queen Mary's party, was killed at Stirling Castle on 4 September 1571 during a botched attempt to abduct the regent, Matthew, fourth earl of Lennox. As punishment the Spens estates centring on Wormiston House near St Andrews were confiscated and awarded to the queen's gaoler, Patrick Lindsay, sixth Lord Byres. In 1574 or soon afterwards James's mother married Sir John Anstruther of that ilk and it was largely thanks to his standing at court that the family returned to grace. The young Spens slowly reacquired the family lands and perhaps the office of constable of Crail, which had been in his family for generations, but he never regained Wormiston. 
In 1589 Spens's sister Lucretia married Patrick Forbes of Corse, an influential theologian and future bishop of Aberdeen (1618-35). About this time Spens himself married Agnes Durie, with whom he had at least four daughters and two sons who survived into adulthood. Spens's status was improving: in February 1593 he attended privy council sessions at St Andrews, and in 1594 and again in 1607 was provost (mayor) of the burgh of Crail, Fife. 
On 29 June 1598 Spens was one of eleven 'gentilmen adventuraris' from Fife contracted by James VI to 'plant policy and civilisation in the hitherto most barberous Isle of Lewis' ('Reg. PCS', '1592-9', 462-3). The project -- similar to the plantation of Ulster -- was expected to bring the king rental income by 1600, though the financial risk fell on the adventurers. In November 1598 they landed with 500-600 troops, built a fortified camp near Stornoway, and began to 'civilize' the islanders, not always by peaceful methods. By December 1601 a bitter dispute had erupted with the local Macleods, and when Spens attempted to capture Neil Macleod he was ambushed and nearly sixty colonists were killed; the settlement in Stornoway was burnt and Spens was kept hostage until the colonists had abandoned the island. A second colonization attempt was made in summer 1605, supported by royal troops; houses were built and crops planted, but raiding by the islanders and financial problems again forced the settlers to leave. A third attempt in 1609 came to the same end. Dispirited, Spens and the two other surviving shareholders sold their rights to the island in 1610 to Lord Kintail for 10,000 merks Scots. 
By this time, Spens's attentions had switched to Sweden. In October 1605, following a costly defeat by the Poles at Kirchholm in Latvia, Karl IX of Sweden commissioned Spens and his younger brother David to raise 1600 mercenary foot and 600 horse in Scotland. Due to finance and shipping problems the levy was only partly completed by 1608, but Spens accepted a further commission in 1609 for 1000 foot and 500 horse. This time recruitment fared better, largely because the British authorities welcomed the opportunity of ridding Ireland of troublemakers after the Nine Years' War. In February 1610 Spens's Scots, Irish, and English recruits marched from Finland across the frozen ice of the Bothnian Gulf to join a Russian-led army, only to be defeated by the Poles at Klushino, near Moscow, on 4 July 1610 NS; weeks later the Poles marched unopposed into Moscow. The Russians were quick to blame their defeat on the treachery of Spens's recruits, although one English officer complained that the Swedes had traded the British soldiers to the Russians 'as horses are in Smythfield' ('EngHR', 29, 1914, 246-56). Spens was technically colonel of the British, but had not joined them in the field and escaped blame. 
Spens's shuttling between Sweden and Britain acquired a diplomatic character. He was also an indispensable courier for correspondence between Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden and Henry, prince of Wales, and their younger brothers Charles Phillip and Charles, duke of York. No later than 1609 Spens was knighted, and from May 1609 he became Britain's special ambassador to Sweden. As he was returning to Sweden in March 1611 from a mission to recruit 3000 Scottish and Dutch mercenaries the Danes arrested him half a mile into Swedish soil and killed one of his party. The incident outraged the Swedes and contributed to the outbreak of the Kalmar War in April 1611. Spens was also instrumental in bringing the conflict to a close: in peace talks at Knared, brokered by James I, Spens represented Sweden, while his stepfather's grandson Sir Robert Anstruther (1578-1644/5?) acted for Denmark. On 18 January 1613 the two Scots reported to James I that peace had been agreed 'chiefly thanks to their own abilities' ('CSP Venice', '1610-13', xxix). 
Appointed Sweden's ambassador to Britain in December 1613, Spens spent several years in London channelling British policy towards Denmark and Poland in favour of Sweden. He intended to return to Sweden in 1618, and even received diplomatic instructions in 1619, but his departure was repeatedly delayed. He finally reached Sweden in spring 1621 as Britain's special ambassador to Sweden. Gustavus Adolphus, who had embarked on a string of attacks on Polish possessions across the Baltic, chose Spens as his chief recruiting master for soldiers from Scotland. Despite Gustavus Adolphus's complaints about nepotism among the Scots, Spens was allowed a free hand and did not hesitate to install kith and kin in plum jobs. In 1624 Spens obtained permission to raise a regiment of 1200 Britons for Sweden, and passed the colonelcy to his eldest son, also James. Of the two regiments which he was to levy in 1627 he gave one to Sir James Ramsay, husband of his daughter Isobel (married in Scotland in 1619). Another daughter, Cecily, married another famous 'Swedish' Scot, General-Major Sir David Drummond. There were also blood ties (difficult to disentangle) to officers of the Monypenny family. More than once Spens's standing with Gustavus Adolphus saved his proteges. On one occasion Colonel Ramsay had been shackled in irons after 'hard words' with the Swedish king, and 'if not for his father-in-law,... his life had been forfeit' (I. Hoppe, 'Geschichte des ersten schwedischen-polnischen Krieges in Preussen', 1887, 419). Nevertheless the Swedish king and the chancellor, Axel Oxenstierna, developed a deep affection for their Scottish soldiers and for Spens in particular. 
As Sweden's wars began to merge with the Thirty Years' War in Germany, Spens's diplomatic remit shifted to the European mainland. His trips from London to Stockholm usually followed a route via The Hague, Hamburg, and Copenhagen, during which he called on notables including the family of the count palatine of the Rhine, exiled in the Netherlands, and Sir Robert Anstruther, now Britain's main representative in Denmark, with whom he often swapped royal letters and information before it was made public. 
In 1624 Spens became involved in protestant attempts to organize a grand alliance against the Habsburgs, a project that depended on British financial commitment. Spens's main remit was to obtain for Sweden the leadership of the alliance's army, but although constantly reporting back from the Netherlands he played a secondary role in the diplomacy. His knowledge of languages was limited, and he preferred to write in turgidly phrased Scots (sometimes deliberately in lieu of a code) which often required translation. He was soon outwitted by Robert Anstruther, who obtained English promises of a subsidy for a Danish-led intervention in Germany. Hopes for a grand alliance faded further in 1625 when a conference in The Hague was postponed after the deaths of Maurice of Nassau and James I. When Charles I came to power he came under the influence of the duke of Buckingham who favoured war with Spain rather than involvement in Germany. Spens reported Buckingham's 'papist' machinations with displeasure to the Swedish monarch, amid perceptive observations on the rift between king and parliament. 
Though Spens was a strict Calvinist, he was not opposed to a religious settlement to the Thirty Years' War. Among his proteges were two champions of ecumenism: his one-time secretary, John Durie (possibly a relative of his wife), and his chaplain, Eleazar Borthwick (sent in 1628 by Spens's brother-in-law, the bishop of Aberdeen). Both got hearings with the Swedish monarch thanks to Spens, and went on to have considerable influence in Europe. 
On 28 April 1627, as reward for his services to Sweden, Spens was made Baron Spens, of Orreholm near Skaraborg in Vastergotland. The jealousy of a Swedish rival, Riksrad Johan Skytte, meant the grant was not officially countersigned until early 1629. On 23 September 1627, as ambassador-extraordinary from Charles I, Spens personally presented Gustavus Adolphus with the Order of the Garter and St George Cross in an elaborate ceremony in the presence of English heralds at Dirschau in Polish Prussia. 
In March 1629 Spens arrived in London to raise troops for Gustavus Adolphus's invasion of Germany. He shipped to Polish Prussia 3000 recruits in three new regiments and from about July 1629 was appointed honorary general over all the English and Scots in Swedish service. 
Early in 1631 the death of his son James nearly killed Spens, who complained of a 'deadlie illnesse' in his will drafted in Stockholm on 31 May (Spens, 51). His health improved after his second wife, Margretta Forath, gave birth to a son, Jakob (their first son, Axel, had been named for the Swedish chancellor). By 3 September 1631 Spens was well enough to join Gustavus Adolphus in Germany as his legate to James Hamilton, marquess of Hamilton's 6000-strong 'English army'. Having landed near Stettin in August, Hamilton's grandiose goal was to recover the palatinate, but he lacked the financial support of Charles I and the trust of Gustavus Adolphus, and his force quickly melted away. Spens could do little to help: often complaining of gout the last of his increasingly scrawly official letters, dated 1 September 1632, was to request Hamilton's presence before the Swedish king on the winding up of his command. 
Spens continued to follow the Swedish court in Germany, and reassumed the colonelcy of his son's old Scots regiment (though there is no record of him serving in the field with it, nor with any other of the units he nominally commanded). He was in Frankfurt am Main when Gustavus Adolphus was killed at Lutzen on 16 November and he himself died at Frankfurt on the morning of 27 November, apparently at the shock of the news. His body was transported to Stettin, where it remained for half a year before being shipped to Stockholm; he is said to have been buried in Riddarholm church, Stockholm, the resting-place of Swedish royalty. He was survived by his wife, who married, in 1637, Hugh Hamilton, a colonel in Swedish service, later Baron Hamilton of Glenlawley. Spens was succeeded in his barony by his son William. The senior branch of the family was introduced into the Riddarhus (house of nobles) in 1635 but died out in 1665. A junior branch, elevated to greve (count) from 1712, survived in Sweden until the end of the twentieth century. 
Spens made a far bolder impression overseas than in Britain. He was the leading figure in the diaspora of Scots who abandoned their impoverished homeland for Sweden's rising star and in shipping in excess of 10,000 Britons to serve in the Swedish army made a significant contribution to the building of Sweden as a great power. Despite his status as double ambassador, there can be little doubt that Spens eventually became more Swedish than British in his affiliations. 


@@@@@


doc= 26143


Spens, John, of Condie (d. 1573), lawyer, was the son of James Spens of Condie, Perthshire. He had a brother, Lawrence, but nothing is known of their mother. A determinant at St Salvator's College, University of St Andrews, in 1535, by 1539 Spens was appearing as an advocate before the lords of session, and a decade later had become one of the nine leading advocates licensed to act in all matters before the college of justice. 
From 1554 Spens acted as one of the assessors (or legal advisers) of Edinburgh town council, and between 1558 and 1564 he was regularly either one of the bailies of the burgh or on the council. In October 1555 he was promoted to act as queen's advocate jointly with Henry Lauder, and received a pension in consequence. In 1560 he acted as a spokesman for Mary of Guise in her last negotiations with the lords of the congregation. On 12 November 1561, following Lauder's death, Spens took his place on the bench, 'ex officio' as queen's advocate, and thereafter also attended the privy council. He still held the office of queen's advocate jointly, being now associated in that office with Robert Crichton of Eliok, but after Lauder's death he was the senior figure. In 1566 he was appointed to a commission for the revision of the laws. 
Spens married Jane Arnot and they had three daughters, Euphemia, Margaret, and Jean. He also had two natural children, John and Grizel. Spens was described by John Knox as 'a man of gentle nature, and one that professed the doctrine of the Evangel' (Knox, 2.401). In May 1555 he acquired the lands of Condie pursuant to an entail in which it had been stipulated that if his uncle, John Spens of Condie, died without male heirs, then the lands would be disponed to him as the son and heir of James Spens. He therefore inherited the lands at the expense of two female cousins. He also owned lands in Gilmerton, near Edinburgh, where he appears to have lived while working in Edinburgh. On his way home in 1564 he and his servants were attacked by nine men who were later forced to apologize before the lords of council. He referred in his testament to Sir John Wemyss, laird of Wemyss, as his 'special gud friend and chief' (NA Scot., register of testaments). Wemyss was a supporter of Queen Mary in the 1560s. Spens retained his position during all the changes of government from 1560 onwards. His estate, including arrears of pensions, exceeded $4000 at his death. His last will and testament is dated 16 June 1573, and he was dead by the end of the month. His wife, Jane, was his executor, and he also made provision for his natural children. 


@@@@@


doc= 26144


Spens, Thomas (c.1415-1480), diplomat and bishop of Aberdeen, was the third son of John Spens of Glen Douglas and Lathallan and his wife, Isabel, daughter of Sir John Wemyss. Having allegedly been educated in Edinburgh in the 1430s, he took his first steps in a long diplomatic career when on 16 December 1439 he was granted a safe conduct by Henry VI to go to England. He also came to hold a number of church offices; by 10 June 1444 he was archdeacon of Moray, and he was appointed to the positions of apostolic protonotary and succentor of Moray by the following year. In the late 1440s, in an ambassadorial role, Spens was instrumental in opening the negotiations which secured the eventual marriage of James II to Mary of Gueldres, niece of the duke of Burgundy. His provision to the bishopric of Galloway, which took place on 8 January 1450, had the effect of placing a loyal king's man in an area of Black Douglas influence. 
Spens was sent by James II on an embassy to Charles VII of France in 1450 and was in turn commissioned by the French king to urge James II's support for Henry VI of England against Richard of York. In the crucial period of tension between James II and the Black Douglases, Spens gave consistent support to the king. He attended the parliament held in July 1451, at which William, eighth earl of Douglas, resigned and received formal regrants of his possessions. Spens was in Newcastle by 24 August, when a three-year truce between Scotland and England was ratified, but he was back in Scotland by 1 September; he appeared then with the king at Falkland, and he witnessed a number of royal charters throughout the winter. He was with James as late as January 1452, shortly before the king killed the earl of Douglas on 22 February. As bishop of Galloway, Spens was the senior churchman in the heartland of Black Douglas influence, but his loyalty to the king appears to have been unwavering. James II sent him to France to explain in person the king's position regarding the Black Douglases, just before the forfeiture of the family in 1455. 
Spens was received at Bourges on 19 May 1455, and was largely engaged in diplomatic activity on the continent until 1458. He was present when the betrothal between James II's sister Annabella and Count Louis of Geneva, arranged in 1444, was formally broken off in 1456. Between 30 January 1458 and 18 April 1459 Spens held the office of keeper of the privy seal. When Ingram Lindsay, bishop of Aberdeen, died on 24 August 1458, Spens was translated from Galloway to Aberdeen before 15 December, and it was as bishop of Aberdeen that on 16 April 1459 he witnessed a charter by Mary of Gueldres, in which she founded the collegiate church of the Holy Trinity, Edinburgh. On 2 June 1460 Spens received a safe conduct for himself and Andrew Durisdeer, bishop of Glasgow, to go to England on matters concerning the existing truce, but the overthrow of the Lancastrian dynasty on 10 July resulted in turmoil and the renewal of Anglo-Scottish hostilities, in the course of which James II was killed. 
Spens was mainly occupied with the business of his diocese during the following year, although he was part of a Scottish embassy once more by 24 September 1461. A safe conduct for one year was issued to him by Edward IV on 25 June 1463, but in spite of this Spens, in company with Alexander, duke of Albany, James III's younger brother, was captured on a return voyage from Bruges in an act of piracy by an English barge and subsequently held captive in England. This had occurred before 8 July 1464, and Spens was not released until the next year; he appeared back at court on 2 July 1465. His detention was designed by Edward IV to exert pressure on the Scots to abandon support for the Lancastrian cause, and the bishop was set free once proposals for a truce, including the projected marriage of James III to an English bride, were put forward. He was sufficiently in favour with Edward IV to receive from that king a large annuity and several gifts. 
Spens was involved in the Stirling agreement of April 1468, whereby the Boyds attempted to secure acceptance for their recent elevation; however, the forfeiture of the family in November 1469 rendered the document ineffective. Upon the death of James Lindsay in 1468 Spens resumed the office of keeper of the privy seal, and appears to have been unaffected by the fall of the Boyds. By 12 June 1469 he had returned from another diplomatic mission to England, in time for the marriage of James III to Margaret of Denmark on 13 July. On 17 August 1472 St Andrews was erected into a metropolitan see, with Patrick Graham as the first archbishop. Spens then petitioned Pope Sixtus IV for exemption from metropolitan jurisdiction for the diocese of Aberdeen during his own lifetime, and received a papal bull granting this on 14 February 1474. 
Spens became embroiled in a protracted dispute over compensation claimed from the English for the seizure of Bishop Kennedy's barge, the 'Salvator', which was wrecked near Bamburgh in March 1473. The issue was settled on 25 October 1474 and on 3 February 1475 Spens took payment of 500 marks on behalf of the Scots merchants whose goods had been plundered. Negotiations for a marriage between Prince James of Scotland and Edward IV's daughter Cecilia saw Spens playing a central role in the preliminary discussions on 25 June 1474, but he was not present when the negotiations were concluded in October 1475. 
Spens was assiduous as a witness to royal charters and was a constant member of the committee of the articles throughout the 1470s. But the fact that he does not appear to have engaged in diplomacy after the mid-1470s may indicate that his health was now declining. He made a number of gifts and improvements to St Machar's Cathedral in Aberdeen, and fortified the bishop's palace as well. He also founded St Mary's Hospital in Leith shortly before his death, which took place in Edinburgh on 15 April 1480. Spens was buried on the following day in the collegiate church of the Holy Trinity, whose foundation he had witnessed twenty-one years earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 26145


Spenser, Edmund (1552?-1599), poet and administrator in Ireland, was born in London but his family possibly came from Burnley in north-east Lancashire. His origins are unclear and his immediate family not established beyond doubt, although a number of possible ancestors and relatives are recorded. The Spensers are noted at the end of the thirteenth century, holding a freehold at Hurstwood, in Worsthorne, 3 miles south-east of Burnley. An Edmund Spenser, head of this branch of the family, is recorded deceased in 1587. He married twice and by each marriage had a son named John, both of whom had sons named Edmund. Spenser publicly claimed kinship with a more exalted line of the family name, the Spensers of Althorp. In 'Prothalamion' he claims that: '
from another place I take my name, 

An house of auncient fame 
(ll. 130-31)' and in 'Colin Clouts Come Home Againe' he notes his relation to the three daughters of Sir John and Lady Katherine Spenser of Wormleighton and Althorp: '
Ne lesse praiseworthy are the sisters three, 

The honor of the noble familie: 

Of which I meanest boast my selfe to be, 

And most that unto them I am so nie. 
(ll. 536-9)' He dedicated three of the poems contained in his 'Complaints' to the three ladies: 'Mother Hubberds Tale' (published separately in 1612) was dedicated to Anne, Lady Compton and Monteagle; 'The Teares of the Muses' to Alice, Lady Strange; and 'Muiopotmos' to Elizabeth, Lady Carey. Spenser also addressed to Lady Carey one of the dedicatory sonnets to 'The Faerie Queene', which contains a reference to the poet's 'remembraunce of your gracious name' -- probably a sly hint at their kinship and her maiden name. 
Edmund's father may have been the John Spenser who moved from Hurstwood to London, where he became a member of the Merchant Taylors' Company. John is recorded working as a free journeyman clothmaker in the service of Nicholas Peele, 'sheerman', of Bow Lane, London, in October 1566. He may have been the John Spenser who became an alderman in 1583, owned a house formerly in the possession of the duke of Gloucester, near the Merchant Taylors' Hall, constructed a warehouse nearby, was made lord mayor in 1594, and subsequently received a knighthood. It is also possible that Edmund was the son of an ordinary journeyman, as his claims to gentleman status came through his own achievements -- a university degree -- and acquisition of land in Ireland. Nothing is known of his mother other than her name, Elizabeth, to which he refers in 'Amoretti', sonnet 74. Spenser probably had a number of siblings. Gabriel Harvey refers to him as 'your good mother's eldist ungracious son' in his 'Letter Book'. There were perhaps two sisters, named Elizabeth and Sarah, the latter of whom later lived in Ireland. A John Spenser who matriculated as a sizar at Pembroke College, Cambridge, at Easter 1575 and graduated in 1577-8 may well have been a younger brother. A John Spenser, perhaps the same person, is recorded as attending Merchant Taylors' School in 1571, and a John Spenser is recorded as serving as constable of Limerick in 1579, the coincidences suggesting, assuming both are the same person, that he was probably related to Spenser in some way. 
It is not certain where in London Spenser was born. Early eighteenth-century antiquarians claimed that he came from East Smithfield but, given the low population of this area, it is more plausible that he was born in West Smithfield. He was probably born in 1552, since he matriculated at Cambridge University in 1569, at a time when the usual age at matriculation was sixteen or seventeen. First he attended the recently founded Merchant Taylors' School, probably from 1561, the year in which it opened, although the sole record of his attendance is for his last year there, 1569. The headmaster was the humanist educational theorist Richard Mulcaster, whose rigorous pedagogical methods and intellectually demanding approach to the curriculum strongly influenced Spenser. Mulcaster was also interested in the development of the English language, advocating its widespread use but recognizing its need to borrow words and phrases from other languages. It is perhaps significant that this problem was one which Spenser examined throughout his literary career. The school was housed in an old mansion, the Manor of the Rose, in the parish of St Laurence Pountney. Other pupils included Thomas Kyd, Lancelot Andrewes, and Thomas Lodge. 
On 26 February 1569 Spenser was one of thirty-one 'certyn poor schollers of the scholls aboute London' -- six from his school -- who were left 1's'. and a gown to wear at the funeral of Robert Nowell, a rich lawyer from Lancashire and brother of Alexander Nowell, dean of St Paul's, in the will of the deceased. This may indicate that the Spensers were poor, and so suggests that Spenser's father was the less rather than the more successful John Spenser mentioned above. Spenser subsequently received three payments from Nowell's bequest: 10's'. on 7 November 1569, 6's'. on 7 November 1570, and 2's'. 6died on 24 April 1571. He also received five other payments while at university, between 1571 and 1574, which may have been on account of ill health or further indications that he was a scholar in need of funds. 
Shortly before he went to university Spenser translated a series of twenty-one poems: six 'epigrams', which were stanzas from Petrarch's canzone 'Standomi un giorno solo a la finestra', and fifteen sonnets from Du Bellay's 'Visions'. These were published with accompanying woodcuts as an introduction to 'A theatre wherein be represented as wel the miseries and calamities that follow the voluptuous worldlings', a translation of a work by the major Dutch protestant poet Jan Van Der Noot by Henry Bynnemann, a prominent publisher, who had entered the work in the Stationers' register on 22 July 1569. Van Der Noot's preface suggests that the translations are his but Spenser later reworked both sequences as 'The Visions of Petrarch, Formerly Translated' and 'The Visions of Bellay' in 'Complaints' (1591). These works indicate that his was regarded as a precocious talent, as it is unusual for a schoolboy to contribute to such an important volume. They also suggest that Mulcaster, who was friendly with Van Der Noot's cousin Emanuel Van Meteren and had other Dutch contacts, may have been instrumental in launching Spenser's writing career. 
Spenser matriculated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 20 May 1569 as a sizar -- a poor scholar who earned his bed and board by performing a series of servant's duties. Spenser wrote little about his life at college but he did refer to 'My mother Cambridge' in 'The Faerie Queene' (book 4, canto 11, stanza 34). He appears to have read widely in a variety of languages, and could read Latin, Greek, French, and Italian, and probably other tongues. His contemporaries included Lancelot Andrewes, who followed him to Pembroke from school two years later; Gabriel Harvey, who became a fellow in 1570 and was to be Spenser's most significant mentor for the next ten years or so; and Edward Kirke, admitted as a sizar in 1571, who may have made some contribution to the notes published with 'The Shepheardes Calender', or at least have been party to their complex humour and eccentric nature. On 18 October 1569 a bill was signed to an Edmund Spenser for bearing letters from Tours for Sir Henry Norris, ambassador to France, to Queen Elizabeth, indicating that Spenser was already involved in secretarial work for powerful patrons. Norris was father of John and Thomas Norris, whom Spenser later served in Ireland. 
Spenser graduated with a BA in 1573, his name placed eleventh in a list of 120, and an MA in 1576, when he was placed fourth from last out of seventy (the lists may not be in order of merit). It is not clear how he spent the next three or four years. He may have travelled back to Lancashire, where he fell in love with 'Rosalind'; E. K., in 'The Shepheardes Calender', encourages readers to identify the love-sick Colin in the January and June eclogues with Spenser -- '[Rosalynde] is... a feigned name, which beyng wel ordered, wil bewray the very name of hys love and mistresse, whom by that name he coloureth' (January); 'this is no poetical fiction, but unfeynedly spoken of the Poete selfe' (June) -- but taking such material at face value is a hazardous enterprise. It is possible that Spenser was in Ireland in the mid-1570s. In 'A View of the Present State of Ireland' (written 'c'.1596) Irenius claims to have witnessed the execution of Murrough O'Brien (July 1577). Such evidence is also problematic, as it depends upon an exact identification of Spenser with Irenius, a fictional character in a dialogue. However, there is corroborating evidence: Spenser is recorded delivering letters and a 'cast of falcons' to Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, from Sir William Drury, president of Munster (8 July 1577). It is possible that Spenser was working for the lord deputy, Henry Sidney, Leicester's brother-in-law, as he had for Sir Henry Norris. 
Some time after 1 April 1578 Spenser was employed in the household of Dr John Young, bishop of Rochester, and former master of Pembroke College when Spenser was a student (Young was installed on the above date). Gabriel Harvey possessed a copy of Jerome Turler's 'The Traveller' (1575), which has the inscription 'Ex dono Edmundi Spenserii, Episcopi Roffensis Secretarii' ('a gift of Edmund Spenser, secretary of the bishop of Rochester'). It is likely that Spenser lived at the bishop's residence in Bromley, which would account for E. K.'s statement in the June eclogue that 'Colin' had 'for his more preferment removing out of the Northparts came into the South'. 
Gabriel Harvey records that he and Spenser met in London on 20 December 1578. Spenser presented Harvey with four 'foolish bookes' that he had to read before 1 January 1579 or give Spenser his four volumes of Lucian. The four volumes were Till Eulenspiegel's 'A Merye Jest of a Man that was called Howleglas' ('c'.1528), Andrew Borde's 'Jests of Scoggin' ('c'.1566), 'Merie Tales... by Master Skelton' (1567), and 'The Pleasaunt Historie of Lazarillo de Tormes' (trans. D. Rowland, 'c'.1569). The outcome of the contest is not recorded. Harvey also noted in his 'Letter Book' that Spenser looked like a 'young Italianate signor and French monsieur', a description that gives a sense of the humorous banter established between the two friends. 
Spenser was clearly writing poetry throughout the 1570s. The prefatory epistle to 'The Shepheardes Calender', signed E. K., claims to have been written 'From my lodging at London thys 10. of April'. E. K. may have been Edward Kirke, Spenser's contemporary at Pembroke, but it is more likely that the epistle was written by Harvey or by Spenser himself, and possibly both. E. K. refers to a series of other works that are now lost: 'Dreames, Legendes, Courte of Cupide', a translation of Moschus; 'Idyllion of Wandering Love, Pageaunts, Sonnets'; and 'The Englishe poete', a critical treatise. It is likely that some of these works were revised and reappeared as parts of longer poems published later (commentators speculate that the 'Courte of Cupide' was revised as 'The Faerie Queene', book 3, cantos 11-12). Certainly this would accord with other information about Spenser's habits of composition. Lodowick Bryskett records, in his 'Discourse of Civill Life' (1606), an exchange -- which may be in part fictional -- between a number of intellectuals at his house near Dublin in 1582. Spenser begs to be excused from a discussion of moral philosophy because he has already completed such a task in 'The Faerie Queene', which suggests that his works were often written a long time before they were published and that they were carefully revised. 
Spenser wrote to Harvey on 5 October 1579 from 'Leycester House' to say that he had entered the earl's service and was ready to travel abroad for his master. It is likely that he had entered the Leicester circle some time between September 1578 and April 1579. On 15 October he wrote to Harvey again, from the house of 'Mystresse Kerkes' in Westminster, to say that he was in 'some use of familiarity' with Sir Philip Sidney and Edward Dyer, and that they debated how to reform English metre and bring it in line with the standards of the ancients. In another letter Harvey writes that both he and Spenser are friendly with Daniel Rogers, another acquaintance of Sidney's. Commentators have suggested that Spenser and Sidney enjoyed a close relationship and discussed poetic matters, before Sidney's untimely death in 1586. Others argue that the evidence is slim and that it is unlikely that someone of Sidney's social status would have been keen to spend a great deal of time with a commoner such as Spenser (Heninger). 
On 27 October 1579 Spenser married Maccabaeus Childe at St Margaret's, Westminster. They had two children, Sylvanus and Katherine -- Richard Mulcaster, Spenser's former headmaster, had a child named Sylvanus. Spenser married again, in 1594, but his poetic persona, Colin Clout, refers to being 'Vassall to one, whom all my dayes I serve' ('Colin Clouts Come Home Againe', 1591), which suggests that Maccabaeus Spenser died between 'c'.1590 and 'c'.1593. 

'The Shepheardes Calender' was entered into the Stationers' register on 5 December 1579 and was published by the protestant publisher Hugh Singleton soon after that date, as the poem bears the imprint 1579 (indicating that it must have appeared before the end of February). The 'Calender' was a popular work and was reprinted in 1581, 1586, 1591, and 1597, demonstrating that Spenser did make an impact as 'our new poet'. It contains twelve poems, complete with prefatory comments and notes by E. K., which may or may not have been written by Spenser himself and Gabriel Harvey, and a series of emblematic woodcuts of allegorical significance. The poems describe events in the lives of a series of fictional shepherds and vary from apparently personal laments on the nature of loss and unrequited love to stringent ecclesiastical satire and attacks on corruption and court patronage. They comment on the nature of love and devotion, the pains of exile, praise for the queen, forms of worship, the duties of church ministers, forms of poetry, the merits of protestantism and Catholicism, and impending death. Equally important is the showy technical proficiency of the works and the ways in which the poems and commentary serve to announce the arrival of a major new English poet. 
The 'Calender' was soon followed by another work, presumably as part of the same plan to launch Spenser as a significant English poet. On 30 June 1580 his and Harvey's 'Three Proper, and Wittie, Familiar Letters' were entered into the Stationers' register; the epistle 'To the Curteous Buyer, by a Welwiller of the Two Authors' is dated 19 June 1580. To these letters were attached 'Two other very commendable letters, of the same mens writing... more lately delivered unto the printer'. Spenser's letters are purportedly written from Leicester House and are dated 5 October 1579 (containing further material dated 15-16 October) and 2 April 1580. They discuss a variety of intellectual and literary matters, concentrating especially on the need to reform English poetry and, especially, the desirability of quantitative metre. The tone, in H. R. Woudhuysen's words, is 'familiar and intimate, knowing and rather jokey, secret and yet clearly assembled with publication in mind' (Hamilton, 435), in line with the textual apparatus of 'The Shepheardes Calender'. The letters contain more references to lost works: 'My Slomber', 'The Dying Pellican', 'Nine Comoedies', 'Stemmata Dudleiana', 'Dreames' (also referred to in 'The Shepheardes Calender'), and 'Epithalamion Thamesis' (probably reworked as part of 'The Faerie Queene', book 4, canto 11). Spenser refers to 'Dreames' and 'Dying Pellican' as 'fully finished'. There is also the first reference to 'The Faerie Queene' when Harvey writes that, for Spenser, ''The Faerye Queene' be fairer in your eie than the 'Nine Muses', and 'Hobgoblin' runne away with the Garland from 'Apollo'' (p. 628). 
In 1580 Spenser became private secretary to Arthur, Lord Grey of Wilton, who was appointed lord deputy of Ireland in July. Spenser probably arrived with Lord Grey on 12 August. His salary, as recorded on 31 December, was $20 p.a. He was also paid $43 19's'. 3died for carrying messages, and paid out $18 16's'. 10died to messengers (12 December). He now lived in Ireland until his death, returning to England at regular intervals for official and literary business. He may not have wished to leave for Ireland, as some have conjectured. It is likely that he incurred the wrath of William Cecil, Lord Burghley, for his hostile portrait in 'Mother Hubberds Tale', which appears to have circulated in manuscript in the late 1570s or 1580. No copies of this manuscript survive and there is no contemporary corroborating evidence, apart from internal references, added later, lamenting the fate of an unsuccessful courtier -- presumably Spenser himself -- who has 'thy Princes grace, yet want her Peeres' (l. 901). The last lines of 'The Faerie Queene' have also been taken to refer back to this incident; Spenser hopes that his work will be read fairly, unlike his 'former writs', and so be: '
free from all that wite [blame], 

With which some wicked tongues did it backbite, 

And bring into a mighty Peres displeasure. 
(book 6, canto 12, stanza 41)' The peer in question was Burghley and the work 'Mother Hubberds Tale'. 
It seems likely that the work was controversial because of its direct satire of the queen's projected marriage to Francois, duke of Alencon. John Stubbs, author of 'The Discoverie of a Gaping Gulf' (1579), an aggressive treatise urging Elizabeth not to make her subjects obey a foreign, probably Catholic, monarch, had just had his right hand severed for publishing his work. Stubbs's book was translated into French and Italian, and a manuscript was sent to the pope, precipitating an international incident. Spenser could hardly have chosen a less apposite time to circulate a topical satire of the incident, in which he seems to show that the queen is in danger of being duped by the French ambassador, Simier, represented as an ape (Elizabeth's name for him) in league with her chief minister, represented as a fox. The disastrous effect of 'Mother Hubberds Tale' probably explains why Spenser, who had promoted himself as the most important new English poet earlier in the year, did not publish another significant work for ten years and concentrated instead on his career in the Irish civil service. 
It is possible that Spenser accompanied Grey on some military expeditions and he may have been present at the notorious massacre at the Fort d'Oro, Smerwick, on the Dingle peninsula, on 9 November 1580, when Lord Grey ordered the slaughter of some 600 Spanish and Italian troops who had surrendered to the lord deputy. The state papers contain letters in Spenser's hand from Grey to Elizabeth and Lord Burghley, vigorously defending his actions. Spenser later defended Lord Grey himself in 'A View of the Present State of Ireland' ('c'.1596). 
Spenser may also have accompanied Grey on expeditions against the O'Mores of Connaught in February 1581 and the O'Tooles, O'Byrnes, and Kavanaghs in co. Wicklow and co. Wexford in May-June; on his northern tour of duty in August, when Grey negotiated peace with Turlogh Lynagh O'Neill and fought in Leinster; and in his campaign against the Munster rebels in September. On 14 March Spenser was appointed clerk of the chancery for faculties, as successor to Lodowick Bryskett. The seven-year appointment required the drafting of the licences and dispensations issued by the archbishop of Dublin. Spenser undoubtedly employed a deputy and kept part of the salary for himself. At the end of the month he was paid $52 4's'. 10died for carrying messages and paid out $39 3's'. 8died to messengers. The total that Spenser was paid for organizing messengers during Grey's deputyship was $430 10's'. 2died He is referred to as 'gent... secretary of the deputy', affirming that his position in Ireland had changed his status, probably through his ability to purchase and rent land. 
Spenser was undoubtedly living in Dublin or close outside throughout this period. It is likely that his intellectual circle in Dublin was wide and varied, as indicated in Lodowick Bryskett's 'Discourse of Civill Life'. As well as Bryskett and Grey, Spenser undoubtedly knew Geoffrey Fenton, translator of prose romances and of Guicciardini's history of Italy, who married into the Boyle family, as Spenser was to do later; Barnaby Rich, soldier and author of numerous romances and political treatises; and Barnaby Googe, author of 'Eglogs, Epytaphs, and Sonettes' (1563) -- pastoral poems that may have had some influence on 'The Shepheardes Calender' -- and numerous translations. 
On 6 December 1581 Spenser was granted the official lease for the abbey and manor of Enniscorthy, co. Wexford, a former Franciscan monastery, 'and a ruinous castle and weir there'. The lands were leased out to Richard Synnot, a previous owner who may have been living there all the time, for $11 13's'. 4died In 1581-2 Spenser also leased a house in Dublin; a former monastery at New Ross, co. Wexford, which he later sold to Sir Anthony Colclough (died 1584); and another ruined Franciscan monastery, New Abbey, near Kilcullen, co. Kildare, 25 miles from Dublin (15 July 1582). He signed a twenty-one-year lease on the last property for $3 a year but forfeited this in 1590. There is only one record of Spenser paying rent (August 1583), which suggests that he probably moved to Munster soon after that date. Spenser's transactions indicate how easy it was for 'new' English civil servants, soldiers, and adventurers to acquire land and wealth well beyond what they could have expected to gain had they remained in England. It is unlikely that Spenser would have been able to become a gentleman in England, and this change in status may also explain why he chose to pursue a career in Ireland. Many of the properties in question were confiscated from Irish 'rebels'. New Abbey was forfeited by James Eustace after his rebellion. 
Lord Grey was recalled and left Ireland on 31 August 1582, so ending Spenser's secretaryship. Grey's appointment was ended partly due to criticism at court of his harsh treatment of Irish rebels, most notably at Smerwick, but he was to remain a heroic figure for many of the 'new' English, who approved of his stern and decisive actions and looked back to his example during the Nine Years' War in the 1590s. Eudoxus, in 'A View of the Present State of Ireland', tries to refute claims that the 'good Lo. Grey... was a blodye man, and regarded not the life of her [majesty's] subjectes no more then dogges' ('Works', 10.159). Such partisan support indicates that Spenser thought highly of Lord Grey and respected him as a master. He may have accompanied Grey on his final expedition to King's county in May-June 1582. 
In May 1583 Spenser was appointed a commissioner for musters in co. Kildare for two years, with twenty-six others. The commissioners were expected 'to summon all the subjects of each barony, and then so mustered in warlike apparel' (Maley, 38), when necessary. Spenser's address is given as New Abbey, implying that this was his principal residence. Spenser was summoned to perform his duties on 4 July 1584, with twenty-five others. 
On 6 November 1583 Lodowick Bryskett, whose career in the Irish civil service appears to have been more advanced than Spenser's and who seems to have acted as patron to the younger man, was officially installed as clerk of the council of Munster and secretary to Sir John Norris, president of the council. Spenser served as his deputy, probably from this time or soon afterwards, on a salary of $7 10's'., but undoubtedly employed a deputy himself. Assuming that the new lord deputy, Sir John Perrot, required secretaries to follow him on expeditions and tours of duty, Spenser may have accompanied Perrot and Sir John Norris on a tour through Munster and Connaught in July 1584 to install Norris and Sir Richard Bingham in their respective presidencies. He may also have travelled north to Ulster with Norris in August and September to confront Sorley Boy MacDonnell, who had landed on the Antrim coast with a large force of Scots in July, and returned to Dublin in October. 
In 1585 Spenser became prependary of Effin, a benefice attached to Limerick Cathedral, which probably made few, if any, demands on his time. A prepend was a pension or plot of land granted to a cathedral to fund a secular priest or a regular canon; Effin, west of Balingaddy, consisted of 1052 acres. In the May and July eclogues of 'The Shepheardes Calender' Spenser had attacked such practices as corrupt. In 'Mother Hubberds Tale' he makes a direct reference to the problematic nature of prepends: '
How manie honest men see ye arize 

Daylie thereby, and grow to goodly prize; 

To Deanes, to Archdeacons; to Commissaries, 

To Lords, to Principalls, to Prependaries? 
(ll. 414-17)' How Spenser performed his duties is not recorded. 
Spenser would have attended the sessions at the presidency court of Munster in Limerick and Cork throughout 1585 and 1586. A few years earlier plans had been made to establish a plantation of English settlers in Munster using the lands confiscated from the native Irish after the Desmond rebellion (1579-83). The forfeited lands were surveyed in September-November 1584 with the purpose of selling them off to settlers; the plan for the plantation was drafted in December 1585 and, having passed through the Irish parliament of 1586, which Spenser would have attended, the articles for the Munster undertakers received royal assent in June. 
At some point in 1586 Spenser acquired an estate of 3028 acres connected to the ruined Norman castle of Kilcolman, in co. Cork, one of the smaller portions of land granted to English settlers on the plantation from over half a million acres confiscated from the earl of Desmond's lands. It is likely that he used one Andrew Reade to claim the property on his behalf. Kilcolman was described as 'a large castle, old, and dilapidated, which at the present time has no use except to shelter cattle at night' (Maley, 43). Spenser would have lived in an adjoining house, not in the castle itself. Like Dublin, Munster would have supplied Spenser with numerous intellectual contacts, allies, and companions. Sir Walter Ralegh was his immediate neighbour, occupying an enormous estate of 42,000 acres in co. Cork and co. Waterford, although he may not have spent much time in Ireland. Richard Beacon, the queen's attorney for Munster and author of 'Solon his Follie' (1594), occupied land also in the counties of Cork and Waterford. Meredith Hanmer, protestant polemicist and historian, whose history of Ireland was included in Sir James Ware's edition of Irish chronicles, together with Spenser's 'View', was archdeacon of Ross from 1591 until his death in 1604. Sir William Herbert, author of 'Croftus, sive de Hibernia liber', occupied land in co. Kerry and acted as vice-president of Munster in the absence of Sir Thomas Norris while living in Ireland from 1586 to 1589. Spenser's life was to be closely connected to the fate of the plantation until his death. 
Spenser was probably in Dublin for much of 1586, attending the Irish parliamentary session, which opened on 26 April and closed on 14 May. A sonnet written to Gabriel Harvey, and later included in Harvey's 'Foure Letters' (1592), is dated 18 July from Dublin, suggesting that Spenser spent most of the year in Dublin, probably returning to attend sessions of the presidency court of Munster held in September in Dungarvon and in October in Lismore and Youghal. The third edition of 'The Shepheardes Calender' was published in London, indicating that Spenser's work was still in demand in England. 
Spenser undoubtedly attended a session of the Munster council in Cork in March and two others in Limerick in June and November 1587. He probably spent most of the year in various parts of Munster. By October he was serving as deputy to Bryskett, clerk of the council of Munster. Records indicate that he must have taken up residence at Kilcolman some time in 1588, probably around September, when Lord Roche, a local Irish landowner, complained to the queen's commissioners that some of his land had been occupied by English planters. It is likely that Spenser spent some of the year with Ralegh, who was resident in his house at Youghal, and was serving as mayor of the town. Spenser sold on his post as clerk of the court of chancery to Arland Uscher (22 June). 
There was general panic in Ireland in 1588, when the Spanish Armada tried to sail home round the Irish coast and out into the Atlantic. Fearing Atlantic storms, many sailed close to the coast and, because their maps were not accurate enough to navigate through the treacherous waters, most were wrecked -- twenty-five in February alone. The English authorities in Ireland, fearing an invasion triggered by an alliance between Irish and Spanish, swiftly mobilized to deal with any survivors. Spenser probably accompanied Sir Thomas Norris's military expedition to Ulster and Connaught in October and November. He would have been in Dublin in December to see Norris knighted by the lord deputy, Sir William Fitzwilliam. 
Spenser would have returned with Norris to Munster in January 1589, as a letter in his hand indicates (Maley, 48-9). He obtained official possession of the Kilcolman estate on 22 May, for which he paid an annual rent of $20 and on which he established a colony of six householders and their families. Meanwhile Lord Roche was making further complaints about the confiscation of his lands, naming Spenser, with George Browne, Hugh Cuffe, Justice Smythes, and Arthur Hyde. On 12 October he wrote directly to Elizabeth, alleging that: 'Edmund Spenser falsely pretending title to certain castles and 16 ploughlands, hath taken possession thereof. Also by threatening and menacing the said Lord Roche's tenants, and by seizing their cattle, and beating Lord Roche's servants and bailiffs, he has wasted 6 ploughlands of his lordship's lands. (ibid., 52)' The undertakers countered with a bill against Roche, alleging that he had: 'relieved one Kedagh O'Kelly, his foster brother, a proclaimed traitor, has imprisoned men of Mr. Verdon's, Mr. Edmund Spenser and others. He speaks ill of Her Majesty's government and hath uttered words of contempt of Her Majesty's laws, calling them unjust. He killed a fat beef of Teig Olyve's, because Mr. Spenser lay in his house one night as he came home from the sessions at Limerick. He also killed a beef of his smith's for mending Mr. Peer's plough iron. He has forbidden his people to have any trade or conference with Mr. Spenser or Mr. Piers or their Tenants. He has concealed from Her Majesty the manor of Crogh, being the freehold of one who was a rebel. (Maley, 52)' The case was to haunt Spenser throughout the next decade, and was arguably a significant influence on the 'Two cantos of Mutabilitie', published after his death (P. Coughlan, 'The local context of Mutabilitie's plea', 'Irish University Review: A Journal of Irish Studies', 26, 1996, 320-41). 
Spenser had clearly been working hard on his poetry, even though he had published next to nothing since his initial success with 'The Shepheardes Calender'. It is likely that his busy job as a civil servant precluded extensive publication -- although we cannot be sure how onerous his duties really were. Perhaps now that he was a landowner of some substance he could find more time to write, or to prepare what he had written for publication, as he produced a large body of work in the last decade of his life. The first edition of 'The Faerie Queene' must have been ready for publication in 1589, for in October he left for England with Ralegh, leaving Richard Chichester as a substitute deputy. Spenser's visit is recorded in 'Colin Clouts Come Home Againe' (first published 1596) -- although as usual we should be wary of taking anything Spenser wrote in his work at face value. The preface to that poem, dated 27 December 1591, 'From my house of Kilcolman', thanks Ralegh 'for your singular favours and sundrie good turnes shewed to me at my late being in England'. 
Spenser may have brought a copy of 'The Faerie Queene' with him in order to see the proofs through the press, as he appears to have been careful to do this for other works. The poem was entered into the Stationers' register on 1 December 1589 and published in early 1590. The appended 'Letter to Raleigh' is dated 23 January 1589 (that is, 1590), suggesting that it may have been inserted at the proof stage. 'Colin Clouts Come Home Againe' claims that Spenser (Colin Clout) was granted an audience with Elizabeth and was able to read out sections of 'The Faerie Queene'. It is quite likely that this did occur, as Elizabeth is the main dedicatee of the poem. Spenser writes that the encounter was a great success: '
Unto that Goddesse grace me first enhanced, 

And to mine oaten pipe enclin'd her eare, 

That she thenceforth therein gan take delight, 

And it desir'd at timely houres to heare... 

And wondrous worth she mott my simple song, 

But joyd that country shephearde ought could fynd 

Worth harkening to, emongst the learned throng. 
(ll. 359-67)' Although it is unsafe to assume that Spenser's audience with Elizabeth went as well as Colin Clout claims, on 25 February 1591 she did grant him a life pension of $50 a year. 

'The Faerie Queene' was a new departure in the history of English poetry, being a combination of Italian romance, classical epic, and native English styles, principally derived from Chaucer. Spenser signalled this by inventing a new stanza (which has come to be known as the Spenserian stanza), a hybrid form adopted from the Scots poetry of James I, 'rhyme royal', and Italian 'ottava rima'. It contained nine lines, the first eight being pentameters and the last line an alexandrine, and employed the rhyme scheme 'ababbcbcc'. It was accompanied by seventeen dedicatory sonnets to a variety of figures. Unusually for an Elizabethan poem these were appended, rather than prefaced, to it. They were addressed to a range of important courtiers: Sir Christopher Hatton; Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex; Sir William Cecil, Lord Burghley; Edward de Vere, seventeenth earl of Oxford; Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland; George Clifford, third earl of Cumberland; Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond; Charles, Lord Howard of Effingham; Sir Henry Carey, first Lord Hunsdon; Arthur, Lord Grey of Wilton; Thomas Sackville, Lord Buckhurst; Sir Francis Walsingham; Sir John Norris; Sir Walter Ralegh; Mary Sidney, countess of Pembroke; Lady Carew; and 'all the gratious and beautifull Ladies of the Court'. It is clear from this list that Spenser had chosen to dedicate the poem to friends and employers -- Ralegh, Norris, and Grey -- and figures who were especially concerned with matters in Ireland -- Ormond, Burghley, and Essex -- as well as to a variety of powerful politicians and potential patrons, such as Mary Sidney and Walsingham. It would be stretching a point to read personal relationships into this miscellaneous group of people, especially if one bears in mind that works could be dedicated to patrons without their knowledge (as was the case with Stephen Gosson's dedication of 'School of Abuse' (1579) to Sir Philip Sidney, and Sir John Hayward's dedication of 'The First Part of the Life and Reign of King Henry IV' (1599) to the earl of Essex). 
The poem has survived as a long fragment of six completed books, each of twelve cantos, of lengths varying from forty to eighty stanzas. A further fragment of a seventh book, published after Spenser's death, consisted of two complete cantos and two stanzas from a third. There was also a letter appended from the author to Ralegh, dated 23 January 1589, explaining the allegorical method of the 'Poet historical'. Scholars are divided on the question of the extant nature of the poem, some concluding that Spenser never really intended to complete it, others that had he lived longer all twelve books would have emerged. Equally the relationship between the 'Two cantos of Mutabilitie' and the rest of the poem has not been satisfactorily resolved, some regarding these as a key to the whole work, others reading them as a minor episode not fully worked through. 

'The Faerie Queene' tells a series of discrete but interrelated stories based around the quests of six knights who each represent a particular virtue. Its allegory is flexible and moves easily from the historically specific to deal with theological, philosophical, and ethical questions, many based on readings of Aristotle's 'Nicomachean Ethics', a stated source of the poem. Book 1 tells the story of the redcross knight, eventually revealed to be the patron saint of England, St George, who has to destroy the dragon who holds captive the parents of his lady, Una. As with all romances the narrative moves sideways as much as forwards (a process known as dilation), and a whole series of episodes represent events and problems precipitated by the Reformation. The lovers are united but, significantly, the knight is recalled to his service to Gloriana, the faerie queen, before they can get married. Book 2 charts the progress of the knight of temperance, Sir Guyon, culminating in the famous description of his destruction of the Bower of Bliss, an episode which has inspired commentators, artists, and writers ever since. Guyon's undoubted virtue is shown to be limited when he is defeated by the knight of chastity, Britomart, the heroine of book 3. While Guyon can only refuse and oppose bodily temptation Britomart is able to experience corporeal ecstasies and agonies, and so point to a way beyond the limits of temperance for those who have to live in the ordinary world. Britomart, in pointed contrast to the real queen of England, the virginal Elizabeth, sees her husband-to-be, Artegall, in Merlin's magic mirror, and the dynasty that she will found stretching into the future. The first edition of 'The Faerie Queene' concluded with the striking image of the hermaphrodite created through the passionate embrace of the rescued lovers, Amoret and Scudamore, a sign that human experience could be equal and satisfying through the institution of marriage. 
The second edition of the poem (1596) is generally agreed to be a darker and more diffuse work. Book 4, the legend of Friendship, has two central figures, Cambel and Telamond, who occupy only a small section of the narrative. Many commentators argue that the original version of the poem that circulated in manuscript in the early 1580s consisted of portions of books 3 and 4, later worked into the printed version with varying success. The book contains the famous description of the marriage of the Thames and the Medway -- again probably adapted from an earlier work or version of the poem. Book 5, the legend of Justice, follows the adventures of Artegall, Britomart's future spouse. This has generally been the least popular section of the poem because of its disturbing defence of English policy in Ireland and, more overtly, its historical allegory, but it has recently received far more attention for the very reason that it was previously ignored. Artegall, abandoned by his tutor, Astrea, has to resolve a number of difficult disputes, foolishly falls prey to the Amazon Radigund, and has to be rescued by Britomart before his violent suppression of rebellion in Ireland is prematurely truncated by Gloriana. Book 6, the legend of Courtesy, depicts the adventures of Sir Calidore, a confused and misdirected knight who tries to give up his elusive quest for the Blatant Beast when he stumbles across a pastoral world at odds with the courtly world he is less than keen to defend. The book, like its predecessor, is replete with disturbing images of violent disruption, principally of disguised rebels ambushing small peasant communities (undoubtedly an echo of Spenser's experience in Ireland). It ends when Calidore finally manages to capture the Blatant Beast, but it escapes to terrorize the world with its awful slanders, which include attacks on the poet himself. 
Spenser may have spent much of 1590 in London, or he may have returned to Ireland, owing to his protracted lawsuit with Lord Roche. A letter from Richard Whyte to Lord Burghley, dated 8 May, suggests that Richard Chichester was still serving as Spenser's deputy as clerk of Munster. A 'bill of imprest' made out by Sir Henry Wallop, treasurer at wars in Ireland, on 30 May may have been made out to Spenser in person, in which case he was clearly back in Ireland. On 6 May Elizabeth granted Spenser and his heirs the manor, lands, castle, and town of Kilcolman in fee-farm forever, confirmed on 26 October. The royal grant notes that part of the estate went by the name Hap Hazard (Maley, 55). 
The volume 'Complaints' was entered into the Stationers' register on 29 December 1590. The publisher, William Ponsonby, included a preface to the reader, which states that his last publication for Spenser, 'The Faerie Queene', 'hath found favourable passage with you [the readers]' and that therefore he has attempted to: 'get into my handes such smale Poemes of the same Authors; as I heard were disperst abroad in sundrie hands, and not easie to bee come by, by himselfe: some of them having bene diverslie imbeziled and purloyned from him, since his departure ouer Sea.' Ponsonby claims that he has gathered the volume together 'for that they al seeme to containe like matter of argument in them'. He also refers to other works that he understands are circulating: 'namelie 'Ecclesiastes', and 'Canticum canticorum', translated 'A Senights Slumber', 'The Hell of Lovers, his Purgatorie', being all dedicated to ladies. Besides some other Pamphlets looslie scattered abroad: as 'The Dying Pellican', 'The Howers of the Lord', 'The Sacrifice of a Sinner', 'The Seven Psalmes, &c.' which when I can either by himselfe, or otherwise attaine too, I meane likewise for you your favour sake to set forth.' From this preface it has been argued that Ponsonby simply went ahead on his own without the poet's consent and that arguments for Spenser's involvement in the physical process of publishing his work should be discounted (see Brink, 'Who fashioned Edmund Spenser?'). It might equally be a means of disguising the fact that he and Spenser worked in close co-operation (Johnson, 27). As well as providing another confirmation of the existence of 'The Dying Pellican' and naming other lost works Ponsonby's comments read like an advertisement for future publications of Spenser's works, suggesting a relationship in print that we should place alongside Spenser's published correspondence with Gabriel Harvey, Sir Walter Ralegh, and the enigmatic E. K. It is implausible that Spenser was not aware of Ponsonby's comments. 

'Complaints', like 'The Shepheardes Calender', is a complex and puzzling volume. Critics who want to claim that Spenser was attempting to follow a poetic career based on the model of Virgil, progressing from the pastoral 'Eclogues' to the epic 'Aeneid', have to ignore 'Complaints', treating it as a detour between the serious business of 'The Shepheardes Calender' and 'The Faerie Queene', often taking Ponsonby's prefatory comments that he, not Spenser, compiled the poems, at face value. 'Complaints' gathers together a series of poems 'being all complaints and meditations of the worlds vanitie, verie grave and profitable': 'The Ruines of Time', 'The Teares of the Muses', 'Virgil's Gnat' (an adaptation of the pseudo-Virgilian 'Culex'), 'Prosopopia, or, Mother Hubberds Tale', 'The ruines of Rome: by Bellay' (a translation of Du Bellay's 'Antiquitez de Rome'), 'Muiopotmos, or, The fate of the butterfly' (dated 1590 and dedicated to Lady Carey), 'Visions of the Worlds Vanitie', and 'The Visions of Bellay' and 'The Visions of Petrarch, Formerly Translated', the last two being revised versions of the material published in Van Der Noot's 'Theatre' over twenty years earlier. 
The volume, evidently published early in 1591, appears to have landed Spenser in more trouble, owing to its satire of Lord Burghley. It was quickly called in. Given that Burghley was one of the dedicatees of 'The Faerie Queene' Spenser may have assumed that the offence taken at the manuscript of 'Mother Hubberds Tale' about 1580 was now forgotten. His mistake, which reflects his lack of knowledge of court life, might have fostered his adoption of an Anglo-Irish identity. This was publicly expressed in 'Colin Clouts Come Home Againe', dated 27 December 1591 -- that is, soon after the publication of 'Complaints' -- where the 'home' that Colin refers to rather bitterly in the poem is Ireland, not England. Gabriel Harvey noted: 'Mother Hubberd in heat of choller, forgetting the pure sanguine of her sweete Faery Queen, willfully over-shott her malcontented selfe' (E. Spenser, 'The Faerie Queene', ed. A. C. Hamilton, 1977, x). The Catholic recusant Sir Thomas Tresham, in a letter of 19 March 1591, also refers to the furore surrounding the publication of the volume, while noting the effect that the scandal had on its price: 'The whole discourse of that ould weoman [Mother Hubberd] ys (as I have heard reported) to showe by what channce the apes did loose their tayles. Thowghe this be a jest, yett is itt taken in suche earnest, that the booke is by Superior awthoritie called in; and nott to be had for anie money. Where ytt was att the first sould for vi. D. it is nowe of redie money a Crowne. The bookebynders have allreadie gotten by the vent of this booke, more then all the Apes in Parys garding is worthe. I did never see ytt myselfe; neither would I read ytt nowe, yf I might have ytt, becawse yt is forbidden. (Peterson, 22-3)' Tresham also attests to the popularity of Spenser, noting that 'The Faerie Queene' 'was so well liked, that her ma:tie gave him ane hundred marks pencion forthe of the Exchequer: and so clerklie was yt penned, that he beareth the name of Poet Laurell'. Now, however, Spenser was 'in hazard to loose his forsayd annuall reward: and fynallie hereby proove himselfe a Poett Lorrell' (ibid., 23). The title poet laureate was evidently an unofficial one but indicates that Spenser did indeed make a significant impact at court in 1589-90, one which he appears to have spoilt rather with the publication of 'Complaints'. This may explain the extent of his bitterness towards the court -- and the queen -- in some of his subsequent writings. 
Spenser continued to produce poetry at an impressive rate. 'Daphnaida: an elegie upon the death of the noble and vertuous Douglas Howard, daughter of Lord Howard and wife of Arthur Gorges', an imitation of Chaucer's 'Book of the Duchess', was published by Ponsonby on 1 January 1592. There is no evidence to suggest how close Spenser was either to Arthur Gorges, later translator of Lucan's 'Pharsalia', or to Douglas Howard herself, daughter of John Howard, second Viscount Howard de Bindon. The poem is dedicated to Lady Helena, marchioness of Northampton, another figure whose relations with Spenser are unknown. The pseudo-Platonic 'Axiochus: a most excellent dialogue, written in Greeke by Plato the phylosopher, trans. by Edw. Spenser' was entered into the Stationers' register on 1 May and published later in the year. The work is a translation from a Greek dialogue between Socrates and Axiochus, an old man, about the fear of death. It is not certain that the translation was by Spenser, as the attribution is based on verbal echoes in Spenser's other works, most of which could be coincidence (although there is a substantial echo of an entire clause in the dialogue in 'The Faerie Queene', book 2, canto 12, stanza 51). The attribution to 'Edw.' may simply be a mistaken expansion by the publisher but remains a troubling detail for those who want to include it in the Spenser canon. Some scholars attribute the work to Anthony Munday. 
There is little record of Spenser in the next two years. He appears to have travelled to England in August-September 1592 and is referred to in a list of colonists who have paid their rent in December of that year. The lawsuit with Lord Roche was still proceeding, with claims and counter-claims. In 1593 Roche petitioned Adam Loftus, lord chancellor of Ireland, that Spenser had falsely claimed his land at Shanballymore (east of Doneraile). He also petitioned against Joan Ny Callaghan on the grounds of his 'supportation and mayntenance of Edmond Spenser, gentleman, a heavy adversary unto your suppliant' (Maley, 60). Spenser sold his office as deputy clerk of Munster to Nicholas Curtis. There were a large number of references to Spenser and his work, borrowings, quotations, and citations in the early 1590s, indicating his popularity and influence as a poet. These include works by Barnaby Barnes, Nicholas Breton, Samuel Daniel, John Florio, Abraham Fraunce, Sir John Harington, Christopher Marlowe, Thomas Nashe, Henry Peacham, George Peele, and Thomas Watson. 
Spenser served as queen's justice for Cork in 1594. The legal battle with Lord Roche continued with Roche complaining in February that Spenser had occupied and damaged his land at Ballingerath, destroying woods and corn to the value of $200. Spenser appeared in court on 12 February and Roche was granted possession of the disputed lands. 
On 11 June 1594, St Barnabas day, Spenser married, as his second wife, Elizabeth Boyle, a relative of Richard Boyle, later earl of Cork. They had one child, Peregrine ('Lat. Strange or outlandish', according to William Camden), born possibly in 1595. The courtship and marriage are represented in the sonnet sequence 'Amoretti' and the marriage hymn 'Epithalamion', entered into the Stationers' register on 19 November 1594 and published as a single volume in early 1595, when they were advertised as poems 'Written not long since'. The dedicatory note by Spenser's usual publisher, William Ponsonby, to Sir Robert Needham claims that he has taken responsibility for publishing the poems in the absence of the poet. Needham, according to Ponsonby's dedication, had brought them from Ireland to London, and it is possible that he also brought over the completed second edition of 'The Faerie Queene'. Sonnet 80 of 'Amoretti' states that Spenser had already finished the six completed books of 'The Faerie Queene', which were to be published in 1596, giving the newly married Spenser time to turn his attentions from Elizabeth, the queen, to his wife of the same name. 

'Colin Clouts Come Home Againe', another poem that draws on Spenser's life, was published in the same year, though it states that it was written 'From my house of 'Kilcolman' the 27. of December. 1591' ('The Poetical Works of Edmund Spenser', ed. J. C. Smith and E. de Selincourt, 1912, 536). The poem fits neatly into a tradition of advice literature that exempts the monarch from the general failings of his or her courtiers, and includes strong criticisms of the court, as well as attacks on the vanity, ignorance, and greed of courtiers in general. It is possible that 'Colin Clout' was intended as a criticism of Elizabeth's regime in the 1590s, especially if we bear in mind Spenser's own lack of preferment in England and his posthumous criticisms of the queen in 'Two cantos of Mutabilitie' (A. Hadfield, 'Edmund Spenser's Irish Experience', 1997, chap. 6). 'Astrophel: a pastorall elegie upon the death of the most noble and valorous knight, Sir Philip Sidney' was published in the same volume and dedicated to the countess of Essex, Sidney's widow, Frances Walsingham, with six other elegies, by Lodowick Bryskett and others; again Spenser's poem was undoubtedly written earlier. He also published a commendatory sonnet prefixed to William Jones's translation of 'Nennio, or, A Treatise of Nobility' (1595). 
The second edition of 'The Faerie Queene' was entered into the Stationers' register on 20 January 1596, and it is possible -- although no evidence survives -- that Spenser was in London to supervise its publication. The work consisted of three new books, 4-6, and a revision of the first three books, with the ending altered to allow the plot to continue; like the first edition it was dedicated to Elizabeth. As in the case of 'Mother Hubberds Tale' it plunged Spenser into considerable trouble and triggered a diplomatic row. Robert Bowes, the English ambassador in Scotland, wrote to Lord Burghley on 1 November 1596 that James VI was extremely angry at the portrayal of his mother, Mary, queen of Scots, and her execution in book 5, canto 9. The poem was withdrawn from sale in Scotland and James signalled his intention to complain to Elizabeth. Bowes wrote to Burghley again, on 12 November, claiming that he had persuaded the king that 'The Faerie Queene' had not been published with royal approval but warned that 'he still desires that Edward ['sic'] Spenser for his fault may be tried and duly punished' ('CSP Scot.', '1589-1603', 723). Nothing appears to have come of James's complaints but in March 1598 he commissioned the poet George Nicolson to write a response to Spenser's book, which was either never completed or has not survived. James's furious reaction indicates that Spenser's work was read seriously and carefully by those with political power and influence. 
Later in the year Spenser published 'Fowre Hymnes', the first two ('Of Love' and 'Of Beautie'), dated 1 September 1596, written 'in the greener times of my youth' and dedicated from the court at Greenwich to Lady Margaret, countess of Cumberland, and Lady Mary, countess of Warwick; the volume also contained the second edition of 'Daphnaida', and 'Prothalamion', a marriage hymn celebrating the betrothals of the two daughters of the earl of Worcester, Lady Elizabeth and Lady Katherine Somerset. The earl was a close associate of Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, in whose capacious circle Spenser appears to have been moving in the last years of his life. The marriage took place at Essex House, London, on 8 November 1596 and Spenser may have attended, given his presence in London recorded in the 'Fowre Hymnes'. He also published a commendatory sonnet prefacing Zachary Jones's translation 'History of George Castriot, Surnamed Scanderbeg' (1596), from the French of de La Vardin. 
It is likely that Spenser completed 'A View of the Present State of Ireland' in June and July 1596, possibly before he travelled to London to attend the weddings celebrated in the 'Prothalamion'. The work recommends that a lord lieutenant be appointed to oversee Irish affairs and refers to 'such an one I Coulde name uppon whom the ey of all Englande is fixed and our last hopes now rest' (p. 228). Many commentators have suggested that Spenser -- through his character, Irenius -- was referring to the earl of Essex, a supposition made plausible by other indications that he had started to move in the large Essex circle. 

'A View' is a work which poses a number of questions. It was not published until 1633, when it formed part of Sir James Ware's 'Ancient Irish Histories', alongside works by Edmund Campion and Meredith Hanmer. It was entered into the Stationers' register on 14 April 1598 with the note 'Mr Collinges / pray enter this Copie for mathew Lownes to be printed when he do bringe other authoritie' (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 3). Commentators have sometimes assumed that this means that the work was censored but this was not necessarily the case. Other works entered in the register were queried in the same way, often owing to disputes between printers and stationers. Given that Matthew Lownes, a printer with a record of literary piracy (most notably over Sir Philip Sidney's 'Astrophil and Stella'), entered the work and not Spenser's usual publisher, William Ponsonby, it is more probable that 'A View' was the subject of a dispute between printers than that it was carefully read and censored. Some twenty manuscript copies survive, including one that belonged to the earl of Essex, which indicates that this work also was read by powerful and influential figures. It is unlikely that Spenser would have been keen to have a political treatise dealing with such a dangerous issue bearing his name circulating to a wide audience in print, considering the dearth of works published that discussed Ireland in the later 1590s when the Nine Years' War was being fought; he had, after all, had his fair share of brushes with the authorities before 1598. The chances are that Lownes wanted to make a profit out of Spenser's name, given the impact of the recently published 'Faerie Queene'. 
Later claims have been made that Spenser did not write 'A View' (Brink, 'Constructing the 'View of the Present State of Ireland'', 'Spenser Studies', 11, 1994, 203-28; 'Appropriating the author'); the work was definitely attributed to Spenser only after his death, by Sir James Ware, although one of the manuscripts bears the initials E. S. Such claims, if substantiated, would cause numerous scholars to revise their interpretation of Spenser's relationship to Ireland. But they have not found much favour with other critics and historians who have defended the attribution of the work to Spenser on a variety of grounds: verbal and stylistic echoes between 'A View' and Spenser's poetry; lack of suitable alternative authors; dating; widespread circulation of manuscripts; and the attribution by Ware. In short it cannot be proved that Spenser wrote 'A View' but the wealth of corroborating evidence suggests that only a bizarre series of coincidences would force scholars to attribute the work to somebody else. 
Spenser was still active in acquiring land, despite the mounting threat to the Munster plantation from Hugh O'Neill's forces in the Nine Years' War. In 1597 he purchased the castle of Renny, in the south of co. Cork, and its surrounding lands for his young son, Peregrine, for $200. Buttevant Abbey also came into his possession. On 7 February 1598 he was noted as being in arrears for the rent of this property. On 30 September, with the Munster plantation on the brink of being overrun by O'Neill's forces, he was made sheriff of Cork by the privy council (which included the earl of Essex) 'for his good and commendable parts (being a man endowed with good knowledge in learning and not unskilful or without experience in the service of the wars)' (Judson, 200). 
Spenser's lands were under serious threat from the rebels when he was appointed, indicating that his elevation was a desperate measure and might not have happened in quieter times. On 4 October Sir Thomas Norris, James Goold, and George Thornton wrote to the privy council from Kilmallock that a force of 2000 Irish rebels were marching towards the area of Kilcolman. By 7 October the plantation was effectively overrun. On 15 October Kilcolman was sacked and burnt. A letter by Sir Thomas Norris of 23 October noted that the son of the Lord Roche with whom Spenser had been in dispute, David Roche, was one of the prominent rebels in the area. Spenser and his family escaped through an underground tunnel, known as the fox hole, leading to caves north of the estate (the tunnel is still recorded as extant in 1840). The family fled to Cork for refuge. 
Spenser, in his new official role as sheriff, is recorded as being in Cork on 7 December. He left the city on 9 December to deliver a letter from the president of Munster, Sir Thomas Norris, to the privy council, detailing the desperate situation in the province. He was probably in Whitehall about 24 December, when he delivered letters from Norris and a host of other documents from the English inhabitants of Munster, some of which were later collected as 'A Briefe Note of Ireland' and attributed to Spenser. This work consisted of three documents: 'A briefe note of Irelande'; an address to the queen beginning 'Out of the ashes of disolacon and wastnes of this your wretched Realme of Ireland'; and 'Certaine pointes to be considered of in the recovery of the realm of Ireland'. Though these have been reproduced in the standard works of Spenser it is now generally agreed that the first two are probably not by Spenser, and the attribution of the third has been disputed. Given that all three short pieces do little more than echo the sentiments and pleas of a desperate people who want more military aid to repel the Irish rebels they could have been written by any number of literate Munster planters, and probably are all that survive of a larger batch of similar documents brought over by Spenser in December 1598. Including or excluding any or all of 'A Briefe Note of Ireland' in the Spenser canon does little to affect his reputation either way. 
On 8 December Spenser was paid $8 for delivering the letters from Norris to the privy council (the official document, as elsewhere, calls him Edward). He died on 13 January 1599 in Westminster. Ben Jonson told William Drummond of Hawthornden 'that the Irish having robbed Spenser's goods and burnt his house and a little child new born, he and his wife escaped, and after he died for lack of bread in King Street' (C. H. Herford and others, eds., 'Ben Jonson', 1925-52, 1.137). There is no other evidence of the dead child and, given that it is unlikely that Spenser starved to death in Westminster, having been paid a pension of $25 and $8 for delivering letters in the previous month, Jonson's comments have usually been discounted. Spenser was buried in Westminster Abbey, near Chaucer, on 16 January, at the expense of the earl of Essex, further evidence of the relationship between the two men. William Camden noted 'his hearse being attended by poets, and mournful elegies and poems, with the pens that wrote them, thrown into the tomb' (Maley, 80). The queen ordered that a monument be erected to his memory but this was not carried out until 1620, at the expense of Ann Clifford, countess of Dorset ('Fowre Hymnes' had been dedicated to her mother and her aunt), who commissioned Nicholas Stone to produce the work. The inscription reads: 'Heare lyes (expecting the Second comminge of our Saviour Christ Jesus) the body of Edmond Spencer, the Prince of Poets in his tyme; whose Divine Spirrit needs noe othir witnesse then the works which he left behinde him. He was borne in London in the yeare 1510. And Died in the yeare 1596. (Judson, 207)' A folio edition of 'The Faerie Queene' was published in 1609 by Matthew Lownes, who acquired the papers of William Ponsonby after his death, in 1604. This was the first work to contain 'Two cantos of Mutabilitie', supposedly the basis for a seventh book of the uncompleted work that the 'Letter to Ralegh' stated would run to twelve books. The discovery may have inspired James Ware's comment in 1633 that 'the latter part' of 'The Faerie Queene' had been lost by a careless servant. The date of these cantos is unknown but they were probably written in the late 1590s, as they contain allegorical material relating to Ireland in line with Spenser's other later writings. Lownes published a folio edition of the collected works in 1611 entitled 'The faerie queene: The shepheardes calender: together with the other works of England's arch-poet, Edm. Spenser'. This was reprinted in 1617. 
Spenser was survived by his widow, Elizabeth, who married Richard (or Roger) Seckerstone in 1603. They had a son called Richard. After Seckerstone's death she married Captain Robert Tynt. Spenser had three children: Sylvanus and Katherine from his first marriage, and Peregrine from his second. Sylvanus, who died in 1638, married Ellen Nagle (or Nangle) and they produced two children, Edmund and William. Sylvanus sued his stepmother successfully for possession of Kilcolman. William inherited the property but, having been converted to Catholicism, was labelled an 'English papist' and transplanted to Connaught in 1654; his lands were assigned to Captain Peter Courthope. William sued for the restoration of the estate, a suit favourably received by Cromwell, but the disputed property only returned to his possession after the Restoration. He became a loyal supporter of William of Orange and received further grants of land (including those forfeited by his cousin Hugoline) before his death 'c'.1720. His son Nathaniel died in 1734 and his grandson Edmund was recorded 'of Kilcolman', indicating that the property remained in the Spenser family for several generations. Peregrine married Dorothy Maurice and was granted the lands surrounding the castle at Renny by his elder brother. He died at some point before 1656. His son Hugoline sided with James II against William of Orange, and his estates were transferred to his cousin William after he was attainted and outlawed on 11 June 1691. Katherine Spenser married William Wiseman of Bandon but there is no record of their having any children. 
Spenser's work has had an enormous influence over the course of English poetry in the four centuries since his death. His most widely read poem has been 'The Faerie Queene', which any aspiring English poet has felt obliged to read carefully and imitate. But 'The Shepheardes Calender' and much of 'Complaints' have also had a major impact (it is one of the great cliches of literary criticism that Spenser's shorter poems would be far better known had he not written 'The Faerie Queene'). Spenser's principal strands of influence have been to create an oppositional, protestant-inspired, anti-courtly poetry in the seventeenth century; to define the style and subject matter of mainstream canonical writers within a central tradition of English writing; to establish the Gothic in art and literature in the eighteenth century; and to help fashion a protestant Anglo-Irish identity in Ireland. 
Many writers of the early Stuart period looked back to the age of Elizabeth with envy and nostalgia. One particular group were the self-styled 'shepheards nation', who modelled their verse on Spenser's pastorals, so forming a community of dissident writers opposed, as their mentor had been, to what they saw as the corrupt, false values of the court. The principal writers were George Wither, William Browne, Christopher Brooke, and, most significant of all, Michael Drayton, whose 'Pastorals' and long chorographical poem 'Poly-Olbion' reuses and adapts numerous episodes from 'The Faerie Queene'. Other imitators of Spenser's style include Phineas and Giles Fletcher. 
At the same time that Spenser was being used as the focus for opposition to the Stuart regime he was also being canonized as the most important Elizabethan poet, having already been lavishly praised by contemporaries such as Sir Philip Sidney, William Webbe, George Puttenham, and Samuel Daniel. Sir Kenelm Digby, for example, extravagantly praised him as 'our English 'Virgil'' in a Neoplatonic reading of 'The Faerie Queene', book 2; Alexander Gill suggested that he was 'more correct in beautifying his language' than Homer; and for Henry Peacham he was 'our excellent 'Spenser'' (Cummings, 126, 144, 147-59). Spenser was to influence virtually all major poets writing in English before the twentieth century. He had a decisive impact on the career of John Milton, who referred to 'our sage and serious Poet 'Spenser', whom I dare to be known to think a better teacher then 'Scotus' or 'Aquinas'' in 'Areopagitica' (1664; ibid., 164). Milton planned to write his epic on the Arthurian legends but changed his mind and switched to the story of the fall for fear of allowing himself to become simply an imitator of Spenser. 
In Ireland 'A View of the Present State of Ireland' was undoubtedly influential in helping to establish a protestant Anglo-Irish identity when it was published, with some of its fiercest comments removed, in 1633 by the Dublin antiquarian Sir James Ware. Spenser drew a clear line between the embattled 'new' English settlers in Ireland, who were opposed and undermined by the native, 'wild' Irish and, worse still, the 'degenerate' 'old' English, the descendants of the twelfth-century Anglo-Norman settlers who had become Irish and Catholic. Spenser is adamant that Ireland must be purged and then properly governed before peace can return to the island, a political message that was influential throughout the seventeenth century, as the numerous references to his work indicate. 
In the eighteenth century Spenser began to be seen as an antique and eccentric poet whose marvellous fictions inspired visions of a vanished, Gothic England of knights, fairies, and castles. Such a case was argued in John Hughes's six-volume edition of Spenser's works (1715), where the perceived irregularities of the poet were made a cause for celebration rather than criticism. This interpretation of Spenser was expanded by subsequent critics such as John Jortin, Thomas Warton the younger, John Upton, and Richard Hurd. Also influential were William Kent's illustrations for Thomas Birch's edition of 'The Faerie Queene' (1751), which used Kent's knowledge of garden design, architecture, painting, and interior design to construct for the poem a Gothic world of mystery, intrigue, and the supernatural. The poem most clearly inspired by this vision of Spenser was James Thompson's 'The Castle of Indolence' (1748). In essence the Romantic version of Spenser was similar, as is demonstrated in the work of the most Spenserian of the English Romantics, John Keats, whose 'Eve of Saint Agnes' clearly owes much to the reading of 'The Faerie Queene' established in the previous century. Spenser was also an important influence on William Blake's art and poetry. 
Spenser's work became more obviously moralized in the nineteenth century and it is significant that numerous editions of 'The Faerie Queene' were produced for children, the complex verse rewritten as prose to draw out the perceived moral of selected episodes. Spenser was an important author for the Pre-Raphaelites, and numerous representations of his work were produced. A fascinating example of Spenser's wide readership is represented by the stained-glass windows commissioned for the entrance to Cheltenham Ladies' College in 1880; these were the brainchild of the headmistress, Dorothea Beale, who wished to provide the young ladies in her charge with suitable ideals of womanhood to inspire them. She selected Britomart as an 'ideal of woman' because she seemed to combine a devotion to duty, motherhood, and marriage with an assertive independence and male virtues. Charles Kingsley's novel 'Westward Ho!' (1855) contains a portrait of Spenser as a vigorous and daring adventurer in both life and writing -- alongside Sir Walter Ralegh -- thus transforming him into a Victorian imperialist and muscular Christian. He was also starting to have an impact in America, and was the subject of a famous essay by the Harvard scholar James Russell Lowell (1819-1891), who emphasized the puritan and Platonic strains in his work. 
Spenser was still read by poets and authors in the twentieth century, a notable devotee being the war poet Wilfred Owen, who writes in his journals of reading Spenser as a means of transporting himself away from the horrors of the front line. W. B. Yeats, who edited an important selection of Spenser's poetry in 1906, wrote an influential preface to that work arguing that Spenser has to be divided up into the sensitive poet who appreciated the beauties of Ireland and the brutal colonizer who sought to impose his narrow-minded English will on the natives. Yeats's version of Spenser is essentially repeated in the critical works of C. S. Lewis, undoubtedly the most widely read Spenser critic of the twentieth century. Spenser featured more in the work of Irish and Scottish writers than of English at the end of the twentieth century, notably in that of Seamus Heaney, George MacBeth, and Brendan Kennelly, who regarded Spenser in the same ambiguous way as Yeats did. 
But perhaps it is true to suggest that Spenser became more of a scholar's poet in the twentieth century and had little impact on a wider reading public. As David Hill Radcliffe has pointed out, 'In the first three decades of the twentieth century, more was written about Spenser than in the previous three hundred years' (Radcliffe, 157). Spenser became one of the key major authors central to university English courses and a writer with whom the aspiring university teacher was expected to struggle. 


@@@@@


doc= 26146


Spenser, John (1558/9-1614), college head, was born in Suffolk, the son of John Spenser, gentleman. He attended Merchant Taylors' School in London from 3 August 1571, and then Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he graduated BA on 29 October 1577. Soon afterwards, on 9 June 1578, despite lacking a master's degree (he was hurriedly admitted as a fellow the following day), Spenser was elected by the president and seniors to the post of Greek reader. 
At this time Spenser was reported variously to have been acting as clerk or a 'famulus collegii'. Both descriptions are consistent with his most likely role -- as a private secretary, probably to the college's president, William Cole, whose wife was Spenser's sister. The president claimed not to have pressed but merely to have acquiesced in his brother-in-law's nomination, but the unprecedented promotion aroused sharp resentment among older and better qualified fellows. Letters were dispatched to the visitor, Bishop Horne of Winchester, pointing to Spenser's lack of qualifications and his youth; his appointment was not only ill-judged but was also in breach of college statutes. But Horne confirmed the legality of the appointment. Spenser graduated MA on 16 March 1581. 
In 1588 Spenser resigned the Greek lectureship, having served the minimum ten years required to retain his fellowship free from the duty of lecturing. He may have been the John Spenser who on 5 June 1589 was instituted to the vicarage of Alvely, Essex, which he held until 1592, when he was presented to Broxbourne, Hertfordshire; it was certainly he who on 12 June 1599 was instituted to the vicarage of St Sepulchre, Newgate. On 21 March 1590 Spenser graduated BTh, and he was awarded his doctorate on 20 April 1602. A chaplain-in-ordinary to King James, he was among the translators of the King James 'Bible', serving on the Westminster group which worked on the epistles of 'St Paul'. It has been remarked that in his sermons he did not adopt the colloquial style common among Elizabethan puritans but spoke with 'a more formal sober and gracious elegance, sometimes falling into excess of wit' (MacLure, 164). Spenser was married to George Cranmer's sister, a favourite pupil of Richard Hooker. He was the first editor of Hooker's 'Of the Lawes of Ecclesiasticall Politie', published in 1604, and there is no doubt about his sympathy with Hooker's approach. Spenser's preface to the 1604 edition lamented 'this unhappy controversy about the received ceremonies and discipline of the church of England' which had 'rent the body of the church into divers parts, and divided her people into divers sects', and had 'taught the sheep to despise their pastors, and alienated the pastors from the love of their flocks' (Hooker, preface). 
On 9 June 1607 Spenser took the oaths as president of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in succession to John Rainolds. His presidency seems to have been peaceful and uneventful. In 1610 he became one of the founding fellows of Chelsea College, Middlesex, and on 13 November 1612 he was collated to the prebend of Ealdstreet in St Paul's Cathedral. He died aged fifty-five on 3 April 1614, and was buried in the chapel of Corpus Christi College. A monument to his memory stands next to one of his predecessor, 'each being attired in his doctor's habits, and each holding a book, Reynolds a closed one, Spenser an open one' (Fowler, 175). His death seems greatly to have distressed his widow and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 26147


Sperling, John (1793-1877), army officer, was born at Tottenham, Middlesex, on 4 November 1793, the son of Henry Piper Sperling of Park Place, Henley-on-Thames, and afterwards of Norbury Park, Surrey, and his wife, Sarah Ann (died 28 May 1850), daughter of Henry Grace of Tottenham. Sperling attended the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and spent some time in the Ordnance Survey before being commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 14 December 1811. He joined at Chatham in March 1812 and was promoted lieutenant on 1 July 1812. 
At the end of 1813, when the Dutch rebelled against French occupation, a British expeditionary force under Sir Thomas Graham was sent to their aid. Sperling was one of the engineer officers under Lieutenant-Colonel Carmichael Smyth who accompanied the expedition, which landed at Williamstadt on 18 December 1813. Sperling distinguished himself in the ensuing operations, and most particularly, in the unsuccessful attempt to storm Bergen-op-Zoom with four columns on 8 March 1814. Headed by Sperling the first column effected an entrance by surprise at the Watergate and seized the guard, the French officer surrendering his sword to Sperling, who kept it as a trophy. The party then swept the ramparts for some way, but not being supported by the main body of their own, and encountering a large force of the enemy, it was obliged to fall back after the death of its two commanders, Carleton and Gore. In the course of this operation it came across the second column, and together they made a stand for the night. At dawn next day it should have been possible to take Bergen-op-Zoom, but instead of support came the order to retire. Sperling was specially commended by the master-general of the Board of Ordnance for his 'gallantry and ability' shown while attached to the advanced party of stormers. 
On 23 March 1814 Sperling was appointed adjutant and quartermaster of the Royal Sappers and Miners and joined the headquarters staff. On 11 April 1814 the news arrived of the entry of the allies into Paris and of the change of government, which ended hostilities. During May Sperling was employed in taking possession of the fortresses assigned for British occupation, and in June he was sent to London to report on the border fortifications to the Board of Ordnance. In August he made a survey and plan of Liege citadel for Lord Lynedoch, who was about to hand over command to the prince of Orange. 
Sperling's duties were greatly increased after news was received of Napoleon's escape from Elba. He inspected many defence works and Wellington, who inspected the border fortresses, was well satisfied with Sperling's preparations. After accompanying Colonel Carmichael Smyth on an inspection of the fortifications Sperling made a sketch of a defensive position at Hal against a French advance; it was laid before Wellington on 17 May and received his approval. 
Napoleon crossed the frontier into the Southern Netherlands on 15 June 1815. Sperling joined Carmichael Smyth on 17 June as the British fell back from Quatre Bras. They remained close to Wellington during the early part of the battle of Waterloo, but later became separated from him, although they remained on the battlefield throughout. From time to time they were forced to take refuge in one of the infantry squares. They returned to Brussels after the battle, moving with the headquarters to Le Cateau on 24 June, and later towards Paris. Sperling reconnoitred the Seine on 2 July to find a suitable bridging site and recommended one at Argenteuil, which was later selected. He entered Paris with the headquarters staff on 7 July and remained there until 27 January 1816, when Wellington moved his headquarters to Cambrai. 
Sperling returned home in November 1818. He retired on permanent half pay on 24 January 1824, and resided at Great Doods, near Reigate, Surrey. Later he lived in a house which he built for himself at 16 Kensington Palace Gardens, London, where he died on 14 February 1877. On 12 March 1819 he married Harriet Hanson; they had one son, John (1825-1894). 


@@@@@


doc= 26148


Spicer, Henry (1742/3-1804), miniature and enamel painter, was born at Reepham, Norfolk; of his parents, nothing is known. He became a pupil of the miniature painter Gervase Spencer. A member of the Incorporated Society of Artists of Great Britain, he exhibited with the society from 1765 to 1783. In 1773 he was appointed secretary to the society; in 1770 he had been elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He exhibited for the first time at the Royal Academy in 1774. Approximately three years later he travelled to Dublin, where he lived for some years and earned several commissions from prominent patrons. He had returned to London by 1782. From 1792 to 1804 Spicer was an annual contributor to the Royal Academy. He suffered ill health for some years before his death, at the age of sixty-one, at 7 Great Newport Street, London, on 8 June 1804. He was survived by his wife, details of whom are unknown. 
Spicer's distinguished sitters included the duke of Northumberland, the earl of Moira, Sir Joshua Reynolds, Edmund Burke, and Lord Nelson. Among his friends were the artists George Stubbs, J. H. Mortimer, William Hamilton, and Ozias Humphry, whose portrait Spicer painted and who lodged with Spicer's widow at 39 Lower Thornhaugh Street until his own death in 1810. Despite his appointment as painter in enamel to the prince of Wales (the royal warrant is in the possession of his descendants), Spicer died a poor man. His works are of admirable quality, full of character, and finely coloured. His miniature of George IV (exh. RA, 1796) and his enamel of the first marquess of Hastings (exh. RA, 1802) are in the National Portrait Gallery, London. The interesting history of his fine enamel of Marie Antoinette (1789, priv. coll.), signed on the front '5/89', is given in D. Foskett's 'Miniatures: Dictionary and Guide' (1987). His portraits of the actors John Moody and William Smith, the dramatist George Downing, Charlotte Augusta, princess of Wales, and of Mrs Chambers were engraved. Examples of his theatrical portraits are in the Garrick Club Collection, London. Both his daughters, F. and M. A. Spicer, went on to become artists. 


@@@@@


doc= 26149


Spiers, Alexander (1807-1869), lexicographer, was born at Gosport in Hampshire, the son of Isaac Spiers, merchant. He studied in England, in Germany, and in Paris. On the advice of the poet Andrieux (died 1833), he settled in Paris as a professor of English, and found employment at the Ecole de Commerce, at the Ecole des Ponts et Chaussees, at the Ecole des Mines, and at the Lycee Bonaparte. He spent fourteen years on his 'General English and French dictionary, newly composed from the English dictionaries of Johnson, Webster, Richardson, &c., and from the French dictionaries of the French Academy, of Laveaux, Boiste, &c.' (1846). He submitted it to the University of Giessen, which awarded him the degree of PhD in 1849. It proved superior to its predecessors and was at once 'autorise par le conseil de l'instruction publique', on 3 July 1846. The twenty-ninth edition, in two volumes, appeared in 1884 (remodelled by H. Witcomb, Spiers's successor at the Ecole des Ponts et Chaussees). An abridgement, under the title of 'Dictionnaire abrege anglais-francais et francais-anglais, abrege du dictionnaire general de M. Spiers', was published in 1851 and supplied to almost every school and 'lycee' in France. He married, on 29 September 1853 at St Giles, Camberwell, Victoire Dawes (1826-1885), daughter of John Newman, architect. They had five sons. 
In November 1857 Spiers brought an action against Leon Contanseau and his publishers, Longmans & Co., for pirating his dictionaries in a work entitled 'A Practical Dictionary of the French and English Languages'. However, Vice-Chancellor Sir William Page Wood (afterwards Lord Hatherley), in his decision on 25 February 1858, maintained that, though great use of Spiers's books had been made without due acknowledgement, as such publications could not be entirely original a charge of piracy could not be sustained ('Weekly Reporter', 1857-8, 352-4; 'The Times'). Spiers's other publications included a 'Manual of Commercial Terms in English and French' (1846), a 'Study of the English Prose Writers, Sacred and Profane' (1852), and a 'Study of English poetry, a choice collection of the finest pieces of the poets of Great Britain' (1855). They were all issued in both English and French editions in London, Paris, and America. Spiers also printed and edited for French students Sheridan's 'School for Scandal' and 'The Essays of F. Bacon, Viscount St. Albans' (1851). 
Spiers was nominated an 'agrege de l'universite', 'officier de l'instruction publique', 'examinateur a la Sorbonne', and 'inspecteur general de l'universite'. He received the cross of the Legion d'honneur from Napoleon III. He died at the rue de la Faisanderie, avenue de l'Imperatrice, Paris, on 27 August 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 26150


Spigurnel, Sir Henry (b. in or before 1261, d. 1328), justice, was the eldest son of Philip Spigurnel, who held the manor of Dagnall near Edlesborough in Buckinghamshire. The family surname came from a hereditary office in the royal chapel and chancery, and Philip was a younger son either of the Godfrey Spigurnel who died in 1240, or of the Nicholas Spigurnel who succeeded Godfrey in office and in the family lands in Nottinghamshire and Essex, and who died in 1266. Henry had at least one younger brother, Thomas, and possibly a second brother, Simon. Since Henry Spigurnel was old enough to be appointed as an attorney by 1282, he cannot have been born later than 1261. He was active as an attorney in the common bench only between 1282 and 1285, and probably undertook this activity only while attending the court to listen to litigation as part of his legal education. By the autumn of 1285 he is to be found speaking as a serjeant in the Northamptonshire eyre, and surviving reports show him acting as a serjeant in a number of other counties on the northern eyre circuit during 1286 and 1287. His first appearance as a serjeant in the common bench was late in 1287, and he soon became one of the court's most prominent and active serjeants. Between 1292 and 1294 he left the common bench to appear as a serjeant on the southern eyre circuit, but he returned to the court when the eyre circuits were suspended in the summer of 1294. 
In October 1295 Spigurnel was appointed a regular assize and gaol delivery justice on a circuit with Robert Retford, covering the south-east midlands and East Anglia. He managed to combine this with a continuing common bench practice as a serjeant, and only ceased acting as a serjeant when he was appointed a justice for the Cambridgeshire and Ely eyre of 1299. The following year he went with the former royal justice William of Brompton to Holland, in connection with the assignment of dower to the king's daughter Elizabeth, countess of Holland and Zealand. Brompton was also among his colleagues on the Cornwall eyre of 1302 where Spigurnel heard crown pleas and took some part in hearing civil pleas. By March 1303 he had become a knight. In 1305 and 1306 he was prominent among the justices appointed to the trailbaston commissions, being one of the 'cruel' justices threatened with violence in the 'Song of Trailbaston'. Spigurnel had sat on a temporary basis in the court of king's bench in the Hilary and Easter terms of 1301 but became one of its permanent justices only at the very end of Edward I's reign (in Trinity term 1307). He then served in the court almost continuously until 1323, apart from apparently brief overseas embassies for Edward II in 1307, 1311 (to the papal curia), and perhaps 1314, and when serving as one of the justices of the Kent eyre in 1313-14. During the same period he also continued active service as a justice of assize, gaol delivery, and oyer and terminer. After he had retired from the king's bench he was commissioned to head an eyre in the Channel Islands, which took place in the autumn of 1323, and he continued to receive judicial commissions until September 1327. 
In or before 1294 Spigurnel married Sara, the daughter and heir of John le Brun, who brought him the Oxfordshire manor of Brize Norton, the Bedfordshire manor of Clapham, and lands at Passenham in Northamptonshire. His home was at Dagnall. In 1297 he received a licence from Bishop Sutton to have a private chapel there, and in 1322 he received permission to assign property to support a chaplain celebrating daily in the chapel. In May 1328 Spigurnel was allowed to delay performing homage to the young Edward III on the grounds that he was too decrepit to travel without danger to his life, and by 26 July 1328 he was dead. His death probably occurred at Dagnall; his heir was his elder son, Thomas. He also had a second son, Master Robert Spigurnel, who was going abroad to study in 1322, 1327, and 1330, and who in 1325 exchanged his living of Keyston in Huntingdonshire for that of Tring in Hertfordshire with Master Robert Inge, a relative of the William Inge who was a contemporary of Robert's father as a serjeant and as a royal justice, and whose connections with Henry Spigurnel went back to the time when they were jointly appointed as attorneys by a number of clients in the 1280s. 


@@@@@


doc= 26151


Spillan, Daniel (1796/7-1854), classical and medical writer, was the son of Daniel Spillan, a butcher. A Roman Catholic by religion, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, as a sizar on 3 June 1817, graduated BA in 1822, and proceeded MA and MB in 1826. On 13 April 1826 he was admitted licentiate of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland, and was elected a fellow on 7 June 1830. 
Shortly thereafter Spillan moved to London, but he was unable to earn a living as a physician, and, having already published some medical texts in Ireland, now sought to maintain himself as a writer. He produced several short books each year, some on medical subjects and written by himself or translated from continental authors, and others translated from classical texts. He was equally unsuccessful in these literary enterprises and was eventually reduced to destitution. He died in St Pancras workhouse of 'disease of the brain' on 26 June 1854, leaving a wife and family. One of his sons also died in the workhouse, probably of tuberculosis, immediately afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 26152


Spiller, James (1692-1730), actor and dancer, was born in Gloucester, the son of a carrier. According to George Akerby, a painter and purported friend who wrote an early biography of him, his father had aspirations to educate him as a gentleman; but Spiller had other intentions. He was apprenticed to a landscape painter, but soon tired of a sedentary life and joined a company of strolling players, in spite of his father's disapproval. He began with them as a low comedian, which suited his earthy and irreverent temperament; later he came to specialize also in old men's parts. There are anecdotes about his patience in making up for these and his success in deceiving even near acquaintances whom he met while in character. 
Spiller's life with the strollers gave him a lifelong taste for drink, which led him into debt, and into imprisonment from time to time. By December 1709 it had also given him a wife, one Elizabeth Thompson ('c'.1690- 'c'.1740), an actress, described as 'a good pretty woman, with a little too much affectation' (Akerby, 10). His provincial experience can hardly have lasted long, for he appeared for the first time on the London stage on 6 December 1709, playing the Porter in a Drury Lane revival of John Crowne's 'The Country Wit' under the management of Aaron Hill. His wife made her debut there three days later. 
Spiller's career at Drury Lane was intermittent. A personal rivalry shaped its early stages, since his parts duplicated those of William Pinkethman, an older and more established comedian. After a reorganization of the theatre companies in 1710 he was forced to leave Drury Lane to accommodate performers displaced from the now exclusively musical Queen's Theatre, and according to Akerby he went strolling again. But he was back at Drury Lane once or twice in each of the next two years, and was apparently a full member of the company again in the 1712-13 season, when he played among others the part of Ananias, an addition to Shakespeare's 'Macbeth'. 
Spiller was now an actor in demand. When John Rich opened the Lincoln's Inn Theatre in 1714 he reminded Spiller of a promise made to his father, the former Drury Lane patent holder Christopher Rich, that he would join his company. Spiller and Pinkethman were again rivals at Drury Lane, and this was another reason for him to move over. He remained with Rich for the rest of his short life. In his first season his parts included Setter in 'The Old Bachelor' and Jeremy in 'Love for Love', both plays being by William Congreve, and Harlequin in 'The Emperor of the Moon' by Aphra Behn. (He had played this part at Drury Lane in 1709; in February 1715 Pinkethman undertook it at Drury Lane, and Spiller sought to reclaim it at the other house in April.) In subsequent seasons he played a further wide range of parts, including Sir Politick in Ben Jonson's 'Volpone' and minor roles in Shakespeare; but his forte was the comic. A ferocious squint, which he developed after the loss of the sight of one eye through smallpox, was an undoubted asset. He was paid well, at $1 6's'. 8died a day, but not enough to keep pace with his extravagancies. In these years Rich, an outstanding Harlequin, was developing the English pantomime, again in rivalry with Drury Lane. Spiller was a popular Harlequin too. He also gained a niche as a speaker of epilogues, quite frequently mounted on an ass and once (unprovably) on an elephant. 
For most of his career Spiller regularly played in the booth theatres set up in the London fairs, Smithfield, Greenwich, and Southwark particularly, when the major theatres closed for the summers. Here his gifts for low comedy found full expression. Pinkethman also ran a theatre booth. Sometimes Spiller joined him, and sometimes he ran against him. On a personal level, the two comedians seem to have been drinking companions, and the story in Akerby that Spiller stole a draft of Charles Johnson's 'The Cobbler of Preston' from Pinkethman's pocket, after he had drunk him into oblivion, rings true, for Christopher Bullock anticipated the Drury Lane production by a week or two with a spoiling version at Lincoln's Inn Fields. 
Spiller separated from his wife at some point, and lived with his mistress, a Dinah Stratford, of Wild Street, who when the 14died a week he allowed her was insufficient was occasionally reduced to the undignified trade of selling asparagus, or sometimes hot baked faggots. Another of his mistresses was a Mrs D., whom he shared with a duke until the duke found Spiller wearing one of his own shirts. 
Spiller's extravagant life kept him in debt, and in 1722 he had to shelter in The Mint, a refuge in Southwark; later, after The Mint was suppressed, he found himself in the Marshalsea. But The Mint gave him the name of his part in John Gay's 'The Beggars' Opera' (1728) -- Matt of the Mint, in which character Gay gave him the appropriate song 'Fill every glass, for wine inspires us'. In this role he was also depicted on the special benefit ticket engraved for him by William Hogarth. One of his gaolers in the Marshalsea retired and took an inn in Clare Market, renaming it the Spiller's Head. 
Spiller's death was sudden. Frederick, prince of Wales, commanded a performance at Lincoln's Inn Theatre of Lewis Theobald's 'The Rape of Proserpine' on 7 February 1730, and Spiller, cast as Clodpole, rose from his sickbed to appear. He died on stage of apoplexy. He was buried on 10 February at St Clement Danes, London, at Rich's expense. Akerby's 'Life of Mr James Spiller, the Late Famous Comedian' was hastily written, being dated '1729' and hence clearly in print before 24 March, when the new year would have officially begun. Many of the anecdotes in it appear also in 'Spiller's Jests' ('c'.1730), which is one of the less amusing joke books of the period. 


@@@@@


doc= 26153


John Spilsbury (1739-1769), printmaker, was apprenticed, probably from 1753 to 1760, to Thomas Jefferys (1719-1771), engraver, cartographer, and map and print publisher of St Martin's Lane, Westminster. In 1761 he married Sarah May of Newmarket, Suffolk, and found a source of income in the increasing children's educational book trade. The commercial success of Jefferys's 'geographical race game' suggested to John the possibility of mounting a map on thin mahogany board, cutting it along the county borders, and selling it, boxed, for children to reassemble. Spilsbury's first 'jigsaw' puzzle appeared in 1766. The advertisements for his business, which was established at Russell Court, off Drury Lane, mentioned prints, maps, and charts, and other books and stationery, plus 'all sorts of dissected maps, for teaching geography'. He also took advantage of the brief fashion for printed silk kerchiefs, offering one with a 'New and most accurate map of the roads of England and Wales; with distances by the milestones'. John also became interested in the Moravian church, where he and his mother attended services, but neither became a member. He died on 3 April 1769 and was interred on 9 April in the burial-ground of St Mary-le-Strand, which lay alongside Russell Court. 


@@@@@


doc= 26154


Spilsbury, Jonathan (bap. 1737, d. 1812), printmaker and portrait painter, was born at Worcester, where he was baptized on 6 February 1737, the eldest of three sons of Thomas Spilsbury (died 1741) and his second wife, Mary Wright (died 1773), a young widow. He was followed by John ['see below'] and a third son, Thomas, who became a printer. All three brothers and their mother eventually settled in London. The careers of Jonathan and John were closely connected and ever since 1785, when the publisher John Boydell mistakenly printed the name John Spilsbury on the title-page of Jonathan Spilsbury's 'Collection of Fifty Prints... from Antique Gems', the brothers' work has been confused. 
From 1750 to 1757 Jonathan was apprenticed to his cousin George Spilsbury of Birmingham, a japanner and box painter. He then moved to London, where his aunt Sarah had married the court painter Jonathan Richardson who probably facilitated his invitation to work in Thomas Hudson's studio before practising as a painter of portraits in oils, watercolours, and chalk, and as a printmaker. Jonathan worked chiefly in mezzotint but also on occasion using etching, dry-point, and stipple techniques. He exhibited three works at the Society of Artists between 1763 and 1771, and thirteen paintings at the Royal Academy between 1776 and 1784. His large mezzotint of George, prince of Wales (later George III), first published in 1759 is, according to its title inscription, after Spilsbury's own portrait of the prince. This royal sitting, which would have considerably furthered Spilsbury's career, must have been arranged through Thomas Jefferys, geographer to the prince of Wales, to whom John Spilsbury was apprenticed. 
In 1761 Jonathan was awarded a premium by the Society of Arts for a mezzotint after Joshua Reynolds of Esther Jacobs. These early mezzotint portraits and another of Reynolds's pupil Giuseppe Marchi, after Reynolds and published in 1761, are among his most accomplished known works. Between 1763 and John's death in 1769 he appears to have worked from John's shop in Covent Garden, and his brother frequently acted as his publisher. A copy of his strongly modelled mezzotint of the Revd Richard Baxter is priced at 1's'. 6died and was published by John Spilsbury in 1763. 
Jonathan frequently visited Bristol, where he met in 1765 Rebecca (1748-1812), daughter of Walter Chapman, prebendary of Bristol Cathedral. After ten years' courtship they married at St Marylebone on 13 February 1775, setting up home at 28 Great Ormond Street. Their daughter (Rebecca) Maria Ann Spilsbury (1777-1820), a surviving twin, was taught by her father and became a notable painter and musician; there was also a younger son. About 1785-9 Jonathan taught drawing at Harrow School where his pupils included the sons of Mrs Sarah Tighe of co. Wicklow, who invited him to Ireland to instruct her daughters. Jonathan's family accompanied him on this mission; they returned to London in 1791 and settled in St George's Row, off Oxford Street. In later life Jonathan produced many rather lifeless mezzotints, some after his own portrait paintings and drawings. A preponderance of clerics, many of Wesleyan persuasion, may reflect his own religious inclinations. While Rebecca stayed within the Church of England, Jonathan had long been drawn to nonconformity and in 1781 he joined the Moravian church, but his ambition to become a Moravian minister was not fulfilled. 
Between March 1781 and December 1784 Boydell published Spilsbury's prints of 'Antique Gems', with a complete octavo set with title-page issued in 1785. For this project Jonathan closely followed the formula employed nearly twenty years earlier by Thomas Worlidge for his 'Select Collection of Drawings from Curious Antique Gems' (published in parts from 1765), using a dry-point Rembrandtesque technique. Jonathan's small dry-point heads in the manner of Rembrandt, dated 1776, are also strongly reminiscent of Worlidge's work, although no record has been found of any formal connection between the two artists. Jonathan was living in St George's Row, Oxford Street, at the time of his death; his last print, of Mary Fletcher, after a portrait by himself, being published in October that year. Rebecca died in February 1812, Jonathan in October that same year; they were interred in the same grave (not following Moravian practice, in separate graves) in the nonconformist Bunhill Fields, on the northern margin of the City of London. 


John's widow ran the business for a short time, then married Harry Ashby, who had been apprenticed with John Spilsbury and later worked with him at Russell Court. Ashby was still advertising 'Dissected Maps for teaching geography... on the original Plan of the late Mr Spilsbury' in 1785 ('Morning Chronicle', 16 Jan 1785). 


@@@@@


doc= 26155


Spilsbury, (Rebecca) Maria Ann (1777-1820), painter, was born at 68 Great Ormond Street, London, the daughter (her twin brother died) of Jonathan Spilsbury (bap. 1737, d. 1812), engraver, and his wife, Rebecca (1748-1812), daughter of Dr Walter Chapman, senior prebendary of Bristol Cathedral. She had a younger brother, Jonathan Robert Henry Spilsbury, who was baptized on 7 December 1779 at St Marylebone, London. Maria Spilsbury received art instruction from her father who, about 1785-9, was drawing-master at Harrow School. His pupils included the sons of Mrs Sarah Tighe of Rossana, co. Wicklow. In 1789, having been employed to teach drawing to Mrs Tighe's daughters, he took his family to Ireland. About May 1791 they moved back to London and settled at 10 St George's Row, Hyde Park. Sir William Beecher gave Maria Spilsbury lessons in colour and she was taught music by Charles Wesley the younger (1757-1834), who considered her the best amateur performer on the organ in London. 
Maria Spilsbury exhibited forty-seven works at the Royal Academy as an honorary exhibitor (1792-1808), and thirty-two at the British Institution (1806-13). Her contributions, primarily oil paintings, included portraits, often of children, such as 'Miss Elizabeth Angerstein Attended by Guardian Angels' (exh. RA, 1805; ex Phillips, 13 June 1997); genre scenes comprising picturesque subjects such as 'The Schoolmistress' (1803; Tate collection) and 'Confusion, or The Nursery in the Kitchen' (exh. British Institution, 1811; Williamson Art Gallery and Museum, Birkenhead) and others revealing an interest in charitable initiatives, an example of which is 'The House of Protection for Destitute Females of Character; Two Girls Applying for Admission' (exh. RA, 1806 and British Institution, 1807); she also exhibited biblical subjects and literary themes from Dr Johnson, William Cowper, Richard Bloomfield, James Thomson, and Mrs Row. Her most ambitious and celebrated works depicted crowd scenes on fete days, holidays, and at open-air meetings: 'Christ Feeding the Multitude, the Second Miracle of the Loaves and Fishes -- St. Matthew, xv' (exh. RA, 1804), 'The Fourth of June' (exh. RA, 1807 and British Institution, 1808), and 'The Royal Jubilee, as Celebrated at Great Malvern, 1809' (exh. British Institution, 1811) were all large-scale works, the last measuring 4 ft 6 in. by 5 ft 6 in. 
Although Maria Spilsbury and her mother were both members of the Church of England, the family had early associations with nonconformity. Jonathan Spilsbury was received into the Moravian church in 1781; Mrs Tighe, a close friend of the family, was a supporter of John Wesley. Through the Wesleys, the Spilsburys became acquainted, about 1798, with the family of Walter Taylor, a nonconformist who ran a successful engineering business in Southampton. By 1807 Maria was engaged to his son, John Taylor (1785-1821) -- dissenter, Calvinist, philanthropist, and unrecognized inventor of the box wheel or Collinges patent axle -- who was her junior by eight years, and whom she married at St George's, Hanover Square, London, on 3 November 1808. They lived in rooms at 8 Collyer's Buildings, Blackheath Road, London. 
During the year of her engagement Maria Spilsbury worked extremely hard (possibly to finance her forthcoming marriage), exhibiting a total of thirteen paintings in 1807 and twelve in 1808. Her work became fashionable and on private view days at her studio in 10 St George's Row over twenty carriages would sometimes wait outside. The prince regent (George IV) and the marquess of Stafford were regular purchasers of her pictures. For these she charged up to 40 guineas, and such was her success that the family was able to depend upon her income. After the death of her parents in 1812 (both were buried at Bunhill Fields, a nonconformist burial-ground near Wesley's Chapel in London), the Taylors moved into 10 St George's Row with the first of their five children. 
In 1814 the Taylors settled in Ireland, where they lived initially with Mrs Tighe in Rossana and from 1817 at her town house in Upper Dorset Street, Dublin. Maria Taylor is said to have exhibited in Dublin at the Hibernian Society (1814, 1816) and at Hawkins Street (1816, 1817, 1819). She continued to paint multiple-figure subjects, such as 'John Wesley Preaching in the Open Air at Willybank, Rossana' (1814/15; Museum of Methodism at Wesley's Chapel, London), which included representations of her family. This painting is probably 'The Irish Fair in the Vale of Glendalough or the Seven Churches', commissioned by the prince regent). 'Patron's Day at the Seven Churches, Glendalough' (exh. Hawkins Street, 1816; National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin), in which the artist painted herself sketching the scene, is another example of her multi-figured subjects. She also executed numerous portraits including 'Mrs. Henry Grattan' (National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin), 'Alexander Hamilton and his Wife and Daughters', and 'Francis Synge', who founded the Pestalozzi School in Dublin. Many of these remain in private collections in Ireland. A number of her subject pictures and her 'Portrait of the Reverend Benjamin Williams Mathias (1772-1841) Chaplain of Bethesda, Dublin' were engraved by Charles Turner (1774-1857). Henry Edward Dawe (1790-1848) engraved her 'Portrait of the Rev. William Kingsbury'. Maria Spilsbury also executed a few original etchings. Other examples of her work are in private collections in New Zealand. She died on 1 June 1820 at her home in Upper Dorset Street, Dublin, and was buried in Drumcondra churchyard. Her husband, John Taylor, died in London the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 26156


Spinckes, Nathaniel (1654-1727), bishop of the nonjuring Church of England, was born on 9 May 1654 at Castor, Northamptonshire, where his father, Edmund Spinckes (1606/7-1671), was the rector. His mother, Martha ('bap'. 1623, died 1693), was the second daughter of Thomas Elmes, esquire, of Lilford and Warmington, Northamptonshire, whom Edmund Spinckes served as a chaplain. Edmund evidently had links with New England, where he had a share in an ironworks at the time of his death as well as property in Ireland. He took the solemn league and covenant and was faced with the threat of nearby royalist troops; he needed a troop of horse to guard him when he preached at Castor and was forced to flee from Warmington on the day before his eldest son was born because enemy parties had twice raided the house that day. Edmund Spinckes was ejected for his nonconformity at the Restoration. Indeed much was made later of Spinckes senior's support for parliament: 'nobody being more zealous for the rebels', and consequently Spinckes junior's achievement in overcoming 'the errors of his father' and conquering the 'prejudice of his first education' ('Remarks', 9.5). In fact, Spinckes senior conformed to the Church of England, and Nathaniel's early schooling was undertaken by Samuel Morton, the rector of Haddon, Huntingdonshire. 
On 9 July 1670 Nathaniel Spinckes matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge. As the eldest surviving son, on his father's death in 1671 Spinckes inherited his father's estate. This 'disqualified him from preferment in his college, according to the statutes' (BL, Sloane MS 4225, fols. 107-11), so Spinckes transferred to Jesus College on 12 October 1672, aged eighteen, where he was elected a Rustat scholar. He graduated BA in 1674. He was ordained deacon on 21 May 1676 by Bishop Henry Compton of London, proceeded MA at Cambridge in 1677, and was ordained priest on 22 December 1678 by Bishop Thomas Barlow of Lincoln. 
Spinckes became chaplain to Sir Richard Edgcumbe at Mount Edgcumbe, Devon, in June 1677, leaving to become curate at Stibbington, Huntingdonshire, in August the following year. In early 1679 he moved to Petersham in Surrey, where he served as curate and as chaplain to John Maitland, earl of Lauderdale, staying there for the next two and a half years. His fellow chaplain was George Hickes, another future nonjuror. He was appointed to the vicarage of Eckington in Worcestershire through the offices of the influential Anglican polemicist Simon Patrick, but was never instituted and, returning the living to its patrons, moved to London. He was curate of St Stephen Walbrook, London, from about March 1683 to September 1685; he also served as lecturer there for some months in 1684 and assisted William Clagett as afternoon preacher at Gray's Inn in 1685. On 17 September 1685 he was instituted as rector of Peakirk-cum-Glinton, Northamptonshire, by the dean (Simon Patrick again) and chapter of Peterborough. On 1 December 1686 he married Dorothy Rutland ('bap'. 1660, died 1727), daughter of William Rutland, citizen of London, who brought with her a portion of $1000. On 21 July 1687 he was made a prebendary of Salisbury, and on 24 September he became rector of St Martin's, Salisbury. 
The revolution of 1688 changed Spinckes's comfortable existence. He lost his livings on 1 February 1690 for refusing to take the oaths of allegiance to the new regime. Much respected by fellow nonjurors such as John Kettlewell, Robert Nelson, and George Hickes for his piety, learning, and sweet disposition he was actively involved in Kettlewell's scheme to raise money to relieve indigent deprived clergy, for which he was one of those hauled before the privy council in 1695, and came to be the chief manager of the fund. However, Spinckes was, it seems, slow to take up his pen as a controversialist. In August 1705 Thomas Hearne recorded that Spinckes had written 'one book already about patience', presumably 'Of trust in God, or, A discourse concerning the duty of casting our care upon God in all our difficulties' (1696). Now Hearne was informed that 'Mr Spinckes is a very prudent man and... well qualified to answer Mr Basset's 'Essay for Catholic Communion'', a polemical work by Joshua Basset who had been the Catholic master of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, appointed by James II ('Remarks', 1.30). This Spinckes duly did with his 'Essay towards a Proposal for Catholic Communion' (1705) which he followed up with 'The Case Truly Stated' (1714), 'The Case Further Stated' (1718), and 'The Article of Romanish Transubstantiation Inquired into and Disproved' (1719). According to Hearne, in 1705 he was also employed in the distribution of money 'given by the chief Jacobites for charitable purposes' ('Remarks', 1.30). Spinckes also entered the controversy against the French prophets with 'The New Pretenders to Prophecy Re-Examined' (1709). In 1712 he published a more popular work, 'The sick man visited and furnished with instructions, meditations and prayers suitable to his condition', the fourth edition of which in 1731 contained a short life of the author by John Blackbourne. 
On 3 June 1713 Spinckes, Jeremy Collier, and Samuel Hawes were consecrated bishops 'at large' by the nonjuring Bishop Hickes, assisted by bishops Campbell and Gadderar. In 1713 he wrote the preface to the published sermons of Hickes. In October 1716 he was taken into custody in Norwich on suspicion of Jacobite activity. From 1716 Spinckes was an important participant in the 'usages' dispute over the proposals of some nonjurors like Collier to return to the first liturgy used by Edward VI. At least four pamphlets were published by Spinckes on this issue, including 'No Reason for Restoring the Prayers and Directions of Edward VI's First Liturgy' (1717) and 'No Just Grounds for Introducing the New Communion Office' (1719). Indeed, Spinckes was to be an intractable opponent of a compromise with the usagers which would have ended the schism between the nonjurors. 
Not all of the work of Spinckes was explicitly acknowledged. His Greek scholarship was put to good use in translating the proposals for unity with the Greek church. In 1721 Spinckes published 'The True Church of England Man's Companion to the Closet' (1721), which became known as 'Spinckes's Devotions' during its long usage in the eighteenth century. In 1726 he published more discourses by Hickes with a preface. 
Spinckes died on 18 July 1727, aged seventy-four; his wife followed seven days later. He was buried in the cemetery of the parish of St Faith under St Paul's, London. Although Spinckes had a large family, seven children died in infancy while an eighth, Robert, drowned in a shipwreck sailing from Bengal to Bombay in 1712. Only William, a merchant, and Anne, who married Anthony Cope, survived their parents. 'The Historical Register' rather sympathetically recorded that Spinckes 'had no wealth, few enemies, many friends... His patience was great, his self-denial greater, and his charity still greater; though his temper seems to be his cardinal virtue' ('Historical Register', 12.29-30). 


@@@@@


doc= 26157


Spittlehouse, John (bap. 1612, d. in or after 1657), Fifth Monarchist, was the son of John Spittlehouse (died 1638), of Gainsborough, saddler, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Waterhouse (died before 1636), and was baptized at Gainsborough on 10 June 1612. He was perhaps educated at the grammar school, possibly by the future Baptist Hanserd Knollys, who taught there in the late 1620s. Spittlehouse fought in the action at Gainsborough in 1643, at his own charges, at Newark in 1644, and thereafter in the parliamentary army until after the battle of Worcester (1651). In 1650 he was assistant to the marshall-general, responsible for military security. In July 1649 he joined other radical officers in Whitehall in a day of solemn humiliation over religious divisions within the army. Spittlehouse and his wife, Mary, were both active members of the London gathered General Baptist congregation led by Peter Chamberlen in the 1650s. 
A prolific pamphleteer, Spittlehouse published polemical tracts against Samuel Oates, John Brayne, and John Simpson, but most of his output was inspired by zeal for the approaching millennium. In 'Rome Ruined' (1650) he justified the regicide, but condemned the failure of parliament and council to promote Christ's reign. He welcomed the overthrow of the Rump Parliament in April 1653 in 'The Army Vindicated', calling for Cromwell to rule as a new Moses with an assembly elected exclusively by godly army officers. The work was republished in a Dutch translation. A few weeks later Spittlehouse suggested that Cromwell himself should nominate every member of the new government. He had some hopes of Barebone's Parliament, and published a tract in September anticipating the speedy abolition of tithes. He clashed with the authorities, however, apparently over fen drainage in the Isle of Axholme, and on 5 December the council ordered his arrest over petitions he had presented, including one to parliament attacking John Thurloe. In March 1654 he begged Cromwell for release, and he was freed on 6 April. Despite this appeal Spittlehouse regarded the new protectorate as a gross betrayal, and he predicted that Cromwell would meet the same fate as the king. He responded to Cromwell's denunciation of the Fifth Monarchists to parliament in September 1654 by publishing a staunch defence and condemning Cromwell as a turncoat. This prompted his rearrest in October, though he was never charged. In 'The Royall Advocate' (1655) Spittlehouse accused the army too of apostasy, called for a radical programme of reforms including the abolition of excise, customs, and tithes and the establishment of the Mosaic law code, and demanded that the army should pay its own way by conquests in Roman Catholic Europe instead of being supported by the taxpayer. He was in custody again in the winter of 1655-6 with John Jones, a Fifth Monarchist conspirator, but was released on 1 February 1656 on entering a bond in $200 to live peaceably. 
An inveterate polemicist, Spittlehouse at various times attacked Presbyterians, Independents, seekers, ranters, and Quakers, but he denied that magistrates had any right to meddle in religious affairs and wanted even the 'Koran' to circulate unhindered. Well read in puritan literature, old and new, he dismissed as worthless both classical languages and universities. His last publication, with William Saller, in spring 1657, championed the seventh-day sabbath. The date of John Spittlehouse's death is unknown; a widow Spittlehouse living in Whitehall, London, in 1659 was almost certainly the relict of a William Spittlehouse, formerly a minor council official and Whitehall doorkeeper. 


@@@@@


doc= 26158


Spode, Josiah (1755-1827), potter and merchant, was born on 8 May 1755 at Stoke-on-Trent, the son of Josiah Spode (1733-1797), founder of the Spode pottery factory there, and Ellen, 'nee' Finley (1726-1802). He was trained in the art of ceramic manufacture by his father and entered the family firm. On 9 July 1775 he married Elizabeth Barker (died 1782) of Lane Delph, daughter of the potter Thomas Barker. They had five children: William (1776-1834), Josiah (1777-1829), Elizabeth ('b'. 1778, died after 1835), Saba (1780-1811), and Mary ('b'. 1781, died after 1834). Both William and Josiah were to become involved in their father's trade. 
In 1778 a London outlet was decided on as the most profitable manner of retailing to the fashionable and lucrative metropolitan market. In that year Spode became a freeman of the City and a member of the Worshipful Company of Spectacle Makers, there being no company of potters or pot sellers. A retail outlet was established in 1778 at 29 Fore Street. Business flourished and the firm moved to successively larger establishments at 46 then 45 Fore Street before settling, in 1794, at 5 Portugal Street, a better address adjacent to Lincoln's Inn Fields. Domestic residences accompanied the premises. These premises were rented, but in 1802 Spode bought the Portugal Street warehouse and the adjoining domestic residence. Such expansion was in response to the firm's growing success and in readiness to market the new bone china his father was producing. The Portugal Street establishment provided the wares for both the London retail market and international trade. The success of the bone china, called Stoke China, can be accredited to Spode's marketing prowess. A shrewd businessman, he was able to capitalize on the demands of fashionable London society. It has been suggested that without his retail ability bone china may not have reached such levels of popularity. The recent reductions in the tax payable upon imported tea also served to widen the demand for tea wares. 
While living in London, Spode maintained his links with Stoke. In 1790 he took a lead role in the formation of the Fenton Park colliery which was the first joint potters' coal company. On the death of his father he returned to Stoke and lived in Fenton Hall. By 1803 he had acquired a 17 acre site in Penkhull on which to build his own mansion, The Mount, half a mile from the Stoke potworks. It was a suitably grand home for a man of his standing and wealth, with extensive grounds that had been enlarged by the time of his death. He also built many houses for his workforce in the vicinity of the large factory works. The London business, while remaining in the name of Spode, was in 1805 put into the charge of a partnership between Spode's son William and William Copeland (1765-1826), who had joined the London firm in 1784. The partnership was dissolved on 31 December 1811 when William Spode retired. Copeland and Spode went into partnership, with Copeland possessing three of the four shares. In 1824 Copeland's son William Taylor Copeland (1797-1868) was admitted to the partnership with his father giving him one of his shares. Following the death of his father, William Taylor Copeland entered into an equal partnership with Spode, each possessing two shares, to run for seven years, and he succeeded Spode as the owner of the firm in 1833. 
Spode's own achievements were as a merchant and in the consolidation of the success of his father to whom is given the credit for the perfection of underglaze transfer-printing on earthenware in blue in 1784 and the development of bone china. Blue printed earthenware, designed to meet the demand for painted blue and white Chinese porcelain, was a highly popular product, perhaps the most famous pattern being the willow design of about 1790, itself a derivative of Chinese scenes. Spode introduced bone china about 1798. It proved popular and successful for the production of dinner ware. It was an elegant white body, translucent yet strong. From 1800 until 1822 Henry Daniel was in charge of Spode's enamelling studio, producing finely designed and painted scenes, often with exquisite gilding. Spode achieved a great accolade in 1806 following a visit by the prince of Wales when he was allowed to title himself 'Potter and English Porcelain Manufacturer to H.R.H. Prince of Wales'. In 1813 Spode adopted the body called by him 'Stone China', which he matched with elaborate Chinese porcelain designs. This was a superior formula to earthenware, proving a stronger body, and its decorations required several firings. Spode was also committed to the technical side of the business, promoting the continued use of steam engines and a partnership with other potters for the lease, in 1799, of the Carloggas china clay and stone pit in Cornwall, thereby securing the supply of essential raw materials. The Spode family is perhaps second only to the elder Josiah Wedgwood in English ceramic history. The introduction of bone china and the popular success of transfer-printed earthenware helped to expand and develop the pottery industry in the Staffordshire Potteries into one of world renown. Josiah Spode died on 16 July 1827 in Stoke-on-Trent and was buried in the churchyard of St Peter ad Vincula there. He was perhaps the most successful bone china manufacturer of the early nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 26159


Spofforth, Reginald (1768x70-1827), composer, was born in Southwell, Nottinghamshire, the son of a currier. His uncle, Thomas Spofforth, was organist of Southwell Minster and gave him his first musical tuition. Encouraged by Sir Richard Kaye, a prebendary of Southwell who was also dean of Lincoln, he went to Lincoln and became deputy organist at the cathedral. He then moved to London and studied composition with Benjamin Cooke and the piano with Daniel Steibelt. His first success as a composer came in 1793, when he won two prizes offered by the Noblemen's and Gentlemen's Catch Club for the glees 'See! smiling from the rosy east' and 'Where are those hours?'. 
Although his earliest publications were of solo songs, Spofforth's importance as a composer is based on the numerous glees (about seventy-five in number) that he published from 1796, many of which also appeared in anthologies. One of them, 'Hail! smiling morn' (no. 6 of 'Six Glees', 1818), was the most popular item in the entire repertory of glees. Spofforth composed many songs and duets and left three books of nursery-rhyme settings, but no instrumental or sacred music. 
Spofforth was chorus master at Covent Garden for a time, and wrote various songs and glees for productions there, but turned down an invitation to succeed William Shield as musical director in 1797. He also served as organist at Fitzroy Chapel and later at Eltham parish church, and was active as a teacher. Some of his unpublished works were issued after his death as 'A Collection of Glees' (1830), with a memoir by his former pupil William Hawes. Spofforth died in Kensington on 8 September 1827, and was buried in the parish church there. A tablet to his memory was erected in Brompton cemetery. 
A younger brother, Samuel Spofforth (1780-1864), composed some sacred music and was organist of Peterborough Cathedral and, from 1807, of Lichfield Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 26160


Spooner, Charles (d. 1767), engraver, a native of co. Wexford, Ireland, learned mezzotint engraving as a pupil of John Brooks in Dublin. After Brooks went to London, Spooner worked for the Dublin printsellers. Five mezzotints and three engravings and etchings published in the years 1749-52 are known. Spooner went to London before 1756, where he scraped a wide variety of portraits and genre subjects. A few of his engravings were after his own drawings, but the bulk of his output consisted in copying popular prints of his contemporaries for the printsellers Robert Sayer and Thomas, John, and Carington Bowles. Like several of his countrymen, Spooner took to drink; he died in London on 5 December 1767 and at his own request was buried in Hampstead churchyard near his friend James Macardell. 


@@@@@


doc= 26161


Spooner, Charles (1806-1871), veterinary surgeon, born on 19 October 1806, was the youngest of the three sons of John Spooner of Fordham, Essex. His father at the time of his birth occupied the dairy farm at Mistley Park, near Manningtree, Essex. On leaving school Charles Spooner was apprenticed to a chemist, George Jervis of Westbar, Sheffield, and at the end of his apprenticeship he entered the Royal Veterinary College, London, as a student, in November 1828. He obtained his diploma on 21 July 1829, and shortly afterwards was appointed veterinary surgeon to the Zoological Society, chiefly through the influence of Professor William Sewell (1780-1853). 
Spooner's appointment extended his knowledge of anatomy and physiology and increased his perception of the inadequacies of the course taught, at that time, at the Royal Veterinary College. While working in his capacity as veterinary surgeon to the Zoological Society, he established a school of veterinary anatomy in a house opposite the college, where he gave private lectures and demonstrations to college students. 'The Veterinarian' reports that Spooner was already 'well known as one of the best veterinary anatomists, perhaps the best, of which the profession could boast' ('Veterinarian', 8.646), and thus a gap which had long existed in the official college training was efficiently filled. Spooner was associated with Sewell in the formation, in 1836, of the Veterinary Medical Association, of which he became treasurer and in 1839 president, an office to which he was subsequently re-elected annually. Spooner's post at the Zoological Society was eventually taken over by William Youatt. 
Early in 1839 Spooner reluctantly accepted the post of demonstrator of anatomy at the Royal Veterinary College, and terminated his private classes. His advancement at the college was rapid. In the same year he became assistant professor in the place of Sewell, who was now made professor of the college on the death of the former chief, Professor Edward Coleman (1764-1839). Spooner delivered his first lecture on 19 November 1839. On 9 January 1840 he was elected by the medical committee of the college to become an examiner of the college students. On 22 July the same year he married Mary Anne, daughter of William Boulton. They subsequently had eight children -- five sons and three daughters. In 1842 he became deputy professor of the college, and during the 1843-4 session the students presented him with a marble bust of himself in recognition of his teaching abilities. In 1853, on the death of Sewell, Spooner became chief professor and secretary, with residence in the college. He now stood at the head of his profession, and in 1858 he became president of the incorporated Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, of which he had been an original petitioner in 1844. 
In 1865 Spooner was a member of the cattle plague commission. His judgement as a witness had by then been frequently appealed to in the law courts in cases of veterinary jurisprudence. He was held in extremely high regard both by his students and by many of his contemporaries within the emerging veterinary profession, and 'The Lancet', reporting on his abilities as a legal witness, claimed 'his testimony and opinion were highly valued by judge, jury and client' ('The Lancet', 869). In 1864, as a tribute to his administrative abilities, a special meeting of the governors of the Royal Veterinary College recorded in the minute book 'that at no time since the foundation of the college has the average number of students in the theatre, or patients in the infirmary, been so large... nor the resources of the college so prosperous as at the present time... since it came under his [Spooner's] superintendence' (minute books, RVC). However, though for some time joint editor of the 'Veterinary Review', Spooner wrote little. It was rather as a surgeon, where he was aided by his accurate knowledge of anatomy, as a lecturer, and as a demonstrator on anatomy, that his talent was shown. Numerous reports of his speeches and lectures may be found in 'The Veterinarian', and in the 'Proceedings of the Veterinary Medical Association'. Spooner was considered the chief authority on horse matters in Britain and a lecture by him entitled 'Horses', delivered before the members of the Farringdon Agricultural Library, was published as the pamphlet 'Horses and Sheep' (1861). 
Spooner died in the Royal Veterinary College on 24 November 1871 and was buried in Highgate cemetery five days later. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 26162


Spooner, William Charles (1809?-1885), veterinary surgeon, was born at Blandford, Dorset, where his father is said to have been an innkeeper. He was in no way related to his namesake, Charles Spooner (1806-1871), with whom he has frequently been confused. He entered the Royal Veterinary College, London, in November 1827, and obtained his diploma on 7 March 1829. While at the college he presented two papers to the London Veterinary Medical Society, one on glanders and farcy and the other on staggers. He went into practice at Southampton, where he established a veterinary infirmary, forge, and register office for the sale of horses, at Vincent's Walk, Hanover Buildings. 
In 1845, however, Spooner largely gave up his veterinary practice and entered into partnership with a Mr Bennett, manufacturer of chemical manures at Eling Hill Farm, near Eling, in Hampshire. Spooner subsequently purchased the Old Bone Mill at Eling, and the Spooner and Bailey Chemical Manure Works became perhaps the most complete of their kind in the south of England. Spooner lectured regularly at various clubs and societies in Hampshire and the adjoining counties. He also played a leading part in the Botley and South Hampshire Farmers' Club. 
Spooner was a frequent contributor to the earlier numbers of 'The Veterinarian' and the 'Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society', and he gained a prize from the society for two essays in the 'Journal' -- 'On the use of superphosphate of lime produced with acid and bones for manure' (1846, 7.143), and 'On the management of farm horses' (1848, 9.249). In 1852 he was awarded a prize by the Bath and West of England Agricultural Society for his essay 'On the most economical and profitable method of growing and consuming root crops'. This essay was printed among the society's proceedings for 1854. In the same year a water drill that he had invented was exhibited at Pusey, and was much praised. 'Mr Spooner has been a writer, lecturer, public-spirited promoter in every way of agricultural improvement... His strong commonsense, well tempered enthusiasm, sound judgement and wide intelligence, had for years exerted a most useful influence on both local and general agricultural progress.' Spooner wrote many books and articles on veterinary and agricultural subjects, of which 'The History, Structure, Economy and Diseases of Sheep' (1844) is perhaps the most well known. However, several other titles should also be mentioned, for example, 'A Treatise on the Influenza of Horses' (1837), 'A Treatise on the Structure, Functions, and Diseases of the Foot and Leg of the Horse' (1840), and 'A Treatise on Manures' (1847). For the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana' Spooner wrote the article 'Veterinary art', which was subsequently published separately. He contributed to John Morton's 'Encyclopaedia of Agriculture', which was published between 1848 and 1853. He edited, and in part rewrote, in 1842, James White's two treatises, 'A Compendium of the Veterinary Art', and 'A Compendium of Cattle Medicine', which contained 'the first short account in the English language of the foot and mouth disease which prevailed in England and Ireland from about 1838 to 1840'. Spooner also wrote on a wide range of other agricultural topics. 
Towards the end of his life Spooner concentrated his attention almost solely on the manufacture of superphosphate and other artificial manures. He suffered greatly throughout life from deafness, which eventually led to his retirement from active life. He died of apoplexy on 3 May 1885 at Eling House, his residence at Eling. He left a widow, Caroline, and a son, Albert. 


@@@@@


doc= 26163


Sporley, Richard (b. before 1410, d. 1491), Benedictine monk and historian, entered the abbey of St Peter at Westminster in 1428-9, and was ordained priest on 15 March 1432. If canonically qualified for ordination, he was then at least twenty-four years old, and must have been born before 1410. He held the minor office of granger three times (1445-6, 1453-63, and 1470-71), but never held a major office with financial responsibilities. The precentorship, which he held from 1464 to 1466, and perhaps longer, and which entailed responsibility for the abbey's books, was probably more suited to his capacities. The receipt of a pension of 20's'. per annum from 1474/5 until his death early in 1491 indicates that he now lived privately, in a chamber. His annals of the kings of England from 1043 to 1483 (BL, Harley MS 692, fols. 198-204'v') were completed, and may have been begun, in this late period. Now valueless, they retained an interest into the sixteenth century, when the text down to 1135 was included by John Joscelyn in his larger collection of annals (BL, Cotton MS Vitellius E.xiv, fol. 254). Sporley may have compiled his history of Westminster Abbey at a much earlier date, and, if later entries in the surviving manuscript can be accepted, did so as early as 1450 (BL, Cotton MS Claudius A.viii, fol. 22'r'). His own contribution to this work was an account, of no intrinsic value, of early abbots and priors (ibid., fols. 40-41'v'). The rest (ibid., fols. 22-39'v', 42-70'r') derives from the history of the abbey by John Flete. 


@@@@@


doc= 26164


Spotswood, Alexander (1676-1740), army officer and colonial governor, was born on 12 December 1676 in Tangier, the son of Robert Spotswood (died 1688), a physician serving with the English regiment, and his wife, Catherine, formerly Elliott, 'nee' Mercer (died 1710). He came to England at the age of seven, one year before the garrison was abandoned, and was educated at Westminster School. His family -- Scottish, royalist, and members of the Church of England -- had seen better times than those of the 1680s, when anti-Scottish, anti-royal sentiments were sweeping the nation. 
Patronage and opportunism marked Spotswood's distinctive military and political careers. He spent seventeen years in the army, receiving his first commission as an ensign in an infantry regiment in 1693 serving under the earl of Bath, and was promoted lieutenant in 1696. When wounded at Blenheim in 1704 he was already a captain. At Oudenarde in 1708 he was captured and exchanged. 
In 1710 Spotswood was appointed lieutenant-governor of Virginia, sharing the salary with his army patron, titular governor George Hamilton, first earl of Orkney. At that time the colony faced problems on all sides. For five years Spotswood enjoyed the support of the colony's council but thereafter relations deteriorated. His attempt to reform the collection of land quitrents alienated Philip Ludwell and cut across the gubernatorial ambitions of the locally powerful William Byrd. Furthermore he unsettled the wily James Blair, commissary of the bishop of London, by attempting to use his full powers over the church. Conflicts over precedence, appointments, and the creation of a new court of oyer and terminer also undermined relations with the council. Relations with the lower house of the legislature were never good either. Spotswood's agenda was costly and his attitude towards the burgesses (members of the lower house) openly contemptuous. In 1718 a petition to the king signed by the speaker, Daniel McCarty, accused Spotswood of subverting the constitution and sought his removal. 
Spotswood's efforts did have benefits, however. When the notorious pirate Edward Teach (Blackbeard) threatened to bottle up the colony's trade in 1718, Spotswood dispatched an expedition to Ocracoke Inlet, though outside his jurisdiction, which led to Teach's death. Thirteen of Teach's men were tried for piracy in Virginia and hanged. Spotswood sought not only to improve colonial defences but to reform abuses in trade with the Native Americans which he believed were a factor in the late war with the Tuscaroras. His policy towards the Native Americans was farsighted though ultimately unsuccessful. In 1714 he persuaded a number of smaller tribes to settle at Fort Christanna with support from the newly created Virginia Indian Company, which received a twenty-year monopoly on trade south of the James River. He also promoted a system of tobacco inspection and the construction of public warehouses in an attempt to boost Virginia's languishing economy. But the system undermined the interests of small planters, and it was further damaged by Spotswood's attempt to use it as a source of patronage by appointing sitting burgesses to agencies at salaries of $250 a year. Most of his appointees were turned out at the next election in 1715, and in 1717 the privy council disallowed both the 'Tobacco Inspection Act' and the 'Indian Trade Act'. Lasting elements of Spotswood's time in office included the policy of settling foreign protestants on the Virginian frontier. He also carried forward the development of Williamsburg, originally laid out by Francis Nicholson, and his famous excursion across the Blue Ridge Mountains in 1716 captured the imagination of nineteenth-century writers. 
Spotswood's career in Virginia illustrated the limitations on the exercise of royal power in the colonies even when in the hands of an able and dynamic official. His attempt to build a power base independent of the traditional sources of authority in the colony alienated Virginians, while his failure to consolidate his relationship with leading families made him vulnerable to complaints from both houses and lost him support among the merchant community in Britain. Caught between a hostile colonial assembly, their friends and representatives in London, and the ambivalence of British merchants, Spotswood was unable to realize many of his most cherished projects. Although relations with the assembly improved in the last years of his governorship, he was removed from office in 1722, by which time he had amassed vast landholdings in the colony. Spotswood spent the period 1724-30 in England securing his land titles on favourable terms, not all of which had been patented in his name. In 1724 he married Anne Butler (died 1750), daughter of Richard and Anne Brayne of St Margaret's, Westminster, with whom he had four children. In 1729 he was appointed postmaster-general at a salary of $300 a year. Returning to Virginia in 1730, Spotswood lived the life of a Virginia planter, land speculator, and ironmaster. From his ironworks at Tubal he exported pig iron to England. When war broke out with Spain in 1739 Spotswood was appointed quartermaster-general and second in command to Charles, eighth Baron Cathcart. As colonel of the American regiment in 1740, he was travelling north to confer with colonial governors, when he fell ill at Annapolis, Maryland, where he died on 7 June 1740. 


@@@@@


doc= 26165


Spottiswood, James (1567-1645), Church of Ireland bishop of Clogher, was born at Calder in Scotland on 7 September 1567, the second son of John Spottiswoode (1509/10-1585), superintendent of Lothian, and his wife, Beatrix Crichton, and the younger brother of John Spottiswoode (1565-1639), archbishop of St Andrews. He was educated at home with a tutor called William Strange, later minister of Kirkliston. He subsequently attended Edinburgh grammar school and a school at Linlithgow. In 1579, then aged twelve, he entered the University of Glasgow, graduating in 1583. After his father's death he entered the service of James VI in 1588, and one of his first tasks was to accompany the king to meet his future wife, Anne of Denmark. He also raised the alarm which prevented the earl of Bothwell from seizing the king in 1591. He was secretary to the ambassadors to the king of Denmark and the German princes in 1598. After the succession of James to the crown of England he was sent to John Whitgift, archbishop of Canterbury, who persuaded him to take orders in the Church of England. He was ordained and presented by the king to the rectory of Wells, in Norfolk. He remained there until 1616, when he formed part of a visitation to the University of St Andrews with Patrick Young, dean of Winchester. There he was made DD for a thesis later published as 'Concio J Spottiswodii... quam habuit as celrum Andreanopoli... pro gradu doctoratus' (1616). In the same year he also published at Edinburgh 'The execution of Neshech and the confyning of his brother Tarbith, or, A short discourse shewing the difference betwixt damned usurie and that which is lawful: wherunto there is subjoyned an epistle of... J Calvin touching that same argument... translated out of the Latine'. 
In 1620 Spottiswood became involved in a dispute in Norfolk involving admiralty rights which took him to the court in London. While there George Montgomery, bishop of Meath and Clogher, who acted as agent for the Irish church at court, died, and Spottiswood's friends persuaded him to petition the king for the bishopric. Through the influence of the duke of Buckingham this was granted. He was nominated on 20 January 1621, arrived in Dublin in April, and the mandate for his consecration was dated 22 October 1621. The delay in issuing the mandate gave rise to a dispute with James Ussher, archbishop of Armagh, about his exercise of the jurisdiction of the see of Clogher. 
By 1625 Spottiswood had become entangled in a dispute with a prominent co. Fermanagh landowner, Lord Balfour, over the right to appoint a schoolmaster to the Royal School at Enniskillen. Under the terms of the Ulster plantation scheme such rights, and the lands of the schools, had been vested in local bishops as trustees of the schools. Geoffrey Middleton, Balfour's chaplain and schoolmaster at Enniskillen, petitioned the king to grant him the school lands in fee. Spottiswood, suspecting that Balfour was attempting to seize the lands for himself, objected, and Balfour began to create a complicated network of rumour and intrigue at court against Spottiswood. The result was a fist fight between the two men and arbitrators were called in. However, a dispute over the meaning of the arbitration led to a chancery suit which was settled in 1627. More serious was the fatal wounding in 1626 of Sir John Weymss, sheriff of co. Fermanagh, by Humphry Galbraith, rector of Derrybrusk, during a raid to seize cattle distrained for non-payment of rent due on land belonging to Spottiswood. The result was a set of actions and counter-actions taken in the Dublin courts between Balfour and Spottiswood -- each trying to bankrupt the other by having higher and higher sureties demanded for appearance at court. In November 1627 Spottiswood was tried for his servants' actions, since the servants did not appear. The jury brought in a verdict of 'ignoramus', but not before Spottiswood had made accusations of witchcraft against Sir John Weymss's daughter. Balfour again tried to blacken Spottiswood's name at court in London but the king intervened, setting up a commission to determine the case. Tensions between the two men persisted in the 1630s, each taking a different side in the factional politics of co. Fermanagh. Spottiswood's own account of the disputes was published in 1811 as 'A Breefe Memorial of the Lyfe and Death of Doctor James Spottiswood', which a later hand continued into the 1630s. 
Spottiswood spent a considerable amount of time and effort in the 1630s recovering alienated church land in the diocese of Clogher and he improved church income considerably. After the outbreak of the rising of 1641 in Ulster he fled to London, where he lived until his death at Westminster in March 1645, being buried in St Benedict's Chapel, Westminster, on 31 March 1645. He left a son, Sir Henry Spottiswood, and a daughter, Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 26166


Spottiswoode, John (1509/10-1585), Scottish reformer and superintendent of Lothian, has been identified as the second son of William Spottiswoode of that ilk in Berwickshire, who was killed at Flodden in 1513, and Elizabeth Pringle (died 1514/15), daughter of Henry Pringle of Hoppringle or Torsonce in Lothian. Spottiswoode was orphaned when four years old; 'his friends put him to school in Glasgow' ('History of the Church', 2.336), where he entered the university in 1534, as 'schir' John Spottiswoode (denoting clerical status), and graduated MA. Acting as the rector's servant in 1534, he was licensed in 1536 as a student of Alexander Logan and later reappeared as the rector's deputy in 1543. His intention was to proceed to study divinity, but he was discouraged by the persecution of heretics at home and so left Scotland in favour of England where he was befriended by Archbishop Cranmer, who brought him to 'knowledge of the truth' (ibid.). He returned to Scotland after James V's death in 1542, with released Scottish nobles captured at Solway Moss, and 'stayed a long time' with the fourth earl of Glencairn, an early protestant sympathizer and friend of England. Glencairn introduced him to the fourth earl of Lennox, employed by Henry VIII to foster support for England among the Scots. When Lennox took to arms in the west at Henry's bidding, in an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the government, Spottiswoode was present at Dumbarton Castle as servitor to the earl's brother, Robert Stewart, bishop elect of Caithness, who became another exile in England and temporarily lost his bishopric. 
Spottiswoode remained with Lennox for some months in England (where Lennox was exiled for his unpatriotic activities) and served as a bearer of Lennox's communications with Henry VIII. On obtaining a pardon enabling him to return home, he was already known to James Sandilands of Calder, himself a supporter of the reformer George Wishart and 'assured' to the English cause. Accepting Sandilands's offer of the parsonage of Calder in 1548, a living with an annual income at the Reformation valued at $185, he lived sometimes with Sandilands, who was preceptor of Torphicen (a hospital of St John of Jerusalem), and sometimes with Lord James Stewart, Queen Mary's half-brother and commendator of St Andrews Priory. In September 1550 Spottiswoode and Sandilands received a licence from the crown to visit France. Spottiswoode went in the entourage of Mary of Guise, the queen mother, whose party also included Lord James, and was in France again in April 1558 when the young Queen Mary was married to the dauphin. At Paris, along with Robert Colville of Cleish, he signed a contract on 14 May 1558 with the Parisian master printer Jean Cavalier, who promised, on gaining approval from the Paris faculty of theology, to deliver to them 200 copies of Patrick Cockburn's 'De vulgari sacrae scripturae phrasi' (1552). 
With the outbreak of the Reformation, Spottiswoode took up residence at Calder, where he served as minister in the reformed church. By then he had been moving in reforming and Anglophile circles for a generation, and a Roman Catholic controversialist depicted him as 'profundlie learnit in the misteriis of the 'New Testament'' ('Works of John Knox', 6.167). He was certainly well equipped to offer his ideas on reform by contributing to the 'Book of Discipline' and the confession of faith, as he was invited to do in 1560. On 9 March 1561 he was admitted by John Knox, who himself declined the office, as superintendent of Lothian, though he retained his parish ministry at Calder. This led his parishioners to complain to the general assembly in 1562 and again in 1563 that they were deprived of his services for much of the year on account of his duties as superintendent which they wished him to demit; the assembly refused their plea. 
In a circular letter written from Edinburgh on 22 March 1561, Spottiswoode showed that he regarded his commission as superintendent to be valid and effective: first, because he possessed the approval and support of the churches in his province; second, because he was so charged by the nobility; and third, because as a consequence of this authorization so to act he had received from the privy council endorsement and added authority for effecting a visitation of his province. Even so he may have felt himself somewhat disadvantaged by Knox, who occupied the pulpit of St Giles in the capital. Knox had authority to call general assemblies, served as a visitor, and had the ear of the English ambassador, who in all his dispatches during Mary's personal rule seems only once to have alluded to Spottiswoode (and even then only in the context of Knox's activities, without mentioning his name). Knox's name also took precedence over Spottiswoode's in a decree granting the earl of Eglinton's divorce in 1562. Nor was Spottiswoode elected moderator of the general assembly, though a regular attender at its meetings. 
In May 1565 Spottiswoode, who was by now married to Beatrix Crichton, mother of his two sons John Spottiswoode and James Spottiswood, delivered to the queen a petition from the brethren of Edinburgh seeking punishment of adulterers and papists and was assured by the queen in 'fair words' of her desire to satisfy men's consciences ('Knox's History', 2.147). He also several times presented to Mary petitions for payment of ministers' stipends. In December 1565 he was appointed by the general assembly to seek from the queen redress of grievances, and in 1566 to ask her that Prince James 'be baptized according to the form used in the Reformed Church' ('History of the Church', 2.40). Although Mary received him graciously, she avoided answering. Yet she allowed him to take the prince in his arms and to offer 'a short and pithy prayer, which was very attentively heard by her'; thereafter 'he spake to the babe, and willed him to say Amen for himself; which she took in so good part, as continually afterwards she called the superintendent her Amen' (ibid.). In the event James was baptized according to Roman Catholic rites, but on 29 July 1567, following Mary's enforced abdication, Spottiswoode officiated at James's protestant coronation at Stirling. With Mary's escape from captivity in Lochleven Castle and the ensuing civil war, he attempted to rally support for the king's cause in a letter in 1569 in which he admonished those nobles who supported Mary and urged them to defect to the king's party, for Mary was an adulterer and murderer who 'deserved more than ten deaths' (Calderwood, 2.482). 
A participant in the convention of Leith in 1572, which sought to settle the vexed question of ecclesiastical endowment and assimilate protestant bishops, Spottiswoode continued to discharge his duties as superintendent of Lothian and to convene meetings of the synod of Lothian, despite the appointment of an archbishop of St Andrews. He repeatedly urged the general assembly to let him demit his superintendent's office, but the assembly showed reluctance. Even in 1575, when Spottiswoode was said to have 'become sickly and not altogether able in his own person presently to visit the whole bounds allotted to him in commission' (Thomson, 1.327), the assembly encouraged him to persevere and granted him the support of assistant visitors. In April 1576 he was censured by the assembly for inaugurating Alexander Hepburn to the bishopric of Ross after 'being admonished of the brethren not to doe it' (ibid., 1.349). Yet he remained prominent in the assembly's deliberations until old age and infirmity intervened. Although he seems to have played no part in the preparation of the second 'Book of Discipline', when the assembly pressed ahead with plans for presbyteries in 1581 it was recommended that a presbytery seat be located at Calder, where Spottiswoode 'might be had to be moderator' (ibid., 2.523). As his son John Spottiswoode, the historian and archbishop of St Andrews, remarked of his father in his declining years: 'When he saw the ministers take such liberty as they did, and heard of the disorders raised in the Church through that confused parity which men laboured to introduce, as likewise the irritations the king received by a sort of foolish preachers, he lamented extremely the case of the Church to those that came to visit him, who were not a few, and of the better sort. ('History of the Church', 2.336-7)' Spottiswoode died in his seventy-sixth year, on 5 December 1585, 'well esteemed for his piety and wisdom, loving, and beloved of all persons, charitable to the poor, and careful above all things to give no man offence' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 26167


Spottiswoode, John (1565-1639), archbishop of St Andrews and historian, was born in Greenbank, in the barony of Calder, Edinburghshire, the eldest son of John Spottiswoode (1509/10-1585), the widely respected protestant reformer and superintendent of Lothian and Tweeddale, and Beatrix Crichton, the daughter of Patrick Crichton of Lugton and Gilmerton by Dalkeith. Although there is no extant record appertaining to Spottiswoode's childhood, like his younger brother James Spottiswood it is likely that he received his initial educational instruction in his father's house under the tutorage of the cleric William Strange. Afterwards he presumably proceeded to grammar school at Edinburgh or Linlithgow, where an introduction to the arts prepared him for entry to university. Spottiswoode matriculated at the University of Glasgow at the early, although not uncommon, age of twelve or thirteen. He graduated MA in August 1581 at the age of sixteen. After graduating he returned to Calder to help his aged father, probably with a view to succeeding to his charge after gaining the requisite experience and having met with the church's thorough exegetical and doctrinal standards. 
In 1583, at the age of eighteen, Spottiswoode was officially deemed qualified to assist his father in his pastorate. He duly succeeded to the incumbency after his father's death in December 1585, and in addition was advanced to the nearby charge of Calder-Cleres on 19 July 1594. He demitted this second charge two years later to make way for John Brown, who was presented to the vicarage by James VI on 31 January 1596. The frequency of his name in extant synod and general assembly registers is indicative of his high standing among fellow ministers. Although the synod of Lothian and Tweeddale records reveal that Spottiswoode encountered difficulties with regard to enforcing church discipline within the jurisdictional bounds of the Linlithgow presbytery, in comparative terms his problems were relatively minor and were not peculiar to his pastorate. Moreover, he continued to play a conspicuous role within the higher echelons of the church, which would indicate that his administrative and managerial talents were recognized at a relatively early date. He was among the commissioners nominated by the general assembly to undertake a visitation of the University of Aberdeen in 1593. He was elected moderator of the synod of Lothian and Tweeddale in October 1594, was assigned a prominent part in negotiations between church and state, and played a high profile role in the battle to extirpate Roman Catholic recusancy from Scotland. In May 1601 Spottiswoode, along with his future archiepiscopal colleague James Law, was instructed to effect the proselytization of William Douglas, tenth earl of Angus. However, he was unable to comply 'because he was directit be his Majestie to awaite upon the Duke of Lennox in his ambassadrie to France' ('Booke of the Universall Kirk', 3.981). He was also appointed by the general assembly on visitations to Galloway in 1596 and Clydesdale in 1601 and 1602. 
The available evidence, although inconclusive, implies that Spottiswoode was a firm adherent of the decidedly presbyterian party within the church up until the late 1590s. However, by 1600 there can be no doubt that Spottiswoode favoured the reinstitution of Erastian episcopacy. Indeed, he was chosen secretary of the Erastian party in the church-state debates, which monopolized the Montrose assembly in March of that year. If he needed to be persuaded of the merits of Erastian episcopacy, the answer to his conversion lies in his belief that the power and coercive authority of the crown and state were essential to both the material and spiritual well-being of the reformed faith in Scotland. It is also worth conjecturing that Spottiswoode's father-in-law, the moderate-minded royal chaplain, David Lindsay, who was appointed bishop of Ross in November 1600, might well have had a bearing on Spottiswoode's future Erastian orientation. In 1589 Spottiswoode had married Rachel, the daughter of that vastly experienced and much respected cleric. During the 1590s their marriage produced three children who survived into adulthood. Their eldest son, John, subsequently became Sir John Spottiswoode of Dairsie after his father's accession to the metropolitan see of St Andrews; their younger surviving son was the lawyer and supporter of Montrose, Sir Robert Spottiswood (1596-1646), and their daughter, Anna, eventually married Sir William Sinclair of Roslin. 
In May 1601 Spottiswoode was nominated chaplain to Prince Henry's house and was called upon to join the duke of Lennox's diplomatic mission to France in July of that same year. From extant correspondence between Spottiswoode and Isaac Casaubon, the French classical scholar who was sub-librarian of the royal library in Paris, it is evident that he almost met with a premature death on his return voyage from France. Spottiswoode set sail for England from Dieppe on the afternoon of 3 November 1601 on board an English merchant vessel. However, the ship never reached its destination for it was caught in a storm and badly damaged, forcing her skipper to return to the port of Boulogne. From there Spottiswoode made a safe and uneventful journey back to Scotland via the English court, which he visited with the prime objective of securing official recognition of James's right to succeed the aged Elizabeth I. Spottiswoode had evidently made a favourable impression on James since he was included in the royal party, which, after James's peaceful accession, headed south in April 1603. News reached the king, while at Burleigh House, that the exiled Roman Catholic archbishop of Glasgow, James Beaton, whom he had restored in 1598, had died in Paris. Spottiswoode was immediately appointed to the see, and was instructed to return to Scotland to escort Queen Anne to London as her official almoner. He was officially installed in the archbishopric of Glasgow in July. 
After the regal union Spottiswoode quickly emerged as the most authoritative and commanding episcopal figure of his generation. As archbishop of Glasgow (1603-15), his ascent was meteoric. Owing to the titular nature of his office and his involvement in more pressing matters on behalf of church and crown, the archbishop did not take up residence in Glasgow until January 1605. However, his acquisition of ecclesiastical, and magisterial authority within Glasgow and its archiepiscopal environs was swift and decisive. The Linlithgow assembly made him constant moderator of the Glasgow presbytery in December 1606, although in practice Spottiswoode rarely attended its meetings until the Glasgow assembly of 1610 restored episcopal ecclesiastical jurisdiction. In his protracted absences from his locality the archbishop relied on the highly competent Patrick Sharp, principal of the University of Glasgow and deputy moderator, to keep him informed of developments and oversee the smooth operation of presbyterial affairs. The same assembly similarly allegedly appointed Spottiswoode moderator of the synod of Clydesdale. Nevertheless, it was not until the following August that the injunction was put into effect after the synod was browbeaten into acceptance of the new constitutional arrangement by the earl of Abercorn at the behest of the king. In a similar manner the archbishop quickly established his grip on the archiepiscopal city as he filled the power vacuum left by the duke of Lennox, who had relocated in England with King James. As early as November 1606 Spottiswoode had gained control of the city administration through his ability to determine the complexion and composition of the burgh council. It was no coincidence that in April 1611 Glasgow was finally accorded royal burgh status through the endeavour of the archbishop. 
Spottiswoode's elevation rested on solid financial and legal foundations. Although they were significantly dilapidated, a grant made under the privy seal on 4 June 1604 reallocated the temporalities of the bishopric back into the archbishop's patrimony. The following year he was granted the parsonage and vicarage of the parish church of Glasgow. More important, in August 1608 he was awarded regality jurisdiction throughout his archbishopric. Such an award not only boosted the archiepiscopal coffers with the profits of justice but also placed a vast reservoir of patronage at his disposal. That same year he was additionally granted the parsonages and vicarages of Ancrum, Eskirk, Stobo, Edilstoun, Kilbryde, and Torrence. In August/September 1614 Spottiswoode successfully negotiated the transfer of Kilwinning Abbey into his patrimony. Moreover the archbishop was instrumental in the acquisition of New Abbey for his younger son, Robert, in September 1612 and had the title deeds of Holyroodhouse conferred upon his elder son, John, in March 1613. 
From the parliament of July 1604 Spottiswoode was a regular lord of the articles, preparing, scrutinizing, and selecting all legislation presented to parliament for its formal approval. From 30 May 1605 he also sat as a privy councillor. He played a key role in the successful campaign of 1608 and 1609 to have commissariat jurisdiction restored to the episcopate. His timely intervention and involvement in the affairs and procedures of the Scottish exchequer in 1608 led to alterations in its constitution and personnel. During his years in Glasgow, Spottiswoode was also heavily involved in government initiatives to advance the cause of church and crown in the Scottish borders and in the highlands and islands. In May 1610 he was made an extraordinary lord of session. Moreover, following the untimely and premature death of his powerful ally, the earl of Dunbar, in late 1611, Spottiswoode was one of the neo-Octavians appointed by the king in April 1612 to oversee the affairs of the combined offices of the treasurer, collector, and comptroller. He was the crown's principal agent in the re-establishment and defence of an Erastian episcopal settlement. He was moderator of the landmark Glasgow assembly of 1610 which fully restored episcopal ecclesiastical jurisdiction and all but made presbytery a bare name, and his ecclesiastical powers were further enhanced in February of that year by the creation of the Scottish court of high commission. Later that same year Spottiswoode, along with Bishop Andrew Lamb of Brechin and Bishop Gavin Hamilton of Galloway, received episcopal consecration in England at the hands of the bishops of London, Ely, Rochester, and Worcester, although at Spottiswoode's insistence, both English archbishops were excluded from the service, since their inclusion might have left the Church of Scotland open to a renewal of the highly contentious and dubious English archiepiscopal claim to jurisdictional supremacy over Scotland. 
In spite of his later assertion incorporated into his will that 'the government episcopall is the only right and Apostolique form', Spottiswoode was, however, no 'jure divino' episcopalian. Nor for that matter was he an enthusiastic supporter of the creation of a British church conforming to the Anglican 'via media'. The archbishop was first and foremost a Scottish churchman. A highly astute and skilful politician, his talent lay especially in administration and in motivating and managing the affairs of men. In addition to Spottiswoode's continual endeavour to right the Church of Scotland's pecuniary difficulties, the perennial problem of Roman Catholic recusancy occupied much of his time and energy. Most notably he was the crown's chief protagonist and prosecutor in the capture, trial, and subsequent execution of John Ogilvie in 1614 and 1615. He penned 'A trve relation of the proceedings against John Ogilvie, a Jesuit, executed at Glasgow, the last of Februarie, anno 1615', in an attempt to demonstrate that Ogilvie was tried and convicted for treason not heresy. Spottiswoode was also a prominent player in the infamous political fall in 1608 of the crypto-Roman Catholic secretary of state and president of the court of session, James Elphinstone, first Lord Balmerino. 
Spottiswoode was elevated to the metropolitan see after the death of George Gladstanes in March 1615. As primate he continued to be the main channel through which James VI and later Charles I sought to Anglicize the Church of Scotland through the introduction of doctrinal, liturgical, and ceremonial modifications. Spottiswoode was the author of the 'Refutatio libelli de regimine ecclesiae Scoticanae', 1620, which was an episcopal riposte to the presbyterian polemics of David Calderwood. His forceful and erudite sermon on '1 Corinthians' 11: 16, given in defence of the king's five articles at the Perth assembly on 25 August 1618, was similarly published in defence of the untimely and unwarranted alterations. Nevertheless Spottiswoode was no slavish sycophant. Although an advocate of the theory of divine right of kings, the archbishop was often working to a quite independent agenda to that of his royal master. The archbishop's extant sermons as primate clearly reveal that he was an orthodox Calvinist in theology if not ecclesiology. It is telling that he informed Isaac Casaubon that he greatly admired the works of the widely renowned Scottish covenant theologian, Robert Rollock, whom he described as 'worthy of immortality' (Burney MSS 366, fol. 197'r'). 
At St Andrews, Spottiswoode continued his quest to secure adequate financial provision for the church. In 1616 he had published a Scottish edition of Sir Henry Spelman's 'De temerandis ecclesiis, or, The rights and respects due to churches, written to a gentleman, who having an appropriate parsonage, employed the church to profane uses, and left the parishioners uncertainly provided of divine service in a parish there adjoining'. He added a preface in which he argued that to 'rest upon the benevolence of the people... is a beggarlie thing... not beseeming the dignitie of the Ministrie'. During his early years as metropolitan Spottiswoode purchased the pre-Reformation archiepiscopal estate of Dairsie, which was held in the name of his son John. The archbishop contributed towards the restoration and refurbishment of the castle at Dairsie and had a new parish church erected there in 1621. Shortly after the death of James VI in March 1625 Spottiswoode wrote that 'posteritie wil admire bothe the workes and the persone [of James VI], and looking back into ages past for the lyk pattern, sal not be able to find any thing to be compared with it' (NL Scot., MS 2934, fol. 28). It was testimony to Spottiswoode's loyalty and to his in-depth knowledge and experiences of the Scottish administration that Charles I made him president of the exchequer shortly after becoming king, despite the fact that the archbishop's conscientious opposition to officiating at the funeral of James VI in May 1625 dressed in Anglican ecclesiastical vestments compelled him to relinquish his place in the ceremony. 
Eight years later, on 18 June 1633, Spottiswoode did officiate at Charles's Scottish coronation in the Canongate kirk. Between December 1634 and March of the following year the archbishop, with the aid of his youngest son, Robert, was the principal crown prosecutor of John, second Lord Balmerino, on account of the nobleman's opposition to the king's religious policy. In January 1635 the archbishop, by now in his seventieth year, combined the two most powerful offices in the Scottish church and state in his person after he was appointed chancellor of the kingdom. Nevertheless Spottiswoode's influence over the affairs of the crown was evidently on the wane. Not unexpectedly he was involved in the preparation of the new book of canons in 1635 and 1636 and in the innovative Scottish prayer book, which was in circulation by the winter of 1636-7. Nevertheless, the impetus behind their introduction lay with the king and the archbishop of Canterbury, William Laud. Although loyalty and duty to the crown compelled Spottiswoode to implement the highly controversial canonical and liturgical alterations, these were done against his better judgement. Indeed, he had intimated to both Charles and Laud that the Scottish church and nation were ill-prepared, and unlikely to accept these new measures without a fight. In February 1638 he reputedly intimated to the privy council that the aberrant imposition of the prayer book was ill-conceived and should be shelved forthwith. In spite of his overtures to dampen the flames which threatened to raze the episcopal edifice to the ground, his career ended in failure and ignominy. His attempts to mediate between the crown and the covenanting government after the revolution of 1637-8 having fared no better, he was forced to seek exile in England, where he lived out the remaining months of his eventful life. 
Having made his will at Newcastle in January 1639, Spottiswoode died in London on 26 November. In spite of his expressed desire to be buried alongside his late wife at Dairsie he was interred at St Benedict's Chapel in Westminster Abbey. The day after his death his 'History of the church and state of Scotland from the year of Our Lord 203 to the end of the reign of King James VI, 1625', was presented to Charles I by John Maxwell, the bishop of Ross. Ironically, the archbishop's 'magnum opus' was not published until 1655, during the Cromwellian interregnum. The 'History' was unquestionably an apologia for the royalist and episcopal cause in Scotland. Its title is somewhat misleading since its spotlight is largely focused on the reign of the 'British Solomon', James VI and I, who commissioned the work. In contrast to the compositions of his presbyterian detractors, Spottiswoode's 'History' is a great deal more guarded and temperate in its use of language. His partisanship, however, is palpably manifest, and his apparent moderation should not obscure the obvious point that the archbishop, unlike his persecuted opponents, could afford to be magnanimous during the years of its compilation. 


@@@@@


doc= 26168


Spottiswoode, John, of that ilk (1667-1728), lawyer and jurist, was born on 28 November 1667, the son of Alexander Spottiswoode (1636-1675), advocate, designated of Crumstaine in right of his first wife, Isobel, daughter of Sir John Home of Crumstaine in Berwickshire, and his second wife, Helen, seventh daughter of John Trotter of Mortonhall. Alexander Spottiswoode had a son, Alexander, by his first marriage, who died unmarried. The family had distinguished antecedents: Alexander Spottiswoode was the son of Sir Robert Spottiswood, Lord New Abbey, senator and then president of the college of justice, executed for treason in 1646, and the grandson of John Spottiswoode, archbishop of St Andrews, lord chancellor of Scotland, and extraordinary lord of session, of the old Berwickshire family of Spottiswoode of that ilk. Alexander's brother Robert was a doctor of medicine, who served in the army with the British garrison at Tangier; Robert's son, another Alexander, ultimately became governor of Virginia. 
Initially schooled in Crumstaine, Spottiswoode attended the Latin school at Duns and then, from 1677, Kelso School, learning Latin and some Greek. From 1683 to 1686 he attended the University of Edinburgh under the regent Herbert Kennedy, though taking classes in mathematics from the famous Newtonian David Gregory. After graduation Spottiswoode was apprenticed on 15 December 1686 to James Hay of Carriber, writer to the signet, in his apprentice's view 'the ablest Conveyancer of the last Age' (J. Spottiswoode, 'Introduction to the Knowledge of the Style of Writs', 1708, sig. a2'r'). Though indented for three years Spottiswoode stayed with Hay until 1692, when, having determined to become an advocate, he left for Leiden in the Netherlands, where he studied law with Gerard Noodt and Ph. R. Vitriarius and chemistry with Jacob Le Mort. He returned to Scotland in January 1694 and was finally admitted advocate on 24 December 1696. 
Lying behind much of Spottiswoode's conduct was a determination to restore the fortunes of his family and ensure once more its landed rank, which the vicissitudes of the seventeenth century had affected so badly. With much effort he reacquired the barony of Spottiswoode; he sought unsuccessfully to involve his cousin Alexander, the future governor, in reacquiring the barony of Dairsie (which had belonged to the archbishop); and he sought from the crown the re-grant of New Abbey (which his grandfather had been compelled to resign to the crown to endow the newly erected bishopric of Edinburgh in return for a promise of $3000, which had never been paid but which the crown had kept after the re-establishment of presbyterianism in 1690). Although parliament recognized Spottiswoode's rights to New Abbey in 1695, it was not re-granted by the crown in his lifetime. He finally purchased the superiority of Spottiswoode in February 1700, and, after his infeftment in the lands and barony in March, thereafter proudly styled himself John Spottiswoode of that ilk, although in 1724 he was still involved in litigation relating to the acquisition. 
Spottiswoode's account books suggest that he was soon making enough to live in a relatively simple but gentlemanly fashion from his practice at the bar. Yet for someone with such ambitions to restore the family fortune, money must have been a scarce commodity. In 1698 he had thought of offering private classes to the apprentices of writers; he was certainly fascinated by the styles of legal documents, perhaps stimulating his antiquarian interests. In 1701 he decided to offer classes in Scots law and civil (Roman) law, which he started to teach in 1702. His classes on Scots law covered the form of process, the styles of documents, and the substance of the law. The first two of these led to his publishing 'Introduction to the Knowledge of the Style of Writs' (1708) and 'The Form of Process, before the Lords of Council and Session' (1711), both of which went through several editions. He relied on Sir George Mackenzie's 'Institutions of the Law of Scotland' to teach the substance of the law, publishing an edition with notes deriving from his classes in 1723. In Roman law he taught a course on Justinian's 'Institutes', using as his textbook Bockelmann's 'Compendium Institutionum Justiniani'. Spottiswoode's classes were initially very successful (his pupils included Duncan Forbes of Culloden), but he seems to have stopped teaching between 1706 and 1710, because of the success of a rival private teacher. After 1710 he taught only his classes on Scots law, probably teaching most years until 1722. Again his classes were successful. 
Active in the Faculty of Advocates, Spottiswoode served as clerk of faculty (1697-1702, 1703-6) and keeper of the library (1702-28), Thomas Ruddiman being his under-keeper. He was also appointed in 1724 to a committee of the faculty to consider the examination of all intrants on Scots law. He also maintained a regular practice, the most noted case in which he was involved being the trial of Captain Green and the crew of the 'Worcester' before the court of Admiralty. The trial was a popular event in the politically charged years before the Union, and Spottiswoode's defence raised strong feelings against him -- particularly troubling to one much given to introspective self-examination. 
Growing success led Spottiswoode in 1710 to marry Helen Arbuthnott (1675-1741), widow of John MacFarlane of Arrochar (younger of that ilk), and daughter of Robert, second Viscount Arbuthnott, and his second wife, Katherine Gordon. The couple had four children: John, the heir (1711-1793); Robert ('b'. 'c'.1711/12); Helen, who married John Gartshore of Alderston; and Anne, who married James Dundas. Spottiswoode was at one time close to the famous historian and antiquary James Anderson, sharing the historical and patriotic concerns of those grouped around Sir Robert Sibbald; indeed he compiled 'An Account of All the Religious Houses that were in Scotland at the Time of the Reformation' (published posthumously with his edition of Sir Thomas Hope's 'Minor Practicks' (1734)). He also briefly ran a printing house. As well as a number of more ephemeral works linked to his teaching and other endeavours, including pamphlets on an election, the Union debate, and the scandal over the Jacobite medal that Henrietta, duchess of Gordon, tried to present to the faculty, he also edited and published in one volume Gilmore's and Falconer's collections of decisions of the session (1701) and his own grandfather's 'Practicks' (1706). These last publications obviously reflected his ambitions in the faculty and his pride in his ancestry. His short work 'Law of Elections' in 1710 was an evident 'piece d'occasion', though reflecting his teaching to some extent. He collected a substantial library, and 2982 items were auctioned after his death. 
The appointment of his pupil Alexander Bayne as professor of Scots law in the University of Edinburgh in 1722 probably led Spottiswoode to end teaching. He also seems now to have played little part in the running of the Advocates' Library, though still keeper, but he did maintain a practice before the session. He died in Edinburgh on 13 February 1728, having played by his example a major part in the successful re-establishment of legal education in the Scottish universities, though he never gained the chair to which he had once aspired. 


@@@@@


doc= 26169


Spottiswood, Sir Robert, Lord Dunipace (1596-1646), judge and politician, was the second son of John Spottiswoode (1565-1639), archbishop of St Andrews, and Rachel, daughter of David Lindsay, bishop of Ross. He was educated at grammar school in Glasgow and at the University of Glasgow (1609-13), where he graduated as master of arts. He then moved to Exeter College, Oxford, becoming a fellow, before embarking on nine years of travel and study in France, Italy, and Germany. During this period he greatly helped his father's work on the history of the church in Scotland by recovering many documents carried abroad by Roman Catholic refugees after the Scottish Reformation. It was presumably on his return to Scotland that he married Bethia (died 1639), daughter of Sir Alexander Morison of Prestongrange. 
Spottiswood's abilities, and his father's position, brought him quick advancement. He was admitted to the privy council of Scotland on 11 July 1622, and was appointed the next day to be an extraordinary lord of the court of session, in place of his father. He took the judicial title Lord New Abbey from lands bought for him by his father, and was knighted in 1624. On 14 February 1626 he was made an ordinary lord of session, and in 1634 changed his title to Lord Dunipace when the New Abbey lands were restored to the crown as a patrimony for the new bishopric of Edinburgh. In October 1633 he was elected president of the court of session, having been nominated by Charles I. After 1625 he never took his seat on the privy council, preferring to concentrate on his judicial duties, and he was omitted from the new council appointed in 1631. 
When open resistance to the king began in Scotland in 1637 Spottiswood became a hated figure, as much because he was the son of an archbishop as because of his political views. Late in that year he travelled to court in England, and it was rumoured that he had gone to inform the king of the incompetence of his officials, being regarded as 'almost a professed enemie' to the noble councillors and 'an agent for the bishops' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.47). He was back in Scotland by 28 February 1638, when he took his seat on the session, and he continued to sit in court until 22 March 1639, by which time the country was on the verge of civil war between the king's supporters and the covenanters. He withdrew eventually to England, but returned to Scotland with Charles I in 1641. Denounced by the Scottish parliament as an 'incendiary' responsible for sowing discord between king and people, he was imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle by parliament on 17 August, but was released on 16 November. The threat to bring him to trial at a later date was abandoned, and, omitted from the new commission to the court of session in October, he returned to England with the king. 
In January 1644 Spottiswood was appointed secretary of state for Scotland by Charles at Oxford, his civil war headquarters, but the Scottish parliament, which had just allied itself with its English counterpart against the king, refused to recognize the appointment, denouncing him as a usurper on 22 July. Spottiswood had formed a close friendship with the marquess of Montrose and in May 1645, having sealed the king's commission to the marquess to be the king's lieutenant-governor and captain-general of Scotland, he set out to deliver the document to Montrose himself. His role was no doubt intended to be much more than that of a messenger. Montrose had raised hopes that his army would soon win control of Scotland from the covenanters, and if that happened moves would need to be made to establish a royalist regime under the powers granted in the new commission. Spottiswood's presence as secretary of state would lend credibility to this transition from conquest to administration. Travelling by way of Wales and the Isle of Man, Spottiswood landed in Lochaber, finally joining Montrose's army at the beginning of September. The timing seemed perfect, for Montrose's victory at Kilsyth a few weeks earlier had left no army in Scotland to oppose him, and he was indeed preparing to establish a regime. But the failure of lowland royalists to rally to Montrose, desertions from his army, and the news of the approach of the cavalry of the Scottish army in England made the situation perilous. As Spottiswood wrote on 10 September, 'All these were great Disheartenings to any other but to him [Montrose], whom nothing of this kind can amate [deject]' (Spottiswoode, xxxvi). When Montrose's forces were crushed at Philiphaugh on 13 September, Spottiswood fled, but was captured, and the fact that he had drawn his sword was used as evidence that he had been 'in arms'. 
Spottiswood was at first imprisoned in Glasgow, where a list of charges against him was delivered to him on 5 November. The main accusations were having accepted office as secretary without parliamentary consent and having served in arms against the state. His defences that he owed natural allegiance to his king, that he had not been in arms, and that he had been promised quarter were rejected in a debate in parliament at St Andrews, and he was found guilty of high treason. He was sentenced to death on 16 January 1646, orders being issued for bringing 'the maiden' -- the Scottish beheading machine -- to St Andrews. On 19 January, the day before his death, Spottiswood wrote to Montrose reaffirming his loyalty, and on the day itself he wrote to his children: all he had to bequeath to them was 'the example of my loyalty, which as yow looke for a blessing from heaven or will have mine to light on you I command you to imitate' (NL Scot., MS 2933, 24'r'). 
On 20 January 1646, on the scaffold, Spottiswood's attempt to make a speech was interrupted by covenanting ministers, who 'tormented him in the last moments of his life with their officious exhortations and rhapsodies' (Maidment, 1.223). Another account speaks of one of the ministers, Robert Blair, being white with fury and breaking 'out into scurrilous abuse' of Spottiswood and his archbishop father, which he bore in 'serene silence' (Wishart, 171). Blair on the other hand records Spottiswood's 'railing discourse', and his own comment that it was no surprise to find the son of a 'false prophet' slandering faithful servants of Christ. Spottiswood, says Blair, 'died railing and raging' ('Life of Mr Robert Blair', 180). Finally, there is the story that he 'died as he lived, full of malice against the cause and the Covenant', affirming his support for Montrose, 'that matchless mirrour of all true worth and nobility' (Maidment, 1.203-4, 208). On balance, it seems he died with spirit rather than serenity. 
Laying aside unsubstantiated charges of corruption as a judge hurled at him by his enemies, Spottiswood seems to have been a scholarly, diligent, and well-liked man. That his father was an archbishop advanced both his career and his death, for in the covenanters' determination to obtain revenge on their enemies Spottiswood was almost a symbolic victim. In hailing him as a 'great man' George Wishart treated him as a symbol of loyalty and martyrdom, but whether he was also 'remarkable for his knowledge of things both human and divine', outstanding as a linguist, and 'deeply versed in history, law and politics' (Wishart, 171) it is impossible to decide through lack of evidence. 


@@@@@


doc= 26170


Spottiswoode, Arthur Cole (1808-1874), army officer in the East India Company, born on 9 January 1808 at Ganjam, Madras, was the eldest son of Hugh Spottiswoode of the Madras civil service, who died on his passage to the Cape on 4 April 1820, and Harriet, daughter of Burton Smith. He entered the East India Company's service as ensign on 25 February 1824, became lieutenant in the 37th native infantry (Bengal) on 13 May 1825, captain on 14 November 1833, and major on 17 March 1851. He served with distinction at the siege and capture of Bharatpur in 1826, heading the assault, and receiving the personal thanks of Lord Combermere. On 29 July 1834 he married Jessy Eliza (1817/18-1898), daughter of Lieutenant-General Lambert Loveday. They had three sons and three daughters. 
In 1835 Spottiswoode began many years' employment in the stud department at Hapur, but left this staff appointment for a time to rejoin his regiment during the Afghan campaign of 1838-9. He was made brevet major on 6 November 1846, and brevet lieutenant-colonel on 20 June 1854. 
Spottiswoode succeeded to the command of the 37th as lieutenant-colonel on 22 May 1856. His regiment was at Benares, and on 4 June 1857, as it was believed to be on the point of mutiny, orders were given to disarm it. It was a case for skilful handling, for there were other native troops there, and the British force consisted of only 250 men and three guns. Spottiswoode still had faith in his men, to whom, as the native officers said, he had always been a father; but he had to parade them and tell them to lodge their arms. While they were doing so the British troops were seen to be approaching, and a cry rose that they were going to be shot down. The regiment broke, and some of the men opened fire, but they were soon dispersed by the guns, as were also the Sikh cavalry who sided with them. For a time there was great risk that the city would join them, and much fault was afterwards found with the arrangements made by the general in command, Brigadier George Ponsonby. Spottiswoode carried out the burning of the sepoy lines during the night, and helped to provide for the security of the European women and the treasure. He became colonel in the army on 23 July 1858, and retired with the rank of major-general on 31 December 1861. He died at 5 Verulam Place, Hastings, on 23 March 1874. 


@@@@@


doc= 26171


Spottiswoode, William (1825-1883), mathematician and physicist, was born in London on 11 January 1825, the eldest son of Andrew Spottiswoode (1787-1866), member of parliament for Saltash (1826-30) and Colchester (1830-31), and partner in the firm of Eyre and Spottiswoode of New Street Square, queen's printers, and his wife, Mary, eldest daughter of Thomas Norton Longman ['see under 'Longman, Thomas], the publisher. Spottiswoode passed from a school at Laleham to Eton College, from where he was expelled for letting off fireworks in the town, thus offending against a decree by the headmaster, Dr Hawtrey. Transfer to Harrow School proved a gain for Spottiswoode, since Eton had an inferior academic record, and mathematics, a subject which attracted him, was not even compulsory there. He went to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1842, graduated BA in 1846 with a first class in mathematics, and gained his MA in 1848. 
In 1845 and 1846 Spottiswoode rowed for Oxford against Cambridge. While he was at Oxford, his father lost his capital through financial speculation and Spottiswoode took over as queen's printer; he showed financial acumen and steadily rebuilt the fortunes of the printing firm, which became a model company of the patriarchal Victorian type. Spottiswoode gave scientific lectures in the school set up for its employees, and throughout his life remained in close contact with the day-to-day working of the company and exercised an interest in the welfare of its employees. He always reserved time for his scientific and literary pursuits. During his annual holidays he travelled widely in other countries, and in 1856 travelled in eastern Russia, publishing in the following year 'A Tarantasse Journey through Eastern Russia in the Autumn of 1856'. In 1860 he visited Croatia and Hungary. 
Meanwhile Spottiswoode was pursuing the mathematical studies which had first attracted him at university, and in 1847 he issued 'Meditationes analyticae', his earliest scientific publication. This was a miscellany of thirteen chapters including such topics as the curvature of surfaces, the calculus of variations, and physical astronomy. From the first he showed 'extraordinary liking for, and great skill in, what might be called the morphology of mathematics' ('Nature'), according to his tutor at Oxford, Bartholomew Price. By his own account it was W. F. Donkin, the Savilian professor, who 'first inspired [him] with a sense of the magnificence of mathematics' ('Proceedings', 491). After Sir William Rowan Hamilton discovered quaternions in October 1843, Spottiswoode began contributing papers on the new algebras. He was one of the first English mathematicians to publish work in continental journals and thus break the introspection which had hindered English mathematics for more than a century. 
Spottiswoode's 'Elementary Theorems Relating to Determinants' (1851) was the first attempt to bring together the main ideas on this topic and to present them in textbook form. At the request of the editor of 'Crelle's journal' ('Journal fur die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik', published from Berlin) he remodelled and expanded this work, taking account of the rapid progress then being made in the theory of determinants. The result was published in the journal in 1856. Spottiswoode's style was neat and precise, reflecting work efficiently executed. His attraction to determinants owed much to his aesthetic sense of symmetry. Like many mathematicians of this period his interests were wide, and he also published on invariant theory, geometry, and the calculus of operations. His high rank as a mathematician was mainly the result of his series of memoirs on the contact of curves and surfaces, contributed to the 'Philosophical Transactions' of 1862 and subsequent years. On 27 April 1861 Spottiswoode married Eliza Taylor Arbuthnot, of Bexley, Kent, the eldest daughter of William Urquhart Arbuthnot, member of the Council for India. Their at-homes in Grosvenor Place, held at the height of the London season, attracted the cream of Victorian science and cabinet ministers alike. During these events the latest news in science would invariably be demonstrated in the laboratory which occupied part of the house. 
In 1871 Spottiswoode turned his attention to experimental physical science. At first he devoted his researches to the polarization of light; subsequently he studied the electrical discharge in rarefied gases. On these subjects he gave popular lectures to crowded audiences at the Royal Institution, at the South Kensington College of Science, and at the British Association. He was constantly active in the cause of science and was a member of the ginger group known as the X Club which was founded in 1864 and met regularly in the St George's Hotel in Albemarle Street near Piccadilly, the only London club to which he belonged. An inveterate member of scientific societies, he served as an officer on many of their committees. He was elected to the Royal Society on 2 June 1853, and joined the Ethnological Society, the Royal Asiatic Society, the Society of Antiquaries, and the Royal Astronomical Society. During a difficult period in the history of the Royal Geographical Society he acted as its secretary (with Francis Galton). His financial abilities were put to good use in the cause of science -- he was treasurer of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1861-74), of the Royal Institution (1865-73), and of the Royal Society (1871-8). He served as president of the mathematical section of the British Association in 1865 and of the recently formed London Mathematical Society in 1870-72. He reached the top of the administrative side of the scientific establishment by being president of the British Association in 1878, and on 30 November that year was elected president of the Royal Society. 
Spottiswoode remained president of the Royal Society until his death. He was awarded the honorary degrees of LLD at Cambridge, Dublin, and Edinburgh, and DCL at Oxford; he became a correspondent of the Institut de France (Academie des Sciences) for the geometrical section after a sharp contest with M. Borchardt in 1876. He was not only a mathematician and physicist but also an accomplished linguist, possessing a remarkable knowledge of both European and oriental languages. He translated 'Jewish Literature from the Eighth to the Eighteenth Century' (1857) from Moritz Steinschneider's original, and delved into the history of mathematics and astronomy in India by reading original sources. The results were published by the Royal Asiatic Society. His scientific publications included 'The Polarisation of Light' (1874), 'Polarised Light' (vol. 2 of 'Science Lectures', published by the Department of Science and Art, 1879), 'A Lecture on the Electrical Discharge, its Form and Functions' (1881), and about a hundred scientific memoirs in various journals. 
Spottiswoode was described by a contemporary as a 'dark, grave, student like but aristocratic-looking person'. He was a member of the board of visitors of the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, and his chairmanship of a visitation was one of the last official duties he performed. He went to Italy on a short holiday to recuperate from overwork and the after-effects of a tricycle accident but after returning home contracted typhoid, and three weeks later died, on 27 June 1883, at his home, 41 Grosvenor Place. He was fifty-eight years old and his death was regarded as a national loss. In recognition of his position as president of the Royal Society and his contribution to science he was buried on 5 July in Westminster Abbey in the presence of civic dignitaries and the whole scientific establishment. 


@@@@@


doc= 26172


Spragge, Sir Edward (c.1629-1673), naval officer, was a son of Lichfield Spragge (died 'c'.1645) of Roscommon and Mary Legge, an aunt of George Legge, Lord Dartmouth. Spragge's grandfather had served in Elizabeth's Irish army and his father was killed as governor of Roscommon during the civil war. Little is known of Spragge's early career. He is said to have spent some time as a slave in Algiers, and it is possible that he served in Prince Rupert's royalist squadron between 1648 and 1653. He subsequently married Clara Colaert, daughter of the governor of Dunkirk. In company with Clara's brother, Spragge put to sea about 1655 in command of a French privateer, which was badly damaged by an English frigate off La Rochelle; unable to fund a second voyage, Spragge then took a volunteer's place under the royalist captain Richard Beach. He subsequently commanded the royalist privateer 'Charles', but the Dutch captured this in July 1660, losing him $10,000 -- or so he claimed. Spragge was always to possess a reputation for avarice, and when he entered the navy shortly afterwards, Charles II's favourite Charles Berkeley remarked 'whether it could be thought safe to put one of the king's ships into his hands, lest he should run away with her, his condition being so necessitous, and his former dealings of no better reputation' ('Samuel Pepys and the Second Dutch War', ed. R. Latham, 1995, 243). 
Despite such concerns Spragge became captain of the 'Portland' on 16 March 1661. He served aboard her until the end of 1662, becoming captain of a foot company at Portsmouth in the same year. He commanded the 'Dover' from May to October 1664 before moving into the 'Lion', which he commanded at the battle of Lowestoft on 3 June 1665; on 24 June he was knighted for his gallantry in this engagement. Spragge commanded the 'Royal James' from August to October 1665. By this time he had abandoned his wife and taken a mistress, probably Dorothy Dennis, with whom he had children. He made the acquaintance of Samuel Pepys at much the same time: the diarist's first impression, not yet clouded by Spragge's later involvement in faction fighting and opposition to Pepys's own patron, Sandwich, was of 'a merry man that sang a pleasant song pleasantly' (Pepys, 'Diary', 11 Jan 1666). During the 1666 campaign Spragge commanded the 'Triumph' before moving into the 'Dreadnought' on 27 May and fighting in her during the Four Days' Battle (1-4 June 1666). After this engagement he was appointed vice-admiral of the blue on 8 June 1666, flying his flag in the 'Victory' and taking a prominent part in the St James's day fight (25 July 1666). At this time Spragge was regarded as the leading naval client of Prince Rupert and was accused, falsely, of instigating the 'division of the fleet' which precipitated the Four Days' Battle (allegedly so that Rupert would not have to share any glory with his joint admiral, Albemarle). In 1667 Spragge served as commander of a squadron attempting to secure the Medway and Sheerness against the Dutch attack on 9-10 June; in the two disastrous days which followed, he moved ashore to take command of some of the gun batteries, and subsequently led a force of frigates and fireships into battle against another Dutch incursion on 23 July. Spragge's background made him a natural scapegoat for the Medway disaster, and he was accused of being an Irish papist. However, he successfully survived a parliamentary inquiry in October 1667, throwing the blame instead onto Peter Pett. 
Spragge commanded the 'Revenge' in 1668, later serving as ambassador to the Spanish Netherlands from 27 November 1668 to 29 January 1669. In April 1669 he rejoined the 'Revenge', bound for the Mediterranean, where he served as vice-admiral to Sir Thomas Allin in the fleet fighting the Algerine corsairs. When Allin went home Spragge became admiral in his place (24 September 1670). His greatest success in this command was his spectacular victory over the Algerine fleet at Bugia Bay on 8 May 1671. Although the enemy vessels were in a well protected harbour, ships' boats broke the boom, enabling a fireship to enter and wreak havoc. Seven Algerine warships and three prizes were destroyed, and the battle prompted a coup in Algiers which led to the signing of a peace treaty. For his success, Spragge was rewarded with 3000 ounces of plate and a pension of $1000 p.a. 
Returning to England in the 'Rupert', Spragge met a squadron under Sir Robert Holmes in the English Channel on 10 March 1672. Holmes had secret orders to attack the Dutch Smyrna convoy, and it was assumed for many years that because he was determined to claim the victory for himself, he failed to pass these on to Spragge, despite allegedly obtaining intelligence of the Dutch fleet's movements from him, and therefore did not maximize his chances of success by uniting the two squadrons. In fact, the two squadrons never communicated with each other at all, as Spragge's journal proves. Nevertheless the relationship between Holmes and Spragge was a bitter one. Holmes by then was Prince Rupert's chief naval client, but Spragge had turned against the prince and thrown in his lot with the duke of York. Spragge was reported to have said that it was for 'the king which he would choose, Holmes or him, and that it would spoil his whole service to make use of them both' (Pepys, 'Tangier Papers', 245). Spragge commanded the 'London' during the 1672 campaign against the Dutch, serving successively as vice-admiral of the blue, vice-admiral of the red, and finally admiral of the blue following the battle of Sole Bay on 28 May 1672, in which he again distinguished himself. In February 1673 Spragge undertook a diplomatic mission to France to adjust the terms of the Anglo-French alliance, attending 'en route' a by-election at Dover at which he was elected an MP; although the result was initially declared void, he won a second ballot, but never took his seat due to his departure for sea as admiral of the blue, flying his flag in the 'Royal Prince'. He fought in the battles of Schooneveld (28 May and 4 June 1673), and was fiercely critical of the tactics of his admiral, Rupert, throughout the campaign. At the battle of the Texel (11 August 1673) Spragge ordered his Blue squadron, in the rear, to back its sails in order to resume a private battle with Tromp, apparently dating from the 1666 campaign. Indeed, among the last words in Spragge's journal, written the night before, were 'Tromp is now in the rear... he will, I hope, fall to my share in the Blue squadron tomorrow' (Anderson, 'Journals and Narratives', 330). The 'Prince' was badly damaged in a three-hour battering from Tromp's flagship and shortly after midday Spragge shifted his flag to the 'Saint George'. When she lost her main topmast shortly afterwards he attempted another transfer, this time to the 'Royal Charles', but his boat was sunk 'en route' and Spragge was drowned. 
Spragge was buried at Westminster Abbey on 23 September 1673. By his will dated 22 May 1673 he made bequests totalling $4800, chiefly to his two sons with Dorothy Dennis, William and Edward Spragge, and his daughter Dorothy. Payment of the bequests had to await a grant by the crown in January 1675 of arrears of pay and pensions totalling over $3000. 


@@@@@


doc= 26173


Sprat, Thomas (bap. 1635, d. 1713), bishop of Rochester, was born at Beaminster, Dorset, and baptized there on 20 September 1635, the son of Thomas Sprat and his wife, whose forename is unknown but was of the Strode family of Parham, Devon. His father was probably the man who proceeded BA of Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in 1629 and MA in 1632, was curate of Beaminster from 1631 to about 1641, and then intruded minister of Tallaton, Devon, from 1646. The elder Sprat may also have been vicar of East Greenwich, Kent, from about 1645 to September 1646, and possibly minister of Winterborne Dancy in 1649; he was buried at Tallaton on 12 May 1655. 
The younger Sprat was educated in Tallaton and matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, on 12 November 1651. He was elected scholar on 25 September 1652 and took his BA on 25 June 1654 and his MA on 11 June 1657. His BD and DD followed on 3 July 1669; in 1671 he was incorporated at Cambridge. Sprat was a fellow of Wadham from June 1657 to 24 March 1670 and was elected catechist in December 1659. 
Sprat's early career was literary. Among his early poems, which soon established him as a wit, were 'Ode on the English Ovid' (1657), about his new friend Abraham Cowley, and his contributions to 'Naps upon Parnassus' (1658). In 1659 Sprat published 'To the happie memorie of the most renowned prince, Oliver, lord protector' in a panegyrical volume which included work by John Dryden and Edmund Waller. Dedicated, with lavish thanks, to John Wilkins, warden of Wadham, it was reprinted in 1682 under the curious title, 'To the happy memory of the late usurper', and appeared in a fifth edition in 1703. The poem was later held against him, yet it may reflect Sprat's wish to impress a useful patron more than his true political beliefs, since in 1659 he also published 'The Plague of Athens'. An allegory on the English revolution the poem turns the plague of the Peloponnesian War into England's sin of disobedience and denounces the 'irreligion' and 'tyrannous... pain'. The style, imitative of Cowley, brought Sprat much praise and earned him the nickname Pindaric. It was reprinted some seven times by 1709. Sprat also vilified the army in a contemporary letter to his friend Christopher Wren. On 20 October 1660 Sprat was installed in the Carlton-cum-Thurlby prebend at Lincoln and, probably on 10 March 1661, he was ordained priest. Through Cowley, Sprat met George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham, whom Sprat served as chaplain from the early 1660s and was one of three trustees for part of his estate from 1675. Sprat may have helped Buckingham write 'The Rehearsal'. On 27 September 1663 Sprat delivered a sermon at St Mary's, Oxford, attended by the chancellor and various lords, and on the next day gave a speech before the king and queen at Wadham College. 
In 1663, on Wilkins's nomination, Sprat became a fellow of the Royal Society. At about the same time he was commissioned to write a 'history' of the society -- a public statement of its aims, methods, and achievements, that might meet criticisms of the Royal Society's limited productivity in the three years since its foundation, and quell fears that experimental science would challenge the belief structures of Restoration society. Neither before nor after writing the 'History' did Sprat demonstrate any interest in natural philosophy, even though he remained a member of the society until his death. His post as Buckingham's chaplain afforded him the leisure to write the 'History'. Sprat's own motivation was probably that the commission allowed him to display his literary talents and associate himself with a company that afforded a chance to redeem himself politically and perhaps advance his career. The 'History' was doubtless heavily influenced by Wilkins, the overseer of the project, but Sprat also built on earlier comments by Abraham Cowley, John Evelyn, and Joseph Glanvill. Sprat's praise of Wilkins in the 'History', often interpreted as evidence of Sprat's limited role as Wilkins's amanuensis, may have been in part the formulaic self-debasement of a client before mentor and patron and thus a trolling device for other patrons, too. As Dr Johnson said, Sprat was 'a very willing and liberal encomiast, both of the living and the dead' ('Johnson's Lives of the Poets', 2.41). 
By November 1664 the 'History' was reportedly almost finished and parts of it were probably printed shortly thereafter, but Henry Oldenburg was concerned that it provided insufficient evidence of the society's scientific productivity. In December 1664, therefore, the council of the society established a committee to select pertinent materials for inclusion. These appear as edited versions of fourteen papers read to the society between 1661 and 1664. The technological bent of all the papers expressed the society's wish to establish itself as of immediate, practical assistance to the nation. A further committee was established in May 1665 to review Sprat's text; Wilkins served on both committees. In 1667 Wilkins also produced an abridgement of the society's statutes for inclusion in the 'History'. 
The council's interventions were a response to Samuel Sorbiere's 'Relation d'un voyage en Angleterre' (May 1664). While generally complimentary to the Royal Society (of which he was a fellow), Sorbiere criticized certain English institutions and implicitly challenged England's leadership in natural philosophy. Charles II forbade the Royal Society to answer the 'Relation'. None the less, conscious that a failure to reply might jeopardize the society's prestige and support, Sprat set aside the 'History' to write the very critical and unfair 'Observations on Monsieur de Sorbier's 'Voyage into England'' (1665), addressed as a letter to Christopher Wren. Sprat twisted Sorbiere's comments to permit a more vehement defence. He challenged Sorbiere's sketch of Hobbes and Bacon, emphasizing the differences between dogmatism and experimentalism, while privileging the society's Baconian methods. Sprat may have intended to distance the society from Hobbes, whose views were close to those of a number of fellows and had the potential to damage the society's reputation. He also denied that the society relied on books or on any modern authority, such as Pierre Gassendi or Rene Descartes. Sprat also challenged Sorbiere's criticisms of England's mercantile policies. In both the 'Observations' and the 'History' Sprat was conspicuously silent concerning the scientific Montfort Academy in Paris, officially established in 1657, and thus a challenge to the Royal Society's chronological primacy and England's leadership. Sorbiere's 'Relation' may also have pushed Sprat to write the contentious third part of the 'History', apparently wholly drafted after this episode, and possibly not overseen by Wilkins or the council. The 'Observations', extensive comments on English religion and politics, thus help to place the 'History' in context. 
Delayed by the plague and the great fire the book finally appeared in the summer of 1667 and was presented to the society on 10 October. Sprat received the society's thanks but the 'History' did not receive their imprimatur. Given the great variety of scientific methods, as well as of political-religious opinions among the fellows, any attempt to portray a corporate ideology of the society, beyond the general language of its charter concerning experiment and utility, was bound to be inaccurate. Sprat portrayed the society as an ideology-free collection of Baconian empiricists, interested only in the discovery and beneficial application of nature's secrets, and uninterested, at least for the present, in theorizing or in establishing laws. In combining a rationalist theology, Anglican and monarchist history, and a normative structure of scientific truth the 'History' represented a proclamation (if not an actualization) of a broad consensus in early Restoration cultural politics. 
The 'History' is divided into three parts. The first part offers an extended critique of various approaches to natural philosophy from ancient times to the current day. Sprat presents three main categories: first, scholastics, but also those moderns who having abandoned Aristotle established another ancient such as Epicurus as the new authority; second, those, principally the Cartesians, who sought to establish a modern authority; third, the modern experimenters. The second part of the 'History' provides an explanation of the origins of the Royal Society, its experimental method, and its purposes. Here Sprat argues that co-operative scientific effort, as conducted and encouraged by the society, would lessen the antagonisms that led to civil unrest, and, as it included the manual arts, provide for the economic and social betterment of humanity. The society intended a ''Philosophy', for the use of 'Cities', and not for the retirements of 'Schools'' ('History', 76). Part three responds to particular social, cultural, and religious objections to experimental philosophy, and predicts future political and economic leadership for England based on the society's contributions. Sprat portrayed the society (and experimental philosophy) as friends of the universities and their form of learning, as well as of rational Christianity and the church, and of the state. 
The 'History' cannot be relied on as an accurate account of the founding, the breadth of views, or the immediate utility of the society. Sprat drew heavily on the iconic status of Francis Bacon (reinforced by Cowley's ode at the beginning of the 'History'), to the point of deprecating other modern influences within the society. He also underplayed the breadth of hypothesizing and of mathematical activity in English natural philosophy in the 1660s. Sprat's construction of the society's Baconianism as almost random fact gathering (though he did criticize Bacon on this score) was contradicted by a number of the scientific 'reports' included in the 'History' itself. He was also disingenuous about interest within the society in alchemy and witchcraft. Sprat exaggerated the institutional and English nature of the Wadham group as founders of the society, perhaps as a political legitimation device directed against the foreign, parliamentarian, millenarian, and non-Anglican associations of the contemporary (and overlapping) London group of experimentalists. 
Sprat attempted to privilege experimentalism by pushing to an extreme the convention among scientists of emphasizing things rather than words. Reports to the society, even exchanges among the fellows, themselves constituted 'things', since they reflected the scientist's own involvement as the witness of an event and therefore offered accurate representations of nature. In order to help incorporate the society's practices (as represented) into a pre-existing cultural consciousness, Sprat in effect recalibrated the terms 'experimental' and 'witnessing' from an individualistic Christian experience to a formal methodological tool for assessing and assimilating single experiences, involving rules and order. 'Truth' was established through demonstrations at the society's meetings to members of the higher social orders, who were better equipped to reliably construct and approve 'truth'. Since this co-operative experimental process would overcome the inherent problems of error or bias in the individual experimenter, Sprat downplayed any reservations, including even Robert Boyle's, concerning the reliability of experiments. Similarly, the moderate but regulated criticism allowed at meetings was represented as a ritualized harmonization within this public science. The experimental, non-dogmatic study of nature 'never separates us into mortal Factions' and, unlike the enthusiasm and dogmatism of the immediate past, permitted fellows 'to raise contrary imaginations... without danger of a Civil War' ('History', 56). 
Sprat also associated the society with the 'universal Disposition of this Age' ('History', 374) for a rational religion. He acknowledged the objection that concentration on secondary causes and the growing emphasis on purely mechanistic explanations reduced emphasis on a providential God. Some scientists did seem 'inclinable to irreligion' and had 'brought a discredit on 'Knowledge' itself' (ibid., 375), but he argued that those wayward in religion would have held the same views whatever their profession. Experimental knowledge protected church and state against 'the wild amuzing mens minds, with 'Prodigies', and conceits of 'Providences' [which] has been one of the most considerable causes of those spiritual distractions, of which our Country has long bin the 'Theater'' (ibid., 362). Religion constituted 'the perfection and the crown of the Law of 'Nature'' (ibid., 368). According to Sprat the church's increasing emphasis on fundamentals matched the underlying natural truths available to experimental philosophy, while the stress on morality and practical divinity paralleled the society's devotion to utility. The church and the society were thus natural allies. 
To overcome remaining doubts Sprat contended that experimentalism constituted a parallel religious exercise. Experimentalism and England's protestant church both dated from, and were defined by, a reformation, that is, an attempt to return to the basic 'things' of nature or 'the plain and unquestion'd parts of the 'Word of God'' ('History', 370). So while the fellows avoided meddling with ''Divine things'', by 'long studying of... the accidents which belong to 'humane bodies'', there might, 'without question, be very neer ghesses made' concerning the operations of the soul, 'and that too, without destroying its 'Spiritual' and 'Immortal' Being' (ibid., 82-3). Christ himself had been an experimentalist, emphasizing the works he performed. Experimentalism even inculcated Christian virtues such as diligence and modesty. As well, the society's utilitarianism would fulfil Christ's insistence upon improving the lot of the poor. The society's admission of Romanists, far from being a mistake, opened the door to a new, non-political eirenicism based on shared knowledge. 
In support of the argument for the society's utility, Sprat transformed certain long-standing, authoritative political-religious conventions, including that of England as Israel. Sprat argued that the aggrandizement of England's financial power through experiment and trade was both necessary and moral. God had designed the English to be best able to comprehend and exploit nature, a task Sprat portrayed as part of the race among nations and churches. Evidence of God's continued favour towards England was now to be located in the material realm of wealth rather than in the immaterial sphere of private revelation and sacrifice. Much of this -- for example, the anti-Dutch remarks -- was set in the developing language of interest, linking the Royal Society and the increasingly fiscally active state in a new political economy. There was, however, a contradiction in Sprat's dual advocacy of international co-operation and England's primacy that also mimicked Bacon. 
Wilkins's general influence, in particular the 'History''s construction of a symbiotic relationship between rational religion and natural philosophy, has led some historians to label the 'History' as latitudinarian. While many positions in the 'History' are similar to those expressed by people commonly called latitudinarians, they were also fairly conventional, while the term 'latitudinarian' is at least very fluid for the early Restoration. Sprat is not named in contemporary discussions of latitudinarians, nor is there evidence that he participated in comprehension schemes in the 1660s. An overtly latitudinarian stance would also not have suited some members of the society's council. Thus, no such classification can safely be made concerning the 'History', though Sprat's later views were decidedly anti-latitudinarian. 
Oldenburg praised the 'History' in the 'Philosophical Transactions' but still, dissatisfied with Sprat's summary of the society's achievements, encouraged Glanvill to write the 'Plus ultra' (1668). There was also much praise of the 'History''s plain style from Oldenburg, Glanvill, and Cowley, the last suggesting that it offered a 'judicious' style incorporating 'all the comely Dress without the paint of Art' ('History', sig. B3'v'). 
Sprat admitted that he had adopted a contentious style to respond to the society's 'Detractors' and their 'Objections and Cavils' ('History', sig. B4'v'). Opponents reacted sharply. In seven books and pamphlets in 1670-71 Henry Stubbe vilified the society, Sprat, and Glanvill, accusing them of attacking the universities, encouraging vice, even promoting a Catholic plot inspired by the writings of Tommaso Campanella (1568-1639). Sprat's comment that a 'mechanical' education might henceforth be more suitable than the traditional 'methodical' approach brought forth a vehement defence of a humanist, word-based culture and learned values. If the society were to abandon the ancient connection between knowledge and virtue England would lack people trained to offer a rhetorical defence of true religion. Sprat was conciliatory to the work of the universities, even condemning iconoclasts who came 'as furiously to the purging of 'philosophy', as our 'Modern Zealots' did to the 'Reformation' of 'Religion'' (ibid., 328-9), but there was much disapproval in the universities concerning the society's perceived threat to their status. 
Stubbe and others also argued that a materialist philosophy fostered 'atheism', an amorphous term commonly associated with personal immorality, scepticism, secularism, republicanism, and 'scoffing'. Sprat had taken pains to dissociate the society from scepticism, but Robert South, preaching at Westminster Abbey in 1667, termed the Royal Society a 'diabolical society' for 'finding out new experiments of vice' which he tied to 'that profane, atheistical, epicurean rabble' (R. South, 'Sermons Preached upon Several Occasions', 1823, 1.375). South delivered a similar diatribe at the dedication of the Sheldonian Theatre in July 1669, at which Sprat may have been present. Meric Casaubon, another forceful critic, alleged that Sprat's mechanist philosophy too easily led to atheism. Several fellows rigorously contravened contemporary moral standards, which made the charge more credible. 
Glanvill published two replies to the attacks and there were also anonymous defences of the society and of experimental philosophy, but Sprat himself did not respond. The society refused to amend or disavow the 'History'. An unofficial French translation appeared in 1669 and 1670; the absence of a Latin edition (though planned) brought some contemporary complaint. Perhaps because of the society's unease the 'History' was not reprinted until 1702, with subsequent reprints in 1722 and 1734. 
Sprat also shared the interest of the Royal Society's council in reforming the English language. He argued against Sorbiere that much of the corruption of English style in the revolutionary era had already been overcome. That the council desired to direct further reform towards 'Philosophical purposes' is evident in its instructions to a committee established in December 1664 (RS, minutes of council, vol. 1, 1663, 'The Journal Book', p. 83). Sprat did not mention this committee in the 'History', but did note that John Wilkins, appointed to guide the committee, was himself working on a 'universal character', a language based on sense experience which would encapsulate the things-in-themselves. Sprat stressed the society's method of making 'faithful 'Records'' and a plain style reporting of observed 'facts', 'barely stated, without any prefaces, apologies or rhetorical flourishes' in order to avoid the 'many mists and uncertainties' that 'specious Tropes and Figures have brought on our knowledg' ('History', 61). The ideal was to recapture 'primitive purity and shortness, when men deliver'd so many 'things' almost in an equal number of 'words'' (ibid., 112-13). Against the mythology-based wit of ancient poets the society would provide 'Ornaments which are 'Tru' and 'Real' in themselves' (ibid., 414). Thus, studying nature, which contained an 'inexhaustible Treasure of 'Fancy' and 'Invention'' (ibid., 413), could improve wit. The plain style required that ''eloquence' ought to be banish'd out of all 'civil Societies', as a thing fatal to Peace and good Manners' (ibid., 111). 
Sprat's interest in language reform was broader than the council's. He praised Pelisson's 'History of the French Academy' (1657), on which he perhaps even loosely modelled the structure of the 'History', and supported the founding of an English language academy to act as an 'Impartial Court of Eloquence' ('History', 43). In a letter to Christopher Wren in 1663 he suggested that wit was not commonly found 'among Men of large and full and high Thoughts' whose strength lay in devising 'general Axioms'. But while axioms were more useful, 'yet they do not affect our thoughts with such an immediate and familiar Delight' (Wren, 2.259). Wit 'must apply itself to the Condition and Inclination of the Company' (ibid., 258) and, as he soon afterwards argued, in its 'true perfection' be 'plyable to all occasions, to walke or flye, according to the Nature of every subject' (T. Sprat, 'An account of the life and writing', 'The Works of Mr Abraham Cowley', 1668, sig. D'v'). That Sprat adopted a more Ciceronian style in his own sermons may indicate that the 'History''s comments on dispassionate rhetoric and mathematically plain language were heavily influenced by the council's instructions and were probably intended by Sprat to be limited to natural philosophy. Sprat's disappointment that Cowley died before undertaking his own work on style also indicates Sprat's belief that his own comments in the 'History' were insufficient. Samuel Butler, a contemporary, commented on the contradiction between Sprat's rhetorical recommendations and his own literary style. 
In 1668 Sprat wrote a Latin panegyric for Cowley, who had died in 1667. An expanded English version, 'An account of the life and writing', was included in Cowley's 'English Works' (1668), published by Sprat in accordance with Cowley's will, though Sprat and Martin Clifford decided against publication of Cowley's letters. Sprat's defence of Cowley's 'Mistress' was denounced by Edmund Elys. In addition to clarifying Sprat's views on language the 'Life' attempted to rehabilitate Cowley by suggesting that anyone who had 'dissembled their Counsels' under Cromwell had been 'one of the greatest helps to the King's Affairs' (Sprat, 'Life', sigs. A'v'-A2). Given Sprat's own difficulties this perhaps constituted a public 'mea culpa'. Sprat also composed Cowley's epitaph in Westminster Abbey. 
In February 1669 Charles II nominated Sprat to a prebend of Westminster Abbey. On 22 February 1670 he was instituted to the rectory of Uffington in Lincolnshire (presented by the duke of Buckingham) and, because of a legal technicality, was later instituted (April 1670) on presentation by the king. Sprat was also licensed to preach in the diocese of Lincoln. There is no evidence that he lived at Uffington, though in 1680 he brought a complex tithe case against a parishioner. In July 1670 Sprat received a licence to accompany Buckingham to France and in August 1676 he became a royal chaplain. 
Sprat married Hellen Wolseley (1647-1726) in October 1676. She was of the Wolseley family of Ravenstone, Staffordshire; her will mentions her grandfather Sir John Zouch and her grandmother Lady Wolseley. The Sprats had two sons. Thomas, born on 5 April 1679, proceeded BA of Christ Church in 1701 and MA in 1704, and among his clerical posts was a chaplaincy to his father (1704). The younger Thomas Sprat died in May 1720, as archdeacon of Rochester and prebend of Westminster. The Sprats' second son, George, was baptized on 12 October 1682 and died on 1 October 1683. 
In September 1679 Sprat became curate and lecturer of St Margaret's, Westminster. He developed a reputation as a preacher, emphasizing the primitive quality of the Church of England and frequently attacking enthusiasm. He was clearly regarded as a close supporter of the king. On 22 December 1680 both Sprat and Gilbert Burnet preached before the House of Commons. Burnet was thanked but Sprat was not, Burnet says, because he had questioned the Commons' sense of duty to the king. Perhaps as a result, on 14 January 1681 Sprat was installed as canon of the Chapel Royal at Windsor. In March 1681 Sprat reputedly supported James, duke of York, in a sermon to the Commons at Oxford; again he received no thanks. A sermon of 1682 argued a duty of 'Christian submission' and the impossibility of a morally just struggle against one's monarch ('A Sermon Preached before the Artillery Company of London', 1682, 5). In the preface to the printed version Sprat contended that 'Enemies of our Church and State' disliked the sermon. He was installed as dean of Westminster on 21 September 1683, resigning his Westminster canonry and his post at St Margaret's, despite his plea to Archbishop William Sancroft noting the deanery's limited revenues and his fear that he would be unable 'to maintain any tolerable reputation, or even to avoid contempt, if I should be straightened in the support of such a dignity' (Bodl. Oxf., Tanner MS 34*, fol. 119). This may have been one of the roots of Sancroft's jibe that income was all important to Sprat. On 2 November 1684 he was consecrated bishop of Rochester, receiving a royal dispensation to retain his deanery, but he had to resign Uffington and the canonry at Windsor. In 1685 Sprat was bequeathed land worth around $25 per year on condition that he pay $200 towards the discharge of his mother's debts. 
Shortly after Sprat's appointment to Westminster the king had asked him to write an account of the Rye House plot. 'A True Account and Declaration of the Horrid Conspiracy' (1685) was based on the documentary evidence of the case. It condemned zeal and proved particularly hostile to William, Lord Russell, while also criticizing Burnet. That both Charles and then James II 'made divers alterations' to the text may help to explain the extreme vilification of the conspirators (Bodl. Oxf., Tanner MS 31, fol. 22'r'- 'v'). Despite refusing James's request to write a parallel account of Monmouth's rebellion Sprat became clerk of the closet in December 1685. However, rumours that he might be translated to York, or even to London, proved inaccurate. None the less he proved one of James's loyal servants. In July 1686 he was appointed to the new commission for ecclesiastical affairs, which also had authority to investigate the universities. He was involved in the notorious case against Henry Compton, bishop of London; in October 1686 Sprat and two other bishops were named commissioners to execute Compton's offices. Sprat also assisted at the degradation of Samuel Johnson, a minister who had argued that kings were subject to English law. In 1687 he signed the address from the church to James II, thanking him for his 'royal favours' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 504). Sprat also wrote prayers celebrating the queen's pregnancy, and, at royal command, later prepared a prayer and service for the new heir. 
While many clergy refused to proclaim James II's declaration of indulgence in their churches, Sprat complied at Westminster Abbey. A schoolboy witness later recalled that Sprat had trembled while it was read. Sprat also ordered the abbey bells silenced amid celebrations of the acquittal of the seven bishops. However, on 15 August 1688 he quit the ecclesiastical commission. In his letter of resignation Sprat stressed his unwillingness to participate in punishing others who had acted 'on a principle of Conscience' (BL, Add. MS 28876, fol. 146). Following Sprat's departure the commission immediately adjourned. James soon dissolved the commission; it was possibly Sprat's withdrawal that ended the commission's viability. As the invasion by William of Orange approached, Sprat and other bishops attended several audiences with James II, advancing the cause of a free parliament. As part of a concerted effort to ensure that the bishops' advice to the king was favourably represented Sprat wrote to Sancroft on 12 November offering his own version of the meeting on 6 November ('The bishop of Rochester's relation'). On 11 December, at the Guildhall, Sprat signed the 'Declaration of Lords Spiritual and Temporal about the Cities of London and Westminster', assenting to the provisional government of peers following James's flight. He also helped to write the prayer which gave thanks that 'our holy Reformed Religion was not overwhelmed with Popish Superstition and Idolatry' ('LondG', 2409, 13 Dec 1688). 
In January 1689 Sprat, who preferred a regency, opposed the argument in the Lords that James had abdicated. Yet in the same month he wrote prayers for William stressing gratitude for delivery from popery and the maintenance of England's liberty, as well as decrying further sedition in the state or schism in the church. Sprat's political malleability and public refashioning are again visible in the claims he made in two explanatory letters of his conduct, addressed to Charles Sackville, earl of Dorset and Middlesex, and published in February and March 1689. In the first letter Sprat claimed to have defended the English clergy against the ecclesiastical commission and to have protected Compton and the universities. In quitting the commission, and so in opposing the 'Counsels of Popery then prevailing', he had put himself under the king's 'severe displeasure' ('A Letter from the Bishop of Rochester', 18). He also recorded his pleasure at being on the 'popular' side for the first time since the Restoration. In the second letter he apologized for his attack on Russell and offered a general defence of his recent actions. He again claimed to have defended the clergy 'from the violent Persecutions of the Popish party', opposed the dispensing power, and called for a free parliament ('Second Letter', 15). He insisted that the established church had both saved England and suffered most. It was finally the trial of the seven bishops which had taught him 'what unalterable Bounds the Law has fix'd between the Just Prerogatives of the Crown, and the Legal Rights of the Subject' (ibid., 18). He proposed moderation towards those -- such as himself -- who 'happen'd to be employed in the late Times' (ibid., 59). Two anonymous replies of April and May 1689 attacked Sprat's credibility and called for punishment. Gilbert Burnet said that George, Baron Jeffreys, a co-commissioner, charged that Sprat himself had incited extremism. 
On 4 March Sprat took the oath of allegiance to William III and Mary II and on 11 April brought the crowns to the new monarchs and bore the chalice in the coronation ceremony. He was also appointed to a new ecclesiastical commission, established in September 1689, primarily to make the liturgy and prayer book more broadly acceptable. Sprat hosted the new commission at the Jerusalem Chamber in October and November 1689, even though he questioned its legality and soon ceased attending. In concert with Simon Patrick and Compton he suggested some revisions to the office of 5 November. His sermon preached before William and Mary on Good Friday 1690 was published 'by Their Majesties Command'. 
In 1692 Sprat, John Churchill, earl of Marlborough, James Cecil, earl of Salisbury, Sancroft, and others, were the intended victims of a plot devised by Robert Young and Stephen Blackhead. Sprat was arrested and examined by the privy council on suspicion of conspiring to restore James II. After ten days' confinement he was released to his residence but was placed under armed guard. At an inquiry on 10 June Sprat confronted Blackhead, who confessed. Each year thereafter Sprat celebrated 13 June, the date of his discharge, as a day of deliverance. Sancroft encouraged William Lloyd to urge Sprat to 'draw up the Narrative' (LPL, MS 3894, fol. 61). The result was 'A Relation of the Late Wicked Contrivance of Stephen Blackhead and Robert Young' (1692) and 'A Second Part of the Relation' (1692). The 'Relation' also provides some personal detail, mentioning Sprat's weak eyes and asserting his methodical record keeping. Sancroft believed that Sprat's 'quick & ready Witt & Memory' kept him from being 'clapt into prison' (ibid., fol. 63). 
While Sprat's attendance at the Lords declined in the 1690s he remained active. In November 1692 Sprat disallowed the epitaph for the late poet laureate, Thomas Shadwell, on the grounds that it was too laudatory of plays to be permitted in a church. In 1694 he arranged the repair of the abbey organ at a cost of $200. He performed the office of burial for Mary II on 5 March 1695. Thereafter he was involved in a complex dispute with the College of Heralds, not settled until December 1696, concerning legal rights to the funerary decorations. In February 1696 Sprat signed a manifesto disowning any sympathy for the Jacobite plotters recently executed. While he refused to sign either the association promising revenge if William met a violent death or a proposed loyalty oath, Sprat wrote in November 1697 an address congratulating William on his safe return from Europe, and stressing again the nation's delivery from 'Romish Superstition' ('LondG', 3344, 29 Nov 1697). Sprat was involved in 1699 in the simony trial of Bishop Thomas Watson but absented himself from court rather than assent to the punishment. In the same year he directed the rebuilding and improvement of the chapel at Bromley Palace, his episcopal residence. Sprat officiated at the funeral of William, duke of Gloucester, on 9 August 1700. He also oversaw the commencement of Wren's extensive repairs to Westminster Abbey and later persuaded Queen Anne to donate a marble altarpiece. In 1700 he arranged for John Dryden to be buried in the abbey. His treatment of the poet John Philips (1676-1709) was less generous. Certain lines on Philips's monument praised the unequalled greatness of Milton in composing blank verse; Philips had been a great admirer and imitator of Milton, but Sprat ordered the lines removed. 
In a long-running dispute in convocation Sprat sided with the lower house and opposed the archbishop's right to prorogue convocation. In June 1701 he became a commissioner of the Society for Propagating the Gospel in America. While he did not attend meetings he helped support ministers, partly by sending books. He also helped prepare Clarendon's 'History of the Rebellion' for publication, which began in 1702, but denied altering the content. Sprat participated in William III's funeral on 12 April 1702 and read the service at the coronation of Anne on 23 April. Rumours that Anne would make him lord almoner or primate of Ireland proved false. Sprat wrote various addresses to the new queen, including one, in April 1708, which emphasized Anne's 'undoubted Right to your Imperial crown and Dignity' ('LondG', 4431, 29 April 1708). On 13 November 1708 Sprat officiated at the burial of Anne's husband, Prince George of Denmark. In 1709 he became one of the charitable commissioners for palatine refugees dwelling in London. In the same year Sprat was a member of a number of committees investigating the Sacheverell affair. He supported Henry Sacheverell in the Lords and voted on the minority tory side against both impeachment and sentence. He was also active in seeking funds for the repairs to Westminster Abbey and in September 1711 he became one of the commissioners for building fifty new churches in London. Burnet says Sprat was the lone bishop who in 1712 opposed the resolutions in convocation that only ministers could legally baptize but that no baptism should be repeated. 
Collections of Sprat's sermons were published in 1697 and 1710. His writings were not systematic but his various works -- including eleven sermons published between 1676 and 1694 and the lengthy 'Discourse Made by the Lord Bishop of Rochester to the Clergy of his Diocese' (1695), as well as John Evelyn's notes on many of his unpublished sermons -- reveal a consistent support for both political authority and for the Church of England, though he held that the church's duty was always 'to keep itself in a due Submission to the Civil Magistrate' ('History', 370). His later works built on his comments in the 'History' that he favoured a religion composed of 'sound, sober, intelligible Doctrines, in plain, practicable, rational Precepts' ('A Sermon Preached before the King at Whitehall', 1676, 7). At the same time his sermons and political writings indicate a firmer approach on many questions as his career developed. In his 'Discourse' (1695) he blamed the neglect of catechizing for the 'profane enormity of manners' ('Discourse', 266) which had led to the civil wars. 
Sprat's ecclesiastical views and his interpretation of the Reformation seem heavily influenced by Richard Hooker, perhaps as refashioned by Isaak Walton, whose work was known to Sprat. The Reformation emerges as an attempt to liberate both reason and the English throne from illegitimate subjection to the pope, rather than as primarily a doctrinal breach. While Sprat was critical of Romanist theology some way of recognizing the legitimacy of the Roman church was not untoward. Yet he moved from a denunciation of anti-Roman rhetoric as late as 1685 to a position, more political than theological, that the Church of England was 'irreconcilable with the Interests of Popery' ('Discourse', 67-8). Sprat worried more about dissent. In his view Calvinist doctrine had been added later to an already existing 'via media' Church of England. While 'comeliness of worship' ('A Sermon Preach'd before the Lord Mayor', 1682, 4) was important the basis of faith was the word preached, though not extempore. Sprat rejected double predestination, stressing instead free human co-operation in grace and a moralist theology which downplayed theological differences. Works, while not 'meritorious' (ibid., 7), were of 'absolute necessity to salvation' (ibid., 37). While acknowledging the moral rectitude of individual dissenters he forcefully opposed changes in the church's liturgy to accommodate nonconformists. Ralph Thoresby thought a sermon of Sprat's in 1683 'too full of severity' ('Diary', 1.157) against dissenters. Sprat also defended the 'Test Acts' and insisted that claims of a 'tender conscience' against the church were specious ('A Sermon Preached at the Anniversary Meeting of the Sons of Clergy-Men', 1678, 30). Typically, he hoped that one effect of the union of 1707 would be that Scottish presbyterians would 'lay aside all Bitterness and Animosity' ('LondG', 4350, 21 July 1707). 
Sprat followed a reasonably consistent neo-Stoic approach to political obligation and right. His attacks on zeal are consistent with a Lipsian desire to detach oneself from the passion that could jeopardize the existence of either the self or the state. Private interests should be subordinated to those of the commonwealth: hence his denunciation of the German radicals for having set 'inward sanctity, and Inspirations' above the public 'Obligations of Virtue, and Obedience' ('A Sermon Preach'd before the Lord Mayor', 1682, 12). In England this behaviour had culminated in the civil war and Commonwealth. Sprat linked right-of-resistance theory with presbyterianism, denounced the idea of popular sovereignty, and denied that England had a mixed constitution. Even under an idolatrous ruler passive obedience was required: for the subject to fight 'against the lawful prince for the Cause of God' was to set one religious principle against another ('A Sermon Preached before the Artillery Company of London', 1682, 22-3). In a dramatic reversal of the resolution of the Commons in 1629 Sprat insisted that 'whoever would subvert the State, they are mortal enemies to Religion' ('A Sermon Preach'd before the Lord Mayor', 1682, 41). For Sprat, therefore, it was the 'glory of the 'Church' of 'England', that it never resist'd Authority, nor engag'd in Rebellion' ('Observations on Monsieur de Sorbier's 'Voyage into England'', 1665, 114). Yet his common emphasis on 'prudence' drew the line at what Lipsian neo-Stoicism termed 'great deceit' (ibid., 79-80). His explanation for quitting James's ecclesiastical commission was at least consistent with his earlier opinion that 'Law, and... the strict rules of Justice' (ibid., 169-70) bound the exercise of authority. He later allowed, without ever elaborating, that those who held 'Lawful, Public Authority in Church, and State' ('A Sermon Preached at the Anniversary Meeting', 37-8) might go beyond reproof and complaints. 
In June 1712 Sprat attended the Lords for the last recorded time. On 24 February 1713 Atterbury noted that Sprat and another bishop were 'much decayed in their understandings, and have lost all spirit and firmness of mind' ('Epistolary Correspondence', 3.317-18). On 20 May 1713 Sprat died, reportedly of apoplexy, at his palace at Bromley. He was buried on 25 May in Westminster Abbey, on the south side of St Nicholas's Chapel. A monument with a long inscription by Dr John Freind stands in the south aisle, near the west door, moved there from the chapel. Sprat's will left his small estate to his son, with a life interest for his wife; it also stressed his previous generosity to his family. His wife, Hellen, died on 26 February 1726, and was buried near her husband in St Nicholas's Chapel on 3 March. Atterbury's and the earl of Ailesbury's view that Sprat was very liberal in his hospitality but restrained in his personal appetites contrasts with other contemporary opinion about his love of good living. Sprat also faced much criticism as a time-server. Burnet offered the harsh summary that Sprat's 'lazy, libertine course of life, to which his temper and good nature carried him, without considering the duties, or even the decencies of his profession' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 6.176) had 'brought no sort of honour' to the party he served (ibid., 4.527). 
Sprat's literary style has also excited a range of opinion, his prose generally faring better than his poetry. John Evelyn praised Sprat's pulpit technique, particularly his 'never making use of notes' and his 'most pure and plain style..., full of matter, readily expressed' (Walcott, 121). John Hughes thought Sprat's language 'united the most Charming Elegance to the strictest Propriety, and is witty without the least shadow of Affectation' (Hughes, 84). Pope listed Sprat among English prose authors from whom an authoritative dictionary for writers might be drawn. Bentley called Sprat 'our English Cicero' (Bentley, xcvi), but the nonconformist Philip Doddridge, while praising Sprat's beautiful language, criticized his Ciceronianism, commenting that 'Tully is translated for many sentences together in some of his Sermons, though not mentioned' (Doddridge, 28). Dr Johnson thought Sprat's epitaph on Cowley 'too ludicrous for reverence or grief, for christianity and a temple' (Johnson, 'Essay', x-xi). Macaulay, too, regarded Sprat's poetry as that of a 'servile imitator' but insisted that his prose writings established him as 'a very great master of our language' (Macaulay, 2.748). At the start of the twenty-first century, Sprat is known almost solely for the 'History'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26174


Spratt, James (1771-1853), naval officer, a descendant of the Revd Devereux Spratt (died 1688) of Mitchelstown, co. Cork, where the family settled, was born at Harrel's Cross, co. Dublin, on 3 May 1771. After several years in the merchant navy he entered the Royal Navy as a volunteer in 1796, served on the coast of Guinea and in the West Indies, was rated a midshipman on the 'Bellona', and was present at the battle of Copenhagen on 2 April 1801. In 1803 he was rated master's mate on the 'Defiance' with Captain Philip Durham, taking part in the action off Cape Finisterre on 22 July 1805 and in the battle of Trafalgar on 21 October. The 'Defiance' had been for some time engaged with the French 'Aigle' (74 guns), whose fire had almost ceased, and Durham wished to board her. However, the wind failed, and Spratt, who had volunteered to lead the boarders but was unable to do so from the ship, and finding that all the boats were disabled, called to his men to follow him, dashed overboard, and, with his cutlass between his teeth, swam to the 'Aigle'. His men had not heard or not understood, and when Spratt arrived alongside the 'Aigle' he found himself alone. He would not, however, turn back; climbing up the rudder chains, he got in through a gunroom stern-port and succeeded in getting onto the poop. Here he was attacked by three men with fixed bayonets. He disabled two of them and threw the third from the poop onto the quarter-deck, where he broke his neck. Spratt, however, fell with him and found himself in the thick of the fight, the 'Defiance' having succeeded in throwing her men on board. By the time the 'Aigle''s colours were struck, Spratt's right leg was shattered by a musket bullet, and, swinging himself back on board the 'Defiance', he was carried down to the cockpit. He would not allow his leg to be amputated, and was afterwards sent to hospital at Gibraltar, where, after he had suffered excruciating pain, his wound was cured to the point that he was able to be sent home. 
Spratt was promoted lieutenant on 24 December 1805, but as his right leg was now 3 inches shorter than the left, and his general health enfeebled, he was appointed to the charge of the signal station at Teignmouth, Devon, where he remained until 1813. On 4 April 1809 he married Jane, daughter of Thomas Brimage, yeoman, of East Teignmouth. They had three sons and six daughters, of whom Thomas Abel Brimage Spratt was the eldest son. In May 1809 James Spratt was awarded the silver medal of the Society of Arts for his invention of the 'homograph' system of signalling with a handkerchief, which formed the basis of the semaphore afterwards adopted in England. After his duties at Teignmouth he served for a year on the 'Albion' on the North American station; but his wound still caused him acute pain, and he was compelled to invalid. During the early part of 1815 he commanded the prison ship 'Ganges' at Plymouth, and in January 1817 he retired on his half pay and a pension of $91 5's'. a year. On 17 July 1838 his scanty means were increased by his promotion to commander, and he settled in the neighbourhood of Teignmouth. Even in his last years he was a remarkable swimmer; during his service afloat he had saved, at different times, nine men from drowning and when nearly sixty he is said to have swum more than 14 miles for a small wager. His bravery at Trafalgar would have been of more service to his career had he not been so severely wounded. He died at Teignmouth on 15 June 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 26175


Spratt, Thomas Abel Brimage (1811-1888), naval officer and hydrographer, eldest son of Commander James Spratt (1771-1853) and his wife, Jane, daughter of Thomas Brimage, was born at East Teignmouth in Devon on 11 May 1811. He entered the navy in June 1827, and from 1832 served in surveying vessels in the Mediterranean, first the 'Mastiff' and then the 'Beacon', under Lieutenant Thomas Graves, who had trained as a surveyor under Captain Philip Parker King. Spratt passed his examination in January 1835, but though specially recommended in October 1837 for gallantry in saving a marine who had fallen overboard, as well as for valuable work in the survey, he was not promoted lieutenant until 15 October 1841. Graves had just been promoted commander but remained in the 'Beacon', as also did Spratt until 1847, when he was appointed to command the 'Volage' on the same service. On 5 March 1849 Spratt was promoted commander and succeeded Graves in command of the 'Spitfire', in which he continued surveying in the Mediterranean. On 27 February 1844 Spratt married Sophia Dear, only daughter of Edward Price: they had children and she survived him. 
During the Crimean War the 'Spitfire' was with the Black Sea Fleet, and Spratt's ability as a surveyor was frequently utilized in laying down positions for the ships, especially in the attack on Kerch and Kinburn, and his service was specially acknowledged by the commander-in-chief. On 3 January 1855 he was promoted captain, and on 5 July was nominated CB. He made a major contribution to the strategy of the Black Sea campaigns, especially in 1855, when he was given the wholehearted support of Admiral Lyons. His surveys opened up the Sea of Azov, which, once occupied, cut Russian logistics in the Crimea. After serving on the allied council of war at Paris in January 1856 he surveyed the approaches to the Suez Canal, a project then opposed by the British government. 
After the peace Spratt commanded the 'Medina', still on the Mediterranean survey, where he remained until 1863. He had no further service afloat and retired in 1870; he became rear-admiral and admiral on the retired list. From 1866 to 1873 he was a commissioner of fisheries, and from 1879 until his death was chairman of the Mersey conservancy board. Spratt died at his residence, Clare Lodge, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 10 March 1888. 
Spratt, elected FRS in 1856, was known not only as an accomplished surveyor and hydrographer but one who contributed to knowledge of the classical and geological history of the eastern Mediterranean coasts and islands. He published 'Travels and Researches in Crete' (2 vols., 1865) and several other books, and numerous papers in scientific journals. He was also important as an oceanographer, conducting pioneering if ultimately unsuccessful work on currents which brought him into contact with the scientific community. His career demonstrated the low status of surveying work and the limits placed on naval careers, however brilliant, by lack of influence. 


@@@@@


doc= 26176


Sprenger, Aloys Ignatz Christoph (1813-1893), orientalist, was born on 3 September 1813 at 3/4 Nassereith, Tyrol, Austria, the ninth of ten children of Christoph Sprenger (1760-1835), collector of customs and storekeeper, and his wife, Theresia (1772-1850), daughter of Johann Dietrich, butcher, and his wife, Johanna. He attended grammar school in Innsbruck (1827-32) and university in Vienna (1832-6). Notwithstanding the support of the famous Austrian orientalist Hammer-Purgstall, he could not find an adequate post. Disappointed, he left Vienna in 1836 and went to London where he approached G. A. Fitzclarence, the earl of Munster. Sprenger became his secretary and contributor to his projected work, 'Military science among the Mussulmans'. In 1838 he obtained British citizenship, which was very useful for his future career. In June 1840 he graduated as doctor of medicine at Leiden with the dissertation 'De originibus medicinae arabicae sub khalifatu'. 
After the death of the earl of Munster, Sprenger gained a post in the medical service of the East India Company. On 16 April 1842 he married Catharina Muller (1810-1893), daughter of John Peter Muller of Frankfurt, and in 1843 they went to India. They had three sons, of whom the eldest, Aloys, joined the public works department in India. Sprenger soon started a successful career in the educational system, focusing on the modernization of language training and the development of the native languages. From 1845 to 1847 he was principal of Delhi College. He published the first weekly magazine in Hindustani as well as an 'English-Hindustany Grammar' (1845). Besides this he began to edit works of oriental authors, including al-Kasani's 'Dictionary of the Technical Terms of the Sufies' (1845) and 'Utbi's 'History of Sultan Mahmud of Ghaznah' (1847). From March 1848 to January 1850 he was in Lucknow, where he examined approximately 10,000 oriental manuscripts. Since nearly all these works were destroyed in 1857, Sprenger's 'Catalogue of the Arabic, Persian and Hindustany manuscripts of the libraries of the king of Oudh' (1854) is a unique document of early Hindustani poetry. It is considered to be one of the essential works of the literary history of the Hindustani language and was later also translated into Urdu. 
From 1850 to 1854 Sprenger was the head of the Madrasas in Calcutta and Hooghly and translator to the government of India. As a secretary of the Asiatic Society of Bengal (1851-4) he had influence on the 'Bibliotheca Indica', a series in which he edited the principal works of Persian and Arabic authors, including Nizami's 'Iskandarnama' (vol. 12, 1852), at-Tusi's 'List of Shy'ah Books' (vol. 19, 1853-5), and others. Besides this he published twenty-three articles in the 'Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal', concentrating especially on early Islamic history. In 1854 his wife and sons went to Europe while he travelled for almost two years through the Middle East. In 1856 he returned to India, but when he repudiated a financial agreement with F. Boutras, a former principal of Delhi College, he was removed from all his civil posts and went back to Europe. However, the thirteen years Sprenger spent in oriental countries were not only the happiest in his life, but also of greatest influence on his further scientific works. 
From 1856 to 1858 Sprenger lived near Heidelberg, where he completed his 'Catalogue of the Bibliotheca Orientalis Sprengeriana' (1857), a collection of nearly 2000 manuscripts and rare lithographs, which he sold to the king of Prussia in 1858. By the late twentieth century the largest part of the collection was in the Preussischer Kulturbesitz, the state library, in Berlin. In 1858 Sprenger was asked to be professor of oriental languages at the University of Bern. During his time in Switzerland (1858-81) he published some of his most valuable works, mainly on ancient geography and early Islamic history. Besides several articles in the 'Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft', he issued 'Die alte Geographie Arabiens' (1875), a work which set new standards for research on pre-Islamic Arabia. 
The focus of Sprenger's interest was the biography of Muhammad. His exhaustive study 'Das Leben und die Lehre des Mohammad' (3 vols., 1861-5) is mainly based on the analysis of Arabic sources which were unknown until then. Sprenger's aim was to show that the emergence of Islam was more a product of the 'zeitgeist' than the act of the prophet Muhammad. The importance of this and other works lies primarily in the fact that Sprenger looked at his subject from a global perspective. This, and his insight into oriental society and its way of thinking, distinguished him from many of his contemporaries. Sprenger's theories on the emergence of Islam became, though extremely controversial, of great importance for the further development of Islamic studies. In 1881 Sprenger was divorced and returned to Heidelberg where he married Antonia (1818-1911), daughter of Dr Johann Diehl, physician, and Sofia Diehl, 'nee' Fleischmann. Sprenger died of influenza on 19 December 1893 at his home, Leopoldstrasse 43, Heidelberg. His ashes were buried on 22 December at the urn cemetery there. 


@@@@@


doc= 26177


Sprigg, Joshua (bap. 1618, d. 1684), Independent minister, was baptized at Banbury, Oxfordshire, on 19 April 1618, the eldest surviving son of William Sprigg or Sprigge ('fl'. 1618-1652) and his wife, Rebecca. His father had been servant to William Fiennes, Lord Saye and Sele, and was later steward of New College, Oxford. Sprigg matriculated at New Inn Hall, Oxford, in 1634 but did not proceed to any degree and went to Edinburgh University, where he graduated MA in 1639. He then returned to England to become a preacher at St Mary Aldermary, London, and after taking the solemn league and covenant was made rector of St Pancras, Soper Lane. 
During the early 1640s Sprigg was an active preacher and religious controversialist. Besides his close connection, through his father, with Saye he seems to have enjoyed the patronage of Lady Willoughby of Parham, to whom he dedicated his sermon on the 'Song of Songs'. In most of his preaching he stuck to purely religious themes, disclosing himself as an advanced Calvinist of millenarian tendencies, stressing human sinfulness and the centrality of Christ, whose second coming he interpreted alternatively as an inward experience of each individual and as a literal event in 'these last dayes' when Christ and man would be 'returned into a unity of Concord and agreement' (Sprigge, 'Christus redivivus', 59, 27). A strong advocate of religious toleration, he was almost certainly the author of 'The ancient bounds, or, Liberty of conscience, tenderly stated, modestly asserted, and mildly vindicated' (1645). In his early sermons Sprigg revealed his animosity to the bishops, rejoicing that they had been 'made Cyphers, instead of making the Parliament so' (Sprigge, 'Solace for Saints', 28). He also deplored the quarrels over church government that had rocked the Westminster assembly of divines: 'And now is all that truth we expected come to a new forme of government, whether Presbyteriall or Congregational?... Is this the shaking of heaven and earth, to shake men out of an Episcopal prelacy into a Presbyteriall?' (Sprigge, 'A Testimony to an Approaching Glory', sig. B5'r'). In 1648 and 1649, because 'The world hath been witnesse of many hard speeches against me', including the accusation that he denied the divinity of Christ, he decided to publish collections of his sermons so that the world could judge for itself. 
One cause of Sprigg's unpopularity in London was undoubtedly his outspoken advocacy of Sir Thomas Fairfax's New Model Army at a time when the City fathers, inspired by Thomas Edwards and other presbyterian clergy, were denouncing it as a breeding-ground of sectarian heresy. He had been hired by Fairfax to be a chaplain and member of the secretariat of the new army. In this capacity he accompanied it on its travels, and wrote a number of dispatches. At the beginning of 1647 he published 'Anglia rediviva', a day-by-day account of the army's successes during the first fifteen months of its existence. In it he provided an unabashedly providential interpretation of the New Model's unbroken string of victories. Whether it was the miraculous draught of fishes near Dartmouth, or the cannon ball that snapped the chain of the drawbridge at Tiverton, or the escape of General Fairfax from a shower of timber, stones, and sheets of lead after the terrible explosion at Torrington, 'you will easily discern a thread of divinity running through the whole proceeding of this army', he wrote in the epistle dedicatory; 'their actions have been nothing else but a copy of the wisdom, power, providence and love of God put forth in men' (Sprigge, 'Anglia rediviva', sig. A3'v'). Mindful of his obligations to his patron Saye, Sprigg also was careful to weave into his account a lengthy justification of Saye's son, Nathaniel Fiennes, who had been court-martialled for his surrender of Bristol in 1643. The apology for Fiennes was so comprehensive that it prompted Clement Walker to refer sardonically to the author as 'Sprigg alias Nathaniel Fines in his legend or romance of this army' (Walker, 1.32). Although the book relies heavily on the pamphlets and newsbooks of the period it is occasionally enlivened by Sprigg's eyewitness accounts, and the whole is shot through with his overarching vision of the New Model Army's providential role in the war against the king. The book was not a commercial success. Four months after its publication the army secretariat paid the publisher John Partridge $150 'for the losses hee sustayn'd by 'Anglia Rediviva'' (Thoresby Society, MS SD ix, unfoliated). In 1648 Sprigg was constituted a fellow of All Souls, Oxford, and the following year he was incorporated MA. At All Souls he exercised his zeal by having a stone carving of Christ's ascension over the college gate defaced. He remained a fellow of the college until 1669. 
In December 1648 Sprigg intervened in the debate in the council of officers at Whitehall over the adoption of the Leveller-inspired 'Agreement of the People'. While he approved the effort to 'promote the spirituall liberties of the saints' by restraining the power of the magistrate over religion, he thought that devising a constitution for England at that moment was a waste of time; they ought rather to wait upon God who was about to 'bringe forth a New Heaven and a New Earth' (Firth, 2.85, 87). 
A few weeks later Sprigg incurred the displeasure of the army high command by his forthright opposition to the execution of the king. On Sunday 21 January 1649 he preached to the members of the court of high commission on the text 'He that sheds blood, by man shall his blood be shed'. Speaking after him in support of the king's execution, Hugh Peters 'made amends' for the disturbing questions raised by Sprigg ('The Moderate', 16-23 Jan 1649, 271). Sprigg did not give up. Barely three days before Charles went to the scaffold he wrote that 'the end of the Lord's judging is purifying not destroying'; 'To execute the King for what he did in prosecution of the War... is to shed the blood of War in Peace' ('Certaine Weighty Considerations', 1649, sigs. B1'r', B2'v'). 
After his failure to avert the regicide Sprigg was next heard of in 1654, when he was one of the signatories to a laudatory epistle written to accompany 'The Judgement Set, and the Bookes Opened', a collection of sermons by John Webster, alongside John Cardell, chaplain of All Hallows, Lombard Street. This and the printing of the book by the radical printer Rapha Harford might suggest that Sprigg was at this point involved in a radical Independent congergation following a mystical religious interpretation of contemporary events. His only other known intervention in public life came on 23 December 1656 when he spoke on behalf of thirty petitioners, asking parliament to reduce the punishment of the Quaker James Nayler, who had been convicted for blasphemously imitating Christ's entry into Jerusalem. He exhorted the MPs to 'leave him to Gospel remedies, as the proper way to reclaim' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 1.217). 
After the Restoration, Sprigg retired to an estate that he had bought at Crayford in Kent. With the death of James Fiennes, Lord Saye and Sele, in 1673 he married in 1675 that nobleman's widow, Frances (died 1684), daughter of Edward Cecil, Viscount Wimbledon. They had no children, and kept conventicles in their house. Perhaps owing to local hostility they moved to Highgate near London, where Sprigg died in June 1684, with his wife following him that same month. He was buried in Crayford church. His will showed him to be a man of substance, owning a coach and horses and land in both Crayford and Middle Norton, the latter bought with his wife's dowry of $2000. He distributed $100 to 'poore Christians' and $500 to endow a workhouse in his native Banbury (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/376, fol. 262'v'). He directed that upon his wife's death his remaining estate should descend to his brother William Sprigg, a political writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 26178


Sprigg, William (bap. 1633, d. in or after 1701), political writer, was baptized on 9 July 1633 at Banbury, Oxfordshire, the youngest surviving son of William Sprigg or Sprigge ('fl'. 1618-1652), steward of New College, Oxford, and subsequently assessment commissioner for Oxfordshire, and his wife, Rebecca. Sprigg's elder brother Joshua Sprigg was an Independent minister, and their father procured the rectory of Somerton, Oxfordshire, for their brother-in-law John Fenwick. After matriculating at Lincoln College, Oxford, on 2 October 1652, Sprigg graduated BA ten days later. On the recommendation of Oliver Cromwell (chancellor of the university), Sprigg became a fellow of Lincoln on 11 December 1652. At Oxford he was part of the experimental philosophy circle that included John Locke, Robert Boyle, William Petty, and Christopher Wren. He proceeded MA on 15 June 1655. His first publication, 'Philosophicall Essayes with Brief Adviso's', appeared anonymously in 1657, with discourses criticizing logicians and Galenist physicians, praising natural science, and exploring themes as diverse as melancholy, atheism, the ministry, and antiquity. The same year he was appointed a fellow of the new college at Durham, a position he held until its dissolution in 1659. On 27 November 1657 he was also admitted to Gray's Inn, and in 1659 he was incorporated MA at Cambridge University. 
Sprigg's major work, 'A Modest Plea for an Equal Common-Wealth Against Monarchy', was published anonymously in September 1659 and reveals his indebtedness to Francis Bacon and especially James Harrington. In the commonwealth he espoused, offices would be filled by rotation among qualified men, with the highest officers being godly gentry. Castigating hereditary nobles, professional clergy, and lawyers as enemies of a free state, he favoured freedom of conscience as long as people kept within legal bounds, moderation, and morality. He called for the abolition of professional clergy and tithes, and for the expropriation of glebe lands for annexation to workhouses. Sprigg urged legal reform, with simpler laws, land registers, and courts in all counties, and a single, free tenure for all land, with compensation to landlords for relinquishing copyhold. Primogeniture should be replaced by gavelkind or multiple inheritance, but he would permit an eldest son to receive a double portion or the entire personal estate. Sprigg supported the decentralization of higher education, with staff rather than superfluous heads governing schools. Instead of classical and scholastic studies, the curriculum in at least some schools should stress such utilitarian subjects as riding, fencing, dancing, music, modern languages, history, politics, civil and common law, chemistry, anatomy, medicine, agriculture, and animal husbandry. In their spare time, students were to study vocational topics. According to Sprigg's friend Anthony Wood, copies of 'A Modest Plea' were 'greedily bought up, and taken into the hands of all curious men' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.560). It prompted an anonymous response, 'A Modest Reply, in Answer to the Modest Plea' (1659). Sprigg's last work, 'The Royal and Happy Poverty' (1660), a meditation on 'Matthew' 5:3, was a sermon preached at Durham; the copy Sprigg presented to Wood is now in the Bodleian Library. 
At the Restoration, Oxford's visitation commissioners ordered Sprigg's removal from his fellowship at Lincoln on 16 August 1660 on the grounds that he had been improperly appointed and had not lived statutably. When he refused to vacate his chamber, they ordered his ejection on 2 October. His petition of 27 December to the House of Commons for restoration of his fellowship was unsuccessful. Returning to Gray's Inn, he was called to the bar in early 1664, and, according to Wood, rendered legal assistance to James, duke of York. Some time thereafter, Sprigg moved to Ireland and married. From 1670 to 1686 he served as recorder of the borough of Galway, where his position was unsuccessfully challenged by the former recorder John Shadwell, attorney-general for Connaught, in 1673. At Lord Kingston's recommendation, Charles ordered Ormond to appoint Sprigg first justice of Connaught in 1672. In 1682 and again in 1683 the government considered appointing Sprigg king's serjeant, but he demonstrated little interest in the position. Following Kingston's death in 1676, Sprigg served as a trustee to settle his debts. Commencing in March 1683, Sprigg received $100 p.a. from the civil list. Following the deaths of his brother and his widow the following year, he inherited their estate at Crayford, Kent, but he opted to remain in Ireland. He also leased land from the Quaker Anthony Sharp in the barony of Coolestown, King's county (co. Offaly). Sprigg sat in Galway's common council in 1686-7 and again in 1701 and in the Irish parliament as MP for Banagher from 1692 to 1699. There is no further record of him after 1701. Although his Irish career was marked by diligent service, his claim to historical significance rests on his authorship of 'The Modest Plea' and his linkage of the Baconian and Harringtonian traditions. 


@@@@@


doc= 26179


Rice, Thomas Spring, first Baron Monteagle of Brandon (1790-1866), politician, was born on 8 February 1790 at 21 Mungret Street, Limerick, the elder son of Stephen Edward Rice (died 1831) of Mount Trenchard, co. Limerick, and his wife, Catherine, daughter and sole heir of Thomas Spring of Ballycrispin, co. Kerry. 
Spring Rice was born into a well-connected Irish gentry family (his paternal grandmother was a daughter of the knight of Kerry) only recently converted to protestantism. He matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1809. His university career was terminated prematurely by his marriage on 11 July 1811 to Theodosia (1787-1839), daughter of Edmond Henry Pery, the first earl of Limerick. They produced eight children while he studied law and laid the foundations for a political career. Spring Rice was a kind and generous parent, a loving husband, and a responsible landlord. 
In 1820 Spring Rice won a seat in parliament for Limerick. He continued to sit for his native town until the 'Reform Act' (1832) made his return there unlikely and he transferred to Cambridge where he remained for the rest of his Commons career. Spring Rice came to the notice of the third marquess of Lansdowne, who remained his patron for many years. The Bowood House circle mixed Benthamite utilitarianism and 'laissez-faire' economics with traditional constitutional whiggism. The members had literary tastes: Spring Rice loved poetry and contributed articles to the 'Edinburgh Review'. They were frightened by even a hint of boldness in the advocacy of reform. Spring Rice followed his leader into Canning's coalition ministry as under-secretary for the Home Office in July 1827, even though this required accepting deferral of Catholic emancipation. He resigned in January 1828 from the brief administration that followed Canning's death, although he had hoped to keep the centrist amalgamation together almost at any cost. 
When the whigs returned to power as a unified party in November 1830, Spring Rice was made secretary of the Treasury. He worked closely with Lord Althorp on budgetary policy. In a government with a weak front bench in terms of speaking talent, his fluent debating style was much valued. In 1833 he expressed interest in gaining election as speaker, and made successive quests for the position in 1834-5, 1837, and 1838-9. His continual canvass for the chair made him increasingly unpopular in the House of Commons. He turned down the Irish secretaryship in May 1833, but was appointed colonial secretary with a seat in the cabinet after Stanley's resignation in 1834. In the latter position he did little to head off trouble in Canada, although his lifelong attachment to the anti-slavery movement and friendship with Thomas Fowell Buxton helped smooth the process of emancipation. 
Spring Rice succeeded Althorp as chancellor of the exchequer after Peel's abortive attempt to form a government collapsed in April 1835. He was widely regarded as not up to the job both by contemporaries and later historians, and admitted his own 'inadequacy' (Murphy, 133-4; 'Greville Memoirs', 3.332, 4.19). His 'Church Rate Bill' of 1837 was ignominiously abandoned, and his attempt to revise the charter of the Bank of Ireland was also a humiliating fiasco. His budgets were pedestrian, adequate when trade remained favourable and expenditures were controlled, but depression and crop failures, combined with rebellion in North America and the compensation charges due to plantation owners in the West Indies, created large deficits. In 1839 he departed from office in the face of withering criticism, consoled by a peerage (5 September 1839). In the Lords he was an active but peripheral figure. 
Lady Theodosia died soon after her husband's resignation, and on 13 April 1841 Spring Rice married Mary Anne (1800-1889), daughter of John Marshall, the Leeds industrialist. His second wife's fortune came in the nick of time. The Limerick estate had never been sufficient to support the family without the supplement of an official salary. Then the terrible famine of the 1840s wiped out much of Spring Rice's Irish income, and he spent the remainder on ameliorative measures. He responded to the catastrophe with compassion and intelligence. He lectured the men responsible for relief, especially Bessborough, Wood, Russell, and Trevelyan, about the condition of the starving masses and the necessity for effective remedies, urging the abandonment of the economic theories he had upheld for a lifetime in face of the immediate need 'to keep society together' (Howell-Thomas, 297, 308). 
Spring Rice was a conventionally devout Anglican 'in a lowish sort of way' (Hilton, 237) who led his family in regular prayers and scripture readings, but he was ecumenical in the political and educational controversies surrounding religion, most notably in his support for appropriation of surplus revenues from the Church of Ireland to lay purposes. In 1835 Spring Rice declared that a 'clergy without flocks and parsons without congregations were scandals which endangered the existence of the Protestant establishment' (Murphy, 111). He believed moral and religious education was 'the greatest of all national duties' (Brent, 58, 246). Historians disagree about the extent of his commitment to state-supported education. Some see his role as central to the formation of whig policy in this area during the 1820s and 1830s (Newbould, 281; Paz, 70-71). Others question his commitment and cite his 'niggardly' allocation of funds to support innovation (Mandler, 183, 188, 190-91). 
Spring Rice was a strong unionist and even went so far as to suggest in 1834, in a parliamentary speech which he later published, that Ireland be renamed 'West Britain' (Brent, 51). He feared repeal legislation would unleash dangerous conflict between the upper and lower classes in an already fragile social order. By showing what Lord Holland called 'injudicious reluctance' in conceding reductions in the stamp duty on newspapers and when introducing the penny post (1839), he alienated Liberal and radical opinion (Holland, 409). He took pride in his traditional whiggism, which, he told the poet Wordsworth, he 'had not added to... nor taken therefrom' over his whole career (Newbould, 316). His conservative opinions made him more comfortable with the Canningites and the 'Derby Dilly' than the mainstream of his party. It was characteristic of both his politics and his need for cash that he spent his last years enjoying the proceeds of the comptrollership of the exchequer, one of few sinecures that had survived from the era of 'Old Corruption', and was only dislodged from it in 1865 by Gladstone's determined efforts. He was never fully welcomed into the circle of the whig grandees and remained more Lansdowne's protege than friend. One grandee thought so little of Spring Rice's dignity that he leap-frogged over his back in the lobby of the House of Commons. Though as a young man he had once escaped the Dublin police bent on preventing a duel by disguising himself as a servant and hiding on a roof-top, his life was otherwise curiously devoid of incident and enterprise. He left a blank silhouette on a political landscape teeming with colourful and distinguished characters. The diarist Charles Greville judged him 'indolent but full of vivacity'. He chaired the royal commission on decimal coinage from 1855 to 1859, when he resigned following parliamentary criticisms of the commissioners' slowness in producing a report. He was a commissioner of the state paper office, a trustee of the National Gallery, a member of the senate of the University of London and of the Queen's University in Ireland, and FRS and FGS ('DNB'). Spring Rice enjoyed the ease and privilege of the London cultural and political worlds, but he was ultimately unwilling to pay the cost of his pleasures by bearing the burden of ministerial responsibility. He died in Ireland at Mount Trenchard, co. Limerick, on 7 February 1866, and was buried at Shanagolden, co. Limerick. 


@@@@@


doc= 26180


John Sprint (d. 1590), also a Church of England clergyman. Sprint the elder, the son of an apothecary of the same name from Gloucester, was admitted to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1560. He became a fellow and vicar of Berkeley, Gloucestershire, in 1563, graduated BA in 1564, and proceeded MA in 1566. He then gained a succession of preferments, becoming rector of Charlton Mackrell, Somerset, in 1567, vicar of Hambledon and dean of Bristol in 1571, canon of Winchester in 1573, and rector of Martyr Worthy, Hampshire, and canon of Old Sarum in 1574. That year on 23 July he proceeded BD and DD from Christ Church, Oxford. Having become archdeacon of Wiltshire in 1578, he gained a number of livings in that county and in Somerset. In 1584 he became treasurer of Salisbury Cathedral, and remained so until his death in 1590. 


@@@@@


doc= 26181


Sprint, John (d. 1623), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born in or near Bristol, the son of 
John Sprint the younger was elected a student of Christ Church in 1592. He graduated BA on 6 March 1596 and proceeded MA on 21 May 1599. He was ordained and soon made it plain that he was a puritan. On 21 November 1602, at a particularly sensitive time in the religious politics of Oxford, he preached in the university church. The sermon does not survive but Anthony Wood claims that he made 'sundry points of Doctrine against the Ceremonies and Discipline now established in the Church of England... also taxing by cavelling speeches the Vice-chancellor, and other Governors of the University' (Wood, 2.272). John Howson, the vice-chancellor, demanded a copy of the sermon and when Sprint refused the request he was imprisoned. This was part of, and exacerbated, a campaign of partisan sermons, and eventually the disputants were called before a commission of the privy council. In March 1603 Sprint was required to deliver a public submission before the authorities in Oxford. 
In 1602 Sprint was appointed vicar of Thornbury, Gloucestershire, and proved himself to be as yet unreconciled to established ritual. About 1604 he wrote a short piece mainly against rituals lacking scriptural authority. Such ceremonies were seen to be invented by Anti-Christ and maintained in the interests of 'Lordly prelacie' with the implication that the government as well as the liturgy of the Church of England was in need of purification. He was finally induced to conform by Samuel Burton, archdeacon of Gloucestershire. Sprint's first published work, 'Propositions, Tending to Proove the Necessarie Use of the Christian Sabbaoth' (1607), was both reformed and orthodox, with voguish puritan sabbatarianism but a conciliatory tone toward the establishment. A catechism, 'The Summe of Christian Religion' (1613), was followed by 'Cassander Anglicanus: shewing the necessity of conformitie to the prescribed ceremonies of our church in case of deprivation' (1618), which became influential among puritan-inclined ministers. Sprint had come to the conclusion, not that the ceremonies were a positive part of worship, but that it was a greater evil to lose the chance to preach than to commit the lesser evil of conducting the ceremonies, providing that these were not imposed in a dictatorial manner. As these arguments came from a writer of proven godliness, they were taken more seriously by puritan clergy than admonitions from the bishops, being cited by moderate puritans in the 1630s. 
Sprint married twice. With his first wife he had a son, John, born late in 1605 or in 1606, and with his second a son, Samuel, baptized at Tetbury, Gloucestershire, on 15 January 1622. In 1623 Sprint published a consolatory work, 'The Christian Sword and Buckler', but died the same year, at Thornbury, and was buried at St Anne Blackfriars, London. His son John (died 1658) matriculated from Pembroke College, Oxford, on 26 November 1624 aged eighteen, and after graduation eventually became curate of Hampstead, Middlesex. His son Samuel (died 1690x98), admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1646, was master of Newbury School and rector of South Tidworth, Hampshire, before his ejection in 1662. Licensed as a congregational minister in 1672, by 1690 he was preaching in Andover and Winton. 


@@@@@


doc= 26182


Sprot, George (d. 1608), conspirator and forger, was a notary of Eyemouth, Berwickshire, who by no later than 1600 had become intimate in the affairs of Robert Logan, seventh laird of Restalrig, and a regular guest at his house at Gunsgreen. Logan died in 1606, but two years later Sprot let slip, while drunk, that he had knowledge of the Gowrie conspiracy. When arrested and interrogated by the privy council in April 1608 Sprot confessed to possession of letters written by Logan to the third earl of Gowrie and others suggesting a plot to abduct James VI to Fast Castle. Tortured in iron boots, he recanted and admitted he had forged the letters. The case was nevertheless brought to the attention of George Home, earl of Dunbar, who intervened to halt the torture and persuade Sprot to revert to his original confession implicating Logan, though Sprot continued to maintain that the letters were themselves forgeries. The likely motive for forging the letters appears to have been to blackmail Logan's heir. 
Sprot was tried and convicted for his role in the conspiracy in August. At his trial it emerged that he had made a regular business of forging letters and receipts for other clients. He was hanged, broken, and quartered at Edinburgh High Cross on 12 August 1608. The following June Logan's corpse was exhumed for the treason trial conducted to forfeit his son Robert, and Sprot's letters were introduced as evidence. The five letters, dated between 18 and 31 July and variously addressed to Gowrie, Logan's agent James Bower, and an unknown person, disclose intrigue between Logan and the Ruthvens, but do not clearly reveal its purpose. Before he was executed Sprot had clarified earlier contradictory statements to confess that he had copied the letter addressed to Gowrie directly from an original letter penned by Logan which he had seen, but that the others were pure inventions based upon this letter. Sprot's compliance may have been secured by Dunbar's promise to safeguard the welfare of his wife and children after his death. The Logan estates were forfeited, to the ruin of the family but also to the considerable benefit of the earl of Dunbar, who still owed a substantial sum for the purchase of the traitor's Berwickshire lands. 


@@@@@


doc= 26183


Sprott, Thomas (fl. 1272), Benedictine monk and chronicler, wrote a history of St Augustine's Abbey, Canterbury -- his own house -- and its abbots. This is generally taken to be the text that survives in two thirteenth-century manuscripts: LPL, MS 419, folios 111-60, which comes down to 1221 and perhaps represents the earlier state of its composition; and BL, Cotton MS Tiberius A.ix, folios 107-80, which, with a change of hand at 1221, comes down to 'c'.1265, and has further additions to about the mid-fourteenth century (ending confusedly and imperfectly, as a result of damage in the Cotton Library fire of 1731). There are also later transcripts: BL, Cotton MS Vitellius D.xi, folios 39-69'v' (abridged from Tiberius A.ix; damaged in the fire of 1731); Cotton MS Vitellius E.xiv, folios 237-252'v' (an epitome made by the Elizabethan scholar John Joscelyn, perhaps from the Lambeth Palace manuscript); BL, Add. MS 46918 (copied from Vitellius D.xi or its exemplar); and BL, Harley MS 692, folios 75-193'v' (a fair copy of Vitellius E.xiv, made by or for Joscelyn's contemporary the antiquary Arthur Agarde). It has not been printed. 
Sprott's chronicle is mentioned twice by the late fourteenth-century St Augustine's chronicler, William Thorne, who in the preface to his own chronicle refers to Sprott's work as ending in 1272; confusingly, just after the end of the portion of his chronicle that relates an event of 1228, Thorne states that he has ceased thereafter to use Sprott's work, and in modern times this has often been thought to mean that Sprott's work came down to no later than 1228. 
The chronicle is initially cast in the form of abbatial biographies, with a few entire texts inserted into the narrative; the number of texts (such as royal grants and papal letters) gradually increases, and the history of the house as a whole becomes the author's main focus. For the twelfth and early thirteenth centuries Sprott is both more detailed and, almost certainly, more accurate than William Thorne, who appears to have derived so much from Sprott's work. For instance, where Sprott recounts the dedication of the abbey's chapel on its manor of Kennington, Kent, on 16 April 1258 -- the first of the abbey's chapels to have two side-altars -- Thorne simply states that the chapel was dedicated in 1258; and while Sprott refers to the abbey's old refectory as being pulled down in 1262, Thorne places this event in 1260 along with the arrival in England of the papal legate Otto (which actually took place in 1237). 
The fifteenth-century catalogue of the library of St Augustine's Abbey includes both of the thirteenth-century manuscripts of the chronicle, and also eight more of Sprott's books: works of canon law, natural science, philosophy, and theology, some of which he may have compiled as well as owned. Overall, their titles are suggestive of his having lived into the second half of the thirteenth century. John Bale credits Sprott with the authorship of 'Cantuariorum historiarum'. 
Confusingly and mistakenly, the authorship of two much later chronicles has been attributed to Sprott: a late fourteenth-century summarized history of the world with some material relating to St Augustine's Abbey (now CUL, Add. MS 3578), edited by Thomas Hearne as 'Thomae Sprotti Chronica' (Oxford, 1719); and a fifteenth-century abridgement of the 'Flores historiarum', in the Joseph Mayer Collection, Liverpool Museum (no. 12012), printed in translation by William Bell as 'Thomas Sprott's Chronicle of Profane and Sacred History' (Liverpool, 1851). 


@@@@@


doc= 26184


Spruce, Richard (1817-1893), botanist and traveller, was born on 10 September 1817 at Ganthorpe in Yorkshire, where his father, Richard Spruce, was village schoolmaster. His mother, Ann Etty, was related to the painter William Etty (1787-1849). Spruce began his education at his father's school; little is known of his later studies. Between 1839 and 1844 he was a schoolmaster, teaching mathematics at St Peter's School, York. 
Spruce began his botanical collecting in Yorkshire about 1833. He specialized in mosses and liverworts, publishing his first paper, on those of Eskdale, in the 'Phytologist' in 1841. He subsequently published papers on those of Teesdale ('Annals and Magazine of Natural History', 1844), and of Yorkshire ('Phytologist', vol. 2). A visit to Dr Thomas Glanville Taylor (died 1848) in Ireland in 1842 confirmed his interest in this group of plants. Spruce came to the attention of Sir William Hooker in 1844 and was recommended for a collecting expedition to the Pyrenees under the sponsorship of George Bentham. In addition to its botanical value, the expedition (1845-6) also served to improve his health. He described the work in three letters published in Hooker's 'London Journal of Botany'. Two works followed: 'Notes on the botany of the Pyrenees' and a more elaborate article, 'The musci and hepaticae of the Pyrenees' ('Annals and Magazine of Natural History', 1849). 
In 1849 Spruce was sent to South America by Hooker, Bentham, and other botanists; Bentham was to receive, name, and distribute the plants he sent home. Towards the end of the year Spruce travelled up the Amazon to Santarem, at the mouth of the Tapajos, where he met the zoologist Alfred Russel Wallace and the lepidopterist Henry Walter Bates. Spruce explored the River Trombetas to a point close to the borders of British Guiana and reached Manaos, at the mouth of the River Negro, towards the end of 1850. Among his discoveries were a number of plants with medicinal properties, including the datura and coca plants. (It was his samples of the latter, sent to Berlin, which helped Dr Nieman isolate the active principle of the alkaloid cocaine in 1858.) Spruce spent three years on the rivers Negro and Orinoco, entering Venezuela and discovering many plants new to science, including 200 species of fungi in the rain forest of the Uapes. His travels were interrupted in 1852 when he returned to the River Negro to assist Wallace, who had been struck down by malaria, and oversee his safe passage down river. 
Spruce returned to Manaos at the close of 1854, and then ascended the Amazon by steamer to Nantua in Peru, proceeding by canoe to Tarapoto at the eastern foot of the Andes, where he stayed two years and collected, within a 25 mile radius, 250 species of ferns. In 1857 he again descended the Amazon and went up the Pastasa to Ecuador, reaching Banos. Six months later he moved on to Ambato, which he made his headquarters for two years and from where, despite the civil war, he explored the Quintensian Andes. In 1859 he was commissioned by the India Office to collect seeds and young plants of the cinchona, the source of quinine; he managed to obtain 100,000 seeds and 600 plants on the western slope of Chimborazo, which were dispatched to Guayadil. Robert Cross later sent them to India, although the plantations subsequently failed. Spruce's report on this expedition was published in 1861. Spruce remained on the Pacific coast until 1864 to recover his health, but in that year he lost his entire capital in the collapse of a Peruvian bank; he returned to collecting for three years, finally embarking for England in 1867 after an absence of eighteen years. 
Spruce's collections included the vocabularies of twenty-one Amazonian languages, hundreds of drawings, and maps of three previously unexplored rivers. His 7000 flowering plant species were catalogued by Bentham, Daniel Oliver, and others; the ferns by Sir William Hooker and John Baker; the mosses by Mitten; the lichens by the Revd William Leighton; and the fungi by the Revd Miles Berkeley. Spruce was awarded a PhD degree by the Imperial German Academy in 1864, was elected a fellow of the Botanical Society of Edinburgh in 1842, and was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. 
Spruce, who never married, retired to Coneysthorpe, Yorkshire, in near poverty in spite of a $100 government pension. He spent the remaining twenty-seven years of his life on sorting his collections, forced by ill health to do much of this work lying down. He died at Coneysthorpe on 28 December 1893, and was buried in the churchyard at Terrington nearby. After his death his notebooks were edited by Wallace and published in 1908 as 'Notes of a Botanist on the Amazon and Andes'. This work best reflects the author's gift for analysis, description, and narrative, along with his dry humour. His name was commemorated by the moss 'Sprucea', and a liverwort, 'Sprucella'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26185


Spry, Henry Harpur (1804-1842), army surgeon and writer on India, second son of Jeffery Spry (died 1829) of the excise and his wife, Philadelphia, daughter of Joseph Knight of Bodrean, was born at Truro Vean, Cornwall, on 6 January 1804. 
Spry trained in London as a surgeon and in 1827 was appointed assistant surgeon in the Bengal army. He was an enthusiast of the new science of statistics and, returning to England on furlough in 1834, wrote up from his tour notes a two-volume work designed to educate the public about India's agricultural and manufacturing capacities. Ironically, in spite of its avowed modernity and simplicity, 'Modern India; with Illustrations of the Resources and Capabilities of Hindustan' (1837) is a rambling, over-confident, and, even for the times, sensationalist work, which alternates lists of animals, plants, manufactures, and so on with highly coloured and fanciful descriptions of Indian behaviour and thought. Spry also published an article on the phrenology of Indian criminals in 'The Phrenology Journal and Miscellany' (1833, 511). In 1837, while still on furlough, he obtained his MD from Erlangen. 
He returned to India in 1838 and became assistant garrison surgeon at Fort William, Calcutta. He was secretary of the Agricultural and Horticultural Society of India and founder of its journal, as well as secretary to the statistics department of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. In England he was a member of the Royal Asiatic Society, the Geological Society, the Statistical Society of London, and the Royal Horticultural Society of Cornwall. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1841. 
Spry died at Fort William on 4 September 1842 after a severe fall from his carriage and was buried in the military burial-ground at Bhawanipur. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 26186


Spry, Sir Richard (bap. 1715, d. 1775), naval officer, second son of George Spry (1685/6-1732) of Place in Cornwall and his wife, Mary, daughter of Richard Bullock of Helston, was baptized at St Anthony in Roseland, Place, on 2 December 1715. He entered the navy in 1733 as a volunteer per order on the 'Exeter', and in the following year was appointed to the 'Swallow', in which he served for four years on the home station. He was afterwards for two years in the 'Canterbury', and passed his examination on 26 June 1740. On 27 September he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Deptford Prize', a small vessel employed in cruising and convoy service in the chops of the channel, until early in 1743, when he was appointed to the 'Superbe', which in October went out to the West Indies, bearing the broad pennant of Commodore Sir Charles Knowles. On 21 September 1744 he was promoted by Knowles to command the bomb 'Comet' and sent to Boston to refit. 
On 12 February 1745, as he was approaching Antigua on his way back, Spry fell in with a large Spanish privateer, the 'Galga', to which, after a stubborn action, he was forced to strike. The 'Comet' was so completely disabled that the Spanish captain gave orders to remove her people and sink her. However, before this could be done, the approach of ships from English Harbour compelled the 'Galga' to forsake her prize. The Spanish now fled but took Spry as a prisoner, landing him at Havana two months later. In June he was sent to Charlestown in a cartel, and in September he joined Rear-Admiral Peter Warren at Louisbourg; on 23 September Warren promoted him captain of his flagship, the 'Superbe'. 
In 1746 when Warren was succeeded by Commodore Knowles as governor of Cape Breton and went to Boston to co-ordinate plans for the proposed invasion of Canada, Spry was sent in the 'Chester' to the Bay of Fundy to add to the defence of Annapolis Royal and to careen by making use of the bay's celebrated high tides. The arrival later that summer on the Nova Scotia coast of a large French naval force under d'Enville seemed at first to threaten Annapolis Royal. Owing to the distress endured by the French from sickness, their attempt was made too late in the season to get into the bay. Spry thereupon returned to England with Warren. In November 1747, still in the 'Chester', he went out to the East Indies with Edward Boscawen; here he took part in the siege of Pondicherry before returning to England in 1750. 
In October 1753 Spry was appointed to the 'Garland', and in June 1754 to the 'Gibraltar', in which he went out to North America with Commodore Augustus Keppel. He was sent home in the following spring, and was immediately appointed to the 'Fougueux', one of the squadron sent out to North America with Boscawen. In the winter of 1755-6 he was left senior officer at Halifax, where in October 1755, having received news that Sir Edward Hawke had begun seizing French shipping, he ordered his own squadron to do the same (Spry to S. Hood, 21 Oct 1755, TNA: PRO, ADM 1/1890). The decision to winter several ships of the line in Halifax harbour initiated a new forward naval policy in the Gulf of St Lawrence. Having established a watering wharf on the future site of the naval yard, Spry had his ships cleaned at a hired commercial wharf, and sailed with his squadron on 18 May 1756, where off Louisbourg, Commodore Charles Holmes assumed command of the blockading force. Spry's arrival was too late to prevent both a large naval force getting into Louisbourg and a squadron with reinforcements for Quebec getting into the St Lawrence. Throughout the summer of 1756 he was with the squadron under Commodore Charles Holmes, blockading Louisbourg. In the same year he succeeded to the family estates in Cornwall on the death of his elder brother. In the following January he was moved into the 'Orford', in which he served on the coast of North America under Vice-Admiral Francis Holburne, at the reduction of Louisbourg by Boscawen in 1758, and in the operations in the St Lawrence under Vice-Admiral Charles Saunders in 1759. In 1760, and again in 1761, the 'Orford' was one of the Grand Fleet in the Bay of Biscay under Boscawen or Hawke, and in November 1761 Spry was moved into the 'Mars', on the same station, where he stayed until August 1762, when he went out as commodore and commander-in-chief on the coast of North America. In Halifax Spry's most enduring indirect achievement arose from his suggestion to the Admiralty that a coastal survey of Nova Scotia be undertaken, a scheme begun under his successor, Alexander Colvill. He successfully recommended Joseph Frederick Wallet Des Barres, a Swiss-born engineering officer, who enjoyed a growing reputation in North America for his surveys. 
In December 1763 Spry was appointed captain of the yacht 'Fubbs', and in April 1766 of the 'Jersey', in which in May he went out to the Mediterranean as commodore and commander-in-chief. He returned to England in November 1769. On 18 October 1770 he was promoted rear-admiral of the blue, and in 1772 he commanded a squadron in the channel. In 1773 he held a command in the fleet when the king reviewed it at Portsmouth, and on 24 June he was knighted. Spry became rear-admiral of the red on 31 March 1775; he died, unmarried, a few months later on 22 November 1775 at his home, Place House, and was buried in St Anthony's Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 26187


Spurgeon, Charles Haddon (1834-1892), Baptist preacher and religious writer, was born on 19 June 1834 at Kelvedon, Essex, the eldest of seventeen children, eight surviving, of John Spurgeon (1810-1902), clerk to a coal and shipping firm and lay preacher, later an Independent minister, and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Jarvis (1815-1888). 
From late 1835 until 1841 Spurgeon lived with his grandparents James (1776-1864) and Sarah Spurgeon and his aunt Ann at Stambourne, Essex. Later, he often spent school holidays there. His grandfather, minister of Stambourne Independent Chapel from 1810 to 1864, influenced him greatly, as did his aunt. The young Spurgeon, his brother James recalled, always had his head in a book, typically works by Bunyan, Foxe, and other puritan divines, and heard with pride of puritan ancestors persecuted for their faith. Other childhood influences included Richard Knill, a missionary visitor who in 1844 predicted Spurgeon's preaching greatness, and his mother, who urged her children to repent and seek salvation. Old for his years, Spurgeon attended a village school in Stambourne, run by Mrs Burleigh. On rejoining his family, now in Colchester, he went to a school run by a Mrs Cook, then from 1844 to Henry Lewis's Stockwell House School, where he won a prize for English. In 1848 he went to the Anglican College Agricultural School in Maidstone, where an uncle, David Walker, was master. The following year he became an articled pupil at John Swindell's school in Newmarket, studying French and Greek. His brother, James, recalled that they enjoyed 'the best education that nonconformity could command' ('The Sword & the Trowel', June 1892, 301). 
Spurgeon had shown religious leanings from an early age. In 1849 he gave a missionary address and began work on a fiercely anti-Catholic essay: 'Anti-Christ and her Brood, or, Popery Unmasked'. He dated his conversion quite precisely, however, to a direct appeal from a Primitive Methodist preacher in Colchester on 6 January 1850. He had meant to worship elsewhere, but changed course to shelter from a snowstorm. The joy and power of his conversion -- his overwhelming sense that day of God's forgiveness and love -- ended years of agonizing about his sinful state and shaped his future ministry, with its emphasis on personal experience. Within weeks he began distributing tracts, and in April he joined the Congregational church at Newmarket. He had, though, been persuaded while at Maidstone of the need for believer's baptism, and on 3 May was baptized in the River Lark at Isleham Ferry by the Revd William Cantlow, minister of Pound Lane Baptist Church, Isleham. 
Back in Newmarket, Spurgeon became a Sunday school teacher. In August 1850 he moved to Cambridge, helping at the school opened by Edwin Leeding, a former usher at Stockwell House, in return for some tuition. That October he joined St Andrew's Street Baptist Church, and was soon giving Sunday school addresses. He was tricked into preaching his first sermon, at Teversham, in January 1851, being under the impression that a companion had been assigned the task. Afterwards he began preaching regularly and to marked effect for the church lay preachers' association. 
In October 1851 Spurgeon agreed to preach at Waterbeach for a few Sundays. He continued for over two years, remaining at Leeding's school for much of that time but abandoning plans to open his own school. The Waterbeach congregation flourished, and three mission stations were opened. Much encouraged, Spurgeon began to build up what was to become a huge library and read avidly, but resisted pressure (including that from his father) to train for the ministry at college. 
Spurgeon's reputation spread, and in December 1853, to his surprise, he was asked to preach at New Park Street, Southwark, a historic church with dwindling congregations. His first sermons there, on 18 December, made a great impression, and the church asked him back for three more Sundays, then for six months, then permanently. Hesitant initially, the nineteen-year-old Spurgeon accepted the invitation on 28 April 1854. Rejecting ordination as needless ceremonial, he was welcomed at a tea for members. His early converts included Susannah Thompson (1832-1903), only daughter of a prosperous ribbon manufacturer, whom he married on 8 January 1856. Susannah was closely involved in Spurgeon's work, despite long spells of ill health from 1868. The couple had twin sons, Charles (died 1926) and Thomas (died 1917), born in September 1856 at their home in the New Kent Road. After early commercial careers, both sons entered the Baptist ministry and became closely associated with their father's work. 
Spurgeon soon achieved celebrity status. Unprepossessing in appearance -- short, stocky, and clumsy, with an over-large head and coarse features -- he was dismissed by many as a nine-day wonder; received coolly by fellow London ministers, he was caricatured and condemned for vulgarity, sensationalism, and irreverence. In spite of, or perhaps because of, his critics, crowds flocked, drawn by his youth and dramatic manner, by his plain speaking, humour, and vivid illustrations, by the force of his conviction, and by his power over his congregation. In the heightened atmosphere induced by cholera and the Crimean War, Spurgeon's message of man's sinful state and the wrath to come touched a raw nerve, and he had a talent for making hearers feel that his message was directed at them personally. London, it was said, had seen nothing like it since George Whitefield ('Pen and Ink Portrait'). 
In February 1855, with New Park Street overflowing, Spurgeon took the unusual step of leasing the Exeter Hall on the Strand, celebrated as the scene of the annual May meetings of religious societies, for regular worship. When his enlarged chapel was still too small, he again took Exeter Hall, moving to the new, and even larger, Surrey Gardens Music Hall in October 1856 then back to Exeter Hall in December 1859. The first night at an over-packed Surrey Gardens ended in catastrophe, when a false fire alarm caused a stampede in which seven died and twenty-eight were badly injured. Some press reports blamed Spurgeon for the disaster, and the incident traumatized him, leaving lasting scars. For a short time it seemed that he might never preach again. When he did return to Surrey Gardens (for more manageable morning services) congregations were even larger. His hearers included Ruskin -- whom he entertained at home in Clapham -- Lord John Russell, Lord Chief Justice Lord Campbell, and Sir Richard Mayne, chief commissioner of police. Finally, in March 1861, Spurgeon moved to the purpose-built Metropolitan Tabernacle at London's Elephant and Castle. Described as the largest building in England for public worship, with space for between 5000 and 6000, the tabernacle cost $31,000, a third of which Spurgeon raised himself, and was opened debt-free -- a testament to his belief in the divine provision of finance. It became a place of pilgrimage, one of London's sights. Spurgeon ministered there until his death, filling the building consistently. Dressed from the 1860s in conservative business suits, his preaching appealed especially to the lower-middle and respectable working classes, but admirers included Gladstone, Lord Shaftesbury, and US President James Garfield. 
Elsewhere, Spurgeon drew record-breaking crowds. In September 1855 he preached on heaven and hell to 12,000 people in a field in Hackney; and nearly 24,000 heard his address at the Crystal Palace in October 1857, on the day of national humiliation following the Indian mutiny. This record-breaking crowd tested to the full his amazing powers of voice projection. Spurgeon's sermon from the Epsom racecourse grandstand in June 1858 on the text 'So run that ye may obtain' showed a publicist's instinct for eye-catching venues and texts. Concerned about crowd safety, he stopped open-air preaching in London, but continued it on frequent midweek tours around the country. Among continental tours in the early 1860s, his 1860 Paris trip was particularly successful, resulting in a special pamphlet. Back in London in 1867, great services in the Agricultural Hall, Islington, boosted his influence in the city. 
Spurgeon reached a still wider audience through his published sermons, including over 3500 weekly penny sermons published from 1855 until 1917, first as the 'New Park Street Pulpit', then as the 'Metropolitan Tabernacle Pulpit'. The sermons, delivered extempore, were taken down in shorthand and revised by Spurgeon every Monday, and quickly reached an average circulation of 25,000-30,000. They were sold on railway bookstalls, telegraphed to America (where until he condemned slavery Spurgeon had a very strong following), inserted as advertisements in Australian weeklies, sent to heads of government, and translated into nearly forty languages from Arabic to Urdu, selling in all over 100 million copies. Sermons noted especially for their converting power include: 'Looking unto Jesus' (no. 195), 'Compel them to come in' (no. 227), and 'The shameful sufferer' (no. 236), all preached at the Surrey Gardens Music Hall; 'There go the ships' (no. 1259); and 'Supposing him to be the gardener' (no. 1699). Among other notable sermons, a highly controversial 1864 address on baptismal regeneration sold nearly 250,000 copies and generated heated pamphlet exchanges. In a move seen by some as unduly provocative and divisive, Spurgeon accused evangelical clergymen of hypocrisy and self-interest for publicly denying that baptism brought salvation, yet subscribing to a prayer book which contained this doctrine. The bitter aftermath of this controversy led to Spurgeon withdrawing for a time from the Evangelical Alliance. 
The weekly penny and other sermon volumes make up around half of Spurgeon's 150 or so publications, excluding the many compilations of sermon extracts, notes, and outlines seized on by countless local preachers. Many of his works are still in print. The most popular included 'John Ploughman's Talk' (1868), a collection of wise sayings, which sold 350,000 copies in twenty years, and 'John Ploughman's Pictures' (1881). A good deal of his writing was devotional, designed for use in daily meditations or family worship, or by enquirers or doubters. Examples include 'The Saint and the Saviour' (1857), 'The Interpreter' (n.d. [1874]), and 'The Cheque Book of the Bank of Faith' (1888), a compilation of 'Bible' promises arranged for daily use. Other notable publications include: 'Commenting and Commentaries' (1876), a frank catalogue of commentaries 'compiled for the use of ministers of average attainments', and the seven-volume 'Treasury of David' (1870-86), an expository and devotional commentary on the 'Psalms'. Spurgeon also wrote many tracts and pamphlets, produced a yearly 'Almanack', and (though he was not particularly musical) wrote hymns and compiled 'Our Own Hymn Book' (1870). He contributed regularly to the 'Baptist Messenger' and briefly (in 1861-2) co-edited the 'Baptist Magazine'. In 1865 he launched his own monthly, 'The Sword and the Trowel', and wrote much of this himself. 
Spurgeon was, though, more than a 'monster preacher' and prolific author. Many of his hearers joined the church, boosting membership from 313 in 1854 to over 5400 in the early 1880s. In the early to mid-1870s, when the church grew at its fastest, over 500 members joined each year. At the tabernacle, the Revd Charles Spurgeon, later plain Mr Spurgeon, and later still, reluctantly, Pastor Charles Spurgeon or (to church workers closest to him) 'the governor' commanded intense personal loyalty. He also headed a host of evangelistic and philanthropic organizations. One of the earliest and dearest to him -- and a personal venture initially -- was Pastors' College, started in 1856 to train promising preachers irrespective of background, funds, or education, and with a stress on winning souls rather than 'lofty scholarship'. By 1892 nearly 900 students, roughly one in five Baptist ministers, had passed through the college, by then housed in purpose-built premises behind the tabernacle. Many were drawn from the tabernacle congregation. Spurgeon's entertaining Friday afternoon lectures to students, many later published, often on practicalities such as posture or gestures, were a highlight of the week. The college also ran evening classes for young working men 'who desire to improve their talents that they may employ them in the service of God' ('The Sword & the Trowel', Aug 1878, 417), and pioneered Friday night popular lectures. An annual college conference, later renamed the Pastors' College Evangelical Association, helped maintain close bonds with former students. A Society of Evangelists (formed 1877-8) supported itinerant evangelists. From 1888 a Missionary Association helped students serving abroad. 
At the tabernacle itself an Evangelists' Association (founded in 1862) supplied lay preachers to mission stations and lodging houses and was a proving ground for many entrants to the college. The Colportage Association (1866) was by 1891 supporting nearly 100 full-time agents from Yorkshire to the Isle of Wight in evangelizing and selling religious and healthy literature door to door. The non-sectarian Stockwell orphanage (1867) catered for 240 boys in a series of separate houses, with a girls' wing added in 1879. Almshouses (1868) replaced and extended an earlier foundation and incorporated a day school for nearly 400 children. Mrs Spurgeon's Book Fund (1875), coupled later with a Pastors' Aid Fund, was by 1887 distributing over 10,000 books and 21,000 sermons a year to needy clergymen and ministers. The Country Mission, 'an evangelistic effort for the suburbs and the country', and a loan fund for erecting new places of worship, together with mothers' meetings, tract societies, temperance societies, and many other benevolent and missionary organizations completed the picture. When the church celebrated Spurgeon's fiftieth birthday in 1884, thirty-one societies, nine 'Bible' classes, and twenty-six missions, schools, or missions and schools were represented. The college, orphanage, and Colportage Association alone cost almost $12,500 a year to run. Raising funds and acknowledging donations took up much of Spurgeon's time. Comfortably off as time went on, he gave generously to the various causes himself. Presented with a testimonial of nearly $6500 to mark his London silver jubilee in 1879, Spurgeon used most of it to secure the future of the almshouses. 
Spurgeon played a leading role in forming the London Baptist Association in 1865, of which he served as president in 1869, and sat on its committee until 1888. He also sat on the Baptist Missionary Society committee, having previously pressed for a tightening of its rules of membership to include a profession of Christian belief. This was part of a wider attempt to strengthen the society's links with the churches and promote the faith mission principle. An ardent admirer of George Muller, the orphanage founder who trusted God to meet his needs, Spurgeon was convinced that society should put its faith in God, rather than subscribers. A committed Liberal until the home-rule split of 1886, after which he supported the unionist cause, he spoke out occasionally on public matters and at elections, and until his resignation in 1891 could be found on Liberation Society platforms. He was not, though, a natural committee man (he declined to join the Baptist Union committee in 1862) and he had little time for public platforms. His workload of between eight and ten sermons a week, editing, church work, and college oversight and correspondence was lightened by the appointment of 'teachers' at the tabernacle from 1862, and further in 1868 when his only brother, James, became co-pastor. At home at Helensburgh House in Clapham, and later amid 9 acres at Westwood, Upper Norwood, he found relaxation in the garden over bowls, quoits, or a cigar. Plagued by kidney trouble from a young age, however, he struggled increasingly with chronic rheumatic gout from the late 1860s. One commentator ('Letters of Charles Haddon Spurgeon', 166) has estimated that he spent around a third of his last twenty-two years either ill, or recovering from or taking precautions against illness. The precautions included annual winter visits to the French riviera, most often to Menton. 
Spurgeon cared little for theological systems. He was, for example, unconcerned that the Calvinist doctrine of predestination sat uncomfortably with zeal to convert sinners. For him, what mattered was the 'Bible', unerring and divinely inspired, and its message that, in Christ, God had paid the price for man's depravity. Deeply suspicious of biblical criticism, Spurgeon's fear that faith was being undermined led him to back opponents of T. T. Lynch's new hymnal in the rivulet controversy of 1856. He joined protests in 1860 at Baldwin Brown's 'Divine Life of Man', rejoiced in 1877 when Congregationalists held firm to their union's declaration of faith and order, and from the early 1880s became increasingly distant from the Baptist Union. His growing disenchantment with theological trends culminated in the down-grade controversy, which rocked the Baptist Union and sent shock waves through wider nonconformity in the autumn of 1887. In a series of colourfully worded articles in 'The Sword and the Trowel', Spurgeon alleged that unnamed Baptist ministers had abandoned, or down-graded, evangelical truths for a new religion 'which is no more Christianity than chalk is cheese'. Surprised and disappointed by the Baptist Union's failure to respond to his allegations, Spurgeon withdrew from it in October 1887, later resigning from the London Baptist Association also. Subsequent negotiations failed to persuade him to return. Spurgeon refused to substantiate his charges. The union held out against his insistence that members should in future be bound by a doctrinal declaration. For a time there were fears that the controversy might split the union. In the event, only a handful of ministers and churches closest to Spurgeon left the union with him. Thereafter, Spurgeon cut a lonely figure, saddened by a sense that friends and former students had betrayed him and by his belief that English Christianity was departing from the true faith. Easily despondent, he sat, said one reviewer, 'like the giant pope in Pilgrim's Progress, at the mouth of the cave, gnashing his teeth against those not of his way of thinking' ('Review of Reviews', 5/26, Feb 1892). 
Spurgeon continued to write and preach. On 26 April 1891, however, a nervous attack left him speechless in the pulpit, and, though he later recovered, his sermon on 7 June 1891 was his last at the Metropolitan Tabernacle. After three months' serious illness, diagnosed initially as severe influenza, Spurgeon recovered sufficiently to travel, first to Eastbourne, then to Menton for the winter, but his health again relapsed. He died on 31 January 1892 at the Hotel Beau Rivage, Menton, of uraemic poisoning (Bright's disease) aggravated by gout. He was fifty-seven. After a memorial service at the Scotch Presbyterian Church in Menton, his embalmed body was brought back to England for a succession of packed memorial services and burial in Norwood cemetery on 11 February. (He had hoped to be buried in the orphanage, but this proved impracticable.) Archibald G. Brown, minister at the East London Tabernacle, and his most distinguished student, gave the graveside eulogy. 
Spurgeon had his critics. George Eliot, noted 'The Times', thought him 'utterly common and empty of guiding intellect or emotion', responsible for 'the most superficial grocer's back parlour view of Calvinist Christianity' ('The Times', 3 Feb 1892). Others accused him of undervaluing academic scholarship (notably by ignoring the several university degrees conferred on him), of lacking awe, of a narrow theology and limited horizons, of seeing things only in black and white. 'With Mr Spurgeon you were either up or down, in or out, alive or dead' (Parker, 'The Times', 3 Feb 1892). Spurgeon's reluctance to accept that there could be more than one side to an argument left him weak as a debater or tactician. He failed to halt the rise of liberal theology. Uncertainty about who was to succeed him, coupled with his strong personal following, also made for problems at the tabernacle following his death. 
For all that, Spurgeon had a huge and lasting influence. In addition to his record-breaking preaching and congregation, and the worldwide audience for his sermons, the training offered at the Pastors' College, where he was revered, helped to change the face of Baptist ministry, encouraging recruits from working-class backgrounds and shaping the style and theology of men such as Archibald Brown and of William Cuff at Shoreditch. Across London and beyond Baptists grew in strength, benefiting enormously from Spurgeon's reputation, the work of his students, evangelists, and deacons, the transfer of tabernacle members, financial help from the tabernacle's Loan Building Fund, and the London Baptist Association's support for new church-building. In 1892 over 200 new churches in London and the home counties alone owed their rise at least in part to Spurgeon. They, and other Spurgeon followers, helped greatly to bolster support for conservative evangelical theology. 
Spurgeon's example encouraged others to advertise sermons and use public buildings for public worship. His Grecian-style tabernacle was much copied. While not alone, he was a leading exponent of a more natural, direct preaching style. The extent of his influence was shown by the 10,000 messages, letters of condolence, resolutions, and telegrams sent to his homes during his last illness; by the daily bulletins on his state of health, published in 'The Times' and posted up in public places; by the thousands attending memorial services around the country; and by the estimated 60,000 people who queued to view his coffin. 


@@@@@


doc= 26188


Spurgin, John (1796-1866), physician and medical writer, was born at Orplands, Bradwell, Essex, where he was baptized on 6 October 1796, the son of William Spurgin, farmer, and his wife, Mary, formerly Payne. He was educated at Chelmsford grammar school (1804-13), then at St Thomas's Hospital from 1813 to 1815. He matriculated at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1814 and held a scholarship there from Michaelmas 1815 to Michaelmas 1816. He then studied at Edinburgh, returning to Cambridge where he graduated MB in 1820 and MD in 1825. He was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1826, holding the office of censor in 1829 and that of conciliarius in 1851-3 and 1862-4. He delivered the Harveian oration in 1851 and the college lectures on materia medica in 1852, in which he dealt with the science of the blood. 
From 1820 Spurgin built up an extensive private practice at 38 Guilford Street, Bloomsbury, moving in 1853 to 11 and then 17 Great Cumberland Street, Hyde Park, where he afterwards remained. He was physician to the Foundling Hospital from 1835 until his death, and physician to St Mark's Hospital from 1855 to 1866. Spurgin and his wife, Rose (1809/10-1882), had a large family, six of whom were baptized at St Pancras. He was the inventor of an 'endless ladder', whereby a pair of endless ropes or chains carrying treads or small tubs ran over revolving drums at the top and bottom of mineshafts or building works, as an efficient method of transporting men and materials. He patented this device (no. 7054) in 1834, and in 1837 filed another patent (no. 7368) for a means of propelling ships by chain-driven paddles. A third patent (no. 12,106) of 1848 related to the zinc plating of steel pen nibs. He also advertised 'Dr Spurgin's Condiment', a solution of common salt and alkaline phosphates, as a digestive and purifier of the blood. 
As a young man Spurgin had been attracted to the works of Swedenborg, whose views he gradually adopted and which influenced his religious and moralistic writing. He gave an account of his experiences in a lecture read before the Swedenborg Association on 24 February 1847 and published the same year. He was for a while chairman of the society, and he intended to produce a translation of Swedenborg's philosophical works, but the only volume published was 'The introduction to an anatomical, physical, and philosophical investigation of the economy of the animal kingdom', with an address to the reader by Medicus Cantabrigiensis (1861). From December 1860 until March 1861 Spurgin was the plaintiff on behalf of the Swedenborgian Society in a lawsuit against William White, the society's resident bookseller, who, it was claimed, was selling 'spiritualist' tracts emanating from a rival author. In an unpleasant and increasingly petulant series of hearings the society failed to dislodge the bookseller immediately as his contract allowed him to sell what books he wished. 
Having published his 'Six Lectures on Materia Medica' in 1852, Spurgin expanded his thesis that blood was the prime fluid, controlling all aspects of the body and its state of health, in 'The Physician for All: his Philosophy, his Experience and his Mission' ('First curriculum', 1855; 'Second curriculum', 1857). In his popular booklet 'Cure of the Sick: not Homoeopathy, not Allopathy, but Judgement' (1860) Spurgin asserted that he himself exercised judgement on the treatment to be applied, and that he had never lost a patient to practitioners of homoeopathy or allopathy, from which he diverted into a lengthy criticism of a recent treatise by Granier on homoeopathy. In 'Drainage of Cities, Reserving their Sewage for Use and Keeping their Rivers Clean' (1858) he proposed modifications to the current plans to build conduits to divert sewage from the Thames. 
Spurgin was considered by an obituarist to be 'a practitioner of good common sense... a large-hearted man and an honour to the profession. At the peak of his career he took to farming and spent his later years in indolence' (Clarke). On 20 September 1865, returning from a visit to a patient at Wanstead, Spurgin was attacked in Bishopsgate by thieves who tried to garrotte him. The injuries he received led to his death at 17 Great Cumberland Street on 20 March 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 26189


Spurstowe, William (d. 1666), clergyman and ejected minister, was the son of William Spurstowe, a citizen and mercer of London, whose family had moved there from Shropshire; he had a brother, Henry, perhaps the Henry son of William baptized at St Stephen, Coleman Street, on 6 February 1613. He was admitted a pensioner at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1623, graduated BA in 1627 (incorporated at Oxford 1628), and proceeded MA from St Catharine's College in 1630. In August 1637, following the death of Egeon Askew, he began to officiate in the parish of Great Hampden, Buckinghamshire, and on the presentation of John Hampden, was installed as rector on 30 June 1638. That year he was also elected fellow of St Catharine's College, Cambridge, a puritan stronghold. 
With Stephen Marshall, Edmund Calamy, Thomas Young, and Matthew Newcomen, Spurstowe was one of the co-authors of the anti-episcopal tract 'Smectymnuus' (1641), a pamphlet defended by John Milton; the initials of his name provided the last letters (uus) of the authorial acronym ['see 'Smectymnuus]. He was elected to the Westminster assembly, as a representative for Merioneth, on 25 April 1642. He served as chaplain to his patron John Hampden's regiment of foot, the 'green coats' in Essex's army, a regiment mainly recruited in Buckinghamshire, and was paid from 30 July to 30 September 1642. In 1643 he preached at Hampden's funeral. He resigned from Great Hampden that year and was installed on 3 May as rector of Hackney, Middlesex, succeeding Calybute Downing. With the other Smectymnuuans he was included in the original summons (12 June 1643) to the Westminster assembly of divines, and took the solemn league and covenant the following September. 
Spurstowe preached four or five parliamentary fast sermons and thanksgiving sermons including one delivered on 21 July 1643 and published as 'Englands Patterne and Duty', in which he assessed the monthly fast programme. Preaching before both houses of parliament, he admonished them that fasting had not been sufficiently effective, 'our teares have not been reforming teares' (p. 17). On 5 November 1644 he preached to parliament in commemoration of the Gunpowder Plot, timely enough as it also celebrated the delivery by parliamentarian forces of Newcastle and Tynemouth Castle. In that sermon, published as 'Englands Eminent Judgements' (1644), he urged England to remember God's deliverance in both instances: 'Oh let it never be said that Englands Nobles, Governours and people, who have enjoyed 'such a deliverance as this', have been careless in preserving its memory; and that in a small tract and revolution of time, all that remaines of it, is like the writing upon some old monument that is wel-nigh worne out, of which little is to be read or knowne. It is a deliverance upon the had of which may be truly written: 'such' as the present age may admire; 'such' as posterity will scarcely believe; 'such' as story cannot parallel. And therefore ought the memory of it to be deare unto every one,' but he also warned the House of Lords to guard against popery and sectarianism, and urging further zeal 'in suppressing of those monstrous births of opinions which every day multiply' (pp. 10-11, 27). Spurstowe also preached parliamentary fast sermons on 24 June 1646 and 25 August 1647, and several of his fast sermons were printed. He was approved as master of Clare College, Cambridge, on 22 April 1645 but this office was given to Ralph Cudworth. In 1645 he succeeded Ralph Brownrigg (who was deprived) as master of St Catharine's, but continued to serve as rector of Hackney. In or before 1644 he married Sarah, whose other name is unknown. A son, William, was baptized at Hackney on 7 November that year. Spurstowe was a member of the provincial assembly of London (1647) and at its first meeting (3 May 1647) was placed on its committee; he served on the eighth London classis, with Thomas Manton. 
Acting as a commissioner to Charles I during negotiations on the Isle of Wight (September-November 1648), Spurstowe strongly opposed the trial and execution of the king, and in opposition he signed 'A Vindication of the Ministers of the Gospel in, and about London' at the end of 1648. With the establishment of the Commonwealth, he refused to take the engagement, and as a result in 1650 was deprived of his mastership of St Catharine's, which in November was given to John Lightfoot. On 30 October 1653, when the Independents sought assistance against the Fifth Monarchists, Spurstowe preached at St Paul's to the aldermen of London and the new lord mayor, Thomas Viner; the sermon was published as 'The Magistrate's Dignity and Duty' (1653). Taking as his text 'Psalm 82', verse 2, he warned against the dangers of a 'self-seeking Magistrate' as well as against the 'Monster of 'Anarchie'' (pp. 2, 16), referring to the dangers of the millenarian faction in the Barebone's Parliament, and to the example of German Anabaptists. He was assistant to the Middlesex commission of triers and ejectors in 1654. Gradually reconciled to the regimes of the 1650s, like other leading presbyterians he supported Richard Cromwell. He was appointed commissioner for the approbation of ministers in March 1660, a committee disbanded that April with the Convention Parliament. 
On 22 April Spurstowe preached a sermon at Hackney in favour of the king's restoration, urging from 'Psalm 2':12, 'Kiss the Son, lest he be angry', and quoting 'Zechariah' 9:9, 'Behold thy King cometh unto thee' ('CSP dom.', '1659-60', 420). On 11 May he set off for the Netherlands in a delegation which included Calamy, to meet with Charles II and negotiate over comprehension for presbyterians and the king's return. Like nine or ten leading presbyterians, Spurstowe became chaplain-in-ordinary to Charles II, and he once preached before the king. Samuel Pepys records on 6 October 1660 hearing Spurstowe preach to the king 'a poor dry sermon' (Pepys, 1.260). Spurstowe took part in the Savoy conference (April-July 1661), which under a royal commission attempted to bring together episcopalian and presbyterian ministers to settle the 'Book of Common Prayer'. Supporters of episcopacy and presbyterianism each had twelve representatives, but the orthodox, led by Bishop Gilbert Sheldon, overcame the presbyterians, led by Richard Baxter, conceding only a few of their recommendations, including the requirement of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible' at all readings. When the conference failed so too did the cause of comprehension and a wider national church. 
When the 'Act of Uniformity' became effective in August 1662, Spurstowe resigned his living in Hackney, in which he was succeeded on 22 September by Thomas Jeamson. Henceforth he lived in retirement in the parish, where Baxter spent a week visiting while preparing the answer to the episcopal defence of the prayer book. Spurstowe visited Cambridge in 1664 and dined at St Catharine's. Baxter describes him as an 'ancient, calm, reverend minister' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.97), while Edmund Calamy (1671-1732) spoke of his charity and the agreeableness of his conversation ('DNB'). Spurstowe established six almshouses for six poor widows at Hackney, with endowment from his brother and heir, Henry, who had become a London merchant and alderman and had married Susanna Renoler at St John's in 1646. Spurstowe also published two substantial prose tracts, a religious meditation, 'The Spiritual Chymist' (1666), and a fiery admonishment, 'The Wiles of Satan' (1666). Having survived the plague he died suddenly in Hackney in 1666. The ejected minister Thomas Woodcock, who also lived at Hackney, recorded among his papers that Spurstowe and William Bates were persuaded: 'to take the Oxford oath at the Sessions... before Judge Keeling, who told them that took it they were now forsworn if ever they kept meetings and did not conforme. This confounds them all, but God prevented this. Honest Dr. Spurstow dyed sudainly the night before. ('Camden Miscellany', 74)' He died intestate, and was buried at Hackney on 8 February 1666. His only child, William, had died at Hackney in March 1654 at the age of nine; Simeon Ashe had preached the funeral sermon. Spurstowe's widow, Sarah, married Anthony Tuckney (1599-1670) on 30 September 1668. Having been granted administration of Spurstowe's estate, valued at $600 a year, she was still involved in chancery proceedings over it in 1675. 
Spurstowe's life shows the trials of presbyterianism through the currents and shifts of the civil war, Commonwealth, and Restoration eras, as he sought a brace against disorders within the church and state while attempting to reform the moral character of the nation, its leaders, and its king. Author of polemics, writing and publishing sermons and devotional works, and active in his ministerial duties, working with eminent presbyterian leaders, Spurstowe sought a middle course of reform for the nation. A fanciful fiction appeared in London in 1847, 'Tract entitled true and faithful relation of a worthy discourse, between Colonel John Hampden and Colonel Oliver Cromwell', purporting to be a transcription by 'the Reverend William Spurstowe', and brought to light by George Nugent Grenville. 


@@@@@


doc= 26190


Squire, Edward (d. 1598), convicted traitor, described himself as a scrivener when he appeared before the privy council in 1598 accused of plotting to poison the queen's saddle. According to his own testimony he took up residence in Greenwich in 1582, married in 1587, and was employed in the royal stables in 1593. In August 1595 he accompanied Drake on his last voyage. The ship 'Frances' on which Squire sailed became separated from the main squadron off Guadeloupe and was captured by Pedro Tello de Guzman and taken to Spain. The English Jesuits had recently (1591) established a seminary in Seville and were in the habit of assisting indigent Englishmen in those parts. Some sort of contact was made between the protestant Squire, together with his companion Richard Rolls, and the English Roman Catholic clergy. Squire returned to England in July 1597. Almost immediately afterwards he and Rolls went to sea again on the earl of Essex's 'island expedition' to the Azores. 
Over a year later Squire was arrested and made prisoner 'unto the prison of the Compter in Wood Street, where he did so remain the space of seven weeks until he was sent from thence unto the Tower' ('APC', 29.506). In October 1598 he was interrogated and arraigned for treason. On 23 November he was hanged, disembowelled, and quartered at Tyburn on the charge of plotting in Seville on 20 April 1597 to poison the queen and for attempting to poison the earl of Essex when he was at sea between Fayal and San Miguel on 27 or 28 September 1597. There is no official account of the trial but the state papers relate the depositions of various witnesses and the confessions of Squire extracted under torture. It was only after his death that there was published an account of his alleged activities from his first arrival in Spain until his imprisonment in the Tower. This takes the form of a letter from England to an Englishman residing in Padua. It is dated 23 December 1598 and was published in 1599; it was reprinted with minor variations in 1624, 1733, and 1862. It sometimes bears the title 'Authentic memoirs of Richard Walpole', but Spedding attributes it to Sir Francis Bacon, who was present when Squire was interrogated. According to this account, the Jesuit Richard Walpole converted Squire to Roman Catholicism when he was in Seville and engineered his return to England with the object of murdering Queen Elizabeth I by applying poison to the pommel of her saddle, taking advantage of his access to the royal stables. There are inconsistencies and improbabilities in this story, which is addressed more to the prejudices of a public ready to discredit Walpole and the Jesuits than to the indictment of one whom William Camden calls 'a petty fogging clerk' (Camden, book 4, 561). 
Martin Aray, an English priest who was in Seville at the time of Squire's visit, wrote a refutation of this account. Admitting that it was not a total fabrication and that Squire was not completely innocent, 'I shew most evidently that all and everything that concerned the Jesuits and Walpole by name... is a mere fable and malicious' (Aray, p. 3'r'). Aray says that Squire was never converted but was detained by the Inquisition in a Carmelite convent at Seville because he had publicly defended protestantism. Moreover he escaped to England and was not sent by Walpole. However, according to Joseph Creswell (BL, Egerton MS 1508, fol. 315) there was a plan to exchange Rolls and Squire for two Spaniards held in England on the plea that as converts they might be able to promote the Spanish and Catholic cause at home. But they escaped before this could be negotiated. In 1602 Thomas Fitzherbert, who had been English secretary to Philip II, published another work which absolved the Jesuits of complicity in a plot of assassination and showed the injustice of the Squire trial. 
Although it is most probable that Squire was not guilty of all the charges laid against him, the trial served to arouse any whose loyalty to the queen might be flagging. A special order of prayer and thanksgiving was issued to celebrate the queen's escape from danger. The Squire plot lived on in history. To protestants he was a despicable traitor whose activities served to expose the perfidy of English Jesuits overseas. To Catholics he was an unfortunate creature who under torture allowed himself to become the tool of an unscrupulous government in discrediting and calumniating the Catholic cause. 


@@@@@


doc= 26191


Squire, John (1780-1812), army officer, eldest son of Dr John Squire (1732-1816) of Ely Place, London, who founded in 1788 the Society for the Relief of Widows and Orphans of Medical Men, was born in London. Educated at Charterhouse School under Dr Matthew Raine, and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, he was commissioned second lieutenant, Royal Engineers, in January 1797, and promoted first lieutenant on 29 August 1798. 
In August 1799 Squire embarked with the expedition under Sir Ralph Abercromby for The Helder. He was wounded in the action of 10 September, and also took part in those of Bergen and Alkmaar on 2 and 6 October. He returned with the army to England at the end of October. 
In 1801 Squire went to Egypt, and served throughout the campaign under Abercromby and under General (afterwards Lord) Hutchinson. He was at the battle of Alexandria on 21 March, the capture of Rosetta on 8 April, the capture of Fort St Julien after a three-day siege on 19 April, and the siege of Alexandria in August, and its capitulation on 2 September. With Captain William Martin Leake, Royal Artillery, and William Richard Hamilton, he deciphered the Greek inscription on the so-called Pompey's pillar at Alexandria. 
At the end of the Egyptian campaign Squire obtained leave and, with Leake and Hamilton, made a tour through Syria and Greece. After leaving Athens for Malta in the brig 'Mentor', laden with some of the Elgin marbles, Squire's party was wrecked on the island of Cerigo on 17 September 1802, and narrowly escaped death. By strenuous exertions many of the marbles and some of the party's journals, plans, and papers were recovered. Wherever Squire travelled he kept a full and accurate journal. On Squire's arrival home early in 1803 he and Leake presented to the Society of Antiquaries a memoir on Pompey's pillar, which was read on 3 February by Dr Raine of Charterhouse School, who had suggested characters to replace the eighteen which had been entirely obliterated. 
Squire was promoted captain lieutenant in February 1803, and second captain on 19 July 1804. He was employed in the southern military district on the defences of the coast of Sussex. On 1 July 1806 he was promoted first captain, and appointed commanding royal engineer in the expedition to South America. He accompanied Sir Samuel Auchmuty to La Plata, landing in January 1807. Squire conducted the siege operations at Monte Video, which, on a practicable breach being made, was carried by storm on 3 February. He was also commanding royal engineer under Major-General John Whitelocke in the operations from 28 June to 5 July which culminated in the disastrous attack on Buenos Aires and the humiliating terms by which Monte Video was given up, and the expedition returned to England. Although Squire received the thanks of Whitelocke in his dispatch, he bore witness for the prosecution at the court martial held in London in March 1808. 
In April 1808 Squire accompanied Sir John Moore's expedition to Sweden, and in the summer he went with Moore's army to Lisbon, taking part in all the operations of the campaign, which terminated on 16 January 1809 in the victory of Corunna. He embarked the same night with the army for England, and arrived in February. In April he was sent by Castlereagh in a frigate on a secret mission to the Baltic, to report on the defences and importance of the island of Bortholm as a defensive naval station. 
On 28 July of the same year he sailed, as commanding royal engineer to Sir John Hope's division, with the army under the earl of Chatham to the Scheldt. On 30 July he reconnoitred, with Captain Peake RN, the channel and shores of the East Scheldt. He took an active part in the siege of Flushing, and was present at its capture on 14 August, before returning to England in December. 
In 1810 Squire published anonymously 'A short narrative of the late campaign of the British army, &c., with preliminary remarks on the topography and channels of Zeeland', a careful study of the geography and history of the campaign, with outspoken criticism of its conduct and able proposals for operations which might have been successful. 
On 28 March 1810 Squire joined Wellington's army in Portugal. He was employed in the lines of Torres Vedras, and on their completion was, in October, appointed regulating officer of no. 3 district, from Alhandra to the valley of Calhandrix. On the retreat of Massena in March 1811 Squire accompanied Marshal Beresford's corps to the relief of Campo Mayor on 25 March. At the end of March his resourcefulness in constructing bridges across the Guadiana River and making a breach in the defences of Olivenza contributed to the latter's capture on 15 April. His services were equally great at the two sieges of Badajoz in 1811 (5-12 May and 25 May - 10 June) and on both occasions Wellington mentioned him in dispatches. 
On 21 June 1811 Squire was attached to Lieutenant-General Sir Rowland Hill's corps in Estremadura. He took part in the battle of Arroyo Molino on 28 October, when the French general, Girard, suffered an overwhelming defeat. His assistance was acknowledged with thanks by Hill in his dispatch, and Squire was promoted on 5 December to brevet major for his services. In March 1812 Squire and Burgoyne, alternating twenty-four hours' duty in the trenches, were the two directors of the attack at the third siege of Badajoz under Sir Richard Fletcher. After the capture of Badajoz by assault, on 6 April, Wellington mentioned Squire in his dispatch, referring to the assistance he rendered to Major Wilson and the 48th regiment in establishing themselves in the ravelin of San Roque. Squire was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel on 27 April, and was awarded the gold medal for Badajoz. 
Squire continued to be attached to Hill's corps, which then attempted to destroy the French bridge of boats at Almarez. But his exertions and fatigue at the siege of Badajoz had greatly exhausted him; and, having repaired the bridge of Merida, he was hastening to join Hill when he fell from his horse and was carried to Truxillo. There he died of 'fever and prostration' on 19 May 1812. Seldom was the loss of an officer of his rank more deplored. 


@@@@@


doc= 26192


Squire, Samuel (bap. 1714, d. 1766), bishop of St David's, was baptized at Warminster, Wiltshire, early in 1714, the son of Thomas Squire (1687-1761), apothecary in that town, and his wife, Susan (1686-1758), the daughter of John Scott, rector of Bishopstrow. Squire was admitted pensioner of St John's College, Cambridge, on 23 June 1730, promptly becoming Somerset scholar. In pursuing what his son later called a 'miscellaneous course of reading' (Squire, jun., handwritten biography in 'Works') Squire laid the foundations for the linguistic versatility of his mature years. Among the languages he studied, either formally or informally, were Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Icelandic, Old English, and Gothic. To defray some of the cost of his education he tutored other students, keeping careful tallies of his income and expenses in account books. Regarded by contemporaries as handsome in appearance and assiduous in his studies, Squire received his BA in 1734, won the Craven scholarship the same year, was elected a fellow of St John's in 1735, and completed his MA in 1737. He was created DD in 1749. 
On leaving Cambridge, Squire determined upon a career in the church; but before assuming the responsibilities of a clerical appointment he took well over a year off for a tour -- not the grand tour of the continent so much in vogue in his day, but rather an exploration of Great Britain. In his later writings he displayed a dislike of things Scottish. Perhaps the prejudice arose during his hikes through -- the words come from 1747 -- 'that land of mountains, barrenness & rebellion' (BL, Add. MS 4318, fol. 266). 
Squire launched his clerical career on Trinity Sunday 1739, when he was ordained deacon. His ordination as a priest came two years later, followed quickly by an appointment to the vicarage of Minting in Lincolnshire. He was now launched upon what one observer would later call his 'easy 'track of preferment'' (BL, Add. MS 5831, fol. 164). In 1742 he left Cambridge for Wells, to serve as domestic chaplain to the bishop, Dr John Wynne. In 1743 he was appointed to the archdeaconry of Bath and the prebendal stall of Wanstraw in Wells Cathedral. In 1748 he became chaplain to the duke of Newcastle, and in 1749 he was appointed to the rectory of Topsfield in Essex; in 1750 he swapped Topsfield for St Anne's, Soho, and in 1751 he received the vicarage of Greenwich. In 1756 he was made clerk of the closet in the household of the prince of Wales, and in 1760 he was installed in the deanery of Bristol. Finally, on 24 May 1761, Squire reached the pinnacle of his ecclesiastical career when he was consecrated bishop of St David's. He openly assigned his promotion to the favour of the earl of Bute. 
The chief reason why Squire's career carried him to the heights of the episcopal bench, however, was that he hitched his star to the court whigs in general and the duke of Newcastle in particular. The political realities of the Hanoverian age specified that a cleric ambitious for a successful ecclesiastical career should provide useful support for the whig cause. One important service Squire provided was political intelligence: from the late 1740s onwards he was the duke of Newcastle's chief source of information about political machinations at Cambridge University. But the most public of Squire's contributions to court whiggery were his five political essays, all products of the 1740s. In 'Letter to a Young Gentleman of Distinction' (1740) he argued, against advocates of the militia, that only a standing army was sufficient for the protection of Britain in its quarrels with France and Spain. In 'The Important Question Discussed' (1746) he skilfully defended the use of British troops on the European continent. In 'A Letter to a Tory Friend' (1746), the most theoretical of his efforts, he affirmed the whig credentials of the Pelham ministry. The final two essays were directed against the conclusions of the Jacobite historian Thomas Carte. 'Remarks upon Mr. Carte's Specimen' (1748) invoked natural law to undermine Carte's support for the house of Stuart; 'A Letter to John Trot-Plaid' (1748) employed satire to mock Carte's tendency to interpret the past in terms of the present, a fault of which Squire, in his role as historian, may be adjudged equally guilty. 
For in addition to careers as clergyman and pamphleteer Squire was a scholar of language and history. In 1741 he published 'Inquiry into the Origin of the Greek Language', arguing for the descent of Greek from Hebrew. He left in manuscript an incomplete grammar of the Saxon language. He lobbied for the study of Old English at Cambridge. He was also interested in the comparative study of ancient civilizations, publishing 'Ancient History of the Hebrews Vindicated' (1741) as a defence of the historical accuracy of the 'Pentateuch' and translating and editing Plutarch's tract on Isis and Osiris (1744). Although a product of authentic enthusiasm, his scholarship may fairly be characterized as unoriginal. 
In the mid-1740s Squire turned his attention to English constitutional history, publishing both 'An Enquiry into the Foundation of the English Constitution' (1745) and 'Historical Essay upon the Balance of Civil Power in England' (1748). These explorations, drawing for their interpretive framework on an uneasy synthesis of the contract theory of John Locke, the republicanism of James Harrington, and the natural law teachings of Cicero, were detailed elaborations of the view of government he was simultaneously promoting in 'A Letter to a Tory Friend'. Squire argued that the constitutional settlement after the revolution of 1688, which he characterized as 'perhaps the most perfect plan of civil empire, which can be invented' (Squire, 34), had recovered for England the spirit of the ancient Anglo-Saxon constitution: both basic frames, he believed, existed to defend liberty, property, and justice. 
In the early 1750s Squire revisited the historical interpretations he had advanced in the 1740s and found their continuationism inconsistent with the growing weight of historical research into medieval England. Squire's effort to bring his whig vision of English history into closer co-ordination with this scholarship left him exposed to charges of internal inconsistency, and he abandoned historical writings for Christian apologetics, producing two works in his capacity as an instructor for the prince of Wales: 'Indifference for Religion Inexcusable' (1758) and 'The Principles of Religion Made Easy to Young Persons' (1763). Finally, also in 1763, he attached his memoir of Thomas Herring, archbishop of Canterbury, as an addendum to a book of sermons by the late prelate. Squire's standing as a scholar of language and history was twice recognized, first in 1746 when he was elected fellow of the Royal Society, and then in 1748 when he was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. 
On 13 May 1752, safely in possession of the living at Greenwich, Squire had married Charlotte, daughter of Thomas Ardesoif of Soho Square. The couple had four children. It was the youngest of them, born in 1764 and also named Samuel, who in 1817 authored the hand-written biography of his father that graced the edition of Squire's works now in the British Library. Samuel Squire the elder died in Harley Street, London, on 7 May 1766; his widow died on 12 April 1771. Three of his children survived him. 
To many contemporaries Squire was a symbol of the avaricious climber, personifying pluralism with his startling accumulation of clerical offices. William Warburton drew on this reputation in his famous comparison of Squire with the political economist Josiah Tucker: 'One of them made Trade his Religion; the Other Religion his Trade' (Nichols, 2.55). But throughout his life Squire was known privately as a generous man, and by late in his career he was behaving in ways quite consistent with an ecclesiastical calling, even earning some grudging commendations for conscientiousness. It is perhaps fair to conjecture that historians, attending chiefly to his enemies when stressing his careerism, have judged Squire somewhat too harshly. 


@@@@@


doc= 26193


Squire, William (d. 1677), Church of England clergyman, was born in Yorkshire, the son of a proctor in the archbishop of York's court. He entered Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1647. After graduating BA in 1650 or 1651 he 'went thence for preferment' to Oxford, where he entered Brasenose College as a batteler, was incorporated on either 16 June 1652 or 16 January 1653, and proceeded MA on 25 April 1653 (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1115). Soon afterwards he became a chaplain at All Souls College and a fellow of University College. Through the influence of Gilbert Sheldon, archbishop of Canterbury, Squire was presented, in 1675, to the rectory of Rolleston, Derbyshire, and on 23 July of the same year was instituted to the prebend of Hansacre, in Lichfield Cathedral. 
Squire wrote two books against Roman Catholicism, published in 1672 and 1674. Among the well-worn arguments deployed in them the following may be singled out as reflecting something of the pragmatic and questioning spirit which had emerged in recent times: 'their pretended traditions are nothing to us, they may be records of their own making... they bring us no other proof than the testimony of men who are parties themselves: we have learnt to call no man on earth, master, or take that for gospel, which any sect, or party of men under what name soever impose on us. Let them prove what they require us to believe. (W. Squire, 'Some More Considerations Proving the Unreasonableness of the Romanists', 1674, sig. A3)' William Squire died at Rolleston at the beginning of September 1677, and was buried on 4 September in the chancel of the parish church under a black marble stone. 


@@@@@


doc= 26194


Stack, Edward (d. 1833), army officer, was born in Ireland, coming from a family styled Stack de Crotto, three members of which served in the French army in the eighteenth century. Edward entered the French army in early life, and became an aide-de-camp to Louis XV. In 1777 he became lieutenant and accompanied La Fayette to America to aid the colonists in their revolt. He was on the 'Bonhomme Richard' on 23 September 1779 when her commander, Paul Jones, captured the 'Serapis' in the North Sea. Shortly afterwards he was placed in command of Dillon's regiment in the Irish brigade, and proceeded to the West Indies, where he served under the marquis de Bouille, governor of the Windward Islands, and assisted in taking Tobago, St Kitts, Nevis, and Montserrat from the British. He was promoted captain in 1789, and for his services in America was made chevalier de St Louis and chevalier de Cincinnatus d'Amerique. 
Stack remained in Dillon's regiment until the French Revolution, when he entered the British service as an officer of the Irish brigade. He became lieutenant-colonel in the 5th regiment on 1 October 1794. The brigade was disbanded in 1798, but he was promoted to a colonelcy on half pay on 1 January 1801. On the rupture of the peace of Amiens in 1803, he was one of those detained in France by Bonaparte. Released on parole, in 1804 he was detected while performing a secret mission for the British government, and was to have been shot with the duc d'Enghien, but was reprieved at the last minute; he was first imprisoned at Biche for three years, and then at Verdun. He was released in 1814 on the restoration of the Bourbons. 
While in captivity Stack was promoted to the rank of major-general in the British army on 25 April 1808, and to that of lieutenant-general on 4 January 1813. After his release he was made a general on 22 July 1830. He was 'tall and thin in person, sprightly and elegant, his manners most accomplished' ('GM', 226). He died at Calais, France, at a great age, in December 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 26195


Stack, Richard (d. 1812), Church of Ireland clergyman and scholar, was an elder son of Edward Stack, a farmer in co. Cork, and his wife, Sarah Ball. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, as a sizar on 27 May 1766, becoming a scholar (1769), and graduating BA (1770), MA (1779), BD (1783), and DD (1786). He became a fellow there in 1779. After ordination to the ministry of the Church of Ireland as a deacon in 1773 and as a priest in 1774, he was appointed curate of St Nicholas's, Cork, in 1775 and curate at Killaspugmullane, co. Cork, in 1777, and was prebendary and vicar of Timoleague in 1778-9. A founder member of the Royal Irish Academy (1785), he was a vice-president and contributed the first paper of all to the literary section of its 'Transactions' (1787). 
Stack resigned his fellowship on 24 September 1791 upon being appointed to the livings of Drumragh (better known as Omagh), co. Tyrone, and Killyleagh, co. Down, both Trinity College advowsons. During this time he published 'An Introduction to the Study of Chemistry' (1802), 'Lectures on the Acts of the Apostles' (2nd edn, 1804; later edn, Philadelphia, 1815), and 'Lectures on the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans' (1806). Later in 1807 he exchanged Drumragh for Cappagh, co. Tyrone. He and his wife, Mary, daughter of John Baldwin of Dysert, Queen's county, had five sons and four daughters. The youngest son, Joseph Stack (1799?-1838), also was ordained and a fellow of Trinity. Richard Stack died on 25 April 1812. His brother John Stack (1760?-1813), also a Church of Ireland clergyman and fellow of Trinity, was secretary of the Royal Irish Academy and author of a pioneering work, 'A Short System of Optics' (1787). 


@@@@@


doc= 26196


Stackhouse, John (bap. 1742, d. 1819), botanist and classical scholar, was born at Trehane, Probus, Cornwall, and baptized at St Erme on 15 March 1742, the second son of William Stackhouse DD (died 1771), rector of St Erme, Cornwall, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Williams; he was a nephew of the theologian Thomas Stackhouse (1680?-1752). Stackhouse matriculated on 20 June 1758 from Exeter College, Oxford, but appears not to have graduated. He was a fellow of the college from 1761 to 1764. He resigned his fellowship on succeeding (27 May 1763) his cousin Mrs Grace Percival, sister of Sir William Pendarves and last in direct line, to the Pendarves estates, near Camborne, and, after travelling abroad for about three years, settled into Pendarves. On 20 April 1773 he married Susannah (1753-1833), only daughter and heir of Edward Acton of Acton Scott, Shropshire. Of their four sons and three daughters, the eldest son (John) died at age seven; the second, Edward William, eventually MP, took the additional surnames Wynne and Pendarves (1815); and the third, Thomas Pendarves, succeeded to Acton Scott and after his mother's death took the additional surname of Acton. 
With an adequate income, Stackhouse was able to develop his early interest in botany, especially seaweeds and, inspired by his classical background, those plants referred to by Theophrastus. In pursuit of seaweed interests, about 1775 he built Acton Castle, named for his wife, and close to the coast at Stackhouse Cove, Mount's Bay. This building, his 'Marine Box', included basement tanks, in which Stackhouse was the first known worker to grow marine algae from spores. There, as Stackhouse told Turner, the 'rocks at low water have many curious 'Fuci''. In his investigations, Stackhouse relied on his own field observations; the herbaria of Dillenius, Bobart, and Linnaeus; and work by colleagues such as T. J. Woodward, Dawson Turner, Samuel Goodenough (bishop of Carlisle from 1808), Lilly Wigg, John Pitchford, and Colonel Thomas Velley. The prime significance in seaweed terms of Stackhouse's work is that he was 'the first to break away completely from the custom of recognizing only the Linnean genera of algae' (Papenfuss, 'Classification', 116). He eventually (1795-1801; 1809; 1816) divided the British species of the Linnaean 'Fucus' into sixty-seven genera, some red, some brown, and some lichenized, of 'algae'. This complex task was inevitably incomplete then and the results are now largely (but not wholly) superseded. Few copies of Stackhouse's main works 'Nereis Britannica', 'Illustrationes Theophrasti', and his edition of 'Theophrasti Eresii de historia plantarum libri decem' have survived; this is unsurprising since sales of the second and third fasciculi of the 'Nereis', his principal text on seaweeds, were poor, partly due to the Napoleonic wars. (However, being his own artist, he broke even.) The 'Nereis' was published as a first edition in three fasciculi (1795-1801) at Bath; the mode of publication made the pagination complex and the plates equally so. A folio work, its make-up and variation between known copies, including the presence or absence of Stackhouse's portrait, are well described by Henrey (1975). The text, in both Latin and English, differs from that of the later (1816) second edition which, in smaller format and in Latin only, also contains additional new genera. Between these, Stackhouse produced his 'Tentamen marino-cryptogamicum'; although dated from Bath, 1807, this appeared in the second volume (1809, 50-97) of 'Memoires de la Societe Imperiale des Naturalistes de Moscou'. Stackhouse was a fellow of the Moscow Society and as early as 1795 of the Linnean Society. Two other papers appeared in the 'Transactions of the Linnean Society', volumes three (1797) and five (1800). 
Stackhouse's more classically influenced botany appeared in 'Illustrationes Theophrasti' (1811) and his two-volume edition of 'Theophrasti Eresii de historia plantarum libri decem' (1813-14). He later extracted the Theophrastan text on frankincense, myrrh, and balsam from the latter, added notes, text, and Latin translation of the Greek (overall as 'De libanoto, smyrna, et balsamo, Theophrasti notitiae', published 1814), and produced a prefatory pamphlet to accompany the 1814 text, under the title 'Extracts from Bruce's travels in Abyssinia, and other modern authorities, respecting the balsam and myrrh trees' (1815). Catalogues of the plants mentioned by Theophrastus appear with the 1811 and 1813-14 works by Stackhouse. There is disagreement among some modern authors on the acceptability of Stackhouse's treatments of Theophrastus and his botany. 
Stackhouse also published in the 'Classical Journal', and contributed to Alberto Fortis's 'Dei cataclismi sofferti dal nostro pianeta, saggio poetico' (1786), Coxe's 'Literary Life and Select Works of Benjamin Stillingfleet' (1811), Withering's 'An Arrangement of British Plants' (1796 and 1801), and Dawson Turner's 'Fuci' (1807-19). In 1804, already much afflicted by gout, he resigned the Pendarves estate to his eldest surviving son, Edward William, and retired to Bath where, increasingly weakened by his condition even after good years, and 'keeping from the air in bad weather & discontinuing totally Malt liquors, & in a gt degree, wine' (Stackhouse to Dawson Turner, 13 April 1809), he died at his house in Edgar Buildings on 22 November 1819. He was buried at All Saints' Church, Weston, Bath; his wife, Susannah, who died on 31 December 1833, and his sister Mary, who died on 26 September 1829, aged ninety, were later buried alongside him. A monument to him, erected in 1820 by his widow, is in Camborne church, Cornwall. 


