@@@@@


doc= 26197


Stackhouse, Thomas (1681/2-1752), religious writer and controversialist, the son of John Stackhouse (1652?-1734), vicar of Coniscliffe (1712-18) and later rector of Boldon, co. Durham, was born at Witton-le-Wear, in that county, where his father was then curate. He was educated for three years at Sedbergh School under Mr Wharton. On 3 April 1699 he entered St John's College, Cambridge, aged seventeen, but the designation of MA that appears on the title-pages of some of his works does not seem to represent a degree from an English university; according to family tradition his MA may have been obtained during his residence abroad. From 1701 to 1704 he was headmaster of Hexham grammar school, and on 24 December 1704 he was ordained priest in London. He then became curate of Shepperton, Middlesex, and from 1713 was minister of the English church in Amsterdam. On his return to England he held a succession of curacies at Ealing, Richmond, and, by 1731, Finchley. He was twice married: he had two sons with his first wife, who died in 1709, and two sons and a daughter with his second wife, Elizabeth Reynell. 
For some time Stackhouse lived in poverty, and in 1722, under the designation of 'A Clergyman of the Church of England', he printed a letter addressed to Bishop John Robinson (1650-1723) in which he exposed the 'miseries and great hardships of the inferior clergy, in and about London'. It was reprinted several times and by 1737 carried Stackhouse's name on the title-page. In addition to publishing some of the sermons that he had preached at Richmond, Stackhouse attempted to supplement his meagre earnings in the 1720s through paid work for booksellers. He edited 'Memoirs of the Life, and Conduct, of Dr. Francis Atterbury, Late Bishop of Rochester' (1723), which he dedicated to William Pulteney and which portrayed Atterbury as deluded by ambition. In this work Stackhouse also allowed himself an attack on those who postponed his own advancement, in particular criticizing the 'daily and visible Insufficiency' of Bishop Robinson (p. 71). He published an abridgement of Gilbert Burnet's 'History of his Own Times' (1724) and edited other works occasionally thereafter, for example assisting in the revision of Sir William Dawes's 'The Duties of the Closet' (1732). He also translated 'Chinese Tales', by Thomas Simon Gueulette, which he dedicated to Mrs Pulteney, and produced 'Reflections on the Nature and Property of Languages' (1731), based on the work of du Tremblay, in which he argued for the evolution of language over time. A more ambitious work of compilation, demonstrating Stackhouse's commitment to improving the learning as well as the income of the lesser clergy, was 'A Complete Body of Divinity' (1729), which summarized under various doctrinal headings a wide range of contemporary theological and apologetic works, including many of the Boyle lectures. 
By the 1730s Stackhouse was looking to benefit from the opportunities created by booksellers who wanted to publish serialized works of reference. His edition of Burnet was issued in the 'Weekly Journal' between 1734 and 1737. But his most important venture was a successor to 'A Complete Body of Divinity', to be called 'A Complete History of the Holy Bible'. Stackhouse had in May 1732 been approached by John Wilford and Thomas Edlin, to whom he owed money for books, to write a work for publication in parts, and had suggested this subject. He subsequently contracted with Edlin but soon fell out with him over payment and the rate of production of both copy and printed text. This quarrel led Edlin to engage John Campbell to take over the work, which he hurried out in 1733, though not before Stackhouse had published 'The Book-Binder, Book-Printer, and Book-Seller Confuted' (1732), defending himself and revealing Edlin's shortcomings as a publisher. Having shrewdly learned his lesson, Stackhouse completed his own text, now called 'A New History of the Holy Bible', and published it himself in 1733. Illustrated with maps and plates, each dedicated to a different member of the hierarchy of the Church of England, this book was based on wide reading and written in an accessible style. It proved to be a great success as a reliable work of reference. A new edition, with a royal privilege and a dedication to Bishop Gibson, appeared between 1742 and 1744 in weekly parts priced 6died, and in 1752 a further subscription was raised for an edition with 104 new plates, engraved at a cost of $800. Despite continuing disputes over copyright there were frequent reprintings at both London and Edinburgh throughout the rest of the century, and editions continued to appear from provincial presses in the nineteenth century, including one published at Newcastle in 1809 with engravings by Thomas Bewick. 
Stackhouse enjoyed further success through serial publication when he issued his 'New and Practical Exposition of the Apostles Creed', in twenty-eight parts at 6died each, from October 1746. A final compilation of a similar kind, 'The Life of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: with the Lives of the Apostles and Evangelists', was published posthumously in 1754 despite an injunction in Stackhouse's will that all his manuscripts were to be burnt. It would be too easy to dismiss Stackhouse's literary productions as hack work. His historical works were frequently reprinted, and his biblical and doctrinal compilations reached a wide audience at home and abroad. Several editions of 'A Complete Body of Divinity', translated into French by J.-F. Boisot, were published at Lausanne from 1759. All four of Stackhouse's major theological works were translated by the Halle-educated pastor Friedrich Eberhard Rambach, and editions were published in German at Rostock, Breslau, and even Philadelphia, where they found favour with pietist divines and readers. 
The admiration that Stackhouse felt for Edmund Gibson, bishop of London, is apparent in the dedications to 'A Fair State of the Controversy between Mr Woolston and his Adversaries' (1730) and 'A Defence of the Christian Religion from the Several Objections of Modern Antiscripturists' (1731), both of which drew heavily on the attacks on deism in the pastoral letter to his diocese that Gibson had recently printed. Charles Chais translated 'A Defence' into French in 1738, and it proved popular on the continent as well as in England, although it was criticized by Liberato Fassoni in his 'De leporii libello', published at Rome in 1761. 


With Gibson's patronage the elder Thomas Stackhouse was appointed to the vicarage of Beenham Valence in Berkshire in the summer of 1733. He died there on 15 October 1752 and was buried in the parish church, where a monument consisting of a representation in stone of 'A New History of the Holy Bible' was erected to his memory. The ironic Latin verses 'Vana doctrinae emolumenta, et varia studiorum incommoda', which were published under his name in 1752, suggest that the concerns that had first tempted him into print continued to bother him at the end of his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 26198


Thomas Stackhouse (1706-1784), educational writer, was the younger son of Thomas Stackhouse and his first wife. He married on 4 April 1767 Hester Nash (died 1794) at St James's, Piccadilly, and appears to have made his living from teaching aristocratic pupils, who included Lady Georgiana Spencer, the future duchess of Devonshire, and the grandchildren of the dowager duchess of Beaufort. He was also responsible for the education of his nephew Thomas Stackhouse (1756-1836), antiquary. He published a new Greek grammar in 1762, 'A General View of Ancient History, Chronology, and Geography' in 1770, and 'The English Particles Rendered into Classical Latin' in 1772. He died at Lisson Grove, London, in 1784. 


@@@@@


doc= 26199


Stackhouse, Thomas (1756-1836), educational writer and antiquary, was born at Cockermouth on 27 September 1756, the son of Daniel Stackhouse and Margaret Morland, who married in 1755, and the grandson of Thomas Stackhouse (1681/2-1752), vicar of Beenham Valence. He was educated by his uncle Thomas Stackhouse (1706-1784) ['see under 'Stackhouse, Thomas (1681/-1752)] in London and worked as a tutor in Liverpool. He published a number of school textbooks on punctuation, ancient Greek society, geography, astronomy, and the use of globes, many of which were illustrated with his own drawings and diagrams. He also wrote a few theological works. His principal hobby was investigating the archaeological remains of early Britons. After walking 'considerably above a hundred miles... among the barrows' near Weymouth and Dorchester, in Dorset, he published 'Illustration of the Tumili, or Ancient Barrows' (1806). He lectured on his antiquarian interests, published as 'Two Lectures on the Remains of Ancient Pagan Britain'; 'Copies of drawings illustrative of a course of lectures on the architectural and other remains of Britain' appeared in 1833. He was elected a member of the Royal Liverpool Academy, founded in 1810. 
On 18 December 1783, at Liverpool, Stackhouse married Ruth (1756/7-1833), daughter of John and Ruth Fell of Blennerhasset, Cumberland. They had three sons -- Thomas ('b'. 1785), John ('b'. 1792), and Joseph (1795-1808) -- and two daughters, Elizabeth ('b'. 1787) and Mary (1789-1790). Their two elder children were born in Lancashire, the three younger in London, which suggests that the family moved to London between 1787 and 1789. In later life Stackhouse joined the Society of Friends. His speech at the eleventh annual meeting of the Peace Society was reported in the 'Herald of Peace' (vol. 6, 1827). His wife died at Stamford Hill on 16 February 1833, aged seventy-six. He himself died at Chapel Road, Birdcage Fields, Hackney, on 29 January 1836, and was buried, with his wife, in the Quaker burial-ground at Park Street, Stoke Newington, on 4 February. He left in manuscript 'Historical, doctrinal, and literary notices of the Society of Friends' but its whereabouts is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 26200


Stafford, Anthony (b. 1586/7, d. in or after 1645), author, was the fifth and youngest son of John Stafford, esquire (died 1595), of Blatherwick, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Bridget Clopton. He may have received his early education at Westminster School. He matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, on 8 March 1605, aged eighteen, and was admitted as a student at the Inner Temple on 30 January 1606. However, he never completed his studies at either place, probably because of the disgrace which overtook his family in June 1607 when his eldest brother, Humphrey, was executed for the buggery of two teenaged boys. The case was reported in a contemporary pamphlet, 'The Arraignement, Judgement, Confession and Execution of Humfrey Stafford' (1607), which drew particular attention to the fact that the accused was 'a Gentleman of high birth, and honorablie descended' ('The Arraignement'). Oblique references to the case can be found in some of Anthony's later works: in 'Staffords Niobe' (1611) he declared that it was better to die childless 'than hereafter to let any crooked branch deform the beauty of the whole stocke, or any disorderlie person... purchase infamy to his whole family', though he added that he could not understand 'how a man by never so hainous a fact can taint his whole blood or kindred', as vice was not hereditary. 
In 1609 Stafford was admitted to study in the Bodleian Library, and over the next few years he published a series of moral treatises drawing on his extensive reading, including 'Staffords Niobe' (1611), 'Meditations and Resolutions, Morall, Divine, Politicall' (1612), 'The Golden Meane' (1613), and 'Staffords Heavenly Dogge' (1615). The recurring theme of these works is the definition of true gentility. 'Staffords Niobe' attacks the ignorant gentleman 'whose minde is capable of nothing but a hunting-match, a racket-court or a cock-pit, or at the most the story of Susanna in an alehouse', and extols Sir Philip Sidney as the personification of the gentlemanly ideal. The title-page of 'Meditations and Resolutions' explains that the work is 'written for the instruction and bettering of youth; but especially of the better and more noble', and 'The Golden Meane' (anonymous, but plausibly attributed to Stafford on stylistic and bibliographical grounds) is a discourse on 'the noblenesse of perfect Virtue in extremes', written in the form of a letter to a 'noble Lord', identified in later editions as Henry, earl of Northumberland. Stafford dedicated these works to a series of prospective patrons: 'Staffords Niobe' to Robert, earl of Salisbury (to whom Stafford admits he is a 'stranger'), 'Meditations and Resolutions' to Frances, countess of Hertford (of whom he claims to be a 'kinsman'), and 'Staffords Heavenly Dogge' to his 'deare friend' Sir John Wentworth, in whose household he may have been living at the time. 
In 1622 Stafford was living in Antwerp, where he was part of a Europe-wide network of correspondents supplying news to the British charge d'affaires in Brussels, William Trumbull. The relationship between the two men was evidently close: Stafford addressed Trumbull as his 'deare father' and assured him that 'above all men living, my deare Lord excepted, I most love and honour you'. Stafford's 'deare Lord' was his patron George, Lord Berkeley (1601-1658), with whom he had been travelling on the continent, and to whom he dedicated his next book, 'The Guide of Honour' (written 'c'.1621 but not published until 1634), the last and most detailed of his treatises on the nature of gentility. 'The Guide of Honour' discusses various aspects of gentlemanly behaviour -- learning and religious devotion, hospitality, and 'care of your private estate' -- and argues that in each case the true gentleman is distinguished by his lack of ostentation. It also refers in passing to another projected work by Stafford, which he also proposed to dedicate to Lord Berkeley: 'I shall shortly write you a peculiar Tract of Historie, and dedicate that to your Lordships Name, as I have already my selfe to your service'; however, this work does not appear to have survived. Stafford was in attendance on Lord Berkeley in July 1623, when they both received the MA degree at Oxford; and G. C. Moore Smith has suggested that Thomas Randolph's ode, 'To Master Anthony Stafford to Hasten him into the Country', may have been written on the occasion of a visit to Berkeley Castle. 
Most of Stafford's later works are on religious themes. 'The Day of Salvation' (1635), dedicated to Lord Berkeley's sister, Theophila, Lady Coke, consists of an extended meditation on the death and passion of Christ. This was followed by two works of translation, 'A Synopsis or Compendium of the Fathers' (1635) from the French work by the protestant theologian Daniel Tossanus (1541-1602), and 'A Wittie Encounter between Monsieur de Moulin and Monsieur de Balzac' (1636), which deals with various matters of religious controversy, including Jesuit theories of regicide. By far the most famous of Stafford's religious writings, however, was his panegyric on the Virgin Mary, 'The Femall Glory' (1635), also dedicated to Lady Coke and described on the title-page as 'a treatise worthy the reading and meditation of all modest women, who live under the Government of Vertue and are obedient to her Lawes'. Its publication provoked a storm of protest. The puritan minister Henry Burton attacked the work in his sermon 'For God and the King' (1636), in which he accused Stafford of crypto-Catholicism, quoting with disgust some of Stafford's more extravagant praise of the Virgin Mary, such as the description of her as 'the Grand White Immaculate Abbesse of your snowy Nunneries'. Stafford defended himself in 'A Just Apology or Vindication of a Booke Entituled 'The Female Glory'', dedicated to Archbishop William Laud and Bishop William Juxon, which survives in a manuscript at Queen's College, Oxford. 
Despite the unguarded language of 'The Femall Glory', Stafford was not a Roman Catholic. His book depicts the Virgin Mary as the embodiment of various feminine virtues -- such as humility, obedience, and 'motherly care' -- echoing some of his earlier works on gentility, in which an idealized figure such as Sir Philip Sidney is held up as a pattern for his readers to imitate. In his 'Just Apology' Stafford claimed that he had merely intended to praise the Virgin Mary, not to invoke her as a saint, and this is corroborated by 'The Day of Salvation', in which he firmly declares that one can be saved only by the merits of Christ, not by the intercession of 'other holy men or angells'. By this stage, however, Stafford had abandoned some of his earlier religious opinions. In 'Staffords Niobe' he had offered a qualified defence of puritan nonconformity, declaring that although puritans were 'guilty of schism, yet they are not dangerous, but live and dye without thought of slaughter'. These views are retracted in the 'Just Apology', which states unequivocally that puritans are 'dangerous, even above the Jesuit' because 'they teach Deposition of Kings'. In his strong hostility to puritanism, his reluctance to engage in anti-Catholic polemic, and his respect for the authority of the Church of England, Stafford was typical of the new style of religious orthodoxy promoted by Archbishop Laud. 
Stafford's final work, 'Honour and Vertue Triumphing over the Grave' (1640), was a biography of his kinsman Henry, fourteenth Baron Stafford, who had died in 1637 at the age of sixteen. It is dedicated to his new patron, the earl of Arundel, and resembles Stafford's earlier works in its attempt to define the nature and attributes of 'true Nobility'. Little is known about Stafford's last years: he was still alive in January 1645, when his brother Walter bequeathed him $5 in his will, but Anthony Wood stated that 'he died, as I have been informed, in the time of the civil wars' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.'). He almost certainly never married. Most of his works have never been reprinted, but 'The Femall Glory' and 'A Just Apology' were edited by the Anglo-Catholic priest Orby Shipley in 1860. 


@@@@@


doc= 26201


Stafford, Edmund (1344-1419), administrator and bishop of Exeter, was the second son of Sir Richard Stafford of Clifton, banneret (died 1380), and Isabel, his first wife (died 'c'.1350), daughter of Sir Richard Vernon of Haddon. Ralph, first earl of Stafford (died 1372), was his uncle, while his father was a prominent associate of Edward, the Black Prince. His elder brother, Richard, died in their father's lifetime, and Edmund inherited his father's lands in 1380. He attended Oxford University, graduating BA by 1363 and BCL in 1369: he was appointed a canon of Lichfield in 1363 and received other benefices in the part of Staffordshire where his family lands lay. His promotion in the 1380s was rapid, more perhaps by virtue of his administrative abilities than his political connections. He became dean of York in 1385 and also in that year took the degree of DCL. He was a king's clerk by 1388, and was appointed keeper of the privy seal on 4 May 1389, following Richard II's dismissal of the officers appointed by the appellants in 1388. During his period of office the practice seems to have begun of sending poor men's causes to the keeper of the privy seal and a group of councillors for adjudication. On 15 January 1395 he was provided to the see of Exeter, 'at the king's instance', according to Walsingham, and he was consecrated by Archbishop William Courtenay (died 1396) on 20 June. He remained in office as keeper of the privy seal until February 1396, and on 15 November of that year he was appointed chancellor. 
Stafford preached the opening sermon in the parliament of September 1397 on the theme 'Rex unus erit omnibus' ('One king shall be king to them all'). He stressed the subject's duty of obedience to the king and submission to the law. Yet although his sermon emphasized the supremacy of royal power, it is not clear that he fully sympathized with Richard's extreme measures in the following two years: his role may rather have been that of an able, if compliant, administrator. His academic standing was recognized in 1399 when he was summoned, together with other Oxford masters, to offer an opinion on the proposal to withdraw obedience from the Roman pope, Boniface IX ('r'. 1389-1404). He lost the chancellorship at the accession of Henry IV, but he remained a member of the council, and was one of the bishops who assented to the imprisonment of Richard II. In March 1401, as part of a general reaction against Henry's dependence on his Lancastrian associates, Stafford was appointed chancellor once again and held office until February 1403, when he was succeeded by Henry Beaufort (died 1447). For several years after his loss of office Stafford continued to play some part in government. He served as a trier of petitions in the parliaments of 1404 and 1406, and was named as one of the king's councillors in the parliament of 1406. 
While he held high office in government, Stafford seldom visited his diocese, but in 1400, in the interval between his first and second tenures of the chancellorship, he carried out a lengthy visitation of nearly every part of his diocese. After 1403 he became mainly occupied with diocesan affairs, and conducted three further visitations, in 1404, 1411, and 1414. After 1414 his health probably began to fail (in his will, dated 24 July 1418, he described himself as sound in mind but weak in body), but he continued to play some part in the administration of his diocese. He died on 3 September 1419, having just been excused attendance at the forthcoming parliament. He was buried in Exeter Cathedral on the north side of the lady chapel in a tomb chest which still survives. He was a generous benefactor to Exeter College, Oxford, giving to the college books for divine service and for the library, and providing more than 200 marks ($133 6's'. 8died) to pay for various building works there. He also owned some books that he had bought at the sale of the goods of Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester, after the latter's condemnation for treason in 1397. He may have had some sense of guilt about the purchase, for in his will he ordered his executors to sell the books and devote the proceeds to prayers for the souls of himself, Woodstock, and all the faithful departed. The family lands, which included Clifton Campville in Staffordshire, of which he had been rector since 1384, passed at his death to his nephew Thomas, son of his younger brother, also called Thomas, who had died some time between 1385 and 1419. He also bequeathed to his nephew some of his personal possessions from his manor of Clyst Honiton, including a tapestry embroidered with the arms of the bishop's father. 


@@@@@


doc= 26202


Stafford, Edward, third duke of Buckingham (1478-1521), magnate, was born at Brecon Castle on 3 February 1478, the eldest son of Henry Stafford, second duke of Buckingham (1455-1483), and his wife, Katherine Woodville (1457/8-1497) ['see under 'Stafford, Henry, second duke of Buckingham]. 
When his father rebelled against Richard III in 1483, Edward Stafford was hidden in various houses in Herefordshire; whether he remained there for the rest of Richard's reign is unclear. He attended the coronation of Henry VII on 30 October 1485, and was created KB. He was recognized as duke of Buckingham and restored to his inheritance on the reversal of his father's attainder in November 1485. Although his mother had married Henry VII's uncle, Jasper Tudor, Buckingham's wardship was entrusted to the king's mother, Lady Margaret Beaufort, and his education probably took place at her various houses, under the aegis of the graduate clerks employed there; he was to follow Lady Margaret's example in his own household. There is no evidence that he attended a university, although by family custom he was almost certainly a benefactor of the monastic Buckingham College, Cambridge, and, under pressure from Lady Margaret, of Queens' College. He was certainly literate, wrote memoranda in his own hand, and possessed an extensive if rather conventional library. In 1512 he commissioned a printed translation of 'Helyas, Knyghte of the Swanne' (STC 7571), and later 'A Lytell Cronicle' (STC 13256), a translation of an account of the Middle East perhaps made in connection with his proposed pilgrimage to Jerusalem in 1520. 
In 1488 Henry VII suggested Buckingham as a possible husband for Anne, the new duchess of Brittany; but, given formidable international competition for her hand, Henry did not press the matter. In December 1489 the king accepted $4000 from the executors of the recently assassinated fourth earl of Northumberland for Buckingham's hand for the earl's eldest daughter, Eleanor Percy (died 1530). The duke became KG in 1495 and in 1498, not yet quite of age, he was granted livery of his lands, but was charged $3000 instead of the usual $1000 by the king, who also demanded $2000 from him for his mother's unlicensed marriage to Richard Wingfield. 
Buckingham served in the army raised against Perkin Warbeck in 1497. He played a conspicuous part in court festivities such as royal weddings and the reception of ambassadors and foreign princes, dazzling observers by his sartorial splendour. At the wedding of Prince Arthur and Katherine of Aragon in 1501 he wore a gown said to be worth $1500, and was chief challenger at the extravagant tournament held the next day. He served as lord high constable and lord high steward at Henry VIII's coronation in 1509. In 1513 he led 550 men on Henry VIII's invasion of France, distinguishing himself, in the event, more by his appearance than by prowess in action. Later, probably in 1517, he excused himself from selection as one of twelve noble 'challengers' to fight against the king and his 'scholars', pleading the danger of 'run[ning] against his person, for I had liever by his commandment go to Rome than so do' (Ellis, 'Original Letters', 3rd ser., 1.214-18). In 1520, at the Field of Cloth of Gold, he served as a judge rather than a participant in the tournaments. 
In 1514 Buckingham was appointed to the commission of the peace in nine English counties in which he had extensive property. His major responsibility for public order related to his lordships in south Wales. In 1504, with other marcher lords, he had entered into indentures with Henry VII to reduce the incidence of murder and robbery by placing his tenants under bond and by expediting extradition over franchisal boundaries. In 1518 he received a stinging rebuke from Henry VIII for his failure to achieve results, being required to place his adult male tenants under bonds immediately. In 1514 he claimed to be entitled to hold the constableship of England by virtue of his tenure of certain manors; a claim ostensibly about status, but with potential political implications. The judges conceded the claim, but with the proviso that the king could dispense with his services, which, inevitably, he did. In spite of his prominence at court and in the country, the duke exercised little political influence, and was never one of the inner circle of councillors. 
There is no evidence of continuous hostility between Buckingham and Henry VIII. In 1509 the young king cancelled many of the recognizances imposed on Buckingham and other magnates by Henry VII. Next year there was talk of a scandal at court when the duke discovered Henry VIII's designs on the virtue of his sister Anne, Lady Hastings. In 1514 Buckingham was forgiven some of the debts incurred in 1498, but in 1515 he failed in his suit against Henry VII's executors for $7000 wrongly extorted from him, together with $3500 in legal expenses and lost revenue. Described in 1510 as a 'mortal enemy' of France ('CSP Spain', '1509-25', no. 44), he resented the pro-French policy begun in 1518. There is little doubt of the duke's dislike of Wolsey, who, he believed, was plotting to ruin the old nobility. However, the circumstances and even the dating of the remarkable letter written by Henry VIII in his own hand, instructing Wolsey to 'make good watch' on five peers, including Buckingham and his brother Henry Stafford, earl of Wiltshire, remain unexplained (Scarisbrick, plate 4). 
In 1519 Sir William Bulmer was accused in Star Chamber of wearing Buckingham's livery in the king's presence although he was a member of the royal household. This was presumably on the occasion of the king's visit to Buckingham's house at Penshurst in August of that year. The case resulted in Bulmer's being publicly rebuked by the king, who declared 'he would none of his servants should hang on another man's sleeve' ('Hall's Chronicle', 599). Buckingham's finances were overstretched at this time, although far from being in a state of crisis, and he grumbled at the expense of accompanying Henry VIII to the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520. Years later, in Mary's reign, his son claimed that Buckingham had angered Wolsey by springing to Queen Katherine's defence when she was rebuked by the cardinal during the festivities. The duke was arrested in April 1521; he was indicted for treason on 8 May and put on trial before his peers in the court of the high steward on the 13th. He was found guilty on 16 May, and executed the next day. The judicial process was completed by a comprehensive act of attainder in the 1523 parliament. 
The evidence against Buckingham was provided by Charles Knyvett, recently dismissed as one of his senior estate officials, his chancellor the cleric Robert Gilbert, his chaplain Edmund Dellacourt, and Nicholas Hopkins, a monk of the Carthusian house of Henton in Somerset. They testified that the duke had been listening to Hopkins's political prophecies since 1512, notably that he would one day be king. Buckingham thought the Tudor family lay under God's curse, as a result of the judicial murder of the earl of Warwick in 1499 (when Buckingham had been a member of the jury): that explained Henry VIII's failure to produce a male heir. Hopkins advised him to make himself popular with the people, and Buckingham was accused in his indictment of trying to bribe the king's guard with expensive clothes and of appointing supernumerary officials to build up his following. He had grumbled about Wolsey and about the reluctance of his fellow nobles to make a stand against the cardinal. Knyvett testified that, after the Bulmer trial, Buckingham talked about his father's plan to stab Richard III to death. Possibly in 1517, and certainly in 1520, he unsuccessfully sought permission to take an armed guard of 300-400 men with him to establish his authority in his Welsh lordships: no doubt a necessary precaution, given his failure to control the area, but inevitably rekindling memories of 1483. 
Buckingham's royal blood was dangerous. As early as 1502 there had, allegedly, been some discussion when Henry VII 'lay sick' as to whether Buckingham or Edmund de la Pole, earl of Suffolk, 'should have the rule in England' (presumably as regent for the young Prince Henry) in the event of the king's death. Buckingham's supporter, a 'great personage', had judged him likely to make 'a royal ruler' (Gairdner, 1.239). His royal blood came from his descent from two sons of Edward III: like the Tudors, from John of Gaunt, through the Beaufort family; and from Edward's youngest son, Thomas of Woodstock. Neither Henry VII nor Henry VIII deliberately sought to destroy Buckingham because of his blood. Henry VIII, indeed, allowed the marriage of Buckingham's heir to Ursula Pole, granddaughter of George, duke of Clarence, which would bring a third stream of royal blood into the Stafford veins. While Wolsey had had Buckingham's household under surveillance for some time by 1521, he had also warned him to be more circumspect in his behaviour. But speculating about possible events after the king's death was treason. Sir John Fyneux, chief justice of the king's bench, ruled that overt action was unnecessary to establish a charge of treason. 
Buckingham certainly expected to be the leading figure in the realm if Henry should die, and intended to take revenge on Wolsey. A claim to regency could easily be misrepresented as a design on the throne, and this is the story that the government put about. Neither the evidence nor the indictment suggests any formed design on the throne, only speculation on what might happen if Henry should die childless. Only one of the prophecies about becoming king postdates Princess Mary's birth in 1516. Buckingham's treason consisted of ill-judged remarks about present politics, speculation about the future, and, after the Bulmer affair, a dramatic bout of the bad temper to which he was prone. He talked vaguely of a possible rebellion. It may be that he was liable to depression. Early in 1520 he told his chancellor that 'he had been such a sinner that he was sure that he lacked grace' ('LP Henry VIII', 3/1, no. 1284 (3)) and that any political action was bound to fail. In October 1520 he surprised his council by announcing an intention to go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem. 
Buckingham possessed the greatest noble estate of his time, worth at least $5000 per annum, with property in most English counties as far north as Yorkshire, and the lordships of Brecon and Newport in south Wales. He took over a depleted inheritance: the Welsh estates had been badly neglected; the English ones were ruthlessly exploited by Margaret Beaufort, but she handed over little documentation to him. He set himself to retrieve the situation by rigorous personal supervision, drawing up rules of procedure, instituting an organized archive, scrutinizing accounts personally, and placing his officials under bond in a manner reminiscent of Henry VII. He instituted at least 128 cases in the courts of king's bench and common pleas, mostly against his own tenants and officials, designed to bring pressure rather than to force a verdict (only six are known to have been successfully concluded). He created parks by enclosure with little regard to the rights of occupiers, and systematically investigated putative villeins to charge them for their manumission. While these policies worked in restoring the value of his English estates, he was unable to enforce his authority in his Welsh lordships, either judicially or economically. He rebuilt a manor house at Thornbury in Gloucestershire as an impressively towered castle, its ostensible military purpose, however, belied by the insertion of huge oriel windows in the living-quarters in the inner court. He intended to endow a college in the adjoining parish church. He restored his London house, Poultenay's Inn, in ostentatious style, providing 'two great roses and two portcullises' over the gates which earned it the name 'Manor of the Rose' (Barron, 11-12). 
Buckingham was buried at the Austin friars' church in London on the day of his execution, 17 May 1521. He was survived by his wife, Eleanor (who died on 13 February 1530), his heir, Henry Stafford, and three legitimate daughters: Elizabeth ['see 'Howard, Elizabeth], unhappily married to Thomas Howard, later duke of Norfolk; Catherine, married to Ralph Neville, earl of Westmorland; and Mary, married to George Neville, Lord Bergavenny. He had an illegitimate son, also Henry, and an illegitimate daughter, Margaret, who was married to his ward Thomas Fitzgerald (of Leixlip), half-brother to the earl of Kildare. 


@@@@@


doc= 26203


Stafford, Sir Edward (1552-1605), diplomat, was the first son of the Marian exile Sir William Stafford (died 1556) and his second wife, Dorothy Stafford (1526-1604), daughter of Henry Stafford, tenth Baron Stafford, and granddaughter both of Edward, third duke of Buckingham, and George, duke of Clarence. With the death of Sir William in Geneva in May 1556, his widow removed to Basel with her three children (including William Stafford), and remained there until Elizabeth's succession in England. From 1564 Dorothy's role as mistress of the robes and close confidante to the queen brought early advancement for her son Edward, though his financial condition, always parlous, did not improve measurably. He was educated at St John's College and Pembroke College, Cambridge. Under the patronage of William Cecil, Lord Burghley, Stafford was elected to parliament as member for Mitchell, Cornwall, in 1571; he sat for Heytesbury in 1572. The following year he became a gentleman pensioner of the court. In 1574 he acted as Burghley's courier of confidential letters to Emden and provided intelligence on the duke of Friesland's rumoured Spanish alliance. In 1576 he was dispatched to France on unspecified business, returning to court on 23 October. 
In spring 1578 the duc d'Anjou renewed his suit for Elizabeth's hand in marriage. In May Stafford went to France to conduct negotiations on the queen's behalf with Henri III and 'monsieur', and appears to have befriended the turbulent duke. When Anjou came to England in August 1579 he stayed initially at Stafford's home. Upon three occasions in 1580, when the proposed marriage alliance faltered on the brink of failure, Stafford was sent to France to urge the king to offer better terms to the Huguenots as a condition of her acceptance. 
At some time during the early 1570s Stafford had married Roberta Chapman, daughter of Alexander Chapman of Ragthorp, Norfolk, with whom he had a son and two daughters. In 1578 she died of complications arising from a fourth pregnancy, and on 29 November 1597 the widower married Douglas Sheffield, 'nee' Howard (1547-1608), sister of Charles Howard, second Baron Howard of Effingham, and spurned lover of the earl of Leicester. It has been suggested that, in making this match, Stafford sought to gain access to the income of the Sheffield estate during the minority of his wife's son. However, the marriage also buttressed his already close links with the queen: his new sister-in-law, Katherine, was Elizabeth's second cousin and closest female companion. 
In 1583 Stafford was knighted and chosen to replace Lord Cobham as ambassador to Paris, having sought the position as a means to relieve a penury undented by a grant of revenue from undiscovered benefices in 1581. The prestigious appointment undoubtedly owed much to his relationship with the French royal family, but much also to his personal connections. He took this occasion to spurn Francis Walsingham's previously friendly advances, possibly because of the principal secretary's growing identification with the Leicester party at court, and place himself entirely under Burghley's political patronage, thus creating a dislocation of loyalties at the heart of Walsingham's sphere of interest -- his intelligence network. Stafford soon experienced the repercussions of his decision. Cobham was actively unhelpful in handing over the reins of his office; correspondence between Stafford, his own mother, and the queen was intercepted by Walsingham's agents; and Walsingham himself warned Stafford not to write to the queen too regularly, for the rather unconvincing reason that she objected to the postal charges. More seriously, Walsingham took notice of, and began to report, Stafford's heavy gambling in Paris and his increasingly desperate financial situation. In turn, Stafford deliberately bypassed Walsingham when sending intelligences from Paris. Dangerously, he also intruded upon existing operations supervised by Walsingham in Paris, and initiated his own subterfuges with a heavy and obvious hand. His subsequent drafting of intentionally inaccurate reports, in the hope of misleading Spanish agents, was hardly a novel device; it was, however, to blur the degree to which his actions were degenerating gradually into outright treachery. To meet some of his debts he accepted 3000 crowns from the duc de Guise for allowing him to see English diplomatic letters, and was in close communication with an English Catholic conspirator in Paris, Charles Arundel. With increasing forcefulness he also expressed his opinion that Mary Stewart should be made Elizabeth's heir, and there is at least one contemporary reference to him as a 'friend' to Mary. 
By spring 1586 Walsingham had been fully apprised of Stafford's actions by his spies in Paris; yet he did not move to impeach him, possibly because his own position at court had become less secure. Burghley, who remained Stafford's friend (though warning him of rumours of his actions), was a powerful guardian, and the absence from court of Leicester, failing abjectly in his Netherlands campaign, removed Walsingham's closest ally in the council. In October 1586 the death of Walsingham's heir, Sir Philip Sidney, seems to have been a personally traumatic event, which excited Burghley's sympathy and support, and encouraged a complete reconciliation between the two men. This may have benefited Stafford also. Walsingham and he exchanged letters during April 1587 which professed their desire for mutual harmony. 
The timing of this 'rapprochement' was fateful. Three months earlier Arundel had secretly acted as a mediator between Stafford and Bernadino de Mendoza, Philip II's ambassador in Paris, to offer Stafford's services as a spy. Money was certainly a motive; but so too, apparently, was Stafford's wish to be revenged for the perceived slights of Walsingham and Leicester. Arundel was given 2000 crowns to pass on to Stafford, and a clandestine -- and certainly an opaque -- relationship commenced. 
Commentators have since expended much attention on the question of whether Mendoza's three pseudonyms for his English informers in Paris were references to three men, or to the same person: Sir Edward Stafford. Recently the latter case has been argued strongly, contradicting more venerable defences of the English ambassador's integrity. Certain facts are indisputable. Between April 1587 and October 1588, during the Anglo-Spanish war's most desperate phase, a stream of intelligences from Mendoza's English spy or spies gave advance warning of Drake's raid on Cadiz, of instructions for the concentration of the English fleet, and dozens of smaller, though useful, details of English diplomatic activity in Europe. Stafford definitely underplayed to London the scale of Spanish preparations against England in the months before the Armada sailed, though, equally, much information he passed to the Spaniards was partly or wholly inaccurate -- either intentionally so, or because Walsingham and others were tainting its flow. Stafford's inaccuracies may indicate simply that he was a poor intelligencer, and that Mendoza -- a very good one -- played him brilliantly. However, some of the information he is suspected to have supplied to his Spanish paymaster was undoubtedly damaging to English interests. 
Following the Armada campaign Stafford gradually ceased to pass on information to Mendoza. It has been suggested that the cancelling of his large debts by the queen undermined his primary financial motive, while the deaths of both Leicester and Walsingham in 1588 and 1590 removed the principal sources of his rancour. He continued as ambassador in Paris until November 1590, when he was recalled. The voluminous evidence of his letters of this later period, principally regarding Henri IV's campaigns against the Catholic league (at several of which Stafford was present in the field), indicates that his industry did not abate with his putative treasons. Following his return to England he held no further major appointment, though he obtained the consolation of the perquisites of the remembrancer and pipe rolls offices. He was elected MP for Winchester in 1593, for Stafford in 1597 and 1601, and for Queenborough in 1604. He was said to have been promised the chancellorship of the duchy of Lancaster by Elizabeth, but the gift was not honoured by James I. Stafford died on 5 February 1605, and was buried in St Margaret's, Westminster. Several debts dating from the time of his French ambassadorship remained outstanding at the time of his death. He was survived by a son, William, from his first marriage. Two daughters born to his second wife died in infancy. 
The evidence of Stafford's treachery, though substantial, remains circumstantial, and the precise degree of his culpability is difficult to establish. How far he willingly passed on genuine intelligence intended to harm his country, or, conversely, attempted to mislead his paymasters while relieving his gambling debts, cannot be determined until the matter of Mendoza's 'one spy or three' is definitively settled. What is indisputable is that Stafford's profound sense of his own dignity (deriving in part from his near regal antecedents), his factiousness, and his intermittent feud with a man of equally elastic principles blurred his understanding of the bounds of self-interest and treason, or rendered them inconsequential. He was fortunate to have played his dangerous game at a time when Walsingham's footing had become less sure, and to have provided too little firm evidence upon which his downfall might otherwise have been arranged. 


@@@@@


doc= 26204


Stafford, Henry, second duke of Buckingham (1455-1483), magnate and rebel, was born on 4 September 1455. His father, Humphrey, styled earl of Stafford (died 1458), was son and heir to Humphrey Stafford, first duke of Buckingham, and his wife, Anne (died 1480), daughter of Ralph Neville, first earl of Westmorland. His mother was Lady Margaret Beaufort, daughter of Edmund Beaufort, duke of Somerset (killed in battle on 22 May 1455), and Eleanor, daughter of Richard Beauchamp, thirteenth earl of Warwick. Henry had a younger brother, Humphrey. 
The deaths of his father in October or November 1458, and of his grandfather, Duke Humphrey, killed at Northampton on 10 July 1460, made Henry Stafford duke of Buckingham at the age of four. His English lands were largely in the hands of his grandmother, Duchess Anne, as her dower; the Welsh lands were in the hands of the crown. Duchess Anne surrendered the duke's custody and marriage to Edward IV in February 1464, for a consideration of $1830; he was immediately placed in the custody of the king's sister Anne, duchess of Exeter. At some time between the king's marriage to Elizabeth Woodville in May 1464 and her coronation in May 1465, Buckingham was married to the queen's sister Katherine ['see below'], like Elizabeth the daughter of Richard Woodville, Lord Woodville and subsequently Earl Rivers (d. 1469), and his wife, Jaquetta de Luxembourg, dowager duchess of Bedford; her other siblings included Anthony Woodville, second Earl Rivers, Lionel Woodville, bishop of Salisbury, and the soldier Sir Edward Woodville. As a bride Katherine brought no marriage portion. The queen was given his custody, and was granted 500 marks out of his Welsh lands, soon augmented by another $100, for his maintenance and that of his brother. The boys lived in her household (as did Henry's wife, at least during the late 1460s), and John Giles, future tutor to Edward IV's sons, was employed to teach grammar to 'the queen's beloved brothers' during 1465-7 (Myers, 308-9). According to Domenico Mancini, writing of the events of 1483, Buckingham resented his marriage because of his wife's alleged 'humble origin', but that may be a retrospective rationalization. There is, however, evidence (in the 'Annales' of the so-called 'Pseudo-William Worcester') that Richard Neville, earl of Warwick (the Kingmaker), regarded the marriage as a rebuff to his own hopes of marrying Buckingham to one of his two daughters and coheirs. Buckingham himself may have regretted losing the chance to acquire half the Kingmaker's estates. 
Buckingham remained in the queen's hands until the brief readeption of Henry VI in 1470-71, when his grandmother, the dowager duchess, and her husband Walter Blount, Lord Mountjoy, took custody of him. (His brother Humphrey had evidently died before this.) In April 1471, after the battle of Barnet, he was appointed by Edward IV to various commissions of the peace, and accompanied Edward on his entry into London after his final triumph at Tewkesbury. He was given licence to enter the lands of his uncle, Sir Henry Stafford, within three days of Sir Henry's death on 4 October 1471. In June 1473, still only seventeen, he had special livery of his grandfather's estates. They were nominally worth some $3000 p.a., although there is evidence of difficulty in raising the full value, while between 1474 and 1480 eleven manors were set aside to provide a dower for his aunt Joanna, separated or divorced from Viscount Beaumont. A further $1250 p.a. accrued to him in 1480, with the death of the dowager duchess. Buckingham was by then easily the wealthiest English peer, with the possible exception of Richard, duke of Gloucester. Another mark of favour was implied in the decision of the heralds in 1474 that as a descendant of Thomas of Woodstock, youngest son of Edward III, and 'therefore near the king and of his blood royal', Buckingham should carry Woodstock's arms, without the quartering of any 'lower coats of dignity' (Dennys, 110). He became knight of the Garter the same year. 
A crisis in Buckingham's relations with the king seems to have occurred on the invasion of France in 1475. The duke took part in the campaign, providing 4 knights, 40 men-at-arms, and 400 archers, but was noted as 'returned home' before the French and English kings met at Picquigny in August. After his return he was kept conspicuously out of public office. He was on no commission, except that of the peace for Staffordshire. He was omitted from the prince's council of 1476, dominated by the Woodvilles, which took responsibility for the government of Wales and the marches. He was briefly high steward of England on 7 February 1478, specifically to pronounce sentence of death on George, duke of Clarence. Edward granted him the manor of Ebbw, previously leased, and the lordship of Cantref Mawr, both in south Wales. Edward also stood godfather to his first son, born on 3 February 1478. But other than for ceremonial occasions in London, Buckingham disappeared again from public life. He played no part in the Scottish wars of the end of the reign. He seems to have resided mostly at Brecon. 
When Edward IV died, on 9 April 1483, Buckingham was quickly in touch with Richard, duke of Gloucester, to seize the young Edward V from the control of his governor, Anthony Woodville, Earl Rivers. While Buckingham may have resented his in-laws, there is no indication that Rivers suspected any hostile move; indeed, he had recently appointed Buckingham a feoffee for his Kentish estates. Rivers escorted Edward from Ludlow to London. Gloucester met him at Northampton on 29 April; Buckingham arrived the same evening. Next morning the two dukes arrested Rivers, and took the king to London, where the council proclaimed Gloucester protector. Buckingham suggested the king be lodged in the Tower. 
Buckingham was Gloucester's trusted ally in the events of the next three months. On 10 May 1483 he was given supreme power under the protector in Wales and the marches, becoming chief justice and chamberlain of both north and south Wales for life, and being granted the supervision and governance of the king's subjects there, with the control of royal castles, nomination to offices, and the right to raise troops. He was also given the oversight of Shropshire, Herefordshire, Somerset, Wiltshire, and Dorset, with powers to raise troops. For all this he was excused rendering financial account. In a proclamation of 10 June the protector accused the queen's party of plotting the murder of himself and Buckingham, 'and the old royal blood of the realm' (Raine, 1.73-4). The killing of Lord Hastings on 13 June cleared the way for Buckingham to re-establish Stafford power in the north midlands, from which it had been largely excluded by Edward IV's promotion of Hastings; the latter's retinue was now reported to have 'become my lord of Buckingham's' ('Stonor Letters and Papers', 2.160-61). Buckingham was part of the delegation headed by Cardinal Bourchier that persuaded the queen to hand over Richard, duke of York, from sanctuary; there is no contemporary evidence for the eloquent speech ascribed to him on this occasion in More's 'Richard III'. He certainly addressed the Londoners at Guildhall on 24 June, setting out Gloucester's claim to the throne; again the text of the speech provided by More is fanciful. Buckingham had the 'chief rule and devising' of Richard's coronation on 6 July. He was appointed to the office of constable (hereditary in the family of his Bohun ancestors) and chamberlain on 15 July, and was given life custody of the castle at Tutbury, Staffordshire, the key to the north midlands, in succession to Hastings. 
A possibly contemporary source refers to Edward V and his brother as 'put to deyth in the Towur of London be the vise of the duke of Buckingham' ('Historical notes of a London citizen', 588). Another miscellaneous compilation ascribes responsibility for their deaths to Richard, 'first taking counsel with the Duke of Buckingham, as said' (Hanham, 107-8). The French historians Commines and Molinet both report the belief in European courts that Buckingham had murdered the children. The Tudor tradition, exemplified by Polydore Vergil and More, makes no explicit mention of involvement by Buckingham in the murders; but it would hardly have been politic to do so before the execution of the third duke in 1521. It may be that Buckingham ordered the princes's deaths, with or without Richard's knowledge; but there is only flimsy circumstantial evidence in support of such a possibility. 
Buckingham was with the king at Gloucester on 2 August 1483, and the two men evidently parted on good terms; indeed as late as 28 August the duke was appointed to a commission to investigate treasons in the London area. Why he was then to rebel, and how long he had been planning rebellion, remains a mystery. Vergil and More believed that the breaking point was Richard's refusal of a claim by Buckingham to that part of the Bohun inheritance held by the crown. The death of Humphrey (IX) Bohun, earl of Hereford, in 1373 had left two daughters as coheirs: Eleanor, later married to Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester, Buckingham's ancestor; and Mary, who married the future Henry IV. Eleanor's moiety descended to Buckingham, Mary's to the Lancastrian kings. The deaths of Henry VI and his son in 1471 extinguished the line of Mary's descendants, making Buckingham heir to her moiety, thirty-eight manors worth $1100 p.a. in East Anglia and the south of England. Unsurprisingly Edward IV kept Mary's estates in his own possession. One consideration moving Edward might have been that the claim could fortuitously draw attention to Buckingham's Lancastrian connection (he was descended from John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, through his Beaufort mother). But neither Edward nor Richard had any problem in acknowledging Buckingham's royal blood, at least as it derived from Thomas of Woodstock. And in fact the disputed estates were made over to Buckingham on 13 July 1483, in a signet letter, with the promise that the transfer would be endorsed in the next parliament. It is hard to see that he had any cause for complaint. He may, however, have been disappointed when, on 23 July, Richard allowed the bulk of the Hastings estates to remain in the hands of Hastings's widow, perhaps an indication that a limit was being set to his acquisitions. 
Bishop John Morton, Buckingham's prisoner at Brecon, helped persuade him to join the Beaufort-Woodville conspiracy which erupted in October 1483. Lady Margaret Beaufort, countess of Richmond, a leading figure in that conspiracy, herself had family connections with Buckingham, both as first cousin to (and namesake of) his mother, and as the widow of his uncle Sir Henry Stafford. The duke was certainly in communication with her son Henry Tudor in Brittany in late September, and evidently urged him to marry Elizabeth of York and claim the throne for himself. Perhaps Buckingham was hoping in the general confusion to advance his own claim. Or he may have feared that the rebellion would succeed, and that the only way not to have to answer for his part in recent events was to join it. The rebels were overwhelmingly Edwardian loyalists from the south of England, intent on restoring Edward's line to the throne. It was only the subsequent parliamentary attainder that placed Buckingham at the centre of events, perhaps to distract attention from this embarrassing truth. 
News of an imminent uprising in Kent reached London on 10 October 1483. Next day the king learned that Buckingham 'traitoriously is turned upon us' (Raine, 1.83-4). According to his subsequent attainder, Buckingham raised an army at Brecon on 18 October, but that date must be too late. The duke had been a demanding landlord to his tenants, and called to his service they showed little enthusiasm for his cause. Polydore Vergil describes his soldiers as Welshmen, 'whom he, as a sore and hard dealing man, had brought to the feild agaynst ther wills, and without any lust to fight for him' ('Polydore Vergil's 'English History'', 199). He marched east, probably hoping to raise the marches; he may have had hopes of raising Sir Gilbert Talbot, in Shropshire, and Lord Stanley, Margaret Beaufort's husband, further north. Neither stirred, although both were to join Tudor in 1485. Meanwhile Brecon Castle itself was captured by Thomas Vaughan of Tretower, no friend of a Tudor rebellion, since Vaughan's father had been put to death by Jasper Tudor in 1471. Later tradition had Buckingham aiming to cross the Severn at Gloucester, presumably to link up with the southern rebellion. If so, he failed and turned north. Arriving at Weobley, in Herefordshire, he attempted without success to raise the local gentry. 
Had Buckingham succeeded in raising the marches, King Richard, threatened with a major rebellion on two fronts, would have been in great danger. But Buckingham evidently lacked the capacity to inspire loyalty; indeed, his part in the rebellion may well have deterred others from joining. Atrocious rain, the flooding of the rivers, large-scale desertion by his Welshmen, the knowledge that Sir Humphrey Stafford was holding Worcestershire for the king, may all have played their part in persuading Buckingham to throw in his hand. He fled into hiding, to the house of his servant, Ralph Banastre, at Wem, in Shropshire. 
Banastre betrayed him (and was granted in reward Buckingham's manor of Yeading in Kent, worth $50 p.a.). On 1 November Buckingham was brought to Richard at Salisbury. According to his son he had secreted a knife to stab the king; Richard refused his request for a meeting. He was executed the following day (a Sunday, and All Souls' day) without trial. His execution and the confiscation of his property were ratified by an act of attainder in parliament in 1484, to be reversed in the first parliament of Henry VII in 1485. 
Little can be said about Buckingham's personality. His support for Richard of Gloucester's coup in 1483 probably stemmed from resentment about his exclusion from political power by Edward IV. His subsequent break with Richard might suggest a dangerous degree of instability; it may be that Edward had already spotted that trait in 1475. No manifesto survives from his rising. His hopes of becoming king himself can be a matter only for speculation. He was evidently a headstrong young man with few political gifts, in contrast to his cousin Henry Tudor -- the future Henry VII -- and manifestly lacking the local political authority of a great nobleman; although he may have had some rhetorical talents. Nothing is known of his religious or cultural interests. He did, however, finance a considerable building project at the Benedictine college at Cambridge; now Magdalene College, it was known, from 1480 at the latest, as Buckingham College. No will survives, nor any tomb or representation of his appearance. He signed himself Harre Bokyngham, with the motto 'Souvent me souvene'. 
Buckingham was survived by his widow, 
Following Bosworth, Katherine Stafford was married, by 7 November 1485, to the new king's 55-year-old bachelor uncle, Jasper Tudor, now duke of Bedford. The act of parliament reversing Buckingham's attainder awarded her not merely her dower but also a jointure of 1000 marks, allegedly specified under Buckingham's will. Her total revenue was some $2500, about half the Buckingham estate; the marriage was clearly intended to bolster Bedford's position as his nephew's representative in Wales. Bedford kept her estates under separate administration. Katherine seems to have resided mostly at Thornbury, Gloucestershire; she and her sister, the dowager queen, are the only surviving siblings to appear in the will of her brother Richard, Earl Rivers, in 1491. Bedford died on 21 December 1495. By 24 February 1496 Katherine had remarried, without royal licence, taking as her third husband a younger man, Richard Wingfield (b. in or before 1469, d. 1525). Wingfield was to embark on a distinguished career, but at this stage he was presumably an impecunious junior member of a very large family. Two of his brothers, John and Edmund, were in the duchess's service, as he may have been himself. Katherine died on 18 May 1497; the fine imposed on her for her unlicensed marriage became a charge on her eldest son, the third duke. Wingfield remarried before 1513. His will, drawn up in 1525, specified masses for Katherine's soul, in striking contrast to the absence of any mention of her in Jasper Tudor's will. 
Katherine had no children by her second and third marriages. From 1485 her sons Edward Stafford, now duke, and Henry were in the custody of Lady Margaret Beaufort, countess of Richmond; Henry Stafford in 1510 was created earl of Wiltshire. Her daughter Elizabeth married Robert Radcliffe, later Viscount Fitzwalter and earl of Sussex, dying between about 1530 and 1532. Her daughter Anne married first Sir Walter Herbert (died 1507), then George Hastings, afterwards earl of Huntingdon, and survived the latter's death in 1544. 


@@@@@


doc= 26205


Stafford, Henry, tenth Baron Stafford (1501-1563), nobleman, was born at Penshurst, Kent, on 18 September 1501, the only legitimate son of Edward Stafford, third duke of Buckingham (1478-1521), and his wife, Eleanor (died 1530), daughter of Henry Percy, fourth earl of Northumberland. Until his father's attainder he was styled earl of Stafford. The year 1516 saw negotiations, at Wolsey's suggestion, for a marriage to a daughter of George Talbot, fourth earl of Shrewsbury, which were unsuccessful. Wolsey had also mentioned in passing 'a good young lady', only daughter to Lady Salisbury ('LP Henry VIII', 2/1, no. 1893), and on 16 February 1519 Stafford was indeed married to Ursula Pole (died 1570) ['see 'Stafford, Ursula, 'under' Pole, Margaret], daughter of Sir Richard Pole (died 1505) and his wife, Margaret, countess of Salisbury. Since Ursula was a granddaughter to George, duke of Clarence, the result was to increase the already dangerous level of royal connection in the Stafford family. 
Stafford was presumably educated in his father's household. Later tradition had him attending both universities, but there is no record of formal membership of either. In 1520 he was at the Field of Cloth of Gold, and in November 1520 his first child was born in the duke's household. Yet the duke was arranging at the same time for Thomas Lewkener 'to take charge of our son the lord Stafford' (Harris, 56). Shortly after his father's execution in the following year the king made provision for an income of 500 marks from Buckingham's Staffordshire and Shropshire properties to be settled on Stafford and his wife jointly and on the heirs of her body -- significantly a concession rather to the Poles than to the Staffords. He lived at a house in Sussex for a time, but claimed to have been later forced by Wolsey to break up his household and move, with his wife and seven children, into an abbey for four years; he also complained that the lands allocated to him yielded less than the estimated 500 marks. He was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1528. Although technically merely Henry Stafford at this time, he was habitually referred to as Lord Stafford; a petition for restoration in blood (though disclaiming any ambition for his father's dignities) was unsuccessful. 
In 1531 Stafford was granted, again with his wife, the castle at Stafford with its appurtenant properties. In the same year the borough of Stafford elected him as its recorder. In 1532 he excused himself from becoming a knight of the Bath. There were rumours (unjustified) in 1536 that he had raised 1000 men on behalf of the rebel Pilgrimage of Grace; in fact he did his duty by the king. He was in Sussex in 1537-8, but wisely kept his distance from his brother-in-law Lord Montague and the alleged Courtenay conspiracy. He also refused to receive his sister Elizabeth Howard, the estranged wife of the duke of Norfolk, into his house. His principal concern was to show his conformity to the king's proceedings, denouncing Walter Blount for speaking disrespectfully of the saints in 1535, while acting promptly to remove an image of St Erasmus in Stafford in 1538. He was assiduous in seeking, with little success, some morsel of monastic land for himself. He was JP for Staffordshire and Shropshire from 1536. His illegitimate half-brother, also Henry Stafford, was MP for the borough of Stafford in 1545 and 1547. 
In the parliamentary session of 1547 Stafford again petitioned for restoration of blood, disclaiming any ambition for his father's land or titles. He received a writ of summons to parliament in November 1548, so now officially becoming Baron Stafford, although as a new creation and so at the bottom of the precedence list. He became an assiduous attender at the House of Lords. In the same year he published his translation of Edward Foxe's justification of the royal supremacy, originally published in 1534, as 'The True Dyfferens Betwen the Royall Power and the Ecclesiasticall Power', with a fulsome dedication to Protector Somerset for completing Henry VIII's work of destruction of superstition and of the powers of the 'Anti-Christ' of Rome. He remained financially embarrassed, selling former Stafford property granted him in 1550, but his principal worry at this time must have been the irresponsible activities in Europe of his son Thomas Stafford, and of his distant relative Sir Robert Stafford (probably the Dominus Stafford commended by Ascham for his Ciceronian studies at Cambridge). In December 1551 he was one of the jury of peers who condemned Somerset. However, he disliked the moves made in 1552 towards a more radical protestantism. He apparently absented himself from that year's parliament as the new 'Uniformity Bill' made its way through the Lords, and was also absent from the parliament of March 1553. 
Stafford raised troops for Queen Mary against Lady Jane Grey in July 1553, and sat on the trial of the duke of Northumberland in August. His reconversion to Catholicism was marked by his translation of two tracts by Erasmus against Luther (neither survives). He petitioned Mary for assistance in October 1553, alleging that his father's fall was due to his defence of Katherine of Aragon against Wolsey in 1520. He was granted in February 1554 office as one of two chamberlains of the exchequer, normally a sinecure worth some $50 p.a. and perquisites. He once again became an assiduous attender in the Lords, and in February 1558 had the satisfaction of having his peerage recognized as carrying precedence from 1299 rather than 1548. His brother-in-law Reginald Pole, now archbishop of Canterbury, helped procure him a keepership in Staffordshire in May 1558. But where he had previously been embarrassed by his Pole relatives, it was now the turn of his own children. His son Thomas landed at Scarborough in 1557 in rebellion, while his daughter Dorothy Stafford, who had married Sir William Stafford (Sir Robert's brother), fled with her husband as a religious exile to Geneva, where, left a widow, she had a spectacular row with Calvin about the custody of her son, Calvin's godson. Stafford was ill in 1558 and falsely reported dead in August. He distinguished himself in Elizabeth I's first parliament in 1559 by being one of nine lay peers to vote against the 'Uniformity Bill', and also voted with the bishops on a technical measure about the lands of the bishopric of Winchester. In September 1559 he was ordered to raise troops in Staffordshire for service in Berwick. 
Stafford had an extensive library of some 300 books, mostly Latin. In addition to the writings of Erasmus and Foxe, he translated from French a treatise on forests (BL, Stowe MS 414, fols. 203-226). He commissioned Humphrey Lloyd to translate Vassaeus on urine, having decided that this would be a useful aid to physicians in diagnosis. He was also influential in having the first edition of 'Mirror for Magistrates' printed in 1559. He devoted considerable effort to rebuilding his family's archive. No doubt this was in part in the hope of regaining the family properties, but he could also be moved by handling a historic document. He fought hard to re-establish the 'ancient order of the Exchequer', involving closer control by the chamberlains than had become customary in recent years, with some success initially, although his successors as chamberlain preferred to let the office revert to a sinecure. Although the evidence is not without ambiguities, Stafford also appears to have concerned himself about the listing and preservation of the ancient documents of exchequer and chancery in the Tower of London. 
Stafford died at one of his ancestral properties, Caus Castle in Shropshire, on 30 April 1563, and was buried in Worthen church nearby on 6 May. His wife survived him, to die on 12 August 1570. There were at least twelve children alive in 1537, and one born subsequently. Two of his sons succeeded as Baron Stafford, Henry (died 1566) and Edward (died 1603). The barony eventually passed through three grandsons, the last of whom was induced to resign it in 1639 through poverty. Stafford was a man with great pride of family, but clearly determined to avoid the dangers which threatened him from his royal ancestry and marital connections, not politically ambitious, perhaps initially an opportunist in religion, but becoming a decisive conservative in later years, at some risk to himself, evidently finding consolation in historical study. 


@@@@@


doc= 26206


Stafford, Hugh, second earl of Stafford (c.1342-1386), magnate and soldier, was the second son and heir of Ralph Stafford, first earl of Stafford (d. 1372), and his second wife, Margaret (died in or before 1348), the daughter of Hugh Audley, earl of Gloucester (d. 1347), and Margaret, the widow of Edward II's favourite, Piers Gaveston. The early death without children of his elder brother, Ralph, in or just before 1347, came as a profound blow to the family, since he had been married to one of the two daughters and coheirs of the influential English commander, Henry of Grosmont, duke of Lancaster (died 1361), and had thus stood to gain control of half the duchy. Hugh's own marriage, about 1350, to Philippa, daughter of another of his father's comrades-in-arms, Thomas Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (died 1369), and Katherine, daughter of Roger Mortimer, first earl of March, was less of a dynastic coup, since it added nothing to the rapidly expanding Stafford estates. Even so, he could still hope to inherit from his parents property spread between Norfolk and the Welsh marches worth about $2700 a year, together with an annual fee of 1000 marks from the crown to support his title. 
Stafford had followed his father to France by 1359, when he joined the retinue of Edward, the Black Prince. He took part in the campaign which led, in May 1360, to the treaty of Bretigny, then spent time in Gascony with the prince, and eventually travelled with him to northern Spain in support of Pedro the Cruel, king of Castile. If not actually present at the battle of Najera in 1367, he was certainly involved in skirmishes during the march beforehand. After many years of active service overseas under the prince's banner he returned home to be summoned to parliament, first as Lord Stafford in January 1371, and then, after his father's death, as the second earl. Although he never came to play a decisive role in English political life, he exercised considerable influence during Edward III's troubled last years. Having sat on a number of royal commissions, he briefly campaigned in France in 1373 and in Brittany two years later, under the less than distinguished command of, respectively, John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and the earl of Cambridge. Shortly afterwards he became a knight of the Garter. Criticism of the king's advisers, their financial incompetence, and the mismanagement of the war effort came to a head in the Good Parliament of 1376. Despite his close connection with the court party, Earl Hugh managed to escape personal censure. He was, indeed, nominated to serve on the committee of peers with whom the Commons regularly conferred, and, significantly, was endorsed by the rebellious lower house as a suitable member of the new 'continual council' of state. He remained in office after Richard II's accession in June 1377, and took part, as carver of the king's bread and meat, in the ceremonies following the coronation. Another, less attractive, side of his character emerges at this time, as he lost some of the respect he had previously commanded from the Commons. His attempt in 1378 to censure the popular London MP, John Philipot, for mobilizing a fleet to defend merchant shipping without conciliar approval, ended in humiliation, and he himself was taken to task for arrogance and empty bombast. According to one chronicler, his temper again defeated him at this time: the allegation that he murdered one John Hawkesley in the choir of Westminster Abbey is not, however, otherwise widely reported. 
Stafford continued to act as a royal commissioner, notably with regard to Scottish affairs and coastal defence. Some idea of his wealth may be gained from his outlay for the year 1383-4: with a net income of $2120 at his disposal, he spent $870 on running his household, $292 on luxury goods supplied by London merchants, almost $200 on buying up property in the midlands, and over $100 on purchases for his eldest son, Ralph. The young man was a particular favourite of Richard II, whose companion he had been as a boy, and in July 1384 the king gave him and the earl a licence to hunt in royal parks. Both father and son joined the expedition which Richard led against the Scots in the following May, but, as the army reached York, Ralph was killed by the king's half-brother, Sir John Holland, in revenge for the death of one of his own retainers. 'Almost distracted by his emotions as a father' (Hector and Harvey, 123) Earl Hugh threatened to return home unless justice was done. Richard agreed, but in February 1386 a grand ceremony of reconciliation took place at Windsor. Although he made a public show of forgiveness, it was with profound rancour as well as grief that Hugh embarked on a series of pilgrimages. After visiting Walsingham, in April 1386 (by which date his wife had died), Stafford set sail for Jerusalem, but got no further than the island of Rhodes where he died, in the hospital of the knights of St John, after a short illness, in late September or early October. 
Earl Hugh's bones were transported to Stone Priory, Staffordshire, for burial beside his wife and ancestors as he had wished. His tomb, which was made in Nottingham, cost almost $13, but the interment itself was a subdued affair, again in accordance with his will. He left four sons, three of whom inherited the earldom in rapid succession. The fourth was created Lord Bourchier in 1411 and died childless nine years later. Each of his three daughters married into the upper ranks of the peerage: Katherine had been betrothed to Michael de la Pole, future earl of Suffolk (died 1415), in Stafford's lifetime; Margaret married Ralph, Lord Neville, future earl of Westmorland (died 1425); and Joan was destined, at a cost of 4000 marks to the Stafford family, to end their feud with the Hollands by becoming the wife of Thomas Holland, earl of Kent (died 1399), the nephew of her brother's murderer. 


@@@@@


doc= 26207


Stafford, Humphrey, first duke of Buckingham (1402-1460), soldier and magnate, was born about December 1402, the only son and heir of Edmund Stafford, fifth earl of Stafford (1379-1403), and Anne of Woodstock (c.1382-1438), the daughter of Edward III's youngest son, Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester. Not yet a year old at the time of his father's death, on 21 July 1403, Stafford became a royal ward, custody of his estates and person being awarded to Henry IV's queen, Joan of Navarre. Since two-thirds of his patrimony was occupied by his mother, he entered a greatly diminished inheritance on coming of age, in December 1422, and received less than $1260 annually from his estates for the next sixteen years. However, fortunes were still to be made in the French wars; and, like generations of Staffords before him, he assumed the profession of arms. He first served overseas in 1420, and was knighted by Henry V on 22 April 1421. 
King Henry's death and the accession of his infant son gave Stafford an early role on the political stage: within the next three years he became a leading member of the royal council, and despite his youth helped to moderate between the warring factions of Henry Beaufort, bishop of Winchester, and Humphrey, duke of Gloucester. His marriage, by 1424, to Anne Neville (died 1480), a daughter of Ralph Neville, first earl of Westmorland, and his second wife, Joan Beaufort, brought him closer to the bishop, although he may initially have sympathized with Gloucester's demands for a more belligerent foreign policy. He spent the years 1430-32 in France with the young king, being engaged in several military offensives and achieving high office as governor of Paris, constable of France, and lieutenant-general of Normandy. Already a knight of the Garter, Stafford was also made count of Perche, with an income of 800 marks a year, but the problems faced by the English in retaining their conquests convinced him that Beaufort was right to advocate peace. His mother's death, in 1438, transformed his own financial position, bringing him the rest of his father's estates (worth an additional $1500 a year), as well as half the Bohun inheritance ($1200), and also the earldom of Buckingham with an annual fee of $1000 charged on the lordships of Holderness, in the East Riding of Yorkshire, and Oakham, Rutland. He was thus one of the greatest landowners in England, with immense reserves of patronage at his disposal. The demands made upon him were, however, correspondingly great. 
Earl Humphrey took part in peace talks at Calais, in 1439, and was made captain of the garrison there two years later. This was a move designed to restore morale among the troops, who often went unpaid. The captaincy ate into his resources: by November 1449 he was owed no less than $19,395 by the crown, and although he eventually recovered half this sum he left office in 1451 heavily out of pocket. His creation as first duke of Buckingham on 14 September 1444 offered some compensation for these losses, while also strengthening his personal relationship with a childless king. Just a few months later, however, Henry Beauchamp was made duke of Warwick with precedence over Buckingham, who sought redress before the parliament of 1445. A compromise solution was reached, but rivalry between the two magnates continued until Warwick's early death soon afterwards. Mutual distrust was exacerbated by a power struggle in the midlands, where Buckingham, challenged on his own territory, fought to retain the allegiance of families traditionally loyal to the Staffords. Notwithstanding his early successes, he possessed neither the charisma nor the political skills to exploit his strengths to the full, and was, moreover, hampered by Henry VI's inability to deploy patronage successfully on his behalf at a regional level. 
Buckingham's problems in managing his affinity were also due to his preoccupation with government policy, not least as spokesman during peace talks with the French in 1445 and 1446. As constable of England he was present at the arrest of the duke of Gloucester during the Bury parliament of February 1447, and was accorded precedence over all English dukes not of royal blood later in the session. A further reward for his complicity in Gloucester's removal (followed as it was by the prisoner's sudden death) was the duke's manor of Penshurst in Kent. As a prominent marcher lord, Buckingham had a vested interest in the enforcement of order on the Welsh border, whither he accompanied the king in 1449 as a royal justice. In the following year he was similarly involved in the judicial sessions following Cade's uprising, having previously been one of the envoys sent to negotiate with the insurgents at Blackheath. There is little to justify their belief that Buckingham had been excluded from power by 'the fals progeny of the Dewke of Suffolk' (Gairdner, 97). 
Buckingham frequently provided a bodyguard for the king during this troubled period, his position in the south-east being further consolidated by a grant of the constableship of Dover and wardenship of the Cinque Ports (conveniently near his headquarters at Tonbridge). Yet this appointment cost him about $250 a year in unpaid fees, and pushed him further into debt. Despite his great wealth, Buckingham was consistently obliged by the pressures of public office to live above a net annual income of approximately $4000. His household alone cost well over $2000 per annum, and his retinue, so often placed at Henry VI's disposal on state occasions, accounted for more than $560. 
Anxious to protect an increasingly vulnerable monarch and maintain the 'status quo' of conciliar rule, Buckingham supported the regime headed by Edmund Beaufort, duke of Somerset, during the early 1450s. In January 1454 he presented the infant Prince Edward (his wife's godson) to the king, who had been in a catatonic state since the previous August. During the tense period before parliament met in February he is said to have ordered 2000 extra liveries for his retinue, although in the end conflict was averted. This was partly because he and his influential half-brothers, Henry and Thomas Bourchier, initially agreed to give their backing to Somerset's rival, Richard, duke of York, when he assumed the protectorship of England. An assiduous member of the royal council, Buckingham devoted himself to government business, hoping vainly for some reconciliation between the two factions. Yet his eldest son was married to Somerset's daughter, and he could hardly avoid a degree of partisanship. He helped to secure Somerset's release from prison, in February 1455, and offered to arbitrate between him and York. On the eve of the battle of St Albans, fought on 22 May 1455, he was still trying, as a commander of the royal army, to effect a compromise. 
Buckingham was wounded during the fighting, and was afterwards bound over in heavy securities (along with his half-brothers) to keep the peace towards the victorious Yorkists. They otherwise treated him (and the Bourchiers) generously, utilizing his expertise as a commissioner and councillor. In May 1456 he was entrusted with the task of putting down anti-Italian riots in London, the violence of which obliged him to take flight into Essex, disgruntled at the failure of the government to assert its authority. He also experienced problems with Queen Margaret, whose intervention in political affairs now polarized the situation even further. He bitterly opposed her decision to dismiss his half-brothers from office, while she resented Buckingham's efforts at Coventry, in October 1456, to protect the duke of York from attack. Yet he made clear to York his dependence upon King Henry's grace, and, in the last resort, aligned himself with the court party and the queen. 
Buckingham had nailed his colours to the mast by the spring of 1457, when he remained with the royal household at Coventry and Hereford for several weeks. He escorted Queen Margaret to London for the 'loveday' (public reconciliation) held between the rival factions on 24 March 1458, but within a year hostilities had again broken out. The presence of Buckingham's men during the ensuing campaign helped to secure a victory for the Lancastrian forces. He was among the first to share the spoils of war, being granted estates worth over $700 a year confiscated from York's chamberlain, Sir William Oldhall, and was promised a further $300 to cover military expenses. 
The duchess of York was placed in Buckingham's charge, and was reputedly treated with great severity. Despite his posthumous reputation as a moderate, Duke Humphrey sometimes betrayed an ungovernable temper: he and his volatile brother-in-law, John Holland, first duke of Exeter, had been involved in a serious affray in 1429; and he had apparently tried to stab Jeanne d'Arc while she was being interrogated by the English, two years later. As commander of the royal army at Northampton, in 1460, Buckingham is said to have threatened his particular enemy, the earl of Warwick, with death if he approached the royal presence, and to have castigated the bishops who then acted as envoys for the duke of York. Buckingham was killed in the ensuing battle, on 10 July, slain near the king's tent by a group of Kentishmen who had good reason to remember his repressive conduct in 1450. He was buried shortly afterwards at the Greyfriars Church in Northampton, after a long career of public service, during which real greatness and the mantle of the elder statesman had alike consistently eluded him. In his will of August 1459 he had made generous bequests for the endowment of chantries at Maxstoke (a favourite residence acquired by exchange with Sir John Clinton) and at his maternal grandfather's college at Pleshey in Essex. 
Buckingham had seven sons, only three of whom survived to adulthood. Humphrey, the eldest, was wounded at the battle of St Albans and died of plague in 1458, leaving an infant, Henry Stafford, as heir presumptive to the dukedom. The next, another Henry, had also married into the Beaufort family, becoming in 1457 the third husband of Lady Margaret Beaufort, mother of the future Henry VII. John, the youngest, was as a mark of royal favour elevated to the peerage as earl of Wiltshire by Edward IV, on 5 January 1470. Three of the duke's five daughters married well, albeit at considerable cost to their father. The eldest, Anne, was allegedly considered by Charles VII of France as a possible wife for the dauphin, although she married the twelfth earl of Oxford's eldest son instead. Her younger sister, Joan, brought her first husband, William, Viscount Beaumont, over $1883 on their marriage in 1452. They later separated, and she took as her second husband a Norfolk knight, Sir William Knyvet. Buckingham promised $1000 to his third daughter, Margaret, and her husband, John Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury, in 1458, but the contract had not yet been honoured when Buckingham died. 


@@@@@


doc= 26208


Stafford, Humphrey, earl of Devon (c.1439-1469), magnate, was the only son of William Stafford (died 1450) and Katherine Chidiock. These Staffords were cadets of the earls of Stafford who advanced in the west country from the late fourteenth century by marrying heiresses in each generation. In 1412 Humphrey's great-grandfather Sir Humphrey Stafford (died 1413) of Hook (Dorset) and Southwick in North Bradley (Wiltshire) had lands assessed at $570, half in Dorset and the rest largely in Somerset and Wiltshire. More accrued from the marriage of Humphrey's grandfather Sir Humphrey 'of the silver hand' (died 1442), whose grandson, another Humphrey Stafford, esquire (senior), inherited the whole but died childless in 1461: Humphrey Stafford, esquire (junior), afterwards earl of Devon, was his heir. (His cousin the heir apparent, Avice, daughter of his uncle Sir Richard Stafford and wife of James Butler, earl of Wiltshire, had died in 1457.) 
Humphrey 'of the silver hand' had five sons, of whom William was the youngest. William's wife, Katherine, was coheir and eventually sole heir of Sir John Chidiock, another major west country landowner, but she outlived both husband and son. William Stafford was killed by Cade's rebels in 1450, when his (unknown) lands were granted to family custodians (including his uncle Archbishop John Stafford) during Humphrey Stafford's minority. Katherine's own lands destined her son to be a leading member of the Somerset and Dorset gentry; he became the largest landowner in Dorset on 7 July 1461 on the death of his cousin of Hook; it is not clear when it became apparent he would succeed. It is not known when he married the heiress, Isabel (died 1489), daughter of Sir John Barre. 
In the late 1450s it may be that Humphrey Stafford was attached to his Lancastrian kinsman the earl of Wiltshire. Certainly Lord Audley was, with whom he was sent in 1460 to relieve the garrison of Guines. Bad weather drove them into Calais, where both were captured by the rebel Yorkists and both converted to the Yorkist cause. Later in 1460, following the Yorkist assumption of power, described as of Enmore near Bridgwater, Stafford was elected MP for Somerset, was then appointed sheriff of Somerset and Dorset, and, by Bishop Waynflete, constable of Taunton Castle. He fought for the Yorkists at Mortimer's Cross near Wigmore (Shropshire) on 2 February 1461 and at Towton (on 29 March), when he was knighted. A host of offices culminated in his summons on 27 July 1461 to parliament as Lord Stafford of Southwick, a title that he had ample means to support. 
Stafford's inheritance was concentrated in Somerset and Dorset, but it is clear that Edward IV's government saw him as the natural replacement not just of the earl of Wiltshire in Dorset but of the Courtenay earls of Devon further west. He overshadowed such other west country peers as lords Fitzwarine, Audley, and Dynham. On 20 February 1462 he was granted the core of the Courtenay estate in Devon: the three honours, castles, boroughs, and hundreds of Plympton, Okehampton, and Tiverton, and six other manors. These were regranted on 23 April 1464 (the day before his barony was reconferred by letter patent), again in 1467, and in 1468. In 1461 he was appointed steward of the duchy of Cornwall, constable of Bristol, keeper of the forests of Kingswood (Wiltshire), Fulwood (Somerset), and Gillingham (Dorset); in 1464 keeper of Dartmoor; and in 1465 warden of the stannaries. His constableship of Taunton was confirmed in 1465, when he also secured Edward IV's confirmation of his appointment by the king's mother as constable and keeper of Bridgwater and keeper of Petherton forest (Somerset). In 1467 he was granted the Courtenay manors of Exiland and Westyate and the fishery of the Exe (Devon); in 1468 the reversion of the foresterships of Exmoor and Neroche on the death of Lord Fitzwarine and the stewardship of Lord Zouche's lands in Dorset, Somerset, and Wiltshire; and on 17 May 1469, when he was created earl of Devon, he was granted five other manors and appurtenances in Devon and Cornwall forfeited by Henry Courtenay, who had been executed for treason earlier that year. Whether or not Courtenay's ruin could be attributed to Stafford's malicious coveting of his lands as alleged by the chronicler Warkworth, the earldom was the logical culmination of a decade's steady accumulation fostered by a king who needed a capable and reliable agent in the west. 
Stafford, inevitably, was nominated to all sorts of commissions and actually served: he was no absentee landlord, and is recorded as feoffee, witness to charters, arbiter, and litigant. He was at Wells and Ilchester (Somerset) in 1462, at Malmesbury in 1465, at Bridport in 1465-6, and at Salisbury on judicial business in 1466 and 1469, but he was most active further west. He presided over the stannary courts at Lostwithiel, Liskeard, and Trematon in 1465 and 1466, attended quarter sessions at Bodmin in 1467, and was at Barnstaple in 1468-9, but it is the records of Exeter, the regional capital, that are most revealing of his dominance. Although he did not actually sit as JP, he received gifts of wine at quarter sessions on twenty-one occasions between 1462 and 1469. At such times, he apparently resided in the city. However his concern to acquire the chapel furniture and three bombards of the last Courtenay earl at Tiverton suggest that this castle was his principal seat. The codicils he added to his will in 1467 and later show how widespread his activities had been and how anxious he was to right the wrongs that he was conscious of committing. 
Stafford's services were not confined to the west country. In 1461-2 he served against the Scots and in 1468 he was treating with Brittany. In 1467 he witnessed both the tournament of Antoine, count of La Roche, the Bastard of Burgundy, and the transfer of the great seal from Archbishop Neville. He sat in parliament, in 1465 carrying provisos from the king's chamber to the clerk of parliament, and attended the royal council. In 1468, when he was identified by Warwick as one of the king's new favourites, he was nevertheless one of those with whom the earl was prepared to be reconciled, but in 1469 he was bracketed with Rivers, Pembroke, and his companion Audley in the earl's rebel manifesto as an evil councillor. Summoned by the king to oppose Robin of Redesdale, allegedly with 7000 men including an Exeter contingent, he disagreed with his fellow commander, the earl of Pembroke, and camped separately, thus facilitating the latter's defeat at Edgcote. Fleeing westwards, he was seized by the 'commons', who allowed him to add a codicil to his will, and was executed at Bridgwater on 17 August. Stafford was buried at Glastonbury Abbey. Since he died childless, his peerages died with him and his inheritances were disputed between his cousins. 


@@@@@


doc= 26209


Stafford, John (d. 1452), administrator and archbishop of Canterbury, was the illegitimate son of Sir Humphrey Stafford of Southwick, Wiltshire (died 1413), and of one Emma of North Bradley, Wiltshire, whom the archbishop supported until her death in 1446. Sir Humphrey's legitimate son and heir, another Humphrey Stafford (1404-1442), was a close friend of the bishop, who acted as a trustee during his minority and later as an executor. Although not closely related to the comital family, the branch's kinship was acknowledged and maintained through patronage and business, and it was itself prominent in the south-west. John and another brother, Henry, were both dispensed their illegitimacy to enter priestly orders before 4 January 1398. Benefiting from this unusually extended family affection, shown even to a bastard child in a junior line, Stafford was able to study at length at Oxford University, becoming DCL by 1413, and still resident in Oxford on 4 March 1414 when called to appear before Bishop Repyndon's inquiry into heresy there. At this time he was licensed on 23 February to become a deacon, and indeed was ordained to the priesthood itself as soon as 7 April 1414. Starting in December 1404 he already held by now, or had held, three rectories, a vicarage, two prebends, and a portion, mainly in the south-west. 
On 5 December 1414 Stafford was appointed as an advocate in the court of arches, and was living in Elden Lane in London (afterwards known as Stafford's Inn) in 1418. Meantime he had become a member of the council of Christ Church, Canterbury, by 1416, and represented the clergy of the Exeter diocese in convocation in November 1417, when he participated in discussions about improving opportunities for preferment for graduates. Edmund Stafford, bishop of Exeter and, of course, a kinsman, was among his benefactors in these early years. By 6 December 1419 John Stafford was chancellor and auditor of causes to Archbishop Henry Chichele, and is found among those witnessing the early stages of the trial of the heretic William Taylor on 12 and 14 February 1420. His gradual accumulation of preferment peaked in his collation as consecutively archdeacon (9 September 1419) and chancellor of Salisbury (30 October 1420). 
Henry V's success in France drew Stafford, like several other leading church administrators, into work for the crown. On 23 February and 28 March 1419 he was appointed to a team to meet French envoys in England and prepare peace terms, and again on 22 April and 6 May. On 15 July and 1 August 1420 he was asked to negotiate with Brittany regarding that duchy's observance of the treaty of Troyes. On 1 May 1421 he was charged to help negotiate an alliance with Genoa. 
Stafford's transfer into crown service was confirmed by his appointment as keeper of the privy seal on 25 February 1421. After Henry V's death he was promoted to treasurer of the realm on 18 December 1422, in the general arrangements for administration of Henry VI's minority. That same day he was made dean of St Martin's-le-Grand in London. His episcopal promotion was now only a matter of suitable opportunity, and his election as dean of Wells (confirmed on 9 September 1423) probably indicated where his own preferences lay. On the death of old Bishop Nicholas Bubwith, Stafford was duly elected as bishop of Bath and Wells, 'c'.19/20 December 1424, but had indeed been papally provided on the 18th, so smoothly had plans been laid. The crown's assent was given on 26 December and Stafford had immediate possession, although formal restitution of temporalities was only made on 25 May, with consecration at Blackfriars on the 27th and profession to the archbishop on the 31st. In the past Archbishop Chichele had protested strongly at such reversal of the traditional order of proceeding, implying as it did that profession to Canterbury was not a necessary precondition, and Stafford was now the immediate colleague of the chancellor, Bishop Henry Beaufort, no friend of the archbishop. But the archbishop raised no objection in the case of this, his former protege and official; indeed, Stafford had recently been admitted to the confraternity of Christ Church, Canterbury, very much Chichele's personal interest, on 8 May 1424. 
In his time as treasurer Stafford had also helped negotiate the release of James I of Scotland from his imprisonment in England (appointed on 3 December 1423), which was much to Beaufort's liking, and had gone with Beaufort three times (18 October 1424, 4 May and 13 July 1425) to try to coax a more generous subsidy from the Canterbury convocation. On 13 March 1426 he resigned. While he had served a long, stressful term, it is certain that he was forced out of office by Duke Humphrey of Gloucester's uncompromising campaign against the council's approach to funding and pursuing the war. Beaufort resigned as chancellor on the same day, when the long-running bitterness came to a public showdown. 
None the less, Stafford remained active on the council, and although he could now make a formal primary visitation of his diocese in 1426-7, and spent about three months a year thereafter in residence (regarding Dogmersfield as a favourite base), his overall record as an active diocesan was to be an indifferent one, a fact of which he was not unmindful. Thomas Gascoigne, the contemporary Oxford moralist, who though curmudgeonly was not usually a liar, also asserted that Stafford had several children with a nun in this period, although no corroborative evidence survives. On 15 November 1428 Stafford served on the convocation committee to discuss a more effective response to heresy. On 23 April 1430 he crossed to Calais in the escort of Henry VI, but returned to London by 8 September. 
Although Stafford does not seem to have been intimate personally with Beaufort or the leading figures in the household of the young king, there is no doubt of the confidence he enjoyed with such men, and on 25 February 1432 he was appointed as chancellor of the realm, to begin an unbroken term in office exceeded in length only by Robert Burnell (1274-92) before, and by the earl of Hardwicke (1737-56) and Lord Eldon (1807-27) since. He went in delegations to convocation at least three times (18 September 1432, 19 November 1433, and 26 November 1439) to cajole subsidies, naturally attended formal meetings of councillors more than anyone else, and opened parliaments, often emphasizing the particular ideology of the regime that the unity of the body politic rested in the person of the king. Although he was fully involved in the increasingly factional rule of first Cardinal Beaufort and then the duke of Suffolk, there is little sign that he was a policy initiator. Primarily, he was the government's principal administrator and lawyer, not a politician. 
On 10 April 1442 Archbishop Chichele wrote to Pope Eugenius IV asking to be allowed to retire and nominating Stafford as his successor. The king supported this proposal, but the pope refused to let the old man go, recognizing him as a stalwart supporter against the Council of Basel. However, Chichele's death on 12 April 1443 allowed for Stafford's smooth promotion; he was elected on 20 May but had in fact been papally provided as early as the 13th. Clearly this vacancy, too, had been well prepared for, and the pope had no objections to Stafford in himself. Stafford received the temporalities on 25 June, the pallium on 23 August, and was enthroned on 22 September during a one-week visit to his diocese proper. Almost at once he appointed an intimate of Suffolk, James Fiennes, Lord Say, to be steward of all the estates of the archbishopric. 
There is no sign that Stafford had the slightest intention of ever resigning as chancellor, even though he was now primate of all England. Although he kept the diocesan administration formally in his own hands, his diocese saw him for little more than half a dozen flying visits of a week or two until the last year of his life. When he did travel away from Lambeth Palace, Croydon was his country retreat. Stafford made no effort to inspect the other parts of his province or promote any reforms, and remained fully occupied by his work as chancellor. He conducted the coronation of Margaret of Anjou on 30 May 1445, and was among the leading men of the realm who received a comparably substantial embassy from France in July. He continued to witness crown documents more frequently than anyone else, to see that the formal bureaucracy under the great seal did its job, and to open parliaments. These, however, included the assembly on 10 February 1447 at Bury St Edmunds, whose sole 'agendum' was to attack the duke of Gloucester, and Stafford could not avoid being identified with Suffolk's increasingly controversial domination of government policy. This culminated in the fall of Normandy in late 1449 and the duke's own impeachment in the new year. Stafford resigned on 31 January 1450, shortly after this process began in parliament. Although he remained at the heart of government, and was never charged with any impropriety in office, still less with treason, he could not have presided over a trial so closely concerned with events during his own tenure. Indeed, no leading minister of state retained his office through this crisis. 
When Jack Cade's followers marched in revolt to London from Kent, Stafford again seems to have been free of any popular ill will, even among men from his own diocese intent on condemning the evil advisers of the king, and especially the running of local government in their shire. Indeed, on 16 June 1450 he led the royal delegation to Blackheath to hear the protesters' grievances, and was one of the few lords who stood their ground and were available to negotiate a settlement after all the violence on 7 July. On 1 August he was appointed to an oyer and terminer commission for Kent to resolve the underlying problems and causes of the rising. This at least obliged him to spend that month and September in his diocese proper, a rare moment, if still of no obvious pastoral merit. 
Stafford returned to Lambeth Palace for the parliament in November and December 1450 and remained there, apart from one short new year break, until March. Thereafter, his register ceases almost entirely, a change about which it would be unwise to speculate, for while he still witnessed many royal documents he does seem to have taken to Kent much more in his remaining year. His will does not survive, in many ways a pity, given that he had a mediocre performance as archbishop to consider, and also the reputed complexities of his personal life. He died on 25 May 1452 at Maidstone, and was buried in the north-west transept of his cathedral, close by the scene of Thomas Becket's martyrdom, a fact that may explain why he never had more than a marble slab, when his contemporaries so favoured great effigy-tombs; it would have been entirely out of character if he had not made his own good preparations. Of his administrative reputation there can be no doubt, and evidently he ensured that the routine work of his episcopacy ran competently. It is difficult to advance beyond such faint praise for him as leader of the English church. 


@@@@@


doc= 26210


Stafford, John (1728-1800), Independent minister, was born at Leicester in August 1728, probably the eldest son of the wool-comber John Stafford. At first he earned his living as a wool-comber, but he left this employment to devote himself to the work of the ministry, and in 1749 entered the Independent academy at Northampton, where he was prepared for the ministry by Philip Doddridge. On Doddridge's death in 1751 he went to the academy at Plaisterers' Hall, Addle Street, London, and finished his seven years' course of study under John Conder at Mile End. 
Some of Stafford's earliest ministerial work was as a supply preacher at Royston, Hertfordshire, and St Neots, Huntingdonshire. In March 1758 he became co-pastor, with John Guyse, of New Broad Street Chapel in London and was ordained on 11 May in that year. He remained minister of New Broad Street until his death, forty-two years later. He married, on 31 July 1758, Hannah Blythe, daughter of Samuel Blythe. They had nine children, eight girls and a boy, five of whom predeceased both parents. The death at the age of fifteen, in 1774, of their eldest daughter, Elizabeth, caused him particular grief, and he published 'A Sermon Occasioned by the Death of Elizabeth Stafford' in 1774. Stafford was not a prolific writer, and was the author of only one other work, which was published in 1772, 'The Scripture Doctrine of Sin and Grace Considered in 25 Discourses on Romans VII'. This ran to a second edition in 1774 and earned him plaudits from such notable dissenting luminaries as Walter Wilson, John Ryland, and Edward Williams. His theology was rigidly Calvinistic. 
Several years after Stafford's ordination his reputation suffered as a result of his having interpreted in favour of himself and his family the terms of a bequest providing for an annual sum to be paid for the time being to the minister of New Broad Street. A court of law decided in his favour on technical grounds, but accompanied the decision with a strong censure on his conduct. It was probably partly as a result of his laying claim to this money that he died a rich man with an estate worth several thousand pounds. From mid-summer 1799 Stafford became afflicted by violent stomach pains. He preached for the last time on 6 October 1799 and died at his house in Chiswell Street, Finsbury, on 22 February 1800. He was buried in Bunhill Fields, where his five children had been buried and where his widow was subsequently buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 26211


Stafford, Ralph, first earl of Stafford (1301-1372), soldier and magnate, was the elder son and heir of Edmund de Stafford, first Lord Stafford (1273-1308), and Margaret (died 1337), daughter of Ralph, first Lord Basset (died 1299), of Drayton, Staffordshire. 
At the time of Ralph's birth, on 24 September 1301, the Staffords exercised considerable influence in the west midlands, but had yet to assume the prominent role in national affairs that fell to them as a result of his own success as a soldier, administrator, and courtier. The bulk of their estates lay in Staffordshire and Warwickshire, with a few additional holdings in Oxfordshire and Lincolnshire, and generated an annual income of about $200 net. This was not enough to support a senior member of the English baronage, although Edmund de Stafford had sufficiently distinguished himself in the Scottish wars of Edward I to merit a personal summons to parliament. The path of advancement through military service was followed with distinction by his son, whose lasting achievement was to elevate his family to the ranks of the higher nobility. 
Having lost his father as a child, Ralph Stafford had come of age and entered his estates by December 1323. He spent his youth in the society of his mother's Staffordshire relatives and of her second husband, a local landowner named Thomas Pipe. Stafford's first known experience of royal service occurred in 1325, when he, his younger brothers, and their stepfather joined the retinue of his maternal uncle, Ralph, second Lord Basset of Drayton. Soon, however, he grew more independent. He was made a knight-banneret in January 1327, being recruited to fight against the Scots shortly afterwards. His support for the plot to free the young Edward III from the control of his mother's lover, Roger Mortimer, earned him the king's lasting gratitude, and marked the beginning of what was to become a close personal relationship. Mortimer's arrest at Nottingham Castle during the parliament of October 1330 enabled Edward to seize the reins of power himself. 
By the summer of 1332 Stafford had become a commissioner of the peace in Staffordshire, and had been sent abroad on royal business with Hugh, Lord Audley. In August of that year he embarked on an expedition in support of Edward Balliol, claimant to the Scottish throne. With considerable expertise, the English captains contrived a difficult landing at Kinghorn, and, in the face of heavy odds, defeated the Scots on 11 August at Dupplin Moor near Perth. Stafford himself enabled the English archers to withstand a lethal onslaught from the Scottish spearmen by ordering them to adopt different tactics. Between 1334 and 1337 he took part in three more Scottish campaigns, being accompanied across the border in October 1336 by his second wife, Margaret Audley. 
The death of Stafford's first wife, Katherine, a daughter of Sir John Hastang of Chebsey, Staffordshire, left him free to make a more ambitious match, in keeping with his social and political aspirations. This he did with characteristic 'elan', by reputedly abducting and marrying Margaret, the sole heir of his fellow envoy, Lord Audley, and his wife, also Margaret, the latter being one of the three sisters and coheirs of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester and Hertford (d. 1314). At a conservative estimate, the girl's inheritance was worth at least $2314 a year, more than ten times the value of Stafford's own modest patrimony. It also promised to establish the Staffords as a powerful presence in the south of England and the Welsh marches. Audley's third of the Clare estates stretched from Norfolk to Wiltshire, and also included the lordships of Kilkenny in Ireland and Newport in Wales. Yet, although Audley began legal proceedings against his new son-in-law in July 1336, a degree of collusion, on King Edward's part at least, seems apparent. Just a few months later, on 29 November, Stafford was summoned to parliament as Lord Stafford, as his father had been before him. He continued to enjoy repeated marks of royal favour, and was soon serving alongside Audley in Scotland, his misdemeanours forgiven, if not forgotten. 
Plans for a war against the French took King Edward abroad in 1338, and Stafford joined his entourage as a trusted adviser. He accompanied the king on journeys to and from England, and was present on 24 June 1340 at the celebrated naval battle of Sluys. Lack of money forced Edward to return home again, in November 1340, for a dramatic confrontation with his ministers. Prominent among them was Archbishop John Stratford, who retreated to Canterbury. Stafford was twice sent to harangue him into submission, but the archbishop insisted on defending himself before parliament. Stafford was, meanwhile, made steward of the royal household on 6 January 1341, in a purge of the existing administration which placed soldiers with little experience of government in positions of authority. 
Many noblemen resented these developments: when Stafford and two other newly appointed officials attempted to prevent the archbishop from attending parliament on 23 April, the Earl Warenne protested that the social order had been reversed. Such 'gentz de mester' ('Chroniques de London', 90), who were little more than servants, had no place in the House of Lords, he claimed. Stafford and his companions allegedly left the chamber in shame, but however humiliated he may have felt he still refused to take the oath demanded of him and the other royal favourites by their opponents. Edward rewarded his loyalty soon afterwards with a grant of mercantile privileges in Warwickshire and Staffordshire. 
The theatre of war now moved to Brittany, where Stafford began campaigning in August 1342 with a personal retinue of about 150 men. Under the command of the earl of Northampton, he helped to relieve the port of Brest, devastated the surrounding countryside, and on 30 September inflicted a crushing defeat on the French force that had been sent to raise the siege of Morlaix. But after Edward III's arrival Stafford's luck ran out. He was captured outside the walls of Vannes, and many of his men were killed. An exchange of prisoners left him free to negotiate a truce at Malestroit in January 1343; and, having displayed a flair for diplomacy, he was dispatched to Avignon in May as an envoy to defend Edward's claim to the throne of France before the pope. During the summer he served on a commercial embassy to Flanders and a mission to strengthen England's ties with Germany. He then returned to Scotland on an expedition for the relief of Lochmaben Castle, but the siege was raised before his arrival. 
In April 1344 Stafford crossed to Gascony with a retinue of over 200 men, returning later in the year to spend some time on his estates and discharge various royal commissions in the west midlands. Even at home he engaged in feats of arms, participating in at least two major tournaments, one of which was held in November to mark the marriage of his elder son, Ralph, to Maud, the young daughter and coheir of his fellow commander, Henry of Grosmont, earl of Lancaster. He was, however, soon back on active service overseas. On 29 March 1345 he resigned as steward of the household, having already assumed office as seneschal of Gascony. He occupied this post for just over a year, although Edward wanted him to stay on. 
In Gascony Stafford was one of Lancaster's marshals, between August and October leading the water-borne assault at the fall of Bergerac, commanding the garrison at Liborne, and heading a contingent at the relief of Auberoche. As captain of Aiguillon, he was besieged in the early summer of 1346 by the future King Jean of France at the head of a large army. He mounted a spirited defence, filling breaches in the fortifications with wine casks full of stones. He evidently escaped long before the siege was raised, on 20 August, as in July 1346 he crossed from England to Normandy with the royal army and helped to lead a successful raid on the port of Barfleur just after disembarkation. Together with his younger brother, Richard, who later became steward to the prince of Wales, he took part in the ensuing campaign and fought at the battle of Crecy on 26 August. 
Although he was reappointed seneschal of Gascony in October 1346, Stafford soon joined Edward III, whose army was digging in outside Calais, ready for a protracted siege. In 1347 he crossed to England on 'secret matters touching the King' ('CClR, 1346-1349', 238), probably in connection with a great council held at Westminster to raise money for the war effort. He had returned to Edward's side by the spring. Stafford was one of the naval commanders who plundered a French supply fleet bringing food to Calais and captured many ships, his triumphs at sea being almost as numerous as those on land. As a royal marshal he received the keys of the town on its surrender in August 1347, and was rewarded with property there. He then took part in negotiations for a truce with France. 
Stafford now basked in the favour of a grateful monarch. In November 1347 he and his wife were allowed to take possession of the estates of her late father without first paying homage to the king. Since he had recently inherited a third share of the lordship of Caus in Shropshire, worth about $265 a year, Stafford suddenly found himself an extremely wealthy man, his coffers swollen even further with booty and ransoms from France. The death of his elder son at this time came as a bitter blow to his growing dynastic ambitions, for it deprived the family of a prospective title to half of one of the greatest inheritances in England. 
Yet Stafford already enjoyed enormous prestige as a landowner, and wished to advertise his power. In February 1348 Edward III permitted him to crenellate his residences in Stafford and Madeley, Staffordshire. His forebears had hitherto been prevented by the crown from building a castle in Stafford, and he had anticipated this singular mark of confidence by entering a contract with a local mason a few weeks earlier. As one of the chief English commanders in France and a veteran of the Crecy campaign Stafford was, moreover, named among the twenty-six founder knights of the Order of the Garter, constituted by Edward III in April 1348 ['see also 'Founding knights of the Order of the Garter]. This was a close-knit group of men, notable for their military prowess and personal attachment to the king. Among them was Thomas Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (d. 1369), whose daughter was betrothed to Stafford's surviving son, Hugh Stafford, shortly afterwards. 
Although Stafford was nearly fifty, with a life of hard campaigning behind him, retirement remained a distant prospect. Having received over $570 in overseas expenses, he contracted in September 1348 to serve King Edward for life with a retinue of sixty men-at-arms in return for an annuity of $600, secured on the customs of London and Boston. One month later he crossed to Calais with the king for further negotiations with the French; and, although the truce continued, he spent part of 1349 on active service in Gascony. As an experienced naval commander Stafford was called upon to defend English shipping against the predatory Castilian fleet, which was defeated on 29 August 1350 off the coast near Winchelsea. He ended the year in York, where he was sent to discuss peace with the Scots. 
To mark the jubilee year of 1350-51 and honour his leading captains, Edward III created a number of new peerage titles. Stafford was elevated to the rank of earl on 5 March 1351, with an annuity of 1000 marks, in lieu of estates to that value. Having replaced Lancaster (who then became a duke) as the king's lieutenant in Gascony, he indented in March 1352 to serve with 200 men, on the understanding that in March 1353 his personal retinue would be doubled at King Edward's charge and that further reinforcements would then be sent out to him. This proved a lucrative campaign, for he took several captives from the garrison at Agen, including the famous captain, Jean le Meingre, lord of Boucicault, for whom he was paid $1000 at the exchequer. Even so, despite his reputation as a commander, Stafford was no match for the count of Armagnac, whose aggressive tactics forced the English to revise their strategy, and in 1355 led to the appointment of the prince of Wales as lieutenant to rally the English defence. 
Stafford, meanwhile, offered armed protection nearer home, when, in the summer of 1353, the prince accompanied justices in eyre to his own notoriously unruly estates in Cheshire, and went in fear of an open insurrection. After a brief spell back in Gascony Stafford prepared to join an expedition in support of King Charles of Navarre (another claimant to the throne of France) which was mounted in 1354 by his old friend, the duke of Lancaster. When these plans were abandoned he took part in Edward III's new offensive in northern France in the autumn of 1355, and then commanded a contingent in the royal army that shortly afterwards invaded Scotland. 
Stafford was clearly a man of remarkable strength and physical bravery. In 1359, when he was again in France with the king, his headquarters near the Somme were attacked by a contingent of Frenchmen. Although by medieval standards he was now well advanced in years, the earl is said to have killed one assailant, disabled another, and captured their commander. The campaign ended in talks at Bretigny in May 1360, which were attended by Stafford as one of the English envoys, and led to the ratification of a formal peace treaty at Calais in October. Even then his days as a soldier were not over: in the following year he travelled to Ireland with the chief governor, the king's younger son, Lionel of Antwerp, earl of Ulster, in order to attempt the restoration of English lordship. 
Stafford already had personal connections with Ireland, for in 1350 he had married his daughter Beatrice to Maurice fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, second earl of Desmond, leasing the young couple his lordship of Kilkenny by way of a settlement. On Desmond's death without children, in June 1358, Edward III granted Stafford custody of all the comital estates not already held as dower by the widowed Beatrice. But he occupied them for only a year, until the next heir took possession. Beatrice had by then become the wife of Thomas, Lord Ros of Helmsley, one of her father's fellow captains in France. Stafford had four daughters in all. Of these, Joan's first husband was John, third Baron Charlton of Powys, after whose death she married Gilbert, third Lord Talbot; while Elizabeth was the second wife of Reynold Cobham, second Baron Cobham (1348-1403) ['see under 'Cobham family]. 
Although the chronicler Jean Froissart reports that Stafford visited France again in 1369 (the year in which his former comrade-in-arms, the earl of Warwick, named him as an executor), the earl may already have been too frail to travel far. Years in the field had taken their toll, and by his death, on 31 August 1372, his once powerful frame was wretchedly emaciated and bowed down with age. He died at Tonbridge Castle, Kent, and was buried in the church of the nearby Augustinian priory, next to his second wife and her parents. He had, however, proved generous to Stone Priory, Staffordshire, the burial place of his own ancestors and centre of the cult of St Wulfhad, of which he was a devotee. A man of more than strictly conventional piety, about 1344 he founded a house of Augustinian friars at Stafford, where prayers were to be said for his first wife and her relatives, and for the king. Shortly before his death the earl also endowed a perpetual chantry at Cold Norton Priory, Oxfordshire, for the salvation of his soul and that of Margaret Audley, whose great wealth had made possible such largess. His younger son, Hugh, succeeded him. 
Earl Ralph's younger brother, 
Sir Richard's influence in Staffordshire derived not only from family connections, but also reflected his increasingly powerful position as a landowner. Clearly a man who brooked no opposition, he was able to secure from his mother part of the inheritance of his younger half-brother, who abandoned as futile attempts to recover his ancestral manor of Pipe after a protracted battle in the courts. His first marriage, in 1337, to Isabel, a granddaughter of Sir William Camville of Clifton Camville and (on the paternal side) of Sir Richard Vernon of Haddon, Derbyshire, also brought him property, even though her brother, William, possessed a superior title. Clifton became Sir Richard's seat, and henceforward he deployed his energies more constructively as a justice of the peace and royal commissioner in the west midlands. But the attractions of local government began to pale when the prospect of military activity came into view. Stafford's first diplomatic mission took place in 1337, when he served as a royal envoy to the counts of Hainault and Gueldres, and to the emperor, Ludwig of Bavaria, in an attempt to isolate the French. He campaigned with Edward III in France in 1339, and almost certainly used his voice as a shire knight in the parliament of 1341 to defend the king's choice of ministers (including his own brother) and their management of the war effort. After a brief period of service against the Scots Stafford returned to France in 1345, where he played a notable part in engagements at Bergerac, Liborne, Auberoche, and La Reole. In 1346 he fought in the vanguard at the battle of Crecy, being perhaps for the first time associated with the young Prince Edward, with whom he was to forge a long and profitable relationship. 
On returning to England, in or before February 1347, Stafford was made steward and surveyor of all Edward's English and Welsh estates, at an annual fee of $66 13's'. 4died He also became a leading member of the prince's council, a justice of his courts in Cheshire, and keeper of his lordships of Cheylesmore and Coventry. For the next eight years he remained one of his senior retainers, constantly preoccupied with a wide range of business, including the recruitment of soldiers for service abroad. There were also opportunities to consolidate his own authority. During the late 1350s he took a second wife, Maud ('c'.1330-1400), the daughter of his kinsman, Sir John Stafford of Bramshall, Staffordshire. Maud possessed a title to part of the manor of Pipe, which Sir Richard promptly claimed. Such was his authority that, while an assize concerning the property was being held at Stafford, in 1359, no less a figure than the sheriff appeared in court wearing Sir Richard's livery. 
Stafford returned to France in 1355 as a knight bachelor in Prince Edward's service. They were bound for Gascony, which Stafford knew well after campaigning there with the earl of Derby in the 1350s. He was promoted to the rank of knight-banneret at Bassoues, and took part in the prince's celebrated march across country from Bordeaux to Narbonne. He returned home to raise reinforcements, but subsequently distinguished himself at the battle of Poitiers in 1356. He was later rewarded by the prince with a gift of $333 for his part in the engagement, as well (in 1358) as a pension of $133 a year for life. Having served with the royal army during the months leading up to the treaty of Bretigny in May 1359, he was then chosen with his brother to negotiate the terms of peace. In July 1361 he was back in the field as seneschal of Gascony, an appointment intended to support the prince during his term as governor of Aquitaine. He was joined there by his illegitimate son Nicholas, and by his eldest legitimate son and namesake, with whom he has often been confused. The latter accompanied him on an embassy to the papal court at Avignon, in 1366, and married the only daughter and heir of Sir John Blount. The younger Richard Stafford's death without heirs, soon after Stafford (designated 'the father') was first summoned to parliament as a baron in 1370, ended any prospect that the title would become hereditary. 
Elevation to the ranks of the parliamentary baronage was an appropriate reward for one who had served the crown so loyally. It was because of his close relationship with Prince Edward and his own impressive war record that Stafford was nominated by the Commons in the Good Parliament of 1376 as one of the twelve lords with whom they wished to confer on matters of state. This was an attempt to place curbs on the unpopular and corrupt court party, with which the prince (then terminally sick) was believed to have little sympathy. But Stafford proved a disappointment. He served as an elected member of the royal council (along with his nephew, Hugh, earl of Stafford) for less than the prearranged year, after apparently losing the support of the Commons because of doubts about his commitment to reform. He was also growing old, and must have been well over seventy by the time of his death on 13 August 1380. His estates in Gloucestershire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, Northamptonshire, Derbyshire, and Leicestershire (some of which had been settled upon him by Lord Basset in the 1340s) descended to the elder of his two surviving legitimate sons, Edmund Stafford, the future bishop of Exeter and chancellor of England. He also left a second legitimate son, Thomas, and two daughters, who were successively betrothed to Sir Thomas Ardern of Elford in Staffordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 26212


Richard Stafford, Lord Stafford of Clifton (c.1305-1380), was a distinguished figure in his own right, achieving fame as a soldier, diplomat, and administrator. His early career was spent, like that of his brother, in the retinue of Ralph, Lord Basset. Both Staffords were pardoned a sentence of outlawry in 1326, because Basset needed them in his retinue at Dover. This, the first of many brushes with authority, arose from the Staffords' entrenched opposition to Edward II. Sir Richard later became involved in a series of brutal feuds among the local gentry and members of his own prolific family, in which political partisanship served to exacerbate disputes over property and patronage. He was imprisoned in 1334 as an accessory to murder, but Lord Basset again came to the rescue by recruiting him for service on the Scottish border. Back in England by 1336 he was then a party to his brother's abduction of Margaret Audley, the last known occasion on which he openly defied the law. 


@@@@@


doc= 26213


Stafford, Richard (bap. 1663, d. 1703), Jacobite pamphleteer, was born at Marlwood Park, in the parish of Thornbury, Gloucestershire. Baptized there on 15 September 1663, he was the second son of John (died 1705) and Catherine Stafford (died 1710), and the grandson of the pamphleteer William Stafford (1593-1684). Educated at the free school at Wotton under Edge, Gloucestershire, he matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 15 February 1678. He spent six years at Magdalen Hall, graduating BA in 1681 and twice taking the oaths of allegiance and supremacy to Charles II and, therefore, to his heirs. From there he went to the Middle Temple in London, where he studied law for six years, though according to Wood he applied himself more to divinity. His 711-page book, 'Of happiness, wherein it is fully and particularly manifested that the great happiness of this life consisteth in the fear of God and keeping his commandments', appeared in 1689. 
After the revolution of 1688 Stafford devoted his attention to promoting the Jacobite cause. On 4 January 1690, 'out of burning zeal', he presented to parliament his 'A Supplemental Tract of Government' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.1124). In this he laid out Christ's laws of government and argued that the revolutionaries had departed 'from the established and fixed order of things he hath set up' (Stafford, 'Supplemental Tract', 1). England, therefore, stood under divine judgment. This action led to his imprisonment at Newgate for four weeks. On 25 March 1690 he sent a one-page broadside to the House of Commons entitled 'His Case Humbley Offer'd to the Consideration of both Houses of Parliament'. This act led the Commons to order the sergeant-at-arms to arrest Stafford and search his quarters at the Temple. He remained in custody until the end of April, when he was discharged and sent to the care of his father in Gloucestershire. A second tract, published at the same time as the broadside, was entitled 'A Clear Apology and Just Defence for Himself' (1690). There he claimed that he was using his study of the statutes and common law of England at the Middle Temple to defend the 'cause of the oppressed king'. However, he not only claimed to speak from his legal training but also claimed that the spirit of God had raised him up to speak the truth of God and warn England that they were a rebellious people (Stafford, 'Clear Apology', 11-12). 
On 3 November 1691 Stafford went to Kensington, the location of the queen's royal court, and distributed pamphlets. This led to his arrest and committal to the Bethlem Hospital. After the speaker of the House of Commons received a packet from him, he ordered the governor of Bedlam to prevent Stafford from obtaining pen, ink, or paper. Despite this order, Stafford continued to publish Jacobite tracts. He remained at the hospital until some time before his death on 2 July 1703 at Thornbury, Gloucestershire, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 26214


Stafford, Richard Anthony (1797-1854), surgeon, was born at Cropredy, Oxfordshire, the third son of Egerton Stafford (1763/4-1843), vicar of Chalcombe and rector of Thenford in Northamptonshire, and his wife, Mary Lucy, 'nee' Wykeham (1769/70-1840). He was baptized on 18 October 1797 at St Mary's, Witney, where his father was resident. Through his mother he was kin to William of Wykeham. Stafford was educated privately at Tamworth and was then apprenticed to two well-known medical practitioners of Cirencester, William Lawrence and Charles Warner, the former being father of the great surgeon Sir William Lawrence. Stafford travelled to London in 1820 and entered St Bartholomew's Hospital. Here he soon attracted the notice of John Abernethy, who appointed him his house surgeon for 1823-4. He was admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1824. He then spent a year in Paris. 
Stafford returned to London in 1826 and began to practise as a surgeon. The Jacksonian prize was awarded to him in the same year for his essay 'On spina bifida'. He was elected senior surgeon to the St Marylebone parish infirmary in 1831, and he was subsequently appointed surgeon-extraordinary to the duke of Cambridge. At the Royal College of Surgeons he was elected one of the first fellows, in 1843, and he was made a member of its council in 1848, though he was soon obliged to retire on account of ill health. He was elected Hunterian orator for 1851, and his oration was printed in the same year, though he was too ill to deliver it. He died, unmarried, on 15 January 1854, at 28 Old Burlington Street, London, aged fifty-six, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Stafford was a skilful surgeon, whose work was always founded on his very accurate anatomical knowledge. He was a voluminous writer whose publications included 'A Series of Observations on Strictures of the Urethra' (1828), and 'An Essay on the Treatment of some Affections of the Prostate Gland' (1840). 


@@@@@


doc= 26215


Stafford, Thomas (c.1533-1557), rebel, was the ninth child but second surviving son of Henry Stafford, tenth Baron Stafford (1501-1563), and Ursula Pole (died 1570) ['see 'Stafford, Ursula, 'under' Pole, Margaret]. The courtier Dorothy Stafford was an elder sister. Two executed grandparents, Edward Stafford, duke of Buckingham (d. 1521), and Margaret Pole, countess of Salisbury (d. 1541), transmitted royal descent from Thomas of Woodstock (died 1397), the Beauforts, and the house of York. As a younger son, Thomas had no hereditary expectations and depended on favour from his family or from those with whom he sought to ingratiate himself. Repeatedly he concealed his cadetship, exploited and exaggerated his lineage, and laid claim to Buckingham's forfeited honours. He wanted advancement commensurate with his ancestry and 'named himself to be a lord' ('CSP for.', '1553-8', 276). Fantasy, deception, and pretexts are indistinguishable from any genuine beliefs or principles held by Stafford. Nothing is known of his education and he first occurs in 1550 as a protestant 'en route' through Paris for Rome, where his uncle Reginald, Cardinal Pole, tried unsuccessfully to win him back to Catholicism; later Pole refused to recommend him to Mary. He spent three years in Italy and in 1553 proceeded to Poland, whence King Sigismund Augustus recommended him to Mary, reminded her of the Staffords' service to her mother, Katherine of Aragon, and requested his restoration to the dukedom of Buckingham. 
When Stafford returned to England, however, he received no favours, and joined Wyatt's rebellion against the queen in January 1554, most probably the midland element led by Henry Grey, duke of Suffolk. Henceforth he was consistently hostile to the Spanish marriage. Briefly imprisoned in the Fleet, he fled to France, where he dishonestly claimed a role in opposing Suffolk, for which he was praised, but denounced the Spanish match to Cardinal Pole, who rebuffed him. He started intriguing with other English exiles, seeking in April 1554 to murder Sir William Pickering and engaging in violent quarrels with his own brother-in-law Sir Robert Stafford; each briefly imprisoned the other in 1556. 'If ever there were a 'tragico comedia' played', the English ambassador observed, 'surely these men played it' ('CSP for.', '1553-8', 264). Although he was apparently irresponsible and incompetent, Mary's ministers feared Thomas Stafford's potential for causing trouble with the French, and placed a spy in his household who kept them informed and even supplied a map of his objective, although this was difficult to identify. Stafford's boasts, propaganda, and disinformation cloud his real intentions and resources. Leaving Dieppe on Easter Sunday (18 April 1557) with two ships and anything between 30 and 100 men, he seized the ill-protected Scarborough Castle on 25 April, titled himself 'The Lord Thomas Stafford, son to the Lord Henry, rightful Duke of Bokingham', and declared himself lord protector. He denounced the Spanish marriage, warned of an influx of Spaniards to enslave the people 'by the most develyshe devize of Mary, unrightful Quene of England', who was disqualified from ruling, and promised that the crown would revert 'to the trewe Inglyshe bloude of our owne naterall countrye' and that the good laws of Henry VIII would be kept (Strype, 3/2.515). Stafford called on the people to rise up, but failed to attract local recruits and on 28 April he himself, thirty-one companions (including four Scots), and the castle were captured by the earl of Westmorland. He was tried, condemned, and executed for treason at Tyburn on 28 May 1557, and later attainted; so were twenty-five followers. 
The whole episode is mysterious and unexplained. It is unclear where Stafford found the resources for his expedition, why the notorious adventurer Jean Ribaud joined him, who were his financial backers, or what he hoped to achieve. When in France, Stafford claimed the English crown as next heir and assumed the royal arms without a difference: actions which, as a younger son with both parents living, he must have known were unfounded. It would not have been surprising if, as on previous occasions, the French had used a pretender to distract and restrain the English government; indeed Stafford claimed, and Mary's regime first feared and then believed, that he was financed by the French. In this case, however, historians are inclined to accept French denials. Henri II was too fearful of an English alliance with Spain against him, for which Stafford duly provided the justification. There is no indication either that Stafford was a figurehead for a more substantial dynastic claimant, or that the whole rebellion was merely a ploy by Mary's councillor Lord Paget to lure Stafford to destruction. Stafford himself had little recent knowledge of England, of warfare and rebellion, or of how to arouse popular support. Scarborough was not a place where the Staffords were strong. Stafford's rebellion may have been an attempt, albeit misguided, by a cadet to draw attention to himself and thus to secure a future. So absolutely did it fail that now, in retrospect, it looks completely unrealistic, and its purpose and potential cannot satisfactorily be assessed. 


@@@@@


doc= 26216


Stafford, Sir Thomas (d. 1655), antiquary, is thought to have been the son of George Carew, earl of Totnes (1555-1629), president of Munster (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.448). Carew bestowed favours in life and legacies in death upon Stafford, and the two lived together for many years. Nothing is known of Stafford's early life, which may have been spent in Ireland. He is probably not the Thomas Stafford of Devon, gentleman, who matriculated to Exeter College, Oxford, on 27 April 1610 aged eighteen and graduated BA on 12 November 1613. 
Stafford's first appearance in the historical record occurred on 6 October 1611 when he was knighted in Ireland by the lord deputy, Arthur Chichester. In 1624 Carew recommended him for a company in Ireland as a reward for his long service. Although Stafford was given a troop of horse, it was, he complained in 1625, 'the meanest in Ireland' being only twenty-five in number ('CSP dom.', '1623-5', 316, 454, 478). About this time he was appointed gentleman usher to the new queen, Henrietta Maria. In 1629, during Carew's final months, Stafford deputized for him as master of the ordnance, and expected to continue as deputy for the new master, Lord Vere. Shortly after Carew's death this arrangement was abandoned by the king, and Stafford was deprived of his troop of horse. He sought recompense for his costs in raising and maintaining the company for two years, in the form of a pension in Ireland. 
By his will, dated 30 November 1625 and proved 29 May 1629, Carew bequeathed his manuscripts to Stafford. Thirty-nine of these volumes, today preserved at Lambeth Palace Library, remain a seminal collection for Irish history in the Elizabethan period and earlier. The presence of four volumes among the Laudian collection at the Bodleian Library suggests that Stafford may have had some contact with Archbishop Laud. Drawing on these documents, Stafford edited and published 'Pacata Hibernia: Ireland appeased and reduced, or, An historie of the late warres of Ireland, especially within the province of Mounster, under the government of Sir George Carew, knight' (1633). Stafford claimed the book had been written three decades earlier by Carew himself, but 'out of his retyred Modestie, the rather by him held backe from the Stage of Publication'. Once the manuscript was found by Stafford, he showed it to the 'view and censure of divers learned and judicious persons' by whom it was 'esteemed worthy the view of the world' ('Pacata Hibernia', foreword). It would seem that Stafford himself was the author, however, compiling a somewhat tedious series of documents, interspersed with seventeen maps tracing the progress of different campaigns between 1599 and 1603. For reasons unknown, part of the proceeds of 'Pacata Hibernia' were to be given to the children of the late John Mynshew, perhaps a relation. According to Wood, Stafford was also 'master of many choice originals of charters of English nobility' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.448). 
Stafford appears to have settled at the Savoy, London, possibly at his master's old residence. Some time in or after 1633 he married Mary, Lady Killigrew (died 1656), widow of Sir Robert Killigrew (died 1633) and daughter of Sir Henry Wodehouse of Kimberley, Norfolk. The marriage produced no surviving children. Stafford's stepson, Sir William Killigrew, was probably responsible for inducing Stafford to take out one of eighteen shares in the Lincolnshire fen-drainage ventures from 1635 to 1639. In the 1630s he was patron of at least two churches, Tottenhoe, Buckinghamshire, and West Ham, Essex, and held various minor offices. He died early in 1655 and was buried with his patron at Stratford upon Avon, Warwickshire, as requested by his will (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/247, sig. 243). His Latin epitaph on the Carew monument recalled him as 'an energetic commander of soldiers in Ireland', dear to the early Stuart monarchs 'by reason of his fidelity and superior work among their households', one who 'lived intimately for a long while' with Carew. His widow sold the Carew manuscripts and died in 1656, requesting burial 'in my owne chappell within my house att the Savoy Ch., the Strand' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/260, sig. 439). 


@@@@@


doc= 26217


Stafford, William (1554-1612), conspirator, was born on 1 March 1554 at Rochford, Essex, the second of three sons of Sir William Stafford of Chebsey, Staffordshire, and Rochford, Essex ('b'. before 1512, died 1556), courtier, and his second wife and cousin, Dorothy Stafford (1526-1604), daughter of the Catholic Henry Stafford, tenth Baron Stafford, and his wife, Ursula ['see 'Stafford, Ursula, 'under' Pole, Margaret]. He was of royal blood and, in addition, his father's first wife was Mary Boleyn, aunt to Elizabeth I. His family was strongly protestant, and in 1555 he was taken by his parents into exile. They went to Geneva, where John Calvin was godfather to his younger brother, John Stafford, who was born there in 1556. Sir William Stafford died in Geneva later that year and his wife managed to escape from Calvin, who wanted to keep her and her family there. In 1557 they moved to Basel, where they lived next door to John Knox. In 1559 the family returned to England and lived at Waltham in Essex. It was from here that at the age of ten William Stafford went to Winchester College as a scholar. He matriculated at New College, Oxford, in 1571 and was a fellow from 1573 to 1575 but was then deprived of his fellowship because he had gone out of residence. 
Stafford then moved to London, where he was associated with the court. His mother was a lady of the bedchamber to the queen and his elder brother, Sir Edward Stafford (1552-1605), became the English ambassador in Paris in 1578. He was rather overshadowed by his important relatives and seems to have had quite a poor reputation. He served at some point as a volunteer soldier in the Netherlands, fighting on the side of the Dutch rebels, and was wounded. In 1585 he left England impulsively to go to stay with his brother in Paris, and the latter wrote to the queen asking that he should be given some employment in the Netherlands again, this time with a command in the English forces being sent there. He does not seem to have achieved this ambition. 
Stafford was for a time famous because he was identified with the 'W. S.' who published a major work on Tudor economics and society in 1582 entitled 'A Discourse of the Commonweal'. It is now generally recognized that this is a work of Sir Thomas Smith, composed in 1549 and published thirty-three years later by his nephew, William Smith. Stafford did enter the pages of history, however, in January 1587 when the 'Stafford plot' was revealed. Late the previous year he had opened a conspiracy with the French ambassador, the baron de Chateauneuf, and his secretary, des Trappes, to kill the queen. Stafford visited the ambassador's house, where, according to his account, it was suggested to him that such a plot would benefit Mary, queen of Scots, and would earn him money and also admiration from Catholic leaders abroad. Stafford then introduced his French co-conspirators to Michael Moody, who was a servant of his brother Edward Stafford and was imprisoned at the time in London for the latter's debts. Moody suggested that Elizabeth should be blown up in her bedchamber by means of a trail of gunpowder. When the French pointed out that this plan would involve blowing up the chief conspirator's own mother, it was proposed that poisoning or stabbing might be better. Stafford, however, then reported the matter to Sir Francis Walsingham, the queen's principal secretary. Des Trappes was arrested and the ambassador confronted with the story. He said that it was Stafford who had initiated the plot, but he had no satisfactory reason to give as to why he himself had not immediately reported it to the English government. 
The best explanation for this plot is that it was indeed concocted by Stafford, on the instructions of William Cecil, Lord Burghley, the lord treasurer, and Walsingham. The purpose was possibly to persuade the queen of the need to execute Mary, queen of Scots, because there was a danger to her life if she did not. This, however, assumes that Elizabeth was not aware of the whole plan, which is perhaps disproved by the fact that in May 1587 when she received the French ambassador back into her favour she joked with him about the matter, behaving as if there was no substance in the plot. The other explanation is that the plot enabled the English to place Chateauneuf under house arrest and hence cut off his links with France at the time of the execution of Mary. It also sent up a smokescreen which made it more difficult for the French to protest about the execution of Mary. If all this is true, Stafford emerges as a member of the very considerable Elizabethan secret service network. 
Stafford was kept in the Tower of London for at least eighteen months after the discovery of the plot, although des Trappes and Chateauneuf were released within four months. The prolonged incarceration of Stafford was because after the release of the two Frenchmen it was necessary for Elizabeth to agree with the French that the true instigator of the plot was Stafford. No charges were, however, brought, and it can probably be assumed that by the end of 1588 Stafford was free. 
About 1593 Stafford married Anne (died 1612), daughter of Thomas Gryme of Antingham, Norfolk, with whom he had a daughter, Dorothy, and a son, William Stafford (1593-1684). He seems to have gone to live in Norfolk, and in 1594 is to be found arresting a seminary priest in that county. In his later years he presented a number of his own books, and some belonging to his mother, to his old school, Winchester. He died on 16 November 1612 but the places of his death and burial are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 26218


Stafford, William (1593-1684), pamphleteer, was born in Antingham, Norfolk, the son of William Stafford (1554-1612) and his wife, Anne (died 1612), daughter of Thomas Gryme of Antingham. He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 8 November 1611, graduated BA on 4 July 1614, and was created MA on 5 March 1618. On the death of his uncle Sir John Stafford in 1624 he succeeded to the estate of Marlwood Park in Thornbury, Gloucestershire. He married on 20 February 1672, at Thornbury, Ursula Moore, and through their son John was the grandfather of Richard Stafford (1663-1703), also a pamphleteer. 
Stafford was the author of 'The Reason of the War, with the Progress and Accidents Thereof, Written by an English Subject' (1646). He writes as a moderate parliamentarian, eager for peace on the basis of a constitutional monarchy. In the preface he mentions that parts of his work had been published in the previous year 'in much imperfection and some haste'. Wood was wrong in supposing that this treatise might be identical with a pamphlet entitled 'An orderly and plaine narration of the beginnings and causes of this warre: also a conscientious resolution against the warre on the parliament side' (1644); the latter publication, written by a staunch royalist, bitterly attacks the action of parliament. Stafford lived to a great age, and died at Thornbury, where he was buried on 4 July 1684. 


@@@@@


doc= 26219


Stagg, John (1770-1823), poet, known in Cumberland as the Blind Bard, was born at Burgh by Sands, near Carlisle, where his father, a tailor, possessed a small property. The young Stagg showed unusual promise, and his parents decided to educate him for the church, but while he was still young he was blinded in an accident, and this put an end to his studies. For some time he made a livelihood by keeping a library in the little town of Wigton and playing his fiddle at local festivities. In his twentieth year he married, and at the same date published a volume of poetry, 'Miscellaneous Poems'. After leaving Wigton for a short stay in Carlisle, he moved to Manchester, where he remained more or less until his death, but he frequently revisited his native county and spent much time among the local people, amusing them by performances on the fiddle, and gathering that intimate knowledge of their customs and dialect which enabled him to depict them accurately in his poems and essays. He also went further afield selling his works, and about 1809 visited Oxford. 
In Charles, duke of Norfolk, and many of the Cumberland gentry, as well as among members of the universities, Stagg found patrons by whom he was encouraged to publish his 'Minstrel of the North' (1810) and two series of 'Miscellaneous Poems' (1804 and 1807), which all went through a second edition. His other works were collected in 'The Cumberland minstrel: being a poetical miscellany of legendary, Gothic, and romantic tales... together with several essays in the northern dialect, also a number of original pieces' (3 vols., 1821). He died at Workington in 1823. He was father of seven children. 


@@@@@


doc= 26220


Staggins, Nicholas (d. 1700), musician and composer, was the son of Isaac Staggins (died 1684), a court musician since 1660, and his wife, Mary (died 1701). Both men held posts as violinists and as wind players (Isaac played the shawm and Nicholas the flute). Nicholas replaced William Young (died 1670), and on 15 August 1674 was also made 'Master of his Majesty's violins' jointly with Thomas Purcell, following the death of Pelham Humfrey. Louis Grabu, master of the king's musick, was dismissed in the wake of the decree banning all Roman Catholics from court, which came into force in November 1673, with Staggins serving in his stead from Michaelmas 1674. He was immediately thrust to the forefront of preparations for the extravagant court masque 'Calisto', which after several postponements was finally premiered on 22 February 1675. Staggins wrote the songs (some are extant in BL, Add. MS 19759) and headed the thirty-three violins in the performance. 
Staggins was appointed deputy marshal of the Corporation of Musick in Westminster on 17 December 1675. About 1676-7 he undertook a European journey, which is confirmed by a petition for arrears of 5 June 1695 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. C 421, fol. 199), in which he speaks of 'Travels in France... Italy, & other Forrin Parts, to capacitate & make my self fit for the Service of His Late Maty Kg Charles the Second'. 
Staggins was granted a doctorate in music at Cambridge in 1682, and the grace appointing him first professor of music there is dated 2 July 1684. According to Anthony Wood, 'His exercise should have been 8 parts for voices and compositions for instrumental music but by the favour of Dr James then Vice-Chancellor, he only composed his exercise for instruments' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood D 19(4)). 
Staggins was steward at the St Cecilia festivals in 1684 and 1685. Little survives of his music, which suggests that it was of poor quality. A few songs were published in contemporary collections; others remain in manuscript, together with a few slight instrumental airs. Staggins seems to have composed odes for William III's birthdays in at least 1693, 1694, and 1696. Some of his songs are settings of texts from contemporary plays, while 'an entertainment of vocal and instrumental musick, composed by Dr Staggins' was advertised in the 'London Gazette' to take place at York Buildings on 10 May 1697. Staggins, who had a house at Little Chelsea, died at Windsor Castle during the night of 12-13 June 1700 and was buried at St George's Chapel, Windsor, on 16 June; he was survived by his mother, two brothers, and a sister. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 26221


Staines, Sir Thomas (1776-1830), naval officer, was born at Dent de Lion, near Margate in Kent, and entered the navy as a midshipman in December 1789 on the 'Solebay', serving on the West Indian station until May 1792. In December 1792 he joined the brig 'Speedy', commanded by Captain Charles Cunningham, with whom he went to the Mediterranean, and whom he followed to the 'Imperieuse' and 'Lowestoft'. When Cunningham was sent home with dispatches Staines was moved to the 'Victory', Lord Hood's flagship, and was present at the engagement of 13 July 1795; he continued in the 'Victory' under the flag of Sir John Jervis in 1796. As mate of the signals he came under Jervis's eye, and on 3 July 1796 he was promoted lieutenant of the sloop 'Petrel'. 
In the 'Petrel' Staines had exciting service. In June 1797 with twenty officers and men in two boats he boarded and captured a French privateer of two long guns and forty-five men, engaging in personal combat with the French commander, who afterwards died of his wounds. The 'Petrel' was captured near Majorca by four Spanish frigates on 12 October 1798. Though she was recaptured the next day Staines and the other officers and men had been removed to a Spanish frigate and were taken to Cartagena. By the end of the year they were exchanged and restored to the 'Petrel', and Staines continued in her until his exertions to reach Sicily with warning of the arrival of the French Brest fleet brought him to the attention of Nelson, who on 17 October 1799 moved him to his flagship the 'Foudroyant' as third lieutenant. In her he was present at the capture in the following year of the 'Genereux' and 'Guillaume Tell' and, under the flag of Lord Keith, in the operations off the coast of Egypt, during which he acted as the admiral's flag lieutenant. For his services in this campaign he received the Turkish order of the Crescent. 
On 15 May 1802 Staines was promoted by Keith to the command of the brig 'Cameleon' (confirmed by the Admiralty on 26 July). Stationed at Malta during the peace, on the renewal of the war in 1803 the 'Cameleon' joined the blockading squadron off Toulon, from which she was detached for cruises along the coast against the enemy's trade. Staines had marked success and captured or destroyed many French coasting vessels and gunboats. On 28 June 1803 Nelson marked his confidence in him by sending him on a spying mission to Barcelona. In September 1804 he was sent up the Adriatic to cruise for three months at his discretion, and was afterwards employed in the protection of the Levant trade until, in September 1805, the 'Cameleon' was sent home and paid off at Portsmouth, where he dined with Nelson on the day before his final departure. 
On 22 January 1806 Staines was advanced to post rank, but not until 28 March 1807 was he appointed to the frigate 'Cyane', which in the following summer was attached to the fleet under Admiral James Gambier during the operations at Copenhagen. In February 1808 the 'Cyane' was sent to the Mediterranean, where she captured several merchant ships off the east coast of Spain, and on 22 May, off Majorca, took a Spanish privateer, the last Spanish warship taken before Spain broke from the French alliance and declared in favour of Ferdinand. For the next year Staines was constantly employed on the south coast of Spain, assisting the patriots and repeatedly engaging with the enemy's batteries and in boat actions. 
In May 1809 Staines was sent to the coast of Naples, where on the 17th he captured two martello towers near Cape Circello. In June the 'Cyane' was part of the squadron under Rear-Admiral George Martin which on the 25th captured the islands of Ischia and Procida; on the 26th she was detached, with the brig 'Espoir' and several gunboats, to intercept a large flotilla of French gunboats escorting a convoy making for the Bay of Naples. After a brisk action eighteen gunboats were taken and four destroyed. In the afternoon Staines landed and destroyed a battery of 36-pounders on Cape Miseno. The next day, 27 May, he destroyed another battery at Pozzuoli, and in the evening engaged the French frigate 'Ceres' (42 guns), which, with a corvette and twenty gunboats in company, was endeavouring to get to Naples, while the 'Espoir' and the Sicilian gunboats were becalmed some distance off. The 'Cyane' was much inferior to the 'Ceres', but the action was continued for more than an hour until, the 'Cyane''s ammunition being exhausted, her rigging cut to pieces, and many men killed and wounded, the 'Ceres' succeeded in getting away with her convoy. Staines himself was severely wounded both in the side and in the left arm, which had to be amputated at the shoulder. In reporting the action of 26 May Martin highly praised Staines's 'gallantry, judgment, and good conduct' (Marshall, 90) and on the further report of the action of 27 May Collingwood, the commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, wrote of Staines's gallantry in a 'succession of battles' (ibid., 93). The 'Cyane' was so battered she had to go to England to be refitted. 
The 'Cyane' arrived at Portsmouth in mid-October, and on 6 December 1809 Staines was knighted, also receiving permission to wear the order of Ferdinand and Merit conferred by the king of Sicily. Appointed to the 'Hamadryad' (42 guns), for the next two years he was employed in convoy duty to Newfoundland and to St Helena. Early in 1812 he was appointed to the frigate 'Briton', in which during 1812-13 he cruised, with some success, in the channel and the Bay of Biscay. 
On the last day of 1813 Staines sailed with several warships and a large convoy of East Indiamen, from which he parted at Madeira, being sent on to Rio de Janeiro. There he had orders to go on to Valparaiso to join Captain James Hillyar in pursuit of the American frigate 'Essex'; but Hillyar had already captured her, and the 'Briton', with the 'Tagus' in company, went on to Callao and thence cruised among the islands, looking for an American ship rumoured to have come round Cape Horn. On 28 August 1814 Staines struck the American colours at Nuku Hiva in the Marquesas Islands, and sailing thence for Valparaiso on 17 September accidentally came on Pitcairn Island, then marked on the chart nearly 3 degrees west of its position ['see 'Adams, John (1768?-1829)]. To his surprise he found it inhabited by English-speaking people, descendants of the 'Bounty' mutineers. The island had been previously visited by an American merchant ship, but the news does not seem to have reached England and the first information was sent home by Staines, who rightly judged that the lapse of years and the care given to the education of the young people there might be held as condoning Adams's original offence. The 'Briton' remained at Valparaiso and the neighbourhood until April 1815, when she returned to Rio de Janeiro and England, and Staines learned that on 2 January 1815 he had been nominated KCB. He married, in May 1819, Sarah, youngest daughter of Robert Tournay Bargrave of Eastry Court, Kent. 
From 1823 to 1825 Staines commanded the 'Superbe' in the West Indies and at Lisbon, and from 1827 to 1830 the 'Isis' in the Mediterranean. In the Greek crisis of 1827-8 he was sent by Sir Edward Codrington to suppress the pirate stronghold of Carabusa, which he achieved in February 1828. 
For the loss of his arm Staines received a pension of $300. His statement of his services, dated at Margate on 10 January 1818, is accompanied by a medical certificate that 'he is incapable, from wounds in his arm, of writing his name'. He had been barely a fortnight back in England after his return from the Mediterranean when he died at his residence, Dent de Lion, on 13 July 1830. 


@@@@@


doc= 26222


Stainton, Henry Tibbats (1822-1892), entomologist, was born on 13 August 1822 in London, where he was baptized on 8 September 1822 at St Benet Paul's Wharf, the eldest son of Henry Stainton, and his wife, Sarah 'nee' Tomkison. His father was originally from Lewisham; the family returned there when Stainton was a few weeks old. He was educated almost entirely at home, but finally attended King's College, London. For several years he was engaged as a businessman under his father. On 28 May 1846 he married Jane Isabel ('b'. 1818/19), youngest daughter of Thomas Dunn, a merchant, of Sheffield. The couple had no children. 
About 1840 Stainton turned to entomology, apparently through the influence of his father's friend, the Revd W. Johnson. In particular, he became interested in the Microlepidoptera and Tineidae (clothes moths), rising at five in the morning to pursue his studies. Stainton published his first paper in 1845 and became the author of a number of works, mostly restricted to British fauna. These included 'An Attempt at a Systematic Catalogue of the British Tineidae and Pterophoridae' (1849), 'A Supplementary Catalogue of the British Tineidae and Pterophoridae' (1851), 'The Entomologist's Companion' (1852; later edn, 1854), 'Catalogue of British Micro-Lepidoptera' (1854), 'Insecta Britannica: Lepidoptera-Tineina' (1854), 'The Natural History of the Tineina' (13 vols., 1855-73), 'June: a Book for the Country in Summer Time' (1856), 'A Manual of British Butterflies and Moths' (2 vols., 1857-9), and 'British Butterflies and Moths: an Introduction to the Study of our Native Lepidoptera' (1867). He also wrote two works on the Tineina of Syria and Asia Minor (1864) and southern Europe (1869). 
Stainton contributed some hundred papers on entomological subjects to various scientific journals. He also edited and supplied notes to James Francis Stephens's 'Catalogue of British Lepidoptera' (1856), Brackenridge Clemens's 'The Tineina of North America' (1872), and to the 'Larvae of British Butterflies and Moths' (1886-1901) by the entomologist William Buckler. An ardent collector of both native and foreign specimens, Stainton made several trips to the south of France. 
In 1848 Stainton joined the Entomological Society of London. He succeeded Edward Doubleday (1810-1849) as secretary of that society in 1850, but quit the post about 1851 or 1852 -- partly owing to his poor relationship with E. W. Janson (1822-1891), and partly to allow him to work on his contribution to 'Insecta Britannica'. However, he later served as president (1881-2), and his interest in the society lasted until his death. He used his own personal wealth to make numerous financial contributions to the society; he also did much to increase its membership list. In 1855 he started the 'Entomologist's Annual' which continued until 1874. In 1856 Stainton established the 'Entomologist's Weekly Intelligencer', which went through ten volumes before being discontinued. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1859, and held the post of secretary from 1869 (following the resignation of George Busk) until 1874; he was also vice-president of the society from 1883 to 1885. In 1864 he co-founded the 'Entomologist's Monthly Magazine', maintaining a connection with the journal until his death. 
On 6 June 1867 Stainton was elected FRS. (Between 1880 and 1882 he served on council.) He attended the meetings of the British Association, and acted as secretary to the biology section in 1864, and also from 1867 to 1872. He became secretary of the Ray Society in 1861, a post he held until 1872. In 1871 he was instrumental in founding the Zoological Record Association (of which he was secretary from 1871 to 1886), which ensured publication of the 'Zoological Record', from 1871 until 1886 (when it was taken over by the Zoological Society of London). He was also a member of the entomological societies of France, Stettin, and Italy, and an honorary member of those societies of Belgium and Switzerland. 
Stainton died from stomach cancer on 2 December 1892 at his residence, Mountsfield, Lewisham, and was buried on 7 December in the family vault at St Mary's, Lewisham (Lewisham Old Church), five days later. He was survived by his wife, Jane Isabel, who presented the Entomological Society of London with about 800 volumes and pamphlets from his library, following his death. Stainton was described (in the obituary notice printed in the 'Proceedings of the Linnean Society') as 'a genial and generous friend and a painstaking industrious worker'. He was also noted as a meticulous and self-critical scientist who took a 'truly biological approach to taxonomy'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26223


Stairs, William Grant (1863-1892), army officer and traveller, the third son of John Stairs (died 1888) of Halifax, Nova Scotia, and his wife, Mary Morrow (died 1871), was born at Halifax, Nova Scotia, on 1 July 1863. He was educated until the autumn of 1875 at Fort Massey Academy, Halifax, and afterwards at Merchiston Castle School, Edinburgh, until July 1878 when he entered the Royal Military College at Kingston, Ontario, Canada. In September 1882 he went to New Zealand, where he was employed as a civil engineer in surveying and mapping the district near Hawke's Bay. On 30 June 1885 he was gazetted lieutenant in the Royal Engineers, and went through a course of professional instruction at Chatham. This was completed in 1886, and at the end of that year he was the first candidate selected by H. M. Stanley for service on the Emin Pasha relief expedition, during which he was to be placed in charge of the newly invented Maxim gun. He sailed with the expedition, on leave from the War Office, on 20 January 1887, and arrived at the Congo River on 18 March. The expedition reached Leopoldville, near Stanley Pool, on 21 April, and the advance in steamers up the river commenced on 3 May. At Bolobo on 12 May the expedition was formed into two columns. Stairs accompanied the advance column under Stanley, and commanded the second company of Zanzibaris. The ill-fated rear column was left behind at Yambuya, 1300 miles from the sea, under Major Walter Barttelot, James Jameson, John Troup, and Herbert Ward. 
The march of the advance column eastward from Yambuya began on 28 June 1887. Stanley, writing of the qualities of the four members of his staff then with him (Stairs, Captain R. H. Nelson, Arthur Mounteney Jephson, and surgeon Thomas Heazle Parke) observed: 'Stairs is the military officer, alert, intelligent, who understands a hint, a curt intimation, grasps an idea firmly, and realises it to perfection'. On 13 August at Avisibba, in one of many violent encounters with local forces, Stairs was wounded by a poisoned arrow, but, under the skilful care of Parke, recovered. Then followed an exhausting march of 156 days through dense tropical forest. The party dropped fifty men on 19 September at Ugarrowa's settlement, and on 6 October left Nelson and Parke and fifty-two men at Kilonga-Longa's. But Stairs, with Stanley and the rest of the party, emerged out of the forest into open country near Indesura on 4 December 1887. Another battle took place on 10 December, Stairs leading one of the columns; and desultory engagements continued until, on 13 December, Stanley and Stairs reached Lake Albert. 
Apparently unable to learn anything of Emin Pasha or to obtain canoes on the lake, the expedition on 16 December retraced its steps to West Ibwiri, where Fort Bodo was constructed. On its completion, on 18 January 1888, Stairs was dispatched with 100 men to bring up Nelson and Parke. By 12 February Stairs had successfully accomplished his mission, which involved a journey of 79 miles each way. Four days later he was sent to escort couriers as far back as Ugarrowa's (183 miles) and see them safely across the river. Later in the year Stanley left Stairs in command at Fort Bodo while he went in search of the rear column, of which nothing had been heard for a long time. 
Stanley returned without any information on 20 December 1888, and on the 27th Stairs was sent forward with 100 rifles to hold the ferry at Ituri River. On 9 January 1889 Fort Bodo was burned, and the whole force crossed the river and established a camp in the village of Kandekore, on the east side. Here Stairs was left in command, in company with Parke, while Stanley went to find Emin and Jephson. Stairs joined Stanley on 18 February at Kavalli's on Lake Albert, where Emin Pasha had already arrived. On 10 April a start for Zanzibar was made, the column being 1500 strong. On 6 June Stairs was sent with a party to explore Ruwenzori, popularly known as the 'mountains of the moon'. Although he was able to ascend only some 10,000 feet, this venture was regarded as one of the few contributions to geographical knowledge accomplished by the expedition. Zanzibar was reached on 6 December 1889. 
Stairs arrived in England in January 1890, and was appointed adjutant of the Royal Engineers at Aldershot. He received from the khedive of Egypt, under the authority of the sultan of Turkey, the third class of the order of the Mejidiye, and permission to accept and wear it was gazetted on 18 February 1890. On 25 March 1891, influenced by a desire to obtain greater freedom for travel, Stairs accepted promotion out of the Royal Engineers to be captain in the Welsh regiment (the 41st). In May, with permission from the War Office, he took command of an expedition of the Belgian Katanga Company to Msidi's country, in the extreme south-east of the territory assigned to the Congo Free State. The Belgian Katanga Company, in which there was a good deal of English capital, was formed to open up the country by trading in indiarubber and ivory. 
Stairs left Belgium for Zanzibar in May 1891. Eventually, with German aid, he got together 500 men on the African coast, and on 4 July started for Lake Tanganyika along the beaten caravan track. With further help from the Germans, he reached the lake, and, crossing it, made an unprecedentedly rapid march to Ngwena on the River Luapula. He suffered from fever during the journey, but otherwise all went to plan. Katanga was reached, and the region found to be in turmoil following the death of Msidi. 
Stairs then took the caravan to the River Shire, and by way of that river and the Zambezi on to the coast. While waiting at Chinde for a ship to Zanzibar, he fell ill of gastric fever and he died on 9 June 1892. He was unmarried. 
Stairs was described by one of his contemporaries as a 'tall, fair and delicate-looking young man; at first sight, very unlike the typical African traveller'. Nevertheless, in contrast to many of his colleagues on the Emin Pasha relief expedition, his reputation appears to have been unscathed by the controversy over the fate of its rear column which developed during 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 26224


Staley, William (d. 1678), victim of the Popish Plot, was the son of William Staley, a goldsmith and banker. He was raised abroad as a Roman Catholic, where it was polemically assumed that with 'too much familiarity with the Jesuits, [he] had imbid'd some of there desperate Principles' ('Tryal and Condemnation', 3). He later took over his father's business in Covent Garden, where his clients were predominantly Roman Catholic. The panic caused by the revelations of Titus Oates and William Bedloe in 1678 of a popish plot had a severe effect on his trade, and Staley was said to be enraged that his creditors called in their money so fast as a result. On 14 November 1678 he was discussing this situation in the Black Lion tavern, King Street, with an old friend, Barthlemy Fromante, a native of Marseilles. Although speaking in French they were overheard by William Carstares and Alexander Sutherland, the latter of whom wrote down in French what was said. The following day Carstares approached Staley and accused him of high treason. Gilbert Burnet, believing that Carstares was 'a loose and vicious gentlemen', wrote to both the attorney-general, Sir William Jones, and the lord chancellor, Heneage Finch, 'to let them know what profligate wretches these witnesses were' ('Burnet's History', 2.171, 113). Such was the political climate that this intervention meant that Burnet was 'most bitterly railed at' and that for a time he lived in 'fear of public affronts' (ibid., 2.172). Carstares, apparently motivated by the belief that 'it might be profitable to turn informer', offered to drop the charge if Staley paid him $200. Staley refused, was arrested for treason, and was brought to trial before the king's bench on Thursday, 21 November 1678. 
Staley's religion, the decline of his business, and the general belief in a papist design to kill the king and convert England to Catholicism were all used as part of the evidence against him. Carstares testified that he had heard Staley call the king 'a great Heretic and the greatest Rogue in the World' and that with hand on heart he had declared 'I would with this hand kill him myself' ('Tryal of William Staley', 4). He also claimed that Staley called parliament 'rogues' for believing that the plot was over, in all of which he was backed up by Sutherland. Both men testified that when they heard these words they were only 7 or 8 feet from Staley in the room opposite and that the door to the room he was occupying was open. 
Staley did not deny his presence in the tavern on that day but claimed that the witnesses had misunderstood the conversation. He testified that the discussion was regarding the king of France and that he had said 'here's the Hand and here's the Heart which would kill myself', not that he had threatened to kill the king ('Tryal of William Staley', 8). This play on words was dismissed by the lord chief justice as a 'Jesuit's trick'. Staley also argued that as 'a person of some intelligence' he would not be foolish enough to speak such words in a public place, where many who understood French would be able to overhear him ('Tryal of William Staley', 8). Summing up, Lord Chief Justice Scroggs made his belief in Staley's guilt quite clear when directing the jury, making references to the plot and the character of Jesuits. The jury found him guilty without withdrawing and he was sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered. 
Dr William Lloyd visited Staley in Newgate and offered him his life if he would discover any further plots. Staley maintained his innocence, claiming that he neither knew of any plots nor had spoken the words he was accused of. On Tuesday 26 November 1678 he was dragged on a sledge to Tyburn where he was executed. Instead of his quarters being set upon the city gates the king allowed them to be delivered to his relatives. Mass was said over his remains and a 'grand' funeral was arranged from his father's house on 29 November, before his burial in St Paul's, Covent Garden (Willis-Bund, 473). This incensed the government so much that the coroner ordered the body to be dug up and delivered to the sheriff to be set upon the city gates. The day following Staley's death saw the beginning of the high profile trial of Edward Coleman, which largely overshadowed the fact that Staley was the first victim of the Popish Plot trials. 


@@@@@


doc= 26225


Stalham, John (d. 1677), clergyman and ejected minister, was born in Norfolk of unknown parents and was educated at Christ's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted in 1617 and whence he graduated BA in 1621 and proceeded MA in 1624. He married Ann Powell (died 1682) of St Giles Cripplegate, London, on 2 August 1632 and their son John followed his father to Christ's in 1667. Stalham was ordained as a preacher in Norwich in 1626 and in May 1632 he was instituted as vicar at the parish of Terling in Essex. 
Stalham succeeded the puritan Thomas Weld, who had been deprived of his living by William Laud, bishop of London, for his refusal to conform. Stalham inherited a parish in which the minister, his patrons the Mildmay family, and leading parishioners had co-operated to establish a godly community, notable for its level of moral reform and puritan zeal. After some initial wavering Stalham continued Weld's opposition to the ceremonialism of the Laudian church. As he acknowledged, he was spurred on to do so by his puritan parishioners, with whom he maintained close links and whom he acknowledged in his various published works. Together they made Terling a godly centre to which others were attracted from elsewhere in the county. As a result he and his parish were several times the subject of investigation by the church authorities, notably over their resistance to the railing in of the communion table. The political breakdown following the collapse of Charles I's personal rule in 1640 allowed Stalham and his parishioners to cast aside the prayer book, denounced as an idol by Stalham, and its ceremonies and to adopt an extemporary form of puritan worship. This led to his being one of the main offenders cited in an Essex petition drawn up in defence of the prayer book in 1641. 
But Stalham went on to play a leading role, both in print and in person, in the religious events of the period. In 1654 he was appointed as preacher of the gospel in Edinburgh and spent some time away from his parish. In Essex Stalham found himself active in defending his vision of the church against the threat from pre-1640 anti-puritan ministers, as assistant in the 1650s to the Essex committee for scandalous ministers, from Baptists and Quakers, and, as signatory to a 1643 petition from Essex ministers against alehouses, from what he termed, 'the ignorant and profane multitude' (Stalham, 'Vindiciae redemptionis', sig. A2'v'). Ironically the greater religious freedoms of the 1640s and 1650s posed problems for Stalham, both in his own parish and more generally in the county. At Terling Stalham found sections of the parish attracted by the appeal of both Baptists in the 1640s and Quakers in the 1650s. In January 1644 he organized a debate at Terling with Baptist emissaries, who included the soapboiler Thomas Lambe, at which he played a leading part and of which he left a printed account ('The Summe of a Conference'), while in 1647 he printed a series of sermons he had preached against the evangelizing activities there of Samuel Oates, father of Titus ('Vindiciae redemptionis'). In the 1650s he was an active controversialist, both writing and preaching against the Quakers. The Quaker James Parnell singled out Stalham as playing a prominent role in his persecution in Essex in 1655. 
As his printed works make clear Stalham was a strict Calvinist with a firm belief in limited election who attacked ideas of universal redemption. Described in 1650 as 'a godly and painefull minister [who] preacheth constantly' (Smith, 305), he ministered at Terling to an Independent congregation. After the Restoration, Stalham was deprived of his living, in October 1662, but he continued to live at Terling, by then one of the largest centres of nonconformity in the county, where he served a large congregational church. The commonly accepted date of 1681 for his death is probably wrong. A letter written in June 1677 referred to his recent death. 


@@@@@


doc= 26226


Stampe, William (b. 1610/11, d. in or after 1654), Church of England clergyman, was a younger son of Timothy Stampe (died 1615) of Bruern Abbey, near Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, and his wife, Mary. He matriculated at Pembroke College, Oxford, on 20 April 1627, aged sixteen, graduating BA on 19 January 1631 and proceeding MA on 24 October 1633. He was presented to the living of St Aldate's, London, in 1637. He was incorporated MA at Cambridge University in 1640. By 1641 he was a schoolmaster in the parish of St Dunstan's, Stepney, and shortly after marrying Clemence Berry of Limehouse there on 26 May 1641 he was presented to the parish living, on 31 August 1641. 
As civil war approached Stampe emerged as an outspoken supporter of the royalist cause. He delivered a sermon in June 1642 describing those raising money for parliament as the 'malignant party' of sectarians and Anabaptists who were the causes of the country's distractions (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 62, fol. 211'v'). On 25 July 1642 he was summoned by parliament as a delinquent, having enlisted the help of his elder brother Timothy, a local JP, to imprison some apprentices who had gathered in the parish to enlist as troops for the earl of Essex's army. William called the apprentices 'Round-headed Rascals' and manhandled some of those present ('Perfect Diurnall', 2). A new charge followed a few days later, when the brothers were accused of having incited a mob of sailors to burst into church and disturb a fast-day sermon. He was committed to the Gatehouse prison for thirty-four weeks, and was twice refused bail despite support from Lord Grey of Ruthin, while the committee for scandalous ministers collected evidence. By 9 August it had been decided to impeach him as a 'principal actor' among local royalists; the living was eventually sequestered in August 1645 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 62, fol. 211'v'). 
Stampe travelled to Oxford after his release and, having published a sermon preached before the king at Christ Church in April 1643, was created DD on 18 July. Popular for his 'edifying way of preaching' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.348), Stampe followed the court into exile, and by May 1649 was chaplain to both Charles II and his aunt Elizabeth, queen of Bohemia. He preached regularly at Charenton, near Paris, and later during the 1650s at The Hague, where he published 'A Treatise of Spiritual Infatuation' (by which he meant the folly of spiritual pride which had led to the religious disorders of the 1640s and which he saw as the disease of the English nation). The work was dedicated to his patron, Thomas Wentworth, earl of Cleveland, and was prefaced with a letter to the members of Trinity House in Ratcliff in particular and to his other Stepney parishioners in general, exhorting them to return to their loyalty to king and church. Although reputed to have died of fever at The Hague in 1653, and to have been buried at Loosduinen, he was probably still alive in April 1654, when Clarendon noted that, although he was considered honest, he was known for his 'vain and peevish humours' (Ogle and others, 2.336). 


@@@@@


doc= 26227


Stanbridge, John (1463-1510), schoolmaster and grammarian, was born in the summer of 1463, and admitted as a scholar of Winchester College in 1475 from Adderbury, Oxfordshire. Later references suggest that his home address changed first to Bodicote near Adderbury, and then to Heyford, Northamptonshire. He became a scholar of New College, Oxford, in 1480, and a fellow two years later, graduating BA in 1484-5 and MA after about a further three years. At Easter 1486 he left New College to become usher, or assistant master, of the new grammar school at Magdalen College, Oxford, founded by William Waynflete in 1481. The headmaster of this school, John Anwykyll, is the first English schoolmaster known to have taught humanist Latin and to have published a textbook of it. Anwykyll died about Christmas 1487, and Stanbridge was promoted to his place at the following Easter, with an annual salary of $12 12's'. In the spring of 1491 he was ordained priest, and left the school at some point between the following Christmas and Michaelmas 1493. 
Little is known of Stanbridge's career during the next eight years. From October 1493 until February 1494 he was vicar of Bledington, Gloucestershire, which suggests a connection with Winchcombe Abbey, the patrons of the living. It is possible that he spent the rest of the 1490s at Lichfield, where the bishop, William Smith, had just refounded the cathedral grammar school in the hospital of St John. The grammarian Robert Whittington, who claimed to be Stanbridge's pupil, was a Lichfield man. Stanbridge certainly enjoyed the patronage of Smith from 1501 onwards. In that year Smith, now bishop of Lincoln, appointed him as master of the hospital of St John at Banbury, Oxfordshire, evidently to open a free grammar school there. The innovation was successful, and the school became well known for its teaching in the early sixteenth century. Smith also made Stanbridge rector of Winwick, Northamptonshire, in 1508, and canon of Lincoln Cathedral, with the prebend of St Botolph, in 1509. This provided Stanbridge with an income of some $25 a year, a respectable sum in comparison with the $10 salaries of most schoolmasters, until his death in the summer of 1510. Two of his printed books, Cicero's 'Epistolae familiares' and Plutarch's 'Lives', survive at Magdalen College. 
Stanbridge became well known as the author and editor of a series of school textbooks which appeared in print during his time at Banbury. They include, in the order of the earliest surviving editions, an 'Accidence' ('c'.1505), 'Parvulorum institutio' ('c'.1507), 'Gradus comparationum' together with 'Sum es fui' ('c'.1509), 'Vulgaria' ('c'.1509), and 'Vocabula' (1510). The 'Accidence', 'Vocabula', and 'Vulgaria' are all attributed directly to Stanbridge in the earliest surviving editions, while the other two works are described as 'from the Stanbridgian collection' or 'edition'. In fact, none of Stanbridge's works was wholly original in form. The 'Accidence', 'Gradus comparationum', 'Parvulorum institutio', and 'Sum es fui' were all based on existing English tracts on Latin grammar and syntax, which went back to the time of John Leylond in the early fifteenth century. Stanbridge's contribution was to revise the treatment of Latin according to humanist standards. The 'Vocabula' and 'Vulgaria' also follow traditional lines, although the material of the latter was largely Stanbridge's own. The works were a success, for several reasons. They were short, and could be built up into sets that covered basic grammar and syntax. They combined familiar formats with up-to-date humanist principles, and appeared when English printers were better able to market books effectively throughout England. They were all frequently published up to the 1530s, until they and other school books were superseded by the issue of an authorized royal grammar in 1540. The 'Vocabula' and 'Vulgaria' even enjoyed a further period of popularity in Scotland during the mid-seventeenth century. 
Stanbridge had a namesake Thomas Stanbridge, who also pursued a career as a schoolmaster. He graduated BA from Oxford in 1510 and MA in 1518, and taught first at Banbury School, probably as usher, in 1511, and later at Magdalen College School, Oxford, where he was appointed headmaster at Michaelmas 1517, apparently holding the post until his death in 1523 or 1524. Thomas is sometimes presumed to be John's brother, but his career implies that he was born about 1490 and suggests that he is more likely to have been a nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 26228


Stanbury, John (d. 1474), bishop of Hereford, was the second son of Walter Stanbury of Morwenstow, Cornwall, and his wife, Cicely. After entering the Carmelite order he was educated at its Oxford convent, becoming DTh and gaining a reputation for outstanding scholarship. An impressive list of writings, mostly on canon law, is attributed to him by John Bale; none of these has survived, but they may help to explain why Henry VI chose him to be his confessor, some time before 1440. Stanbury has frequently been mentioned in connection with the foundation of Eton College, but the link, if any, is unclear -- he is not named in documents relating to the foundation of Eton, although as the king's confessor and a noted scholar he may well have acted in some advisory role. He would appear to have been highly regarded by his order, since in 1446 he represented the Oxford 'distinctio' at the general chapter held in Rome for the reformation of the Carmelites. Early in that year the king nominated Stanbury for the see of Norwich, and he was elected by the monks; but Walter Lyhert (died 1472), a protege of William de la Pole, marquess of Suffolk, was papally provided on 24 July. Denied Norwich, Stanbury was provided to the poor see of Bangor on 4 March 1448, and consecrated by Archbishop John Stafford on 20 June. He rarely if ever visited his diocese, but bequeathed $30 to the fabric of its cathedral in his will. Constantly in attendance at court, he shared the unpopularity of Henry VI's ministers, and is mentioned as 'Frere Stanbury' in a song of Cade's followers in Kent in 1450. 
On 7 February 1453 Stanbury was translated to Hereford, where he was enthroned on 25 April, but as he continued to act as the king's confessor he was very seldom seen in his new diocese. Between 1453 and 1457 he was frequently present at meetings of the king's council, while in January 1457 he was nominated to the council of the prince of Wales. Loyal to Henry VI, Stanbury was arrested shortly after the battle of Northampton (10 July 1460), and briefly imprisoned in Warwick Castle. He attended the first session of Edward IV's first parliament on 4 November 1461, but it is unlikely that he came to any parliament or great council thereafter. On 21 April 1462 he was granted permission to resign his see (perhaps he had been persuaded to ask), on the grounds that he was 'so old and weak', but in the event he remained bishop. Early in 1463 he intervened in the election to the deanship of Hereford, quashing that of John ap Richard and then collating his own vicar-general, Richard Pede, to the office. Thereafter Stanbury seems to have been conventionally, if rather intermittently, active as bishop, though in 1472 a number of heresy trials took place before him. He supported the readeption of Henry VI, but was subsequently pardoned by Edward IV. Stanbury died in the Carmelite house at Ludlow on 11 May 1474 and was buried in Hereford Cathedral, where a beautifully carved alabaster monument with an inscription was erected over his tomb. His episcopal ring and the vestments in which he was buried were discovered during architectural alterations in 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 26229


Standish, Arthur (fl. 1552-1615), writer on agriculture, was, on his own assertion, a descendant of the Standish family, of Standish, near Wigan, Lancashire, and was plainly familiar with the layout of Standish Hall and grounds. Northamptonshire, Huntingdonshire, or Cambridgeshire are most likely candidates for his home county. His place of residence remains unknown, though his writing shows an acquaintance with the East Anglian fens. Other Standishes in his or the next generation were connected with Peterborough and Brixworth, Northamptonshire, Conington in north Huntingdonshire, and west Cambridgeshire, and several Standishes attended Cambridge University. In the will, dated 1552, of Dr Richard Standish (died 1553), rector of Standish, Arthur shared with a brother and three sisters a bequest of $50. They were named as the children of Thomas Standish, one of the two feoffees who instituted Richard as rector on 19 May 1541, but the precise relationship was not disclosed. 
The midland revolt in 1607 had troubled Standish deeply, and it is noteworthy that three of the rebel villages in Northamptonshire were Pytchley, Rushton, and Haselbech, close to Brixworth, where one Standish branch held the manor. In a search for measures to reduce discontent among the common people, Standish made a four-year journey through the kingdom in search of answers. He was seemingly a curious, gregarious, and sociable enquirer, questioning all he encountered, including surveyors, husbandmen, and working men. The resulting essay, 'The Commons Complaint', was personally approved by James I. Henry Peacham wrote in praise of the author in the 1611 edition. Eight versions are known, four of 1611, and four more of 1612, 1613, 1614, and 1615. The texts of each edition were changed to accommodate new knowledge, and the last three were much abbreviated, given another title, 'New Directions of Experience to the Commons Complaint', and focused on one only of the four 'complaints' with which he started. 
Central to Standish's concerns was the destruction of woods, leading to high fuel and food prices, which, he said, had risen faster since 1605 than in the previous twenty years. His remedies for fuel shortages were the planting of more trees, and, to increase food supplies, the planting of fruit trees, the destruction of vermin, the breeding of wildfowl and poultry, and the reduction of dovecotes, since pigeons consumed much grain. 
Standish gave practical instructions on tree-planting, especially of fruit trees -- notably apples, wardens, pears, walnuts, and chestnuts -- either in hedgerows or in orchards, where he insisted on regular planting in rows and on cereals being grown for some years between the rows. He urged attention to soils and the use of lime as a fertilizer, gave measured distances for the trees, and expected the better feeding of livestock, including pigs fed on mast, and more cider and perry for households and for sale. Combating vermin meant reducing rooks, crows, sparrows, buzzards, kites, and other birds of prey. He was alone among his contemporaries in recommending fowl and poultry plots. These were to be hedged enclosures, for taming and breeding wildfowl such as ducks and mallards, and for the keeping of hens. His scheme was inspired by his observations in St James's Park in London and at Standish, but it benefited from knowledge of practices in the East Anglian fens, where local people regularly collected wild birds' eggs in spring. The details on breeding, feeding, housing, and killing the birds were precise and practical, with estimates of costs and profits. A clear illustration of a hedged and moated wildfowl or poultry plot appeared in editions of 1611 and 1612. In the texts of 1613, 1614, and 1615 the poultry-wildfowl project was omitted; it had evidently not evoked public interest, though a not dissimilar scheme for wildfowl decoys did succeed. The revised text dealt only with the replanting of woodlands. Current concerns had shifted the weight of different arguments, and prominence was now given to human greed for profit, the needs of the iron and glass industries for fuel, and a fear that coal near the coast, though easily shipped, might not prove a sufficient substitute. Nothing is known of Standish's later life, nor of the date or circumstances of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 26230


Standish, Frank Hall (1799-1840), art collector and author, born at Blackwell, Darlington, co. Durham, on 2 October 1799, was the only child of Anthony Hall ('b'. 1776) of Flass, Durham, and his wife, Charlotte Rey. A distant cousin of Sir Frank Standish of Duxbury Hall, Chorley, Lancashire, he succeeded to the estates (but not the baronetcy) in 1812, adding the Standish name and arms to his own. The estate was the centre of a violent rival claim by a local weaver, Thomas Standish, who barricaded himself in for several months. In 1817 Standish was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, but never took his degree. He spent his early twenties travelling the continent, living initially in France but from 1830 settling in Seville, Spain, where he acted as host to British and French travellers and artists, including Richard Ford and Benjamin Disraeli. In Seville, Standish acquired works of Spanish art and literature -- especially paintings and drawings by Murillo and other seventeenth-century artists -- so avidly that at his death he left $60,000 in debts. He also commissioned architectural views from David Roberts, including for instance 'Interior of Seville Cathedral: High Altar' (Downside School, Somerset). He wrote a biography of Voltaire (1821), some poetry, and several travel books, including 'Seville and its Vicinity' (1840) with an engraved portrait of Standish by E. Davenport, after a drawing by G. Alessandri, as a frontispiece. The last publication, though rambling, is informative on the collections of other British and Spanish residents from whom Standish bought many of his own works, including the British vice-consul in Seville, Julian Williams. 
Standish died unmarried at Cadiz on 21 December 1840, having sent most of his art collection and library to Duxbury Hall (dem.). He was buried in the Standish crypt at St Laurence's, Chorley, on 21 January 1841. A wall monument in the chancel, by F. Webster of Kendal, recites his claim to the baronetcy and his fame as a collector. Standish bequeathed his entire collection for the use of King Louis Philippe, ostensibly out of respect to the French nation, but supposedly also to spite the British government for refusing to revive the Standish baronetcy. In May 1841 Baron Isidore Taylor (1789-1879), whom Standish knew in Seville, visited Duxbury to make the selection for the king, leaving Murillo's 'Ecce homo' (formerly Cook Collection, Richmond, Surrey) and some replacement copies for Standish's heirs. The house contents were sold on 2 June 1881. A full-length portrait copied by J.-B. Mauzaisse after the Seville painter Jose Gutierrez de la Vega (1791-1865), showing Standish against the Seville skyline, hangs at Astley Hall Museum, Chorley. 
The French king deposited 244 paintings in the 'Musee Standish' alongside his 'Galerie Espagnole' in the Louvre. It had a mixed press: 'Le Charivari' (16 April 1841) satirized it (as full of English novels and portraits of Standish), while Thore reviewed it favourably, especially four paintings by Murillo, including 'Christ after the Flagellation' (Urbana, Ohio), and the rare collection of Murillo drawings, which Standish himself particularly admired. The collection's display in Paris impressed others, including the artist Millet. The books and 269 drawings were sold in Paris in December 1852, including an outstanding set of thirteen Murillo drawings (Louvre) and a study (Musee Bonnat, Bayonne) for the painting in Sheffield's Graves Art Gallery. The paintings were sent to England and sold at Christies on 28 and 30 May 1853. The fourth marquess of Hertford paid the highest sum (against bidding from the National Gallery, London), giving $1680 for Velazquez's 'Don Baltasar Carlos' (Wallace Collection, London). He also acquired one of the few French paintings, Lancret's 'Italian Comedians by a Fountain'. Other Standish paintings can be found in the national galleries of Dublin, Stockholm, and Washington: Morales's 'St Jerome', Murillo's 'Double Trinity', and, from Zurbaran's studio, 'Sts Paula, Eustachia, and Jerome'. The Royal Collection holds Zurbaran's 'St Ignatius Loyola' (Hampton Court, London); while Antonio de Pereda's 'Kitchen Scene' and a portrait attributed to Alonso Cano are at Penrhyn Castle, Anglesey. Another work by Cano, 'Adam and Eve', is at Pollok House, Glasgow, as are Herrera the younger's 'Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament' and Morales's 'Virgin Holding Christ's Head'. The London sale of Standish's collection increased the popular British fascination with Spanish culture already sparked by the publications of Richard Ford and Stirling Maxwell. 


@@@@@


doc= 26231


Standish, Henry (c.1475-1535), bishop of St Asaph, was born at Standish, Lancashire, possibly (according to Dugdale) the son of Alexander Standish. He was educated at the Franciscan school in Hereford, at Oxford, where he had proceeded DTh by 1502, and perhaps at Cambridge. A Franciscan friar, he became warden of Greyfriars, London, about 1508, and later Franciscan provincial, before his consecration as bishop of St Asaph. He was also rector of Standish, Lancashire ('in commendam' with his episcopal appointment). He preached before the king in February 1511 and thereafter became a court favourite, asked back in the spring of every year from 1515 to 1520 (receiving 20's'. each time). His sermons, much to Henry's liking, brought him an important place among the king's spiritual advisers. It was thought by Wood that Standish had collected his sermons together as 'Sermons Preached to the People', but firm evidence is lacking. 
Perhaps because of his court position, Standish became involved in the disputes over benefit of clergy of the years following 1510. In this clash between church and state, Standish opposed his fellow clergymen. At a conference held at Blackfriars in February 1515 he argued that clergymen were subject to temporal authorities, and raised clerical ire further by giving a series of lectures on the issue, following which he was summoned to convocation on heresy charges. At a second Blackfriars conference, held later that year, he was vindicated by the king's legal experts, although Bishop Fox clearly had reservations, remarking to the king, 'Sir, I warrant you Dr. Standish will not abide by his opinion at his peril' ('LP Henry VIII', 2/1, no. 1313). Some time later, ignoring Wolsey's claims for William Bolton, Henry nominated Standish to the see of St Asaph (provided by papal bull dated 28 May 1518), less, perhaps, as a reward than as a sign of royal displeasure to other bishops. He was consecrated by Warham at Otford, Kent, on 11 July 1518, for which he later became subject to a 'praemunire' charge, for having been consecrated before he had received royal assent and done homage for his temporalities. 
Little is known of Standish's administration of his diocese, which was probably left largely to his chancellor and vicar-general, Robert ap Rhys. In 1520 he gave a canonry to his nephew Richard Standish, and the fact that he later made bequests to the Carmelites of Denbigh and to his own cathedral suggests that he was not entirely uninvolved in diocesan affairs. In 1521 he re-emerged from obscurity, when he publicly attacked Erasmus's scholarship in a sermon at St Paul's Cross. His subject was ostensibly Christian charity, but soon turned into an attack on Erasmus's Greek 'New Testament'. John Stokesley (later bishop of London) and Thomas More took Standish to task over his opinions. Shortly thereafter, hoping to check the distribution of Erasmus's work, Standish took his warnings against Erasmus to the king, fearing 'a time of by far the greatest peril was at hand' because of them ('Collected Works Erasmus', 8.10). In subsequent debate he was overmatched by Stokesley and More, and the king, 'sorry to see such colossal stupidity pilloried in such exalted company', ended it. Erasmus labelled Standish an 'egregious numskull' (ibid., 6.13-14). Standish probably wrote out his arguments in a treatise directed against Erasmus's translation of the 'New Testament', but whether this was ever actually published (as Wood suggests) is questionable. 
Standish thereafter played only a small role in official matters. In May 1522 he received Charles V at Canterbury, and in February 1524 accompanied Sir John Baker (later attorney-general) on an embassy to Hamburg. Early in 1526 he was a member of Wolsey's heresy commission which received the recantation of and imposed a public penance upon Robert Barnes and five Hanse merchants. And he was subsequently among the judges at the trials for heresy -- all in London -- of Richard Foster, Thomas Bilney, and Thomas Arthur (November 1527), and John Tewkesbury (December 1531). Standish supported Katherine of Aragon when Henry VIII began proceedings for a divorce, speaking on her behalf on 29 June 1529, although she later doubted his sincerity. According to Campeggi, Standish had submitted a book on Katherine's behalf (it was not read out in court). In the Lords, Standish objected to a discussion of the divorce prior to a papal decision but, in upper convocation, agreed that the pope's original dispensation allowing Henry to marry Katherine was faulty. On 11 July 1530 a 'praemunire' information was filed in king's bench against him (and thirteen other clerics) because he had supported Wolsey's legatine authority through a composition with the cardinal for an annual payment of 10 marks. 
On 15 May 1532 Standish subscribed to the king's supreme headship of the English church, and in the summer presided briefly in southern convocation. He was one of the three bishops who on 13 March 1533 consecrated Thomas Cranmer as archbishop of Canterbury. Standish's support for the king's policies was held in doubt by Thomas Cromwell, who used the first available occasion to test him. In October 1533 Robert ap Rhys, Standish's vicar-general at St Asaph, was indicted for 'praemunire' in the great leet of Denbigh, and Standish, as his superior, was included in the charge. Both men fought the charges, and swore out writs of 'supersedeas' in chancery. John Salisbury, the steward of the court at Denbigh, failed to process the writs even after 'subpoenas' were sworn out against him. The results of this are unclear, but Standish was finally pressured into a formal renunciation of papal jurisdiction on 1 June 1535. He died a little over a month later, on 9 July, probably of old age. 
In his will, made on 3 July and proved on 31 August, Standish directed that he should be buried 'among the friars minor', perhaps a reference to the London Greyfriars, though no monument to him there is recorded by Stow. He left $40 for his burial, and $13 6's'. 8died for his tomb. His other bequests included $40 apiece for paving the choir of St Asaph Cathedral, for building an aisle of the Franciscan church in Oxford, for exhibitions for Oxford scholars, and for the Lancashire parish of Standish. He also left $5 to buy books for the Oxford Franciscans, and appointed executors to dispose of his library. However, his legal capacity to make a will, as a religious who had become a bishop, was open to question, and Standish's will seems to have brought trouble to his legatees. 


@@@@@


doc= 26232


Standish, John (c.1509-1570), Church of England clergyman, is said to have belonged to the family of Standish of Burgh, Lancashire, and to have been the nephew of Henry Standish, bishop of St Asaph. Admitted a scholar of Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1524 he graduated BA on 16 May 1528. On 16 June following, aged nineteen, he was appointed a scholar of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, becoming a fellow in 1530. He proceeded MA on 17 July 1531 and relinquished his fellowship. He was ordained priest at Lichfield on 24 February 1532 but thereafter gravitated to London. By 1538 he had become praelector in theology at Whittington College, also serving as a university preacher at Oxford that year. After Robert Barnes had been burnt for heresy in 1540, defending his protestant views at the stake, Standish published 'A Lytle Treatise Against the Protestation of R Barnes at the Time of his Death', which was answered by Miles Coverdale. Perhaps as a result of this literary effort Standish was admitted BTh at Oxford in 1540 or 1541 and incorporated DTh on 16 July 1542. On 3 December 1543 he was collated rector of St Andrew Undershaft in London and on 30 June 1544 vicar of Northall, Middlesex, at the hands of Edmund Bonner, bishop of London. 
During the next five years Standish rapidly transferred his allegiance to the evangelical camp and accordingly prospered under Edward VI. He was appointed chaplain to the king in 1550 and on 12 July that year was presented by the crown to the eighth prebend in Worcester Cathedral, receiving licence in 1552 to retain it though non-resident. In March 1551, probably as a result of the government's drive at this time to promote protestant preaching in the north, he was presented to the rectory of Wigan, Lancashire, although it must be doubted that he was ever admitted. On 10 January 1553 he was instituted by Nicholas Ridley, first protestant bishop of London, to the archdeaconry of Colchester on the presentation of Sir Edward Norton. Later that year he was admitted rector of Medbourne, Leicestershire. By now he was married but nothing is known of his wife. 
The chapter of St Paul's, even under Ridley, had remained notably conservative and Standish's position as one of its few married prebendaries left him extremely exposed after the accession of Mary in July 1553. Possibly for that reason his institution to the archdeaconry of Colchester was cancelled on 22 January 1554, six weeks before Mary ordered the deprivation of married priests. After she had done so Standish was deprived of his London living and of Northall, and probably also of his Worcester prebend, where his successor was installed in September 1554. If he had ever held the rectory of Wigan it was presumably likewise relinquished at this time. 
Standish repaired the damage by repudiating his wife and, thus reconciled to the Marian regime, published in 1554 'A discourse wherin is debated whether it is expedient that the scripture should be in English for al men to read that wyll', in which he assigned fifty reasons why it was not. Nearly half of them emphasize that making the 'Bible' accessible to the laity undermined the established order. It gave rise to 'teachers in corners & conventicles', encouraged women to engage in theological debate, and made servants 'stubborne, frowarde and disobedient' towards their employers (sigs. K3'r', H7'r'). Standish finally advocated the burning of all English bibles and was accordingly denounced by John Bale. 
Standish was collated by the restored Bonner to the rectory of Paglesham, Essex, on 19 November 1554 and in 1555 was admitted rector of Rodmarton, Gloucestershire. In 1556, apparently still in possession of Medbourne, he dedicated to Cardinal Pole 'The Triall of the Supremacy wherein is Set Forth the Unitie of Christes Church'. On 21 October 1557 Bonner further collated Standish to the prebend of Ealdland in St Paul's and on 15 October 1558, having taken part during the summer in the heresy trial of the Lancastrian martyr Roger Holland, he was once again admitted archdeacon of Colchester. He was deprived of the latter on 23 October 1559, during Elizabeth's royal visitation, and had to relinquish Paglesham to the married priest he had supplanted. Yet he seems to have been allowed to keep his prebend and on 15 December 1560 was admitted rector of Evington, Leicestershire. His successor was collated to Ealdland, vacant by his death, on 31 March 1570. 


@@@@@


doc= 26233


Standish, Myles (c.1584-1656), soldier and colonist, was born at Ellanbane, Lezayre parish, on the Isle of Man, the second of three sons born to John Standish and Christian Lace. The strongest clues to his parentage come from his will, in which he refers to certain lands in Lancashire 'Surruptuously Detained from mee'. This claim has led past historians to suppose that Standish was from Lancashire; however, it now appears that he was descended from an Ormskirk, Lancashire, branch of the family which had dwelt on the Isle of Man for several generations. If so, his will refers to lands which passed wrongfully to his younger brother William, his older brother John having died young. While the above seems the likeliest construction of his ancestry, genealogists have not established the facts conclusively. 
Little is known of Standish's life before his emigration to America. He apparently had some schooling, for at his death his estate included an impressive library, and he served as treasurer for Plymouth Colony for five years. According to a contemporary, he 'went over into the Low Countries, and was a soldier there, and came acquainted with the [English separatist] Church at Leiden' (Morton, 170). Again, the likeliest scenario is that, at about age seventeen, he joined the English forces at Ostend in 1601. Before the truce with Spain in 1609 he may have attained an officer's rank, but nowhere has this been verified. He probably lived in Leiden while serving in the peacetime garrisons of Holland until 1616. There is no evidence that he ever formally joined the English separatists' church either in Holland or in America, so he may have attended the English Reformed church in Leiden, as this congregation included many English and Scottish families and single people. 
In 1619 the Leiden separatists decided to establish a colony in Virginia, funded by a London-based company of merchant adventurers. Standish, already 'acquainted' with the separatists, joined them as their captain-elect. After several false starts during the summer of 1620 the 'Mayflower' left Plymouth on 6 September 1620, carrying Standish, his wife, Rose (died 1621), and 100 other passengers on a sixty-six-day voyage across the northern Atlantic ['see 'Pilgrim Fathers]. The ship made landfall at Cape Cod on 11 November 1620, and immediately steered south, intending to make Hudson's River (later New York), which was part of the Virginia Company's patent. After attempting the treacherous shoals south of the cape, however, the 'Mayflower' put into the harbour at what is now Provincetown, Massachusetts. Clearly outside their legal patent, some of the passengers, many of whom were not separatists, threatened to go their own way. Fearing anarchy, the colony leaders drafted an agreement, now known as the Mayflower Compact, declaring the colonists a 'civil body politic' and binding all signers to obedience thereto. Standish signed the document, as did nearly every adult male. The settlers spent more than a month at Cape Cod, sending out armed parties under Standish's leadership to reconnoitre the area. Ill-advisedly these parties purloined some stores of Indian corn they found, and desecrated several graves. Eventually a party of Nauset Indians retaliated, attacking the English one morning in their encampment. No one was hurt in the ensuing exchange of arrows and bullets, and the Indians withdrew. 
Finding Cape Cod inhospitable, another party, including Standish, crossed Cape Cod Bay and, after being nearly lost in a storm, drove their boat onto an island, which proved to be within a harbour 'fit for situation' (Bradford, 72). They selected this site, which they subsequently named New Plymouth, for settlement and brought the 'Mayflower' into the harbour. Poorly prepared for the sharp New England winter, the settlers suffered heavy losses from sickness; half the company died by springtime. Standish's wife, Rose, was among these, but Standish himself seems to have been one of the few not affected by the sickness, and an eyewitness praised his attentive care to the sick and dying. When nearby Indians contacted the settlers in March 1621, he participated in the negotiation of a treaty of alliance with Massasoit, a principal sachem of the Wampanoag people. 
The first few years of the settlement saw initially friendly relations with Indians begin to fray. On several occasions the English responded to rumours of Indian hostility with displays of force. Standish led these demonstrations, and it is clear that he was not the best diplomat: on one occasion he threatened to burn an entire Indian village in retaliation for some petty theft. Nevertheless, in more reciprocal situations such as trading or negotiating alliances he was fairly successful, learning the local Indian dialect with proficiency. 
Standish's most controversial actions occurred in March 1623. Relations with Massasoit, the settlement's chief supporter, had cooled ominously, especially after the arrival of another, less disciplined group of English at Wessagusset. But when one of the Plymouth colonists nursed the sachem through a dangerous illness, Massasoit told him of a cabal of Massachusett Indians planning to destroy the English at Wessagusset, and next at Plymouth. Reportedly, Massasoit advised making an example of the Massachusett, a task for which Standish needed no prodding. Taking a boat to Wessagusset with only eight men to avoid arousing suspicion, he found the English settlement there in severe disarray, with Indians openly threatening the English, and personally insulting Standish. Luring four of the Indians into a house, he and three of his men fell upon them, killing all except one, whom they subsequently hanged. He then evacuated the settlement, fought a sharp skirmish with enraged Massachusett on the retreat, and returned to Plymouth with the head of one of his victims. The incident all but destroyed relations with the Massachusett, and prompted the church's pastor in Holland to lament, 'Oh, how happy a thing it had been, if you had converted some before you had killed any!' (Bradford, 374-5). 
In the summer of 1623 more colonists came to Plymouth, among whom Standish found a second wife, Barbara (died after 1659), who bore him three sons, John, Alexander, and Charles, by 1627. In the summer of 1625 he sailed to London to negotiate with the merchant backers of the colony, who had not seen a satisfactory return on their investments and were unwilling to keep the colony further supplied. An epidemic of plague had compelled the merchants to seek safety out of the city, however, so Standish returned the following April with only a supply of goods purchased on usurious credit. Another colonist took up the negotiations until, in November 1626, the merchants agreed to sell their interest to the Plymouth colonists for $1800 in nine yearly payments. Eight principal planters, including Standish, became 'undertakers' for the colony, agreeing to make the first six payments in exchange for a monopoly of the colony's trade during that time. The colonists were serious about protecting their trade with the Indians, which was their chief profit, and Standish led at least two forays against interlopers. One of these, Thomas Morton, established a trading post at a place he called Merry Mount. Morton and his men alarmed the Plymouth people by selling weapons and liquor to the Massachusett Indians, and by frolicking with Indian women. In 1628 Standish led a band of Plymouth men there, who arrested Morton and broke up his operation. In 1635 he headed his last military expedition against French intruders at Penobscot, in Maine; that effort failed, however. He was named a captain for planned intercolonial expeditions against the Narragansett Indians in 1643, and against the Dutch in 1653, but neither of these efforts went beyond the planning stages. 
Standish was active in civil as well as military matters. He served frequently as assistant governor, and from 1644 to 1649 was the colony's treasurer. Together with several other families he founded the town of Duxbury in 1632, but offered to reside in Plymouth during the winters to be nearer the church. After the 1620s his years seem to have been relatively peaceful; he had a substantial dwelling in Duxbury, and his wife bore him at least four more children, Myles, Josias, Charles, and Lora. 
Standish has been the subject of considerable romance since Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's epic poem 'The Courtship of Myles Standish'. Barring Alden family tradition, there is no evidence to support the famous story of the widower Standish's wooing of young Priscilla Mullins (she subsequently married John Alden), nor any for the claim that he was secretly a Catholic. Even the common portrayal of him as a short man is debatable; when his grave was excavated in 1889, the remains indicated a man who had stood 5 feet 7 inches. His reputation for a short temper, however, seems justified; even an admirer conceded that Standish may have lacked 'that tenderness of the life of man which is meet' (Bradford, 375). In his old age Standish 'became sick of the stone, or stranguary' (Morton, 170). He made his will on 7 March 1656, and 'after his suffering much dolorous pain', died on 3 October 1656 at Duxbury, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 26234


Stanfield, Clarkson (1793-1867), painter, was born at 18 High Street East, Sunderland, co. Durham, on 3 December 1793, apparently the fifth and youngest child, and the younger son, of James Field Stanfield (1749-1824), actor and author, and his first wife, Mary Hoad, who died in January 1801. No baptismal records of James's first family are known -- possibly a consequence of his Catholicism -- but his son's given names were either Clarkson Frederick or Frederick Clarkson Field. Since his later signet bore the initials CFS the former is more likely; Clarkson, the only name that he used, was given to him for Thomas Clarkson, the abolitionist, whom his father knew in that cause. Adding to the uncertainty is his apparent Catholic rebaptism as Thomas Clarkson Stanfield, at St Mary's Chapel, Hampstead, on 3 October 1846, a week after his namesake's death. The name William Clarkson, a recurring error in the literature about him, may originate in a misreading of his monogram signature, or from confusion with his half-brother, William James Stanfield (1804-1827), whom he trained as a scene painter in London and who worked briefly there and in Manchester before his early death. Stanfield's elder brother, James George Stanfield (1787?-1853), became a seaman-gunner and appears to have died as a Birmingham hawker. An older sister, Mary, who may have become a Mrs Cuthbert, was an actress at the Theatre Royal, Edinburgh (1809-22), and a personal protegee there of its leading lady and joint manager, Harriet Murray (Mrs Henry Siddons) from late 1811. The names of two other full sisters may have been Jemima and Helen. 
Stanfield's mother is said to have been artistic and to have taught painting; family report gives Clarkson's childhood ambition to be a 'parson or a painter'. As a boy he occasionally appeared on stage before being apprenticed to a heraldic coach painter in Edinburgh in 1806. In 1808 he ran away because of the drunkenness of his master's wife, and went to sea in a collier, possibly the brig 'Alexander', of North Shields, in which he was serving when in July 1812 she was taken up as a transport in London. He was then pressed into the navy as an able seaman on the London receiving ship 'Enterprise' under the alias Roderick Bland, although 'Patrick Bland' is given, wrongly, in all naval musters after the first. For the next two years he was in the Sheerness guardship 'Namur', under Captain Charles Austen (brother of the novelist Jane Austen), where his talents were noticed in painting a toy coach for the captain's children and, reputedly, scenery for amateur theatricals in which the playwright and journalist Douglas Jerrold was involved as a naval boy volunteer. In 1814, while helping to decorate the port admiral's ballroom in Sheerness Dockyard, he was promised shore employment by the yard commissioner, William Lobb, but the latter's death in July forestalled this. Back afloat, Stanfield's health deteriorated (perhaps exacerbated by an injury to his left leg from a fall) and he was discharged ashore from the hospital ship 'Ceres' on 9 December 1814, and rejoined his family in Scotland. Early in 1815, still listed as able seaman Patrick Bland, he joined the East Indiaman 'Warley' in London, and in April sailed for Whampoa (Huangpu), in China, from where he returned with many sketches in May 1816. His next ship, the Indiaman 'Hope', did not sail for Madras, as expected; instead in August of that year he gained employment as a decorator and scene painter at the Royalty Theatre, Wellclose Square, London. 
Stanfield married, first, Mary Hutchinson (1798/1799-1821), an actress at the Royalty Theatre, at St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, on 20 July 1818. They had a son, Clarkson William (1819-1853), and a daughter, Mary (1821-1854), following whose birth Mary Stanfield died. Probably early in 1825 Stanfield married Rebecca Adcock (1808-1875), an actress from a northern theatrical family long acquainted with his own, and together they had eight sons and two daughters, born between February 1826 and 1845. 
Stanfield remained intermittently connected with the Royalty (also called the East London) until late 1822, when he was nominally 'scenic director', but when Joseph Glossop opened the new Coburg Theatre (now the Old Vic) in May 1818 he was engaged there under J. T. Serres. Glossop moved him to Astley's Amphitheatre when he and William Barrymore (whose real name was Blewitt, or Bluett) opened it for a winter season in 1819, and he was part of the Astley's company that Barrymore took to the Edinburgh Pantheon in autumn 1820. There, through his father, he met the painter David Roberts, a lifelong friend with whom he first worked at the Edinburgh Theatre Royal early in 1821. He had exhibited his first easel paintings at the Royal Academy and at the British Institution in 1820, and showed three at the Edinburgh Institution exhibition in 1821 before his return to Astley's in April of that year and to the Coburg from October. At the end of 1822 Glossop's Coburg regime collapsed, and Stanfield, Roberts, and Barrymore (as director of spectacle) were engaged by R. W. Elliston at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. Stanfield's work, already well noticed at the minor theatres, made an immediate impression there in helping Barrymore to revitalize Elliston's failed Christmas pantomime 'Gog and Magog' (with scenes by Roberts and their friend Alexander Nasmyth) as 'The Golden Axe'. This secured him an initial three-year contract at $8 a week from 14 January 1823, and at Drury Lane over the next twelve years he achieved a legendary reputation as a creator of romantic landscape scenery, supported and rivalled by Roberts in architectural subjects until 1826. He worked with great speed and facility, and their joint efforts successfully challenged the dominance of the Grieve family of scene painters at Covent Garden. Stanfield's work especially 'taught pit and gallery to admire landscape art and the boxes to become connoisseurs', according to his friend W. M. Thackeray (Marvy, 'Sketches after English Landscape Painters'). He was especially famed for his vast 'moving dioramas' -- land and seascape panoramas, unrolling with complex lighting and mechanics as travelogue interludes, introduced mainly into Christmas pantomimes and Easter spectacles. Subjects included the building of Plymouth breakwater (1823, which he repainted at Birmingham in 1824); the 'Adventures of a Ship of War' (1825); views on the Rhine and 'Spithead to Gibraltar' (1828); 'Windsor and its Vicinity' (1829); Napoleon's passage of the Simplon (1830); Venice (1831); and Niagara (1832). As Ottley later wrote: 'Only those who have seen these really stupendous works can form an idea of the inventive talent and artistic skill displayed, and the extent of travel developed in them... and whilst they established the fame of the author they led to a permanent advance and improvement in the scenic decoration of our theatres. (Ottley, 155)' In 1826, when Elliston's management failed, the Drury Lane proprietors presented Stanfield with a silver testimonial to his efforts for the theatre, while the size of his name on the playbills in his later career itself indicated the star status of his work. At Christmas 1834 a confrontation with manager Alfred Bunn over the precedence between scenery and horses in the equestrian spectacle of 'King Arthur' by Isaac Pocock led to Stanfield's resignation, which friends and the pressures of his easel work had already been urging. However, he willingly returned to help his friend W. C. Macready's management of both Covent Garden (1837-9) and Drury Lane (1841-3), supporting his dramatic reforms by contributing, at Covent Garden, a diorama, 'Scenes at Home and Abroad', to his Christmas pantomime of 1837 and dioramic illustrations to the chorus scenes in a seminal revival of 'Henry V' in 1839, and the scenery of Macready's equally spectacular Drury Lane staging of Handel's 'Acis and Galatea' (1842). His designs for the latter were reused for a revival at the Princess's Theatre in 1869, and most of them are among about eighty pieces that came to light in 1993 and are now in the Theatre Museum, London; no more than ten previously were known. In all Stanfield painted over 550 scenes in more than 170 productions in his scenic career. 
Outside the theatre Stanfield painted the moving panoramas 'Destruction of Algiers, 1816' (with Roberts, 1824) and 'Battle of Navarino' (with his pupil Charles Tomkins, Roberts, and J. W. Allen, 1828). The first was seen in Liverpool, then in the Netherlands and Germany; the latter in those countries before returning to Hull. He also painted a 'Poecilorama' of small dioramic views for the Egyptian Hall, Piccadilly and 'The Ruins of an Italian Abbey by Moonlight' at Vauxhall Gardens (both 1826), and, with Roberts and others, views for the British Diorama at the Royal Bazaar, Oxford Street (1828-9), where in the latter year his 'York with the Cathedral on Fire' (resulting from Jonathan Martin's arson) itself caught fire during a showing and destroyed the bazaar; he painted further views for it (in 1830 and 1834) after it had been rebuilt. His last professional stage works were act-drop designs for Her Majesty's Theatre in 1846 and for his friend Ben Webster's management of the new Adelphi in 1858. The only remaining fragment of his scenery (as opposed to his designs) is the centre of his Eddystone lighthouse act-drop for Wilkie Collins's 'The Lighthouse' (1855; Dickens House Museum, London), one of the amateur productions that he later helped to decorate for Charles Dickens, whom he met through Macready in 1837 and of whom he became a close friend and companion for the rest of his life. He also painted scenes for Dickens's amateur productions of 'Not so Bad as we Seem' (Bulwer-Lytton, 1851) and 'The Frozen Deep' (Collins, 1857); his drawing of Dickens as Captain Bobadil in Ben Jonson's 'Every Man in his Humour' (1845) is in the Garrick Club, London, of which he was a loyal member from its foundation in 1831. He provided illustrations for Dickens's 'Christmas Books' -- 'The Chimes' (1844), 'The Cricket on the Hearth' (1845), 'The Battle of Life' (1846), and 'The Haunted Man' (1847) -- and for the popular edition of 'American Notes' (1850); Dickens dedicated 'Little Dorrit' to him on its completion in 1857. He also illustrated 'The Pirate and the Three Cutters' (1836) and 'Poor Jack' (1840) for Captain Marryat, another friend from about 1833; reports that they met in the navy are baseless. Other major literary editions for which he provided drawings were the works of George Crabbe (1834) and Boswell's 'Life of Samuel Johnson' (1835, ed. J. W. Croker, rev. J. Wright), both published by John Murray, to whose production 'Illustrations of the Life and Works of Lord Byron' (1833) he also contributed -- as he did, with others, to the Cadell 'Abbotsford' edition of the 'Waverley' novels of Sir Walter Scott (12 vols., 1842-7) and to his friend John Forster's 'The Life and Adventures of Oliver Goldsmith' (1848). 
Stanfield's rise as a painter in oils and watercolours -- especially of works produced for topographical engraving -- developed in tandem with his reputation as a scene painter, despite some carping by reviewers about his theatre background and criticism of its influence on his easel style. In both areas he seems to have been largely self-taught, although he was advised by (and an admirer of) Alexander Nasmyth and John ('Jock') Wilson, both also scene painters as well as being, respectively, landscape and marine painters. Ruskin, despite considering Stanfield too prosaic, called him 'the leader of the British Realists' and, next to Turner, 'the noblest master of cloud forms of all our artists' (Ruskin, 1.119, 239). Although Thackeray praised his work as comprehensible, by contrast with Turner's 'mysticism and oracularity', Stanfield was a firm admirer of Turner and on good terms with him. Between 1820 and his last submission in 1867 he showed 135 paintings at the Royal Academy, his only absences being from 1822 to 1826, in 1828, and (owing to a tour) in 1839. However, his early success was associated more with the British Institution, whose $50 premium he won for his large 'Wreckers off Fort Rouge, Calais' in 1828 (engraved by J. P. Quilley, 1829), and the Society of British Artists, of which he was a foundation member from 1823, vice-president in 1828, and president in 1829; from 1820 to 1853 he showed twenty-two works at the former, and from 1824 to 1829 twenty-one at the latter. He resigned from the Society of British Artists in June 1830, when he failed to exhibit, and made a clear bid for membership of the Royal Academy by showing there instead his large view of St Michael's Mount, Cornwall (National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne). This impressed the new 'sailor king', William IV, who commissioned from Stanfield views of Portsmouth and Plymouth, the latter being changed to one of the royal opening of New London Bridge in 1831. Both (still in the Royal Collection) were exhibited in 1832, at the British Institution and the Royal Academy respectively. They ensured Stanfield's election as an associate of the Royal Academy in November 1832, after failure in the previous two years. He was elected Royal Academician in February 1835, six weeks after his stormy resignation from Drury Lane Theatre, and almost immediately served the first of four terms (1836-7, 1844-5, 1851-2, 1860-61) on the academy's council, on two occasions when others had declined to do so. In the first year of each term, and in 1852, he was also a member of the academy's hanging committee. In 1844, on the recommendation of Charles Eastlake, he was appointed the first curator of the Naval Gallery at Greenwich Hospital, to advise on acquisitions (all by gift) and the maintenance of the collection and the Painted Hall, at the honorarium of $100 a year. He held the post until 1865 and, with Eastlake and Roberts, was on the 'ad hoc' committee that chose 102 (out of 19,000) watercolours from their friend Turner's bequest for their first exhibition at Marlborough House, in February 1857. Stanfield also gave evidence, as a professional witness, to the parliamentary committees investigating art unions (1844) and the National Gallery 'cleaning controversy' (1853). 
While Stanfield's China voyage informed some of his stage designs it did not prompt any substantial easel work. From the 1820s onwards this was based on sketches from his travels in Britain and Europe and on his knowledge of the sea and ships, with results that Ruskin rather overpraised when he said that 'one work of Stanfield alone presents us with as much concentrated knowledge of sea and sky, as, diluted, would have lasted any one of the old masters his life' (Ruskin, 1.348). He may have briefly visited Calais in 1820 but his earliest tour, to the Low Countries and as far as Cologne, was in 1823. From July to September 1824 he accompanied the intrepid William Brockedon on the first of his journeys in the French, Swiss, and Italian Alps, a trip covered in Brockedon's 'Journals of Excursions in the Alps' (1833), which was dedicated to Stanfield. In April 1825 he went up the Seine to Paris. In July 1828 he set out for the Netherlands and Germany, but became ill at Cassel, France, and recovered at Calais and Boulogne before going home in August. In the summer of 1829 he toured Devon and Cornwall. From late August to October 1830 he went, via the Netherlands, up the Rhine to Venice, returning through France, whose channel coast he revisited with his family in summer 1832. From mid-September to November 1837 he journeyed along the Meuse, the Moselle, and the Rhine, and from 28 August 1838 travelled through France and Switzerland to Milan, and thence, via Ancona, to Naples and its vicinity; he returned to England, on 17 March 1839, via Rome, Florence, and the Corniche. This time his companion was T. G. Fonnereau, an architectural enthusiast and former lawyer whom he may have met through John Murray. They got on well and Fonnereau dedicated his own small, privately printed volume of resulting sketches to Stanfield, who, having spent Christmas alone and delayed by storm on Ischia, was in Naples to witness an eruption of Vesuvius at new year 1839. Sketches of this survive (examples in the Tate collection, V&A, and NL Scot.) but a painting commissioned in Rome by the duke of Buccleuch may not have materialized. The most notable picture from this tour is 'Castello d' Ischia, from the Mole' (exh. RA, 1841; Sunderland Art Gallery), which was engraved for the Art Union. A pair of views, of Vietri and Amalfi, were purchased by Queen Victoria, who commissioned a third, of Ischia, in 1841 and a view of the royal yacht 'Victoria and Albert' off St Michael's Mount in 1846, the last two as gifts for Prince Albert (Royal Collection). In 1843 Stanfield was one of the artists commissioned to decorate the garden pavilion (dem. 1920) at Buckingham Palace with 'frescoes' based on Milton's 'Comus'. 
Stanfield's first return to the north-east and Scotland was in autumn 1841; a west-country jaunt with Dickens, John Forster, and Daniel Maclise in autumn 1842 is well recorded in Dickens's letters. Later tours, of which few details survive, were to the Netherlands in 1843; Dorset (autumn 1844); south Wales (1848); and, with his wife and daughters, to the northern Pyrenees, via La Rochelle and Bordeaux, and along the Spanish coast to San Sebastian in the autumn of 1851. A visit to northern Ireland in 1856 was Stanfield's last tour out of England, although he and Roberts went to Edinburgh and its vicinity in 1858, where both were dined by the Royal Scottish Academy and Stanfield received his diploma as an honorary member (since 1830) and occasional exhibitor. In 1860, to mark their long association, Stanfield and Roberts jointly contributed the $250 needed to build one of the houses for 'decayed actors' in the new dramatic college at Maybury. 
Stanfield's repertory mirrored his travels. Two impressive early works were 'Market Boat on the Scheldt', (exh. British Institution, 1826; V&A) and 'Cologne on the Rhine' (exh. Society of British Artists, 1826; Rheinisches Landesmuseum, Bonn). Thereafter French and Italian views dominate until 'The Day after the Wreck' (exh. RA, 1844; Graves Art Gallery, Sheffield), showing a Dutch Indiaman aground in the Ooster Schelde, introduces the results of his tour of the Netherlands in 1843, following which further French, British, Spanish, and Irish subjects make up a balanced continuation of his exhibited work. Two of his most important early commissions were a group of ten Venetian and other Italian views for the former Adam dining-room at Bowood House, Wiltshire, for the third marquess of Lansdowne, which he delivered between 1833 and 1845, and another five for the duchess of Sutherland at Trentham, Staffordshire, begun in 1834. Both series were later dispersed, although 'Venice from the Dogana' (exh. RA, 1833, where it was the reported focus of rivalry with Turner) is now again at Bowood, with other examples. The largest and one of the earliest of many marine set-pieces is the huge 'Battle of Trafalgar' (exh. RA, 1836), commissioned by the United Services Club, Pall Mall, as a pendant to the earlier 'Waterloo' by George Jones. Based in part on eyewitness accounts from club members, it is the best broadly realistic treatment of the subject. Though smaller, at 8 ft rather than 15 ft wide, 'HMS 'The Victory' Towed into Gibraltar... after the Battle of Trafalgar' (exh. RA, 1853; priv. coll.) is a more original variant on the Nelson theme, showing the dramatic composition, clarity, colour, and immediate surface effects that characterize Stanfield's best oil work and that appear to have made his stage scenery so impressive when viewed under gaslight. Ruskin admired the way that Stanfield could: 'carry a mighty wave up to the sky and... [make] its whole body dark against the distant light using... nothing more than chaste and unexaggerated colour to gain the relief. His surface is at once lustrous, transparent and accurate to a hair's breadth in every curve. (Ruskin, 1.348)' Although it anticipates the picture the description is well applied to the small but fine 'Dutch Dogger Carrying Away her Sprit', known as 'On the Dogger bank' (exh. RA, 1846; V&A). An example of what Ruskin also called 'Stanfield's true salt, serviceable, unsentimental sea' (ibid., 1.120), this was one of three works that he sent in 1855 to the Universal Exhibition in Paris, where he was awarded a first-class gold medal. In 1862 he was also made a chevalier of the Belgian order of Leopold. His most original marine work, 'The Abandoned' (exh. Universal Exhibition, Paris, 1855, and RA, 1856) -- a deserted hulk rolling on a frightening sea -- and one probably reflecting his religious anxieties and the recent deaths of his two eldest children, has been untraced since 1930 and is only directly known from a colotype taken when it was shown at the Manchester Art Treasures Exhibition in 1857. 
Stanfield's dramatic mountain views were also impressive. 'The Battle of Roveredo, 1796' (exh. RA, 1851), a scene in the Italian Alps, was one of several large works with a Napoleonic theme, while his 'View of the Pic du Midi d'Ossau', set in the Pyrenees (exh. RA, 1854) and painted, for 700 guineas, for Elhanan Bicknell -- one of his many mercantile or industrialist patrons -- is a vertiginously icy setting for the 'contrabandistas' who populate its foreground (both now in the Royal Holloway collection, University of London). 
Stanfield also had a large output of watercolours, many for topographical engraving, beginning with views for 'London and its Vicinity' (1827), published by George Cooke, whose son Edward William Cooke helped Stanfield with sketches and became his principal follower as a marine painter. He illustrated Heath's 'Picturesque Annual' for 1832 (scenes from Italy, the Tyrol, and the Rhine), 1833 (Belgium and the Netherlands), and 1834 (the channel coast of France), and in 1836 produced his own 'Coast Scenery: Views in the British Channel' (published by Smith, Elder & Co.), dedicated to William IV. His lithographed 'Sketches on the Meuse, Rhine and Moselle' followed in 1838; he also contributed views that were lithographed in J. P. Lawson's 'Scotland Delineated' (1847-54) and to many other steel-engraved publications. His finished watercolours show the same picturesque qualities as his oils, but -- as Ruskin noted and criticized him for checking -- his rapid and less considered sketches, especially of sea and weather, often show 'powers and perceptions of a far higher order than... in his academy works' (Ruskin, 1.119). He was a regular visitor at several of the London 'conversazioni', and in March 1829, through his countryman G. F. Robson, was elected with C. R. Leslie to the convivial Sketching Society that from 1808 met weekly from October to May. Both of them, with Stanfield's son George and the Chalon brothers Alfred Edward and John James, were those present at its final meeting, in February 1851, after which it faded away, Stanfield having attended 446 times. 
Stanfield's health worsened in the 1840s; his leg gave him recurrent pain, and in the later 1850s rheumatism or 'neuralgia' sometimes kept him housebound and unable to paint or write. Having lived in Lambeth from 1819 to 1827 he moved into his friend William Etty's ground-floor rooms at 14 Buckingham Street, Strand, when Etty moved upstairs. From 1832 to 1839 he and his growing family took over George Cruikshank's former house -- 36 Mornington Crescent, Camden Town -- and then moved to 48 Mornington Place until 1847. In 1840, under advice to seek cleaner air while illustrating 'Poor Jack', he rented Nyn Cottage, at Northaw, Hertfordshire, near Captain Marryat's brother Joseph (who was his banker). In 1846 he lodged at Hampstead for the same reason, and contemplated moving to Ramsgate, where he and Etty spent time with their Catholic friend A. W. N. Pugin. Instead he settled in a short, eighteenth-century terrace -- The Greenhill, Hampstead -- from 1847 to 1865. His house there (now Stanfield House and the sole survivor of the row) and 14 Buckingham Street bear plaques recording his residence. His last years were spent at 6 Belsize Park Road, where he died, after a week's illness, on 18 May 1867; he was buried on 27 May at Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery. Many obituaries reflected the esteem in which he was held, while granting that although his work was unpretentious, dramatic, skilled, and picturesque it was rarely of the highest aesthetic order. There was, however, general agreement on his achievement in raising theatre scene-painting standards, and thereby broad public taste in art, and a moving editorial tribute by Dickens in 'All the Year Round' (1 June 1867) described him as 'the soul of frankness, generosity and simplicity. The most genial, the most affectionate... and the most lovable of men' (p. 537). 
Though he became portly in middle life Stanfield in the 1820s was 'a tall and handsome young man of agreeable, if not of polished manners, liking and seeking company of an intellectual character' (Hall, 477). He was sociable, a listener rather than a speaker, and was widely liked for his straightforwardness and modesty, although friends learned to tread softly around his increasingly devout Catholicism. In this he was probably influenced by Etty (a high-churchman), certainly by Pugin, and by Abbe Morel, at Hampstead; he also knew, and was admired by, cardinals Wiseman and Manning, the latter a convert. Of recorded portraits of Stanfield the most notable are two by his friend John Simpson, of about 1829. One (exh. RA, 1829; engraved W. Say, 1834) is in the National Maritime Museum, the other still in the family's possession; a third, of about 1833 and attributed to Simpson, is in the National Portrait Gallery. A monumental bust by George Clarke of Birmingham ('c'.1829) is the most intriguing example of others now unlocated. Examples of Stanfield's paintings and drawings are held in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, the Tate collection, London, Sunderland Museum and Art Gallery, and many other British public collections. Of his children with Rebecca Adcock the eldest, Henry James Field, died in 1838. The second, George Clarkson ['see below'], was also a painter, as was a grandson, Joseph John Richard Bagshawe (1870-1909; RBA, 1904), fifth son of Stanfield's elder daughter, Harriet (1837-1911), and W. H. G. Bagshawe QC (1825-1901), later a judge. Two other sons, Francis (1835-1914) and Raymund (1841-1918), became Catholic priests, the former being a notable hymnodist. 


On 1 May 1854, at Leeds, Stanfield married his cousin Maria Field Blackburn, a daughter of his father's half-sister Maria (1802-1858) and John William Blackburn, solicitor and coroner of Leeds. They lived at 42 Belsize Square, Hampstead, but it was in the house of his sister Harriet Bagshawe, 46 Belsize Square, that he died of liver disease at the age of forty-nine, on 22 March 1878. He was buried with his parents at Kensal Green. The probate value of his estate, left to his wife, was less than $300. His five sons all emigrated in early adulthood, one to Canada and four to Australia; another had died as an infant in 1858; the couple also had two daughters. His wife died at Ramsgate, Kent, on 17 April 1884, aged fifty-one. 


@@@@@


doc= 26235


George Clarkson Stanfield (1828-1878), landscape painter, was the second son of Clarkson Stanfield and his second wife, Rebecca Adcock, and was born on 1 May 1828 at 14 Buckingham Street, Strand, London. He was largely trained by his father, to whom he was later a general assistant, and attended the Royal Academy Schools, though apparently not formally enrolled in them. He first exhibited at both the British Institution and the Royal Academy in 1844, when he was sixteen and his father was on the latter's hanging committee. He showed forty-nine works at the former until its closure, in 1867, and seventy-three at the academy up to 1876. As well as British subjects he painted landscapes based on visits to France, the Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy, including river scenes and some coastal views. His style in oils is closely related to that of his father but characteristically more laboured, his bright landscapes often resembling coloured scale models. His success was limited, probably owing to changing taste after his father's death and to his derivative style, coupled with a suggestion of family improvidence and, finally, illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 26236


Stanfield, James Field (1749-1824), actor and author, was born in 1749 in Dublin, according to family report. He was educated in France for the Roman Catholic priesthood but instead became a seaman, and claimed to have voyaged to most parts of Europe and North America. In September 1774, as a common mariner, he sailed from Liverpool in the snow 'Eagle' under Captain David Wilson, on a slaving voyage to Benin. Arriving by early November the 'Eagle' was turned into a coastal depot, and Stanfield was sent up the Formosa or Benin River to work at an inland factory at Gwato, near Benin City, possibly as a clerk given his education. He spent about eight months there before rejoining Wilson in a new ship, the 'True Blue', which sailed for the Caribbean in September 1775. Of the 213 slaves carried on a notably brutal 'middle passage' 23 died; by contrast only 15 of the 25 European crew who left Africa survived to reach Jamaica early in January 1776. Stanfield returned to Liverpool in the 'True Blue', arriving in April and remaining there some time as one of only four who returned from the round voyage in both ships. It may have been his last voyage, but notes by the Newcastle antiquary John Bell assert that he was detained in the American war and, if true, this could only have been subsequently. Against it stands the fact that in February 1777 a Mr and Mrs Stanfield appeared on stage at Manchester, a venue at which (with Bristol) Stanfield claimed to have performed, though supporting evidence is lacking, including of such a marriage. Stanfield was in London, occupation unknown, for a period in mid-1781, and appeared on stage at Lichfield that December and at Bath from September 1782 to July 1783. On 25 October 1785 he was married at Cheltenham to Mary Hoad of that town, and from October 1786 to December 1812 was on the northern stage, including the York, Scarborough, and Harrogate circuits. He was joint manager of a band of strollers there and in the borders between 1799 and 1808. From April 1814 he taught elocution and composition in Edinburgh. He played his last-known stage parts early in 1817 at the Glasgow theatre and was still there in 1819-20 as prompter, but some time thereafter he joined his son Clarkson Stanfield in London. 
From 1793 to 1796 Stanfield ceased acting and settled as a 'brandy merchant' in Sunderland, where he was a principal founder of the subscription library in 1795. His slaving experience having allied him with the abolitionists, he wrote graphically against the trade in his 'Observations on a Guinea Voyage, in a Series of Letters Addressed to the Revd Thomas Clarkson', published in 1788. His dramatic poem 'The Guinea Voyage', in the style of Falconer's 'Shipwreck', appeared in 1789. Stanfield later had both reprinted in one volume at Edinburgh in 1807, the year of abolition. Overall his account's particular importance is as the first condemning the slave trade as a grave of European seamen, though also testifying to its other horrors and the potentials for more worthy commerce with the African society he had seen. He also wrote two shorter abolitionist poems: lines 'Written on the Coast of Africa in the year 1776 ['sic']' were only published in 1795, while an 'elegy' of 1796 commemorated Captain Matthew Winterbotham of the Sierra Leone Company, who drowned at Dix Cove, Senegal, after a 300 mile inland investigation of alternative commerce to 'the detestable slave trade'. Stanfield was himself called before one of the parliamentary inquiries on slavery, probably in 1790, but no firm evidence of his appearance has emerged. In 1790 W. Thompson of Newcastle published anonymously his 'Life of the Late John Howard', a biography of the prison reformer, and in 1795 he began an 'Essay on the Study and Composition of Biography', published by subscription at Sunderland in 1813. Moralistically erudite but also reviewed (by John Foster, 'Eclectic Review', February 1814) as confused and 'ineffective, in a very strange degree', it was founded on his zeal for the philosophy of Francis Bacon, which his command of Latin allowed him to read in the original. More recently it has been credited as 'the first full-length book on the theory of biography in English', lacking originality but at least providing 'a coherent synopsis of literary opinions' on the topic at that time (Nisbet and Rawson, 303). He wrote an unpublished two-act comic opera, 'The Fishermen', in 1786, and was an author of songs and other verse. Much of this was masonic, Stanfield being a prominent Sunderland freemason, and sixteen pieces, including the two short slavery poems, appeared in the 'Freemasons' Magazine' between 1793 and 1798. He was also a noted performer of his own comic Irish songs. Of these, 'The Wedding of Ballyporeen' and 'Patrick O'Neal' (celebrating the naval battle of 1 June 1794) were the best known. 
Stanfield's talents were admired by learned friends, including the biographer G. W. Meadley and the moral philosopher Dugald Stewart, and he remained lively and undaunted despite chronic financial hardship. As an actor he played character parts, and Tate Wilkinson, the York theatre patentee, testified to his rapid memory, spirited intelligence, and unhandsome appearance; an engraved portrait after Clarkson Stanfield is in the British Museum. Stanfield's wife, Mary Hoad, died on 11 January 1801 at Morpeth; Maria Field Kell, whom he married on 29 October of that year, died in Edinburgh on 17 September 1816; both were actresses and with both he had numerous family. Of these, Mary, an actress in Edinburgh, and Clarkson were children of the first. A daughter of the second, Maria (1802-1858), was also an actress in Glasgow and elsewhere before marrying a lawyer, John Blackburn, at Liverpool in 1831. Stanfield died in his lodgings in Wootten Street, Lambeth, on 9 May 1824, aged seventy-four, and was buried at St Mary's, Lambeth, six days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 26237


Stanford, Charles (1823-1886), Baptist minister, was the only son of Joseph Stanford (died 1862), a shoemaker. He was born at Northampton on 9 March 1823; he had a sister who died in childhood. He was for some time a shoemaker, then a lawyer's clerk, and afterwards a bookseller's assistant. Through the liberality of his employer, a Mr Phillips, he received some education. He and his parents joined the Independent Doddridge Chapel in 1839, but Charles went a step further and was baptized at Greyfriars' Chapel at about the same time, while continuing in membership at Doddridge Chapel. A Sunday school teacher and chapel librarian, he preached with such success that he was recommended to the Baptist college at Bristol, which he attended from 1841 to 1844. 
Stanford's first pastorate was at Sparrow Hill, Loughborough, where he stayed from 1845 until Christmas 1846. In 1847 he became minister of the United Presbyterian and Baptist church at Devizes. Under his ministry the congregation gradually increased, and a new chapel was opened on an adjacent site in 1852 as a solely Baptist foundation. In May 1858 he was invited to become co-pastor, with Dr Edward Steane, of Denmark Place Chapel, Camberwell, London. Steane suffered a serious breakdown in health, and from 1861 Stanford was sole pastor. There, in addition to his church duties, he was an active missionary to the surrounding neighbourhood. He remained at Camberwell until his death. He was on the committee of the Baptist Missionary Society in 1863-6, and remained an enthusiastic advocate of missions throughout his life. From 1866 he was a virtual invalid and made only occasional forays from his pulpit into the wider Baptist world. In 1881 he was vice-president, and in 1882 president, of the London Baptist Association, despite being nearly blinded by glaucoma. 
Stanford published many sermons and addresses. His two best-known works are 'Joseph Alleine, his Companions and Times: a Memorial of Black Bartholomew' (1861), his contribution to the bicentenary of the Ejection of 1662; and 'Philip Doddridge' (1880), in the series 'Men Worth Remembering'. 
Stanford was twice married: first, in June 1847, to Jane Johnson, who died in 1849, and second, in 1854, to Jane Kingdon, elder daughter of Paul Anstie. He had no surviving children. Having suffered all his life from asthma and angina, he died after a brief illness at his home, 26 De Crespigny Park, Denmark Hill, on 18 March 1886, and was buried in Norwood cemetery on the 24th. 


@@@@@


doc= 26238


Stanford, Sir William (1509-1558), judge and legal writer, was born on 20 August 1509, the second son of William Stanford, mercer, of London, and Margaret Gedney (died 1541). He is said by Wood to have been 'among the Oxonians' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.262) before proceeding, doubtless via an inn of chancery, to Gray's Inn in 1528. He was called to the bar before 1536 (when he was elected an ancient at the age of twenty-seven), and began to practise in the beginning of Lent 1539, earning $36 in fees in his first year and nearly $52 in his second. One of his first appointments in the 1530s was as steward of St Mary's College, Stafford. Staffordshire was the county of his father's origin, and of his ancestors, and in 1541 (and 1545) he was elected to parliament for Stafford, in 1547 for Newcastle under Lyme. Several of his early clients were from Lancashire, and he practised at Lancaster assizes in the early 1540s. In 1542 he was appointed attorney-general to the newly established court of general surveyors of crown lands, and obtained a grant of arms; in the following year he became a justice of the peace for Middlesex. By 1543 he was earning over $100 a year in private practice, besides his stipend of $40. 
In 1543, according to a note in his fee book, Stanford entered the service of Lord Chancellor Wriothesley, who is known to have been his patron. This perhaps refers to his work as a commissioner for the sale of crown lands. He became a bencher of Gray's Inn in 1545, when he read on the statute '34 Edw. III c. 12', concerning forfeiture for treason. His double reading, in 1551, was probably on 'Westminster I c. 1', concerning justices of the peace, though it has also been suggested that he read on 'Prerogativa regis'. Notwithstanding the fall of Wriothesley, and his religious leanings towards Rome, in November 1552 he was created serjeant-at-law. His fee book shows that in his first year as a serjeant his income from fees rose to $315 a year; many of his clients were from Lancashire. On 19 October 1553 Mary I appointed him one of the queen's serjeants, and in that capacity he undertook with due fairness, but unsuccessfully, the prosecution of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton in 1554. About Michaelmas 1554 he became a justice of the common pleas, and he remained in that position until his death on 28 August 1558, receiving a knighthood in 1555. He was buried on 29 August at Hadley, Middlesex, where his funerary tabard and penons were still on display in the following century. Besides his property in Hadley, Islington, and other parts of Middlesex, he left estates that he had acquired in Staffordshire. To Sir James Dyer he bequeathed 'a gilt cup with the cover called the Maudelyn box'. He was survived by his widow, Alice, daughter of John Palmer of Kentish Town, Middlesex, with whom he had six sons -- the eldest of whom, Robert, took the family back to Staffordshire and represented that county in the first parliament of James I -- and five or six daughters. Dame Alice (died 1573) later married Roger Carew of Hadley. 
Stanford is remembered in the legal profession for two important books, one of which is still sometimes cited in the courts. Coke supports the supposition that the first printed edition of 'Glanvill' was published in 1554 'by the perswasion and procurement of Sir William Stanford, a grave and learned judge' ('Fourth Institute', 345, margin). The greatest of his own books was 'Les plees del coron' (1557), a textbook on criminal law. It was heavily based on the material gathered in the title 'Corone' in Fitzherbert's 'Graunde Abridgment', arranged in chapters, in the form of a continuous text, with passages quoted from Glanvill, Bracton, and relevant acts of parliament. It was the first legal textbook in England to adopt the practice of citing specific authorities for every proposition, and as such had a major influence on legal literature, though it lacked the elemental clarity of Littleton's 'Tenures', which was written by a judge of the same court a century earlier. 
Stanford's other principal book was his 'Exposicion of the Kinges Prerogative', written in 1548 and dedicated to Sir Nicholas Bacon as attorney of the wards. It was not printed until 1567, though there is an incomplete manuscript version of similar date in the British Library (Harley MS 854). This treatise seems to have had its roots in the readings on 'Prerogativa regis', even if not a reading by Stanford himself, and is concerned with the property rights of the crown rather than with constitutional principles. Unlike the former work, it was written in English. It also drew a great deal on Fitzherbert, and the author expressed the hope that others would take different titles in the abridgement and subject them to the same analytical treatment, though he had no immediate followers apart from Simon Theloall on writs. Fulbeck justly said of Stanford's books in 1600 that they were of: 'force and weight, and no common kind of stile; in matter none hath gone beyond him, in method none hath overtaken him. And surely his method may be a law to the writers of the law which shall succeed him. (Fulbeck, 72-3)' Both works enjoyed several editions down to 1607, when they were printed together. 


@@@@@


doc= 26239


Stanger, Christopher (1759-1834), physician, was the son of Daniel Stanger, a merchant of Whitehaven, Cumberland, and his wife, Hannah. He was baptized at Holy Trinity, Whitehaven, on 1 January 1760. His family had for several centuries owned estates near Keswick, and a township to the west of Derwentwater once bore their name. Stanger studied under the Revd Fisher at Kirkoswald and was later apprenticed to Mr Abbs, a surgeon in Newcastle upon Tyne. He graduated MD at Edinburgh on 24 June 1783. His dissertation bore the title, 'De iis quae ad sanitatem conservandam plurimum conferre videntur'. He then studied for four years at Paris, Vienna, Montpellier, Gottingen, and Leiden. 
On his return Stanger established a practice in London, and was admitted LRCP on 30 September 1789. The following year he was appointed Gresham professor of medicine, and in 1792 became physician and governor to the Foundling Hospital. In June 1793 Stanger was chosen to act with John Cooke (1756-1838) and William Charles Wells on a committee formed by the licentiates of the Royal College of Physicians to present an address to the college claiming to be admitted fellows. The petitioners were excluded from fellowship of the college under a by-law which declared that fellows should be graduates of Oxford or Cambridge: this despite the eminence of the Edinburgh medical school. The college refused to receive the address, and Stanger applied to the law courts. On 27 January 1796 the court of king's bench granted a rule to compel the president and fellows to show cause why they should not admit Stanger. On 23 April, when Erskine appeared for the defendants, the rule was discharged by Lord Chief Justice Kenyon on the ground of an informality in Stanger's application. The case was reopened in the autumn and was argued by Adair, Law, Chambre, and Christian for the plaintiffs, with Erskine, Warren, and Gibbs for the defendants, 13-16 May 1797; but the court unanimously refused the mandamus. 
In 1798 Stanger appealed to the public in 'A justification of the right of every well-educated physician of fair character and mature age, residing within the jurisdiction of the College of Physicians of London, to be admitted a fellow if competent'. The pamphlet showed that Lord Mansfield had decided in 1767 that the college were bound under their charter to admit as fellows all duly qualified licentiates of whatever university. But Stanger's efforts produced little effect. Isaac Schomberg had unavailingly put forth a somewhat similar claim in 1753. Stanger, who possessed extensive attainments and great energy, also published 'Remarks on the Necessity and Means of Suppressing Contagious Fevers in the Metropolis' (1802), and contributed a paper on coughs to the 'Transactions of the Medical and Chirurgical Society'. He died in London on 21 September 1834. 


@@@@@


doc= 26240


Charles Stanhope (1673-1760), politician, was educated at the Inner Temple and began his ministerial career in 1714 as under-secretary of state to his cousin James, first Earl Stanhope. He went on in 1717 to become secretary of the Treasury, and entered parliament as member for Milborne Port in July of that year. He came to grief through his zealous dealing in South Sea stock and promotion of the company's interests ['see 'Promoters of the South Sea Bubble]. The Commons secret committee of inquiry acquitted him by only three votes, after the personal intervention of the king on his behalf. Stanhope's further advancement was put off in 1721, as Robert Walpole was convinced that it would revive the South Sea issue in the Commons if persisted in. Stanhope protested that 'this is the cruellest usage of me in the world, and is what must forever ruin my reputation and fortune'. He could not gain his point, despite writing an impassioned letter to the king: 'what your Majesty shall now do must for ever determine my future Character and fortune in the World' (Stanhope to Newcastle, 19 Aug 1721, BL, Add. MS 32686, fols. 181'r', 184'r'). Stanhope was elected to the duke of Newcastle's Aldborough seat in 1722, and from 1722 to 1727 he held the post of treasurer of the chamber. When George II came to the throne, though, Stanhope's hopes of office were ended. The new king found among George I's papers a memorial from Lord Sunderland, in Charles's handwriting, proposing to have the then prince of Wales kidnapped and held in exile. The king resolved never to employ Stanhope and resented Walpole's attempts to recommend him. Stanhope inherited the family estates from his elder brother Thomas in 1730, and went over to the opposition after his election for Harwich in 1734. He left parliament in 1741, and died, unmarried, on 16 March 1760. 


@@@@@


doc= 26241


Stanhope, Charles, third Earl Stanhope (1753-1816), politician and inventor, was born in London on 3 August 1753. He was the second, but only surviving, son of Philip Stanhope, second Earl Stanhope (1714-1786), and his wife, Grizel Hamilton (1719-1811). His father, the son of the general and whig politician James Stanhope, first Earl Stanhope, was a relatively minor politician in the House of Lords but an accomplished mathematician and classical scholar. A fellow and benefactor of the Royal Society, he was a close friend of Robert Simson, professor of mathematics at Glasgow University and the dedicatee of the third volume of Joseph Priestley's 'Experiments on Air'. Partly because of his political independence he was held in high regard by William Pitt the elder and by Benjamin Franklin. Lady Stanhope was the daughter of Charles Hamilton, Lord Binning, and Rachel Baillie, and sister of the seventh earl of Haddington. 
Charles Stanhope was therefore bred to aristocratic society virtually from birth. He entered Eton College on 24 September 1761, shortly after his eighth birthday, and remained there for two years. His dame at Eton was Mrs Frances Yonge. His elder brother, Philip, suffered from tuberculosis and was sent to Geneva for the benefit of his health. However, he died there on 6 July 1763 and Charles assumed the courtesy title of Lord Mahon and became the heir to the earldom of Stanhope. The family lived at Geneva from July 1764 until 1774. At first the objective was to preserve Mahon's health, which, like that of his brother, was thought to be delicate, and the services of Dr Theodore Tronchin were obtained. Once it became clear that Mahon was in no danger of succumbing to any serious ailment his father decided to remain in Geneva, where he could enjoy intellectual exchanges with fellow mathematicians and arrange for his son to have expert tuition. Mahon received private instruction from Georges Le Sage and, despite his youth, was allowed to meet his father's friends as if he were an adult. The family would have nothing to do with Voltaire, but Mahon met Horace-Benedict de Saussure and in 1765 was frequently in the company of Adam Smith. It has been suggested, though not conclusively, that the Stanhopes in Geneva were engaged in an unofficial mission to observe the political situation, and to keep a watching brief on English commercial interests in the city (Bennett, chap. 3). At all events Mahon quickly became involved in cultural and political activities which undoubtedly influenced his later career. 
From 1771 Mahon began to spend more time with his Genevan friends. He belonged to a society of artists and such was his skill with the crossbow that he became 'king', or commander, of the archers. In this capacity he associated with a wider range of people than would have been the case had he experienced a full education at Eton. He was elected to the Council of Two Hundred. Though his involvement in Genevan politics was cautious, he made the acquaintance of, and sympathized with, those excluded from power, including the discontented 'Natifs'. Several personal traits which characterized his later life were already apparent. His hostility to the theatre in Geneva, especially when comedy was performed, suggests a puritanical streak, while his physical awkwardness and indifference to dress and to such manifestations of elegance as hair powder led his mother to dub him 'the Quaker' (Newman, 131). He dabbled in scientific experimentation, invented a pyrometer, composed a paper on the pendulum, and wrote a volume recommending methods of preventing the fraudulent use of gold coins. In 1773 he was elected to the Royal Society. 
In summer 1774 the family left Geneva and, after a brief sojourn in Paris, returned to England. In September Mahon was presented at court. On the dissolution of parliament he made his first attempt to enter parliament as a candidate for the city of Westminster, which, with some 12,000 voters, was the largest and most independent borough constituency in the country. He stood in the radical interest, supported by John Wilkes, with Lord Mountmorres and polled 2342 votes, but ended in fourth place. His candidature for Maidstone, when he challenged the Aylesbury interest in a by-election in 1777, was too brief for success. He had, however, attracted favourable comment from critics of Lord North's administration. Chatham observed 'Lord Mahon is himself a 'Mine' richer than all' (Newman, 134). His connection with Chatham's family was cemented by his marriage, on 19 December 1774, to Lady Hester Pitt (1755-1780), the eldest daughter of Chatham and his wife, Lady Hester Grenville; he thus became the brother-in-law of William Pitt the younger. Mahon and his wife had three daughters, Hester Stanhope (1776-1839), Griselda ('b'. 1778), and Lucy ('b'. 1780), but his wife never fully recovered from the birth of the latter and died, apparently of dropsy, on 20 July 1780. 
Mahon was identified in politics with Lord Chatham's small, though intellectually powerful, group of followers in opposition to North's policies, particularly over America. He was in attendance when Chatham collapsed following his last speech in the House of Lords on 7 April 1778. Thereafter he transferred his allegiance to the earl of Shelburne, who succeeded to the leadership of Chatham's group. In 1775 he had visited Shelburne and met Joseph Priestley and Richard Price, thus strengthening his affinities with radical dissenters. He was an enthusiastic supporter of the county association movement for economical and parliamentary reform in spring 1780 and formed a friendship with its most prominent spokesman Christopher Wyvill, whose Yorkshire Association had launched the movement. He helped to organize the petitions in Buckinghamshire and in Kent, where he was elected chairman of the committee of correspondence. He joined the Society for Constitutional Information shortly after its foundation in 1780. He strongly opposed the attempts of Lord George Gordon's Protestant Association to repeal the 'Catholic Relief Act' of 1778 and, according to Horace Walpole, 'laboured to pacify the tempest' on 2 June 1780, prevailing upon at least one section of the rioters to disperse (Walpole, 'Corr.', 25.54). 
At the general election held in autumn 1780 Shelburne brought Mahon into parliament without a contest for his pocket borough of Chipping Wycombe. Mahon was re-elected in 1784. He created an immediate impression in the House of Commons and made more than ninety speeches in his short career in the lower house. Persevering with one of his Genevan obsessions he took a particular interest in questions of currency, and subjected the financial policies of North, and even of Pitt, to critical scrutiny. His ungainly energy is said to have caused him inadvertently to strike Pitt on the head in the course of an enthusiastic declamation. Meanwhile, on 19 March 1781 he married as his second wife Louisa (1758-1829), the daughter of Lady Chatham's younger brother, James Grenville, and Margaret Eleanor Banks. They had four sons, one of whom died in infancy; the eldest,Philip Henry Stanhope (1781-1855), ultimately succeeded to the earldom ['see under 'Stanhope, Philip Henry, fifth Earl Stanhope]. 
The fall of North's administration in March 1782 gave rise to a fluid and unstable parliamentary situation. Mahon gave cautious support to Shelburne's ministry (July 1782 to February 1793) and began a campaign for the reform of electoral law with the objective of placing a limit upon expenses and reducing corruption. In 1782 he introduced a bill to reduce electoral costs by allowing the sheriffs to move the place of polling to different locations within constituencies. When its key clause was defeated in committee Mahon withdrew the bill completely. In May 1783 he succeeded in steering a similar bill through the Commons but it was lost in the House of Lords. He gave full support to the parliamentary reform bills introduced by Pitt and vehemently opposed the Fox-North coalition and in particular its 'East India Bill'. When the coalition was dismissed by George III in December 1783 Mahon gave strong encouragement to the new and insecure ministry formed by Pitt, and indeed helped to stiffen the resolve of the new minister when the resignation of Lord Temple and the prospect of immediate defeat in the Commons led Pitt to consider the abandonment of the enterprise. When parliament was dissolved at the end of March 1784, however, it was clear that Pitt would survive, and Mahon threw himself eagerly into the general election campaign. In Buckinghamshire he addressed a meeting which voted an address of thanks to the crown with an outspoken attack on the 'India Bill': 'Why, says Mr Fox, give to me, and seven men named by me, two million sterling of annual patronage, and that shall be your remedy, God defend the Nation from such a remedy as that!' (Stanhope and Gooch, 59). He also took part in the unsuccessful campaign to secure the defeat of Fox in Westminster. 
In the new parliament Mahon continued to give independent support to Pitt's ministry. Pitt consulted him over the proposal to reduce the tea duty in 1784. The following year he introduced a bill which would have established a register of voters in county constituencies in the hope of curbing fraudulent voting. It was carried in the Commons but fell foul of some of Pitt's own cabinet colleagues, notably Lord Thurlow, in the Lords. Mahon had voted for Pitt's own 'Reform Bill' on 18 April 1785. By this time he had acquired a reputation for a certain radical eccentricity and excessive optimism, both for his opinions and for the manner in which he expressed them. 
On the death of his father (7 March 1786) Mahon succeeded as third Earl Stanhope. He took his seat in the House of Lords on 31 March. Almost immediately he introduced, in collaboration with William Wilberforce, a further bill for district polling. Like its predecessor of 1785 it was defeated in the Lords by what Wyvill termed 'a formidable coalition of the King's Friends and the Whig Aristocracy' (Ditchfield, 'House of Lords and parliamentary reform', 213). Although increasingly critical of Pitt's ministry, especially over financial policy, his previous record obstructed any co-operation with the opposition of Fox and Portland. None the less Stanhope enjoyed a moment of success in 1788 when he piloted a district polling bill into law. It provided for an electoral register in each county constituency. Stanhope canvassed assiduously in its favour and sought to meet some of the criticisms of his previous bills. But his success was short-lived, since a series of petitions from English counties, complaining that the costs of the registers would be borne by the county rate, led to the repeal of the act, untried in a general election, in 1789. Stanhope then abandoned his efforts to reform the electoral law. 
During the later 1780s Stanhope renewed his connections with protestant dissent. He came to favour universal toleration, with a repeal of all discriminatory religious legislation. In 1789 he introduced into the Lords a bill to this effect, with the reluctant exclusion of Catholics from its benefits. Not surprisingly it encountered episcopal hostility, particularly from John Moore, archbishop of Canterbury, and Samuel Horsley. After a lengthy debate the bill was rejected without a division. Stanhope's pledge that 'if the right reverend Bench would not suffer him to load away their rubbish by cart-fulls, he would endeavour to carry it away in wheelbarrows, and if that mode of removal was resisted, he would take it, if possible, away with a spade, a little at a time' and his claim to have 'taught the bench of bishops religion' (Debrett, 26.261, 262) only served to accentuate his public reputation as an obsessive crank, with an almost unlimited capacity to bore. Graphic satires depicted him as a rod-wielding schoolmaster. In private, however, Stanhope could be intellectually engaging, with genuine scientific interests which included fireproofing, calculating machines, and the development of lightning conductors. He addressed the Royal Society on the latter subject in February 1787. He also proved himself accessible to those outside the political elite. In 1789 he held detailed consultations with representatives of the Society of Friends, and as a result introduced (June 1789) a bill to relieve Quakers from the more burdensome consequences of non-payment of tithes. By this time Stanhope's anti-clerical motivation was plainly in evidence, and the 'Quaker Bill', now associated with a more general threat to the Church of England, was summarily dismissed in the House of Lords. 
Stanhope had moved away from support of Pitt's administration some years before the start of the French Revolution. Indeed, Pitt, like Stanhope himself, was no sympathizer with the 'ancien regime' in France. But the wider ramifications of the Revolution caused a breach in their relations. Stanhope became chairman of the Revolution Society, founded to commemorate the centenary of the events of 1688, and renewed his friendship with Richard Price. He defended the latter against the strictures of Burke's 'Reflections' in 'A Letter from Earl Stanhope to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke' (1790) and was praised by Catharine Macaulay as 'a patriot, a philosopher, and the firm friend of the general rights of man' (Macaulay, 5). He endorsed the address of congratulations from the Revolution Society to the French people on the fall of the Bastille and in letters to Condorcet and Rochefoucault, some of which were published, he expressed strong approval of the early stages of the Revolution. Even when he withdrew from the Revolution Society it was over a matter of personal pique rather than any difference of political sentiments. His libertarian reputation was enhanced by his support for the 'Catholic Relief Act' of 1791 and his energetic defence of the relaxation of the law of libel which took legislative form in Fox's 'Libel Act' of 1792. He published a pamphlet, 'The Rights of Juries Defended' (1792), which drew admiring letters from sympathizers such as Wyvill and Bishop Richard Watson. At the same time he was 'deeply occupied' with his 'great project', the construction of a form of steamship; its importance, in his eyes, was increased by the prospect that it would bring Britain and France, under its new regime, closer together (Newman, 152-3). 
The outbreak of war between Britain and revolutionary France in February 1793 marked a decisive change in Stanhope's political career. A little earlier Stanhope had been asked by Talleyrand, the British envoy in London, to obtain British arbitration between France and Austria in the hope of avoiding a general European conflict. Grenville, the foreign secretary, and Pitt discountenanced the idea. Stanhope consistently opposed the French war as unjust and inexpedient. On 1 February 1793 he told the House of Lords 'You will not make this a war of the people of Great Britain', adding 'it is a war of the Government of England against the funds of England, against her paper currency, against her best and dearest interests'. He argued that 'The real motives for this war is that you dislike the principles of the French Revolution. If these principles are good, it is not your war that will extinguish them' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 30, 1792-4, 323). His amendment urging the king to seek every means to avoid war was negatived without a division. Stanhope was now increasingly perceived as a dangerous fanatic rather than a relatively harmless eccentric. As early as December 1790 Horace Walpole had described Stanhope's 'Letter to Burke' as 'the ravings of a lunatic, imagining he could set the world on fire with phosphorus' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 34.98). The reference to a chemical process was not accidental, and Stanhope was soon linked with Joseph Priestley as a theological heterodox and politically dangerous menace. Indeed he employed one of Priestley's fellow Unitarians, the Revd Jeremiah Joyce, as tutor to his sons. Joyce shared Stanhope's political opinions and in May 1794 was arrested at Chevening on a charge of treasonable practices. When Joyce was released in the following December without being charged Stanhope held a large public entertainment in celebration; the songs, toasts to liberty, and dancing continued through the night. 
On 23 January 1794 Stanhope moved in the House of Lords a motion to recognize the French republic and in the following April moved that there should be no British interference in the internal affairs of France. Much of his opposition to the war was based on an oft-repeated assertion of the liberty of the French people to determine their own form of government. He spoke against the suspension of habeas corpus, criticized the 'Treasonable Practices' and 'Seditious Meetings' Bills and, with Lauderdale, called for a review of the trials of T. F. Palmer and Thomas Muir. In this spirit he supported the London Corresponding Society and adopted the sobriquet Citizen Stanhope; as late as 1804 he was still signing letters with this appellation. Although his radical principles never extended to abandoning his own privileges and property, he was fond of symbolic gestures such as the removal of the coronets from the gates at Chevening. Horace Walpole relished the idea of 'a detachment of 'poissardes' on the road to Chevening to create Earl Stanhope no peer!' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 11.97). Stanhope's isolation among the political elite was now almost complete; in 1794 most of the Portland whigs joined in coalition with Pitt's government, while the few remaining Foxites found him too disreputable and unreliable an ally. Stanhope responded by writing a series of protests in the House of Lords, to which he was the only signatory. Hence there emerged his image as the minority of one, enshrined in a medal of that title which was by no means unflattering to its subject; its obverse declared him a 'friend of trial by jury, liberty of the press, parliamentary reform' and other radical causes (Newman, 158). In 1798 he was even suspected of association with Arthur O'Connor, the 'United Irishman' arrested at Margate in 1798. Three years earlier he had seceded from the House of Lords in frustration, and did not resume attending until February 1800, although in the previous year he had written 'An Address to the Nations of Great Britain and Ireland on the Projected Union', a proposal which he opposed. 
Stanhope continued in his single-handed motions for peace, but by this time was more occupied with opposition to the slave trade, a subject on which he found himself in unwonted harmony with much of the political nation. He was among the strongest advocates of the abolition bill which was passed in 1807. He never abandoned his libertarian principles, criticizing the 'Indictment Bill' of 1808 and introducing a new 'Toleration Bill' into the House of Lords in 1812. Although the latter was defeated a more effectively promoted measure, securing the repeal of the 'Five Mile and Conventicle Acts', was carried in the same year under the leadership of William Smith MP. Stanhope even achieved some success with his financial proposals. In 1811 cases of forgery and fears of depreciation led him to sponsor a bill to make it illegal for guineas to be sold at more than 21's'., and for paper money to be accepted at less than its face value. The bill was accepted by the ministry and became law. At the same time he used his position in the Lords to table motions urging a uniform system of weights and measures, and opposing the imposition of the corn duty in 1815. The rejection of the latter gave rise to the last of his long sequence of Lords' protests. 
At no time did Stanhope relinquish his interest in scientific discovery and technological invention. He was far more than an amateur dabbler in these areas. He registered patents for steamships in 1790 and in 1807, had some of his designs accepted by the Admiralty in 1795-6, and consulted Boulton and Watt over developing steam-powered propulsion. He arranged for an engine to be constructed by his own engineer, Robert Walker, and persuaded the Admiralty to build a vessel, the 'Kent', to his specifications. He agreed to enter into a bond of $6000 to be forfeited in the event of the ship's failure. It was to have no masts or sails and to be powered by a vibrator, a mechanically driven 'self-feathering paddle' (Newman, 174), but its sea trials in March 1797 did not justify the new technology and the Admiralty discontinued the experiment. His other main experiment in the design of a ship, the 'Weatherer', met a similar fate in 1808 and 1813, while his scheme for a floating mine to be used as a weapon against hostile fleets did not materialize. Although still an advocate of a negotiated peace, Stanhope entertained less sympathy with Napoleonic than with revolutionary France and saw no inconsistency between his political opinions and designing weapons of war for the British armed forces. 
From about 1800 Stanhope took up an interest in the technology of printing, notably by devising a new printing press which bore his name, by developing a form of stereotyping and by introducing a system of logotypes. The latter proved a failure, but his stereotyping was taken up both by the Cambridge and by the Oxford university presses. His printing press, constructed of iron and employing a novel lever and screw motion, was a labour-saving device which amounted to a considerable improvement on its predecessors and, indeed, the most successful device of its type before the arrival of the steam press. The Oxford University Press purchased several models and it was used for the printing of 'The Times'. At no time did Stanhope expect to derive a profit from these inventions, and over a long period they proved costly to him. That cost, however, may serve as evidence of his genuine commitment to scientific and technical advance, and of his restless and widely dispersed energy. Among his other schemes was a plan for a canal in Devon to serve his estate in that county and (1801) a new method for burning lime. 
In the later part of his life Stanhope's family relationships were unhappy. Lord Holland's observation that he was 'a bad husband, an unkind, perhaps an unjust, father' (Newman, 186), though exaggerated, was not wholly inaccurate. His erratic conduct and obsessional interests undoubtedly made him difficult to live with. In 1800 his daughter Hester left Chevening to stay with Lady Chatham at Burton Pynsent; shortly afterwards she found refuge with her uncle, William Pitt, and served as his hostess at Downing Street and at Walmer Castle, Pitt's seat as lord warden of the Cinque Ports. She encouraged Stanhope's sons, her half-brothers, to follow her example in departing from the family home. There were unseemly financial wrangles, some of which found their way into court and into print, between Stanhope and his eldest son, Philip Henry, Lord Mahon. The marriage of his daughter Lucy, at sixteen, to the surgeon Thomas Taylor did not receive her father's approval and caused some public amusement. Stanhope disinherited all his children. In his will, dated 22 November 1805, the only member of his family who was even mentioned was his mother, who, in the event, predeceased him. His relations with his second wife deteriorated after the arrival at Chevening of Mrs Walburgh Lackner (died 1838) as music teacher; she became his mistress and gave up her musical profession on being promised a bequest of $5000 on his death. Stanhope and his wife drew up a deed of separation in 1806. When he died of dropsy at Chevening on 15 December 1816 it was with a distinct sense of personal even more than political isolation. He was buried at Chevening on Christmas eve. 
Stanhope was a man of considerable intellectual ability. Many of his ideas, particularly in the scientific and industrial spheres, were successfully taken up by others. In politics he belonged to a group of aristocratic radicals who, for all their energy and sincerity, brought their cause into disrepute and found it difficult to reconcile their principles with their privileges. In the 1780s Wraxall wrote of him 'His person was tall and thin, his countenance expressive of ardour and impetuosity, as were all his movements. Over his whole figure, and even his dress, an air of puritanism reminded the beholder of the sectaries under Cromwell, rather than a young man of quality in an age of refinement and elegance. ('Historical and Posthumous Memoirs', 3.401-2)' Yet he also possessed charm, and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' wrote on his death 'Though we did not coincide with the political principles of this distinguished Nobleman, we admired his talents, and hesitate not to admit the eulogy of a partial friend' ('GM', 86/2, 1816, 563). His achievements fell far short of his efforts, but he had the consolation of knowing that he had made a considerable impression among his contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 26242


Stanhope, Charles, third earl of Harrington (1753-1829), army officer, was born on 20 March 1753, the elder son of William Stanhope, second earl of Harrington (1719-1779) ['see under 'Stanhope, William (1683?-1756)], only son and namesake of the first earl of Harrington, and Lady Caroline Fitzroy (1722-1784), daughter of the second duke of Grafton. Lord Petersham, as he was styled after the first earl's death, in 1756, was educated at Eton College from 1767 to 1769. Like his father and grandfather, he entered the army, becoming ensign in the Coldstream Guards in November 1769, and captain in the 29th foot in July 1773. In September 1774 he was briefly MP for Thetford, and from December 1776 he sat for Westminster, although he can rarely have been able to attend the Commons. Having embarked for North America in February 1776, he successfully landed his regiment's grenadier company, of which he had received the command in exchange for a light company, under fire at Quebec; and, serving under Major-General Guy Carleton, he saw action against the American colonists at Trois Rivieres on 8 June 1776. As aide-de-camp to Lieutenant-General John Burgoyne, the commander of the British forces in the north, he fought in the disastrous Hudson valley campaign of 1777. Praised by Burgoyne for his excellent qualities and services, he was sent by him to England with dispatches announcing the surrender at Saratoga. There he obtained a captaincy in the 3rd foot guards and was allowed to purchase a higher commission. He defended his commanding officer on giving evidence to a Commons select committee of inquiry, on 1 June 1779, when, according to Horace Walpole, he 'did himself and Burgoyne honour' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 39.325). The following year, as lieutenant-colonel of the 85th foot, which he had raised at his own expense, he took part in the consolidation of the defences of Jamaica against a possible French invasion. 
Petersham succeeded his libertine father as third earl of Harrington on 1 April 1779, and inherited the family estates at Elvaston Castle, Derbyshire, and the London residence of Harrington House, Craig's Court, Charing Cross. On 22 May that year he married Jane (1755-1824), daughter of Sir John Fleming, first baronet, of Brompton Park, Middlesex, and Jane Coleman. She was lady of the bedchamber to Queen Charlotte and a society hostess, and together they had eight sons and three daughters. Harrington took his seat in the House of Lords on 14 April 1779, but was inactive in politics, usually supporting the ministry of the day, as was expected of him as a courtier. Having returned in ill health from Jamaica, where his regiment was decimated by disease, Harrington was patronized by George III, who, on 26 November 1782, appointed him a colonel in the army and one of his aides-de-camp. Named colonel of the 65th foot in March 1783, he commanded the garrison at Dublin until 1785, when he was allowed to return home. In January 1788 he became colonel of his former infantry regiment, the 29th, and took up residence at Windsor. In March that year he declined a diplomatic posting in Russia because he would not have obtained the 'rank' of ambassador (BL, Add. MS 28063, fols. 122, 146). In December 1792 he received two appointments that he would hold for the rest of his life: the colonelcy of the first Life Guards; and the position of gold-stick-in-waiting. Prevented by this household employment from serving with the duke of York in Flanders, he was, however, promoted major-general in October 1793, and lieutenant-general in January 1798, and on 24 October 1798 he was sworn of the privy council. He was made second-in-command of the London staff in July 1803, and in October that year became a general. He undertook diplomatic missions to Berlin and Vienna in late 1805, and to Berlin again in early 1806. He was commander-in-chief in Ireland from October 1805 until his retirement in January 1812, and was sworn of the Irish privy council in August 1806. 
Harrington saw out his days as governor of Windsor Castle, to which he was appointed in March 1812, and was awarded the grand cross of the Hanoverian order in 1816. A tory of unexceptionable character, Harrington, who received royal favour from George III and his successor, was a highly respected professional soldier. His adoption with the 65th foot of the system of tactics first devised by David Dundas, the Irish quartermaster-general, proved a great success and by the early 1790s it had been made general practice in the services. He made another significant contribution to the development of the forces by his introduction of a sword that, meeting with the approval of the duke of York, became the standard army sword in the early nineteenth century. He died at Brighton on 15 September 1829, and was buried at Elvaston on 27 September. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Charles Stanhope, fourth earl of Harrington, who was himself succeeded by Stanhope's third son, Leicester Stanhope, fifth earl of Harrington. 


@@@@@


doc= 26243


Stanhope, Charles, fourth earl of Harrington (1780-1851), dandy, was born at Harrington House, Craig's Court, Charing Cross, London, on 8 April 1780, the eldest of the seven sons and three daughters of Charles Stanhope, third earl of Harrington (1753-1829), army officer, and his wife, the heiress Jane Fleming (1755-1824). Two of his sisters married the dukes of Bedford and Leinster. One of the duchess of Bedford's nephews wrote that had the third earl of Harrington 'staid at home, tended his farms and educated his sons and daughters the former might not have been the disreputable scamps they are, and the ignorance and low minds of the latter would have been corrected by education' (Blakiston, 491). Viscount Petersham, as he was styled until 1829, was educated at Eton College before joining the Coldstream Guards in 1795. He was promoted captain in the prince of Wales's light dragoons (1799), major, the Queen's rangers (1803), lieutenant-colonel, 3rd West India regiment (1807), and was placed on half pay in 1812, becoming colonel in the army in 1814. 
Petersham was a close companion of the prince regent, later George IV. He was a lord of the bedchamber to the incapacitated George III between 1812 and 1820, and to George IV from 1820 to 1829. He was a great dandy, affecting the immaculate dress, exaggerated manners, and eccentricities of behaviour of his kind, and featured frequently in contemporary prints. He wore distinctive hats, designed the overcoat that became known as the petersham, was a connoisseur of both tea and snuff, and pursued women with more drama than discretion. Princess Lieven recounted his wooing of a Mrs Brown, by purchasing 'a brown carriage, brown livery, brown hat, brown spurs, brown harness' and brown court dress, embroidered with dead leaves; when Mr Brown discovered the affair, he thrashed Petersham in the street (Quennell, 105-6). Petersham succeeded as fourth earl of Harrington in 1829. A devotee of the stage, on 7 April 1831 he married the actress Maria Foote (1797-1867), who had been his mistress for some time; she was the daughter of the theatre manager Samuel T. Foote. Their son was born the following December, but died in 1836; their daughter, Jane, was to marry the third Marquess Conyngham. The new Lady Harrington was too notorious to appear in society, and they lived in seclusion at Elvaston Castle in Derbyshire, where Harrington devoted himself to landscape gardening and gothicizing the castle. He appeared in the House of Lords occasionally and bestirred himself to oppose the repeal of the corn laws in 1842. Harrington died in Brighton on 3 March 1851 and was succeeded by his brother, Leicester Stanhope. 


@@@@@


doc= 26244


Stanhope, Sir Edward (c.1546-1608), civil lawyer, was the fourth son of Sir Michael Stanhope (b. before 1508, d. 1552), courtier and administrator, and Anne ('c'.1515-1588), daughter of Nicholas Rawson of Aveley, Essex. He was born in Kingston upon Hull, Yorkshire, of which his father was lieutenant and governor, about 1546. Sir Michael Stanhope was executed as an accomplice of his brother-in-law, the duke of Somerset, in 1552. Edward Stanhope's brother Sir John Stanhope (c.1540-1621) became first Baron Stanhope, while another brother, also named Edward ('c'.1543-1603), was treasurer of Gray's Inn, member of the council of the north, and MP for Nottinghamshire in 1571 and 1572 and for Yorkshire in 1601. His other brothers, Sir Michael ('c'.1549- 'c'.1621) and Sir Thomas Stanhope ('c'.1540-1596), were also notable. The former was a prominent courtier and landowner, and the latter was an important figure in midland politics, being JP for Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire, sheriff for both counties on a number of occasions, and deputy lieutenant of Nottinghamshire. Both men were MPs. Edward Stanhope the younger entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1560, graduated BA in 1563, was a minor fellow in 1564, and graduated MA in 1566. In 1569 he was elected a major fellow. Robert Beaumont and John Whitgift were masters of the college during these years. 
An appointment as prebendary of Botevant, Yorkshire, in 1572 secured through the influence of his kinsman William Cecil, first Baron Burghley, lord treasurer, yielded $20 per annum and enabled Stanhope to study civil law. He received the degree of LLD in 1575 and was admitted as an advocate of the arches that same year. He became a member of Doctors' Commons on 15 January 1576, and in 1580 he leased a set of chambers at that society's house on Knightrider Street. He served as master in chancery from 1577 to 1608, chancellor of London diocese from 1578 to 1608, and vicar-general to Richard Bancroft, archbishop of Canterbury, from 1605 to 1608, a position he held jointly with Sir Thomas Crompton. In this latter capacity he was responsible for confirming the election of bishops, a task he often shared with his fellow civilians. Burghley obtained for him the additional post of commissioner in the fines office in 1589. He also served occasionally as a commissioner for admiralty criminal causes, commissioner for piracy, and member of the court of delegates. In 1589 he was presented to the rectory of Terrington in Norfolk and two years later he was appointed canon and chancellor of St Paul's Cathedral, at which time he resigned his prebend. 
Stanhope's service as an ecclesiastical judge and as a member of the high commission from 1584 until 1608 gained him the reputation as an implacable opponent of puritans. The Marprelate tracts in 1588 and 1589 referred to him as Tarquinius Superbus and predicted that 'a praemunire will take you by the back, one day, for oppressing and tyrannizing over her Majesty's subjects as you do' (Pierce, 32, 51). He was also involved in the prosecution of Catholics, being named to a special commission 'touching Jesuits and other disguised persons' in 1593 (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 3.437). In 1604 he and three other civilians were appointed to a committee to examine the books printed in the realm without authority. Stanhope also became involved in questions regarding the procedure and competence of ecclesiastical courts. In November 1594 John Whitgift, archbishop of Canterbury, commissioned him to survey the ecclesiastical courts in London, and in 1604 Bancroft appointed him, together with Sir Thomas Ridley and John Cowell, to revise the canons concerning procedure in the ecclesiastical courts. 
In the parliaments of 1584 and 1586 Stanhope was elected MP for Marlborough, Wiltshire, through the patronage of his cousin Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford. Hertford concentrated his leading legal clients, including Stanhope, in the House of Commons. Stanhope was included on the parliamentary committee regarding the fate of Mary, queen of Scots, in 1586. In 1593-4 he was also appointed to the commission of oyer and terminer to try Roderigo Lopez, Elizabeth I's physician, and others for treason, and in 1603 he was included on a commission to try Sir Walter Ralegh for the same crime. Stanhope twice avoided charges of political disloyalty himself. His testimony regarding the legitimacy of Hertford's younger son Thomas Seymour in 1592, who was born in the Tower after his parents' marriage had been declared invalid, came to the attention of the queen in 1595, but Whitgift protected Stanhope from any serious consequences. Final recognition of his wealth and status came under James I, when he was created KB on 25 July 1603. 
Known as 'rich doctor Stanhope', Sir Edward combined the profits of many offices to produce exceptional wealth, especially for a civilian ('Journal of Sir Roger Wilbraham', 100). He amassed an estate estimated at $40,000, including five manors in Yorkshire, one in Lincolnshire, and another in Warwickshire. In 1600 the crown granted him and his brother Michael the manor of Hucknall Torkhard in Nottinghamshire. Edward Stanhope lent money to the earl of Arundel and Sir William Sandys and was known for being 'miserly in his expenditure' (ibid., 99). He died in London on 16 March 1608 and was buried in St Paul's. He bequeathed $700 and his books on divinity, canon law, civil law, common law, and statute law to Trinity College, and made other generous bequests. As he never married, the remainder of Stanhope's substantial estate was divided up among his family. 


@@@@@


doc= 26245


Stanhope, Edward (1840-1893), politician, the second son of Philip Henry Stanhope, fifth Earl Stanhope (1805-1875), the historian, and his wife, Emily Harriet (died 1873), second daughter of Sir Edward Kerrison, bt, was born at his father's house in Grosvenor Place, London, on 24 September 1840. After some tuition at a private school in Brighton, he entered Harrow School, under the headmastership of Dr Vaughan, in September 1852. At Harrow he won the Neeld medal for mathematics in 1859. Though of slight physique, he more than held his own in athletic sports and games. Stanhope was a member of the celebrated cricket eleven of 1859, when Harrow defeated Eton College by an innings. He was a first-rate rugby football player, shot extremely well, and was fond of fishing. Stanhope left Harrow at midsummer 1859, and went up to Christ Church, Oxford, in the following October. Pursuing his natural bent towards mathematics, he obtained a first class in mathematical moderations in Michaelmas term 1861. Being destined for the bar, he went in for a pass in classics in Easter term 1862, and the examiners paid him the compliment of an 'honorary fourth'. Despite his fourth class the following November he was elected to a fellowship at All Souls. With his brother he visited the United States, both North and South, during the civil war. He then began his legal studies in London, and was called to the bar at the Inner Temple on 1 May 1865. He joined the home circuit, but his practice was mainly at the parliamentary bar, where his clear elocution and power of lucid statement soon established his reputation. In 1868 he was appointed an assistant to the royal commission on agricultural employment, with the remit of especially inquiring into the employment of children, young persons, and women in agriculture. His report of 1869 exposed the conditions of cottage life in Dorset and provoked protests from the landed interest. 
On 18 May 1870 Stanhope married Lucy Constance, youngest daughter of the Revd Thomas Egerton and niece of the first Baron Egerton of Tatton; they had no children. 
Stanhope's ability impressed his father's first cousin, James Banks Stanhope (1821-1904), a bachelor, who made him his heir, installed him in his house, Revesby Abbey, near Boston, and promoted his political career, supporting him for the normally safe tory seat of Mid-Lincolnshire at the general election in 1874, for which he was returned unopposed. He held the seat, which became the Horncastle division in 1885, until his death, unopposed except in 1886 and 1892. Stanhope did not have to be an assiduous MP and 'might as well have been a borough member, for all that he seemed to care about agricultural politics' (Olney, 238). Even so, he was quickly recognized as a coming man in the still understaffed tory party. He seconded the queen's speech address in 1875 with a notable oration, likened by Lord Randolph Churchill to a 'recitation from Gibbon'; he was, Derby thought, 'able, popular, and deserves promotion' ('Diaries', 248). On 18 November 1875 he was made parliamentary secretary to the Board of Trade, an office of immediate importance because of Samuel Plimsoll's crusade against the scandalous conditions in the merchant navy. Stanhope was placed in charge of the 'Merchant Shipping Bill' of 1876 (replacing the temporary act of 1875), made a strong speech on the second reading (17 February 1876), and oversaw the act's administration. 
On 6 April 1878 Stanhope was promoted to under-secretary of the India Office, serving under Gathorne Hardy at a time of great and unusual public interest in India. Hardy came to rely on Stanhope to defend the government in the Commons. He became an authority on Indian finance and twice presented the Indian budget, in 1878 and 1879, on the second occasion meeting the deficit in part by a significant expansion of Indian employment in the Indian Civil Service. On 9 December 1878 he defended the government in the important censure debate on the Afghan fiasco. Out of office in 1880, Stanhope was soon drawn into the internecine warfare within the tory party. He supported Northcote against the 'Fourth Party' and began a long and rather acrimonious, nagging, tussle with Churchill. He was also a member of the central committee, and was given special responsibility for improving tory organization in the counties. 
In Lord Salisbury's minority government of 1885-6 Stanhope was initially vice-president of the committee of education with, unusually, a seat in the cabinet, and then, from 19 August, president of the Board of Trade. In the Salisbury government formed in August 1886, he was colonial secretary. In a brief space of time Stanhope had reached high office and was an important member of the government with the prospect of major office in the near future (he might have been foreign secretary in 1886, but for the opposition of Churchill). He at once made his mark, summoning the first colonial conference, which met in April 1887. He was also active in the Imperial Federation League (with his cousin Lord Rosebery), and became its president in September 1892. His time at the Colonial Office was brief, however, for in the reshuffle consequent on Lord Randolph Churchill's resignation in December 1886, Stanhope became, in January 1887, war secretary -- at a moment of crisis, for some anticipated war with France. 
Though Stanhope was largely ignorant of military affairs and though these were an area of considerable potential danger to the government, Salisbury's style of leadership left him largely on his own at the War Office. This was especially daunting given the omnipresence of the energetically reactionary duke of Cambridge, the commander-in-chief, and the supposed reformer, Sir Garnet Wolseley, the adjutant-general. Stanhope in time found both difficult and his differences with each spilled out into criticism of him by the military members in the Commons in a series of rows, with information leaked by both Cambridge and Wolseley. St John Brodrick later observed of Stanhope's attempts to reform the War Office, 'under the circumstances it is a matter of wonder that Stanhope should have accomplished what he did' (Beckett, 298). The 'Imperial Defence Act' of 1888 greatly improved coaling stations and military ports. The removal of the surveyor-general of the ordnance improved the muddle left by Cardwell's ambivalent structure within the War Office, and the Army Service Corps and other changes of supply laid the basis for the future. But the changes led to parliamentary concern and the appointment of the Hartington royal commission, which in 1891 recommended reconstruction of the War Office on the retirement of the commander-in-chief. Stanhope, however, did not seriously try to obtain Cambridge's retirement, which was finally achieved by his Liberal successor, Campbell-Bannerman. The Stanhope memorandum of 8 December 1888 set out the army's priorities and provided 'more direction in the last third of the nineteenth century than at any period in British military history' (Beckett, 299). Stanhope reformed the general officers' list and the system of promotion to general. He had the army camps at Aldershot, Shorncliffe, Strensall, and the Curragh rebuilt, and port garrisons were much improved. The Stanhope lines at Aldershot testified to this achievement for much of the next century, as did the Stanhope storehouses, part of the defences of London. He persuaded the major railway companies to participate in a scheme to employ reserve and discharged soldiers. He established the Wantage committee in April 1891 on imperial military arrangements, though he has been criticized for opposing its radical recommendations. His period at the War Office was not popular with his party, which, despite his caution over the Wantage report, thought him unduly iconoclastic and disliked many of the details of his reforms (such as the passing over for promotion of some generals in the reform of the list and his refusal to reopen the question of purchase of commissions). Stanhope's reforming zeal brought overstrain, exhaustion, and severe gout; he only managed to attend parliamentary discussions of the estimates in 1891 by dosing himself with colchium and he had to spend much of the spring of 1892 at the baths at Aix-les-Bains (Beckett, 301). Stanhope went out of office with the Salisbury government in July 1892 a tired and sick man. The War Office and his health had ended Stanhope's reputation as a focus of leadership within the tory party and an antithesis to the Cecil faction. Despite his poor health, in the 1892 parliament he was elected chairman of the low-church group, speaking as such on establishmentarian issues in the 'Parish Councils Bill' of 1893, and he was chairman of Lincolnshire county council, playing a leading part in the establishment of Woodhall spa. 
Stanhope was a short man, with one shoulder markedly higher than the other. He was reserved, but an effective Commons debater. He enjoyed the estate at Revesby, making it available to his nephews and nieces (having no children of his own), and was a reforming farmer. He made a large collection of prints and caricatures of Pitt the younger which he thought would be his sole claim to posthumous fame. He was, from 1882, like his father a trustee of the National Portrait Gallery. In December 1893 he went to Chevening, his brother's house near Sevenoaks in Kent, to rest. He there suffered a very severe attack of gout and, after a partial rally, died from a heart attack on 21 December 1893. He was buried at Revesby Abbey. His wife survived him, dying on 24 October 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 26246


Stanhope, George (1660-1728), dean of Canterbury, was born on 5 March 1660 in Hartshorne, Derbyshire, the thirteenth son of Thomas Stanhope (died 1675), rector of Hartshorne, vicar of St Margaret's, Leicester, and chaplain to the earls of Chesterfield and Clare. His mother's maiden name was Allestry (or Allestree), and she was also from Derbyshire. Stanhope was educated at Uppingham School until 1667, when he entered Eton College. He was admitted into King's College, Cambridge, in 1677, became a fellow in 1680 and gained his BA in 1682 and his MA in 1685. He was vicar of Quy (Quoi), Cambridgeshire, in 1687-8, vice-proctor in 1688, and rector of Tewin, Hertfordshire (1689-1702). In 1689 he was given the vicarage of Lewisham in Kent by the earl of Dartmouth, having been his chaplain and tutor to the earl's son, and he continued to hold this post until his death. Stanhope was made chaplain to William and Mary in 1694 and continued in that post under Queen Anne and George I. He was incorporated at Oxford in 1696 and gained his DD in 1697. He became a Boyle lecturer in 1701, and continued to hold the position in 1702. Encouraged by Archbishop Thomas Tenison, he subsequently published his Boyle sermons, dedicating them to the primate. 
In 1702 Stanhope was made vicar of St Nicholas, Deptford, in Kent and he was installed as dean of Canterbury on 23 March 1704. He was also the Tuesday lecturer at the church of St Lawrence Jewry until 1708, when he resigned. It was said that Queen Anne was considering promoting Stanhope or Robert Moss to the bishopric of Ely, but that she was prevented from giving either cleric the see by her death in 1714 (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 4.153). Stanhope married Olivia Cotton of Beresford, Stafford, and they had one son and five daughters. Olivia died on 1 June 1707. About 1709 Stanhope married Ann Parker, the daughter of Captain Alexander Parker and Prudence Wager. Thomas Hearne considered this marriage a scandal, as Stanhope's new wife was relatively young. Ann Stanhope outlived her husband, dying in 1730, aged fifty-four. 
Stanhope had strong links with the high church. He and Dr Robert Moss both refused to preach a thanksgiving sermon before the lord mayor and aldermen on 5 December 1709, as a protest against the treatment the high-churchman Dr Henry Sacheverell had recently received for the inflammatory sermon he had delivered on 5 November 1709. Stanhope was also a member of the tory October Club, through which he was associated not only with Dr Sacheverell but also with the high-churchmen Joseph Trapp and Francis Atterbury. However, Stanhope was also friendly with low-churchmen, and was not as extreme as these high-flying divines. For example, in October 1705 Stanhope was nominated as prolocutor of the lower house of convocation by the moderate clergy, though on this occasion he was not chosen. Also when convocation met in February 1714, Francis Atterbury wanted the high-churchman Thomas Sprat to be made prolocutor rather than the more moderate and Hanoverian Stanhope. This time Stanhope was given the position. Thomas Hearne even called Stanhope a member of the low-church party, although this is unlikely. 
Stanhope held the position of prolocutor twice more, and was involved in this capacity in the attempted censure of Bishop Benjamin Hoadly in 1717 for the principles he had expressed in his 'Preservative' (1716) and his infamous sermon 'The Nature of the Kingdom or Church of Christ' (1717). Stanhope, who objected to Hoadly's views, used his position as prolocutor to prevent Edward Tenison, one of Hoadly's supporters, from defending Hoadly by reading the schedule for prorogation in the middle of Tenison's speech. Tenison responded by publishing his full speech and criticizing Stanhope's actions in two pamphlets (1718). Stanhope replied to these criticisms, further denounced Hoadly's views, and defended the actions of the lower house in two pamphlets entitled 'A Letter from the Prolocutor to the Reverend Dr Edward Tenison' (1718) and 'The Report Vindicated from Misreports' (1718). It was for his role in the attack upon Hoadly that Stanhope was removed from the list of royal chaplains. 
In 1718 Stanhope engaged in a correspondence with Francis Atterbury over a recent decrease in the number of baptisms, and these letters were published in 1758. Stanhope published the 'Paraphrase and Comment upon the Epistles and Gospels' (vols. 1 and 2, 1705; vol. 3, 1706; vol. 4, 1708). This book was originally written for the use of Prince George; however, he died in 1700 before its publication. Stanhope translated many works, and was believed to have been the translator of 'The Wisdom of Charron' (1697) and 'The Maxims of Rochefoucault' (1706) though they both appeared anonymously. The publication of these two books prompted Dr Thomas Warton to assert that 'it appears a little strange that so orthodox a Divine as Stanhope should translate two books that are supposed to favour libertinism and scepticism' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 4.155). Stanhope also published numerous sermons throughout his life, as well as his Boyle lectures. He was considered an excellent preacher, who delivered sermons on a number of public occasions and in front of the monarch. John Evelyn, who heard him preach a sermon in 1695 at Whitehall, wrote in his diary that 'This Mr Stanhop[e], is certainly one of the most accomplish[ed] preachers that in my life I ever heard, both for Matter, Eloquence, Action, Voice, Authority: & one of an excellent Conversation as I am told' (Evelyn, 5.223). 
George Stanhope died on 18 March 1728 at Bath, and was buried in the chancel of the church at Lewisham. A memorial was placed within the rails of the communion table of Lewisham church, and his widow erected a second memorial in the old church at Lewisham. In his will he left $250 to Canterbury School to establish an exhibition for a scholar chosen by the dean and chapter of $10 per annum to be held at King's College, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 26247


Stanhope, Lady Hester Lucy (1776-1839), traveller, was born on 12 March 1776 at Chevening, Kent, the eldest daughter of Charles Stanhope, Viscount Mahon (afterwards third Earl Stanhope) (1753-1816), and his first wife, Lady Hester Pitt (1755-1780), who was a daughter of the first earl of Chatham and the favourite sister of William Pitt the younger. When the young Hester was four years old her mother died, and shortly afterwards her father remarried. Hester was a strong-willed child, and she grew up to become a proud, independent, and imperious woman. Having received no offers of marriage she remained at Chevening until 1800, when her grandmother offered her a home. In 1803 she gratefully accepted her uncle William Pitt's invitation to stay with him at Walmer Castle, where he lived while out of office, and she moved with him to London when he again became prime minister. This was the happiest period of her life, when she was at the very centre of things. She was devoted to Pitt and helped him in every way possible, particularly by acting as his hostess and lady of the house. She was attractive and high-spirited, and she cheered Pitt in his last few years, but her high-handed manner and sharp tongue aroused resentment in some of Pitt's colleagues and guests. 
This brief brilliant period ended with Pitt's death in 1806. As Pitt had wished, parliament voted Lady Hester a pension, but only of $1200 a year. For the next few years she led an aimless and unhappy life; she was now a person of little importance and she found this intolerable. She became irritable and quarrelled with friends and relations. In 1809 she suffered a double tragedy when both General Sir John Moore (to whom she perhaps considered herself engaged) and her half-brother Charles were killed at the battle of Corunna. Feeling that she must get away from England she took ship first to Gibraltar and then to Malta, where in May 1810 she met Michael Bruce ('b'. 1787), the son of a wealthy businessman, who was travelling for pleasure. A passionate love affair followed, and they started living together. 
After a couple of months in Malta, a year in and about Constantinople, and a shipwreck off Rhodes, Hester and Michael reached Cairo, where Mehmet Ali Pasha received them with honours and pageantry. A tour in the Holy Land and Lebanon followed. No one really knew quite who Lady Hester was (was she perhaps the daughter of the king of England?) but everyone knew that she was a great personage and must be treated as such. She travelled in style, made lavish gifts to pashas and others in authority, and arrogated to herself the right to do very much as she pleased. She was warned that when she reached 'fanatical' Damascus she must wear a veil and conform to convention in other ways, but this she refused to do. Unveiled, tall, and impressive in her Turkish male clothes she entered the city on horseback and made a great sensation. She queened it in Damascus for three months while she began to plan her next and most adventurous journey, to Palmyra. She was not, in fact, much interested in the ruins of the ancient city, but the prospect of being the first European woman ever to reach it no doubt excited her, and she took great pride and pleasure in achieving the journey in the (well-paid) company of Bedouin and their sheikhs rather than that of officials and soldiers. On 17 March 1813 she rode triumphantly into Palmyra at the head of a cavalcade of Bedouin. They and the inhabitants of the village put on a show for her and, as she liked to believe, she was crowned Queen of the Desert under the triumphal arch. This was one of the great moments of her life, described in enthusiastic letters and never forgotten. 
Hester now decided that the time had come for Michael to return to England as his father wished; she would stay in Syria. Michael duly left on 7 October 1813 to travel overland to Constantinople and thence to Europe. They never met again. 
Before leaving England in 1810 Hester had engaged a young doctor, Charles Meryon, as her physician. He had accompanied her and Michael in their travels and it was well that he was still with her, for soon after Michael left she fell ill and almost died. It was thought probable that she had caught the plague which was then rife in the country. Early in 1814 she was well enough to be moved and was taken to the place which was to be her home for some years, the former convent of Mar Elias on the first slopes of the mountains behind Sidon. 
In 1815 Lady Hester persuaded the Ottoman authorities to join her in a fruitless search for buried treasure and in 1816 to mount a pitiless punitive expedition against a group of villages to avenge the death of a friend of hers who had been murdered somewhere in that area. Many of the expenses of these activities fell to her, and she found herself seriously short of money. The costs of her extravagant progress through the Near East had largely been met by the flow of funds from Michael Bruce's father, but this had now ceased and she was left with little but her pension. She had to borrow, and gradually sank deeper into debt. She worried about her debts and yet could not refrain from spending money, although now she spent it in different, less ostentatious, ways. After living some years at Mar Elias she moved to Dar Jun, a more remote spot higher in the hills, where she repaired an old building, added others, laid out gardens, and surrounded the whole with a wall. Here she lived with an unruly household of some thirty servants and slaves for the rest of her life. She no longer travelled, indeed seldom left the house, and she spent much of her time musing about the occult sciences, with which she gradually became obsessed. 
Lady Hester also took an active interest in the events going on around her. During successive episodes of civil strife in Lebanon in the 1820s and 1830s, and particularly during the siege of Acre by Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt in 1831-2, she gave sanctuary to numerous refugees, among them deserters and others on whom Ibrahim and Amir Bashir of Lebanon wanted to lay hands. Despite threats and persecution she refused to give them up, put guards on her gates, and gloried in defying the 'bloody tyrant' Bashir and his master Ibrahim. 
Lady Hester's health deteriorated as she grew older. She suffered not only from serious physical ailments but also from nervous instability; bouts of temper and near hysteria were succeeded by exhaustion and depression. She broke off almost all contact with her family and yet blamed them for neglecting her. Whereas in the past she had written innumerable letters -- often several thousand words in length -- to friends and relations she now wrote very few. She brooded over the past, compared her present 'misery' to her great days with Pitt, and frequently and vehemently declared that she would never return to England, for which she had conceived a violent aversion. In her later years she lived in near squalor in one or two rooms and never went beyond the outer wall. Her chief solace was talking for hours on end, almost always at night, to Meryon or to the occasional visitor from Europe. Even when she was ill and tired she could summon up enough strength and liveliness of manner to entertain the few visitors she thought worth receiving. Those so favoured were often obliged to sit with her until the small hours, listening to her reminiscences and to speculations and pronouncements about religion, astrology, her own mystic powers, and the prophecies in which she believed or half-believed. 
Meanwhile Lady Hester's debts continued to mount, and one of her chief creditors asked Mehmet Ali Pasha to help him recover what was owed. Mehmet Ali took the matter up with the British consul-general, who referred it to London. Eventually the foreign secretary, Lord Palmerston, decided that if no other solution could be found Lady Hester's pension must be stopped for payment of the debt. She was informed of this by a letter dated 10 January 1838. She reacted with a last great burst of letter writing -- indignant and defiant letters went to all concerned or who might be concerned, including Queen Victoria. In August, although she was weak and ill, she sent Meryon home to arrange for publication of these letters in newspapers, which he did, to no good effect. She dismissed most of her servants, all but closed up the gate in her wall, and took to her bed. She died on 23 June 1839 at Dar Jun, and was buried there, probably the next day. 


@@@@@


doc= 26248


Stanhope, James, first Earl Stanhope (1673-1721), army officer, diplomat, and politician, was born in Paris, the eldest of the seven children of the Hon. Alexander Stanhope (1638-1707), himself the youngest son of Philip Stanhope, first earl of Chesterfield, and his wife, Katherine (died 1718), the daughter of Arnold Burghill, of Thinghall Parva, Herefordshire. During his education at Eton College and at Trinity College, Oxford, where he matriculated in May 1688, he acquired a bookish trait which never left him, and later in life, both as an army officer and politician-diplomat, his familiarity with classical and modern authorities invariably impressed those who encountered him. 
Stanhope was not allowed to languish in academe, however. In 1690 he was taken to Madrid by his father, who had been posted there as envoy, and in 1691 he was sent to Italy to begin military schooling as a volunteer aide-de-camp to his father's friend the duke of Schomberg, commander of the allied army in Savoy. The duke ensured that Stanhope received thorough training as an officer, putting him though all the soldierly grades before appointing him ensign in 1692, and as a captain in 1693 he saw action at the battle of Marsaglia. He returned to London in 1694, was commissioned captain in a new regiment of foot, and in August joined William III's army in Flanders. His winning charm and precocity made him popular with members of the high command, and he was a regular dining companion of the king himself. Such vital patronage, his bravery, and a wound at Namur in 1695 secured him a prestigious guards captaincy and the army rank of lieutenant-colonel, thus virtually guaranteeing his future prospects of promotion. In the summer of 1697 the earl of Portland provided him with his first taste of diplomacy when he included the young colonel on his staff at the opening of peace negotiations outside Brussels. The following year the earl appointed him second secretary in his glittering entourage as ambassador at Paris, but within only a few months this promising career possibility was in tatters owing to a 'misunderstanding' with Portland, which forced his return to England. Besides his prodigious hard drinking, he got into frequent gambling scrapes, and on at least one occasion his fiery temper resulted in a duel in which both he and his opponent were wounded. Many, however, were prepared to forgive his as yet untamed excesses, admiring his intellectual flair, his wit, his ambition, and a promise of future distinction. 
During the next few years of peace Stanhope focused his attention on politics. In 1701 he published a translation of Demosthenes' third 'Philippic', which, though a thinly veiled attack on Louis XIV, was not well taken by the ministry. He established valuable friendships among the leading whig politicians and grandees, and was a founder member of the Kit-Cat Club, one of whom, the duke of Somerset, became his chief political patron. In February 1702 he was made full colonel of a foot regiment, and with government assistance entered parliament at a by-election early in March for Newport, Isle of Wight. He delivered his maiden speech on 19 March in favour of the proposed union with Scotland. With the renewal of war Stanhope's aspirations were directed once more on procuring an army command, though only as a route to the diplomatic career he so much coveted. Hopes of an envoyship at Stockholm came to nothing. Instead, he requested and obtained a place as Spanish secretary on the duke of Ormond's staff in the abortive expedition to capture Cadiz in August, and in October at the storming of Vigo Bay was commended by the duke for his gallantry. He spent the winter in London attending the House of Commons, the duke of Somerset having in the summer general election provided him with a borough seat at Cockermouth, Cumberland, and in future years indulged his developing passion for whig politics whenever intermissions between campaigns allowed. A glaring allegation of homosexuality was made against him in an anti-whig verse published in January 1703, though on this particular question of Stanhope's personality no substantiating evidence has been produced. His military duties in 1703 took him and his regiment to Flanders, where he saw service under Marlborough, but in 1704 illness barred him from taking command in an assignment to garrison a key fortress on the Portuguese frontier with Spain. He nevertheless pressed hard for promotion to brigadier-general. In most respects he was loyal to the Marlborough-Godolphin ministry, though at times he caused ministerial irritation through his forceful whiggery and support for country measures against government corruption. 
Promotion to brigadier-general came in April 1705 and was back-dated to August the previous year. Stanhope intended that the 1705 campaign would be his last, hoping thereafter to obtain a government post. In May he returned to Spain on the staff of the earl of Peterborough. The allied campaign in the Peninsula to place the Archduke Charles on the Spanish throne had made little headway. A more ambitious plan was now conceived to overrun Spain by means of a combined land and sea operation to take Catalonia, and from there to march on Madrid, while a simultaneous offensive would approach from Portugal. In September, after the landing in Catalonia, Stanhope helped to capture the key fortress at Montjuich, outside Barcelona, and on the fall of that city negotiated terms of capitulation and assisted Peterborough in quelling the savage uprising that followed. Stanhope was sent back to London with the dispatches, and in the archduke's letter to the queen he was praised 'for his great zeal, vigilence and very wise conduct, of which he has given proofs on all occasions' (Williams, 45). He briefed the cabinet council on the state of affairs in Spain and threw himself once more into the parliamentary fray. During proceedings on the 'Regency Bill' early in 1706 he helped head a major whig revolt against the government, promoting the demand for a 'place clause' to curb government influence in the Commons, but in mid-February he was abruptly removed from the scene by orders to embark for Spain. The defeat of the clause prompted him to comment bitterly: 'I have learnt from Demosthenes that the... sure preservative which a free people can have against the encroachments of tyrants is an eternal mistrust and jealousy' (HoP, 'Commons, 1690-1715'). 
Stanhope arrived at Barcelona with reinforcements early in May and he was appointed envoy to the archduke jointly with Lord Peterborough. Most of his time was spent smoothing endless quarrels over military and strategic objectives between the archduke, Peterborough, and the other commanders, duties which sorely tested his patience. The allied armies managed to link in August at Guadalajara, to the north-east of Madrid, but subsequent campaigning was inconclusive and badly directed, 'a sure game thrown away', as Stanhope himself regretted (HoP, 'Commons, 1690-1715'). He quickly lost all sympathy with Peterborough's cautious holding operations, remarking in a dispatch to the secretary of state that 'her Majesty did not spend such vast sums, and send such number of forces to garrison towns in Catalonia and Valencia, but to make King Charles master of the Spanish monarchy' (Williams, 53). So futile did he regard his own presence in Spain that he made several appeals to be discharged, but in vain. Peterborough was relieved of his command at the end of February 1707 and replaced by Lord Galway, but the adoption of Stanhope's pleading for an offensive policy had repercussions little short of disastrous. Disagreements among the allied commanders resulted in part of the army being sent to Catalonia, while Galway, seriously in need of new recruits, marched south-eastwards to Murcia, only to be bloodily defeated by Berwick's army at Almanza in April. At home Peterborough laid the blame squarely on Stanhope, informing Marlborough that 'Mr Stanhope's politics have proved very fatal, having produced our misfortunes and prevented the greatest successes' (ibid., 55). The allies were subsequently pursued back into Catalonia by the French, losing almost all of their previous gains. 
Having been promoted major-general in January 1708, Stanhope returned briefly to England, and in parliament, besides justifying his own conduct, helped defend the ministry against censure over the recent failures in Spain. The ministry, pressurized by public dissatisfaction, stepped up its efforts to win the war in Spain and chose Stanhope, not only to resume his role as envoy to the archduke, but to be commander-in-chief of the entire British force in Spain. Stanhope, still only thirty-five, had neither the seniority nor, arguably, the experience for such responsibility, but, in selecting him, Marlborough was clearly taken by his extensive knowledge of conditions in Spain, his fresh ideas, and the enthusiasm 'to get out of Catalonia and enlarge our bounds'. 
In May, after several weeks in conference with Marlborough at The Hague, Stanhope rejoined the army in Catalonia. An important, basic priority for success in Spain was possession of a Mediterranean base for the British fleet and from which operations could be launched. Stanhope had long advocated Port Mahon on Minorca, with its excellent harbourage, as ideally situated, and in July he received an instruction from Marlborough to capture the island. On 14 September Stanhope began landing 2600 marines there, and on the 28th, with cannon in place, began his assault on the heavily garrisoned Fort St Philip, which overlooked the harbour. Stanhope himself led the attack on the right wing of the fort, and on the 30th took the garrison commander's surrender. English losses were fewer than fifty, though Stanhope's younger brother Philip was among the dead. Stanhope was determined that the island should be ceded to Britain, but his undiplomatic bullying of the archduke on this point procured only a provisional British occupation, and possession was not finally confirmed by a Spanish government until 1713. No further gains under Stanhope's command were made that year. In an unfortunate reversal of fortune, he and the archduke's commander Starhemberg were forced to abandon their attempt to recover Tortosa in December as the French began to sweep back into Valencia and Catalonia. 
Stanhope stayed in Spain throughout the winter of 1708-9 and was promoted lieutenant-general in January 1709. In the new year his progress was again seriously hampered by the numerical inferiority of his army against the Franco-Spanish forces. Since his army had already been hard-pressed and under-sized in Catalonia, the ministry diverted him to Gibraltar to launch an attack on Cadiz. He tried to impress on Godolphin in September that 'a lingering war in Spain will do not good, and cost three times as much as one vigorous effort the first year' (Newman, 39). The operation had eventually to be abandoned in October on account of the late arrival of reinforcements from England. After returning to England in January 1710 Stanhope immersed himself in the fervid party atmosphere stirred by the whig government's impeachment of the high-church preacher Henry Sacheverell and was appointed one of the chief managers of the trial. In Westminster Hall, on 28 February, Stanhope eruditely expounded the notion of 'compact' as the true foundation of any government, and demonstrated that Sacheverell's pulpit declamation on the tory doctrines of passive obedience and non-resistance was tantamount to a denial of the validity of the post-revolution constitution and government. Stanhope's daunting performance, assisted with few notes, was impressively arrayed with references to the classics, Fortescue, Hooker, Grotius, and Locke, and even cleverly deployed tory authorities to sustain his case. Tory propagandists singled him out for a particular savaging in the ensuing months, calling him a sodomite and a profaner of his religion. 
Having persuaded Marlborough and Prince Eugene of the need for an all-out strike against the Bourbons in Spain, Stanhope secured substantial reinforcements, and by midsummer the allied army outnumbered their now mainly Spanish opponents -- Stanhope's English battalions exceeding 4200 and Starhemberg's imperial forces almost 20,000. Stanhope once more had to overcome Starhemberg and the archduke's preferences for defensive action and to drive westwards from Catalonia into Aragon. On 27 July, while leading the vanguard, he successfully routed the Spanish cavalry at Almenara, himself killing the Spanish commander in hand-to-hand combat. He then pursued the Spanish in their retreat to Saragossa, where under the city walls on 20 August a pitched battle was fought between the two armies. The Bourbon army was beaten off with a loss of some 12,000, and it was acknowledged by the archduke and Starhemberg that 'the Queen's troops got the day by the resolution of Mr Stanhope' (Williams, 97). 
Stanhope then persuaded the council of war that they should continue their south-westwards advance and take Madrid, while Galway's army approached from Portugal. However, by the time the allies entered Madrid on 28 September the city had emptied of its Bourbon monarch, the government, and some 30,000 inhabitants, who had all retired north to Valladolid. The allied position rapidly deteriorated over the next month or so. Galway's army was still in Portugal, and the Spanish, under the new French commander Vendome, began manoeuvring vigorously towards the allied army, giving them little option but to begin retreating towards Aragon. The 4500-strong English division under Stanhope took the road to Brihuega and, having arrived there on the evening of 6 December, began preparing fresh supplies. Stanhope, however, had failed to take the essential precaution of scouting the surrounding countryside, and he also failed to realize that Vendome's force of 10,000 had taken a parallel route from Madrid and was now drawing near. Belatedly perceiving his endangered situation on the 8th, as the Spaniards took up position in the surrounding hills, he put the town into a state of defence. The attack began on the 9th, and by late afternoon several breaches in the town walls enabled the Spanish to pour through, though for several hours they were held back by the sheer intensity of British fire. By 7 p.m., however with 600 men dead and wounded, ammunition running low, the town overrun with 2000 enemy troops, and still no sign of Starhemberg marching from nearby Cifuentes, Stanhope had no option but to surrender. He did so, as he later reported in his official dispatch to the secretary of state, Lord Dartmouth, as: 'I felt myself in conscience obliged to try and save so many brave men who had done good service to the Queen and will, I hope, live to do so again... I cannot express to your Lordship how much this blow has broken my spirits which I shall never recover. (Williams, 112)' He secured capitulation terms as favourable as possible to his men, and for the next eighteen months was kept a prisoner of war in Spain. The humiliation at Brihuega was a huge personal disaster for Stanhope, whose great misfortune was to have been consigned to a theatre of war in which the British ministry showed only intermittent interest. 
Stanhope returned to England in August 1712. With peace in the offing and the tories secure in office there was now no prospect of resuming his military career. Inevitably, he gravitated towards full-time politics, where his energies were needed by the whig opposition. Parliament did not reassemble until April 1713, and in the meantime, on 24 February 1713, he married Lucy Pitt (1692-1723), a younger daughter of the wealthy Indian nabob Thomas 'Diamond' Pitt. Although in future years Stanhope found little time for domesticity, it was a happy union, and the couple had seven children, including two sets of twins. 
In the Commons, after several years' absence, Stanhope now occupied a leading position among whig politicians, and was prominent in the attack on the peace settlement and the new commercial concessions with France. He also published his forebodings about the dire effects on the English economy in a new journal, the 'British Merchant'. He briskly upstaged tory efforts to tar him with irregularity in his military expenses while in Spain. After losing his parliamentary seat at Cockermouth at the general election in August 1713, another was found for him at Wendover in March 1714. During the session he upheld the principles of toleration against the 'Schism Bill', the tory blueprint for eradicating religious dissent. Behind the scenes Stanhope was deeply involved in perfecting secret plans with other whig leaders to take control of London militarily should the tories renege on the Hanoverian succession and bring in the Stuarts. However, the peaceful aftermath of the queen's death on 1 August 1714 rendered these precautions unnecessary, and the construction of a ministry on whig lines proceeded quietly. Stanhope was already held in high regard by Elector George of Hanover, and even before the queen died he was promised high office. It was initially expected that he would return to the military sphere as commander-in-chief in Ireland until Horatio Walpole, who had served on Stanhope's diplomatic staff in Spain, proposed him to Lord Townshend early in September to be Townshend's fellow secretary of state, with responsibility for the southern department, and occupy the leading ministerial position in the Commons. He was appointed on 14 September 1714 and sworn of the privy council on the 24th. 
With no previous ministerial experience, Stanhope now found himself the incumbent of one of the highest offices of state. Almost from the start he was a vital new force in ministerial politics, and it was largely owing to his untiring energies that Britain acquired a prominent interventionist role in the maintenance of European peace following the treaty of Utrecht. At first he shared responsibility for foreign affairs and worked within the purview of his senior colleague Lord Townshend, who, with other leading whigs, harboured an ingrained distrust of the French and was anxious to re-establish the old London-Hague relationship. Stanhope's thinking on post-war Europe, however, was in many respects ahead of that of other British politicians. His feeling that little was to be obtained from the self-obsessed Dutch inclined him naturally towards his old acquaintance the emperor, the former Archduke Charles, while Britain's trading advantages, he felt, were best guaranteed through mutual accords with Spain. The ministerial priority of restoring the old rapport with the Dutch was to be obtained by Britain's mediation in their complex dispute with the imperialists over the question of the barrier fortresses protecting them from France, and in October Stanhope took the initiative of visiting The Hague and Vienna in an effort to bring the two parties to the negotiating table. Stanhope thereby set an early precedent for his dynamic style of diplomatic engagement. His impatience and desire to see quick results strengthened his willingness to travel to foreign courts and deal in person with foreign ministers and monarchs. Lacking the suave urbanity of the career diplomatist, he forced his views through charm, bullying, and outbursts of temper as occasion demanded, but his bluntness and honesty of purpose won him a high reputation among European statesmen. He himself ascribed his success to the fact that 'he always imposed on foreign ministers by telling them the naked truth' (Williams, 168). 
In 1715, alongside his monitoring of the barrier negotiations, Stanhope was involved in the task of consolidating the dynasty at home. Electioneering, in which the whigs obtained a strong majority, was followed by the secret committee preparations, Stanhope presiding, for the impeachments of Lord Oxford and other leading members of the late tory ministry. On receipt of intelligence in July of the Pretender's planned descent on the English coast, Stanhope took direction of the mainly military measures for its suppression. At the diplomatic level he took care to keep the French passive and to dissuade them from assisting the Pretender and his forces. In Scotland, where the Pretender raised his standard in September, he co-ordinated troop movements with the commander-in-chief, the duke of Argyll, and was in constant touch with field commanders in the pursuit of the rebels. The suppression of the rising by January 1716 owed much to Stanhope's organizing prowess, and it was this demonstration of Britain's ability to sustain her new ruling dynasty which encouraged other powers to regard her more positively. The finalization of a new barrier treaty between the Dutch republic and the emperor towards the end of 1715 through British mediation marked a successful outcome to Stanhope's first initiatives. Stanhope was in full agreement with Townshend's project for an alliance with Austria, and as deadlock threatened the completion of the treaty of Westminster in May 1716, he intervened with an incisive clause promising British defence of Italy from Spain but which carefully avoided a commitment to furthering Charles VI's Mediterranean ambitions -- particularly his claim to Sicily, which in 1713 had been ceded to Victor Amadeus of Savoy. In the same month Stanhope concluded an agreement with Spain which expanded the commercial concessions Britain had secured at Utrecht. 
The French desire for an improved understanding with the British gathered momentum after the death of Louis XIV. But although approaches to Stanhope were made by his acquaintances from former days -- the duc d'Orleans, now regent for the sickly infant Louis XV, and his chief minister the Abbe Dubois -- French ambiguity over the Pretender's claims to the British throne filled Stanhope with misgiving. Negotiations between Stanhope and Dubois went ahead in Hanover in the summer of 1716. At first each trod warily, but a genuine friendship soon developed, and from the lengthy summer dialogues between the two men there emerged a draft treaty. It was from this point that Stanhope began to assume the role of chief executor of Britain's foreign policy. Working closely with George I in Hanover, he was awakened to the implications of the king's involvement as ruler of a north German state in the ongoing Baltic struggle against the hegemonic ambitions of Charles XII of Sweden, and was obliged to plan policy in accordance with the king's dictates. Dubois had already intimated his master's willingness to break the French alliance with Sweden and support the king-elector's longstanding claims to the Swedish-held duchies of Bremen and Verden. However, critical developments in the Baltic situation in late summer heightened the importance of Stanhope's negotiations with Dubois. The former accord which Hanover enjoyed with Tsar Peter of Russia broke down over the latter's increasingly evident wish to establish himself in neighbouring Mecklenburg, which, together with the discovery that the Swedes were in league with the Jacobites, plus the fact that the Russians, too, were wooing the French, demanded that Stanhope conclude the alliance with the French as a matter of supreme urgency once preliminaries had been signed in August. 
Although Stanhope's efforts brought him the king's gratitude, news was filtering through to him that the chief ministers at home, Townshend and Robert Walpole, resented the sacrifice of British interests to Hanover. Their anxiety to remain within an exclusively Austro-Dutch alliance system led them into conflict with Stanhope's purposes as they tried to assuage Dutch misgivings and secure the republic's inclusion in the intended triple alliance. Townshend was also irritated that the king's policy of containing Sweden in the Baltic had shifted, obviously with Stanhope's assistance, to the distinctly Hanoverian one of containing Russia, but in confiding to Stanhope his scathing disapproval of the king's entire northern policy he committed the cardinal error that quickly sealed his fate. Stanhope, his standing with the king now immeasurably strengthened, tried at first to conciliate Townshend, but, finding himself thwarted and still criticized, brought the issue to a head by tendering his own resignation in November. The king refused, and in December Townshend was removed from the centre of power and appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland. The French alliance was formally completed at the end of December 1716. Stanhope had avoided Dubois's demand that the Utrecht settlement be guaranteed in its entirety, since this would have stifled Stanhope's plans to settle the differences between the Spanish king and the emperor over their claims in Italy which had begun to threaten a reopening of war. Most importantly, however, the British and French guaranteed each other's successions, and a tacit acknowledgement was given to George's claims to Bremen and Verden. 
It required Stanhope's constant efforts to keep the alliance intact, but the combined diplomatic and military power it represented was vitally important to him in his ambitions to establish a wider system of collective security in Europe. In parliament he had to bear the brunt of criticism of the king's pro-Hanoverian policy in the Baltic, but he vigorously demonstrated that the king's interests in the area were also Britain's, and that trade could not be secured until Charles XII of Sweden had been vanquished and Russian encroachment arrested. The ministry finally split in April 1717, when Townshend and Walpole left office and took their adherents with them into opposition. Stanhope had undoubtedly seen his chances rise as Townshend's disagreement with royal policy took shape, but his hand was also forced by exasperation at Townshend's counter-productive activities and failure to grasp the current realities of Britain's situation in northern Europe. Stanhope was now the king's chief minister, becoming first lord of the Treasury and chancellor of the exchequer in Walpole's place on 15 April. He professed little capacity for Treasury business, and faced many difficulties in leading the government during his remaining months in the Commons. On 3 July, shortly before the session closed, he was raised to the peerage as Viscount Stanhope of Mahon. In the previous month he had purchased a country seat and estate at Chevening in Kent comprising 3466 acres, the outlay of $28,000 coming mainly from his wife's dowry. 
While at Hanover in 1716 Stanhope had also begun to consider how the Anglo-French alliance might be employed to reconcile Spain and Austria, and he lost no time in opening negotiations with other interested parties. The two powers had never formally made peace during the Utrecht negotiations: the emperor maintained his claim to Philip V's throne, and their simmering antagonism centring on Italy threatened Europe with a new war. Stanhope's initial plan involved satisfying the emperor in his claim to Sicily, which Victor Amadeus of Savoy was to hand him in return for Sardinia. The emperor would also gain Spain's formal renunciation of her Italian dominions as decreed in the 1713 settlement, while the emperor, in turn, would give up his claim to Spain. Though no longer technically responsible for foreign policy, Stanhope retained full control of the complex negotiations he had begun even before leaving Hanover in January 1717. A conference eventually opened at Hampton Court in November 1717 attended by representatives of all the powers concerned except Spain. The Spanish, meanwhile, had grown increasingly warlike as Stanhope's old acquaintance Cardinal Alberoni and Philip V's new queen, Elizabeth Farnese, determined on recovery of Spain's former Mediterranean empire. 
In March 1718, while deep in these negotiations, Stanhope was relieved of the additional burdens of the Treasury, which he handed over to the earl of Sunderland, and became senior secretary of state in the northern department, his gifted protege James Craggs succeeding as junior secretary. The following month he was advanced to an earldom. Imperial foot-dragging tested Stanhope's notorious impatience to the limit, but he and Dubois finalized a peace plan embodying Stanhope's original aims, plus, in a desperate effort to placate Spain, a guarantee that Philip V's younger son should succeed to the Farnese dominions of Parma, Piacenza, and Tuscany. In July, after Stanhope had rushed to Paris to stiffen the regent's vacillating resolve against the strong pro-Spanish faction at the French court, a convention was signed between Britain and France requiring Vienna and Madrid to accept the Quadruple Alliance (Britain, France, Austria, and the Dutch republic) within three months or to have it forced upon them. As the Spanish prepared to attack the Italian mainland, having already landed troops in Sardinia and Sicily, Stanhope stationed an English fleet under Admiral George Byng in the Mediterranean as an assurance to the emperor that Spanish aggression would be suffered to go no further. In August, armed with the emperor's formal acceptance, Stanhope visited Madrid himself in a personal bid to persuade the Spanish to accept the treaty, but his proposals for an avoidance of war, including the return of Gibraltar, made no impression on the cardinal. On his return to Paris news greeted him that Byng had already encountered and decimated the Spanish fleet off Cape Passaro on 11 August. 
Alberoni's intransigence gave Stanhope little option but to commit Britain to a limited war with Spain by the end of the year. It was all the more necessary in view of Spanish attacks on British shipping and evidence that the cardinal was scheming with the Jacobite court. At home renewed prospects of war confronted Stanhope's ministry with strong opposition in the Commons led by Walpole, who disparaged Stanhope's policy as 'contrary to the interests and rights of the nation' and Stanhope himself as the 'knight errant of English diplomacy' (Williams, 322). In an artful move Stanhope substantially defused the threat posed by the Walpole-Townshend faction by choosing at this juncture to fulfil a personal ambition to appease whig notions on the subject of religious dissent. As Stanhope predicted, Walpole stuck by his tory allies and lost much credibility in attacking a bill which moderately lightened the legal impediments against nonconformists in public life, and the government regained many of its old supporters. He was also anxious to procure passage of the 'Peerage Bill', introduced in February 1719, an insidious measure whereby Stanhope sought to preserve his ministry's majority in the House of Lords, should George I suddenly die, by fixing the number of peers and restricting the monarch's right of creation. The bill was much despised, however, as a most undesirable piece of constitutional tampering, and its critics, led by Walpole, forced its defeat in April and again in December. 
The death of Charles XII of Sweden in December 1718 had enabled Stanhope to redouble his efforts to bring peace to the Baltic and secure Britain's all-important access to naval stores while leaving his colleague Craggs to supervise the details of the war with Spain. He was keen to exploit Sweden's new vulnerability and use her conquered acquisitions in north Germany as bargaining pieces in a series of treaties between Sweden and her former enemies. To Swedish diplomatists he professed a desire to drive the Russian tsar from his encroaching hegemony in the Baltic, but realized that in the long term Russian aspirations in the eastern Baltic would have to be accommodated. He firstly secured French backing, and, through his able emissary at Stockholm, Lord Carteret, plied the new Swedish Queen Ulrica with assurances of British naval and financial support, which, with the Russian fleet already ravaging the Swedish coast, were readily accepted. At the same time Stanhope instigated negotiations at Berlin for a rapprochement between George I and Frederick William I of Prussia, his chief aim being to concert their respective territorial claims on Sweden, and, most importantly, to wean the Prussian king from his alliance with the tsar and encourage his co-operation with the other north German and Scandinavian powers. 
For a while Stanhope had to compete with the conflicting policies of George I's chief Hanoverian minister, Bernstorff, who resented Stanhope's sweeping intervention in northern policy and continued to pursue anti-Prussian and anti-Russian objectives, which Stanhope's purposes now superseded. Eventually, in July 1719, the king gave in to gentle pressure from Stanhope and removed Bernstorff from the negotiations. Preliminaries were then quickly completed in August between Britain, Prussia, and Sweden, confirming Sweden's cession of southern Pomerania and Stettin to Prussia and of Bremen and Verden to Hanover -- though not before in the final stages Stanhope had characteristically threatened to deny the Swedes promised naval assistance against the tsar until they signed. The agreements were finalized in the treaties of Stockholm of November 1719 and February 1720. 
As Stanhope had hoped, the Anglo-French war with Spain precipitated the downfall of Alberoni, and in January 1720 his diplomacy finally induced Philip V to accede to the Italian settlement embodied in the Quadruple Alliance and make peace with the emperor, while at the same time ensuring commercial advantage for Britain. He had substantially achieved the main objects of his plans to consolidate the peacemaking of 1713-14, but the completeness of his achievement was beset by further problems. The Spanish now clamoured for the return of Gibraltar, while in the north he was still preoccupied with Russia. Reluctant to authorize a direct attack on the tsar's positions in the Baltic, Stanhope hoped that the presence of the British fleet would alone be a sufficient deterrent. At home a reconciliation between government whigs and the supporters of Walpole and Townshend was effected in April 1720. Stanhope's discovery that Bernstorff and the German fraternity at court were intriguing with the opposition whigs to topple his administration enabled him to seize the initiative, make terms with Walpole and Townshend, and restructure the ministry in ways more favourable to himself and Sunderland than to his erstwhile opponents. As he prepared to accompany the king to Hanover in the summer, the ministry enjoyed greater unity and political security than at any time previously. 
While in Hanover Stanhope continued to strengthen the British-Hanoverian connection with Prussia and himself visited Berlin in July. But the appearance of this power bloc irritated the Austrians, and disagreements with Vienna rapidly multiplied. Stanhope was exasperated by Austria's lack of co-operation in bringing pressure on Russia in the Baltic; and when in October the tsar refused George I's offer of mediation, he could only advise the Swedes to make what peace they could with Russia. His return to London was hastened in November by the deepening crisis unleashed by the bursting of the South Sea Bubble ['see 'Promoters of the South Sea Bubble]. Although like other members of the government he had been a subscriber to South Sea stock, there was no suggestion, then or later, that Stanhope had been party to any underhand dealings. Even so, his authority was weakened under heavy parliamentary attack in December and his confidence was shaken by the disclosures concerning Sunderland, Aislabie, Craggs, and others. Early in the new year there was talk that he was to leave the ministry and replace the dying duke of Marlborough as captain-general of the army. He continued none the less to defend his government with customary vigour and panache. It was while doing so in the House of Lords on 4 February 1721 that he was taken ill with a violent headache. After some apparent recovery the following day, he died of a stroke at eight o'clock that evening. The king was shocked and distraught at the sudden 'loss of so able and faithful a minister, of whose service his Majesty had so great need at this critical juncture' (Newman, 99). On the king's orders Stanhope was given a full military funeral through London on 17 February to Southwark, and he was afterwards privately buried at Chevening. 
Stanhope's uniqueness among the senior politicians of early Hanoverian Britain is too often obscured in the pages of drily written diplomatic history. Yet to the huge problems of securing Britain's new ruling dynasty and the consolidation of European peace after 1714 he brought boundless energy and determination precisely when such qualities were urgently required. His military career, played out in the badly resourced Spanish theatre of war, gave him practical insight into the futility of international conflict, while from thinkers such as Pufendorf, whose major works graced his library shelves, he imbibed a rationale for peace based on reason in which negotiation played the key part in the balancing of interests. His southern and northern settlements were the fruits of far-sighted diplomacy, and the new relationship established with Britain's old enemy France became the vital precondition for the long period of peace under Walpole. Tough, persistent, and sometimes high-handed, Stanhope was not always statesmanlike, while his impatience with foot-dragging and minutiae was almost legendary; however, his resolute pursuit of ambitious schemes ensured for Britain a lead at this time in setting a European-wide agenda for the maintenance of peace. 
In the political arena at home Stanhope pitched himself against those who saw Britain in insular terms, and even among his whig brethren cautious elements regarded him as 'too hot and projecting' ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 511). The strong domineering streak in his personality and his closeness to the king brought out arbitrary instincts in him as chief minister, the extremes of which were apparent in the underlying purposes of the 'Peerage Bill' and a number of other measures projected to strengthen the arm of the new whig establishment. And although he was prepared to pay lip-service to whiggish notions of religious tolerance which had been dear to him in his days as a fledgeling MP, his willingness to assuage the dissenters was marked with ulterior political motives. His sudden death left unresolved many immediate problems at home and abroad, and in this sense his legacy was an incomplete one. 


@@@@@


doc= 26249


Stanhope, John, first Baron Stanhope (c.1540-1621), courtier, was the third son of Sir Michael Stanhope (b. before 1508, d. 1552) of Shelford, Nottinghamshire, courtier, and Anne Rawson ('c'.1515-1588) of Aveley-Belhouse, Essex. Sir Michael's half-sister Anne married Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset, who became lord protector under Edward VI. This connection prompted Sir Michael's advancement, as lieutenant (1542) and then governor (1544) of Hull. He made an agreement with Sir William Knolles, alderman of Hull, in 1548 for the marriage of his son John with the latter's daughter and heir, Mary ('c'.1540-1567). The date of their marriage is unknown but it was before September 1557. Sir Michael fell from power with his brother-in-law, leading to his execution and attainder for supposed complicity. The attainder was quickly reversed in Mary I's reign and the family was restored in blood. In 1556 John attended Trinity College, Cambridge, and was admitted to Gray's Inn; he was an ancient of the inn in 1569. A younger son needed powerful relatives to forge a career, although real success long eluded him. Stanhope did use his connections to gain repeated election to parliament for different boroughs, including Totnes in 1571, Marlborough in 1572, Truro in 1586, and Preston in 1597. 
Stanhope's marriage may initially have been of greater value to him. Following his father-in-law's death in 1557, he probably lived off the inheritance of his wife. This, however, was entailed on her male children and they had only a daughter, Catherine. If it reverted on Mary's death, at Beauchamp Court in Warwickshire in 1567, to her sister Anne Offord (died 1571), as it should have done, he may have been in financial difficulties. He appears to have actually resided in the north and helped suppress the northern uprising in 1569, for which he was rewarded with leases of forfeited lands in Easby, Yorkshire, Darlington, co. Durham, and elsewhere. He had sufficient standing in 1578 for Lord Scrope of Bolton to agree a marriage between his son and Stanhope's daughter, Catherine, who, however, died in London in 1581. Having become bailiff of Beverley, Yorkshire, to Edwin Sandys, archbishop of York, Stanhope managed his own election to parliament there in 1584. He was appointed vice-admiral for Yorkshire in 1587, JP and of the quorum for the North Riding ('custos rotulorum' by 1593), and eventually to the council of the north. With the backing of Sandys and the council of the north he sought to be returned as knight of the shire for Yorkshire in 1587, but was defeated in a disorderly election. By then, however, he resided when not in London at Harrington, Northamptonshire, which he bought in 1590. He did not have a substantial estate in the county but held local offices. Stanhope became steward of the Northamptonshire estates of the duchy of Lancaster, high steward of Peterborough Cathedral in 1600, feodary for Northamptonshire in 1602, and was elected senior knight of the shire in 1601. 
Precisely when Stanhope became a courtier is uncertain: he was mediating between William Cecil, Baron Burghley, and Sir Christopher Hatton in 1577, a year before he appears as normally resident at court and possibly a gentleman of the privy chamber (albeit perhaps supernumerary and unsalaried). On 6 May 1589 he married Margaret Mackwilliams ('c'.1565-1640), the coheir of another courtier, Henry Mackwilliams. They had two daughters who survived Stanhope, and a son, Charles (1595-1675). All three were born at Chelsea. Margaret was related to Burghley through her mother, Lady Mary Cheke. This explains Stanhope's rise to real prominence at court, commencing with the important office of master of the posts in 1590. He associated himself with Sir Robert Cecil and was increasingly favoured by the ageing Elizabeth I. Stanhope flattered her skilfully, as in 1597 when he praised her speech to the Polish ambassador, and became a worthwhile if not always decisive intermediary with her, employed among others by the Cecils themselves. His influence at court was perceived as a formidable problem by Gilbert Talbot, seventh earl of Shrewsbury, in his feud with the Nottinghamshire Stanhopes. Stanhope was first knighted and then appointed treasurer of the chamber in 1596. Court rumours repeatedly forecast his further advancement for several years before 1601, when he became vice-chamberlain of the household and privy councillor. This restriction of offices to Cecil supporters was caused by the factional behaviour of Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex. 
Stanhope remained in all his posts on the accession of James I, who appointed him keeper of Eltham in Kent, where he maintained a residence at which he once entertained the king. In 1605 Stanhope was created Baron Stanhope of Harrington: a rank for which, by previous standards and despite his substantial salaries, he was surely inadequately endowed. He regularly interceded with the powerful and the king, conveying James's wishes, and controlling much of the expenditure of an increasingly costly court. Stanhope was a commissioner for the union of the crowns in 1604 and councillor of the colony of Virginia in 1609. He once rebuffed an attempt by the king's favourite Robert Carr, earl of Somerset, to buy him out. However, he was ageing and attended only half the sessions of the privy council in 1612-13. He had been securing joint appointments to certain offices with his son ten years earlier: to the mastership of the posts in 1603 and keepership of Colchester, Essex, in 1607. He relinquished the vice-chamberlainship in 1616 and the treasurership of the chamber in 1618. He last served as a commissioner in 1620. He died on 9 March 1621, at Stanhope House, St Martin-in-the-Fields, Middlesex, and was buried in the chancel of St Martin-in-the-Fields, near his Mackwilliams parents-in-law, 'because I have lived there the space of thirty years and more' (PROB 11/137, sig. 31). His widow survived until 1640. 


@@@@@


doc= 26250


Stanhope, Leicester Fitzgerald Charles, fifth earl of Harrington (1784-1862), army officer, was born at Dublin barracks on 2 September 1784, the third son of Charles Stanhope, third earl of Harrington (1753-1829), and his wife, Jane (1755-1824), eldest daughter and coheir of Sir John Fleming, bt. His brother was Charles Stanhope, fourth earl. He entered the army in 1799 as a cornet. In 1803 he was promoted captain and in 1807 he served in South America. From 1815 to 1817 he was deputy adjutant-general in the East Indies and in 1816 was promoted major. From 1817 to 1821 he was deputy quartermaster-general in India. For his services in the Anglo-Maratha War of 1817-18 he was created CB on 14 October 1818. In 1823 he was placed on half pay with the rank of lieutenant-colonel and became full colonel in 1837. 
In 1813 Stanhope published his first pamphlet, 'The Military Commentator', which was critical of military law and particularly of the practice of flogging in the army. His 1823 'Sketch of the History and Influence of the Press in British India' was part of his campaign for press freedom in India, which ended in the suppression of the 'Calcutta Journal' and the expulsion from India of its editor, James Silk Buckingham. He was a prominent critic of many of the policies of the East India Company. 
Stanhope presented himself before the London Greek Committee in 1823 as a liberal and a follower of Bentham and volunteered to be the committee's agent in Greece. The offer was accepted and he left in September 1823. Stanhope saw the Greeks as Eastern people, similar to the Indians with whom he was familiar. Referring to them as 'natives' and 'children' (Rosen, 148, 149), Stanhope felt that they needed firm and authoritative guidance to set up an independent constitutional republic. These views brought him into conflict with most philhellenes, who had an idealized and romantic vision of the Greeks, and with many Greeks themselves, whose main aim was independence, not the establishment of a constitutional liberty. 
In November 1823 Stanhope met Byron at Cefalonia, in the Ionian Islands, and the following month at Missolonghi, on the western approaches to the Gulf of Cornith, he met Mavrocordato, the leader of the western Greeks, whom most outsiders regarded as the natural leader of a new state, but whom Stanhope regarded as just one among many factional leaders and one misguidedly willing to consider the imposition on Greece of a foreign monarch. At Missolonghi Stanhope sought to establish schools and particularly a free press, and was dismayed and irritated by the lack of enthusiasm for these projects shown by Mavrocordato and his ally Byron. In 1824 Stanhope approached Odysseus, leader of the eastern Greeks, then in control of Athens, in the hope of uniting the Greek factions. Odysseus, described by St Clair as 'the most unusual Benthamite ever to burn a village or slit a throat' (St Clair, 191), responded readily, if insincerely. Stanhope used his time to establish a school and another newspaper, earning the nickname the Typographical Colonel. He hoped to bring the parties together at a conference in Salona, getting them to form a unified constitutional government to receive the first instalment of the committee's loan, thereby blocking Mavrocordato's plans to gain control over the loan. Mavrocordato was persuaded by Byron just before his death to attend the conference, but ultimately neither he nor Odysseus did. Canning recalled Stanhope, possibly in deference to requests by Turkey, or possibly because his actions were undermining the position of Mavrocordato, who was seen as Britain's main ally. He left for England from Zante on the 'Florida' with Byron's body in May 1824, leaving the country in a state of chaos, the leaders divided, and the loan inaccessible in the hands of the bankers, since there was then no one in the country who could authorize its release. 
Stanhope's letters to the Greek Committee were rapidly published as 'Greece in 1823 and 1824' (1824) to try to answer the inevitable criticism. William Parry in 'The Last Days of Lord Byron' (1825) saw Stanhope's antipathy to Byron as the root of the trouble, and this account made a lasting impression. Count Alerino Palma in 'Greece Vindicated' (1826) pointed to the conflict between Stanhope and Edward Blaquiere, also in Greece on behalf of the London Greek committee, and found that Stanhope's conduct had increased the division among the Greeks and alienated many members of the London Greek Committee from the cause. There were also criticisms from Blaquiere himself and in the newspaper press. Stanhope's second edition of his book (1825) aimed to vindicate his actions. Rosen describes Stanhope as vain, arrogant, and condescending to all who disagreed with him, which cannot have helped matters, but attributes his actions to honestly held ideas, not, as has been claimed, those of Bentham, but ideas on how to build a modern European state and nation. 
After his Greek adventure Stanhope settled down to a life of relative obscurity. On 23 April 1831 at St James's, Westminster, he married Elizabeth Williams (1810/11-1898), daughter and heir of William Green of Trelawney, Jamaica. They had two daughters and two sons. Stanhope's elder brothers having died childless, in March 1851 he succeeded to the earldom of Harrington. In later life he was chiefly interested in temperance reform, on which subject he issued a pamphlet in 1858. He died at his home, Harrington House, Kensington Palace Gardens, London, on 7 September 1862. He was succeeded by his younger but only surviving son, Sidney Seymour Hide Stanhope, sixth earl of Harrington (1845-1866). 


@@@@@


doc= 26251


Stanhope, Sir Michael (b. before 1508, d. 1552), courtier, was the second son of Sir Edward Stanhope (died 1511), knight of the body to Henry VII, and Adelina, daughter of Sir Gervase Clifton of Clifton, Nottinghamshire. In January 1529, following the death of his elder brother, Richard, without male children, he became head of the Stanhope family; by November 1537 he had married Anne ('c'.1515-1588), daughter of Nicholas Rawson of Aveley, Essex, and they had seven sons and four daughters. Among his sons were the lawyer Sir Edward Stanhope and the courtier John Stanhope. 
Although Stanhope was in the service of Thomas Manners, first earl of Rutland, by 1532, it was his part in preventing the rebellion in Lincolnshire spreading to neighbouring counties in the autumn of 1536 that brought him significant provincial advancement. In Nottinghamshire he served as a justice of the peace from 1537, and as bailiff of the lordship of Knessall and keeper of the park there from 1538, while in 1545 and 1547 he was returned to parliament as knight of the shire for the county. Stanhope also secured much former monastic property in Nottinghamshire: most importantly, he purchased Shelford Priory and several neighbouring manors in November 1537; in 1539 he obtained the lease of Lenton Priory and appointment as bailiff of the lordship; and, in 1540, he bought Shelford Manor and lands nearby. During the early 1540s he also obtained office in Yorkshire: as lieutenant of the garrison of Kingston upon Hull in February 1542; as a commissioner of the peace in the West Riding from 1543, and in the East and North ridings from 1544; and, by September 1544, he had become governor of Hull. His responsibilities at Hull, moreover, involved not only maintaining the town's defences and guarding its vital armoury but also an important role in Anglo-Scottish relations, supplying provisions, men, and ships for Berwick, border campaigns, and English expeditions into Scotland. Apparently, though, his high-handedness provoked resentment among the townsmen of Hull, while he himself complained to the privy council in 1546 about their 'lewd behaviour' towards him. 
Stanhope's sister Anne had by 1535 married Sir Edward Seymour as his second wife. Already a courtier and favourite of Henry VIII, Seymour was probably instrumental in bringing Stanhope to prominence at national level. First securing a modest post in the royal stables in 1538, he became an esquire of the body in 1540, and by February 1546 he had been knighted. Once his patron, newly created duke of Somerset, had overthrown Henry VIII's will and obtained effective regency powers for himself as protector to the young Edward VI, Stanhope's career took off with a vengeance. Somerset appointed him groom of the stool in August 1547 (an office that gave him control of the king's privy purse) and master of the king's harriers in July 1548, while by 1549 he had become chief gentleman of the privy chamber. His office made him effectively Edward's keeper. Soon acknowledged as both a highly influential member of Somerset's household and a leading figure in the royal entourage, Stanhope's identification with his patron became even more blatant when he accompanied Somerset to Windsor during the 'coup d'etat' by the London lords in the autumn of 1549. Once they had successfully taken possession of Edward VI's person, Somerset found himself incarcerated in Windsor Castle and Stanhope was placed under house arrest; and when Somerset was transferred to the Tower of London in mid-October, Stanhope was among those accompanying him to imprisonment. 
Released in February 1550, after entering into a bond of $3000 to 'be from day to day furthcumyng and to abyde all orders' ('APC', '1547-50', 398), Stanhope was once more a prisoner in the Tower by the end of October 1551, this time on a charge of involvement in Somerset's conspiracy against the now all-powerful duke of Northumberland. In January 1552 he was brought to trial for having 'feloniously' instigated Somerset to insurrection and 'holding rebellious assemblies, for the purpose of taking, imprisoning and murdering' the duke of Northumberland, the marquess of Northampton, and the earl of Pembroke (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 3.369). Pleading not guilty and asserting that he had 'never offended against the King's Majestie nor against any of his Counsell' (Wriothesley, 2.67), Stanhope was nevertheless convicted of felony and sentenced to be hanged. In the event he was beheaded on Tower Hill on 26 February 1552. An act confirming his attainder was passed by parliament in April 1552 but reversed early in Queen Mary's reign, when his son and heir, Thomas, took possession of the family lands. His widow, Anne, it was reported, 'brought up all her yonger children in vertue and learninge' at Lenton Priory and 'kept contynewallie a worshipfull house' there until her death in 1587 ('Revd J. Standish's paper', 46). 


@@@@@


doc= 26252


Stanhope, Philip, first earl of Chesterfield (1583/4-1656), royalist nobleman, was the son of Sir John Stanhope (died 1609) and his first wife, Cordell Alington. Aged seventy-two when he died, Stanhope must have been born in 1583 or 1584; he may well have been the Philip Stanhope, son of John Stanhope, baptized at Holy Trinity-the-Less, London, on 6 January 1584. In the reign of Elizabeth the Stanhopes of Shelford had become one of the leading families in Nottinghamshire with substantial estates in the south of the shire. Philip Stanhope was knighted in 1605 and in the same year married Catherine, daughter of Francis, Lord Hastings. After her death in 1636 he married again; his second wife was Anne (died 1667), widow of Sir Humphrey Ferrers and daughter of Sir John Pakington of Westwood, Worcestershire, and his wife, Dorothy Smith. 
In November 1616 Stanhope paid Secretary Winwood $10,000 for the barony of Shelford. This aroused the ire of another leading Nottinghamshire figure, Sir John Holles, who had recently paid a similar sum for a barony. Holles justified his complaint that his cousin's creation was 'a perpetuall dishonor to the King his Majesty and all the nobility' with a list of Stanhope's brushes with the law. Holles reported that Stanhope had been twice indicted for buggery at the assizes, though he admitted the indictments had been passed over by the lord chief justice. Sir Philip and his accusers were embroiled in Star Chamber proceedings, where Holles claimed Stanhope had to pay costs for his unjust vexations. The accusation that Stanhope was often bound over to keep the peace can be sustained on one occasion, for in 1611 he forfeited a recognizance of $500 after he failed to appear at the assizes and keep the peace. The more serious charge that he had been cleared by the king's pardon for a murder by his servants has less substance, for an investigation exonerated Stanhope of any involvement in the death. Stanhope's first appearance at the Nottinghamshire quarter sessions was in July 1612 and according to Holles he had been removed from the commission for his conduct. This could explain his absence from the sessions after April 1614, but he had returned by January 1616. Though it is not possible to substantiate all Holles's accusations, there is sufficient evidence to appreciate why John Chamberlain wished Winwood had 'met with a more worthy subject' ('Letters of John Holles', 1.142; 'Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.33). 
Stanhope remained on the Nottinghamshire bench, serving conscientiously until July 1627. Though no evidence appears to survive of his views about the legality of the forced loan, his removal from the commission of the peace at the same time as other opponents of the levy suggests he shared their views. He rarely attended the House of Lords, preferring to send a proxy. During the adjournment of parliament in August 1628 he was advanced to the earldom of Chesterfield and in December 1629 he was restored to the Nottinghamshire commission of the peace. Thereafter his attendances at quarter sessions were infrequent and none is recorded after January 1635. In February 1639, when he was commanded to attend the king at York, he pleaded for his failure to attend an 'extremity of weakness' from which he doubted he would recover. 
Chesterfield continued to be absent from the House of Lords. It is only in October 1642 that some indications of his political views emerge. The earl, who had built a mansion at Bretby in Derbyshire, joined the earl of Devonshire and the gentry of the shire in accusing Sir John Gell of disrupting the peace by his attempts to raise troops for parliament. In December, when Chesterfield and his son Ferdinando Stanhope vowed to attack Derby, Gell took his revenge and sent troops to attack Bretby House. When the parliamentarian troops stormed the house Chesterfield and his son fled and, after the earl's wife refused to give money to the soldiers for drink, the house was sacked. Chesterfield's troops plundered houses in the Vale of Belvoir and in January 1643 his house at Shelford became a satellite garrison for the royalist stronghold of Newark. In March 1643 Chesterfield was among the defenders of the close of Lichfield Cathedral when it was besieged by parliamentarian forces led by Lord Brook and Gell. According to Clarendon, Gell proceeded so vigorously and the defenders 'so faintly or unskilfully' that the strong natural defences of the close were easily overcome (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.474-5). 
Chesterfield was taken prisoner and sent to London. In June 1643 the Lords granted his request that because of ill health he should be allowed to live in a private house. After pleas to parliament in 1646 he was allowed $5 a week for his maintenance provided he did not entertain 'malign preachers' or use the 'Book of Common Prayer' (Whitelock, 2.239). It was not until April 1649 that Chesterfield asked to compound and his fine was fixed at $8698 7's'. 6died The earl had previously claimed he was utterly disabled of all means to redeem himself for during his captivity his houses were ruined, his woods felled, and his lands laid waste, with personal estate worth more than $36,000 carried away. As a result of the sequestration of his lands the burden of debts had been greatly increased. The committee for compounding reported that $4000 was the most that the earl could procure on his credit and suggested that this sum should be accepted lest the whole be lost. The recommendation failed to pass the Commons and the lands of the earl were included in the first act of sale. As Chesterfield was tenant for life and was probably sixty-seven years of age any purchase of his lands was speculative. The Nottinghamshire properties were sold in 1652 but were later transferred by their purchasers in trust for his grandson and heir, Philip Stanhope, Lord Stanhope (1633-1714). In 1654 Chesterfield had his allowance withdrawn by parliament as his house had become a refuge for dissidents. The earl paid heavily for his support of the king; three of his sons were killed fighting for the royalist cause and Shelford House was burnt to the ground. He died in London on 12 September 1656 and was buried in St Giles-in-the-Fields; his estates descended to his grandson Philip, who became the second earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 26253


Stanhope, Philip, second earl of Chesterfield (1633-1714), courtier and politician, was born in the parish of St Mary Cray, Kent, the eldest son of Henry Stanhope, styled Lord Stanhope (died 1634), and his wife, Katherine Stanhope (bap. 1609, d. 1667), daughter and coheir of Thomas, second Baron Wotton. His father died in November 1634, and in the same year Stanhope survived an attack of the smallpox. Until the age of seven he resided at Lord Wotton's seat. In 1641 his mother married John Poliander Kirkhoven, lord of Hemfleet, in the Netherlands, and Stanhope spent the next few years there. He was educated by Kirkhoven's father, the professor of divinity at Leiden. He also studied at the prince of Orange's college at Breda and spent time at the courts of the queen mother and princess royal. Stanhope matriculated at Leiden on 4 June 1649. Next he went to Paris where he attended Monsieur de Veau's academy, which he left after a duel. At the start of November 1650 he left Paris 'en route' for Rome in the company of William Swan, and a tutor, John Bargrave. He was present in Turin at the wedding on 11 December 1650 of Ferdinand Maria, elector of Bavaria, to Henrietta Adelaide of Savoy. He was in Rome by 29 April 1651 when he dined at the English College. He then moved on, signing the visitors' register at Padua on 30 October 1651, and also visiting Naples, Venice, and Milan. 
Stanhope returned to England via Germany and the Netherlands, and in April 1652 he petitioned the committee for compounding claiming that his grandfather (Philip Stanhope, first earl of Chesterfield) had repossessed the manor of Sawley after his father's death, and it had then been sequestrated. On 21 June 1652 he married Lady Anne Percy (1633-1654), eldest daughter of Algernon Percy, tenth earl of Northumberland. She died of the smallpox on 29 November 1654, eight days after the birth of a son, who survived her for only three weeks. As a consequence of this bereavement Stanhope obtained a pass on 27 June 1655 to travel to France, and after a short sojourn in Paris he went on to Rome. His return to England was occasioned by the death of his grandfather on 12 September 1656, and an attempt by his uncle, Arthur Stanhope, to seize his estate for debt. Apparently Oliver Cromwell tried to entice Chesterfield into marriage with one of his daughters and offered him a military command, which Chesterfield refused. A proposed match with a daughter of Lord Fairfax was called off after they had been 'thrice asked in St. Martin's Church' ('Letters', 19). Chesterfield was at this time engaged in affairs with Barbara Villiers ('bap'. 1640, died 1709) ['see 'Palmer, Barbara] (later duchess of Cleveland and mistress of Charles II) and Lady Elizabeth Howard ('c'.1638-1714) (who later married John Dryden). On 16 February 1658 Chesterfield and Lord St John were arrested to prevent an intended duel, and on 8 June of the same year Chesterfield was held in the Tower after a duel with a Captain Whalley MP. In September 1659 he was accused of complicity in Sir George Booth's rising, but although he was imprisoned in the Tower, the county committee in Derbyshire could not find sufficient evidence to warrant the seizure of his estate. 
Although involved in royalist plots, Chesterfield was perceived as too far engaged with his mistresses to be a major influence. In any case he had to flee the country following the death of Francis Wolley, the son of a Hammersmith doctor, whom he had killed in a duel on 17 January 1660 over the price of a mare. He subsequently sought the pardon of Charles II at Breda, and was able to join the king on his journey into England. Shortly before 25 September 1660 Chesterfield married Lady Elizabeth Butler (1640-1665), daughter of James Butler, first duke of Ormond. They had a son, who died as an infant, and a daughter. 
Chesterfield was appointed on 24 February 1662 as lord chamberlain to Queen Catherine of Braganza, and in parliament he seems to have been a court supporter, voting against the impeachment of Clarendon in 1663. Life at court, however, proved difficult for Chesterfield as it was reported in November 1662 that the duke of York was 'smitten in love' (Pepys, 3.248) with his countess, and that Chesterfield had taken her away from court into Derbyshire on that account. Chesterfield resigned his court post in 1665. His wife died of the 'spotted fever' ('Letters', 25) in July 1665, being buried on the 18th. Chesterfield also contracted the disease, but recovered. 
On 13 June 1667 Chesterfield was made the colonel of a foot regiment to be raised for active service, but it was disbanded following the treaty of Breda. In 1668 he appears to have travelled to Bourbon in France to take the waters. When Ormond visited Oxford University in his capacity as chancellor on 15 July 1669, Chesterfield was made a DCL. That year he married Lady Elizabeth Dormer (1653-1677), daughter and coheir of Charles Dormer, second earl of Carnarvon. They had two sons and two daughters. On 17 March 1670 he was named steward of the honour of Tutbury. Most of 1670 appears to have been spent attending to the house and gardens at Bretby, in Derbyshire. 
Chesterfield opposed the declaration of indulgence in 1672, and on 22 November 1675 he voted for an address to Charles II to dissolve parliament. In both 1668 and 1674 he had entrusted his proxy to peers who were now in opposition, and in 1676 Halifax wrote to persuade Chesterfield to attend the next parliamentary session. Shortly before 24 October 1677 his wife died, a week after a miscarriage, Ormond writing of 'the very uneasy and uncomfortable condition your lady lived long in' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 4.57). The death of his wife led to rumours of melancholia during 1678, and Chesterfield confessed to staying in his chamber for six months. He was one of the few protestant peers who returned to the court fold in the years before 1679 and he seems to have forgiven the duke of York, who wrote from his exile in The Hague in April 1679 of Chesterfield's 'expressions of kindness' ('Ormonde MSS', 1.28). In December 1679 Chesterfield replaced the disgraced duke of Monmouth as chief justice in eyre south of the Trent. He voted on 15 November 1680 against the 'Exclusion Bill', having spoken in the Lords of his fear of another republic, for 'the blood of the last king has left an eternal stain upon this kingdom' (Swatland, 115). He also voted on 23 November 1680 against a motion for a joint committee of both houses to debate the safety of the kingdom, and on 7 December for a verdict of not guilty against the Roman Catholic peer Viscount Stafford, accused of involvement in the Popish Plot. On 26 January 1681 he was sworn a member of the privy council, an appointment York was in hearty agreement with, and he duly attended the third Exclusion Parliament in March. On 6 November 1682 he succeeded the earl of Mulgrave as colonel of the 3rd regiment of foot guards (relinquishing it on 26 January 1684 over a question of precedence). He spent the summer of 1683 rebuilding Bretby, which had been badly damaged by fire in 1680. In February 1684 he stood as surety for the earl of Danby upon his release from the Tower. 
Chesterfield acted as lord sewer at James II's coronation, but in October 1685 he resigned as chief justice in eyre pleading ill health -- 'I am fit for nothing but a retirement, being very seldom free either from the stone or gout' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 7.379). He left his proxy in the hands of the marquess of Halifax. His name appears on a list of November 1687 of those opposed to the repeal of the 'Test Act'. Although approached by the earl of Danby in the autumn of 1688, he refused to join in the Orangist conspiracy, but nor did he reveal the plot to the king. Chesterfield's actions in joining the forces raised in the midlands following the invasion were prompted by a desire to safeguard Princess Anne, who had fled to Nottingham. Here he proved obstinate in his loyalty to the king, refusing to join a council of war, and refusing an association promoted by the earl of Devonshire to destroy all papists in England should the prince of Orange be killed or murdered. When he left the princess in mid-December, he retired to Bretby. 
In the convention of 1688-9, Chesterfield was initially a supporter of a regency, voting on 31 January 1689 against declaring William and Mary king and queen. On 4 February he voted against agreeing with the Commons that James II had 'abdicated' and that the throne was 'vacant'. Crucially, on 6 February, despite attending a conference between the houses, Chesterfield was not present to vote when the Lords agreed to these resolutions. He refused all offers of employment from William III, and seems to have held that William should only be accorded allegiance as 'de facto' monarch. He remained a tory opponent of the court, supporting the place bill in the 1692-3 session, and refusing the association to defend William of 1696, and the abjuration of the Pretender in 1702. 
Chesterfield remained active in local politics, supporting his tory son-in-law Thomas Coke in Derbyshire elections in 1701-2. He waited on Queen Anne shortly after her accession. In retirement Chesterfield divided his time between London and Bretby. In April 1705 he was reported to be 'so well again that he can scarce find a complaint' ('Cowper MSS', 3.59), although the marriage of his youngest daughter in 1706 left him 'a perfect hermit' (ibid., 72). On 30 November 1708 he was elected a FRS. Chesterfield died on 28 January 1714 at his house in Southampton Square, London, and was buried on 12 February at Shelford, Nottinghamshire. His son Philip Stanhope succeeded him as third earl of Chesterfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 26254


Philip Stanhope, fifth earl of Chesterfield (1755-1815), politician, who was born on 10 November 1755, the son of Arthur Charles Stanhope (died 1770) of Mansfield Woodhouse (a great-great-grandson of the first earl) and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Headlam (died 1764). He succeeded to his father's estates in March 1770 and to the earldom in March 1773. He married, first, on 20 August 1777, Anne (1759-1798), the daughter of the Revd Thomas Thistlethwaite; she died on 20 October 1798, and on 2 May 1799 Chesterfield married Lady Henrietta Thynne (1762-1813), the third daughter of the first marquess of Bath, who died at Chesterfield House, London, on 31 May 1813. He was felt to have acted harshly in 1777 when he refused to intervene to save his former tutor, William Dodd, from the gallows for forging a draft on him for $4200. He spoke occasionally at first in the House of Lords, mainly on formal occasions, and supported Lord North and then William Pitt. No speeches by him are recorded after 1792. He was often at court and he and both his wives were on cordial terms with George III and Queen Charlotte. He held a number of undemanding posts, as lord lieutenant of Buckinghamshire (1781-2); ambassador to Spain (1783-7), which he never took up; master of the Royal Mint (1789-90); joint postmaster-general (1790-98); and master of the horse (1798-1804). His appointment as ambassador in December 1783 was seen by Horace Walpole as evidence of the feebleness of Pitt's fledgeling ministry, and he dismissed the fifth earl as 'a worthless young man, universally despised' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 33.430, n. 2). Nevertheless, he was given the Garter in January 1805. A painting of 1810 by Weaver shows him as a short, corpulent man, incongruously wearing the sash of the Garter while inspecting a prize heifer in the stables. The eighteenth-century house at Bretby was allowed to fall into decay, and Chesterfield employed Wyatville to begin building a heavy castellated mansion, finished after his death by his only son, the sixth earl. He died at Bretby on 29 August 1815. 


@@@@@


doc= 26255


Stanhope, Philip Dormer, fourth earl of Chesterfield (1694-1773), politician and diplomatist, was born on 22 September 1694 in the parish of St James's, Westminster, the son of Philip Stanhope, third earl of Chesterfield (1673-1726), and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Savile ('c'.1674-1708), the daughter of George Savile, first marquess of Halifax. 
Philip Dormer Stanhope came from a long-established and well-connected family with estates in Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire. One ancestor, Sir Richard Stanhope, represented the county of Nottinghamshire in parliament in the reign of Henry IV; another, Sir Michael Stanhope, was a brother-in-law of Protector Somerset, and shared the latter's fate in 1552. Sir Michael's great-grandson, Sir Philip Stanhope, was created Baron Stanhope in 1616 and advanced to the earldom of Chesterfield in 1628. The family was staunchly royalist. The first earl died in 1656 after prison; his eldest son, Philip, was killed in 1645 defending Shelford. The second earl took up arms in 1688 but refused the oath to William of Orange as king. His first wife was a daughter of the tenth earl of Northumberland; his second of the first duke of Ormond; his third (and grandmother of the fourth earl) was the daughter of Charles Dormer, second earl of Carnarvon. Philip Dormer Stanhope's mother was the daughter of Lord Halifax (the Trimmer) and the recipient of his celebrated 'Advice to a Daughter'. There were several other branches of the Stanhope family, one of which became earls of Harrington. James Stanhope, the leading minister when Philip Dormer Stanhope entered the House of Commons in 1715, and later Earl Stanhope, was another cousin. The duke of Newcastle was a distant but useful relative. Along with these formidable advantages went some personal defects. Stanhope was short, if not squat, with a large head and bad teeth: 'a stunted giant' (Hervey, 1.72) was one description. Lady Cowper thought his voice 'a shrill scream' ('Diary', 145). There is little doubt that his obsessive concern for deportment and appearance was an attempt to compensate for these physical disadvantages, just as the advice to his son not to acquire a nickname such as Muttering Stanhope reflects his own resentment at being dubbed 'Little Lord Stanhope' ('Letters', 4.1448). At the end of his life he wrote: 'I have wished myself taller a thousand times, but to no purpose, for all the Stanhopes are but a size above dwarfs' ('Unpublished Letters', no. III). He claimed that he lacked both ambition and avarice. That may be doubted. Although he shared many noblemen's distaste for routine administration and could, like most disgraced politicians, muse on the charms of retirement, he filled several important posts and was eager to make a mark, in politics and society, and as a patron of the arts. The ambition he showed for his son and his godson could hardly have been surpassed within the bounds of normal psychology. A noble disdain for money was the affectation of many wealthy gentlemen of the period: it did not prevent him from making a lucrative marriage in which passion, it was said, played a minor role. 
Stanhope was brought up mainly by his grandmother Lady Halifax. He was tutored privately and then sent to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he led an agreeable life as a fellow commoner; however, he had no great affection for the university, which he called later 'an illiberal seminary' ('Letters', 4.1685). When he left Cambridge, he told his son in 1751, 'I was an absolute pedant... convinced that the classics contained everything that was either necessary, useful or ornamental to men' (ibid., 4.1760). While he was on the grand tour, in The Hague and Paris, the death of Queen Anne brought in the Hanoverians and the whigs, and Stanhope hastened home to begin his political career. Having been introduced at court by James Stanhope, he was appointed a gentleman of the bedchamber to George, prince of Wales, and was returned to parliament, just under age, on 3 May 1715 for St Germans, a nomination borough hired by the government. 'From the day I was elected till the day that I spoke', he wrote in 1754, 'I thought nor dreamed of nothing but speaking' (ibid., 5.2102). In his maiden speech on 5 August 1715 he demanded, perhaps imprudently, that an example should be made of Ormond, the tory leader, for betraying the nation. The melodramatic story that he was forced to flee abroad after his speech may be doubted: the house was indulgent to under-age speakers, and the comfortable whig majority was unlikely to be savage to one of their own number who stood in need of six weeks. He was joined in parliament by his brothers William (1727), John (1727), and Charles (1730). His later advice to his son reflects his feelings on setting out: 'you will be of the House of Commons as soon as you are of age; and you must first make a figure there, if you would make a figure, or a fortune, in your country' (ibid., 4.1455). 
The well-publicized quarrel between George I and his son caused difficulties for the prince's followers, especially those connected with James Stanhope, who stayed in office. Philip Dormer Stanhope's political behaviour, like that of his leaders, became contorted. He voted for the 'Septennial Bill' in 1716, a basic whig measure, but, following the rift between the courts in 1717, pursued a zig-zag course, in part a product of his own independent attitude. He voted with the tories against the repeal of the 'Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts', having then, as he later remarked, more faith in the Church of England than he had subsequently, yet he supported Stanhope's 'Peerage Bill' in 1719, and a year later was said to be in difficulties with the prince over the South Sea question. A letter to an unnamed friend about this time suggests that he was anxious for some place, perhaps diplomatic, since his father was not generous. The reconciliation between the prince and the king in 1720 made life easier. In 1722 Stanhope was re-elected, this time for Lostwithiel, a borough under government command, and at the beginning of the session, as a mark of distinction, was asked to move the election of the speaker. In 1723 he was made captain of the yeomen of the guards but did not stand for re-election to parliament. This was presumably at his own choice, since the member returned in his place was a government supporter: perhaps it was because his father was already in poor health. But he was a difficult subordinate, refusing appointment to the newly founded Order of the Bath in 1725 on the grounds that it was a mere trifle, and he lost his captaincy as a result. That autumn he spent miserably at the family seat, Bretby, in Derbyshire, waiting for his father to die. He did not pretend any great show of grief and hated the country. To Henrietta Howard, the mistress of the prince, he wrote: 'since my father had his fits, he has continued entirely senseless... how long he will continue so, I cannot tell; but this I am sure of, that if it be much longer I shall be the maddest of the two, this place being the seat of horror and despair... were I inclined to a religious melancholy, I should fancy myself in Hell. ('Letters to and from Henrietta', 1.197)' In letters to his son he denied that affection between parents and children was natural, insisting that it must be fostered by kindness and consideration. In January 1726 his father's death transported him, as fourth earl of Chesterfield, to the House of Lords, which was better suited to his prepared oratory. He left behind him in the Commons a member who had persistently jeered at him by mimicking his somewhat florid gestures. 
In June 1727 Chesterfield moved the formal address on the accession of George II, and the new king insisted that some provision be made for him. His gift for languages, together with his experience in the Netherlands, where he had some relatives, suggested a diplomatic appointment: he was made ambassador to The Hague, and took his brother John with him as secretary. At the same time he was sworn of the privy council. His main concern at The Hague was to help conclude the peace treaty with Spain, under discussion at the congress of Soissons. His cousin William Stanhope conducted the negotiations with Madrid and at the conclusion of the treaty of Seville was made Lord Harrington and secretary of state. But, in a diplomatic bouleversement, the British decided to ally with the emperor in the second treaty of Vienna, and Chesterfield was much engaged in securing the adherence of the Dutch. At first he enjoyed the activity and splendour of his new post and his wealth enabled him to entertain lavishly, but he soon tired of Dutch society, and by 1730 he was asking when his successor could be appointed. He conducted with some skill the preliminary negotiations for the marriage of the princess royal to the prince of Orange, which eventually took place in 1734. For Chesterfield the most important consequence of his mission was his liaison with Elizabeth de Bouchet, which produced in March 1732 his son Philip, to whom the later 'Letters to his Son' were addressed, and on whom Chesterfield pinned so many hopes. In August 1728 he asked Charles, third Viscount Townshend, to obtain him the Garter, arguing that it would help his diplomatic status, but he had to wait until May 1730. Townshend's retirement at that time had no effect upon Chesterfield's progress, and in June 1730 he was made lord steward, with the understanding that he would assume the duties when his mission to the Netherlands was satisfactorily completed. In the event he did not have to perform the steward's duties for long. Not until February 1732 was he able to return home, and the following year Sir Robert Walpole's 'Excise Bill' produced a major political crisis. Chesterfield's hostility to the measure was well known. In the Commons his three brothers voted against the bill, and doubt whether he could get it through the Lords was an important factor in persuading Walpole to abandon the measure. On 13 April, by way of example and to demonstrate that he retained the king's favour, Walpole had Chesterfield dismissed from his stewardship and Lord Clinton, another potential rebel, from his lordship of the bedchamber. Hervey quotes a dignified protest to the king from Chesterfield, claiming eighteen years of uninterrupted attachment, and explaining that 'I declared at all events against a measure that would so inevitably lessen the affections of Your Majesty's subjects to you... I thought of it as the whole nation did' (Hervey, 1.172-3; 'Letters', 2.265-6). Chesterfield joined Scarbrough, Bathurst, Cobham, and Carteret, with Bolingbroke in the background, in a most formidable and talented opposition. In May he helped to inflict a snap defeat on the government, demanding a report on the accounts of the South Sea Company. Walpole's response was to strengthen his debating team in the Lords by sending Hervey and Hardwicke there. Cobham and Bolton were dismissed their regiments 'in terrorem', and Chesterfield spoke strongly for a bill to prevent the removal of army officers for political offences; he lost by 100 votes to 62. 
The first disappointment for the opposition was that, though they made gains at the general election in May 1734, they were not sufficient to unseat Walpole. Bolingbroke, always volatile, gave up the struggle and retired to France. This placed an extra burden on Chesterfield, particularly in the vigorous newspaper and pamphlet warfare. Early in 1734 three of his essays, including 'An army in waxwork', appeared in 'Fog's Journal' and did much to cheer the opposition. His marriage in September 1733 also had political implications. He was already on cool terms with Queen Caroline because of his friendship and correspondence with Lady Suffolk, the mistress of George II. Chesterfield's bride was the forty-year-old Petronilla Melusina von der Schulenburg ['see below'], the daughter of George I by his mistress the duchess of Kendal. In 1722 she had been created countess of Walsingham in her own right, though after the marriage she was known as Lady Chesterfield. Among the many advantages the marriage offered was that the duchess was Chesterfield's next-door neighbour in newly built Grosvenor Square: another was that the countess was reported to have a marriage portion of $50,000, a pension for life of $3000 per annum, and further expectations on the death of her mother. Chesterfield's windfall went towards completing his magnificent house in South Audley Street, which was given its grand opening in 1752. According to Horace Walpole, George II was extremely reluctant when the duchess died in 1743 to pay over Lady Chesterfield's inheritance, and had to be prompted by the threat of legal action. Hervey provided a glimpse of Chesterfield's new existence in October 1733: 'Lord Chesterfield has not stirred from Twitenham since the declaration of his marriage. He talks, Lady Chesterfield kisses, and the Duchess of Kendal spins all day long... he has no resources to dissipate his boredom' (Holland Fox-Strangeways, 179). Although Chesterfield treated his wife with courtesy and consideration, and she in return took a kind interest in the progress of his illegitimate son Philip, rumours were soon circulating crediting Chesterfield with extramarital affairs, including one with Lady Frances Shirley. 
The main strategy of the opposition was to unite the still formidable tory party with the whig dissidents in order to bring about Walpole's downfall. Chesterfield developed in the Lords into one of the house's most effective speakers, shedding much of his earlier elaboration and adopting a more direct and relaxed debating style. Both Hervey, who often followed him in debate, and Horace Walpole, unsympathetic to him, paid tribute to his brilliance on occasion. Chesterfield did not allow himself to be inhibited by consistency. On 6 March 1733, before his dismissal, he had defended the army estimates, ridiculing the idea that the army might be a threat to liberty; on 28 March 1734 he denounced a motion to augment the army in the light of the War of the Polish Succession as 'the most extraordinary demand that was ever made on any Parliament in this kingdom... adieu for ever to the liberties of Great Britain' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 8.1236, 9.531-8). In May 1737 his speech against Walpole's 'Playhouse Bill', to establish the licensing of plays by the lord chamberlain, won immense applause: 'the only way to prevent being ridiculed or censured is to avoid all ridiculous or wicked measures... I shall always be extremely cautious and fearful of making the least encroachment upon liberty' (ibid., 10.328-42). The decision of the prince of Wales in 1737 to move into opposition made it much easier to defy the charge that Chesterfield and his friends were crypto-Jacobites, and Chesterfield became a regular visitor to the prince's London headquarters at Norfolk House. But their most likely chance of ousting Walpole was that Britain might become involved in war, for which neither his talents nor his policy were well suited. In May 1738, in a debate on 'the depredations of the Spaniards', Chesterfield complained of the 'scandalous insults' offered to the nation, and demanded satisfaction by force of arms if necessary (ibid., 10.776-83). Walpole's response was to try to reach agreement with Spain, and in January 1739 a convention was signed. Chesterfield, in the presence of the prince of Wales for support, attacked the convention on 1 March in a speech 'prodigiously applauded as very fine, and very artful'. The settlement was 'the most inglorious, the most pernicious that this nation ever made... we must now fight them before we can expect any justice or satisfaction from them' (ibid., 10.1091-1246). Walpole carried the day by 95 votes to 74, an ominously slight majority. Mrs Delany, who attended the debate, thought that Chesterfield 'spoke most exquisitely well... I never was so well entertained in my life as with his speaking' ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 1st ser., 2.45). War came in October 1739, but for a time Walpole held on. Admiral Edward Vernon's great victory at Portobello in November 1739, though in the event a flash in the pan, convinced many that a glorious war was about to begin. 
By the time the next general election was due in 1741 there were signs that Walpole's grip was faltering. His last great parliamentary triumph was in February 1741, when an injudicious motion begging the king to dismiss him split the opposition. The tories, disliking the threat to the royal prerogative, abstained, leaving Walpole victorious in the Commons by 290 votes to 106 and in the Lords by 108 to 59. Chesterfield did not speak in the debate, being 'too weak', though he signed the protest: he was far from well and increasingly gloomy about the chances of ousting Walpole ('Egmont Diary', 3.192). He had no great opinion of his allies John Carteret and William Pulteney. Assured by Pulteney in November 1740 that Walpole was rocking, Chesterfield 'only laughed at this, and told him I was quite weary of hearing the same story for seven years together' ('Letters', 2.433). He returned to active service on 9 April 1741 with a speech opposing a vote of credit on the grounds that the government would only use it to bribe the electorate. His weak support he blamed on Carteret and the prince. Soon after the general election in May 1741 he set out on a continental trip in search of health, telling Marchmont that, 'unless the prospect here mends extremely, I shall not be in haste to return' (ibid., 2.450). Although first impressions suggested that Walpole's majority had been further eroded, Chesterfield remained pessimistic, convinced that his allies would ruin everything: 'we ought to have meetings to concert measures some time before the meeting of the Parliament' he wrote from Spa to George Dodington in September: 'but that, I likewise know, will not happen. I have been these seven years endeavouring to bring it about, and have not been able; fox-hunting, gardening, planting, or indifference having always kept our people in the country, till the very day before the meeting of the Parliament. (ibid., 2.469-70)' From Spa he went to Paris and thence to Avignon, where he paid his respects to the aged duke of Ormond. Horace Walpole believed that Chesterfield was on a secret mission to persuade Ormond to instruct the Jacobites to join forces to bring Walpole down. This is rather unlikely. Despite his contempt for Hanover and its natives, Chesterfield had little sympathy for the Jacobites, in part because he disliked Catholicism so much, and a journey of more than 1000 miles was scarcely necessary to obtain endorsement of so elementary a tactic. He spent three days with Bolingbroke, whom he admired extravagantly, but complained that he talked of nothing but metaphysics. 
Chesterfield returned with reluctance in November 1741, having found the French climate good for his health, still convinced that the opposition faced 'a melancholy and ignominious scene' in parliament ('Letters', 2.477). The pre-Christmas session was not decisive. Despite his gloom, Chesterfield took the floor at once, opposing the address: 'I see many motives for censure, none for approbation, all for distrust' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 12.223-6, 232-42). Horace Walpole, aware that his father was fighting for his political life, called Chesterfield's speech 'very fine' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 17.230). But when the struggle recommenced after Christmas it became clear that Walpole's days were numbered. Pulteney's motion for a committee of inquiry into the war was defeated by only 253 votes to 250; in a debate on the absence of officers from Minorca, in which Chesterfield took part, the court survived by 69 votes to 57. At the beginning of February, Walpole resigned and was created earl of Orford. 
The triumphant opposition split at once. Negotiations were conducted mainly by Pulteney, who did not take office but accepted an earldom. Sir Spencer Compton (Lord Wilmington) was put in as nominal first minister and Carteret joined Newcastle as secretary of state. The tories did not receive any employment, and neither did Chesterfield: 'I have been offered none', he wrote to a friend, 'I have asked for none, and I will accept of none till I see a little clearer into matters than I do at present; I have opposed measures not men' ('Letters', 2.490). He continued in opposition and in April spoke in favour of a place bill which the new ministers were attempting to smother. The following month, disclaiming any personal animosity against the fallen minister, he urged acceptance of a bill to indemnify witnesses against him, arguing that 'rejecting this bill is passing one of impunity for all future ministers... when the nation cries for an enquiry, will you lie under the imputation of obstructing it?' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 12.643-714). When the new ministers carried its rejection by 109 votes to 57, Chesterfield signed the protest. Despite his talk of 'measures not men', under the veneer of urbanity Chesterfield harboured some unpleasant and vengeful feelings. With such limited support he could hope to do little more than be a nuisance to ministers. He concentrated on the Hanoverian issue and early in 1743 published 'The Case of the Hanover Forces in the Pay of Great Britain', which provoked considerable controversy, allowing him to contribute a 'Vindication' and a 'Farther Vindication'. He added a number of essays in 'Old England' under the pseudonym Jeffery Broadbottom, criticizing the valour of the Hanoverian troops and the honours paid them and calling for some form of national government. In the House of Lords his attacks on George II were less and less veiled. He was first into action on the address of thanks in November 1742, complaining that it was an excuse to offer up incense to the monarch, and deploring its 'style and servility' (ibid., 12.843-7). On 1 February 1743, in a debate on the hiring of Hanoverian troops, he remarked offensively that Britain, 'after having exalted the Elector of Hanover from a state of obscurity to the crown, is condemned to hire the troops of Hanover to fight their own cause' (ibid., 12.1065-8, 1134-45). Even on domestic issues he could cause embarrassment. The 'Gin Bill' of February 1743 was intended to deal with the increasing scourge by replacing prohibition, which could not be enforced, by a system of licensing and control. Chesterfield attacked it with 'reason, wit and ridicule': 'it ought to be called a bill for encouraging the consumption of such liquors, by enabling all the poor in the kingdom to get drunk as often as they please' (ibid., 12.1191-1440). The revenue raised by the promotion of vice would no doubt find its way to Hanover. Ministers carried the day by 82 votes to 54, and Chesterfield confessed that he was disconcerted to find so many bishops supporting him -- not his usual predicament. Debating victories lifted morale, but the real hopes of the opposition were indications of growing tension within the government between Carteret and Pulteney (now the earl of Bath) on the one hand and the Pelhams and Hardwicke on the other. 
During the recess of 1743 Chesterfield had a private meeting with Henry Pelham (who had replaced Wilmington as first minister) which did not reach agreement but was not acrimonious. Chesterfield accordingly remained in opposition. To George Dodington he wrote once again urging a meeting before parliament assembled: 'though my former ill-success makes me almost despair, it shall not however hinder me from trying to prevail with people to know what they are to do, before they do it' (Owen, 197). The main issue was still foreign policy, Carteret's domain. George II had distinguished himself at the battle of Dettingen in June 1743, but the commander-in-chief, Lord Stair, had resigned, it was said in disgust at the favour showed to the Hanoverian regiments. The debate on the address on 1 December 1743 became single combat between Chesterfield and Carteret. Chesterfield did not divide against, but was at his irritating best: 'some questions might naturally arise to a sceptic in politics, or to a man whose confidence in the administration was less than mine -- it might be asked upon what success we are about to congratulate His Majesty, what armies have been routed, what provinces have been conquered... what ambassadors are arrived to sue for peace... I shall not oppose a panegyric on His Majesty's conduct and behaviour [though] His Majesty's behaviour might deserve praise, while his conduct incurred censure. (ibid., 13.100-35)' Chesterfield hoped Britain was not about to plunge into a formal declaration of war against France. Carteret retorted that he would not be intimidated by Chesterfield's menaces, or by 'those scattered remarks which I consider as preludes to a formal attack' (ibid.). As for the difference Chesterfield had perceived between the king's conduct and behaviour, 'I confess myself unable to understand: His Majesty's behaviour in the field was intrepid, and his conduct in general wise' (ibid.). Chesterfield and his ally in the lower house, William Pitt, were building up massive resentment in George II, to whom Hanover and his 'German minister' Carteret were equally dear. On 27 April 1744 he spoke at length in opposition to a bill to make it treason to correspond with the Pretender's sons, arguing that there were few Jacobites in England and the danger slight. 
The French declaration of war in March 1744 made the resolution of the cabinet's disunity imperative. In October 1744 the death of Lady Marlborough brought Chesterfield a bequest of $20,000 for his services to opposition, but ironically made it easier for him to take office. The possibility of a national government or 'broad-bottom' administration was increasingly canvassed. Carteret was forced to resign in November 1744, and in the grand reshuffle Chesterfield joined the cabinet as lord lieutenant of Ireland. The explanation he gave Marchmont was, as usual, laconic and unheroic: 'it had business enough to keep a man awake and not enough to hinder him from sleeping' (Rose, 1.183). Unlike a secretaryship, it did not demand constant attendance upon the king. Several tories were also brought in -- Lord Gower as lord privy seal and Sir John Hynde Cotton as treasurer -- though no place could be found for Pitt, whose insults to Hanover had been even more venomous than Chesterfield's. Since Chesterfield's own vituperation had been directed largely at their former colleague and rival Carteret, he was at first on cordial terms with the Pelhams. Stephen Poyntz noted in January 1745 that, among the newcomers to the ministry, 'the most open and hearty, and he in whom Mr Pelham places the chief confidence, is my old friend Lord Chesterfield' ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 110). 
Before he could take up his Irish duties, Chesterfield was sent on a diplomatic mission to The Hague to persuade the Dutch to enter the war against France. The king's audience before his departure in January was terse to the point of brusqueness, but the mission was a total success. The Dutch agreed to put 60,000 men into the field and to accept the duke of Cumberland -- the king's youngest son -- as commander-in-chief: in exchange their naval contribution was reduced and they were assured of further mercenary support. It was hardly Chesterfield's fault that Dutch performance proved inadequate, and that the French victory at Fontenoy in May destroyed allied plans before he had reached home. 
Chesterfield's stay in Ireland was very brief and very successful -- perhaps the two things were related. He arrived in Dublin on 31 August 1745. Since Prince Charles Edward had landed in Scotland the previous month, Chesterfield's main aim was to ensure that the Jacobite invasion of England would not be accompanied by insurrection in Ireland. On arrival he took brisk military measures, raising new regiments among the protestants of the north. William Lecky considered his viceroyalty brilliant and 'eminently successful'. The external threat helped to create protestant solidarity, and in his farewell speech to the Dublin parliament on 11 April 1746 Chesterfield was able to refer to 'the almost unprecedented temper and unanimity with which you have carried on the public business' ('Miscellaneous Works', 1.270). His own wealth, augmented by that of the duchess of Kendal, enabled him to entertain well at the castle. He had no great opinion of Irish landlords, who drank too much and treated the poor 'worse than negroes'. Convinced that repression was more likely to provoke rebellion than prevent it, he refused to take action to close Catholic churches or to hound Catholic priests, and when he left he was able to claim that 'not one man of them stirred during the whole rebellion'. Troops were sent from Ireland to reinforce the defences of England. It was probably his greatest service to the Hanoverian succession and helped to soften George II's rancour. Newcastle congratulated Chesterfield on the extraordinary reception one of his letters had had in the closet: ''Chesterfield is in the right: it is the wisest letter that ever was wrote'' ('Private Correspondence', 73-4). His relaxed attitude towards possible disaffection in Ireland was in sharp contrast to his vindictiveness towards the Scottish rebels: 'some particular acts of vigour and severity are absolutely necessary, and it is not a time for favour or lenity... the Commander-in-Chief should be ordered to give no quarter' ('Letters', 3.671-2). 
Chesterfield's absence in Dublin meant that he was not directly involved in the showdown between the Pelhams and the king which took place in February 1746. The ministers had long decided that so public a demonstration of the king's dislike was too damaging to accept, and had resolved to stage a mass resignation as soon as the Jacobite danger had passed. The king's response was to try to sponsor a ministry headed by Bath and Carteret, now Earl Granville, but they could obtain no support: wits complained that no gentleman could walk the streets of London without the danger of being importuned to join the cabinet. The Pelhams came back on their own terms, which included a post for William Pitt. With their policy, Chesterfield was in full agreement -- indeed he was one of the chief instigators -- since he believed that the block on patronage which the king's hostility implied made government almost impossible. 'You must mark out Lord Granville by exterminating without quarter all who belong to him', he had written ('Private Correspondence', 45). 
Chesterfield returned to England in April 1746 and was immediately struck down with a severe illness. This was one reason for declining in July the offer of yet another diplomatic mission to The Hague: in addition, he had little confidence that the Dutch could be persuaded to improve their war effort. In August he wrote to Newcastle that, 'after a long and painful struggle, it is now decided that you should have for some time longer, your most faithful friend' ('Letters', 3.770). But, despite their victory over the king, ministers were still at odds. Harrington, the first to tender his resignation, had borne the brunt of the king's resentment and was being steadily undermined by his fellow secretary Newcastle. In October 1746 he resigned and was replaced as secretary of state for the north by Chesterfield. 
The period of one year and four months which brought Chesterfield's political career to a close was in marked contrast to his triumph in Ireland, and was almost certainly an error of judgement. It is doubtful whether his health was strong enough, not so much for the routine of office, but for the constant in-fighting and manoeuvring in the cabinet. He should have realized more clearly that Newcastle's enthusiasm would disappear at speed and be replaced by his normal jealousy. Indeed, it appears that Chesterfield was bounced into the post on 28 October, when Harrington suddenly resigned, allowing himself to be talked into it by flattery and the last twinges of political ambition. From the outset the signals were not encouraging. 'An Expostulatory Letter to a Certain Right Honourable Person on his Late Promotion' forecast that he would not enjoy his new position. The king remarked to Newcastle that, if the new appointment did not work, they could get rid of him, to which Newcastle replied that Chesterfield had already made the same point. To his son, Chesterfield wrote in November that the post was 'in some degree inflicted upon me', and that he doubted whether he was really fit for a position which 'requires more strength of body and mind than I have' ('Letters', 3.830). 
For a time, interest in his new post carried Chesterfield, while Newcastle's attention was partly diverted by planning for the general election of July 1747, which ministers won comfortably. Thereafter, difficulties developed. Patronage disputes formed an obbligato to most ministries, since success in carrying recommendations not only built one's political foundation but announced to the world one's standing and prospects. The major question remained foreign policy. Chesterfield's low opinion of the efficiency of the Dutch republic persuaded him of the need for peace on whatever reasonable terms could be obtained, while Newcastle still hoped that the war could be brought to a successful conclusion. French diplomatic advances led to a peace conference at Breda, to which the young Lord Sandwich was sent. Attached at first to Chesterfield, he soon perceived that Newcastle was a better long-term bet and transferred his allegiance. When Chesterfield managed to appoint his friend Solomon Dayrolles as resident at The Hague, Sandwich regarded him as a spy. By the summer of 1747 complaints were creeping into Chesterfield's letters to Dayrolles, and by the autumn a kind of sullen resignation had taken over. In June Chesterfield reported wryly that 'many people think that 'my Brother' [Newcastle] will wear out my patience, as indeed he has most people's, but... I may hold out longer than people think' ('Letters', 3.942). In July he wrote that Newcastle had, he believed, promised Sandwich the secretaryship in succession, and the following month that Sandwich had 'for some time made his option between the duke of Newcastle and myself' (ibid., 3.991). In September he would 'continue in public life, while I can do it with honour, and when I cannot, I shall enjoy private life with pleasure' (ibid., 3.1014). In October he told Dayrolles how disagreeable it was 'to tug at the oar with one who cannot row, and yet will be paddling so as to hinder you from rowing' (ibid., 3.1043), and that he did not know how much longer he could bear it. By January 1748 he had had enough. It was well known, he wrote, that he was no more than a 'commis' -- as for business, 'I have now gone through every part of it, without liking it at all the better for being acquainted with it. Like many other things, it is most admired by those who know it the least' (ibid., 3.1088). On 6 February he resigned, assuring the king that he would continue to support the government, and explaining to Dayrolles that he would now be able to enjoy 'philosophical quiet' (ibid., 3.1097). From Bath, to which he had at once travelled to repair his shattered health, he wrote, with an air of detachment but surprising naivety for a man in his mid-fifties: 'I have been behind the scenes, both of pleasure and business. I have seen all the coarse pulleys and dirty ropes, which exhibit and move all the gaudy machines; and I have seen and smelt the tallow candles which illuminate the whole decoration, to the astonishment and admiration of the ignorant audience. (ibid., 3.1109)' He was allowed one final triumph. Within a fortnight the imminent collapse of the Dutch war effort, as he had often predicted, made peace inescapable. 'Chesterfield told me six months ago, it would be so' (ibid., 3.1122), he reported the king as saying, and Newcastle confessed that the outcome of the power struggle might have been very different had the news of the Dutch collapse come through a few days sooner. To Sandwich Newcastle wrote that the reports of Dutch bankruptcy 'go much further than Lord Chesterfield's gloomiest forecasts, which I used to put down to prejudice, passion and personal pique and resentment' (Lodge, 316). 
In a letter from Bath to David Mallet, Chesterfield pondered the explanations that would be offered for his resignation. A brisk, if brief, pamphlet war broke out, with 'An Apology for a Late Resignation' putting Chesterfield's case, 'An Answer' confuting it, and 'An Impartial Review' suggesting middle ground. Within a month, however, Chesterfield wrote that 'new matter has shoved me off the coffee-house tables' ('Letters', 3.1118-19). His career was by no means a complete failure, and, in view of his poor health, it was creditable how much he did achieve. As a diplomat he was highly successful and as viceroy -- not the easiest of posts -- outstanding. His wealth offered always a very agreeable alternative existence -- he resumed gambling at White's as soon as he resigned -- free from the drudgery, anxieties, and irritations of political life. He lacked the drive and determination of a Walpole, Pelham, North, or Pitt, younger sons or men of little personal wealth, who needed office to make their way in the world. In this sense he choked on the silver spoon with which he was born. In addition he made two simple mistakes, which he shared with Bolingbroke and Carteret, two other clever men. He overestimated how much cleverer he was than others -- writing to Bolingbroke of the tediousness of dealing with second-rate minds -- and he overestimated the importance of sheer cleverness in political life as against other assets. He might have remembered a maxim of Rochefoucault, whom he liked to recommend, that real cleverness takes the trouble to disguise itself. Chesterfield's did not, and, considering the emphasis he placed in the 'Letters to his Son' on the art of making friends, it is ironic that he made so many enemies. He had neither a large parliamentary following nor a fund of goodwill on which to draw in a crisis. On the news of his retirement, Lady Westmorland said, unkindly but not unfairly: 'I apprehend this occurrence to be of very little importance to the world, for as his going in produced no good effects, his going out can produce no bad ones' ('Eighth Report', 569a). 
It would have surprised Chesterfield when he retired to know that he had twenty-five years of life ahead of him. His health had frequently been very bad, with unpleasant giddy spells and rheumatic pains as well as the remorseless onset of deafness. He referred to his 'shattered carcase' ('Letters', 4.1244), and as early as 1741 wrote to his Dutch friend Baron Torck: 'I have been so ill all this winter that I thought the play was going to end' (ibid., 2.444-5). But he did not totally abandon politics. He continued to attend the House of Lords, and in 1751 he was responsible for the calendar reform which brought Britain into line with the continent. He took trouble with his speech on that occasion, describing it with some pride to his son. In 1753 he disliked the repeal of the 'Jewish Naturalization Act', regarding it as a surrender to intolerance and bigotry. There were occasional suggestions or rumours that he might return to office, but he had little desire left. On 24 May 1755 he moved the adjournment to prevent 'an indecent, ungenerous and malignant' motion by Lord Poulet being debated, which begged the king not to visit Hanover. 'People are impatient to see what great employment I am to have', commented Chesterfield: 'I have nothing to fear, I have nothing to ask, and there is nothing that I will or can have... public life and I, we are parted forever' (ibid., 5.2143). His last speech in the House of Lords was on 10 December 1755, when he defended the subsidy treaties in an oration of nearly an hour. However, the effort, he wrote, 'very near annihilated me' (ibid., 5.2170), and he was carried home before the debate was concluded. In January 1756 Mrs Delany reported that he had had a stroke, brought on by gambling. In 1757 he was brought into action once more to reconcile Newcastle and Pitt, but he acted as broker and took no office for himself in that most successful of wartime coalitions. 
The overwhelming concern of Chesterfield's later life was plotting and monitoring the career of his son Philip: 'his success in the world', he wrote in 1751, 'is now the only object I have in it' ('Letters', 4.1735). The 'Letters' brought more lasting fame, as well as censure, than all his political achievements. They have been greatly admired. Shellabarger called them 'one of the world's permanent books... an exquisite flower of civilisation'. That may seem excessive for writings which were never conceived as a book, which were published after the author's death, probably against his wishes, and which were, by their very nature, repetitive, unrevised, and miscellaneous. From 1761 he added the letters to his godson, Sturdy, his eventual successor as fifth earl. When the two did not provide him with enough opportunity to offer sage advice, he wrote to young Lord Huntingdon, son of the religious reformer Selina: 'I consider him my adopted son', he told the marquise de Monconseil (ibid., 4.1583). 
The series of 448 letters to his son began when the boy was five and continued until within four weeks of his death in 1768 at the age of thirty-six. In one sense they were compensation for the university education Philip did not receive and were intended to provide the essential foundation for a career in politics or diplomacy. At their peak, from 1748 to 1752, the long and earnest homilies were landing on Philip's table at the rate of one a fortnight. They constitute one of the heaviest intellectual bombardments ever attempted: 'you chiefly employ, or rather wholly engross my thoughts', the boy was told (ibid., 5.1943-4). There was no escape, since Philip was asked for comments and replies and was warned that he would be questioned about his understanding of them. The subject matter was adjusted as Philip grew. When he was eleven, at Westminster School, he was asked: 'are you sufficiently upon your guard against awkward attitudes... and disgusting habits, such as scratching yourself, putting your fingers in your mouth, nose and ears?' (ibid., 4.1516). Later they dealt with questions of dress and deportment -- how to enter and leave a room with ease, to be polite to servants, to smile often and never laugh, to avoid drink, gluttony, and gambling, to flatter vicariously and bait one's hook, to avoid low company, to choose a wife with discretion, and to make friends and avoid making enemies -- what Chesterfield called 'the necessary arts of the world' (ibid., 5.1997). 
Although the 'Letters' were not intended for publication, when they appeared one year after Chesterfield's death they attracted widespread comment. George III was reported to have said that, 'for my part, I like more streight forward work' ('Early Journals and Letters of Fanny Burney', 2.33n). Samuel Johnson's brutal dismissal of them as teaching 'the morals of a whore and the manners of a dancing master' was to be expected from a man of painful seriousness and deep religion, yet he added that, if the 'immorality' were removed, they would make 'a very pretty book', which 'should be put into the hands of every young gentleman' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.266, 3.53). Horace Walpole, who, with Edward Gibbon, had declined to edit them, though finding the repetition endless and tiresome, conceded that 'to my great surprise they seem really written from the heart' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 28.146-7). Later comments reflect the changing values of their own day. The nineteenth century deplored the lack of zeal in religion, the twentieth century Chesterfield's unflattering views on women. Macaulay thought the 'Letters' were 'trash' ('Letters of Thomas Babington Macaulay', 2.288-9), and Lord Mahon warned his readers not to be corrupted by them. Colin Franklin in 1993 thought that, on women and marriage, Chesterfield was 'at his most atrocious' (Franklin, 12). 
Concentration on the contents of the 'Letters', many of which were, after all, intended as a training in diplomacy, runs the risk of neglecting their tone and the effect which they produced. It would be foolish to deny that they were well intentioned, that Chesterfield mixed praise and encouragement with reproach, or that, as Walpole put it, he had a difficult cub to lick into shape. But, in addition to the heavy didacticism, not uncommon in eighteenth-century fathers writing to their sons abroad, there is a note of menace, which could hardly fail to have had a stultifying, if not paralysing, effect. As an illegitimate son, Philip Stanhope had no claim on the earl and was totally at his mercy, as his father reminded him: 'remember, that I am under no further obligation than to give you the necessary means of subsisting... if once we quarrel, I will never forgive' ('Letters', 3.1070). If Philip should cease to deserve his affection, 'you may expect every possible mark of my resentment' (ibid., 3.1320). The battering was remorseless. 'I shall ask you questions about this letter' (ibid., 2.376), Chesterfield wrote (on chronology) to his seven-year-old son. 'If you should disappoint me, I would not advise you to expect much from me' (ibid., 3.752), and, again, 'I shall expect perfection... or you and I shall not be very well together. I shall dissect and analyse you with a microscope' (ibid., 3.974). Even compliments contained threats: 'I begin to believe that I shall be proud of you... Those expectations of mine seem so well grounded, that my disappointment, and consequently my anger, will be so much the greater if they fail' (ibid., 4.1198-9). The unlucky youth was reminded how fortunate he was to have so painstaking an instructor: 'you should be sensible of your good fortune in having one who interests himself enough in you to inquire into your faults in order to inform you of them' (ibid., 3.1171). Chesterfield wished he could be invisible so that he might hear and judge the boy's 'natural and unguarded conversation at breakfast' (ibid., 4.1365): 'Remember that I shall know everything you say or do at Paris exactly as if by the force of magic' (ibid., 4.1608). To welcome Philip back from his protracted grand tour in 1751, his father wrote: 'You must therefore expect the most critical 'examen' that ever anybody underwent. I shall discover your least, as well as your greatest defects, and I shall very freely tell you of them' (ibid., 4.1696). 
The result was predictable. The boy grew up shy, deceitful, graceless, and awkward -- 'a meer pedantic booby', in Fanny Burney's opinion ('Early Journals', 2.63). Lord Charlemont, in a detailed account, made the best case for Chesterfield, arguing that the 'Letters' had been a desperate attempt to cure 'a total want of good breeding', yet one wonders whether the remedy was not the cause. Stanhope grew up 'a perfect Tony Lumpkin... all the anxious father's pains were thrown away on the utterly incurable son' ('Charlemont MSS', 1.324-30). Chesterfield brought him into parliament in 1754 for the nomination borough of Liskeard: Philip broke down in his maiden speech and never spoke again. With considerable difficulty, in 1757 Chesterfield got him appointed resident at Hamburg, which he left in 1759, though he retained the post for another four years; in 1764 he became resident in Dresden and gave up his seat in parliament. When Philip died in 1768 at the age of thirty-six, Chesterfield discovered that he had been secretly married for ten years, significantly to the illegitimate daughter of an Irish gentleman, and had two sons, Charles and Philip. His widow, Eugenia Stanhope, arranged for the publication of the 'Letters' the year after Chesterfield's death. 
In the 236 letters to his godson Philip Stanhope, known as Sturdy ['see below'], the touch is lighter, partly because the boy had a father alive and was not completely in Chesterfield's power. Yet even there, menace was not absent. 'Though he loves me', the earl wrote to Philip's father in 1764, 'he fears me more than he does anybody in the world; and I endeavour to keep those two sentiments alive in him' ('Letters', 6.2580). The outcome was hardly more encouraging. Fanny Burney, who was at court with the fifth earl in the 1790s, wrote: 'how would that quintessence of high ton, the late Lord Chesterfield, blush to behold his successor; who, with much share of humour and of good humour also, has as little good breeding as any man I ever met with' ('Diary and Letters', 5.92). Although he was well received at court and obtained the Garter, his career was in no way remarkable. Even Lord Huntingdon, to whom Chesterfield addressed nearly fifty letters, turned out to be something of a disappointment. 
Chesterfield's health slowly degenerated. 'I feel a gradual decay', he wrote in April 1765, 'though a gentle one; and I think that I shall not tumble, but slide gently to the bottom of the hill of life. When that will be, I neither know nor care, for I am very weary' ('Letters', 6.2651). In September 1765 he told the bishop of Waterford: 'I am neither well nor ill, and hobbling on to my journey's end' (ibid., 6.2667). He maintained an interest in politics. He disapproved strongly of the 'Stamp Act', sending his proxy to Newcastle to use for its repeal in 1766, and he commented on the imprudence of Pitt in exchanging the Commons for the House of Lords, 'that Hospital of Incurables' (ibid., 6.2752). His frequent visits to Bath patched him up from time to time: 'I could now outcrawl a snail', he wrote in 1769, 'or perhaps even a tortoise' (ibid., 6.2899). From 1772 he could no longer write, and he died, at Chesterfield House, Grosvenor Square, on 24 March 1773, leaving a long letter of advice to be delivered to his heir. He was buried on 10 April at Shelford, Nottinghamshire, one of the family estates, with little pomp or expense, as his will dictated. Maty, his first biographer, recorded that, polite to the end, his last words were: 'Give Dayrolles a chair' ('Miscellaneous Works', 1.225). 
Chesterfield's will, printed in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', aroused much comment. The bulk of his property went to Sturdy, then on the grand tour, but advised from the grave never to visit Italy, 'the foul sink of illiberal manners and vices'. He was to forfeit $5000 to the dean and chapter of Westminster should he keep hounds or racehorses, stay overnight at Newmarket, or lose more than $500 in a gambling session. Philip's mother, Mme de Bouchet, was given $500 'as a small reparation for the injury I did her': she rejected it. Philip's sons, Charles and Philip, were to share $310,000, with an annuity of $100 each. There were bequests to servants, 'equals by Nature, and my inferiors only by the difference of our fortunes'. Lady Chesterfield, who had much property of her own, received $1000 per annum and the use of the London and Blackheath houses. Mrs Delany thought that she had been cheated and 'very ungratefully used' ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 2nd ser., 1.529, 2.32-3), and Mrs Montagu noted that people were disgusted at the will. One feature of the will seems to have escaped comment: Chesterfield's reference to the Almighty as 'Eternal, Supreme, Intelligent', reflecting a rational deism, comes close to flattering God. 
Chesterfield's 'Letters' to his son Philip were published in 1774 by James Dodsley, who gave Eugenia, Philip's widow, 1500 guineas for the copyright. A half-hearted attempt by the executors to prevent publication finished in a settlement. The 'Letters' were followed in March 1777 by the 'Miscellaneous Works', published by the Dilly brothers Edward and Charles, edited by Matthew Maty, and completed by J. O. Justamond, which included a long biographical introduction and essays from 'Old England' and 'The World'. The following month there appeared seven of the 'Characters' -- sketches of contemporaries such as Walpole, Hardwicke, Henry Fox, and Pitt -- and perhaps the best of Chesterfield's work. In 1778 the Dilly brothers printed sixteen characters. Thirty-six additional letters, communicated to him by Chesterfield's grandson Philip Stanhope, were published in 1787 by Dodsley. Lord Mahon edited the complete works in five volumes in 1845-53, including four characters not previously printed. Meanwhile the letters to Chesterfield's godson were lying at Bretby until rescued and printed by Lord Carnarvon in 1890, with a substantial memoir of the author. The letters to Arthur Charles Stanhope, Sturdy's father, were first printed in 1817 and reissued as an appendix to Lord Carnarvon's second edition, and the letters to Lord Huntingdon, edited by A. F. Steuart, were published by the Medici Press in 1923. There followed in 1930 a volume of the correspondence between Chesterfield and Newcastle, edited by Sir Richard Lodge for the 'Camden Series' of the Royal Historical Society. In 1932 Bonamy Dobree produced a six-volume collection of all the letters, the first volume of which contained a 225-page life of the earl, in a limited edition of 900 copies, published by Eyre and Spottiswoode. In the first volume Dobree included notes on the previous editions. Finally, in 1937, S. L. Gulick edited twenty-six more letters to the godson in 'Some Unpublished Letters of Lord Chesterfield', for the University of California Press. There have also been numerous selections, abridgements, pocket editions, and translations. 
Of the miscellaneous writings sometimes attributed to Chesterfield by far the most successful was 'The Oeconomy of Human Life', published in November 1750. The formula was a common eighteenth-century one -- letters home by a foreigner, sometimes a Chinese or Persian, but this time an Indian -- permitting gentle satire. 'The Oeconomy' was translated into a number of foreign languages and repeatedly reprinted. Chesterfield's part in it is not absolutely clear. In 1750, for example, the 'Gentleman's Magazine' 'industriously attributed' the work 'to a noble earl, distinguished by his genius and the elegance of his writings and speeches' ('GM', 20, 1750, 483) and Chesterfield's authorship was restated in 'Notes and Queries' (Oct 1854). However, Dobree did not regard it as by Chesterfield, though he offered no comment. More recently scholars have predominantly rejected Chesterfield's hand and attribute the work to Robert Dodsley, who may have encouraged the earl's association to increase sales. A second part of 'The Oeconomy', which followed at once, was repudiated by Dodsley, and is assumed to be a pirate enterprise, probably by John Hill, a quack physician and occasional writer. Chesterfield's known miscellaneous writings were essays contributed to 'The Craftsman', to 'Common Sense', 'Old England', and 'The World'. The poetic and satirical squibs, including one directed at Queen Caroline, though admired, do not have the cutting edge of those by Hervey or Charles Hanbury-Williams. Among the political pamphlets attributed to Chesterfield, either in full or in part, were 'The Case of the Hanover Forces in the Pay of Great Britain... Examined' (1743), 'The Interest of Hanover Steadily Pursued' (1743), 'Vindication of a Late Pamphlet' (1743), and 'An Apology for a Late Resignation' (1748). The 'Characters', never printed in his lifetime, were polished and shrewd descriptions of his contemporaries, and have been much used by historians. Written after Chesterfield's retirement from active service, they were free from vituperation, relaxed, and fair-minded. 
Chesterfield's wit, celebrated in a number of collections and anthologies, has suffered from the passage of years. Hervey and Walpole insisted that it was prefabricated, and Johnson remarked that, though he had thought Chesterfield a lord among wits, he was only a wit among lords. Nevertheless, at its best it has a playful gentleness, almost whimsical in character. In 1748 he said of Field Marshal Wade's house in Cork Street, built for elegance rather than convenience, that, although one could not live in it, it would be worth buying the house opposite to look at it. His humour mellowed with age, becoming self-deprecating and rueful. His deafness was so acute, he wrote, that his great enjoyment was his garden, where he could converse with his fellow vegetables. His comment in 1768 on the death of the duke of Newcastle, so often his adversary, was far from unkind: 'my old kinsman and contemporary is at last dead, and for the first time quiet' ('Letters', 6.2872). Of himself, he remarked: 'Tyrawley and I have been dead these two years, but we don't choose to have it known' (Boswell, 'Life', 2.211). 
As a patron of literature and the arts, Chesterfield was not always fortunate. Though Lady Chesterfield was a keen supporter of the opera, the earl had little interest in music, and his deafness would in any case have made enjoyment difficult. He was a keen collector of books and his libraries were highly regarded: he advised his son to collect for use, and not for binding or appearance. He purchased paintings regularly and was in negotiation for two during his final month, winning the approval of Horace Walpole (no easy feat) for a nicely turned 'bon mot'. His literary patronage was not conspicuously successful. Alexander Pope was too haughty and independent to admit to a patron, though he and Chesterfield were on close terms and Pope was included among the earl's 'Characters'. His acquaintance with foreign savants such as Montesquieu and Voltaire was not one of patronage. Robert Dodsley and David Mallet were minor figures. Henry Jones, 'the bricklayer poet', repaid Chesterfield's very substantial help by trying to borrow money from his servants and was cast into outer darkness; for James Hammond, Chesterfield wrote a kind preface to his posthumous poems, but Johnson, in the 'Lives of the Poets', had the last word: 'of the prefacer, whoever he was, it may be reasonably suspected that he never read the poems'. Horace Walpole dismissed Chesterfield in 1750 as 'the patron of bad authors and bad actors' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 20.142). Chesterfield's attempt to help Johnson by praising his 'Dictionary' in 'The World' misfired badly. He was scarcely to blame and was unlucky to have plumbed the deep well of Johnson's pride and bitterness: 'is not a Patron, my Lord, one who looks with unconcern on a man struggling for life in the water, and, when he has reached ground, encumbers him with help?... Such treatment I did not expect, for I never had a patron before. (Boswell, 'Life', 1.256-67)' But Chesterfield handled the matter with dignity and adroitness, and Johnson, in his later years, came close to recanting. 


The earldom and estates passed to 


@@@@@


doc= 26256


Stanhope, Philip Henry, fifth Earl Stanhope (1805-1875), historian, was born at Walmer, Kent, on 30 January 1805. He was the elder and only surviving son of 
Philip Stanhope, who thus became fifth Earl Stanhope, shared few of his father's extreme opinions, though the relations between them, unlike those between the father and the grandfather, were cordial. From 1816 until his father's death in 1855 he was styled Lord Mahon. Educated at home by tutors, he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 19 April 1823 and graduated BA in 1827; he was elected FRS the same year. On 10 July 1834 he married Emily Harriet, 'nee' Kerrison (died 1873). 
Mahon seems to have gained little from his time at Oxford. In 1825-6 he toured the continent, from which came his first book, 'The Life of Belisarius' (1829). His father opposed his wish to enter the army and thus he instead entered the Commons, sitting as an independent for the rotten borough of Wootton Bassett from 1830 to 1832, when the seat was disfranchised. Mahon was a strong supporter of Peel, who differed from his father in opposing parliamentary reform. His maiden speech on 22 March 1831, opposing the 'Reform Bill', made a strong impression and on 1 July 1831 he presented the Oxford University petition against the bill. In December 1832 he was elected for Hertford, defeating Thomas Duncombe, but he was unseated on petition. 
Mahon thus found himself, though without a seat, among the political group later to be called Peelites. He was cautious about a wholehearted commitment to politics, and was already well into historical studies. However, during Peel's brief government of December 1834 to April 1835 he was under-secretary for foreign affairs, with the duke of Wellington as foreign secretary; Mahon had especial responsibility for South America and central and southern Europe. Wellington being in the Lords, Mahon had to answer Palmerston's criticisms in the Commons. His defence of the government's Spanish policy incurred considerable criticism from the whigs: Clarendon referred to 'that little shrivelled old woman, Mahon' (Newman, 258). Mahon was elected for Hertford at the general election of 1835 and held the seat until he went to the Lords in 1855. But his caution about office increased. He declined to return to the under-secretaryship when the Conservatives came back into office in 1841. 
Mahon declined, repented, and again declined the Madrid embassy in 1843. He declined and then accepted the secretaryship of the Board of Control for India in June 1845 and reluctantly went with Peel over the repeal of the corn laws in 1845-6. After 1846 he did not again hold political office. After Peel's death in 1850 he drifted away from the Peelites and after 1855 played some part on the Conservative side in the Lords. He declined the embassies in Vienna and St Petersburg when Lord Derby offered them to him in 1858, but was then piqued when Derby did not offer him a post in 1866, and complained that he should not only be thought of as a potential diplomatist. But when Derby offered him the duchy of Lancaster in 1867, he declined it. This pattern of reluctance -- which foreshadowed that of his nephew Rosebery -- was not the result of caution about Conservatism, which he increasingly supported, though never in his father's extreme fashion. Stanhope played an occasional part in legislation; it was his amendment to the 'Representation of the People Bill' in 1867 which ended the requirement of a general election on the death of the monarch. He was a member of several royal commissions, including those on clerical subscription (1864), the Irish church (1867), and ritual and rubrics (1868). Had he wished to submit himself to the daily political round, he could have been a prominent tory cabinet member. But his interests were wider and his dislike of impromptu speaking greater than that role required. 
Lord John Russell spent his years in opposition writing whig history, especially of the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. So, at much the same time, did Lord Mahon perform the same service for the Conservatives. But in the latter's case it quite quickly became his overriding interest. His first book on British history was 'The History of the War of Succession in Spain, 1702-1714' (1832; 2nd edn, 1836). It was written largely from the papers of his ancestor James Stanhope, first Earl Stanhope, which were at Chevening. This established Mahon's pattern and his contribution: an accurate and honest use of thoroughly researched private papers (usually, but not exclusively, those of his relatives). Macaulay's slightly patronizing review in the 'Edinburgh Review' (January 1833) argued fairly that Mahon's style was 'now and then unpleasantly stiff' and that he was 'a little too fond of uttering moral reflections in a style too sententious and oracular' (Newman, 286). Mahon's next book was 'The History of England from the Peace of Utrecht to the Peace of Versailles, 1713-1783' (7 vols., 1836-53); an American edition of volumes 1-4 was published in 1849 and the sections on India were published in 1838 as 'The Rise of our Indian Empire'. For many years this 'History of England' was regarded as the standard narrative work on the eighteenth century. Mahon's comments on George Washington involved him in a prolonged row with various American writers, and various pamphlets were published, including Mahon's 'Letter to Jared Sparks' (1852). In 1840 he published 'Spain under Charles II', chiefly extracts from the correspondence of his relative Alexander Stanhope, British minister at Madrid (1690-1700), and in 1842 'Essais sur la vie du grand Conde' (privately printed in 100 copies); it was published in English in 1845. In 1851 he published a work begun in 1838 and the product of his membership from 1837 to 1847 of the Roxburghe Club: 'The Forty-Five; being a Narrative of the Rebellion in Scotland', for which he researched at the state paper office. 
This steady flow of volumes established Mahon as a leading historian, not merely in terms of his readership, which anticipated Macaulay's, but in terms of his method: his documentary forays remain of value. Mahon was also an important historian of his own times. Fascinated by Wellington, he carefully recorded the duke's conversation, and deliberately led the latter to comment on hitherto undiscussed episodes. 'Notes of Conversations with Wellington' was published posthumously (1888). Mahon was, with Edward Cardwell, Sir Robert Peel's executor, and their rapid publication (2 vols. and 3 parts, 1856-7) of Peel's 'Memoirs' -- chiefly in fact political memoranda -- boldly responded to the biographical initiative taken by Disraeli by his biography of Peel's rival Lord George Bentinck (1852). 
Mahon's habit of working from collections of papers readily to hand pointed naturally to studies of his Pitt relatives. In 1842 he produced 'Correspondence of William Pitt and Charles, Duke of Rutland' and in 1852 'Secret Correspondence Connected with Mr Pitt's Return to Office in 1804'. In 1855 John Murray, his publisher, suggested a life of Pitt the younger, but he initially declined to write it. However, his interest was titillated by the arrival at Chevening of a substantial part of the Pitt papers, lent by a relative, Pitt's great-nephew Colonel Pringle. Stanhope -- as Mahon had become -- thus had a chance temporarily to add these to the Chevening papers and others that he borrowed, thus assembling a large collection of Pittiana. Stanhope's 'Life of... William Pitt' was published in four volumes in 1861-2; it was in a fourth edition by 1867, and a new edition with corrections was published posthumously (1879). Stanhope believed he might 'be in error when I venture to pronounce him the greatest of all the statesmen that his country has produced' (Stanhope, 'Life of Pitt', 4, 1862, 420), but he did not seriously question his own judgement. However, his biography was not hagiographical. Its firm base in accurately transcribed texts gave it lasting value regardless of its interpretation of events, and as an account it has not been altogether superseded. The assessment of John Ehrman, Pitt's recent biographer, is that Stanhope 'is Pitt's best biographer' ('The Younger Pitt', 1969, 69). Stanhope's transcriptions of George III's letters began the rehabilitation of that misunderstood monarch. Stanhope completed his writings on the eighteenth century with 'The History of England, Comprising the Reign of Queen Anne until the Peace of Utrecht' (1870), a book intended to bridge the gap between the end of Macaulay's 'History' and the start of Stanhope's own earlier work, a slightly curious intention given Stanhope's political differences from Macaulay. 
Throughout his writing life Stanhope's enthusiasm for documents generated extra volumes of correspondence, often printed privately, to the extent that 'it is not possible even now to establish with certainty a complete canon of his works' (Newman, 282). He edited Lord Chesterfield's letters (5 vols., 1845-53) but declined John Murray's request that he edit Lord Hervey's 'Memoirs'. 
Stanhope realized that his documentary interests suggested more than historical writing. From the 1830s he played an active role in encouraging public interest in the preservation and ordering of the public records, and he served on the royal commission for the publishing of state papers until it ceased in 1854, and he was a member of the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts from its foundation in 1869 until his death. When Thomas Noon Talfourd lost his seat in 1841, Mahon continued Talfourd's attempts to reform the law of copyright. Mahon's bill of 1842, amended by Macaulay and with a compromise between the various parties, became law and established copyright periods for the rest of the nineteenth century. In 1841 Mahon had become a vice-president of the Society of Antiquaries (succeeding Henry Hallam); in 1846 he became president, an office he held for nearly thirty years. As such, he was also a trustee of the British Museum and a member of the Royal Academy's council. In 1844 he was appointed a commissioner for promoting the fine arts; he consequently became involved in the decoration of the new Palace of Westminster, and chaired several of the relevant subcommittees. He proposed a parliamentary grant for excavations on the supposed site of Troy. This exposed him to Robert Lowe's sarcasm, but Heinrich Schliemann's discovery gave Stanhope ample revenge. 
Of these many forward-looking interests, one was to bear especial fruit. In 1845 Mahon raised in the Commons the idea of a national collection of portraits. On 4 June 1852, probably seeing in Disraeli a chancellor of the exchequer who might be generous, Mahon again raised the matter in the Commons and Disraeli responded favourably. Changes of government and the costly Crimean War intervened, and it was not until 4 March 1856 that Stanhope (by now in the Lords, quoting a letter from Thomas Carlyle in support) moved a motion which, after amendment, recognized 'the expediency of forming a Gallery of the Portraits of the most eminent Persons in British History' ('Hansard 3', 140.1789). Stanhope had already secured the support of the prince consort and of Sir Charles Eastlake, director of the National Gallery (Eastlake's letter advocated the association of the portraits with good biographical notices). The commissioners of the National Portrait Gallery first met on 9 February 1857 and elected Stanhope chairman. Stanhope quickly appointed George Scharf as secretary and saw the gallery through its first twenty years, chairing the trustees, as they became, until his death. A plaster medallion of Lawrence Macdonald's bust of Stanhope is appropriately placed above the entrance doorway of the National Portrait Gallery; it was presented by Scharf. 
Stanhope was physically unimposing, often being referred to as 'little', though he seems to have been of average height. He had a large head, and a slight lisp when speaking in public. J. L. Motley described him as 'a slender, thin man, with handsome features, curly hair, with spectacles' (Newman, 309). His daughter-in-law found him 'highly strung... fond of ladies' society and somewhat helpless in the trifles of life' (ibid., 312). His wife was jolly and enjoyed jokes, such as menus composed of dishes her husband disliked. She suffered from asthma and bronchitis, for which they often in old age went to Germany. She died of bronchitis on 31 December 1873 at Chevening and was buried there. Two years later, when convalescing, Stanhope died of pleurisy at Merivale House, Bournemouth, on 24 December 1875; he was buried at Chevening on 30 December. He was succeeded in the title by his son Arthur Philip Stanhope (1838-1905). His second son, Edward Stanhope, became president of the Board of Trade. 
Stanhope was insufficiently speculative to be a great historian. But he was certainly a good one, and his influence on the understanding and maintenance of the British past was pervasive and beneficial. 


@@@@@


doc= 26257


Stanhope, William, first earl of Harrington (1683?-1756), diplomatist and politician, was the third surviving son of John Stanhope of Elvaston, Derbyshire, and his wife, Dorothy, the daughter of Charles Agard of Foston, Derbyshire. His elder brother was Charles Stanhope (1673-1760) ['see below']. Having begun his career in the army, Stanhope entered the diplomatic service, in which he found early success and royal approval, and later enjoyed a long period as secretary of state. Horace Walpole said that Stanhope 'raised himself from a younger brother's fortune to the first posts in Government, without either the talent of speaking in Parliament, or any interest there' (Hervey, 1.4). He was educated at Eton College and at the Inner Temple before entering the army. In 1703 he became a captain in the 2nd foot guards, in 1710, lieutenant-colonel of the 3rd foot guards, and in 1711 colonel of a regiment of foot. In Spain he served under his cousin General James Stanhope. In 1715 he became a colonel of a dragoon regiment (which he held for three years) and was elected MP for Derby on his family's interest. Although his active military career was over, he was once more colonel of a dragoon regiment from 1725 to 1730, and he continued to advance through seniority, reaching the rank of general in 1747. He did not stand for parliament again in the election of 1722 but sat for the borough of Steyning for a few months from April 1727, and in the general election of that year he was once more elected MP for Derby. A consistent supporter of the whig ministry, he remained in the Commons until his elevation to the peerage as Baron Harrington on 6 January 1730. 
A key element in the post-war policy of James, Viscount Stanhope, as first lord of the Treasury was to prevent an Austro-Spanish war over Italian territories. In August 1717 Colonel William Stanhope was sent as envoy-extraordinary and plenipotentiary to Spain, where he arrived in early October. Stanhope disliked Madrid, 'so dead and barren a place as to all engagements' (Stanhope to Henry Worsley, Madrid, 17 Dec 1717 NS, BL, Add. MS 15936, fol. 146'v'). However, he seems to have pursued his mission energetically, though the Spanish foreign minister Cardinal Alberoni was intent on war. By early September 1718 talks had broken down, and Stanhope was warning both diplomats and the trading community of an impending war (Stanhope to Henry Worsley, 9 Sept 1718 NS, ibid., fols. 166-7). On 17 November 1718 he set out for France, the Spanish king having refused to give him an audience of leave-taking. About this time he married Anne (died 1719), the daughter and heir of Colonel Edward Griffiths, who died giving birth to their son William, later second earl ['see below']. 
In May 1719 Stanhope was sent as plenipotentiary with the French army on the Spanish frontier and spent the summer campaign season with the duke of Berwick's army, his last active military service. In early December he returned to England, and through the patronage of Lord Townshend soon returned to Spain as ambassador-extraordinary and plenipotentiary. Stanhope arrived in Madrid on 18 June 1720, aiming both to counter the active Jacobites there and to persuade the Spanish king to withdraw his Italian pretensions. Philip V's fear of losing face was compounded by bouts of mental illness, in which he would try to mount the horses in the palace tapestries. Philip repeatedly refused to execute the terms of the Quadruple Alliance until Gibraltar was delivered to Spain. James, Viscount Stanhope, was not opposed in principle to restoring Gibraltar, and the king even agreed to persuade parliament over time to cede it in return for some equivalent. In the meantime, though, George I declared that he would continue the war ten years longer sooner than give it up. William Stanhope spared no pains to persuade Philip and the Spanish ministers that their demands were impossible, and George declared himself extremely pleased with every part of Stanhope's conduct in pushing forward a treaty of friendship with Spain. The monarch's approval was vital to a diplomatic career, and Stanhope gratefully acknowledged the king's thanks as 'the utmost that my ambition would ever aim at' (Stanhope to Carteret, 30 June 1721 NS, BL, Add. MS 22520, fols. 152-3). Though lamenting 'the proverbial dilatoriness of the Court of Spain', Stanhope used the latitude his instructions gave him to engage in creative diplomacy (Stanhope to Carteret, 7 Jan 1722 NS, New York Public Library, Hardwicke Collection 64). In late 1722 he was secretly discussing a possible exchange of Santo Domingo for Gibraltar, though without any real expectation of success. Stanhope's health was bad for some months in 1723, but his main concern at this time was the impending fall of his patron, Lord Carteret. Suspecting Horace Walpole of encouraging Benjamin Keene, the consul at Madrid, to spy upon him, Stanhope begged to return to England for a few months. His chief motive was 'to know thereby the true foot, upon which I stand with the Ministers, in order to take my measures thereupon for continuing much longer here or not' (Stanhope to Sir Luke Schaub, 22 March 1724 NS, BL, Add. MS 4204, fol. 133'r'). 
In fact Stanhope continued in his Spanish embassy, succeeding that year, after 'a vast deal of trouble' in prevailing on Philip V to soften enough towards the British merchants to issue a cedula for the annual ship (Stanhope to Newcastle, Madrid, 15 Nov 1724 NS, BL, Add. MS 9152, fols. 161-3). Stanhope still had to convince Philip V that it was impossible for Britain as yet to restore Gibraltar. Consequently, his dispatches at this time were full of his frustration and even rage at the impenetrable, Jesuitical, and deceitful nature of diplomacy at the Spanish court. In summer 1725 he had to accept 'the almost utter improbability of avoiding a speedy rupture with Spain' (Stanhope to Townshend, 6 Aug 1725 NS, BL, Stowe MS 256, fol. 34'r'). The dominance of the duke of Ripperda, 'a zealous Jacobite', who in December 1725 gained the title of first minister, gave Stanhope the opportunity to show his mettle as a diplomat (Stanhope to Newcastle, 11/22 June 1725, ibid., fol. 14'r'). He had known the Spanish minister intimately for eight years and their conversations were frank and vigorous. In 1726 Ripperda was ousted by Don Jose Patino and sought refuge with Stanhope, who took him in, even though the embassy was surrounded by Spanish forces. After some negotiation, on 25 May 1726 Ripperda was given up, with all his papers, and placed in a tower of the Alcazar in Segovia. In the meantime he had been persuaded to disclose to Stanhope the terms of the recently concluded secret treaty of Vienna. 
The Spanish court, with the empire and Russia, was planning an invasion of England, and Stanhope soon informed his court of the sailing of a well-provisioned fleet. This prompted Admiral Hosier's ill-fated expedition and the final collapse of relations between Britain and Spain. In autumn 1726 Stanhope had to placate Spanish resentment at the British ministry's decision to send a fleet along the Spanish coasts. He delivered a memorial that was on the whole pacific, but detailed and insistent. When an undeclared war subsequently broke out between Britain and Spain, the letters between Stanhope and the Spanish secretary of state, the marques de la Paz, were published in a pamphlet that satirized the ministry's concerns about Spanish and Russian aid to the Jacobite Pretender, and blamed the war on poor diplomacy. A pro-ministerial answer attacked this pamphlet and its 'Continuation' as the productions of Spanish agents, and claimed that the author of the latter was Daniel Defoe. 
Before the rupture with Spain, Stanhope was ordered to stay long enough to procure intelligence and then to set off without a formal leave-taking. His conduct throughout was approved by George I, who affirmed that 'had it been possible for all the prudence and Attention that Man could employ, to have prevented their running into so wild and extravagant a way of acting, you would have succeeded in it' (Newcastle to Stanhope, 22 Dec 1726 OS, BL, Stowe MS 256, fols. 70-71). Leaving Madrid with the unequivocal approval of his own king, Stanhope went to Paris where, in April 1727 along with Horace Walpole senior, he had a highly favourable audience with Louis XV. Soon after, he was the obvious choice to join Walpole as plenipotentiary for the congress of Soissons. According to the duke of Newcastle: 'Stanhope was thought on equaly by us all, is undoubtedly extreamly proper, is quite out of business, & has nothing to do, & upon the occasion expresses as he has great reason his gratitude to you for your goodness to him' (Newcastle to Walpole, 2 June 1727 OS, BL, Add. MS 32750, fol. 446'r'). Though he came to resent the 'Vast Expence' of the posting, this was an important step in Stanhope's career. He got on well with Cardinal Fleury, and was active in cultivating those with news to give. His diligence and success were warmly commended by the new king, George II. 
On his return to England, Stanhope was involved in discussions in late March 1729 at Lord Townshend's house, where it was decided that the plenipotentiaries should not go back to the congress unless the Spanish ministers were to sign the treaty. Stanhope now made his career needs known also to Walpole and the inner circle of ministers, and to the queen. He was denied the white staff of the royal vice-chamberlain, but Newcastle told him 'I find the peerage is still your favourite point', and this he was promised (Coxe, 'Walpole', 2.643-5). He was duly ennobled as Baron Harrington of Harrington, Northamptonshire, on 6 January 1730. His visits to London also brought about a liaison with Anne Vane, the eldest daughter of Lord Barnard, and a maid of honour at court. Town rumour held that the lady was very forward in the match, and the wedding day was even named in the 'Evening Post'. Instead she became his mistress, then that of Lord Hervey, and later she had a son by the prince of Wales. Harrington was torn reluctantly from the enjoyment of his new love and new dignity to be sent once more to Soissons as ambassador-extraordinary and plenipotentiary, charged with securing full agreement from all the powers to the recent treaty of Seville. The diplomatic instructions were signed on 18 February 1730, and he set out three days later. 
Shortly after, Harrington was picked to succeed Lord Townshend as secretary of state for the north, a fact revealed to some ministerial insiders as early as April 1730. He learned of the king's intention to confer on him the seals only a month later. He set out for England on 18 June NS, and on arrival he was declared secretary of state and gave up his regiment. At the height of his popular reputation, he was greeted with a published eulogy: '
I sing the Man who dares to Master Fate, 

Who knew to merit first, and then be Great... 

Hail, happy Fav'rite, of the best of Kings, 

Great 'Harrington', all Hail, Louisa sings. 
(Louisa [E. Boyd], 'To the Right Honourable William Lord Harrington on his Late Return from Paris: a Poem', 1730, 3, 5)' Harrington expressed himself to Newcastle as 'extremely happy... upon the prospect of being joyn'd in office to one, upon whose friendship and judgement I can so intirely depend' (3 June 1730 NS, BL, Add. MS 32767, fol. 326). With the Walpoles, Horace and Robert, however, his relations were more ambiguous. Horace Walpole found it necessary to assure diplomats abroad of 'ye most cordiall & unalterable friendship between Ld Harrington & me; and between our respective friends in ye administration' (Walpole to Sir Thomas Robinson, 9 Feb 1731, BL, Add. MS 23781, fol. 212). However, in the War of the Polish Succession which broke out in autumn 1733, Harrington favoured active support of the empire against France, while the Walpoles pursued a policy of non-engagement. He arranged a secret diplomatic mission on behalf of the emperor in which the bishop of Namur, Thomas Strickland, visited London, though this was thwarted by Horace Walpole's direct intervention with the queen. Horace complained of receiving from Harrington 'some expressions and some turns in his letters more cold and ungracious than I ever had in seven years during my embassy in France' (Walpole to Sir Robert Walpole, 22 Oct 1734 NS, Coxe, 'Walpole', 3.184). In turn, he was critical of Harrington's overly complaisant manner in his diplomatic dealings: 'I am very sensible that your good breeding, and naturall disposition can't help being civill to ye De--ll if he waited upon you' (Walpole to Harrington, 20 Oct 1735 NS, Lewis Walpole Library, Yale University, Weston MSS, vol. 2). His civility was less of a handicap in high society, and Harrington was publicly celebrated as a model of true politeness. He had a reputation for discretion and taciturnity, however, as well as scrupulous courtesy: 'you know how tenacious Lord Harrington is upon subjects intended not to be divulged' (John Cope to Edward Weston, 28 May 1737, ibid.). The queen disliked Harrington, confiding to Hervey: 'There is a heavy insipid sloth in that man that puts me out of all patience' (Hervey, 2.346). The king in 1736 proposed to dismiss him, and would not take him, as was usual, to Hanover that summer. He may have owed his survival in office to the support of the Walpoles. 
A severe test of Harrington's urbanity was the controversy surrounding the birth of a daughter to the princess of Wales. With Sir Robert Walpole he was a witness to the apology of Frederick, prince of Wales, for having hurried his wife, in labour, from Hampton Court to London. At the king's request, both men wrote down the prince's words, which Walpole incorporated into a pamphlet account of the quarrel in the royal household. The duchess of Marlborough, a bitter opponent of the ministry, commented on Harrington's plight: 'as he is a Man that has affected a great deal of Civility and fairness between Man and Man, He, it is said, has vex'd himself upon it... He might have done something to have taken off the Odium of being an Evidence: But I believe, not without losing his Places. Which is not to be expected from a Man, who has done so much dirty Work as to rise so fast without any great Parts. (Duchess of Marlborough to earl of Stair, 8 Nov 1737, James Marshall and Marie Louise Osborn Collection, Beinecke Library, Yale University)' Harrington's finances continued to be strained, as he informed the king in June 1740, asking for a tellership of the exchequer, and citing 'The extreme streightness of my Family Circumstances, with the very expensive Way I am obliged to live in, & the great Charge of my Children now grown up' (draft letter to George II, 14 June 1740, Lewis Walpole Library, Yale University, Weston MSS, vol. 3). Asking Walpole's help, he pleaded 'the very indifferent Prospect I have, whenever the Income I enjoy [as Secretary] shall cease, of being able to support Myself & Family in any tolerable manner' (1 July 1740, ibid.). 
In the ministerial divisions of the late 1730s Harrington aligned himself with Newcastle and Hardwicke in favour of the war with Spain that finally began in October 1739. Harrington flattered the king in his closet with pro-Hanoverian policy ideas and in 1741 he played an important part in negotiating the Hanoverian neutrality treaty, signed by George II without consultation with his British cabinet. When the ministry was rearranged on Sir Robert Walpole's fall, he was given an earldom on 9 February 1742, and on 17 February he moved to the presidency of the council and was replaced as secretary of state by Lord Carteret. Harrington joined with Newcastle and Henry Pelham in opposing the new secretary's war policies, and on Carteret's fall from office he became secretary of state once more, on 22 December 1744. In 1745, while in Hanover with the king, he explored the viability of a congress between the maritime powers and France that might settle the conflict and thwart Carteret's desire for a grand alliance against France and more general war. The contest over policy was brought to a head by Carteret and William Pulteney (now lords Granville and Bath), who strengthened the king's reluctance to bring William Pitt into the ministry, a stance which led to the mass cabinet resignations of February 1746. 
Harrington was the first to confront the king and resign (10 February 1746), followed soon by Newcastle. He gravely offended the king by the manner in which he threw down the purse and seals, and never regained the royal favour. At the same time, in his pursuit of a peace on almost any terms, he was increasingly out of step with the Pelhams and Lord Chancellor Hardwicke, who favoured a vigorous war. In October he resigned once more, this time for good. His political prospects were summarized by the bishop of Salisbury: 'he was not well with the K[ing] upon the late resignations; cannot be supposed to be well with those he then helped to remove; is certainly ill with the present Ministry. What prospect then of his returning, unless by the fatal miscarriage of the measures which he has opposed? (Thomas Sherlock to Edward Weston, 3 Nov 1746, Lewis Walpole Library, Yale University, Weston MSS, vol. 3)' His resignation, so Newcastle later told the king, 'was neither known nor expected by me, above twenty four hours before it happened', and arose purely from his opposition to the ministry's war policy (Coxe, 'Pelham', 2.402). 
With some difficulty the king was persuaded to appoint Harrington as lord lieutenant of Ireland in the room of his relative Lord Chesterfield, who became secretary of state. At first his conduct in this new office was approved by George II, and the country air even cleared up the gout which was increasingly troubling him. He was unlucky, though, in arriving in a country disturbed by serious rioting in 1747 and still agitated by a pamphlet war fomented by Charles Lucas. In August 1750 Harrington came to Pelham 'full of anxiety and trouble', having found out that he was not long to continue as lord lieutenant. 'He fears a sudden stroke, and thinks that if he is removed, before any thing else is allotted to him, he shall be left without anything at all' (Pelham to Newcastle, 24 Aug 1750, Coxe, 'Pelham', 2.380). Harrington indeed obtained no further post, despite trying to secure the privy seal. He anxiously asked Pelham if he had offended the king by his conduct in Ireland, and was told that his resignation in 1746 was the real problem: 'I owned sincerely to him, that I took the old affair to be the sore which I never saw healed, with regard to him, since the thing happened... At present he is calm, but very anxious as to his fate' (ibid., 2.381). 
Harrington spent his few remaining years out of politics. He died on 8 December 1756. Despite his prolonged success at the centre of government, Harrington's finances were always insecure, and he lacked the patronage power expected of leading politicians. Lord Hervey's caustic summary of his position in 1733 put this in perhaps unfairly personal terms: 'he had reduced himself to a state of annihilation; he was absolutely nothing, nobody's friend, nobody's foe, of use to nobody, and of prejudice to nobody... He was forgotten in his eminence, seen every day, and never mentioned' (Hervey, 1.174). Hervey could also, however, see him in a more positive light: 'Lord Harrington's understanding had very odd luck in the world, for it was as much underrated after he came to be Secretary of State as it had been overrated before... His parts in reality were of the common run of mankind. He was well bred, a man of honour, and fortunate, loved pleasure, and was infinitely lazy' (ibid., 2.346). The younger Horace Walpole's summary was similar. Harrington, he said, 'understood both foreign affairs and the court; little of the constitution... He was very ambitious, civil, ceremonious, and a lover of pleasure. Never offended any party... was well with most' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of the Reign of King George II', 1.151). It was a lukewarm tribute, but one to which Harrington would have been too courteous to object. 
Harrington's elder brother 
Lord Harrington's son 


@@@@@


doc= 26258


William Stanhope, second earl of Harrington (1719-1779), army officer and politician, was born on 18 December 1719. Styled Viscount Petersham from 1742 until his accession to the earldom in December 1756, Stanhope was a soldier, entering the army as an ensign in 1738 and serving with distinction in the War of the Austrian Succession. He was a captain by 1739, a lieutenant-colonel by 1741, and from June 1745 until his death was colonel of the 2nd Horse Grenadier Guards. This prestigious command followed his distinguished service at Fontenoy, where he was slightly wounded. He was MP for Aylesbury from 1741 to 1747 and for Bury St Edmunds from 1747 to 1756, generally supporting the ministry. On 11 August 1746 he married Lady Caroline Fitzroy (1722-1784), a noted beauty and the eldest daughter of Charles Fitzroy, second duke of Grafton, who as lord chamberlain was a close colleague of William's father, the first earl of Harrington. It was a striking match for one who had nothing but his commission to support him: 'neither he nor his father, Lord Harrington, have a single foot of land to make any settlement with' (J. Harris, 'A Series of Letters: of the First Earl of Malmesbury, his Family and Friends, from 1745 to 1820', ed. earl of Malmesbury, 2 vols., 1870, 1.39-40). The second earl was rather eccentric, and his face was said by Horace Walpole to be as twisted as the legs which caused his odd walk and gave him his nickname Peter Shambles. He advanced in seniority in the army, becoming major-general in 1755, lieutenant-general in 1758, and general in 1770. From 1748 he held the post of customer in the port of Dublin, which he enjoyed until his death on 1 April 1779. He was survived by his wife, who died suddenly on 28 June 1784, and his eldest son, Charles Stanhope, third earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 26259


Stanley, Arthur Penrhyn (1815-1881), dean of Westminster, was born on 13 December 1815 at Alderley rectory, Cheshire, the third of five children of the rector, Edward Stanley (1779-1849), later bishop of Norwich, and his wife, Catherine (1792-1862), the daughter of Oswald Leycester, the rector of Stoke upon Tern. He had two brothers and two sisters. In September 1824 he was sent to a small private boarding-school at Seaforth, where Gladstone had been a pupil. Already distinguished by an insatiable love of reading, in 1828 his parents took him to the Pyrenees, a visit described fluently in his diary and the subject of many of his early poems. 
On 31 January 1829 Stanley entered Rugby School, of which Thomas Arnold had recently become headmaster. In 1831 he was promoted to the sixth form where for the next three years he came under the supervision of Arnold himself, whose influence upon him, both in the chapel and the classroom, was profound. Arnold deepened in him the whig convictions which his family had already instilled in him. He did not excel at rugby football, but impressed his contemporaries with his intellectual abilities; they recognized that he was not to be judged by their conventional standards, much like Arthur in Thomas Hughes's 'Tom Brown's Schooldays' (1857). 
In November 1833 Stanley gained a scholarship at Balliol College, and in the following October went into residence at Oxford. He became friendly with W. G. Ward and Benjamin Jowett, and heard Newman lecture in the university church, but he remained true to liberal principles and was never a Tractarian, though impressed by Newman's earnestness, which reminded him of Arnold. In 1837 he won the Ireland scholarship for the composition of Greek and Latin verse, and in the same year the Newdigate prize for English verse with a poem on the set subject of 'The Gypsies'. In November 1837 he was awarded a first-class degree in classics. He was elected to a fellowship at University College, Oxford, in July 1838, though he would have preferred to have been a fellow of Balliol. However, he learnt that Balliol was not inclined to elect someone so liberal in outlook as he was known to be. In the next year he won the chancellor's Latin essay prize and in 1840 both the chancellor's English essay prize and the Ellerton theological essay prize. Stanley was obliged by the terms of his fellowship to be ordained in the Church of England. However, he had grave doubts about subscribing to the damnatory clauses of the Athanasian creed but, having been told that they were not to be regarded as integral to that creed, he was prepared to be made a deacon in December 1839. In 1843 he was ordained a priest. 
In 1840 Stanley was present at the coronation of Queen Victoria and wrote a vivid, detailed account of the event. Shortly afterwards he left England for a tour of ten months, visiting Switzerland, Greece, Italy, Malta, and Sicily. His love of foreign travel remained with him until the end of his life. He was not attracted by the beauties of nature but delighted in visiting scenes of historical importance, describing them in many of his books and letters. On his return to Oxford in May 1841 he was immediately embroiled in the controversy over 'Tract 90', which had appeared in February of that year. Far from condemning it, he concluded that it would allow Roman Catholics to become members of the church and universities of England, 'which I for one cannot deplore'. 
The sudden death of Thomas Arnold in June 1842 dismayed Stanley, but when Arnold's widow asked him to write the headmaster's life he devoted himself with great energy to this task. 'The Life and Correspondence of Thomas Arnold', published in May 1844, was perhaps Stanley's greatest work. As an official biography it tends to gloss over Arnold's defects, nor does it give much space to the controversies in which Arnold had engaged; but the author's close knowledge of his subject, the inclusion of Arnold's letters in the text, and a powerful description of Arnold's death make it an important contribution to the life of an eminent figure of that age. 
In 1843 Stanley was appointed a college tutor and considerably raised the status of University College in the university. He was a strong supporter of religious toleration. He opposed both the university's condemnation of W. G. Ward in 1845 and the agitation against R. D. Hampden's appointment to the bishopric of Hereford two years later, protesting against the clamour with which the evangelicals assailed the former and conservative churchmen the latter. The sermons which he preached before the university were published with additions and appendices in November 1847 under the title 'Sermons on the Apostolical Age'. In the preface he urged his readers to consider the contribution of German theologians to biblical studies, but he was not a great biblical scholar and the book made little impact. 
On 6 September 1849 Stanley's father died. On 13 August in the same year Captain Charles Stanley RE, his younger brother, had died in Hobart, Tasmania, and on 13 March 1850 his other brother, Captain Owen Stanley RN, died on board HMS 'Rattlesnake' in Sydney harbour. His older sister, Mary ('b'. 1812), never married. She went out to nurse in the Crimea, but her devotion to Florence Nightingale evaporated and in 1855 she returned to England, where in the following year she was received into the Roman Catholic church. Her conversion, however, did not lessen his affection for her and he continued to write her long and frequent letters which form an important source for Stanley's life. She died in 1879 and was buried at Alderley by her own request, with Stanley officiating. Catherine, his other sister ('b'. 1821), married Charles Vaughan, the headmaster of Harrow, who, when he was detected in an amorous relationship with one of his pupils, had to resign in 1859; Stanley helped to negotiate the terms of the resignation with the minimum of publicity. He saw much of Catherine after her husband became master of the Temple and went to live in London. 
On the death of his father Stanley had to support his mother and sisters, but by his succession to a small estate he was obliged to resign his fellowship. He was offered the deanery of Carlisle, which he refused, and in July 1851 a canonry at Canterbury, which he accepted. Before leaving Oxford he had been appointed secretary to the Oxford University commission, whose report, partly composed by him, was published in March 1852. It recommended many reforms, including the creation of a new governing body for the university; the relaxation of the stipulation that all fellows of colleges should be ordained; the abolition of the distinction between noblemen, gentlemen commoners, and commoners; and the abrogation of the rule that all undergraduates must study the classics. The report was a triumph for the liberals of the university and provoked a violent reaction from the Tractarians led by E. B. Pusey. 
Since the duties of a canon of Canterbury were not onerous, Stanley was able to make an extended tour of Egypt and the Holy Land in 1852 and 1853. Starting from Cairo he and his companions sailed up the Nile, which he found intolerably dull, but the great granite statues of Rameses and two other pharaohs at Thebes impressed him. They went as far south as Abu Simbel, but turned back to Cairo, climbed the pyramids, and then set out on camels for the Sinai peninsula, at that time visited only by the most intrepid of European travellers. In the monastery of St Catherine at the foot of Mount Sinai they found the great German scholar Tischendorf, who on a previous visit had discovered there an important biblical manuscript, the 'Codex Sinaiticus'. After moving on to the Gulf of 'Aqabah, they turned up the defile that led to Petra, which Stanley pronounced to be a city not of bright colours, but of dull crimson, indigo, yellow, and purple. They reached Jerusalem on Easter eve 1853, from where they made expeditions to Nazareth, Damascus, Jericho, and the Dead Sea. The tour led to the publication of 'Sinai and Palestine' in March 1856, Stanley's powers of observation and description, together with the unfamiliarity of the places that he had visited, making the book an instant success. It reached a fourth edition within a year, and as late as 1881 was still being reprinted. 
In June 1855 Stanley had published a 'Commentary on the Epistles to the Corinthians' as a companion work to Jowett's 'Commentary on the Epistles to the Thessalonians, Galatians and Romans'. The young J. B. Lightfoot, later bishop of Durham, subjected Stanley's book to searching criticism in the 'Journal of Classical and Sacred Philology' (3.81-121) and concluded that the study of the biblical text was not his vocation. Nor was the book aided by Stanley's execrable handwriting, which led the printer to substitute 'the horn of the burning beast' for 'the thorn of the burning bush'. His delight in the history of Canterbury Cathedral led to a series of essays published as 'Historical Memorials of Canterbury' in December 1854; here his gift of writing powerful, dramatic narrative found full scope, particularly in his account of the murder of Becket. On the anniversary of Becket's death he would marshall his family and friends round the scenes of the event 'till when at length, the chapel of the martyrdom was reached, as the last shades of twilight gathered among the arches, and the whole scene became so real, that, with almost a thrill of horror, one saw the last moments through one's ears! (A. J. C. Hare, 'Macmillan's Magazine', 44.263, Sept 1881, 365)' 

In December 1856 Stanley was appointed regius professor of ecclesiastical history at Oxford, the chair being attached to a canonry at Christ Church, though he was not installed as canon until March 1858. He lectured frequently, his lectures forming the basis of his books 'Three Introductory Lectures on the Study of Ecclesiastical History' (1857), 'Lectures on the History of the Eastern Church' (1861), and 'Lectures on the History of the Jewish Church' (3 pts, 1863-76). In 'Lectures on the History of the Eastern Church' he dealt in the first part with the church's history in the East down to the advent of Muhammad, and in the second part with a history of the Russian church from its foundation to his own time. He has little to say on theology or on Orthodox worship and spirituality, for to him the Eastern church appeared barbarous and stagnant, though he recognized that this had saved it from the restrictions of the Council of Trent and the divisions of the reformed churches. Icons he regarded as coarse paintings on smoke-darkened boards. But the book has verve and contains some telling details: Stanley relates that in the church of Alexandria for centuries, and still in the church of Armenia, the dead hand of the first bishop was employed as an instrument of consecration in succeeding generations. 
At Oxford, Stanley was a stimulating teacher, acknowledged by John Richard Green as his mentor who had taught him not so much a creed as fairness. It was in pursuit of fairness that he campaigned for an increase in the miserly salary paid to the regius professor of Greek, who was now Jowett. He disapproved of some of the negative contents of 'Essays and Reviews' (1860), but pleaded that the essayists had been unfairly treated. When in October 1862 there appeared the first volume of Colenso's radical revaluation of the 'Pentateuch' he again championed the writer as 'an evidently honest and single-minded religious man', though he could not understand the book's mathematics. 
In January 1862 Stanley was asked to accompany the prince of Wales on a tour of the Middle East, which took place between February and June of that year; it was not without tension, for the prince preferred shooting to the inspection of ancient sites and monuments. His 'Sermons in the East' (1863) were preached during the tour, in the course of which his mother died on Ash Wednesday, 7 March, and was buried at Alderley. The tour brought him into greater royal favour, and also closer to Lady Augusta Bruce (1822-1876) ['see 'Stanley, Lady Augusta Elizabeth Frederica], fifth daughter of the seventh earl of Elgin; the brother of Augusta, General Bruce, was the prince's governor and in charge of the tour. General Bruce died in London in 1862 of a fever caught in the marshes of the upper Jordan. 
On 22 December 1863 Stanley was married quietly to Lady Augusta in Westminster Abbey. She was a woman of the bedchamber to Queen Victoria, who was greatly displeased at losing Augusta's services and thought the marriage to be most unnecessary. It took time for them to work themselves back into the royal confidence, but at last the queen accepted the situation. She called Stanley 'the little Dean'; he was 5 feet 51/4 inches tall, his chief facial feature being a sharply pointed nose. Thereafter he and Augusta were often at Windsor, where the queen frequently consulted Stanley on matters of church and state, admiring his liberal principles, though she found his temperament so cold that he seemed to her sexless. Nor were the visits only one way, for in 1869 she took tea at the Westminster deanery where, among others, she met Carlyle and Browning. 
On 9 January 1864 Stanley was installed as dean of Westminster in succession to Richard Chenevix Trench, who had become archbishop of Dublin. A prayer used at his installation declared that one purpose of his office was to encourage 'the enlargement of the Christian church', which he interpreted to mean that the Church of England should aim to be comprehensive; this also implied for him a close relationship between the church and state. He therefore invited to preach in the abbey clergy of many schools of thought, from the Tractarians Keble and Pusey (though they both declined), to evangelicals such as William Thomson, the archbishop of York, taking in liberals such as Frederick Temple on the way. In convocation he argued unsuccessfully that the Athanasian creed should be removed from the 'Book of Common Prayer', and in 1870 invited Dr Vance Smith, a Unitarian minister on the commission which was revising the Authorized Version of the 'Bible', to receive communion in the abbey. The historical associations of the great church also excited him and led him to write 'Memorials of Westminster Abbey', published in 1868, heavily laden with descriptions of its innumerable monuments. 
Stanley's sympathies, however, extended far beyond Westminster. In Scotland he was elected rector of the University of St Andrews, which he visited in March 1875. His 'Lectures on the Church of Scotland' (1872) and 'Addresses and Sermons Delivered at St Andrews' (1877) illustrate his interest in Scottish history. In 1877 he visited North America, which resulted in another book, 'Addresses and Sermons Delivered in the United States and Canada' (1879). Augusta had died three years earlier, so he was accompanied by George Grove, famous for his dictionary of music and musicians, and by Gerald Harper, a doctor and friend of his sister, Catherine, appointed to look after his health. From Boston he travelled via Philadelphia and Baltimore to Washington where he met the president, Rutherford Birchard Hayes, and went on to New York and Niagara Falls before he crossed into Canada. At Montreal he met the governor-general, the marquess of Dufferin and Ava, and accompanied him to Quebec. He returned to the United States, stayed with Emerson at Concord, and made a final visit to New York before returning to England. 
Stanley's conviction that church and state should be firmly linked led to his decision to forbid the use of the abbey to the bishops attending the first Lambeth conference in 1867. This was on the grounds that it had not been summoned by the secular authority, as the first general councils of the church had been, but by bishops; he also feared that it would condemn Colenso. His last book, 'Christian Institutions' (1881), advanced the view that the material element in religion was minimal and also stressed the importance of the laity in the church. He had a considerable affinity with the Quakers, which went back to the years when his father was at Norwich and he had come into contact with the great Quaker family of Gurney. 
In January 1874 Stanley had officiated at the Anglican marriage service in St Petersburg at the wedding of Prince Alfred, the second son of Queen Victoria, and Princess Marie, the only daughter of the tsar, which took place when the service according to the Orthodox rite had been performed. There was also a brief visit to Moscow. Augusta had gone with him, but on her return she was taken ill and after months of suffering died on Ash Wednesday, 1 March 1876. The queen authorized her burial in the abbey and, hidden from sight, watched the funeral from a private pew looking down into the nave; she thought the service was too long, though she was much distressed. 
In the summer of 1881 Stanley was taken ill while preaching a course of sermons on the beatitudes in the abbey. It proved to be erysipelas, and he died on Monday 18 July at the deanery, Westminster. He was buried the following Monday in the King Henry VII Chapel of Westminster Abbey by the side of his wife. The pallbearers at his funeral included the duke of Westminster, Matthew Arnold, Benjamin Jowett, W. H. Smith, and W. E. Forster, as well as representatives from the Church of Scotland and English nonconformist churches, and indicated the breadth of his interests in the church and nation. The queen lamented the passing of her beloved Dean Stanley, who was more to her than any bishop or archbishop, and Matthew Arnold commemorated his death in the poem 'Westminster Abbey', in which he told the legend of how St Peter himself had consecrated the church, when a fisherman had seen it glorified in light. Now, more than twelve hundred years later, Stanley had shed more light on Westminster. 
Stanley's writings proved to possess considerable staying power, and as late as the 1920s Evelyn Waugh noted in 'Decline and Fall' that his 'Lectures on the History of the Eastern Church' was still being read in Oxford. While his theological works have outlived their usefulness his travel books, with their descriptions of foreign scenes and his reaction to them, are still of interest; so also is his life of Thomas Arnold, which remains important for the study of that famous headmaster. Since his death his vision of a comprehensive church has been partly realized in the ecumenical movement and in the gatherings of representatives of different faiths, but the link between the Church of England and the state has become weaker, a development which he would not have regarded with any favour. 


@@@@@


doc= 26260


Stanley, Charlotte, countess of Derby (1599-1664), noblewoman and royalist heroine, was born at the chateau of Thouars, Poitou, in France, in early December 1599, the second child and eldest daughter of Claude de La Tremoille, duc de Thouars (1566-1604), and his wife, Princess Charlotte Brabantine of Orange-Nassau (1580-1626). As the granddaughter of William the Silent and the daughter of one of France's leading Huguenot families she could count among her uncles three of the leaders of European protestantism: Prince Maurice of Nassau, Henri, duc de Bouillon, and Frederick IV, the elector palatine. 
Having survived an attack of smallpox as an infant she was raised -- according to the last wishes of her father -- in strict adherence to the reformed faith. By the age of five or six she wrote confidently to her mother that she could converse in Latin and that she knew seventeen psalms by heart. She spent most of her childhood and youth at Thouars, only rarely appearing at the court at Paris. 
In June 1625 the duchesse de Thouars went to England as part of the household of Henrietta Maria, and arranged a marriage between Charlotte and James Stanley (1607-1651). Known at least from February 1626 as Lord Strange, he was the son of William Stanley, sixth earl of Derby, and his wife, Elizabeth Stanley ('nee' de Vere). Though it was never actually paid, the offer of an enormous dowry -- potentially as much as $26,000 -- and the prospect of forging an alliance with a family of royal pedigree and international prestige proved an extremely attractive proposition for the Stanleys, and one which they could not lightly refuse. Accordingly, the couple were married in the palace at The Hague on 26 June 1626 in a magnificent ceremony. 
In August 1626 Lady Strange accompanied her husband to the court at Whitehall and waited in attendance upon Henrietta Maria. Unfortunately the combination of Charles I's dislike for Lord Strange -- whom he believed to be a potential rival for the throne -- and Henrietta Maria's contempt for Huguenots ensured that the Stanleys quickly fell victim to court gossip and censure. As a result in August 1627 they retired to their estates at Lathom and Knowsley, in Lancashire. Save for a brief reappearance at court, when she acted the part of a nymph in Ben Jonson's 'Chlorinda' in 1630, and a visit to her family in The Hague in the spring of 1632, Lady Strange remained in the north-west of England for most of the next fourteen years. Between January 1627 and November 1641 she gave birth to nine children -- six of whom were to survive into adulthood -- setting the seal upon a remarkably happy and devoted marriage, and one for which she duly thanked the will of God, the love of her husband, and the foresight of her mother for fashioning. 
However, Lady Strange's domestic bliss was shattered, in the early 1640s, by the cumulative blows of the threat of Irish invasion, the death of her father-in-law -- on 28 September 1642 -- and by the slide of the nation into civil war. Her husband, now seventh earl of Derby, had initially attempted neutrality in the conflict, following the traditional policy of the Stanley family in Lancashire of placing themselves both outside and above the wranglings of conflicting interest groups within county politics. However, perceiving this to be no longer viable, in autumn 1642 Derby embraced the royalist cause with an enthusiasm not matched by his military abilities. Following the crushing defeat of his local army in April 1643 Countess Charlotte, having urged her husband to go to York to seek help from the queen, herself wrote to Henrietta Maria appealing for reinforcements but received only the curt reply that the earl of Derby should obey the commands of the king and secure his faltering hold over the Isle of Man. 
By winter 1643 the countess was secure behind the heavily fortified walls of Lathom House and, in the absence of her husband, was jibed at by an enemy propagandist who said that she 'had stolen the Earl's breeches when he had fled... into the Isle of Man, and hath in his absence play'd the man at Lathom' (Ormerod, 2.163, 167). Though the surrounding area was hostile towards the royalist garrison local parliamentary forces were not powerful enough to assault the stronghold, with its nine towers and deep moat. However, this situation changed overnight following Sir Thomas Fairfax's victory at the battle of Nantwich, on 25 January 1644. In February the Manchester committee of the parliamentarian forces decided that Lathom should be besieged and on the 27th of that month their troops surrounded the house. The countess managed skilfully to spin out negotiations over the possible surrender of the garrison until 11 March, but revealed something of her imperious and haughty nature in her contemptuous reception of colonels Rigby and Assheton, and in her demands for Fairfax to both wait upon, and defer to, her person. 
Hostilities commenced on 12 March and the siege lasted for eleven long weeks. The countess had the command of a garrison of some three hundred men, and following Fairfax's sudden withdrawal into Yorkshire the besieging army was never experienced or numerous enough to prevent the royalists from breaking out and raiding with virtual impunity. During this period the countess was instrumental in raising morale among her soldiers and the legend was born of her valiant and selfless defence of her home, romanticized in Victorian novels by Sir Walter Scott, W. H. Ainsworth, and others. The seizure of a 13-inch mortar by the garrison, on 25 April, appeared to have removed the most immediate danger threatening the fortress, but it was the news of the approach of Prince Rupert's relief column which ultimately proved decisive. The parliamentarians raised their siege on 26 May, and Rupert subsequently presented the countess with twenty-two enemy colours taken at the storm of Bolton, which had not three days before 'proudly flourish't before her house' (Ormerod, 2.183). 
Upon the advice of Prince Rupert the countess left Lancashire and, on 30 July 1644, transported herself and her children to the Isle of Man. From there she could only watch as a helpless bystander as her possessions in the north-west of England fell one by one to parliament in the wake of the royalist defeat at Marston Moor. Lathom itself capitulated in December 1645 and was completely demolished the following year. With Lancashire lost to them the Stanleys now began to consolidate their power in the Isle of Man. Such was their desire to recapture something of the splendour of the court life denied to them, and their need to reimpose their rule upon a thoroughly disaffected subject people, that they fostered the growth of elaborate ceremonial and courtly ritual at Castle Rushen, and sponsored the performance of masques as part of extravagant Twelfth night celebrations. 
Though her husband was specifically excluded from the offer of pardon extended by parliament in November 1645 the countess travelled to London two years later in a largely futile attempt to save the Stanley estates from sequestration. More seriously she broke from her son and heir, Charles Stanley, Lord Strange (1627-1672), over his decision to marry, in 1650, Dorothea Helena de Rupa, a lady-in-waiting to Elizabeth of Bohemia. Choosing only to refer to her new daughter-in-law as Delilah she signalled her scorn for her son by bequeathing him a derisory sum of $5 in her will drawn up in May 1654. 
The outbreak of the third civil war in the late summer of 1651 saw the seventh earl landing a fresh army upon the Fylde coast and entrusting the defence of the Isle of Man to his wife. However the Manx feared that the countess was planning to make separate terms with parliament, by which they would be sold 'for 2d. or 3d. a head', and rose in revolt on the night of 19 October 1651 (Harrison, 'Illiam Dhone', 4-8). The outlying forts fell easily to the insurgents but the stone walls and presence of professional soldiers meant that the castles of Peel and Rushen held out until the landing of Commonwealth troops over a week later. It was from their envoys that the countess learned, for the first time, of her husband's execution at Bolton on 15 October. This news, brusquely delivered, appears to have broken her resolve and she tamely surrendered Castle Rushen to parliamentary authority on 30 October, although she appears to have remained at liberty upon the Isle of Man until December. 
Countess Charlotte then went to London in an attempt to salvage something of her family's fortunes. Authorized by the council of state, trustees had begun to sell off the Stanley estates in July 1651, while the income from the residue the family was permitted to retain was not, it was claimed, reaching them. The situation was aggravated by suspicion of the dowager countess: informers alleged not only that she had maltreated parliamentary prisoners on the Isle of Man but also that she had visited Charles II in Scotland. In consequence she had to wait until 1653 to compound for her estates. 
By March 1652 the countess was writing bitterly of the failure of her son and daughter-in-law to do anything to alleviate her poverty while she was in London, but she was nevertheless able to arrange marriages for her three surviving daughters, Henrietta Maria (1630-1685), Katherine, and Amelia-Anna-Sophia (died 1703), respectively to William Wentworth, second earl of Strafford (in 1655), Henry Pierrepoint, marquess of Dorchester, and John Murray, second earl and first marquess of Atholl (in 1659). In 1655 mounting debts forced her to abandon her life in London and to hurry back to her estates at Knowsley, in an attempt to shake off the attentions of her most persistent creditors. She remained there, living quietly, fearful of the government and careful not to draw too much attention to herself, until the Restoration of May 1660. Choosing to celebrate this event by donating a large font, bearing a pro-monarchist inscription, to the parish church of Ormskirk, the countess dowager returned to London and was present at the coronation of Charles II on 23 April 1661. However, hers was not a heart to be moved by the spirit of the 'Acts of Indemnity and Oblivion' and she embarked upon a bitter struggle to win back her lost estates, and to bring to trial all those who had had a hand in the conviction and execution of the seventh earl. Once again, forced back to Lancashire by the pressure of her mounting debts and by the indifference of the court to her vengeful campaign, she continued in her denunciations of radicals, Quakers, and presbyterians, and fully concurred with the decision of her son -- to whom she was now reconciled -- to purge thoroughly the municipalities of the north-west of both protestant and Roman Catholic dissenters. Having fallen seriously ill during the winter of 1663-4 she died at her hall at Knowsley on 22 March 1664 and was buried beside Earl James, 'in her owne Chancell', at Ormskirk on 6 April (Draper, 244). 


@@@@@


doc= 26261


Stanley, Edward, first Baron Monteagle (c.1460-1523), soldier, was the fifth son of Thomas Stanley, first earl of Derby (c.1433-1504), and his wife, Eleanor Neville ('b'. 'c'.1440, died before 1471), fifth daughter of the earl of Salisbury. He married first Anne Harrington (1455-1489), and second, about 1501, Elizabeth Vaughan (died 1515), with whom he had a son, Thomas, and a daughter, Jane. Stanley also had three illegitimate children: a daughter, Mary, and two sons, Edward and Thomas ['see below']. During the Scottish campaign of 1482 he was knighted by Richard, duke of Gloucester. The following year he served as a pallbearer at the funeral of Edward IV. He was one of several northern knights granted lands and offices in southern counties during Richard III's reign. Richard's patronage did not, however, secure his loyalty, and Edward benefited from his family's support for Henry Tudor, becoming sheriff of Lancashire in October 1485. 
Stanley's main residence was at Hornby, Lancashire, formerly a Harrington estate, inherited through his wife. Although frequently present at court -- for the creation of Prince Henry as duke of York in 1494, and at the reception of Katherine of Aragon in 1501 -- his most important duties concerned the security of England's northern border. Responsible for the defence of Lancashire and a commissioner of array for Yorkshire and Westmorland, he led 3000 men in the army of Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey, which defeated a Scottish invasion at Flodden on 9 September 1513. Commanding the English left flank, he won distinction by storming Branxton Edge, and overrunning the enemy baggage park. For his valour he was installed KG in 1514 and summoned to the House of Lords as Baron Monteagle the following November, a title that was supposedly an allusion to the eagle crest of the Stanleys and the seizure of the high ground at Flodden. 
For a while Monteagle was prominent in English diplomacy in France, attending both the marriage of Princess Mary to Louis XII in 1514 and the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520. Yet it was to be the regional politics of north-west England that dominated his affairs. In 1521 his nephew, the earl of Derby, resenting the encroachment of royal authority into Lancashire and Cheshire, engaged in some provocative challenges to the crown. Men of his household killed deer in the royal forests of Bowland. Monteagle faced a conflict of loyalties, but swiftly seems to have chosen his king over his kin. At a specially convened session of assizes to deal with the offenders, there were scuffles between his adherents and those of Derby. The rift eventually became so bitter that the earl attempted, unsuccessfully, to deprive his uncle of Hornby and its revenues, in his will of 1521. During the next two years Scottish troops again massed on the border. Monteagle was busily organizing companies of soldiers to meet this threat when he died, at Hornby Castle, on 6 April 1523. The parish church was being rebuilt at the time, and he was buried in the grounds of Hornby Priory, which was later demolished. Both Henry VIII and Cardinal Wolsey were left gold rings and bequests of money in his will. 




@@@@@


doc= 26262


Stanley, Edward, third earl of Derby (1509-1572), magnate, was born on 10 May 1509, probably at Lathom House, Lancashire; he was the second but eldest surviving son of Thomas Stanley, second earl of Derby ('b'. before 1485, died 1521), and his wife, Anne Hastings (died 1550). The second earl, the son of George Stanley ('c'.1460-1503) and Joan Strange (died 1514), heir of the barony of Strange of Knockin, had succeeded his grandfather Thomas Stanley, first earl of Derby ('c'.1433-1504). He served on Henry VIII's French expedition of 1513, but also incurred royal displeasure by excessive self-assertion in Lancashire, for instance an invasion of Furness Abbey in 1514. In 1520 he was sworn of the council, but he died on 23 May 1521 and was buried at Syon Abbey, Middlesex. 
Thomas Wolsey had considered the second earl a potential opponent. His heir now became Wolsey's ward and accompanied the cardinal on his French embassy of 1527. Wolsey reputedly took over $5500 from the estates, while rent evasion grew. At his majority Derby had to raise capital by increasing renewal fines but conceding long leases with low rents. After Wolsey's fall the remaining year of Derby's wardship was bought for 3500 marks by Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk (1473-1554); according to a royal pardon of February 1530, he was 'abducted' and married to 'Katharine, daughter of the said Thomas' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 4, pt 3, no. 2810); a statute later that year assured the dower of Derby's wife, Dorothy, daughter of Thomas Howard, second duke of Norfolk (1443-1524), and his second wife, Agnes Tilney (died 1545). Strained attempts have long been made to conflate these Howard wives, but the reports of the Spanish ambassador confirm that Derby had married the third duke's daughter by 9 December 1529, that she died on 15 March 1530, and that by October Norfolk, desperate not to lose his outlay, was begging 'the nuncio to obtain dispensation for one of his sisters to marry the earl of Dalbi, who had been formerly married to one of his daughters' ('CSP Spain', '1529-30', p. 762). Derby and Dorothy Howard had three sons, Henry Stanley, fourth earl of Derby (1531-1593), Sir Thomas (died 1576), and Sir Edward (died 1609), and four daughters, Anne (died 1602), Jane (died 1569), Mary (died 1609), and Elizabeth (died 1589x91), all of whom married minor peers, mostly religious conservatives: respectively Charles, Baron Stourton (died 1557), Edward, Baron Dudley (died 1586), Edward, Baron Stafford (1536-1603), and Henry Parker, Baron Morley (1532-1577). 
Later Derby married Margaret Barlow (died 1559), daughter of Ellis Barlow of Barlow, Lancashire, and Anne Reddish, and they had one son and two daughters. His last (childless) marriage was to Mary Cotton (died 1580), daughter of Sir George Cotton of Combermere, Cheshire (formerly governor to Henry Fitzroy, duke of Richmond, and then to Prince Edward), and Mary Onley. Derby's widow subsequently married Henry Grey, fifth earl of Kent (1541-1615). 
Derby received livery of his estates in 1531, when he was already sitting in the Reformation Parliament, having signed the peers' petition to Pope Clement VII to grant Henry VIII's divorce in July 1530. He attended Henry to meet Francois I at Boulogne in 1532, was made knight of the Bath on 30 May 1533 before Anne Boleyn's coronation, and acted as cup-bearer on the occasion itself, thus being officially associated with Henry's change of queens. A papal report of 1538 ranked Derby as 'the greatest of power and land' among the English nobility, but 'young, and a child in wisdom, and half a fool' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 13, pt 2, no. 280). Henry VIII's limited regard may be implied by Derby's failure until immediately after the king's death either to be chosen knight of the Garter (17 February 1547), despite repeated nominations, or to obtain his request for his local dissolved monastery of Burscough. 
Derby had performed equivocally in 1536 during the great crisis of the Pilgrimage of Grace. Risings in adjacent counties spilled over into north and north-east Lancashire, but Derby was able to retain the loyalty of most of the county and in late October was preparing to move into the West Riding to suppress Sawley Abbey when word of the Pontefract agreement immobilized the opposing forces. He has been reproached for slowness, but most other peers (even Norfolk) failed to move offensively against the rebels at all. After further unrest Derby and Robert Radcliffe, earl of Sussex (1483-1542), widower of his sister Margaret Stanley, were jointly appointed lieutenants in Lancashire, to avenge rebellion and conclude the monastic dissolutions. In 1542 Derby served in Norfolk's Scottish campaign. 
Derby had common religious ground with the pilgrims; but, formerly a multiple monastic steward, he was able to turn pragmatically to acquiring former monastic property in Staffordshire, Cheshire, Lancashire, and Shropshire. Though he missed the Lords bill of attainder against Thomas Cromwell, he voted for the six articles in 1540. In Edward VI's reign he repeatedly entered dissents against legislation of a protestant tendency -- the bills of uniformity (January 1549), against old books and images (January 1550), and for the marriage of priests (February 1552), and the new uniformity bill (April 1552). 
Derby was particularly suspected by the Edwardian regime because of his autonomous control of the Isle of Man, including the church and a permanent garrison. A report sent from Flanders to Rome in June 1550 claimed that, having refused 'to renounce his title of the Isle of Man', he would resist by force ('CSP for.', '1547-53', pp. 119-20). Escalating rumour during 1550-51 linked the reluctance to come to court of Derby and Francis Talbot, fifth earl of Shrewsbury, with the probability of a Catholic rising in the north-west. They were alleged to be intriguing with Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset, against his supplanter, John Dudley, earl of Warwick, later duke of Northumberland. During the summer of 1551, however, Warwick managed to regain at least the acquiescence of the northern earls. On 9 August Derby, like Henry Fitzalan, twelfth earl of Arundel, was given 'peculiarly limited membership' of the privy council, attending only when called by the full councillors (Hoak, 69) -- this associated him with the prohibition of Catholic service for Princess Mary then issued. In December Derby's heir, Henry, Lord Strange (along with Arundel again), was called as a witness to Somerset's treasonable propositions; Northumberland thought it prudent not to charge Strange himself, while Derby was empanelled for the trial. 
Appointed lord lieutenant of Lancashire on 16 May 1552, Derby concentrated on local duties. Thus he avoided signing the letters patent for Jane Grey's succession, though Strange did, and on Edward VI's death he raised support for Mary in Cheshire. He was then made a full member of the privy council (17 August 1553) and acted as high steward for Mary's coronation, bearing a sword (as he had at Edward's). He was a commissioner for Edmund Bonner's restoration as bishop of London and for the trial of Jane Grey. He also took at least a local interest in the prosecution of heretics. George Marsh was imprisoned and interrogated at Lathom House. The fact that John Bradford was a native of Manchester made Derby pay some attention, although he was imprisoned in London; while complaining that Bradford was dispatching subversive letters into his home county, the earl's main role was unsuccessfully to seek his recantation, sending him a succession of Catholic churchmen. Derby, 'particularly remarkable among the nobility because of his great popular following', also participated in the defeat of Wyatt's rebellion (MacCulloch, 284). 
Although initially reported to be an opponent, Derby took a prime ceremonial role for Mary's marriage to Philip of Spain, meeting him on landing (20 July 1554) and being one of the five to give the bride away five days later. He was one of the four earls receiving the largest Spanish pension ($500), who were rumoured, probably wrongly, to favour crowning Philip. Proposals that Philip should have the council reduced in size would have involved discarding Derby. Strange, made a gentleman of Philip's chamber, reacted by repeatedly fighting Spaniards. Derby did not receive much material generosity from Mary, but was an executor of her will. 
After Elizabeth I's accession she and Derby inclined to uneasy accommodation. He was retained as a privy councillor, and this time did not dissent from a protestant religious settlement -- he did not attend the House of Lords after 9 March 1559 and gave his proxy to his protestant fellow councillor Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford. In June 1559 he was also a royal visitor for the northern province and in July 1562 an ecclesiastical commissioner for the diocese of Chester. He was chamberlain of the county palatine of Chester from 1559 to 1565, when supplanted by the regional empire-builder Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, and successfully defended palatine jurisdiction against the exchequer and admiralty courts. Derby still retained considerable influence in Lancashire parliamentary elections, checking that of the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. 
Derby accepted the obligations of public office, but acted slowly and reluctantly against Catholics, and against relatively unimportant ones at that. He harboured the papal agent Nicholas Morton in 1569, and the northern rebels of that year hoped for his support. Elizabeth suspected him, but retained him as lord lieutenant of Lancashire and Cheshire: in the event he wisely stood on the sidelines. Plots to free Mary, queen of Scots, from Tutbury implicated Derby's younger sons, Edward and Thomas, but not Derby or his heir. 
Derby died at Lathom House on 24 October 1572 and was buried with great magnificence on 4 December in Ormskirk parish church, where a chapel and monumental tomb were built. His funeral reflected his penchant for somewhat old-fashioned aristocratic display. He was noted for hospitality, supposedly feeding sixty poor every day and 2700 on Good Friday; his house was a centre of social and cultural life called 'The Northern Circuit' (Seacome, 'House of Derby', 154). 
Derby had retained extensive property, patronage, and influence in north-west England, albeit limited by the growth of a protestant society in the region, which ultimately extended to his protestant heir. By 1569, as Sir Francis Leek wrote, 'all the keys of Lancashire do not hang at the earl of Derby's old girdle' ('CSP dom.', 'addenda', '1566-79', p. 159). Allegedly 'half a fool' in the 1530s and again reported to Rome in 1567 as 'not so prudent as potent' ('CSP Rome', '1558-71', p. 265), Derby's resilience through the tumultuous mid-sixteenth century suggests 'some political wisdom, for which he has not always been given credit' (Coward, 'A 'crisis of the aristocracy'', 66). Arguably in 1536 as much as in 1569 he was successfully 'emulating his ancestors in the Wars of the Roses... by playing a waiting game' (Haigh, 'Last Days', 74). 


@@@@@


doc= 26263


Stanley, Edward (1779-1849), bishop of Norwich, second son and seventh child of Sir John Thomas Stanley, sixth baronet, of Alderley Park, Cheshire, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Hugh Owen of Penrhos, Anglesey, was born in London on 1 January 1779. His elder brother, John Thomas, was first Baron Stanley of Alderley, and father of Edward John Stanley, second Baron Stanley of Alderley. Edward's natural inclination was for the sea, but he was not allowed to enter the navy. Educated partly at private schools, partly by tutors, he was sent in 1798 to St John's College, Cambridge, knowing nothing of Greek, almost equally ignorant of Latin, and possessing only a smattering of mathematics. Hard work to some extent remedied these deficiencies. In 1802 his name appears in the mathematical tripos as sixteenth wrangler. 
Ordained in 1805, Stanley was briefly curate of Windlesham in Surrey. In that year he was presented by his father to the family living of Alderley, Cheshire, where he remained for thirty-two years. In 1810 he married Catherine (1792-1862), daughter of the Revd Oswald Leycester, rector of Stoke upon Tern; among their children were Arthur Penrhyn Stanley and Mary Stanley. 
An excellent parish priest at a time when the standard of parochial duty was low, Stanley devoted himself earnestly to his work. He was keenly interested in education, introducing into his schools gymnastic exercises, and subjects such as elementary botany, English history, and geography. Infant schools, temperance societies, mechanics' institutes, and statistical societies found in him a zealous patron. He was also instrumental in founding a clerical society among the neighbouring clergy. A natural aptitude for science, and a conviction of its intimate connection with religion, made him a student of ornithology, entomology, mineralogy, and geology. His ornithological observations were embodied in his 'Familiar History of Birds, their Nature, Habits, and Instincts' (2 vols., 1836) and his nickname was 'Jim Crow'. He was one of the first clergymen to lecture on the then suspect science of geology. A whig in politics, and by nature a reformer, he took up a position on questions of the day which was rare in his profession. His pamphlets, published in 1829 and 1836, attempted to allay the animosities between Roman Catholics and protestants. In 1831, in the midst of the 'Reform Bill' agitation, he promoted a petition for church reform. When the new and unpopular poor law came into operation in 1834, he offered his services as chairman of the board of guardians called on to administer the act in his union. 
Stanley was unsuccessfully sounded out by Lord Melbourne about becoming bishop of Manchester (the new see then being planned) but in 1837 he accepted the offer of the bishopric of Norwich, a notoriously lax and corrupt diocese. In the same year he became clerk of the Chapel Royal and in 1840 a fellow of the Royal Society. By vigorous enforcement of the 'Plurality and Non-residence Act', he added during his episcopate 173 parsonage-houses. During the same period he increased the number of Sunday services by 347. He doubled the number of schools and reformed the preparation of candidates for ordination, becoming personally acquainted with the previous career of every candidate. At great personal expense he prosecuted and removed those clergymen whose lives had brought them within the reach of the law. By the appointment of seventy rural deans, each of whom was every year entertained at the palace, he made himself acquainted with what passed in every part of his diocese. Instead of holding septennial confirmations at a few large centres, he confirmed annually at convenient stations. He assisted all the charitable institutions of the county, especially those in Norwich, interested himself in the working of the poor laws, and personally inspected the efficiency of the local schools. In the House of Lords he was a regular attendant and a staunch supporter of whig principles. His most telling speeches were delivered in defence of the government scheme of education in 1839, on behalf of relaxing the stringent terms of clerical subscription in 1840, and on the endowment of Maynooth in 1842. He took part, with especial pleasure, in such movements as 'Bible' societies, city missions, and British and foreign schools, which brought together on neutral ground churchmen and nonconformists. The same feeling led him to support in the National Society in 1839 such changes as would open the doors of schools to the children of nonconformists. He was also the first bishop who interested himself in the movement for ragged schools. Always an eager advocate of temperance, he appeared on the platform with Father Theobald Mathew, who in 1843 was his guest at Norwich. 
Stanley's liberal views, fearlessness of criticism, and vigorous reforms at first created ill feeling in the diocese. Before the close of his episcopate, however, he not only changed the whole atmosphere of religious life throughout his see, but won the affectionate esteem of all classes, lay and clerical. In August 1849 he started for a tour in Scotland with his wife and daughters. At Brahan Castle in Ross-shire he was taken ill and, after a few days, died from congestion of the brain on 6 September 1849. On 21 September he was buried in the nave of Norwich Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 26264


Stanley, Edward (bap. 1792, d. 1862), surgeon, son of Edward Stanley and his wife, Susanna, sister of Thomas Blizard, surgeon, was baptized at St Andrews, Holborn, on 5 August 1792; his father was in trade in the City of London. He went to the Merchant Taylors' School (1802-8), and then was apprenticed to Thomas Ramsden and John Abernethy, both surgeons at St Bartholomew's Hospital. Stanley was made MRCS in 1814, and won the Jacksonian prize in 1815. 
Stanley was elected assistant surgeon to St Bartholomew's in 1816. With Abernethy's assistance and approval, he enlarged the museum and made the first catalogue of the collection. He was for a time demonstrator in anatomy and later lecturer, in 1826, when he succeeded Abernethy. He was elected surgeon to the hospital in 1838, and rapidly became famous as a clinical teacher. 'The Lancet' said of him that he 'showed the same order and method [in surgery] that he had displayed in his teaching', that he 'was sometimes slow but never unsafe' ('Lancet', 590). 
Stanley worked in London all his life; he lived first in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and then in Brook Street, where he carried on private practice. He had a wife, three daughters, and a son who became a clergyman. He was short (5 feet 2 inches) and timid, a kindly, humane, straightforward, and honest man. 
Stanley was elected FRS in 1830. At the Royal College of Surgeons he was a life member of the council from 1832, Arris and Gale professor of human anatomy and physiology in 1835, Hunterian orator in 1839, a member of the court of examiners in 1844, and president in 1848 and 1857. He was president of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society as early as 1843, and he was appointed surgeon-extraordinary to the queen in 1858. 
Stanley had a 'gift for accurate clinical description' (Kelly, 271). He wrote 'A Manual of Practical Anatomy' (1818), and 'A Treatise on Diseases of the Bones' (1849). Another major contribution was 'On dislocations, especially of the hip joint', published in 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions' in 1841, which accurately described locomotor ataxy. 
Stanley retired from his hospital appointment in 1861, but he regularly attended the weekly operations on Saturdays until 24 May 1862, when he suffered a cerebral haemorrhage after watching an operation; he died at the hospital within the hour. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26265


Stanley, Edward George Geoffrey Smith, fourteenth earl of Derby (1799-1869), prime minister, was born on 29 March 1799 at Knowsley Hall, Lancashire, the eldest son of Edward Smith Stanley, thirteenth earl of Derby (1775-1851), and his wife, Charlotte Margaret (1778-1817), his first cousin and the second daughter of the Revd Geoffrey Hornby, rector of Winwick, Lancashire. 
Edward Stanley's childhood at Knowsley, as part of an extended family, was dominated by the powerful personality of his grandfather the twelfth earl of Derby (1752-1834). In addition to his parents and grandparents, the Knowsley household also came to include Stanley's siblings, Charlotte (1801-1853), Henry (1803-1875), Emily ('b'. May 1804, died Nov 1804), Louisa (1805-1825), Eleanor Mary (1807-1887), and Charles (1808-1884), as well as the children of the twelfth earl's second marriage, to the actress Elizabeth Farren, namely Lucy (1799-1809), James (1800-1817), and Mary (1801-1858). From his gregarious grandfather Stanley inherited an early commitment to partisan whig politics. In later years he remembered learning as a young boy a family catechism beginning 'What does A stand for?' 'An Axe.' 'What is an Axe for?' 'To chop off Kings' heads.' Alongside the high ideals and lowlier pursuits, such as gambling, game shooting, and horse-racing, of Foxite whiggery, as personified by his ebullient grandfather, he was also influenced by the austere Anglican evangelicalism of his mother. His surviving childhood poems, in conventional evangelical terms, dwell upon the themes of earthly temptation, divine judgement, and the necessity of personal faith to secure that grace made available by Christ's atonement on the cross. Stanley's more reclusive father, who though a loyal whig in politics was devoted to the private study of zoology and ornithology, had less influence on the young statesman. Indeed, one of his first actions upon the death of his father in 1851 was to disperse the very large collection of animals and birds his father has assembled at Knowsley. 
Stanley was sent to Eton College, where he was in the fifth form lower division in 1811 and upper division in 1814. His Etonian contemporaries included his uncle James Stanley (who was twelve months his junior), Edward Pusey, Richard Jelf, John Evelyn Denison (later speaker of the House of Commons), Charles Augustus Ellis, sixth Baron Howard de Walden, and Lord Francis Leveson-Gower (later Egerton). Under the harsh regime of John 'Flogger' Keate, Stanley exhibited both a striking cleverness and a remarkable self-assurance. At Eton, Edward Pusey recalled, Stanley displayed 'an iron will and an unbounded self-confidence' (H. Liddon, 'Life of Edward Bouverie Pusey', 3 vols., 1893, 1.13). His acute intelligence was refined through the narrowly classical Eton curriculum, and literary translation remained for the rest of his life an absorbing private pursuit. He became an early and accomplished member of the Eton Society (a debating club known as Pop), the nursery of some periods' greatest orators. During his final year at Eton, in 1817, Stanley undertook an abridgement of Herodotus, as well as Livy's Roman history, and drew up extensive notes on the Hindu and Muslim history of India. When later addressing the faculty and students of Glasgow University, during his installation as lord rector in December 1834, he observed that for any man wishing to study politics or the art of persuasion nothing was more necessary than to imbue the mind with the spirit of the ancient poets and historians, so as 'to draw from that pure and crystal fountain some of the copious diction, high sentiment and masculine thought, which so eminently distinguished those great men' ('The Times', 22 Dec 1834, 3). During his final months at Eton, Stanley's uncle and contemporary James Stanley died. This was followed, on 16 June 1817, by the death of his mother. 
In October 1817 Stanley went up to Christ Church, Oxford, as a gentleman commoner. Under his tutor the Revd Edward Goodenough (later headmaster of Westminster School and dean of Wells), he continued to read Herodotus, Thucydides, Aeschylus, Plato, Aristotle, Horace, and Tacitus. Thomas Short, who taught him mathematics for one term, judged his pupil 'a clever promising young man' (Christ Church Archive, cen.i.a.4). As part of the smart Etonian 'set' within the college, Stanley was noted for his academic abilities and boisterous self-assurance. In 1819 he won the prestigious chancellor's prize for Latin composition with his spirited poem 'Syracuse'. Earlier that same year he also led a group of drunk undergraduates who, late one night, pulled the figure of Mercury, erected in 1695, down from its plinth in the centre of Christ Church's Great Quadrangle. The college authorities drew a discreet veil over what was regarded as a gentlemanly escapade. Not unusually for a son of the peerage, he went down from Christ Church in April 1820 without taking a degree, leaving behind him a reputation for scholarly cleverness and spirited wilfulness, complemented by his assured self-confidence and evident sensitivity to personal criticism. 
After Oxford, Stanley associated himself with the urbane and sophisticated third marquess of Lansdowne, a prominent whig who had served as a youthful chancellor of the exchequer in the 'ministry of all the talents' from 1806 to 1807. Under Lansdowne's tutelage he undertook extensive reading outside the classics in preparation for a political career, thereby broadening the political ideas he inherited from his grandfather. Through Lansdowne he was introduced to the liberal views of the Scottish Enlightenment and political economy, and also read extensively in British history. This reinforced his belief in the pre-eminent status of parliament as the authoritative arena of national politics and the source of constitutional sovereignty. Thus parliament checked the potential tyranny of both an arbitrary royal prerogative and the wayward democratic mob. Party deliberation within Westminster defined the authentic national interest and bestowed upon cabinets the authority to govern. Stanley's scepticism regarding popular agitation and disdain for the press was also encouraged by his studies. Parties in parliament complemented the legitimate hierarchical social influence of a responsible and enlightened aristocracy. His commitment to the Anglican church establishment within the United Kingdom stood upon the authority of the law as the foundation of a civil order safeguarding property and progress. 
Early in 1822 Stanley travelled to Italy. While composing a series of Petrachan 'Sonnets to Italy' during his journey, he also assaulted a Neapolitan official for a perceived insult. As a result he was sentenced in Naples to one day in the black hole and thirteen days in the common gaol. Here he experienced those harsh conditions of incarceration which prompted William Gladstone, thirty years later, to decry Neapolitan barbarity. Upon his return Stanley was elected, on 30 July 1822, as MP for the borough of Stockbridge -- an interest in the constituency having recently been bought by the whig Earl Grosvenor from the West Indian proprietor Joseph Foster Barham. He loyally returned whig votes in Commons divisions, making his maiden speech on 30 March 1824 on the 'Manchester Gaslight Bill', which was favourably received as a signal of the arrival of a promising young whig talent. Soon afterwards he spoke against the radical Joseph Hume's call for an inquiry into the Anglican Irish church establishment, arguing that any interference with the property of the Church of Ireland would be a dangerous precedent justifying the disruption of other legally designated forms of landed, funded, or commercial property. 
In the autumn and winter of 1824, accompanied by his Christ Church friends John Evelyn Denison, Henry Labouchere, and John Stuart Wortley, Stanley travelled in Canada and the United States. Upon his return he married, on 31 May 1825 at Marylebone, Emma Caroline (1805-1876), second daughter of Edward Bootle-Wilbraham, afterwards first Baron Skelmersdale (1771-1853). They established their first married home at Ballykisteen, the 4000 acre Derby estate in Tipperary. Their first child, a son called Edward Henry Stanley, was born on 21 July 1826. Their second son, the future governor-general of Canada Frederick Arthur Stanley, followed in 1841. Stanley spoke little during the 1825 and 1826 parliamentary sessions. At the general election on 26 June 1826 he was returned for Preston under a popular franchise, defeating the rival candidacy of William Cobbett. During the eventful session of 1827 Stanley, like his mentor Lansdowne, moved closer to the liberal tory George Canning, and supported his unsuccessful bid to revise the corn laws in March 1827. Following the premature death of Canning (who had been premier since April) in July 1827, Stanley accepted the office of colonial under-secretary on 15 October 1827 under Canning's successor Lord Goderich, but resigned from the post when the duke of Wellington became prime minister in January 1828. 
During the following months, with Lansdowne's influence waning, Canning's legacy provided a template for Stanley's ambition. 'The old stubborn spirit of Toryism', he declared to the Commons on 18 February 1828, 'was at last yielding to the increased liberality of the age' ('Hansard 2', 18, 1828, col. 523). Stanley attacked Wellington's ministry for its opposition to Catholic emancipation, defended Canning's proposed revision to the corn laws in April 1828, and voted for the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts'. He also supported proposals for gradual, as opposed to extensive, parliamentary reform. By July 1828 some MPs, most notably Sir James Graham, looked to the youthful and self-assured Stanley to lead a centrist merger of moderate whigs and liberal Canningite tories. This was the context for William Huskisson's description of Stanley in 1829 as 'the Hope of the Nation' (T. Creevey to Ord, 1 Nov 1829, 'The Creevey Papers', ed. H. Maxwell, 1905, 545). The passage of Catholic emancipation at the hands of Wellington and Sir Robert Peel in April 1829, however, removed the ground upon which a moderate coalition might stand. None the less, Stanley had acquired sufficient stature, particularly as an effective speaker, as to give some credibility to the claim of his being the only 'brilliant eldest son produced by the British peerage for a hundred years' ('The Times', 25 Oct 1869, 7). 
On 29 November 1830 Stanley was appointed chief secretary for Ireland, without a seat in cabinet, in Lord Grey's reform ministry, and was sworn of the privy council. When he was defeated, amid violent scenes, in his re-election for Preston in December 1830 by Henry 'Orator' Hunt (1773-1835), William IV made the constituency of Windsor available, for which royal borough Stanley was returned on 10 February 1831. In Ireland, which he believed was on the verge of rebellion, Stanley was confronted by the novel political agitation of Daniel O'Connell's popular Catholic campaign and increasing rural violence against the payment of the Anglican tithe, within the wearingly familiar context of Irish sectarian politics. His first priority as chief secretary was the full restoration of the rule of law. Only with the establishment of stable civil order, he insisted, could remedial reforms be responsibly undertaken. This priority caused constant conflicts with ministerial colleagues, such as Lord Holland, Lord Althorp, and Lord Brougham, as well as the lord lieutenant of Ireland, Lord Anglesey, who all strongly favoured immediate concessions to Irish grievances. Stanley's own and entirely secular diagnosis of Ireland's ills was the absence of a resident gentry, want of capital, shortage of employment, and lack of adequate education. 
During 1831, fierce and bitter confrontations between Stanley and O'Connell became regular parliamentary occurrences. In January 1831 O'Connell was arrested for seditious activity, although, to Stanley's great displeasure, the charges were subsequently allowed to lapse on the understanding that he would support parliamentary reform. Later in the year Stanley armed the Irish yeomanry (a largely protestant force) and attempted to introduce an 'Arms Bill', regulating the importation of weapons into Ireland and increasing the penalties for possessing arms without a licence. He insisted on an arrears of tithes measure, passed in June 1832, requiring the collection of unpaid tax. This, Anglesey complained, left the lord lieutenant 'carrying at the point of a bayonet, an odious measure' (Marquess of Anglesey [G. C. H. V. Paget], 'One-Leg: the Life and Letters of Henry William Paget, First Marquess of Anglesey, 1768-1854', 1961, 264). In 1833 Stanley secured a very strong 'Peace Preservation Act' which empowered the lord lieutenant to suppress meetings and to declare disturbed districts under martial law. His dramatic description in the Commons, on 27 February 1833, of the murder and rural outrages occurring in Ireland secured parliamentary support for the measure. Lord John Russell regarded this speech as 'one of the greatest triumphs ever won in a popular assembly by the powers of oratory' (J. Russell, 'Recollections and Suggestions', 1875, 113). Alongside firm coercive legislation Stanley introduced a number of concessionary Irish reforms. His 'Irish Education Act' of 1832 created the Irish board of national education in receipt of a government grant to support schools admitting children of all denominations and providing religious teaching of an undogmatic character. The scheme drew on an anonymous pamphlet, 'Thoughts and Suggestions on the Education of the Peasantry of Ireland' (1820), read by Stanley, upon Lansdowne's recommendation, ten years earlier. Stanley also established the Irish board of works and the Shannon navigation improvements. In the spring of 1832 he oversaw a 'Tithes Act' which enforced a permanent commutation of tithes for money payments. In later life he regarded this legislation as his most important achievement while Irish chief secretary. The most laborious and disagreeable task he faced, he recalled, was reforming the notoriously corrupt Irish civil list. 
In June 1831 Grey brought Stanley into his cabinet, and increasingly relied on him as a counterweight to their more radically minded colleagues. During November 1831, amid reform riots in the country, Stanley undertook, on behalf of Grey, some of the delicate private negotiation with the more moderate opponents of reform, such as lords Wharncliffe and Harrowby, exploring the possibility of a compromise reform settlement. Many believed Grey was grooming Stanley for the Commons leadership once Lord Althorp, upon the anticipated death of his father, was elevated to the Lords. Meanwhile, during 1831-2, the combative Stanley proved himself the strongest ministerial speaker in the Commons, particularly in the prolonged exchanges over parliamentary reform. For example, he effectively answered Peel on 4 March 1831 and delivered, on 17 December 1831, a brilliant and crushing response to John Wilson Croker. During the 'Days of May crisis' in 1832, when Grey briefly relinquished office, Stanley rallied the party with a powerful after-dinner speech at Brooks's Club. The final passage of the 1832 'Reform Act for England and Wales' owed much to his forceful advocacy. Stanley also oversaw, during 1832, an 'Irish Reform Act' which enlarged the county electorate by enfranchising various categories of leaseholder, introduced a $10 householder borough franchise, and gave an additional five MPs to Irish constituencies. On 17 December 1832 he succeeded his father as MP for North Lancashire, which seat he held until he was raised to the Lords in 1844. 
On 28 March 1833 Grey transferred Stanley to the Colonial Office. Here Stanley drew up the 'Abolition of Slavery Bill' which became law in August 1833. This legislation enacted a fixed seven-year period of apprenticeship for freed adult slaves and allocated $20 million compensation for plantation owners. In April 1833, at the young age of thirty-four, Stanley suffered his first chronic attack of gout, aggravated by the unceasing exertions of the previous years. Thereafter, recurrent attacks of the illness forced him to his bed in excruciating pain with increasing frequency. In May 1834 the debate on Irish church revenues prompted Stanley's resignation from Grey's ministry. Stanley's 'Irish Church Temporalities Act' of 1833 had reformed the institutional structure of the church by reducing the number of bishoprics and scaling down the revenues of the remaining twelve. But in May 1834 Russell, fresh from a tour of Ireland, pushed for further Irish church reform. Stanley fiercely objected to Russell's Commons pronouncement, on 6 May, in favour of the appropriation of Irish church revenues for secular purposes. With Graham and the duke of Richmond, he resigned on 27 May. 
After May 1834 Stanley led a small group of independent MPs derisively dubbed by O'Connell the 'Derby Dilly', a reference to George Canning's poem 'The Loves of the Triangles'. On 2 July 1834 Stanley famously and injudiciously described whig policy over the Irish church tithe as resembling the sleight of hand practised by thimbleriggers (tricksters) at a fair. The offensive tone of his 'Thimblerig' speech widened the breach with former whig colleagues. Having assumed, upon the death of his grandfather on 21 October 1834, the title Lord Stanley, he now looked to hold the Commons balance of power between Peel's Conservative Party on one side and whig, Irish, and radical MPs on the other. He declined to join Peel's Conservative cabinet in December 1834. Rather, he took the opportunity of his installation as lord rector of Glasgow University on 21 December 1834 to announce what became called the 'Knowsley creed', in which he promised to uphold traditional institutions, including church establishments, in the affection of the country, while removing proven blemishes in the constitution and embracing responsible reform. In doing so he committed himself to opposing reckless and destructive radical change. But the pre-emptive publication of Peel's Tamworth manifesto, just days before the announcement of the Knowsley creed, and Russell's subsequent unification of the whig, radical, and Irish opposition in the Lichfield House compact of March 1835 undercut Stanley's ground. By April 1835, with Lord Melbourne and Russell's return to office, the Derby Dilly was politically marginalized, and Stanley's 'visions of the helm' rapidly faded (Croker to Peel, 8 Jan 1835, C. S. Parker, 'Sir Robert Peel', 2 vols., 1891, 2.277). 
During 1835 and 1836 Stanley gradually moved towards union with Peel's Conservative Party. On 1 July 1835 he and Graham crossed the floor of the Commons to sit alongside Peel's supporters. At a banquet for Peel, given at the Merchant Taylors' Hall on 12 May 1838, he sat beside Peel as one of his chief lieutenants, and declared that the traditional whig aims of moderate and responsible reform were now to be realized through the Conservative Party. At the beginning of 1841 he joined the Carlton Club. In opposition from 1835 to 1841, Stanley forcefully criticized the government's Irish and ecclesiastical proposals, its 'Jamaica Bill', and its policy with regard to Canada. In February 1840 he introduced an 'Irish Voters Registration Bill', proposing annual registration along English lines and the abolition of the existing certificate system. O'Connell immediately denounced 'Scorpion Stanley' and launched the National Association for Repeal of the Union. The 'Irish Voters Registration Bill', however, ran out of parliamentary time and was withdrawn by Stanley on 6 July 1840. In February 1841 he reintroduced the bill. But the success of the Conservative no-confidence motion of August 1841 forced Melbourne's government from office, and with a large Commons majority Peel formed a Conservative ministry. 
On 3 September 1841 Stanley joined Peel's cabinet as colonial secretary, the post from which he had resigned seven years earlier. During his tenure of office Hong Kong became a British colony, under the terms of the treaty of Nanking (Nanjing) of 1842. In 1843 Natal in South Africa and Sind in India also became British territories. Stanley worked with the foreign secretary, Lord Aberdeen, in negotiating the Webster-Ashburton treaty of August 1842, which settled the boundary dispute between the United States and Canada. In 1843 he also supported the 'Canadian Corn Bill', which allowed Canadian corn into the British market at a greatly reduced import duty. While advocating a policy of free trade with the colonies, however, he opposed the extension of this policy to commercial relations with foreign powers. 
In November 1844 Stanley was elevated to the Lords with the title of Lord Stanley of Bickerstaffe. The government need for debating strength in the upper house and Stanley's ill health were given as the official explanation for this move. But the elevation was also, in part, due to a cooling of relations with Peel. Stanley subsequently rejected Peel's argument in October 1845 that the condition of Ireland required a broader policy of free trade: it was a policy, he maintained, inconsistent with Peel's previous statements, which also violated the government's understanding with its own back-bench support. Repeal of the corn laws, in such circumstances, would be a breach of faith. On 22 December 1845 Stanley resigned from Peel's cabinet, his parting words to his ministerial colleagues being 'we cannot do this as gentlemen' (Lord Broughton, 'Recollections of a Long Life', ed. Lady Dorchester, 6 vols., 1909-11, 6.229). 
Stanley resolutely opposed Peel's repeal of the corn laws, most notably in his speech of 25 May 1846, when he defended protection as necessary to preserve the twin pillars upon which the British empire stood: the landed interest and the colonial system. Yet Stanley was never a doctrinaire protectionist. Rather, he saw repeal as a betrayal of the mutual trust that should exist between a party leadership and its parliamentary support. 'Peel's great error', Stanley observed to Lord George Bentinck in October 1847, 'has always been disregarding the opinion of his party, whenever it did not exactly square with his own' (Stanley to Bentinck, 27 Oct 1847, Derby MS 920 DER (14) 177/2). To accept office, he later maintained, 'with the purpose of throwing over, voluntarily, the main object of those who have raised us to it is to follow too closely an 'exemplar vitiis imitable' to which I can never submit' (Derby to Disraeli, 18 Jan 1852, Monypenny & Buckle, 3.317). 
During 1846 Stanley accepted, with initial reluctance, the leadership of the protectionist Conservatives who opposed corn law repeal. Yet he continued to look towards a reunion with the Peelites. As opposition leader after 1846 Stanley consistently advocated a moderate policy, distancing himself from militant popular protectionist agitation and the intense anti-Catholicism of some of his supporters. During 1848 he encouraged the abandonment of the label protectionist for the resumption of the more moderate party designation Conservative. He delivered powerful attacks on Russell's government over the expulsion of the British ambassador to Spain in 1848; on his amendment to the royal address in 1849; on the 'Navigation Bill'; and on Lord Roden's removal from the commission of the peace in February 1850 over accusation of partiality in his dealings with an Orange march at Dolly's Brae, in co. Down. Most notably, on 17 June 1850, Stanley secured a Lords majority of seventeen votes criticizing Lord Palmerston's policy of gunboat diplomacy in the Aegean in the Don Pacifico affair. 
The paucity of talent among the Commons protectionist leadership remained a difficulty for Stanley throughout this period. The mercurial Lord George Bentinck resigned the Commons leadership in December 1847. Thereafter, Stanley was forced to acknowledge Benjamin Disraeli's pre-eminence, by virtue of his debating skills, within Conservative ranks. Stanley remained, however, deeply suspicious of Disraeli's propensity to intrigue, his volatile temperament, and the obstacle he presented to reunion with the Peelites. Not until 1850 was Disraeli recognized by Stanley as sole Commons leader. Disraeli was not invited to Knowsley until December 1853, and Stanley never visited Disraeli's country seat at Hughenden. 
In February 1851, upon Russell's resignation as premier, Stanley was invited by the queen to form a government. Initially, on 22 February, he declined the commission. 'It is a bungling fisherman who strikes at the first nibble', he privately commented: 'I shall wait till my fish has gorged the bait and then I am sure to land him' ('Disraeli, Derby and the Conservative Party', 44). The queen then reverted to Stanley on 25 February, Russell in the interim having failed to form a ministry. But the Peelites, at Graham's urging and despite Aberdeen's professions of friendship, refused to join Stanley in office. The subsequent hesitation of his own supporters, particularly John Herries and Joseph Henley, forced an exasperated Stanley to abandon his commission. After February 1851 he gave up hope of a collective reunion with the leading Peelites and came to regard moderate whigs as better prospects for future adhesion. On 30 June 1851 his father died and he succeeded to the title as fourteenth earl of Derby. 
Upon Russell again resigning as premier on 21 February 1852 Derby formed a Conservative government. Once more rebuffed by the Peelites, Derby formed his cabinet from meagre and inexperienced Conservative materials. This led to the government being given the hostile appellation of the 'Who, Who' ministry. Much abuse was, and has continued to be, heaped upon this makeshift 1852 government, which was hampered by its minority status in the Commons. Nevertheless, Derby secured the Conservatives' official relinquishment of protectionism, which he recognized as the major bar to a broader reconstruction of party alignment. During 1852 new militia legislation (based upon a plan devised by Prince Albert) was passed, a new constitution for New Zealand was established, legal reforms were enacted (streamlining common-law procedure, remodelling chancery practice, and generally revising the equity system), and fiscal free-trade reforms were incorporated in Disraeli's budgets. This legislative activity sustained Derby's aim of proving that the Conservatives in office, though shorn of Peelite talent, were capable of moderate and responsible government. In July 1852 Derby dissolved parliament, and the ensuing general election returned to the Commons some 299 Conservatives, 315 Liberals, whigs, and radicals, and 40 Peelites. On 16 December 1852 Disraeli's supplementary budget was decisively defeated, primarily as a consequence of Gladstone's ferocious opposition. The following day Derby resigned as prime minister. 
In opposition, first to Aberdeen's coalition ministry from December 1852 to February 1855, and thereafter to Palmerston's first ministry until February 1858, Derby adopted a policy of 'armed neutrality'. Through 'masterly inactivity' he sought to kill the government with kindness, as he privately described it ('Disraeli, Derby and the Conservative Party', 92). He believed that any government, such as Aberdeen's Peelite, whig, Liberal, and radical coalition, made up of discordant non-Conservative elements must eventually break apart -- as long as the Conservative opposition avoided raising issues which might unite them. As a result non-Conservative governments fell, in 1855 and 1858, because of hostile radical, rather than conservative, initiatives. This was meant to show moderate whigs that their real friends sat opposite, not alongside, them in the Commons. Such calculation, as well as patriotic duty, tempered Derby's criticism of government mismanagement during the Crimean War. Moreover, the unresolved issue of parliamentary reform, he anticipated, would prove the pernicious solvent of non-Conservative Party connection after 1852. Reform would bring whigs and moderate Liberals together with the Conservatives in opposition to dangerously radical and destructive change. 
When, on 29 January 1855, Aberdeen's coalition was defeated over a radical motion for an inquiry into the conduct of the Crimean War, the queen asked Derby to form a government. Believing neither Russell nor Palmerston capable of forming a stable government he initially declined the commission, thereby causing his rivals' weakness to be exposed. He then expected to be sent for by the queen a second time and to be in a much stronger position to invite non-Conservatives to join him. As anticipated Russell failed to form a government, but, to Derby's surprise, the elderly Palmerston succeeded in bringing a whig, Liberal, and Peelite cabinet together under his leadership. This, in retrospect, exposed Derby to Conservative criticism. Disraeli, for one, was incensed by what he saw as a lost opportunity, but by November 1855 he was in agreement with Derby that 'silence and inertia are our wisest course' (Disraeli to Derby, 7 Nov 1855, Derby MS 920 DER (14) 145/3). During these years Disraeli served his leader well by providing a target for those frustrated or disillusioned by Derby's quiescence in opposition. Conservatives found it easier to despise Disraeli than be disloyal to Derby. 
In February 1858, following defeat over a radical attack on their handling of the Orsini crisis, Palmerston's government resigned. On 21 February Derby promptly accepted the premiership for a second time. Invitations to join his cabinet were extended to the Peelite Gladstone and the duke of Newcastle, and to the whig third Earl Grey, but were rejected. Once again, therefore, Derby was forced to form a purely Conservative cabinet from restricted resources, enjoying only minority support in the Commons. None the less, he sought firmly to establish the Conservatives as a credible and moderate party of government: a party, as he termed it, prepared strenuously to maintain the institutions of the country, while not hesitating to support measures of undoubted improvement. On 1 March 1858 Derby told the Lords that there could be no greater mistake than supposing a Conservative ministry to be a stationary ministry. Their age, he pronounced, was one of constant moral, social, and political progress, in which old institutions should, by judicious changes, be adapted to the increased demands of society. Thus, during 1858, Disraeli introduced a budget reviving the terms of Gladstone's 1853 fiscal plan; an 'India Act' revised the government of the Asian subcontinent in the wake of the Indian mutiny; a bill abolishing the property qualification for MPs (a Chartist demand) was supported, as was legislation allowing practising Jews to sit in the Commons; Anglo-French relations were calmed in the aftermath of the Orsini crisis; Anglo-American relations were soothed over Central America; mediation was pursued in the affair of the 'Charles et George'; the Cagliari incident was resolved; and a policy of neutrality adopted over the Italian question. 
In March 1859 Derby's ministry introduced a 'Parliamentary Reform Bill' which proposed an identity of suffrage in both counties and boroughs at the $10 householder level. The new uniform franchise was safeguarded by clauses stripping borough freeholders of their county vote and a redistribution scheme mitigating the effect in the counties of a uniform suffrage. Derby saw the measure as a moderate and comprehensive settlement. But the success, by 330 to 291 votes, of a Commons motion moved by Russell on 1 April 1859 objecting to the disfranchisement of borough freeholders in the counties scuttled the bill. Derby immediately dissolved parliament. The Conservatives gained seats in the election, but their 306 MPs remained in a minority in the event of the divided opposition finding ground upon which to unite. The Willis's Rooms meeting of 6 June 1859 brought whigs, Liberals, radicals, and Peelites together, and on 10 June Derby's ministry was defeated in a packed chamber by 310 to 323 votes on a broad Commons opposition motion of no confidence. In recognition of his services to the country the queen, upon Derby's subsequent resignation of the premiership, made him a knight of the Garter. 
In opposition to Palmerston's second ministry from June 1859 to October 1865 Derby resumed a strategy of 'masterly inactivity': what Lord Malmesbury, his confidant, described as keeping 'the cripples on their legs' (Malmesbury, 2.215). Once again Derby believed a broad Liberal alliance to be an inherently unstable party alignment. In 1860 the Conservatives assisted Palmerston in shelving Russell's parliamentary reform legislation. The supreme achievement of Palmerston's last years, however, proved to be keeping the Liberal 'bundle of sticks', as the whig Lord Clarendon had called it, bound together (Lord Fitzmaurice, 'The Life of Second Earl Granville K.G.', 2 vols., 1905, 1.487). Palmerston's longevity deferred the Liberal disintegration anticipated by Derby. Meanwhile, increasingly frequent severe attacks of gout enhanced for Derby the advantages of parliamentary quiescence. Also the recurrence of periods of depression during his later years, which usually descended upon him during the recess at Knowsley away from the exhilaration of Westminster and after the main racing calendar, brought on moods of despondency and gloom. Although he consistently criticized Russell's foreign policy (for example, on 4 February 1864 he delivered a major speech in the Lords preventing British intervention in the Prussian-Danish War), restraint remained the keynote of his opposition during Palmerston's lifetime. 'Our game', Derby told Disraeli in July 1865, 'must be purely defensive' (Derby to Disraeli, 25 July 1865, Derby MS DER (14) 190/1). 
In October 1865 Palmerston died while still in office. This raised the long-awaited prospect of party reconstruction, with Russell succeeding Palmerston as premier, around the revived issue of parliamentary reform. Following the rejection of a Liberal 'Reform Bill' in June 1866 upon a hostile motion moved by dissident Liberals, Derby formed, on 28 June, his third minority Conservative government. As he later declared to the Lords, he 'did not intend for a third time to be made a mere stop gap until it would suit the convenience of the Liberal party to forget their dissensions'. He was determined to take such a course 'as would convert, if possible, an existing minority into a practical majority' (22 July 1867, 'Hansard 3', 188, 1867, col. 1783). Having accepted office, Derby told Sir John Pakington privately in December 1866, 'I mean to keep it as long as I can' (Derby to Pakington, 4 Dec 1866, Derby MS 920 DER (14) 193/1). He saw in the reform issue the opportunity, once again, to prove a Conservative government capable of overseeing judicious change and safeguarding progress. In November 1866 he advocated a reform scheme for England and Wales adopting a rated urban household suffrage, moderated by plural voting. Having skilfully managed ministerial discussion during the recess, however, the increasingly frail Derby found his control of the reform measure wrested from him during the intense Commons debate that ensued after February 1867. The Conservative bill broadly designed by Derby became subject to and transformed by Disraeli's tactical dexterity. With Disraeli's compliance many of the safeguards, such as plural voting for professionals, a two-year residential qualification, and the personal payment of rates, were stripped away from the urban household suffrage. As a result a more extensive measure than Derby had originally conceived was passed by the Commons, which effectively almost doubled the size of the electorate. None the less, Derby rallied Conservative peers behind the bill as a means, he declared, of establishing the institutions of the country on a firmer basis, while increasing the loyalty and contentment of a greater portion of her majesty's subjects. In August 1867 the second 'Reform Act' was passed. The county suffrage in England and Wales was lowered to an annual $12 rental qualification, a modest redistribution of forty-five seats gave an additional twenty-five members to county constituencies, while a Parliamentary Boundary Commission, packed with Conservatives, redrew the constituencies so as to reduce urban electoral intrusion into the counties. 
In February 1868 a rapidly ageing and sick Derby resigned from the premiership, handing the office over to Disraeli. Derby also resigned the formal leadership of his party in the Lords. Thereafter, he spoke repeatedly and forcefully against the disestablishment of the Church of Ireland, as proposed by Gladstone, and delivered his last speech to the Lords on 17 June 1869. In March 1869 the queen had honoured him with the GCMG. Derby attended the Lords for the last time on 22 July to hear the 'Irish Disestablishment Bill' passed and remarked to Lord Cairns, on departing the chamber, 'I have nothing left but to go away' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', ed. A. C. Benson and Lord Esher, and G. E. Buckle, 2nd ser., 1926-8, 1.521). 
Having retired to Knowsley at the end of the 1869 session Derby died there, after being for days in a state of semi-consciousness due to the large quantities of opium administered to relieve his pain, at 6.55 a.m. on 23 October 1869. His final words, in response to the enquiry as to how he was feeling, were 'Bored to the utmost power of extinction' ('Diaries of E. H. Stanley', 37). As in life so Derby approached death with a characteristic insouciance. According to his instructions he was buried on 29 October 1869 in Knowsley parish church with a strictly private service attended only by family, servants, and tenants. He was survived by three children, Edward Henry, fifteenth earl of Derby (1826-1893), Frederick Arthur, sixteenth earl of Derby (1841-1908), and Emma Charlotte (1835-1928), who married the Hon. W. Talbot. 
Derby's classical and literary talent received early recognition with the chancellor's prize in 1819. Throughout his life he continued to translate classical authors, particularly Homer, and contemporary French and German poetry. His conversation also revealed a love for and familiarity with Shakespeare, whose works he enjoyed reading aloud to his family. In 1852 he succeeded the duke of Wellington as chancellor of Oxford University and was created DCL by diploma. His Latin speeches, particularly those given at his installation in the Sheldonian Theatre in 1853 and delivered on 16 June 1863 upon the visit of the prince and princess of Wales to the university, were widely admired for their easy and excellent style. Derby's 'Translations of Poems Ancient and Modern', privately printed in 1862, included a blank verse translation of part of the 'Iliad'. His translation of the whole, as 'The Iliad of Homer Rendered into English Blank Verse' (2 vols.), appeared in 1864 to much critical praise. It reached its sixth edition by 1867. In 1870 the Derby (classical) scholarship was posthumously established at Oxford to commemorate his connection with the university. 
In 1828 Derby published his 'Conversations on the Parables for the Use of Children'. The lucidly written and engaging 'Conversations', composed in the form of daily lessons given by a mother to her two young children, revealed the influence of his own maternal evangelicalism. The parables were explained as moral lessons on the Christian duties of personal faith, charity, and humility. A second edition was published in 1832. In 1839 Derby published 'The Miracles of Our Lord Explained'. In epistolary form this work discussed Christ's miracles as parables, illuminating key Christian truths such as the sanctity of marriage, the ascendancy of God's power over evil, and the necessity of God's grace to the removal of sin. The work is notable for its earnest warnings of the dangerous seductive falsehoods of Catholicism. Like the blind man restored to sight, Derby explained, only personal faith, not priestly power, could enable the genuinely repentant to receive the blessings of God's redeeming love. 
Throughout his life Derby was a passionate sportsman. Horse-racing and 'battue' shooting remained, until the 1860s, absorbing diversions from public life. As a young man he managed his grandfather's large stable. Yet, despite his best efforts, during his racing career he failed to win either the Derby or the Oaks, those highlights of the racing calendar established by his grandfather. In 1858 he came close, with his horse Toxophilite, to achieving the double distinction of winning the Derby and being prime minister in the same year. Other famous horses from his stable, such as Dervish, De Clare, Canezou, and Ithuriel, brought him much success. In 1849 he was appointed steward of the Jockey Club. His letter to the Jockey Club of 1857 became a classic and oft-quoted statement of the appropriate conduct for gentlemen of the turf. In 1863, because of ill health, he sold a greater part of his stud and formally retired from the turf. Game-shooting on the Knowsley estate, accompanied by his spaniels and with his tenants acting as beaters, remained a passion he shared with close friends and political intimates such as Lord Malmesbury. 
Derby prided himself on the affection with which he was held by his tenants. Visitors to Knowsley often observed the warm relations between him and those who farmed or worked on the estate. Elsewhere in the county Derby's son, in 1853, 'found remaining an almost feudal respect for our family' ('Disraeli, Derby and the Conservative Party', 112). In 1862 Derby became chairman of the central relief committee in Lancashire during the cotton famine. At Manchester, on 2 December 1862, he praised the noble manner in which destitution was being borne by the working men of Lancashire, and until 1865 he devoted much energy to raising private subscriptions for the relief of suffering in the county. He contributed $10,000 to the fund himself, then regarded as the largest single subscription, up to that time, made by an individual Englishman to a public fund for a single purpose. He also served as a Sloane trustee of the British Museum from 1835 to 1866 and as an elder brother of the Trinity House from 1852 to 1869. 
Derby was the first British statesman to become prime minister three times. He remains, at the beginning of the twenty-first century, the longest-serving party leader in modern British politics. When unveiling a statue of Derby in Parliament Square, Westminster, in July 1874 Disraeli summarized his career thus: 'He abolished slavery, he educated Ireland, he reformed parliament' (Monypenny & Buckle, 2.451). Because of his debating power Derby played an important part in the reforms of the early 1830s, particularly the '1832 Reform Bill'. Between 1846 and 1868 he restored the Conservatives as a credible party of government. Throughout his career he advocated moderate judicious reform, which he presented as the essential safeguard of peaceful, well-ordered progress. This was the context for his private conviction that 'real political power was not to be had in England: at best you could only a little advance or retard the progress of an inevitable movement', and that it was the purpose of politics to provide a stable, yet flexible, framework for the onward advance of society ('Disraeli, Derby and the Conservative Party', 104). Derby retained, however, an abiding distrust of non-parliamentary politics, as manifested in populist campaigns or the influence of the press. Throughout his life he remained convinced that the authentic national interest was to be discerned in the calm deliberation of parties in Westminster rather than popular platforms or extra-parliamentary agitation. Dangerous extremism, either radical or ultra-tory, was to be contained, and reckless change to be held in check. Only when necessary did he speak outside parliament. 
As a result Derby's achievement as a statesman was confined to the parliamentary arena. His attractive tenor voice, precise diction, clearness of style, and commanding intelligence made him one of the most effective parliamentary speakers of his day. This was despite the extreme nervousness he experienced prior to making any major statement. T. B. Macaulay, to whom Derby confessed that before speaking his throat was as dry as a man about to be hanged, noted that, none the less, Derby 'speaks like a man who never knew what fear or even modesty was' (G. O. Trevelyan, 'The Life and Letters of Lord Macaulay', 2 vols., 1876, 1.242). One hostile observer, the first earl of Kimberley, judged Derby's magisterial speech on the Don Pacifico affair in 1850, 'the most brilliant speech I think I have ever heard' ('The Journal of John Wodehouse, First Earl of Kimberley, 1862-1902', ed. A. Hawkins and J. Powell, Camden Fifth Series, 9, 1997, 44). The whig lord chancellor, Lord Campbell, declared the combative Derby to be 'a host in himself. He has marvellous acuteness of intellect and consummate power in debate. There is no subject which he cannot thoroughly and lucidly explain' (M. S. Hardcastle, 'Life of Lord Campbell', 2 vols., 1881, 2.324). Disraeli privately marvelled at Derby's capability: 'his mind always clear, his patience extraordinary, he rises in difficulty, and his resources never fail' ('Disraeli, Derby and the Conservative Party', 72). The Conservative minister and novelist Edward Bulwer-Lytton thought Derby 'the 'cleverest' public man he had ever met. Others had more genius, more knowledge, more pure intellect, but none seemed to rival Derby's cleverness' (Bulwer-Lytton memo, 1869?, Herts. ALS, Lytton MS C13, fol. 21). 
Yet, though he achieved much, after his death Derby was much neglected. In part this was because of his temperament and manner. He was well known for his love of the pointed jest. When, in later life, he heard the riddle posed 'Why is heaven like a bald head?', Derby declined the conventional response that both were shining places where no parting existed. But he immediately replied that 'in neither place is a 'Whig' in sight' (Bagley, 185). But, despite his charm, Derby rarely established confidential relations with supporters or social inferiors. He 'made no pains to soothe irritated vanities. He thought he did the party a great favour to lead it at all' (Bulwer-Lytton memo, 1869?, Herts. ALS, Lytton MS C13, fol. 21). Only the aristocratic sharers of his amusements became intimates. He rarely frequented the Carlton Club and entertained little at his London residence in St James's Square. The countess of Derby was neither a successful nor enthusiastic political hostess: one guest remembered her entertainments as being 'of a dullness as depressing as a London fog' (Lord Redesdale, ed., 'Memories, by Lord Redesdale, 1867-76', 2 vols., 1915, 1.534). Derby's aloofness, a robust, often sharp, sense of humour, and total absorption in the activity of the moment repelled easy social familiarity. Moreover, his manner led many to doubt his seriousness of purpose. Hence Lord Brougham's double-edged comment that at thirty Derby was by far the cleverest young man of the day, and that at sixty he would be the same (Lord Morley, 'The Life of Gladstone', 3 vols., 1903, 1.160). In his poem 'New Timon' (1845) Bulwer-Lytton famously described Derby as 'frank, haughty, rash, the Rupert of Debate'. 
As later historians of Conservatism celebrated the contributions of Peel and Disraeli so Derby was overlooked. An official multi-volume biography, as bestowed by W. F. Monypenny and G. E. Buckle on Disraeli, was never produced. Disraeli himself, in his 1852 biography of Lord George Bentinck, portrayed Derby as 'a secondary personage in the party and the legislature' (Monypenny & Buckle, 3.328). Later Disraelian apologists, such as the tory journalist T. E. Kebbel, declared that Derby lacked 'any taste for those strategical manoeuvres which are as necessary in politics as in war' (T. E. Kebbel, 'A History of Toryism', 1886, 332). Although Kebbel's 1890 memoir of Derby was more generous, the short biography by the tory writer George Saintsbury, published in 1892, concluded that Derby, despite his talents, 'had no consistent or thoroughgoing theory of politics' (G. E. Saintsbury, 'Lord Derby', 1892, 199). The appearance of Charles Greville's 'Memoirs' in 1888, edited by Henry Reeve, gave further ammunition to Derby's detractors, as Greville believed Derby, whom he deeply disliked on a personal level, was too much affected by 'the Newmarket style of life' to be a serious politician ('The Greville Memoirs, 1814-1860', ed. G. L. Strachey and R. Fulford, 1938, 6.457). Thus Derby became conventionally portrayed as either a frivolous or apathetic aristocratic politician devoid, as one modern historian has described it, of 'the qualities of ambition and dedication normally necessary for successful party leadership' (J. B. Conacher, 'Party politics in the age of Palmerston', '1859: Entering an Age of Crisis', ed. P. Appleman and others, 1959, 166). Recent historical scholarship has begun to revise this verdict, recognizing that Derby's insouciant manner and passion for the turf were not proof of a lack of political seriousness; although to date, 130 years after Derby's death, no full study of his complete career, based upon his papers and correspondence (now housed at the Liverpool Record Office), has yet been published. 


@@@@@


doc= 26266


Stanley, Edward Henry, fifteenth earl of Derby (1826-1893), politician and diarist, was born on 21 July 1826 at Knowsley, the family seat in Lancashire, the eldest son of Edward George Geoffrey Smith Stanley (1799-1869), from 1851 the fourteenth earl of Derby, and his wife, Emma Caroline Bootle-Wilbraham (1805-1876), daughter of the first Lord Skelmersdale. Sent to his father's old school, he did not fare well in the schoolboy republic that Eton College then was. Removed to a very different regime at Rugby under Arnold and Tait, he expressed his lasting gratitude by a bequest of $2000 to fund a scholarship or exhibition there. He matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1844, graduating in 1848 with a first in the classical tripos and junior optime in the mathematical tripos. He belonged to the Apostles, the select undergraduate society that was a formative influence on a number of liberal-minded intellectuals in the Victorian age and afterwards. 
The Stanleys were a whig family, but Edward Henry's father, who changed sides after sitting in the cabinet that passed the 'Great Reform Bill', had emerged as the leader of the protectionist majority when the tories split over the corn laws in 1846. It was as a protectionist that the younger Stanley first stood for parliament in March 1848, narrowly losing a by-election at Lancaster before being returned, in his absence, for King's Lynn in December, a seat he retained until he went to the Lords in 1869. At this stage of his career the protectionist case convinced him. After visiting the West Indies in 1848-9 and again in 1849-50 he spoke and wrote in favour of the embattled sugar planters of the British Caribbean against the free trade that was slowly ruining them and their colonies to the advantage of foreign competitors employing slave labour. Sympathy with British settlers and businessmen was to characterize his brand of liberal imperialism at the India and colonial offices. The travels which had taken Stanley to North and South America as well as the West Indies took him to northern India in 1851-2; few Victorian politicians saw as much of the world beyond Europe. 
Deputed by his formidable father to address a protectionist rally at Edinburgh in April 1851, he 'thought it unwise to refuse but at the last moment took to my bed on the plea of illness' ('Journals and Memoirs... 1849-1869', 62, 24 April 1851). Only a little ahead of his party in deciding that protection was a lost cause, he soon found himself 'extremely unpopular' with them, yet widely seen, at the same time, as their future leader (ibid., 108, 30 June 1853). Brought home from India to be parliamentary under-secretary at the Foreign Office in his father's ministry of February-December 1852, he confirmed the perception of him as an able man in a party woefully lacking in ability after the Peelites' departure. The promise and the hereditary position of Lord Stanley, as he was styled from 1851, did not blind tories to his feeling of kinship with the more progressive elements among their Liberal opponents. He confided to his diary that, while he intended to remain on the tory benches as long as his father was politically active, Derby's death or retirement would set him free to review his allegiance. His close friendship, personal and political, with Disraeli added to tory distrust. Stanley was a regular contributor to Disraeli's journal of those years, 'The Press', which voiced their criticism of the Aberdeen and Palmerston ministries for taking Britain into the Crimean War and keeping her there. Notwithstanding his attitude to the war, Palmerston offered him a cabinet place in the autumn of 1855, which Stanley declined, giving as his reasons loyalty to his father and unresolved doubts about Palmerstonian diplomacy. In his diary the youthful tory reflected that Palmerston was too old and his government's prospects still too uncertain for the offer to be tempting: acceptance might mean 'a sacrifice of permanent results for temporary distinction' (ibid., 139, memorandum on public affairs, Nov 1855). The comment is revealing, as is the whole episode. 
Meanwhile Stanley, with Disraeli and others, tried to broaden toryism's appeal by demonstrating its willingness to back the sort of reforms, in several fields, that would commend it to intelligent middle-class opinion. Stanley himself identified such opinion particularly with the northern capitalists, whose achievements he admired: 'no class that I know in English life equals them'. A visit to Bury in 1853, where the employers were among the best of their kind, determined his aim in public life, 'shaping my political course so as not to lose their support, if it can... be gained -- and I think it can'. The house of Stanley's old influence in Lancashire was perpetuated and strengthened by his intelligent courtship, from this time, of the urban patriciates neglected by his father. As a result, no doubt, he hesitated to join Derby's second cabinet in February 1858: he saw the numerous reactionaries in his party as 'the worst section of the political world' and, despite their continuing friendship, shared the widespread view of Disraeli as someone who would do anything for office. But these were views which, it seems, he kept to himself, and he joined. A hint from Derby that the governor-generalship of India might shortly be his for the asking helped to overcome Stanley's reluctance ('Journals and Memoirs... 1849-1869', 112, 22 Nov 1853; 156, 21 Feb 1858). 
Stanley never governed India, or Canada, another imperial opportunity that attracted him. Briefly colonial secretary in the 1858-9 government, he moved to the India board in June 1858, on Lord Ellenborough's enforced resignation, and became the first secretary of state for India under the act ending company rule in the subcontinent. Prudence restrained him from publicly condemning the atrocities, 'painful, even disgusting', that marked the repression of the Indian mutiny in 1857-9: 'over opinion I have little power' (Stanley to Delane, 14 Oct 1858, A. I. Dasent, 'John Thadeus Delane', 1908, 1.298-9). He accepted that, as John Lawrence, among others, urged, the situation in India called for a generous amnesty and guarantees of respect for Indian religions and established rights. His original draft of the resulting proclamation of November 1858, sent round the cabinet, was criticized as reading 'too much like a respectable magistrate's advice after a parochial row' (Malmesbury to Stanley, 15 Aug 1858, Steele, 155). Stanley disliked rhetoric, and generally eschewed it: but the revised text, given a Burkean ring, answered its purpose. He made an enemy of the queen, however, by obstructing the royal wish for a unified British and Indian army; both he and his father threatened Victoria with their resignations. In the more important controversy over the future of tenant right in British Indian land legislation he leant towards those who wanted to weaken it with a view to attaching the native aristocracy more firmly to alien rule. British businessmen and planters, and the Lancashire cotton lobby, also had a cautious friend in him. On the other hand he congratulated himself on having offered a seat on the new Council of India in London to J. S. Mill, whose authority upheld tenant right in India against its assorted critics. 
Within the cabinet and party Stanley was bolder in domestic politics, working closely with Disraeli. The outline of the tory 'Reform Bill' they drew up in August 1858 was inspired, so far as Stanley was concerned, by the desire for 'a reconciliation and almost fusion of the landed with the town interest'. He talked of resigning when Disraeli abandoned the substantial redistribution of seats they had prepared. 'I neither think it can succeed, nor that it ought to', wrote Stanley of their diminished bill. As the one decided reformer in the government, he predicted that failure on reform would offset gains for the 'liberal spirit' displayed in other areas of policy (Stanley to Disraeli, 26 Oct 1858 and 10 Feb 1859, Steele, 138-9). He argued in cabinet for submitting to the Liberation Society's demand for the abolition of church rates: the dissenters were too influential to be resisted indefinitely. He voted with Disraeli, and against several of their cabinet colleagues, for the admission of Jews to parliament; a step which, like parliamentary reform, was deeply distasteful to many tories. Yet the experiment in liberalization left the party in better shape to begin another long spell in opposition. Although Stanley was on good terms with some leading radicals he thought 'the masses' were not ready, if they ever would be, for an extension of the franchise, and tried to capitalize on the dislike of the rich businessmen he knew for the household suffrage of Bright and Cobden (ibid., 140-41, Stanley at Liverpool, 29 Oct 1859). 
In opposition Stanley was both important to his party and independent of it. An odd tribute to the standing he enjoyed was the Greek suggestion that he should be a candidate for the country's vacant throne in 1863; he did not take it seriously. His sympathies, unlike those of most tories, were with the north in the American Civil War. At the 1865 general election he contradicted Disraeli on the hustings when his old friend raised the time honoured cry of 'the Church in danger': 'I do not believe that the Establishment... in England is in any danger whatsoever' (Stanley at King's Lynn, 19 July 1865, Steele, 279). He sounded more like a distinctively progressive whig than any kind of tory. Even before Palmerston's death in October 1865 his name was mentioned as the possible premier of a coalition, uniting the moderate men of both parties, which might be trusted to carry a safe reform bill. After the Liberals fell out over reform in 1866 Stanley passed up his chance, such as it was. Self-knowledge had taught him that he was 'only too apt to leave in other hands... the responsibility of deciding on the questions of the day' ('Journals and Memoirs... 1849-1869', 179, 30 Nov 1861). As a leading member of his father's last government, formed in June that year, he found reasons for supporting household suffrage when Derby and Disraeli introduced it; although he suggested, as a compromise, the $6 borough franchise in their ten-minute bill, quickly dropped, of February 1867. As far back as 1859 he had offered himself, unsuccessfully, for Marylebone, one of the largest urban constituencies. He now summed up the supposedly democratic Hyde Park riots of July 1866 as devoid of 'malice... mere larking... only love of destruction, noise, and fighting' (ibid., 261, 24-5 July 1866). Since they were as yet impervious to radicalization, household suffrage was not going 'to effect a real transfer of power to the working class... equally opposed to our interests and ideas' (ibid., 293, 5 March 1867). Pessimistic, initially, about the government's hopes of carrying household suffrage, he was not tempted to emulate Cranborne, the future Lord Salisbury, and the other cabinet ministers who resigned in protest. 
While the cabinet were discussing reform and getting it through, Stanley was occupied with the Foreign Office, which he held (July 1866-December 1868) under his father and Disraeli, who took over as premier in February 1868. Then and later, he cast Britain in Europe as 'simply a spectator of events' ('Journals and Memoirs... 1849-1869', 262, 30 July 1866). Nevertheless, he approved and actively seconded the efforts of Lord Cowley, the ambassador in Paris, to defuse the Luxembourg crisis which menaced France and Prussia with an unwanted war in 1867. Stanley presided at the London conference where a settlement was agreed: 'for years no subject has caused me so much uneasiness as this' (ibid., 308, 4 May 1867). Yet, sharing the general distrust of Bismarck, he did not think the outcome of the Austro-Prussian War and the approach of German unity were necessarily harmful to British interests. He gave priority to the troubled Anglo-American relationship. His preference for the north during the civil war helped with the 'Alabama' question, where he noted how public opinion had registered the awesome increase of American strength demonstrated in the war. He exploited the changed British attitude in consenting to arbitration on the 'Alabama' claims: to compensation for losses inflicted by the Confederacy's commerce raider and her sister ships, built and fitted out, like her, in Britain in breach of international law. It was imperative to heal this running sore in the relations between Britain and America: 'If I accomplish this', he reflected, 'my tenure of office... will not have been useless' (ibid., 288, 10 Feb 1867). His decision to go to arbitration started a long and difficult negotiating process concluded by the treaty of Washington in 1871. 
Stanley was not, as he has sometimes been called, a Cobdenite in any real sense, but someone who well understood that aristocratic primacy and landed property were the safer for the avoidance of hostilities with the United States or continental great powers. Without any of Cobden's feelings for the Celtic and Catholic Irish, he realized how strongly they wished for separation from Britain and for restitution of the land so largely owned by aliens in race and religion. His family were Irish landlords until he sold their 7000 acres in Munster not long after succeeding his father. He was one of those more than willing to sacrifice the established church in Ireland for the sake of the Union and the landlords. He had thought an Anglican establishment in Catholic Ireland hard to justify from his first years in parliament. When, in the mid-1860s, the resurgence of Irish unrest forced British political parties to balance coercion with some concessions, he went further than any of his colleagues in hinting at disestablishment; the time was ripe 'to get rid of the thing altogether' ('Journals and Memoirs... 1849-1869', 331, 15 July 1868). Stanley looked, and felt, less like a tory than ever. After Gladstone's victory in the 1868 election, the passing of the 'Irish Church Bill', and Derby's death in October 1869 (when he succeeded as fifteenth earl) he sought to distance himself from the tories, once again relegated to opposition. 
That was how a worldly whig described Derby in his thirties (Clarendon to the duchess of Manchester, 7 Aug 1860, A. L. Kennedy, ''My Dear Duchess'', 1956, 112). The personable heir to a great fortune spent only half his annual income of $2000 on himself, set aside a third for good causes, prominent among which were those in his East Anglian constituency, and invested whatever was left in companies trading in the empire. Books, travel, and shooting were his pleasures. When he came into his inheritance he set himself to clear the estates of debt and sold off his father's racing stable. Twenty years after his succession the unencumbered income stood at nearly $250,000 p.a., up by a third, while continuing purchases took the acreage, he noted with satisfaction, to 'just 1/1000th part of the area of the British islands' (Derby diaries, 1889, Lpool RO). About half this vast property, five-sixths of it in the industrial county of Lancashire, consisted of urban leaseholds. No one was more aware of the political danger from agitation against the overwhelming concentration of land ownership revealed by the ''New Domesday'' of 1873. Derby had been instrumental in securing that census of landed property in the mistaken belief that it would prove to be more widely dispersed than radicals alleged. For all his admiration of J. S. Mill -- whose 'On Liberty' he called 'one of the wisest books... of our times' (Stanley, 2.81, 6 June 1881) -- he was disturbed by the sage's mild proposals for land reform in 1871: 'If he succeeds, it will be time to think of a new home in Australia' (Derby diaries, 16 May 1871). His own shrewd judgement of people and economic trends reassured him. A good and improving landlord, he was convinced that his class must demonstrate its political and social usefulness by leadership and example, local and national. To be found wanting in those respects would be 'fatal to the existence of a governing class' ('Diaries... 1869-1878', 527, 18 March 1878). Generous with his time and purse, he was a chairman of quarter sessions for over thirty years and a benefactor in Liverpool, where he was the largest private landowner, and in other towns. 
Even as a young man Derby felt a compulsion to busy himself with politics for fear of 'probable mental deterioration' ('Journals and Memoirs... 1849-1869', 157, 21 Feb 1858) if his days were not full. Years afterwards, contemplating the unwanted prospect of the premiership if Disraeli's health broke down, he shrank from retirement and 'the loss of a kind of employment which habit has made not uncongenial and which, if sometimes disagreeable, keeps off mere vacancy and weariness' ('Diaries... 1869-1878', 369, 21 Jan 1877). As such remarks hint, Derby lacked a faith. In later life he seldom went to church. The contemporary religious thinker who most influenced him was the Unitarian W. R. Greg, whose book, 'The Creed of Christendom: its Foundations and Superstructure' (1851), 'I read again and again... it fastened itself on my mind' (Derby diaries, 19 Nov 1881); a mind prepared, he added, by D. F. Strauss's 'Das Leben Jesu'. Derby was a sceptic who remained a seeker after truth, rejecting uncomfortable seers like Tolstoy for preaching, in 'My Religion', 'a kind of Quaker Communism' (Derby diaries, 30 Sept 1888). The certainties to which this troubled intellectual clung were social: property and the laws of the market. Nothing alarmed him so much as the recurrent talk of a graduated income tax, 'the most revolutionary of all schemes' ('Diaries... 1869-1878', 286, 25 March 1876). In other ways he thought of himself, and perhaps was, a radical, 'not an ultra-radical' (Derby diaries, 30 Nov 1882). The monarchy struck him as an 'anomaly' (ibid., 16 Dec 1882). High tories and high-churchmen, particularly the latter, were anathema to him; in his diary he alluded to the 'parti pretre' like some Gallic anti-clerical ('Diaries... 1869-1878', 387, 30 March 1877). He disliked both Gladstone and Salisbury for their high-churchmanship and its political expression. In the speeches which he felt it was incumbent upon him to make to a wide variety of institutions and organizations he promoted a utilitarian, and wholly secular, understanding of social mechanisms. 'All capital is accumulated labour' (Stanley, 1.81, 1 April 1869), he reminded employers and workmen; 'if class differences widen instead of narrow... how long will you be able to avert an explosion?' (ibid., 2.88, 6 June 1881). 
The emotional life of a cerebral politician centred from his thirties on the great lady, with a powerful attraction for clever men, whose second husband Derby became on 5 July 1870. Lady Mary Catherine Sackville (1824-1900), daughter of the fifth Earl De La Warr, was married in 1847 to the widowed second marquess of Salisbury, James Gascoyne-Cecil, with whom she had five children ['see 'Stanley, Mary Catherine]. She encouraged Derby's devoted attachment during her husband's lifetime, when he was a regular visitor to Hatfield. If her desire to see Derby succeed helped to keep him in politics, her love of intrigue and gossip seriously damaged his reputation at a critical juncture. Nevertheless, their childless union brought him as much personal happiness as he was capable of feeling, and his devotion endured. 
Derby's relations with his wife's stepson, the third marquess of Salisbury, affected their careers. After Disraeli led the tories to defeat in the 1868 election a discontented party was inclined to think of Derby as the natural replacement, not least because of the importance of the north-west to tory electoral prospects. He gave Disraeli's critics no encouragement when, in the absence of both men, the change was mooted at a party conclave in 1872. He had previously refused the leadership in the Lords, to which he was elected in February 1870: 'my habit of mind is not that of a partisan... By accepting... leadership of one political party, I lose all hold over members of the other' ('Diaries... 1869-1878', 51, 20 Feb 1870). Although Salisbury had strongly supported his election to the Lords' post, Derby deplored the combativeness which characterized him in opposition. He acquiesced, however, in his wife's successful mediation between her stepson and Disraeli when a tory ministry was being formed in March 1874. Derby himself went back to the Foreign Office. Prompted by his wife, he was to suggest Salisbury, who had proved himself at the India Office, as the British plenipotentiary to the fruitless Constantinople conference of the powers on the Eastern question in 1876. For rather different reasons neither wanted to involve Britain in another war to save the Ottoman empire from Russian aggression. Derby was quite unsympathetic to Salisbury's -- and Gladstone's -- high-church solicitude for the sultan's Christian and Orthodox subjects. He had as little sympathy with Disraeli's desire for a diplomacy that maintained and enhanced British prestige at the risk of war in the run up to the predicted disintegration of Turkey's empire. 
Positioning Britain for her share of the spoils, and getting in first at the places that mattered to her, seemed to Derby 'mere buccaneering... giving the signal for a general scramble' ('Diaries... 1869-1878', 392, 21 April 1877). He fought a long rear-guard action in cabinet against such proposals. It was a policy that Salisbury eventually joined Beaconsfield (as Disraeli had become) in adopting, even though it meant preparing to fight Russia -- the champion of Ottoman Christians and at war with Turkey from 1877. Derby believed Salisbury was ambitious to be foreign secretary himself: they disagreed about the extent to which Britain could avoid being drawn into the great power politics of the continent. 'To me it is not very... intelligible', wrote Derby in August 1877, while ministers continued to debate their response if Russian invaders, held up in the Balkans, overcame Turkish resistance, 'as long as our... interests are not touched, why should not foreigners settle their own differences in their own way?' (ibid., 427, 2 Aug 1877). He was unwilling to do more than warn Russia against occupying Constantinople itself, which would have been too much for the British public, and defined Britain's essential interests in the Middle East. 
In January 1878 Derby thought it provocative to send British warships into the Sea of Marmora, with or without the permission of the Turks, and resigned. He withdrew his resignation when the order to the Mediterranean Fleet was countermanded, and later consented to the naval presence off Constantinople. He did not leave the government until it seemed to decide in March on seizing a strategic point in the Levant as Britain dominated international negotiation of the peace terms imposed upon the Turks. He saw in this 'an absolute violation of international law and right' ('Diaries... 1869-1878', 518, 2 March 1878), and resigned on 27 March 1878. In the event Britain obtained Cyprus by agreement with the sultan before the congress in Berlin distributed other portions of his empire. Derby's stand against the acquisition of Ottoman territory without regard to legality had apparently had an effect. 'I have gained', he said to himself, 'the reputation of independence and moral courage' (Derby diaries, 14 April 1878). That was true of his political opponents. His own party never forgave him for holding them back from the brink of war. 
Derby had not neglected to brief the editors he was used to seeing about his preferred policy in the developing crisis. In newspapers given over to the 'jingo' excitement of the moment in London society and at court he was attacked with increasing violence as calls for British intervention against Russia grew louder. Those cabinet colleagues who wanted Britain to assert herself -- virtually all of them in the end -- put his reluctance to act down to a paralysing fear of responsibility. During the last weeks before his resignation Salisbury and Cairns, the lord chancellor, were chosen to share the drafting of critical diplomatic exchanges with him. This gave rise to the legend, reproduced by Salisbury's daughter and biographer, that Derby was by then foreign secretary only in name. He was also said to have taken refuge in drink. Worst of all, he and his wife were alleged to have leaked cabinet secrets to the Russian ambassador, Count Pyotr Shuvalov, whose mistress she was supposed to be. A good deal of this criticism has been perpetuated by historians. Little use has been made, so far, of Derby's diaries, most of which were not rediscovered before the 1970s. They do not leave the impression of someone who had lost control of himself and his department. The doggedness with which he fought his corner in cabinet, with little help from others after Lord Carnarvon's resignation in January 1878, is persuasive evidence on the other side. 
The relationship of husband and wife to Shuvalov was close because the Russian was working against the war party in St Petersburg. In that context Lady Derby's indiscretions probably did more good than harm. As Derby's successor Salisbury benefited from the delay in Britain's confrontation with Russia until the latter was exhausted by her hard-won victory over Turkey. Yet he was unsparing in his condemnation of Derby who, he held, might have organized Europe to restrain Russia at an early stage of the crisis. When Derby revealed in the Lords (18 July 1878) that the cabinet had considered seizing the equivalent of Cyprus without the sultan's consent, Salisbury likened him to the odious figure of Titus Oates, divulging imaginary secrets to discredit his opponents. If the cabinet took no such decision, as the premier and Salisbury contended, they had certainly approved the idea (Millman, 412-13). Derby still retained his old affection for Beaconsfield, while knowing him to be 'utterly without scruple'. He could never excuse Salisbury's desertion to the premier (Derby diaries, 4 April 1878, 14 April 1878). 
Nothing in Derby's subsequent career quite equals in importance his handling of the Eastern crisis. He determined to make up to the Liberals without leaving the tories, but soon formally changed his party. Gladstone, who had prophesied a great future for the young Stanley ('Later Derby Diaries', 164, n. 1), sought to bring him into his second government of 1880 from the start. Derby did not, at any time, reciprocate Gladstone's esteem for him. The Liberal leader was 'uncongenial to me', he observed in 1881, 'as a... 'devot', and as an ardent democrat' (Derby diaries, 30 Nov 1882). When he finally yielded to Gladstone's overtures in December 1882, he gave way because 'bound to do what I can... to prevent the two sections of Whigs and Democrats from quarrelling'. The queen's vehement objections to 'a most disagreeable, irresolute and timid minister' (Victoria to Gladstone, 14 Dec 1882, 'Letters of Queen Victoria', 2nd ser., 3.378) diverted him from the India Office to the colonies, his actual preference. 
As colonial secretary from December 1882 Derby negotiated with the Transvaal the London convention of 1884, which enlarged the independence of the republic, victorious in the Anglo-Transvaal War of 1880-81. His predecessor, Lord Kimberley, responsible for the Pretoria convention in 1881, which had explicitly retained British suzerainty over the Transvaal in conceding self-rule, believed the African majority there and in South Africa as a whole was predestined to go the way of the Aborigines in Australia and the Maori in New Zealand. Derby was not convinced: 'the negro of South Africa is a tougher and more improveable being, up to a certain point'. Nor did he think British opinion would stand an Antipodean solution to the native problem (Derby diaries, 14 March 1882). Nevertheless, he accepted the advice of Sir Hercules Robinson, the high commissioner in South Africa, that suzerainty inspired 'false hopes' in the Transvaal's African population when the British government was not prepared to enforce its theoretical control of the republic's native policy (ibid., 16 May 1883). Derby was, however, unwilling to renounce suzerainty explicitly in the London convention, in which the word was not mentioned. He claimed afterwards that 'whatever suzerainty meant... the condition of things which it implies remains' (Schreuder, 430). The Transvaal interpreted the agreement differently, and the conflicting interpretations fed the continuing tension that eventually resulted in the South African War. In return for omitting the contentious word from the treaty, surrendering control of native affairs, and extending the Transvaal's boundaries, Derby obtained the 'North Road', giving the self-governing Cape Colony access to the unclaimed regions of the interior without having to cross the republic's territory. He was also able to keep the Boers out of Bechuanaland and, later, Basutoland. The attitude of the British press strengthened his hand: 'When the 'Daily News' and 'Pall Mall Gazette' join with the 'Standard' and 'Morning Post' the practical unanimity of opinion... is irresistible by any minister' (Derby diaries, 11 Jan 1884). 
Derby got the best settlement possible when the Gladstone cabinet was disinclined to resort to force again: he proved more than a match for the Transvaal president, Paul Kruger, who had counted on the secretary of state's supposed weakness (Schreuder, 417). The republic received what Derby had recommended for Basutoland: 'give them 'Home Rule' with a kind of protectorate, conducting their external relations but leave them free in regard of internal affairs' (Derby to Gladstone, 25 April 1883, BL, Add. MS 44141). Though he 'totally' distrusted the Cape politicians, Boer and British, he worked with them to avert a republican ascendancy fatal to British influence in South Africa (Derby to Gladstone, 5 Jan 1884, BL, Add. MS 44142). The races, white and black, were to remain within an imperial framework that sought to reconcile their interests with Britain's strategic concerns in a pragmatic and liberal fashion. Striving to make Gladstone see that the encroaching Transvaal must be made to honour its treaty obligations in respect of the Bechuana chiefs and people, Derby told him that 'there can hardly be a case where right is more plainly on our side' (ibid., Derby to Gladstone, 21 Oct 1884). He argued for the territorial moves that checked the Boers from the Transvaal and the smaller Orange Free State, and also the advance of Germany -- 'these predatory proceedings' -- after she had established herself in South-West Africa (ibid., Derby to Gladstone, 27 Dec 1884). 
In Africa and the Pacific, Derby did not move quickly enough for many contemporaries, including his own officials at the Colonial Office. The permanent under-secretary of state complained of his 'constitutional feebleness... It was a cruelty to him and to the Empire to put him in his present post' (Sir Robert Herbert to Lord Carnarvon, 1 Oct 1884, BL, Add. MS 60795). The tactics of delay and evasion came easily to Derby with his sceptical outlook, and he made deliberate use of them. Holding that the settler colonies were much too ready to call on Britain and the British taxpayer for assistance in realizing their schemes of local expansion, he confided his intentions to his diary: 'They will be disappointed so far as I am concerned' (Derby diaries, 15 May 1883). They were: when the representatives of five Australian governments waited on him to urge pre-empting rival powers in the race about to start for New Guinea, the New Hebrides, Samoa, and other island groups in the south Pacific, 'I tried a little sarcasm, asking whether they did not want a whole planet to themselves' (ibid., 28 June 1883). Yet it seemed clear to him that if Britain did not act on their demand for the annexation of New Guinea, at least, there was a danger that the Australians might sever their ties with the mother country. It was opposition in the cabinet that delayed Derby's intended proclamation of a protectorate over the coasts of New Guinea not occupied by the Dutch until Germany claimed the north-east, facing Australia. 
The record shows that 'Dawdling Derby', as one civil servant described him ('The Diary of Sir Edward Walter Hamilton', ed. D. W. R. Bahlman, 1993, 2.768), was not the weak and indecisive minister depicted by his critics. They inspired the press attacks calling for bolder policies than he thought were sensible. A lifelong imperialist, he appreciated the changed mood among enthusiasts for empire that affected both political parties: 'My personal sympathy with the new movement is not warm', he remarked, 'but I have no scruple in... accepting it'. His business was to moderate and direct the rising clamour for an ever bigger empire, reflecting that after all his country was 'rich enough to afford the amusement' (Derby diaries, 11 Jan 1884). Fond of saying 'We don't want any more black men', he was loath to countenance the expansion that took place in west Africa where, in his view, the liabilities far outweighed any possible advantages. His empire was the mid-Victorian one, principally composed of the settler colonies and India. The outcome of the Berlin conference on west Africa in 1884 owed little to him. As for Egypt, the future of which loomed large in the cabinet's deliberations, he advocated treating her like an Indian princely state under British protection, or obtaining an international guarantee of her continued existence, as an alternative to annexation (ibid., 22 Jan 1884, 23 May 1884). 
Derby was his own man in the cabinet that fell in June 1885. More Liberal than whiggish, he came out for disestablishment, 'ultimately', before the 1885 general election (Stanley, 2.135, 10 Oct 1885). He had not been particularly worried by the sound and fury of the dispute between the houses over redistributing the constituencies in 1884: 'the quarrel was not worth pushing to... extremities'. Nor was he frightened by Chamberlain's 'radical programme', which, he perceived, 'has not gone down' (Derby diaries, 19 Nov 1884, 2 Jan 1886). It was Ireland that drove him, as it did Chamberlain, into the Unionist camp in 1886, and made him a reluctant ally of Salisbury. For Derby there was 'nothing arbitrary or despotic' in continuing to overrule a 'local majority' in Ireland, if coercion was tempered by land purchase and a prudent extension of the elective principle to county or provincial government (Stanley, 2.98, 4 Jan 1882). Admitting in private that home rule, or independence, might have to be conceded at some future date, he was not ready to surrender the Union and the loyalist minority to Parnellite nationalism. But it was not only his ineradicable distrust of Salisbury that made him oppose a coalition between tories and Liberal Unionists. The semi-detached position of the Liberal Unionists, whom he led in the Lords until 1891, suited him very well. He was among those on that wing of the Unionists whose dislike for a binding continental, and especially a German, alliance would have prevented Salisbury from drawing nearer to Germany in his foreign policy. Above all Derby watched carefully for signs that the socialism advancing rapidly in Europe was making headway in Britain too. He understood the appeal of Henry George's ideas, but correctly forecast that they would take 'a comparatively mild form' in Britain. 'Fabian Essays', he was glad to find, were 'in general temperately written and free from abusive language' (Derby diaries, 10 Jan 1884, 24 April 1890). In 1889 alone he delivered nine speeches in London and Lancashire on social and political topics, including protection, land reform, and industrial relations. His themes were the classical Victorian ones of class co-operation and freedom, modified by recognition of the need for some judicious state intervention. Asked to chair the royal commission on labour in 1891, the last of the inquiries on which he served, he remarked of Tom Mann and the Welsh miners' leader, William Abraham (Mabon), that they were 'not exactly the colleagues one would have chosen but it is necessary that the class... for which they speak should be represented' (ibid., 10 April 1891). 
Derby died at Knowsley, of influenza, on 21 April 1893 and was buried six days later in the parish church; his widow lived until 1900. He was succeeded by his brother Frederick Arthur Stanley, created Baron Stanley of Preston in 1886, a former Conservative minister and governor-general of Canada. They had not been on good terms since Frederick accepted promotion to the cabinet on Derby's resignation in 1878. Derby, who received the Garter from Gladstone in 1884, accumulated other distinctions that were probably more to his taste: he was lord rector of both Glasgow (1868-71) and Edinburgh (1874-7) universities, and chancellor of London University (1891-3). He was an active president of the Royal Literary Fund. His unending benefactions were a duty that he did not always relish: he subscribed to the new bishopric of Liverpool, 'which I care nothing for and rather dislike than otherwise' (Derby diaries, 26 April 1878). He was one of the founders of University College, Liverpool. Unpretentious in his manner, though reserved, he was more respected than popular in his native Lancashire; its accents, acquired in childhood, he never lost. In society unkind stories circulated about him: this immensely rich man was supposed to be afflicted with a mild form of kleptomania (Schreuder, 308). Unconstrained, and among social or intellectual equals, he was surprisingly good company for someone of his temperament, seldom labelled a bore. His lack of ambition for the premiership was misunderstood and misrepresented. When he ruled himself out as the obvious successor of the ailing Disraeli in 1876, a colleague wrote that he 'withdraws more and more and feels his unfitness to lead men' ('Diary of Gathorne Hardy', 12 July 1876). Later, his reputation suffered from his having left the Conservatives and the Liberals in turn. Historians have not spared an innate caution that often resembled timidity, while they have tended to discount the effective defence he offered of his actions in debate and on the platform. He left his mark on colonial policy, where he demonstrated, as he did in his reaction to home rule, that he could act decisively when sure of himself. As foreign secretary he may well have 'carried isolationism to its highest point' (Taylor, 188), but his was a reasoned policy in 1866-8 and 1874-8. The publication of his diaries after nearly a century has furnished posterity with one of the richest sources for his age, and the opportunity of reassessing a remarkable figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 26267


Stanley, Edward John, second Baron Stanley of Alderley and first Baron Eddisbury (1802-1869), politician, was born on 13 November 1802 at Alderley Park, Cheshire, the eldest son of John Thomas Stanley, first Baron Stanley of Alderley (1766-1850), and Maria Josepha (1771-1863), daughter of John Baker Holroyd, first earl of Sheffield. He had a younger twin brother, William Owen Stanley (1802-1884). His father, a strong whig, was MP for Wootton Bassett from 1790 to 1796; his mother, whose intellectual talents were admired by Gibbon, was a domineering personality (GEC, 'Peerage'). Stanley was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1822 and graduated BA with third-class honours in classics in 1825. He married Henrietta Maria Dillon-Lee (1807-1895), eldest daughter of the thirteenth Viscount Dillon, on 7 October 1826 at Florence ['see 'Stanley, Henrietta Maria]; although the marriage was valid they underwent a second ceremony at Alderley on 26 June 1833. They had four sons and six daughters, including Henry Edward John Stanley, who succeeded as third baron, Edward Lyulph Stanley, Rosalind Frances Howard, countess of Carlisle, Katharine Louisa Russell, Lady Amberley, mother of the philosopher Bertrand Russell, and the women's welfare activist Maude Alethea Stanley. 
Stanley was first returned to parliament for Hindon, Wiltshire, in the last unreformed election of 1831, and when that borough was disfranchised represented North Cheshire from 1832 to 1841, and from 1847 to 1848. On 12 May 1848 he was created Baron Eddisbury, and he succeeded to the barony of Stanley of Alderley on 23 October 1850. 
Stanley entered parliament as a whig. He came to prominence through Edward Ellice and Lord Durham. It was probably Ellice who persuaded Lord Melbourne to appoint him as secretary to the Treasury in 1835. Stanley had served as under-secretary for the colonies under Lord Grey in 1833-4, and as under-secretary to the Home department under Lord Melbourne from July to November 1834. Ellice was Treasury secretary, but his keen interest in electoral matters prevented him from devoting the time required to manage the government's often disorganized and disunited supporters in the Commons. Lord Althorp, leader in the Commons, had hoped that reform would forge a united party in the house, but lack of attention to the whip generated a series of parliamentary crises. Stanley's connections to Durham, Joseph Parkes of Birmingham, and other members of the radical movement seemed to make him an ideal person to keep the coalition of whigs, radicals, and Irish members together following the so-called Lichfield House compact of 1835. Stanley was appointed paymaster-general for the government's last few months of office from June to September 1841, and was appointed a privy councillor on 11 August 1841. 
As Treasury secretary, Stanley was only a moderate success. Parkes thought him a good 'whipper in', although he made no strong impression on Lord Holland, who continued to regard Ellice as the chief whip as late as January 1836. Many did not trust him. Nicknamed Benjamin Backbite at Oxford on account of his often malicious satire, he could be either genial or disagreeable. One clerk called him 'cross-grained and tyrannical' (Bourne, 412). 'The Times', in his obituary, concluded that although he had 'spice of ill-nature', he was a man of 'great kindliness of heart, and ever ready to do a friendly and obliging action' ('The Times', 17 June 1869). 
During his first term as Treasury secretary, Stanley had the advantage of a comfortable majority, but following losses in the elections of 1837, the lack of formal management procedures produced unnecessary crises. Ellice warned Melbourne by the end of 1838 that Stanley had been unable to do a good job and that the party, if it was to stay together in the Commons, was in need of a new secretary. His warning was prophetic, for it was clear that Stanley had not warned the members of the importance and suspected closeness of the Jamaica division that prompted the government's resignation in May 1839. In fact, his dalliance with Durham, Parkes, and other radicals lost him support among the whiggish leaders and members. Melbourne would not move him to the Colonial Office, as Ellice recommended, because of that connection. Stanley's radical propensities may have been shaped by his wife, who had strong Jacobin and radical sympathies. As Durham's private secretary when the 'Reform Bill' was drafted, he quickly became known as his 'radical henchman'. Although he was closely connected to the radicals Joseph Hume and Henry Warburton who founded the Reform Association in 1835, the whigs refused to join that populist organization devoted to organizing further reforms. The following year, Stanley joined with Parkes and Hume to organize a Liberal Union club to 'humanize the Radicals and liberalize the Whigs' (Parkes to Brougham, 12 Feb 1836, Brougham MSS). But this new Reform Club was quickly and deliberately swamped with whig grandees, who did not want to alienate the radicals by disowning their alternative to Brooks's Club, but who had no intentions of cavorting so openly with Stanley's connections. If his serving as Treasury secretary was a tactical device to hold a parliamentary alliance together, such a strategy was not without difficulty. 
Where Ellice had served as Stanley's early mentor, Lord Palmerston did so in the later stages of his career. Why he should do so is not at all clear. Stanley and Palmerston were poles apart politically; they had represented the opposite ends of the spectrum in Melbourne's government. Stanley was among those in 1836 who wanted Palmerston elevated to the peerage, and hence removed from the Commons. He had, moreover, intervened with the press on behalf of Lord John Russell in the latter's vituperative and public opposition to Palmerston's bellicose quarrel with France over Eastern affairs. Yet in July 1846, when the whigs returned to office, Palmerston chose him as under-secretary for foreign affairs, a post he held until February 1852. Perhaps Palmerston continued to be influenced by thoughts of Lady Stanley, to whom he had attempted, unsuccessfully, to make love in his 'impudent, brusque way' in 1826 (Bourne, 213). He had continued to hold her in some regard, terming Stanley at one point 'joint whip with Mrs Stanley' ('DNB'). Whatever the reason, Palmerston continued to look after the career of this unexceptional career politician. Vice-president of the Board of Trade in February 1852 and again from 1853, he was appointed president in March 1855 at a time when trade policy took a decided back seat to foreign wars, and remained in this office until February 1858. In August 1860 he was appointed by Palmerston as postmaster-general with a seat in the cabinet, remaining until July 1866, but he refused further office, on account of declining health, when offered a cabinet seat by Gladstone in 1868. 
Stanley died at his London house, 40 Dover Street, on 16 June 1869. As he lay dying, he heard a noise in the street, and asked his daughter if the revolution had begun. He was buried at Alderley Park on 23 June 1869. His wife long outlived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26268


Stanley, Edward Smith, thirteenth earl of Derby (1775-1851), politician and naturalist, the son of Edward Stanley, twelfth earl of Derby (1752-1834), and his first wife, Lady Elizabeth Hamilton (1753-1797), only daughter of James, sixth duke of Hamilton, was born in London on 21 April 1775. His great-grandfather, Edward, eleventh earl of Derby, was descended from a brother of Thomas, second earl of Derby, and succeeded to the earldom on the extinction of the direct line in 1736. His grandfather, James, Lord Strange, took the additional name of Smith in accordance with the will of his wife's father, Hugh Smith (died 1745) of Weald Hall, Essex. 
Styled Lord Stanley until 1832, he was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated as a nobleman in 1793 and graduated MA in 1795. He married, on 30 June 1798, his cousin, Charlotte Margaret, second daughter of his aunt, the Hon. Lucy Stanley, by her marriage with the Revd Geoffrey Hornby. Charlotte died on 16 June 1817; they had three sons and four daughters. 
In the general election of 1796 Stanley was returned as a whig member of parliament for one of the two Preston seats. For half a century a dispute had existed between the earls of Derby and the corporation of Preston as to the right to nominate the representatives of the borough. Between 1768 and 1795 both seats had been held by nominees of the Derby family. In the elections of 1796 Preston corporation determined to secure one of the two seats for the tories and nominated John Horrocks, of the Lancashire firm of Horrocks, Miller & Co. Horrocks and Stanley stood as arch rivals in 1796, but by the election of 1802 an amicable arrangement had been made between the two men to share the seats, an arrangement which was subsequently maintained by Stanley and Horrocks's brother Samuel. In 1806 and 1807, although technically opposed in politics, Stanley and Samuel Horrocks shared a joint committee and a joint canvass, and were elected together. In spite of opposition by other candidates, this agreement lasted at least until 1826, when Stanley's son successfully contested the seat. 
In 1812 Stanley ceased to sit for Preston and was elected one of the members for the county of Lancashire. He held that seat continuously until the passing of the 'Reform Bill' in 1832. Throughout his parliamentary career he was a firm and consistent supporter of the whig party without ever taking a prominent place in it; he spoke little in the House of Commons. In 1832 Lord Grey's ministry needed further strength in the House of Lords; Stanley was thus elevated to the peerage during his father's lifetime by using the title Baron Stanley of Bickerstaffe. Two years later, on the death of his father on 21 October 1834, Stanley succeeded to the earldom; on 17 April 1839 he was created a knight of the Garter. 
Subsequently Derby played little part in political life, but became increasingly prominent in the world of natural history, especially as one of the figureheads of the science of zoological classification, particularly the taxonomy of birds. He was president of the Linnean Society of London from 1828 to 1834, and president of the Zoological Society of London for twenty years from 1831 until his death. He not only encouraged the reading of accounts of new species by chairing meetings of the two societies, but contributed many scientific papers himself to the proceedings of the Zoological Society and donated many specimens to its collections. He actively encouraged collectors in the field, such as Thomas Bridges in South America, Joseph Burke in South Africa and North America, John MacGillivray in Australia and Indonesia, and Thomas Whitfield in west Africa. With contributions from such individuals, and from other zoological contacts, he formed at Knowsley Hall, near Liverpool, a private and very extensive menagerie of birds and mammals. His record of keeping and breeding rare and later extinct species of bird is still regarded as extraordinary; he was the first to breed in captivity such species as the nene (or Hawaiian goose) and the passenger pigeon. He was probably the first person to breed the Australian budgerigar in captivity in Britain, hatching two chicks in his aviaries in February 1848. Fish and reptiles were also kept in the Knowsley collections; the first live African lungfish ('Protopterus' sp.) seen in Britain were brought there from the Gambia in 1843. They were placed in warm tanks within the plant-houses and successfully induced from their mud cocoons. 
Derby also formed a fine museum from specimens purchased at auction or contributed by his collectors and contacts, and from animals from his menagerie as they died. One of the last, an Asian parrot, was an undescribed species which his assistant Louis Fraser named Lord Derby's parakeet, 'Palaeornis derbyanus', in 1850. Many other species are named after the thirteenth earl, such as the Stanley crane, 'Anthropoides paradisea'; the white gallinule, 'Porphyrio stanleyi'; Derby's puffbird, 'Trochilus derbyi'; Lord Derby's eland, 'Tragelaphus derbianus'; and the woolly opossum, 'Caluromys derbianus'. In 1814 Henry Salt brought back from Abyssinia twelve new species of bird, which Derby named scientifically, calling one of them, a lovebird, 'Psittacus taranta' Stanley. Many of the forms in his menagerie were painted by such famous artists as Josef Wolf and Edward Lear. Lear also composed many of his limericks for the Derby children. 
The maintenance of the menagerie alone cost $10,000-$15,000 per annum; it occupied 100 acres of land and 70 of water. Derby spent much of his own time caring for the occupants of the menagerie and wrote copious notes on day-to-day events. At his death the living collections included 345 mammals of 94 species (principally antelopes); of these, no fewer than 207 individuals of 39 species had been bred at Knowsley. His aviaries contained 1272 birds of 318 species (excluding poultry), of which he had bred 549 individuals of 45 species. Even more remarkable is the total figure of 619 bird species kept at Knowsley over the forty-five years the menagerie existed. After Derby's death some of the living animals were given to the Zoological Society in Regent's Park; the queen selected two black-necked swans and five rare Impeyan pheasants for her own gardens. The remainder were sold at auction in October 1851 but realized only $7000. 
The Knowsley Museum is estimated to have included 20,000 mammals, birds, and lower vertebrates; some invertebrates, such as specimens of molluscs, are known to have been donated to the British Museum before Derby's death. The vertebrate collections were bequeathed to the city of Liverpool, where they provided the foundation of what was first the Derby Museum, then the Liverpool Free Public Museum. In 1983 this institution became part of the newly created National Museums and Galleries on Merseyside, the bestowal of national status being in some measure due to the importance of Derby's collections. These include not only many forms now extinct or endangered, but also numerous specimens on which the original scientific descriptions of their species were based (types), and which are therefore of unique importance. Type specimens include those for many of the forms named after the thirteenth earl, as well as for species such as the brown kiwi from New Zealand, the possibly extinct paradise parrot from Australia, and the red-flanked duiker from west Africa; the specimens continue to be actively researched, particularly by bird taxonomists. 
In later life Derby was lord lieutenant of Lancashire, and passed much of his time at Knowsley Hall. He died there on 30 June 1851, and was buried in the family vault at Ormskirk, Lancashire, on 8 July; the funeral procession was more than a mile in length. His eldest son, Edward George Geoffrey Smith Stanley, succeeded him in the title. 


@@@@@


doc= 26269


Stanley, Ferdinando, fifth earl of Derby (1559?-1594), literary patron, was the eldest surviving son of Henry Stanley, fourth earl of Derby (1531-1593), and his wife, Margaret ('c'.1540-1596), daughter of Henry Clifford, second earl of Cumberland. In 1572, at the age of twelve, he matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, and in the same year he assumed the courtesy title Lord Strange upon his father's ascension to the earldom of Derby. After being summoned to court by Queen Elizabeth 'to be fashioned in good manners', he spent several of his teenage years as a squire in the royal household (Bagley, 53). 
In 1579 or 1580 Stanley married Alice Spencer (1559-1637), youngest daughter of Sir John Spencer of Althorp, Northamptonshire. The couple had three daughters: Anne ['see 'Brydges, Anne, Lady Chandos (1580-1647)], who married Grey Brydges, Baron Chandos (1608), and Mervin Touchet, earl of Castlehaven (1624); Frances (1583-1636), who married John Egerton, earl of Bridgewater; and Elizabeth Hastings, nee Stanley (bap. 1587, d. 1633), who married Henry Hastings, earl of Huntingdon. As his family grew, Stanley was being groomed to succeed his father as earl. In 1585 he served as mayor of Liverpool, and three years later he served temporarily as lord lieutenant of Lancashire and Cheshire at the time of the Spanish Armada. In 1589 he was called to the House of Lords, and on 17 September of that year he received an honorary MA from Oxford. 
In addition to pursuing these serious duties Stanley was a noted lover of poetry and drama. From the late 1570s onwards he patronized a company of players, Strange's Men, and his tumblers performed at court several times in the 1580s. After the earl of Leicester's death in 1588, several of Leicester's players joined Strange's Men, who grew increasingly prominent. Late in 1589 they defied the lord mayor to play at Cross Keys, and by 1592 they were the leading company in England, often playing at court. William Shakespeare was probably a member about this time, and several of Shakespeare's future colleagues in the Lord Chamberlain's Men formed the core of the company. 
In the early 1590s Stanley was also well known as a patron of poets. Books dedicated to him include Robert Greene's 'Ciceronis amor' (1589); the second edition of 'Of Prayer and Meditation' (1592), Richard Hopkins's translation of a work by Luis de Granada; Anthony Munday's translation, 'The Defence of Contraries' (1593); and Matthew Gwinne's Latin elegy for the fourth earl of Derby (1593). He was praised in George Peele's 'Polyhymnia' (1590), George Chapman's 'Shadow of the Night' (1594), and (under the name 'Amyntas') Thomas Nashe's 'Pierce Pennilesse' (1592). Edmund Spenser eulogized him as 'Amyntas' in 'Colin Clout's Come Home Again' (1595), writing that: '
He, whilst he lived, was the noblest swain 

That ever piped on an oaten quill: 

Both did he other, which could pipe, maintain, 

And eke could pipe himself with passing skill. 
(Heywood, 35)' This suggestion that Stanley himself wrote poetry is confirmed by John Bodenham's 'Belvedere' (1600), which lists him among its contributors. S. W. May has attributed four poems to him, three of them short but one containing 141 lines, which appear in printed and unprinted collections. 
Upon his father's death on 25 September 1593 Ferdinando Stanley became the fifth earl of Derby. Almost immediately, Catholic plotters sent Richard Hesketh to try and persuade the new earl to claim the crown as the great-grandson of Mary Brandon, Henry VIII's younger sister, but Derby turned the plotters in, leading to Hesketh's execution. Less than seven months after becoming earl, Derby suddenly fell ill on the evening of 5 April 1594, and died eleven days later at Lathom House, Lancashire; he was buried on 6 May at Ormskirk. Stow describes his final illness in excruciating detail, reporting that the day before his death the earl melodramatically instructed his doctors to stop treatment, because 'I am resolved presentlie to die, and to take awaie with me onely one part of my armes, I meane the Eagles winges, so will I flie swiftly into the bosome of Christ my onely saviour' (Stow, 1277). 
The earl's sudden, early, and violent death naturally aroused suspicion. He was praised posthumously in William Covell's 'Polimanteia' (1595) and John Weever's 'Epigrammes' (1599), the latter suggesting that he had been 'bewitcht' (Weever, 8). Stow gives a list of reasons why 'many learned men' believed he had died of witchcraft, and it was also popularly supposed that he had been poisoned. No wrongdoing was ever proved, though, and in the absence of male children the earldom passed to Ferdinando's brother William Stanley. However, Ferdinando's widow, Alice, claimed the right to her husband's estates, leading to legal wrangling which was not resolved until fifteen years later. In 1600 she married Thomas Egerton, later Baron Ellesmere, the lord chancellor, and was a well-known patron of poets until her death in 1637. 


@@@@@


doc= 26270


Stanley, Hans (1721-1780), politician, was born on 23 September 1721 at Paultons, near Romsey, Hampshire, and was baptized at Holyrood in Southampton the following month. He was the only son of George Stanley (died 1734) and his wife, Sarah (died 1764), the elder daughter and coheir of the eminent physician Sir Hans Sloane (1660-1753). His family was originally engaged in trade, but his parents' marriage in 1719 brought part of Sloane's Chelsea estate into the Stanley family. On 31 January 1734 his father committed suicide and his mother was left to bring up Stanley and his three sisters on her own. Two of his sisters later made political marriages: Anne (died 1803) married Welbore Ellis (1713-1802), and Sarah married Christopher D'Oyly ('c'.1717-1795). 
After being educated in Hackney and Switzerland, Stanley sought a political career, but he was restless and easily diverted into literary pursuits. He was returned as member of parliament for St Albans at a by-election on 11 February 1743, and sat for the constituency until the dissolution in 1747. He was admitted as a burgess at Southampton in 1747 with a view to establishing a political interest there, but he had no place in the next parliament, and for a time considered abandoning parliamentary life for diplomacy. He travelled frequently in France, and resided for two years in Paris, where he studied the law of nations. At the general election of 1754 he achieved his ambition at Southampton, which he then represented continuously until his death. 
On 13 September 1757 Stanley was appointed a lord of the Admiralty and became one of Newcastle's following. Hearing from Lord Temple of Pitt's good opinion of him, he wrote to Pitt on 18 April 1761 to set out his claims to employment should peace negotiations be opened with France. Pitt enlisted his services, 'from opinion of his abilities'. Stanley set out for Calais on 24 May 1761, and on 4 June arrived at Paris as charge d'affaires. He remained there until 20 September, when it became clear that the mission had failed, and he then returned home. Charles Jenkinson, then under-secretary of state, described one of his reports disapprovingly as 'the first despatch in which I ever saw metaphysical reasoning', but Carlyle later praised them, in his 'History of Frederick of Prussia' (1858-65), as 'the liveliest reading one almost anywhere meets with in that kind'. Stanley, adds Carlyle, was 'a lively, clear-sighted person, of whom I could never hear elsewhere' (ibid., 6.204-5). Stanley was disappointed at not being trusted with the conduct of the negotiations when they were renewed in 1762, but he wrote the duke of Bedford a handsome letter on their success, and, though numbered at this time among Pitt's followers, defended the peace in the House of Commons on 9 December 1762 with 'spirit, sense, and cleverness'. Pitt paid him 'the highest compliments imaginable' ('Correspondence', 3.168). 
Stanley was created a privy councillor on 26 November 1762. In 1763 George Grenville, the new prime minister, offered him a lordship of the Treasury, but he declined, and in a spirited letter complained of the neglect of his talents. Hearing in July 1764 of the impending death of Lord Holmes, who was governor of the Isle of Wight and constable of Carisbrook Castle, he solicited and obtained this post, much to the annoyance of Lord Carnarvon, the lord lieutenant, who promptly resigned. Lady Hervey described the governorship as 'a very honourable, very convenient employment for him, and also very lucrative', and Stanley was reportedly 'very happy with his new government', which he hoped to use to build up a personal interest in the island ('Letters of Mary Lepel', 307). He built Steephill Cottage, on the site of the present castle, near Ventnor, in 1770 at considerable expense, and he entertained there several foreign ambassadors. 
In July 1766 Pitt appointed Stanley ambassador-extraordinary to Russia, despite his declaration that 'nothing can be further from the plan of life I had proposed to myself, or from my wishes' than any political or diplomatic career ('Grenville Papers', 3.284-5). He was instructed to proceed to St Petersburg by way of Berlin, with the object of making a 'triple defensive alliance' of Great Britain, Russia, and Prussia. The appointment was hastily made without the knowledge of Conway, then leading the House of Commons, without any intimation to Macartney, the ambassador at St Petersburg, and without consultation with Sir Andrew Mitchell, the British representative at Berlin. However, before Stanley left England the government's overtures were coldly received by Frederick of Prussia, and he never took up the appointment. When on 24 March 1767 Grenville made a strong attack on Chatham for his magnificent plans for special embassies, and mentioned this case, Stanley, 'a very warm man, retorted with vigour' as he had acted 'with singular honour' in waiving his right to the appointment (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 2.438-9). 
Stanley had previously given strong support to Grenville, both in parliament and in local politics, but he lost his office at the Admiralty board when Rockingham took over the premiership in 1765. He resumed his career under Pitt in 1766, when he was appointed cofferer of the household, an office which he temporarily vacated in 1774, but resumed in 1776 and held until his death. He had meanwhile resigned his post of governor of the Isle of Wight, but was reappointed to that office also in 1776. Afterwards the post was conferred upon him for life, an act without precedent at the time, and 'it was said with an additional pension' ('Last Journals of Horace Walpole', 1.327, 2.362). In November 1768 he seconded the address to the king on behalf of the Grafton administration. For the rest of his life he supported the administration of the day, speaking often in the house on a variety of topics, repeatedly opposing the repeal of the 'Stamp Act' and supporting the American War of Independence, but he made little impression on members or on the reporters. The king appreciated 'his zealous support on all occasions' ('Correspondence of George III', 3.149), but he received no further preferment. 
Early in January 1780 Stanley paid a visit to Earl Spencer at Althorp. On the morning of 12 January he cut his throat with a penknife in the woods, and died before assistance could be obtained. 
Stanley's abilities were unquestioned, and his character was highly respected. Lady Hervey, who knew him well, called him 'a very ingenious, sensible, knowing, conversable, and, what is still better, a worthy, honest, valuable man' ('Letters of Mary Lepel', 204). However, he was awkward in appearance, ungracious in manners, and eccentric in his habits. He never laughed, and his speech was described by Madame du Deffand as slow and cold without action, and as pompous without weight. A bachelor, with 'a large house in Privy Gardens, joining to Lord Loudoun's', and with the country residences of Paultons, which he inherited from his father, and Steephill, which he built at Ventnor, he spent most of his time away from them, 'and when at home in town commonly dined at an hotel'. He inherited from his mother her share in the Sloane property at Chelsea. In his will he made provision for his illegitimate son, then at sea, but the estate of Paultons passed, subject to the life interest of Stanley's sisters, to a cousin, Hans Sloane (1739-1827), the nephew of Sir Hans Sloane. Stanley was one of the trustees for the collection of Sir Hans, and was until his death a family trustee of the British Museum. 
Stanley left in manuscript various works, including a defence, written in Ciceronian Latin, of the English seizure of the French ships previous to the declaration of war. A poem of his in three cantos was imitated from Dryden's 'Fables', and at the time of his death he was engaged in translating Pindar. Dr Joseph Warton praised his knowledge of modern and ancient Greek, stating that he maintained a learned correspondence with the Abbe Barthelemy of Paris on the origin of Chaucer's 'Palamon and Arcite'. He was an intimate friend of Helvetius, much to the discontent of Gibbon, who complained in February 1763 of the excessive admiration enjoyed by Stanley in French society; and he was a pallbearer at Garrick's funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 26271


Stanley, Henrietta Maria, Lady Stanley of Alderley (1807-1895), political hostess and campaigner for women's education, was born in Halifax, Nova Scotia, on 21 December 1807, the eldest child of the six sons and five daughters of Henry Augustus Dillon-Lee, thirteenth Viscount Dillon (1777-1832), and his wife, Henrietta (1789-1862), daughter of Dominick Geoffrey Browne, MP for Mayo. 
The Dillon family's Roman Catholicism and Jacobite sympathies had taken them into exile in France in the early eighteenth century. The conversion to Anglicanism of the head of the family allowed them to resume control of their Irish estates and the thirteenth viscount raised troops to fight against Napoleon; but he and his family preferred to live abroad. In 1814 they settled in Florence. Lady Stanley's grandson, the philosopher Bertrand Russell, attached great importance to her non-English upbringing: 'my grandmother's outlook, throughout her life, was in some ways more Continental than English. She was always downright, free from prudery, and eighteenth-century rather than Victorian in her conversation. Her French and Italian were faultless, and she was passionately interested in Italian unity. ('Amberley Papers', 1.17)' In Florence, Henrietta Maria met, and married on 7 October 1826, Edward John Stanley, eldest son of Sir John Thomas Stanley, seventh baronet, created Baron Stanley of Alderley in May 1839. E. J. Stanley sat as a whig MP in 1833-41 and again in 1846-7, before going to the Lords in May 1848 as first Baron Eddisbury of Winnington; he succeeded his father as second Baron Stanley in October 1850. Nicknamed 'Benjamin Backbite' or, more familiarly, Ben, he held a succession of minor offices before entering the cabinet as president of the Board of Trade in 1855; but during the 1830s he functioned as principal whig whip, or, as Palmerston put it, 'joint whip with Mrs Stanley' ('DNB'). 
Mrs Stanley, who shared her husband's sharp tongue, presided over an intellectual as well as a political salon, numbering among her friends Thomas Carlyle, F. D. Maurice, and, from 1861, Benjamin Jowett. She was one of the original 'lady visitors' of Maurice's foundation, Queen's College, Harley Street, in 1848 and from this moved to a more general involvement in schemes for women's education, to vindicate, as she later put it, 'the right of women to the highest culture hitherto reserved to men' (Stanley, 314). She supported the campaign to secure the admission of women to the university local examinations; in 1865 she was one of the signatories of the memorial to the Taunton commission asking for the inclusion of girls' schools in their inquiries. In 1867 she declined an invitation to join the committee planning a women's university college: 'it is not liked to see my name before the public' (Stephen, 162); but the death of her husband on 16 June 1869 enlarged her freedom of action. She was an energetic member of the National Union for the Improvement of Women's Education, founded in 1871, and of its offspring, the Girls' Public Day School Company (1872); and from 1874 she campaigned for the Medical College for Women which eventually found a home at the Royal Free Hospital. She wrote of her campaigns in an article, 'Personal recollections of women's education', in 'The Nineteenth Century', August 1879. 
At the beginning of 1872 the invitation to involve herself more formally in the affairs of what was to become Girton College had been renewed and Lady Stanley accepted, becoming a signatory of the Girton memorandum and articles of association on 15 May 1872 and joining the building subcommittee. For the remainder of her life she gave generously of her time and her money to Girton, taking a turn at standing in as mistress when Mrs Austin's health broke down while the college was still at Hitchin; taking gifts to the first students on the Girton site; donating $1000 for the library which now bears her name, a chemical laboratory, a lodge for the head gardener, and many other smaller items. The students appreciated the warmth and wholehearted commitment which lay behind Lady Stanley's plain speech and no-nonsense manners; and she had the further advantage of an unassailable social position, so important to an enterprise thought by many people to be daring and by others to be downright scandalous. She herself put the qualities to be sought in a mistress of the college in the following order: 'social position, good sense and power of governing and conciliating' (Stephen, 271). She was one of the few members of the Girton executive committee able to stand up to the founder, Emily Davies; and from 1890 until her death in 1895 she blocked a further round of building schemes, including a chapel, to which she was deeply opposed. She campaigned instead for the improvement of staff salaries and equipment. 
Lady Stanley retained her interest and involvement in politics, breaking with W. E. Gladstone over home rule and becoming a moving spirit in the Women's Liberal Unionist Association. Her four sons and six daughters included Henry Edward John Stanley, third Baron Stanley of Alderley, Edward Lyulph Stanley (her favourite), Maude Alethea Stanley, Blanche, countess of Airlie, Katharine (Kate) Russell, Viscountess Amberley, and Rosalind Howard, countess of Carlisle; and they formed a close-knit but energetic and noisy family circle. Bertrand Russell, who feared his grandmother's biting tongue, retained an abiding memory of the arguments at the Sunday luncheon table over which his grandmother presided at 40 Dover Street in London: 'invariably they wrangled about some impersonal subject, such as Home Rule or the existence of Adam and Eve. The din used to alarm me, but they enjoyed it, and were the best of friends with each other' ('Amberley Papers', 1.13). She died at 40 Dover Street on 16 February 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 26272


Stanley, Henry, fourth earl of Derby (1531-1593), magnate, was born in September and baptized on 4 October 1531 at Lathom House, Lancashire, the eldest son of Edward Stanley, third earl of Derby (1509-1572), magnate, and his first wife, Dorothy, daughter of Thomas Howard, second duke of Norfolk, and his second wife, Agnes. Stanley was among the young lords educated with Edward VI and attended his coronation on 20 February 1547, at which he was created KB. He was a gentleman of the privy chamber and was styled Lord Strange until he succeeded his father in October 1572. Strange was sent as a hostage to France in April 1550 with Edward Seymour, second earl of Hertford, and other noblemen's sons. Upon his return, Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset, recruited his support. Somerset, it was claimed, encouraged Strange to convince Edward to marry the duke's daughter Jane, to keep watch on the young king's words and deeds, and to report any secret conferences Edward had with his privy councillors. These proceedings formed one of the principal charges on which Somerset was condemned, though he denied them at his trial in December 1551. 
With the accession of Mary I Strange was appointed gentleman of the privy chamber to Philip of Spain in July 1554. He issued a challenge on 25 November to fight Don Federico de Toledo 'at the barriers' on 4 December, which was not taken up (BL, Add. MS 33735, fol. 6'v'). Strange married Margaret (1540-1596), daughter of Henry Clifford, second earl of Cumberland (1517-1570), and his first wife, Eleanor, in the Chapel Royal, Whitehall Palace, on 7 February 1555. The ceremony was marked by the introduction of a Spanish game, 'juego de canas', with the title 'jube the cane' or 'jube the sane' (Heywood, 1.12). Margaret was granddaughter of Henry VIII's younger sister, Mary, duchess of Suffolk, who had some claim to the crown, but Strange kept these claims in the background and they never became an issue. He had frequent quarrels with his wife, leading to their eventual separation. They had four sons: Edward, who died young, Ferdinando Stanley, fifth earl of Derby (1559?-1594), William Stanley, sixth earl of Derby (bap. 1561, d. 1642), and Francis, who also died young. 
Strange entered parliament as Baron Strange on 23 January 1559. He became a member of Gray's Inn in 1562, and was made an honorary MA of Oxford University on 6 September 1566. He succeeded his father as earl and as lord lieutenant of Lancashire on 24 October 1572. Serving as commissioner for ecclesiastical causes, he was an active member of Elizabeth I's council of the north. He did not share his father's Catholicism, his protestantism stemming from his upbringing at Edward's court. Derby patronized young protestant clergy and espoused protestant theological views. As Lancashire became religiously divided in the 1570s he prosecuted recusants vigorously, but he continued to assist Catholics who had been family friends, and was slow to prosecute them in the face of new legislation which he was empowered to enforce. Thus he was accused of being too lax on Catholics in 1587, and there was an attempt to purge his ecclesiastical commission for the diocese of Chester. 
Admitted a knight of the Garter on 24 April 1574, Derby was made ambassador-extraordinary to confer the insignia of the Order of the Garter on Henri III of France on 20 January 1585. He was sworn of the privy council on 20 May 1585, and appointed a commissioner to try Mary, queen of Scots, on 6 October 1586. Derby was made chief commissioner to treat with Alessandro Farnese, duke of Parma, for peace with Spain at Ostend in January 1588, for which he kept a diary (BL, Sloane MS 262). Throughout these diplomatic missions he kept Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, informed of his activities. Derby was appointed lord high steward on 23 March 1589 for several treason trials, including that of Philip Howard, earl of Arundel, in the following month. 
Derby was an active local governor. He wrote many letters concerning the management of castles, ports, and harbours, and instructions to county and borough JPs. He tried to appoint town officials in Chester, Liverpool, and Preston, and to place nominees in county and borough parliamentary elections. Success was limited. He also kept accounts of revenues and household expenses of his Lancashire and Cheshire estates, as well as Manx revenues and exchequer customs accounts at Douglas on the Isle of Man. Derby visited Man in 1577 and 1583 to improve his rental income, attacking the 'tenure of straw' customs enjoyed by his tenants there (Coward, 'Crisis', 72-3). Placing hope on increased revenues from Man, however, was unfulfilled as the Stanley estates there were losing their economic value in the late sixteenth century. 
Derby, however, was considered a spendthrift. Always short of money, he borrowed over $2000 between 1562 and 1568, and sold several manors in subsequent years. Part of the problem was that his father did not trust his business acumen, accusing him of making 'evill bargaines'. Thus the third earl entailed most of his estates in trust to his male heirs to prevent his immediate heir from dissipating them (Coward, 'Stanleys', 29-31). The fourth earl's household staff reached 118 in 1587, and 145 by 1590. His wife, Margaret, was equally profligate. Derby had to sell lands worth $1500 in 1567 to pay her creditors. One of his claims for separation at Gaddesden in Hertfordshire in 1567 was her inability to run their household. Thus he took all their plate and goods to London in order to raise money for her debts. The privy council wrote to the lord mayor of London to persuade creditors not to harass her in 1579, appointed a commission to reduce her debts in 1581, and the queen allowed her to sell her inheritance the following year. 
Derby's common-law marriage about 1570 to Jane Halsall of Knowsley, Lancashire, a local acquaintance, brought him at least four more children and more debts than he could handle. By 1570 his diplomatic missions, with a train of eighty gentlemen and yeomen and an entourage of 220, brought him close to insolvency. Desperate, he tried to enclose his lands and release them with increased rents. Trying to provide for his illegitimate children, in 1582 Derby set aside $660 and $100 per annum to be paid out of his rents; if the money was not there, his son Ferdinando Stanley, Lord Strange, was obligated to pay the remainder from his properties or they would be distrained. By 1593 Derby owed sureties of $8732 to London merchants and had to sell the rest of his outlying estates. 
Derby died at Lathom House on 25 September 1593, and was buried in his father's chapel at the parish church of Ormskirk, Lancashire, on 4 December. In his will, written on 21 September, Derby was quite positive of his hope of achieving salvation. He gave all his goods and chattels to his servants towards payment of his debts, his Lancashire and Cheshire lands to his son Lord Strange, and those in York, Somerset, Oxfordshire, and Middlesex to William. He obliged Strange to keep all his servants, with generous pensions paid out of his rents for any servants he released. His common-law wife survived him, and Margaret died in Cleveland Row, Middlesex, on 29 September 1596 and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 22 October. 
Derby acquired a love of letters and music from his wife, Margaret. He met actors, poets, heralds, and wrestlers, and invited them to perform at his house. Plays were given in his honour at Chester in the 1570s, and several writers of prose and verse dedicated their works to him. He was patron of a company of actors called 'Derby's Men' which performed before the queen on 14 February 1580 and which became more famous under the patronage of the fifth earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 26273


Stanley, James (c.1465-1515), bishop of Ely, was the sixth son of Thomas Stanley, first earl of Derby (d. 1504), and his first wife, Eleanor (died in or before 1471), daughter of Richard Neville, fifth earl of Salisbury. Edward Stanley, first Baron Monteagle (d. 1523), was his brother. Although it has been claimed that James Stanley was educated at both Oxford and Cambridge, there is no evidence that he was ever at Cambridge. He was MA of Oxford by 1481, however, when he was acting as tutor to Edward de la Pole, son of the duke of Suffolk, and the same university granted him the degree of DCnL on 18 June 1506. He has sometimes been confused with his uncle, another James Stanley, who preceded him at Oxford, and also as the warden of the collegiate church of Manchester. 
In 1471 Stanley received a papal dispensation to hold a major cathedral or collegiate dignity as soon as he was fourteen years of age. He was canon of Southwell, with the prebend of Dunham, 1479-85, rector of Eccleston, Lancashire, 1482-5, and precentor of Salisbury, 1485-1506. On 20 September 1485 he was also made dean of St Martin's-le-Grand, London, for life by royal grant, probably through the influence of Lady Margaret Beaufort, his father's second wife and mother of Henry VII. In the same year he succeeded his uncle as warden of Manchester collegiate church, a position he held until 1509. During his wardenship, the buildings were considerably extended. He held numerous benefices and offices during the 1480s and 1490s. He was rector of Hawarden, Flintshire, 1486-1505; canon of Salisbury, with the prebends successively of Yetminster Prima, 1492-3, and Beaminster Prima, 1493-1506; canon of Ripon and prebendary of Givendale and Shelton, 1493-8; rector of Winwick, Lancashire, 1494-1515; and rector of Rotharne, Cheshire, 1498-1515. The last two benefices were united by papal dispensation on condition of cure of souls being provided, and Stanley was subsequently granted leave to retain these parishes after becoming a bishop. In June 1492 Stanley was granted a dispensation to study at Oxford, although he held a benefice with the cure of souls. He is said to have been at Paris in 1496, but the story that he was rejected as a student by Erasmus is incorrect, being based entirely on a dubious supposition by Erasmus's eighteenth-century biographer, Samuel Knight. On 19 November 1500 Stanley was made archdeacon of Richmond, a position he held without distinction. Finally, on 18 July 1506, he was appointed bishop of Ely by papal provision, the temporalities being restored on 5 November. 
There can be no doubt that Stanley owed his advancement in the church to the influence of his father, and above all to that of his stepmother. As soon as he was appointed to Ely he consulted with Lady Margaret over the choice of a successor to Manchester; and once established as bishop he was closely involved in her patronage of Cambridge University. Like her he was generous in his support of Jesus College, endowing a fellowship in 1506, and later (in 1514-15) issuing statutes. He also participated in Lady Margaret's foundation of colleges. In the case of Christ's College, founded in 1506, Stanley's principal contribution lay in his exemption of the new foundation from episcopal visitation. In the case of St John's College, however, although in 1508-9 he gave his formal consent to the conversion of St John's Hospital into a college, and transferred to his stepmother his own position as patron of the hospital, he was also careful to safeguard the rights both of his see and of the hospital's remaining brethren. Furthermore, he improved the episcopal residence at Somersham, Huntingdonshire, where he spent his summers, while wintering with his brother in Derbyshire. Stanley died at Manchester on 22 March 1515, having probably been suddenly taken ill, since he made his will just two days earlier. He was buried in the Ely chapel in the collegiate church, for the building of which he left $100 in his will, and where he is commemorated by a brass showing him in episcopal robes. 
Stanley's life and reputation epitomized all that later reformers despised in the pre-Reformation clergy, though in fact he was hardly typical of the early Tudor bench. He was a pluralist, incontinent, and generally absent, and Godwin's sour appraisal of him as 'so drowned in pleasures he passed his time without doing any one thing worthy commendation or remembrance' (Godwin, 223-4) is only reinforced by the lines found in the family poem that although a priest, 'yet little priest's mettle was in him, by Christ' (Hibbert-Ware, 51). He was apparently fond of cock-fighting; and a liaison with his housekeeper at Somersham produced at least two sons, John and Thomas, and a daughter, Margaret, who married Sir Henry Halsall of Halsall. The elder son, John, fought at Flodden Field on 9 September 1513, was knighted, and founded the family of Stanleys of Hanford, Cheshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 26274


Stanley, James, seventh earl of Derby (1607-1651), royalist army officer, the so-called 'martyr earl' executed for his loyalty to Charles I during and after the English civil war, was born at Knowsley in Lancashire on 31 January 1607, the eldest son of William Stanley, sixth earl of Derby (bap. 1561, d. 1642), and Elizabeth de Vere (1575-1627), daughter of Edward de Vere, seventeenth earl of Oxford. On 26 June 1626 he married, at The Hague, Charlotte de La Tremoille (1599-1664) ['see 'Stanley, Charlotte, countess of Derby], daughter of Claude de La Tremoille, duc de Thouars, and Charlotte Brabantine de Nassau, daughter of William the Silent. They had six children who survived beyond infancy, Charles, Edward, William, Henrietta Maria, Katherine, and Amelia. Until the death of his father on 29 September 1642 James Stanley was known as Lord Strange, despite the fact that Earl William had not inherited the barony of Strange. 
Lord Strange was given great responsibilities at an early age. After being educated by private tutors in the great Stanley households at Knowsley and Lathom, and on his return in 1625 from journeys to France and Italy, he was elected MP for Liverpool -- a seat of which the Stanleys were chief patron -- and on 1 February 1626 he was admitted to the Order of the Bath at the coronation of Charles I. More importantly on 27 September 1626 Attorney-General Heath was ordered by the duke of Buckingham to draw up joint grants to Lord Strange and his father of the offices of lord lieutenant of Lancashire and Cheshire and chamberlain of the county palatine of Chester. It soon became apparent that his father's participation in these major offices, as in the running of the Stanley estates, was purely nominal. Lord Strange was left to run single-handedly the lieutenancy and to restore the Stanleys' economic fortunes that had been seriously damaged by a ruinous inheritance dispute between his father and his nieces that had begun in 1594 when William succeeded his brother as sixth earl of Derby. The settlement of the dispute in 1610 was only achieved at huge expenses in lawyers' fees and out-of-court settlements with the earl's nieces, which were funded by heavy borrowing and sales of land. In meeting this problem Lord Strange was helped by a handsome dowry of $24,000 on his marriage, part of which he used to recover some of the lost family estates. He also undertook a vigorous estate administration policy in both England and the Isle of Man. 
Lord Strange's 'Private Devotions' and his surviving commonplace books and prayers indicate that he adhered firmly to the theology and liturgy of the English church as it had developed during the reigns of Elizabeth I and James I. These views were confirmed by his marriage to a woman who was so closely connected with the anti-Catholic cause in Europe that the elector palatine and his wife were present at the wedding in 1626. His distaste for the ecclesiastical policies of Charles I and Archbishop Laud accounts for his withdrawal from the court for much of the 1630s. His antipathy to Laudian bishops also explains his decision to vote for a bill aimed at excluding bishops from the House of Lords early in 1641 during the first session of the Long Parliament, at which he was a frequent attender. 
Yet his misgivings about royal ecclesiastical policies did not prevent Lord Strange from being a loyal supporter of Charles I in the months before the outbreak of the civil war in 1641-2. In 1642 he seized stores of ammunition in the castles at Liverpool and Lancaster for the king. His attempt on 15 July 1642 to persuade the municipal authorities in Manchester to surrender their ammunition failed and provoked a riot, an incident which was used as the basis of parliament's impeachment of him for high treason, which was published on 16 September 1642. Ironically he was also mistrusted by Charles I and those around him. Clarendon blamed him for being 'unactive' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.471). One of the reasons for this may have been that in the late summer and autumn of 1642, because Lord Strange was appalled at the growing divisions in the north-west and the damage they caused to Stanley power there, he made unsuccessful attempts to get parliamentarians and royalists in the north-west to agree to truces. This might have been misinterpreted as lukewarmness to the king's cause. Relations between the court and Lord Strange were also damaged when the king decided to set up his standard declaring war on the parliamentarians on 22 August 1642 at Nottingham and not, as Lord Strange had recommended, at Warrington. His reputation at court was not improved by his poor showing as a soldier in the early months of the civil war, which is partly to be explained by his strained relations with his fellow royalist commanders, Richard, Lord Molyneaux, and Thomas Tyldesley, both Catholics. 
Strange was forced to abandon his week-long siege of Manchester on 2 October 1642, four days after he became earl of Derby, and he failed to prevent parliamentarian garrisons occupying Preston and Lancaster. He made an unsuccessful attack on Bolton on 16 February 1643 and two days later failed to capture Lancaster Castle. Although in March 1643 he retook Preston and in April repelled Sir William Brereton's attack on Warrington, these successes were forgotten in the wake of a major defeat he suffered at the hands of a smaller parliamentarian force at Whalley on 20 April 1643, which was quickly followed by the surrender to the parliamentarians of Preston, Wigan, and Warrington. It has been suggested (Hutton, 'Royalist War Effort', 82-3, 121) that these defeats contributed to the decision of the royalist council of war to reduce its reliance on territorial magnates like Derby in favour of professional generals like John Lord Byron. Derby's visit to York after these defeats to plead with Queen Henrietta Maria for armed assistance proved fruitless and he was ordered to the Isle of Man, which it was believed was threatened by a Scottish invasion. 
Derby arrived on the Isle of Man on 15 June 1643 to find it on the brink of a rebellion led by Edward Christian of Maughold, who had been deprived of the governorship of the island in 1634 but who had been restored to favour as receiver-general in 1636. Among the rebels' grievances were payments of tithes to the church and the earl's policy of trying to replace the Manx 'tenure of straw' by which many of his tenants held their lands, a customary tenure akin to freehold, with commercial leases. They also demanded that the 24 Keys (the island's governing body) be chosen by the people and that the deemsters (the island's judges) be chosen by this body and not by the earl of Derby. Derby forestalled this major attack on the Stanleys' prerogative powers in the island by adroitly combining a willingness to listen to the islanders' grievances (meetings to consider them were held at Castle Peel on 18 July and at Castle Rushen on 30 October) with minimal concessions and firmness (Christian was imprisoned and remained there until 1651). 
In March 1644 Derby returned to England because Lathom, commanded by Countess Charlotte, was besieged by parliamentarian troops. He appealed successfully to Prince Rupert for assistance and their combined forces won a battle at Stockport on 25 May, relieved Lathom, and retook Liverpool. On 28 May they also recaptured Bolton, but only after the massacre of at least 1000 soldiers and civilians. In the words of a contemporary pamphlet, Rupert took Bolton, 'denying quarter to any, whether soldiers or men in their houses, till the sword drunk with blood was sheathed' (Pendlebury, 9). The earl was personally blamed for the murder of one parliamentarian, Captain Booth. Rupert's military success in the north was halted by his defeat at the battle of Marston Moor on 2 July 1644. The countess retired to the Isle of Man on 30 July and she was joined in September by her husband, leaving Lathom again under siege (it finally surrendered in December). After crushing a resurgence of revolt, led this time by Edward Christian's brother, William, Derby set about rebuilding and extending the island's defences from his home at Derby House within the walls of Castle Rushen. He remained there until 1651, the island providing a safe haven for royalist refugees. 
Derby's refusal to surrender the island to the parliamentarians ensured that all his efforts to end the sequestration of his English estates failed. At the very end of 1644 negotiations brokered by two of the earl's officers, William Farington and John Greenhalgh, came to nothing. Countess Charlotte's journey to London in 1647 to plead his case was in vain. On 12 July 1649 Derby's petition to parliament submitted in January 1649 to allow him to compound for his estates was accepted on Fairfax's recommendation (the fine was fixed at over $15,572), but this decision was later reversed. The earl was also excepted from the amnesties offered to royalists in the parliamentarian proposals made for a settlement at Uxbridge in 1644, in the Newcastle propositions in 1646, and at Newport in 1648. 
In the period after the king's execution hatred of Derby among supporters of the new regime was increased by his scornful reply in July 1649 refusing Henry Ireton's demand that he surrender the Isle of Man, which was printed by parliamentarian order. A petition circulating in some south-eastern parishes of Lancashire at about this time indicted the earl as 'the first and principall Incendiary of war in the countie' and (echoing army remonstrances against Charles I in 1648) concluded that 'our Countye being thus defiled with blood cannot otherwise be purged then by the blood of those who shed it' (Manchester Central Library, Manchester Archives and Local Studies, BR f 942.962 P 13). In May 1650 his daughters were imprisoned by parliamentarian order. Stanley estates began to be sold by the trustees of the Commonwealth under the first of three acts of sale passed in July 1650. In these circumstances Derby's return to England in August 1651 to join the king's army 'en route' from Scotland was extremely risky. It was later alleged that his wife prodded him into action, telling him to 'pull off the breeches and she would put them on, and then lead them on' (Green, 'Calendar', 1296). 
Derby landed with a small force in Lancashire on 15 August and met the king on 17 August. His attempt to rally presbyterian support in Lancashire behind the king failed and on 25 August his forces were comprehensively defeated near Wigan by Colonel Robert Lilburne. He escaped, after being given shelter by the Penderels at Boscobel House in Shropshire, to join the king's army at Worcester a day before the royalist defeat there on 3 September. He helped the king escape capture, guiding him to his friends at Boscobel. From there he went north, but at Newport in Shropshire gave himself up to parliamentarian troops led by Captain Oliver Edge. After being imprisoned in Chester Castle, on 29 September, he was arraigned on a charge of high treason by a court martial. Despite the support of Oliver Cromwell his plea for clemency was rejected, as was his defence that he had been given quarter when he had surrendered to Captain Edge. He was condemned to death. During his last days he met his daughters and was reconciled with his eldest son, Charles, whom he had disinherited in a will he had drafted before he left the Isle of Man on the mistaken assumption that his son had accepted the English republic. On 15 October he was executed at Bolton, the scene of the massacre of 1644. His body was then taken to be buried in the Derby chapel in Ormskirk church. 
Derby's violent death ended an undistinguished career. He had made only a limited contribution to the royalist war effort in north-west England and his heavy-handed rule of the Isle of Man had prompted mounting opposition among many islanders. At the end of his life even his earlier success in restoring his family's economic fortunes had been undone. Not only were the Stanley estates confiscated, but by virtue of a parliamentary act of July 1651 some of these were sold. It is difficult to envisage a more problematic legacy than the one he left his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 26275


Stanley, Sir John (c.1350-1414), soldier and administrator, was a younger son of William Stanley of Storeton, Cheshire, and Alice, daughter of Hugh Mascy of Timperley, Cheshire. He made his name as a soldier in the French wars, and achieved eminence as lieutenant of Ireland and steward of the household of Henry IV. 
The earliest records of John Stanley relate to his involvement, in the company of his elder brother William, in a forced entry at Thurstaston Hall in 1369 and in the murder of Thomas Clotton in 1376. As bailiffs of the Forest of Wirral, his father and elder brother were notorious for their oppressive tactics, which in turn prompted men in the district to petition for the disafforestation of Wirral in 1376. Even before his outlawry after the murder of Clotton, Stanley, like so many Cheshire gentlemen at the time, had sought his fortune in the French wars. A pardon in 1378, at the instance of Sir Thomas Trivet, in whose company he was setting out, referred to earlier service in Aquitaine. A later ballad tradition alleges participation in the 'chevauchee' of Sir Robert Knolles, another famous Cheshire soldier, in 1372. 
By 1385 Stanley was clearly a soldier of some standing. In this year he secured, in the face of opposition from John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, the hand and inheritance of Isabel, daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Lathom of Lathom and Knowsley in south-west Lancashire. In 1386 he was in the service of Richard II's favourite, Robert de Vere, duke of Ireland, who appointed him his deputy in Ireland. The two events set the pattern of his career: dynastic aggrandizement in his native north-west, and a distinctive role in the royal service which involved providing the military muscle for maintaining English rule in Ireland and enhancing the power of the court party. 
In harness in Ireland, Stanley was fortunate to avoid involvement in de Vere's royalist rising in 1387 which ended in defeat at Radcot Bridge and the assault on the king's party in the Merciless Parliament early in 1388. On Richard II's resumption of power in 1389 he was appointed justiciar of Ireland, a post he held until 1391. His experience, martial and administrative, was put to good use in the king's first expedition to Ireland in 1394-5. A continuing political role, however, is suggested by his dispatch from court in 1393 to treat with the 'loyalist' rebels in Cheshire, many of whom were recruited for service in Ireland. Likewise his appointment as controller of the wardrobe in October 1397 was linked with the development of the king's Cheshire bodyguard. He also served as captain of Roxburgh from 1396 to 1398. Needless to say, he accompanied Richard II to Ireland in 1399, returning with him, or perhaps in advance of him, to organize resistance to Henry Bolingbroke. His submission to the latter at Shrewsbury in August must be regarded as an act of betrayal. Still he remembered Richard II as well as Henry IV when, shortly before his own final departure for Ireland in 1413, he endowed masses for the souls of his parents and benefactors. 
Stanley's value to the Lancastrian regime was clear. He was granted the lordships of Mold and Hope in the Welsh marches, and dispatched to Ireland to serve a term as lieutenant there. In 1403 he was appointed steward of the household of Henry, prince of Wales, playing a role both in the military education of the young prince and in the recruitment of his retinue at the time of the Glyn Dwr rebellion. His commitment to the Lancastrian dynasty was tested in 1403 when so many of the Cheshire gentry joined the rebellion of the Percys. Wounded in the throat at the battle of Shrewsbury, the hardbitten soldier reputedly would have little truck with his compatriots. Asked by the king's messenger what should be done with Cheshire he said, with a rattling in the throat, 'burn and slay, burn and slay' ('Brut: England', 2.549). There can be little doubt, however, that his position in the royal household provided important avenues of reconciliation for the gentry of the north-west. 
Stanley's career reached its peak in the aftermath of the Percys' rebellion. In 1405 he was rewarded with a grant of the lordship of the Isle of Man, forfeited by Henry Percy, earl of Northumberland, which gave his lineage a crown. Around the same time he became steward of the king's household, and secured election as a knight of the Garter. In 1409 he was appointed constable of Windsor Castle. At the beginning of Henry V's reign (1413) he served again as lieutenant of Ireland. The Connacht annalist regarded him as a ruthless and grasping soldier who hated the Gaels, and his death at Ardee in Louth in 1414 was attributed to the 'venom' of the bards. 
Stanley built up a considerable estate in Lancashire, his native Cheshire, and further afield in Ireland and the Isle of Man. The manors of Lathom and Knowsley, his wife's inheritance, were to remain the main seats of his descendants, the earls of Derby, but he himself probably spent little time at home. He built a crenellated house at Liverpool, doubtless planned as a centre of operations for his Manx and Irish interests. His rapid territorial aggrandizement was a disruptive influence in the region, but his military career and connections with court provided a basis for regional leadership. This position of aristocratic pre-eminence was consolidated by his son and namesake, the second John Stanley (died 1437), of Lathom, the father of Thomas Stanley, first Baron Stanley (d. 1459). Given his origins in the 'wilderness of Wirral' and his status as a knight of the Garter, the first Sir John Stanley is sometimes associated with the patronage of 'Sir Gawain and the Green Knight', an alliterative poem in the dialect of the north-west midlands. 


@@@@@


doc= 26276


Stanley, John (1712-1786), organist and composer, was born in London on 17 January 1712, the third but eldest surviving child (of six) of John Stanley (died 1735), a Post Office official, and his wife, Elizabeth Davy (died 1730), sexton at the church of St Mary Bothaw. When two years old he was blinded by falling on a marble hearth while holding a china basin in his hand. At the age of seven he was placed under John Reading, then organist at St John's, Hackney, but soon after he became a pupil of Maurice Greene, organist at St Paul's Cathedral. Evidently making rapid progress, in October 1723 Stanley was appointed organist of All Hallows, Bread Street. Just three years later he won the more prestigious position at St Andrew's, Holborn, where he succeeded Daniel Purcell and John Isham. In 1729 he presented as his exercise at Oxford the ode 'The Power of Musick' and became the youngest person there to graduate BMus. He was elected organist to the Society of the Inner Temple in 1734, and held this post, with that at St Andrew's, until his death. Stanley's reputation as a performer was such that, according to John Alcock: 'it was common, just as the service at St. Andrew's church, or the Temple, was ended, to see forty or fifty organists at the altar, waiting to hear his last voluntary: even Mr. Handel himself I have many times seen at each of those places. ('Universal Magazine', 79, July 1786, 44)' On 22 July 1738 Stanley married his pupil Sarah Arlond (died 1780), the daughter of Captain Edward Arlond, a merchant in the East India Company; they had no children. 
Despite the loss of his sight, Stanley was a good player at skittles, shovelboard, billiards, and of whist, using perforated cards. He also enjoyed walking and horse-riding. His musical ear and memory were exceptional: he could remember and perform any piece after hearing it once, and even when he had to accompany a new oratorio his sister-in-law, Ann Arlond (who lived with Stanley and his wife), needed to play it through to him once only. Having to accompany a 'Te Deum' in D by Handel (probably the 'Dettingen'), and finding the organ to be tuned a semitone sharp, he transposed the entire composition without hesitation, a feat that seems to have impressed his contemporaries. He played regularly in concerts in London, and sometimes too in the provinces, and he was in much demand as a teacher; among his earliest pupils was John Alcock, only three years his junior. Stanley was a member of the Academy of Vocal (later Ancient) Music. He also played the violin, and led the subscription concerts at The Swan tavern in Cornhill and The Castle in Paternoster Row, using a Stainer violin for orchestral playing and a Cremona for solos; both were lost when The Swan burnt down in 1748. During this period Stanley was a prolific composer of cantatas. Most were published, including three sets (1742, 1748, 1751), and many of them have texts by John Hawkins. Yet he is much better known for his three sets of organ voluntaries (1748, 1752, 1754), and also for the six concerti grossi (op. 2, 1742), which rank among the finest of their type. 
When Handel became blind and could not accompany his oratorio performances, Stanley was recommended to him as a substitute; but Handel preferred John Christopher Smith, objecting, he said, to the blind leading the blind. After Handel's death, in 1760 Smith and Stanley entered into partnership and continued the Lenten oratorio performances at Covent Garden. The seasons consisted mostly of oratorios by Handel, though the new managers took the opportunity to include their own works. Stanley had written an oratorio, 'Jephtha', in the early 1750s, but it was apparently never performed. For their first season (1760) Stanley composed 'Zimri', which was published in full score but without the choruses and most of the recitatives. He played organ concertos in the intervals of the oratorio performances, as Handel had done (though other instrumentalists were permitted to play solos too), and he accompanied the oratorios throughout. He published six of his organ concertos as op. 10 in 1775. Stanley also wrote secular theatre works: for Drury Lane he composed incidental music to John Hawkesworth's 'Oroonoko' (1759) and the masque 'The Tears and Triumphs of Parnassus' (1760), the latter an elegy on the death of George II and a homage to George III, but these are now lost. However, the pastoral 'Arcadia, or, The Shepherd's Wedding', performed at Drury Lane on 26 October 1761 to mark the recent marriage of George III and Queen Charlotte, survives, as does the opera 'Teraminta' (probably never performed), which was once thought to be by John Christopher Smith but is now attributed to Stanley. 
In 1770 the oratorios moved to the Drury Lane Theatre; in 1774 Stanley's 'The Fall of Egypt' was performed, and in that same year Smith retired. His place was taken in 1776 by the elder Thomas Linley, and he and Stanley continued the oratorios until Stanley's retirement in 1785. From 1775 to 1777 Stanley directed the annual performances of 'Messiah' in aid of the Foundling Hospital, where he had become a governor in 1770. In February 1779, on the death of William Boyce, Stanley was appointed master of the king's band, in which capacity he supplied fifteen new year and birthday odes; the music for all of them is now lost. He became, in addition, 'Conductor of the Musick at the Balls at Court' in 1782, after the sudden death of Charles Weidemann. His last composition was probably the ode, with a text by the poet laureate, Thomas Warton, written for the king's birthday on 4 June 1786. It was duly performed, but Stanley had died at his house in Hatton Garden on 19 May. He was buried on the evening of 27 May in the new ground attached to St Andrew's, Holborn. On the following Sunday an appropriate selection was performed 'on that organ on which Mr. Stanley had with much eminence displayed his musical abilities near sixty years'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26277


Stanley, Montague (1809-1844), actor and landscape painter, was born in Dundee on 5 January 1809. His father served in the Royal Navy and he was sent, with his wife and young son, to New York in March 1810. He died about 1812, and in 1816 his widow remarried and moved to Halifax in Nova Scotia. At this time Montague Stanley showed an interest in the theatre and received notice for his role as Ariel in 'The Tempest'. In 1817 the family moved to Kingston, Jamaica; two years later his stepfather died of yellow fever. Montague Stanley sailed for Liverpool in 1819 with his mother, stepbrother, and stepsister. The family first settled in Suffolk and later in Lancashire. 
In 1824 Stanley received his first engagement as an actor in York, using the stage name Mr Manby. In 1826 he joined W. H. Murray's company in Edinburgh. Described as a very handsome young man and a good singer, he appeared in both acting and singing roles. He played in further seasons in Edinburgh, then also in Dublin in 1830 and London in 1832 and 1833. In 1834 he joined the Theatre Royal in Edinburgh, where he remained for the rest of his theatrical career. He was considered a sound and judicious actor, his renderings were sensible, and he never offended, but he was criticized for a certain coldness and stiffness of action. During these years he became profoundly affected by Christianity and decided to leave the theatre on religious and moral grounds. His final stage performance was in Edinburgh, playing Laertes to Charles Kean's Hamlet. 
Stanley had no formal training as an artist. He first made copies, but by the mid-1820s he had begun to draw from nature and he received some instruction in landscape painting from John Ewbank. He first exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1828 and from 1834 he was a regular exhibitor until his early death. After his retirement from the stage he made a living by teaching the flute, elocution, fencing, drawing, and painting. However, his ambitions were to become a full-time painter. First elected an honorary member of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1835, he was made an associate in 1838 in recognition of his talents. His landscapes present a Romantic interpretation of Scottish scenery in the manner of Horatio McCulloch. He painted in the highlands and in Cadzow Forest, Lanarkshire, and also in Wales and the Lake District. His works survive as book illustrations, for example as sixty wood-engravings in Sir Thomas Dick Lauder's 1842 edition of Uvedale Price's 'On the Picturesque'. Unfortunately after his death many of his paintings were destroyed in a fire on a train which was carrying them to Edinburgh for auction. 
In 1834 Stanley married into a respectable Edinburgh family, which perhaps hastened the demise of his acting career. At the beginning of 1844 he secured a house, Ascog Tower, at Ascog in Bute which afforded views to the Clyde near Rothesay. It enjoyed a more temperate climate than Edinburgh, a matter of importance as Stanley's health was causing concern. In January 1844 he paid his last visit to Edinburgh, and on 4 May he died at home of consumption. He was buried in the churchyard at Ascog, and was survived by his wife and seven young children. 


@@@@@


doc= 26278


Stanley, Thomas, first Baron Stanley (1406-1459), magnate, was born on 2 August 1406, the eldest son of Sir John Stanley (died 1437) and Isabel Harrington, and grandson of Sir John Stanley of Lathom ('c'.1350-1414), a soldier and courtier who was controller of Richard II's household and steward of Henry IV's. Thomas Stanley was introduced early into aristocratic and court circles. His marriage to Joan, daughter of Sir Robert Goushill, may have taken place as early as 1422, when he appears with John (V) Mowbray, duke of Norfolk (died 1432), Joan's half-brother, among the feoffees of James, Lord Berkeley (died 1463), her brother-in-law. He represented Lancashire in parliament in October 1427, and may have been knighted at Henry VI's coronation in November 1429. In other respects his early career had a definite orientation towards the Irish Sea. In 1425 he was resident at The Tower in Liverpool, the base from which the Stanleys ruled their island kingdom of Man, and in January 1431 he was appointed lieutenant of Ireland for six years. In this office he built up a large retinue, and considerable credit with a regime that lacked funds but could show great favour. 
The beginnings of Henry VI's personal rule formed the context for rapid advancement. In the royal entourage from 1436, Stanley had been appointed controller of the household by April 1439. Thenceforward he was prominent among the clique that, under the leadership of William de la Pole, earl and later duke of Suffolk (died 1450), ruled in the king's name. He was appointed constable of Chester Castle in 1437, chamberlain of north Wales in 1439, and, in survivorship with Suffolk, justiciar of Chester and north Wales in 1443. The beneficiary of considerable patronage, largely but not exclusively in his native region, in October 1443 he was granted the castle and lordship of Mold and Moldsdale (Clwyd) in tail male. 
His father's death in 1437 made Stanley the greatest landowner in the north-west. His territorial power and his influence at court were mutually reinforcing. Local men looked to him to advance their careers and arbitrate their quarrels as their singular 'good lord'. In September 1446, for example, he arbitrated in a dispute involving Vale Royal Abbey, and resolved a bloody feud between the Venables and Bulkeley families by imposing a sort of wergeld. Conversely, the royal household saw him as the man to harness the resources of the palatinates of Chester and Lancaster, and the principality of Wales. Stanley provided the regime with military muscle. From 1442 until her death in 1452 he was responsible for the custody of Eleanor Cobham, and in 1447 for the arrest of her husband, Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, the king's uncle. In the wake of Cade's rebellion in 1450 he led troops, mainly Cheshire and Lancashire men, to ravage Kent. Later that year he and his officers in north Wales sought to block the return of Richard, duke of York (died 1460), from Ireland. 
The attack on the Suffolk regime in 1450-51 did not leave Stanley unscathed. In October 1450 he resigned the justiciarship of north Wales, and the 'Act of Resumption' of 1451 required him to surrender the lordship of Mold. Meanwhile parliament demanded his removal from the royal household, and he was replaced as controller by his cousin Sir Richard Harrington. The increasingly bloody factional struggles of the Wars of the Roses obviously posed serious challenges to his position. Yet Stanley was better placed than most of his fellow magnates. With a firm power base and a large and disciplined following, he was a man with whom regimes had to deal. An adroit politician, he was appointed to the council during the first protectorate (1454-5), and blocked the duke of Exeter's attempt to raise a curialist rebellion in Lancashire. Arriving at St Albans in force but too late to prevent a Yorkist victory on 22 May 1455, he adumbrated the strategy of waiting on events which was the Stanley hallmark throughout the Wars of the Roses. It served his retainers, and himself, well. He emerged from the mayhem as chamberlain of the household in summer 1455, and is referred to as a peer of the realm by November. 
In January 1456 Stanley was summoned to parliament as Lord Stanley. His elevation was more than justified by his landed wealth, his role in national life, and his connections with the nobility. Through her Fitzalan mother, his wife, and thus their children, were of royal blood. His eldest son, Thomas Stanley, the future earl of Derby, married Eleanor, daughter of Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury (died 1460), while his younger son Sir William Stanley became steward of the prince of Wales's household after the accession of Edward IV. He himself was installed as knight of the Garter in 1457. With the increasing polarization between a resurgent court party headed by Queen Margaret and a York-Neville alliance, however, his position became more difficult. A critical moment came in the summer of 1459 when, with the queen marshalling her forces in the midlands, and the earl of Salisbury crossing from Yorkshire to join his allies at Ludlow, the civil war came close to the borders of Cheshire. At the battle of Bloreheath local men fell on both sides, but the bulk of the Stanley forces remained aloof. By then, however, the first Lord Stanley was no longer the head of the lineage. He had died on 11 February 1459. 


@@@@@


doc= 26279


Stanley, Thomas, first earl of Derby (c.1433-1504), magnate, was the eldest son of Thomas Stanley, first Baron Stanley (1406-1459), and Joan, daughter of Sir Robert Goushill. 
Little is known about Thomas Stanley's early life. Family tradition has him winning his spurs avenging a Scots raid on the Isle of Man, presumably that of 1456. His father's lands and offices in Cheshire and Lancashire, and on the Isle of Man, gave him ample opportunity to gain experience in the leadership of men; his father's prominence in the king's household likewise provided him with an early introduction to court. He is named among the squires of Henry VI in 1454. The Stanleys had connections, too, with nobles outside court circles. In the late 1450s Thomas married Eleanor, daughter of Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury, and sister of Richard Neville, earl of Warwick (the Kingmaker). Among their children was James Stanley, bishop of Ely. On his father's death in February 1459, he found himself heir to a formidable inheritance but in a position fraught with danger. 
In 1459 the accord between the Lancastrian and the Yorkist lords broke down, and the conflict came to the borders of the Stanley sphere of influence. Queen Margaret held court at Lichfield, appealing on behalf of the prince of Wales for the loyalty of the men of the palatinate of Chester. With the earl of Salisbury mobilizing in Yorkshire, and heading south-west to join the duke of York at Ludlow, the queen ordered Lord Stanley to raise forces to intercept him. Salisbury, too, was in communication with his son-in-law. The two armies met at Bloreheath in August 1459. Though no more than a few miles away, Stanley kept his 2000 men out of the fight. It was alleged that he both prevented some Cheshire levies joining the queen, and secretly committed troops to Salisbury. His brother, William Stanley, was certainly in the rebel host, and subsequently attainted. On the morning after the battle, Thomas sent the queen his excuses and 'departed home again', while writing to congratulate Salisbury on his escape. The parliament that met at Coventry later in the year petitioned for Thomas Stanley's attainder. The queen thought it wise to overlook his conduct, and pardoned him. 
In the summer of 1460 Lord Stanley again disappointed the queen. After Henry VI's capture at the battle of Northampton, he began to co-operate with the Yorkist lords who had possession of the king and ruled in his name. In October he participated in the settlement by which Richard, duke of York, was made heir to the throne, and in November he was serving, alongside his Neville affines, in the council. While York and Salisbury rode north against the queen's forces in December, and were defeated and slain at Wakefield, he may have remained with the younger Yorkist lords in London. Given the lack of firm evidence as to his participation in the acclamation of Edward IV and the Yorkist victory at Towton, it is probable that over the winter of 1460-61 he returned to the relative security of his own regional power base. Still, Stanley rapidly consolidated his association with the Yorkist regime. In the early 1460s he joined his brother-in-law, the earl of Warwick, in the sieges and campaigns that drove the Lancastrian forces across the Scottish border. Stanley was not one of Edward's inner circle, but was confirmed in his fees and offices. The new king needed Stanley to secure the north-west, with its traditions of loyalty to the royal household. With Lancastrian forces holding out in Wales and in the north, the region had obvious strategic importance. In 1464 there was a Lancastrian rising in the area, and in the following year Henry VI sought refuge in north Lancashire, where he was finally taken captive. When in 1465 Lord Stanley took honours in the tournament held to celebrate the marriage of Edward IV and Elizabeth Woodville, it might have seemed as if he had ridden out the storm. 
In the late 1460s, however, instability returned. The coalition that had brought Edward IV to the throne was breaking apart, and Stanley found his loyalties divided between the king and his Neville in-laws. The dramatic shifts in political fortune between 1469 and 1471, and their impact on the tangled networks of affinity and allegiance, are hard to unravel. When the earl of Warwick, fleeing before Edward IV in 1470, made his way to Manchester in the hope of support, Stanley held aloof, but on Warwick's return he lent him armed support in the restoration of Henry VI. For Lord Stanley, alongside the main game, there was an important sideshow. In 1468 he had been granted the wardship of the heiresses of the Harringtons of Hornby in north Lancashire. His bid to take over their estates was resisted by the male heir, who remained loyal to Edward IV. Stanley's siege of Hornby Castle was his main contribution to the fighting of this time. This struggle involved conflict with Richard, duke of Gloucester, the king's brother, who backed the Harringtons and was based for a time at Hornby. Lord Stanley stood his ground in the north-west, and, given his profile and Neville connections, did well to avoid the bloodbath at the battles of Barnet and Tewkesbury, which followed the return of Edward IV in the spring of 1471. Sir William Stanley was among the first to rally to Edward, and he may have brought his brother's good wishes with him. 
Lord Stanley was soon forgiven for his disloyalty. Appointed steward of the king's household late in 1471, he was thenceforward a regular member of the royal council. The death of his first wife some time before 1471 severed his connection with the Nevilles and made possible, some time early in 1472, a marriage even more distinguished and politically significant. Margaret Beaufort, countess of Richmond, his new wife, was the mother of Henry Tudor and potentially heir-general of the house of Lancaster. Yet the marriage was probably blessed by Edward IV, and strengthened rather than weakened Stanley's position at court, where a match between Elizabeth of York and Henry Tudor was mooted. At the same time, while Edward's reservations about Stanley's loyalty may have led to the advancement of the king's brother in the region, their respective spheres of influence had been redrawn in Stanley's favour by 1475. Stanley led a retinue of 40 lances and 300 archers in the king's expedition to France in 1475, during which he found an opportunity to commend himself to the favour of Louis XI. In 1482 he served with a large company in Gloucester's campaign in Scotland, and played a key role in the capture of Berwick. 
In the mean time Lord Stanley consolidated and extended his hegemony in the north-west. The changes of regime never really weakened his family's grip on the key offices in the palatinates of Chester and Lancaster. Stanley was a man of considerable acumen, and probably the most successful power-broker of his age. Like most effective affinities, his retinue was held together not by grants of annuities but by the less brittle bonds of good lordship. Given his office holding both regionally and at court, Stanley did not need to draw ruinously on his own reserves to dispense patronage on a grand scale. His active role in the arbitration of local disputes is well documented. The royal council and the council of the duchy of Lancaster regularly referred matters to him. He in turn delegated business to his counsellors, kinsmen and wives. On occasion Eleanor, Lady Stanley, took the initiative as facilitator and peacemaker. In the mid-1460s she wrote to Peter Warburton on a client's behalf, making clear what was required to 'cause me to be your good lady', and in 1466 she took the sting out of a dispute between two Lancashire squires (JRL, Arley Charter 30/2; Lancs. RO, DDF 600). 
Yet 'good lordship' had its brutal face. The Stanleys were disinclined to brook any opposition or tolerate any rivals in the north-west. If the vicissitudes of the time encouraged some Lancashire families, like the Butlers, barons of Warrington, to assert themselves, they were soon put in their place. Early in 1464 Sir John Butler was slain, prompting the king to summon Lord Stanley before him. According to ballad tradition, which adds lurid detail to the sparse record, Butler was murdered by Stanley's servants. Indeed the ballad takes amoral delight in the king's reluctance to discipline Stanley. In defending and extending their hegemony the Stanleys were prepared to go head-to-head with the mightiest in the land. In 1469 the king appointed his brother to a number of duchy of Lancaster offices previously held by Stanley. In defiance of royal orders, Stanley made it impossible for Gloucester to assume his responsibilities. This rivalry, with the struggle over Hornby another focus, led briefly to open warfare. According to the Stanley legend, Gloucester assembled an army at Preston intending to attack and burn Lathom, but was put to flight by the Stanleys at Ribble Bridge. Gloucester's banner was taken by Jack Morris of Wigan and was kept as a trophy at Wigan church for some forty years. 
After the accession of Edward V, Stanley was prominent among the lords and prelates who sought to maintain a balance of power between the young king's uncle, Richard of Gloucester, and his maternal kinsmen, the Woodvilles. When Gloucester attacked this group at a council meeting on 13 June, Stanley was wounded and placed under arrest, but was spared summary execution, the fate of Lord Hastings. According to Polydore Vergil, Gloucester feared that Stanley's son would raise Lancashire and Cheshire against him. On 24 June Gloucester had Edward V and his brother declared illegitimate, and two days later he took the throne as Richard III. In preparing the ground for the usurpation and in consolidating his position, Richard found it more expedient to appease than to alienate the house of Stanley. Lord Stanley, who continued as steward of the household, was soon at liberty and seemingly implicated in the new order. He bore the great mace at Richard's coronation, and his wife waited on the new queen. He was elected to the Order of the Garter, taking the stall vacated by Lord Hastings. 
To all appearances, Stanley was a pillar of the Ricardian regime. After the coronation he joined the royal progress westwards to Gloucester and then northwards to York. His commitment to the new regime paid dividends in the autumn of 1483, when a series of plots against the king coalesced in a major rising in southern and western England under the leadership of the duke of Buckingham. A key feature of the rebellion was the link forged between men loyal to Edward IV, who, assuming his sons had perished in the Tower of London, shifted their allegiance to his daughter, Elizabeth of York, and the die-hard Lancastrians who espoused the cause of Henry Tudor. When Richard returned from the north to suppress the rebellion, Stanley and his brother were at the king's side and were richly rewarded from the forfeited estates of the rebels. In place of Buckingham, Richard appointed Stanley as constable of England, first in an acting capacity and then, on 18 December, formally. Yet it is conceivable that Stanley might himself have become involved in the rising. His wife, Margaret Beaufort, was a key conspirator, and brokered the alliance between Elizabeth of York and her son Henry Tudor. Stanley, who seems to have been with the king when he heard news of the rebellion, may have had no other option than to act as his loyal lieutenant. Indeed it was only by making a solemn undertaking to keep his wife in custody and to put an end to her intrigues that Stanley saved her from attainder. 
Richard cannot wholly have trusted Stanley. When in the summer of 1485 the latter took leave to return to Lathom the king asked that his son, George Stanley, Lord Strange, take his place at court. The Stanleys had been in communication with Henry Tudor and the Lancastrian exiles for some time. Henry Tudor's strategy of landing in Wales and crossing to Shrewsbury depended on the support of Sir William Stanley, the chamberlain of Chester and north Wales, and presumably on that of Stanley himself. Once informed of the invasion, the king ordered the two brothers to raise the men of the region in readiness to take the field against the pretender. On hearing that Henry Tudor was marching unopposed through Wales, Richard ordered Lord Stanley to join him at once. According to the continuator of the Crowland chronicle, Stanley excused himself on the grounds of illness. By this stage the king had firm evidence of Stanley complicity. After an abortive bid to escape from the court, Lord Strange confessed that he, his uncle Sir William Stanley, and his cousin Sir John Savage (d. 1492) ['see under 'Savage family] were in league with Henry Tudor. The king proclaimed the two knights traitors, and let it be known that Strange was hostage for his father's loyalty in the coming conflict. 
Henry Tudor led his army into the heart of the kingdom, making contact with Sir William Stanley at Stone in Staffordshire. Three armies followed each other into the midlands: Lord Stanley and his forces; then Sir William Stanley; and finally Henry Tudor and the rebel host. It cannot have been entirely clear whether the Stanleyites were falling back before the rebels or shielding them from the royal host. After his evacuation of Lichfield, Lord Stanley may have had a secret meeting with Henry at Atherstone on 20 August, but when the Stanleyites arrived south of Market Bosworth they took up a position independent of both the royal host and the rebel army. The two brothers played similar roles to those they had played at Bloreheath over a quarter of a century earlier. Lord Stanley took no part in the action, hanging between the two armies, and it was Sir William's intervention that gave Henry the victory. It was presumably the elder brother, if anyone, who placed Richard's coronet on Henry Tudor's head. 
Henry VII showed his gratitude to his 'right dearly beloved father' on 27 October 1485 by creating him earl of Derby. Early in 1486 he confirmed him as constable of England and high steward of the duchy of Lancaster, and granted him other offices and estates. Even so, at the time of the Lambert Simnel rising of 1487, there may have been concern that the Stanleys were again hedging their bets, and there was relief in the royal host when the Stanleyites came in at Nottingham. The victory at Stoke (16 June 1487) brought further rewards for Stanley, notably lands forfeited by Viscount Lovell, Sir Thomas Pilkington, and Sir Thomas Broughton in Lancashire and elsewhere. In 1489 the Stanleys again made a notable contribution to the army raised by the king to suppress a rising in Yorkshire. It may be that Sir William Stanley, now chamberlain of the household, felt that he deserved greater reward. In 1495 he rashly entered into an intrigue with the supporters of Perkin Warbeck. Henry VII felt confident enough to strike him down, and then to undertake a state visit to Lancashire, where he stayed with his stepfather and mother at their manors of Lathom and Knowsley. 
In 1504 the earl of Derby could look back on a career of forty-five years of remarkable political success. His closeness to the royal family, his tenure of high office nationally, and his territorial holdings, which stretched from the Isle of Man deep into the midlands, made him a figure of great power and influence. Under his adroit leadership the north-west escaped the worst horrors of civil strife, while most of its leading families consistently found themselves on the winning side. The deeds of the Stanleys were celebrated in ballads composed in the region, while the hangings from King Richard's tent and other trophies were displayed at Lathom and elsewhere. At the same time Stanley and his wives helped bring a degree of cultivation and refinement to the north-west. Their patronage underpinned the careers of a number of young Lancashire men, like William Smith, Hugh Oldham, and Christopher Urswick, who later won distinction in the church and world of learning. 
Still, Derby's last years may not have been entirely happy. There are signs that he had overextended himself. Spending more time in the capital, he found it hard to resolve the disputes that arose in his sphere of influence and maintain control over unruly members of his affinity. A property dispute at Mellor on the Cheshire and Derbyshire border festered in the 1490s as both sides found support from within the old Stanley connection, and as appeals to Derby's 'good lordship' prompted fitful, rather than focused, intervention. Henry VII showed himself less willing to accommodate the aggrandizement of the Stanleys. In 1495 he had Sir William Stanley executed on charges of treason, and over the next few years clipped the wings of a number of other family members. 
Henry VII's visit to Lancashire in the summer of 1495 marked a watershed of sorts. Early in 1499 Margaret Beaufort left Lathom for good, establishing an independent household at Collyweston and taking a vow of chastity. Derby visited her from time to time as he moved between Lathom and the capital, where he continued to serve as a member of the king's council and constable of England. He presided in this latter capacity at a state trial at Westminster in May 1502. His eldest son, George, Lord Strange, died after a banquet in London in December 1503. Derby fell ill at Lathom the following summer. In his will of 28 July 1504 he ordained masses for the souls of himself, his wives, parents, ancestors, children, siblings, and, ever the good lord, 'them that have died in the service of my lord my father or of me' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/14, fols. 148'r'-149'v'). He died at Lathom the following day, and was buried with his ancestors at Burscough Priory. 


@@@@@


doc= 26280


Thomas Stanley (d. 1569), bishop of Sodor and Man, was the illegitimate son of the first Baron Monteagle. As lords of Man, the Stanleys controlled the Manx church and, after attending Oxford, Thomas was consecrated as bishop in 1510. A pluralist, he was also rector of several northern parishes, including Badsworth, Yorkshire, and Winwick and Wigan in Lancashire. Often at odds with authority, he boasted in 1523 of his intent to leave England to take service with Richard de la Pole. In 1536 he sneered at the earl of Derby, his kinsman, for accepting a commission to raise troops to suppress the Pilgrimage of Grace. Eventually, in 1545, he was deprived of his bishopric for refusing to comply with the act that reallocated his see from the province of Canterbury to that of York. Restored in 1556 by Queen Mary, he then supported the crown, presiding over the ordination of priests in Preston. On Elizabeth's accession he took up residence in Durham where he wrote a metrical chronicle of the Stanleys, completed in 1562. He thereafter attracted comment chiefly for his idleness, for he lived, it was said, 'as merry as Pope Joan' (Bridgeman, 139) until his death in March 1569. 


@@@@@


doc= 26281


Stanley, Thomas (1625-1678), poet and classical scholar, was born in September 1625 in Cumberlow Green, Hertfordshire, the eldest son of Sir Thomas Stanley and his second wife, Mary, daughter of Sir William Hammond, of St Alban's Court, Nonnington, Kent. Through his mother he was cousin to the poet Richard Lovelace and nephew to the poet William Hammond, to both of whom he paid tribute in his verse 'Register of Friends'. At the house of his father, a substantial landowner in Hertfordshire, Stanley was tutored from an early age by William Fairfax, son of Edward Fairfax, the translator of Tasso, who remained his mentor and friend for many years, providing the groundwork for Stanley's later career as classical scholar and translator. 
In June 1639, at thirteen, Stanley entered Pembroke College, Cambridge, his uncle's college, matriculating on 13 December; he proceeded MA in March 1642. Stanley remained in residence in Cambridge until 1643, with brief intervals at Oxford and a trip to Durham in 1641 in Hammond's company, where he met and befriended the precocious 'early blossom of the wondring North', the poet John Hall (Hall was then fourteen and Stanley sixteen). At the outbreak of the civil war, distressed at 'the fury of unruly Times', Stanley left England for the continent, returning 'from his Travells in France' in 1646 ('Poems and Translations', 356). He then took up residence in the Middle Temple, living in chambers adjacent to those of his kinsman Edward Sherburne, with whom, united by 'the double Ty of Sympathy and Blood', he 'entred into a near Communication of Friendship and Studies' (ibid., xxv, 363). It is likely that Stanley provided financial assistance to some of his fellow royalist poets at this time and afterwards: the dramatist James Shirley, another close friend of this period, acknowledged his generosity as patron at a time of 'poverty', as did Hall (Bentley, 220-21). 
Like his friends Sherburne and Lovelace (and unlike Hall, who wrote pamphlets urging submission to the 'de facto' power of the Commonwealth), Stanley was an ardent royalist. In 1646 he founded an order of the Black Riband, in which sympathizers of the king in his distress indicated their continued loyalty by a symbolic ribbon of mourning worn on the arm. 'Psalterium Carolinum: the Devotions of his Sacred Majestie in his Solitudes and Sufferings' (1657) is Stanley's verse paraphrase of Charles I's 'Eikon basilike', with a musical setting by John Wilson. The 1660 reissue includes a dedication to Charles II, describing the work as motivated by 'a pious Duty to the sacred memory' of the martyred king. Stanley's name does not appear in the 1657 edition, and though the 'Register of Friends' treats the civil war period as 'barbarous Times' of 'servitude', this poem was written long after the Restoration and remained unpublished until after Stanley's death. 
On 8 May 1648 Stanley married Dorothy Enyon, eldest daughter of the late Sir John Enyon of Flower (Floore), Northamptonshire, and his widow, Lady Jane Enyon. His friends Shirley, Sherburne, Hammond, and Fairfax wrote epithalamia celebrating the wedding, as did Lovelace in an 'Anniversary' in the following year. Stanley had nine children, the eldest of whom, Thomas Stanley the younger ('b'. 1650), was admitted to Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1665, and published a translation, 'Claudius AElianus his Various Histories', in the same year. 
Stanley's 'Poems and Translations' was published in 1647, when the poet was twenty-two; the title-page states that the volume was 'Printed for the Author, and his friends'. According to the editor of the 1743 edition of Stanley's 'History of Philosophy', the 'Madrigal Poems and other Pieces... together with some Translations out of the 'French, Italian', and 'Spanish'' in the 1647 collection were largely written at Cambridge, before Stanley set out on his travels (CUL, MS Add. 7514 shows that Stanley revised the poems extensively in 1646 and 1647). Bibliographically, 'Poems and Translations' is a complex volume, since it consists of several distinct sections, with separate title-pages, signatures, and pagination, which are bound together in the British Library copy and several other extant copies. As originally conceived, the volume seems to have consisted of two parts, each separately paginated: poems (sixty-two love lyrics, all highly conventional, with titles such as 'Love Deposed' and 'Speaking and Kissing') and a series of extended translations from the Greek and Latin: 'Europa', 'Cupid Crucified', and 'Pervigilium Veneris', with the Greek or Latin text on pages facing the translations and a Latin commentary appended. Yet even among the ostensibly original poems, a large proportion are imitations or translations: Praz points out close parallels with Marino, Tasso, Lope de Vega, and other poets (Praz, 280-88). Commendatory poems described the volume as 'forraign wealth transferr'd' and 'improv'd', praising Stanley's learning which '
extends through all 

Languages which we 'Europaean' call. 
('Poems and Translations', sig. A2, A3'v')' 
'Europa' and its two companion poems were reissued by Humphrey Moseley as a separate publication in 1649, and Moseley is also identified as publisher in 1647 (2nd edn, 1650) of two further translations by Stanley: 'Aurora', from a prose romance by the Spanish author Montalvan, and 'Oronta the Cyprian Virgin', from a poem by the Italian author Preti. 

'Poems, by Thomas Stanley Esquire' (1651) is a thoroughly revised and expanded version of the first part of 'Poems and Translations' (1647). It includes forty-two lyric poems from the earlier collection (omitting twenty) and adds twenty-one new poems, each of which explicitly indicates a source: 'To his Mistress in Absence. Tasso'; 'The Sick Lover. Guarini'; 'The Enjoyment. St. Amant'. As with the 1647 collection, there is a second volume of translations, largely from the Greek and Latin, separately paginated (260 pages, where the 'Poems' volume has only 86 pages). The title-page, with no general title, lists the authors and poems translated: 'Anacreon. Bion. Moschus. 'Kisses', by Secundus. 'Cupid Crucified', by Ausonius. 'Venus Vigils''. Later in the volume there are separate title-pages for the 'excitations' or notes on these poets, for a separate section of translations from the French, Spanish, and Italian (four new poems and two from earlier editions), and finally, for a prose translation from Pico della Mirandola, 'A Platonick Discourse upon Love'. In several extant copies, the prose translation 'Aurora', with separate pagination and signatures, is bound with the two volumes of verse poems and translations, but it is unlikely that this third volume (with a title-page dated 1650 and listing Moseley as publisher) was 'ever intended to form part of' the 1651 collection ('Poems and Translations', l-li). 'Poems, by Thomas Stanley Esquire' (1652), listing Moseley as publisher, is made up of sheets of the 1651 edition with a new title-page; Moseley also advertised 'Poems and translations, the compleat workes of 'Thomas Stanley' Esquire, 1653', in a bookseller's catalogue, but no copy dated 1653 is extant. 
The 1651 volume of verse translations includes the first complete English translation of the 'Anacreontea'. This translation, in tetrameter couplets, was published at a time when the poems attributed to Anacreon, with their refined hedonism, were particularly influential among Stanley's fellow Caroline poets; 'in an era that was not outwardly congenial to their kind of poetry', such poems could be taken to have 'definite royalist subtexts' (Revard, 'Stanley', 160, 171). Stanley's translation of the 'Anacreontea' remained the standard English version for some time thereafter, as did his version of the 'Basia' of the neo-Latin poet Johannes Secundus. In translating Secundus, Stanley omits the five most openly erotic poems in the sequence and thus 'has subtly altered the character of the 'Basia'' in ways consistent with his own love poems, described by Hall and others as 'chaste' (Revard, 'Secundus', 556-7). Saintsbury, in his anthology 'Minor Poets of the Caroline Period', comments that in his translations Stanley 'has almost unerringly selected writers who are suitable to the poetical style of his own day, and has transposed them into English verse of that style' (Saintsbury, 3.98). The assessment of Crump, his modern editor, is that 'as a translator he was unmatched by any of his contemporaries, with the possible exception of Richard Crashaw', writing poems closely modelled on those by earlier poets which nevertheless 'attained the freedom and spontaneity of original expression' ('Poems and Translations', xl). 
In 1656 the composer John Gamble published 'Ayres and Dialogues', musical settings of lyric poems by Stanley. The collection contains eighty-seven songs, with accompaniment for the bass viol or lute, taken from the 1647 and 1651 volumes, as well as three poems by Stanley written before 1647 but not published earlier. 'Ayres and Dialogues' includes thirteen poems from 1647 not included in 1651, fifteen poems from the translations of Anacreon, four from the translations of Secundus, and nearly all the lyric poems from 1651 (with texts generally agreeing with 1647 where the two earlier editions differ). In his preface Gamble apologizes that the poems had been 'so long with' him, and variant readings suggest that for some of the songs he used unrevised drafts in his possession since 1646 ('Poems and Translations', xxxii). Poems by Stanley were also set to music by Henry Lawes, Jeremy Savile, Henry Bowman, and John Roffey, appearing in various songbooks between 1653 and 1686, and by John Wilson, who also set 'Psalterium Carolinum'. 
After 1648 Stanley's principal residence was Rushden Manor in Hertfordshire where, accompanied for the next five years by his kinsman and fellow translator Sherburne, he devoted his time to scholarly pursuits. According to the 1701 'Account' of his life and writings, an 'Affection to Learning' was his dominant characteristic: 'Neither his Cares nor Concerns for his Family, nor the Caresses and Endearments of a young Wife, could prevail with him to intermit his ordinary Studies, on which he was obstinately bent' ('Account', sig. A2'v'). The first volume of his ambitious 'History of Philosophy' -- the 'Life' claims that 'Mr 'Stanley' has outshone all that preceded him in the Extent of his Design, and the vast Multitude of Particulars he has amassed together' (ibid.) -- was published in folio by Humphrey Mosely and Thomas Dring in 1655. In its account of 'those on whom the Attribute of Wise was conferred' in antiquity, with particular attention to Thales, Solon, and Socrates, the first volume established the pattern of 'Lives and Opinions' followed in the later volumes. Volume 2, which included detailed accounts of the philosophical doctrines of Plato, Aristotle, and Stoicism, was published in 1656, and volume 3, which encompasses Pythagoras and the pre-Socratics, Scepticism, and a particularly detailed and sympathetic account of Epicureanism, appeared in 1660. In these three volumes Stanley sought to give a comprehensive account of the various schools of Greek philosophy, in as impartial a way as possible: 'there is due to every one the Commendation of their own Deserts', he writes in the dedication to volume 1. A fourth folio volume, 'The History of the Chaldaick Philosophy' (evidently an afterthought, since the title-page of volume 3 describes it as 'the third and last volume'), published in 1662, is briefer and more tentative in treating the occult learning of ancient Egypt, Babylonia, and Persia: 'there is not any thing more difficult to be retrieved out of the Ruins of Antiquity than the Learning of the Eastern Nations' (ibid., 756). Stanley's 'History of Philosophy' was accepted as a standard authority for many years, republished in a single volume in 1687, 1701 (with an informative 'Life'), and in 1743 (once more with the biography), and translated into French and Latin. 
Stanley's next scholarly project, no less ambitious in scope, was an edition of the plays of Aeschylus. The edition, published in folio in 1663, contains a complete Greek text (seven plays and fragments), a Latin translation of each play, and detailed notes, textual and explanatory, in Latin. Stanley devoted nearly ten years to this edition, which has been described as 'the first substantial contribution made by English scholarship to the study of Greek poetry' and 'one of the most influential editions' of any Greek author, superior to any previous editions of Aeschylus (Fraenkel, 40-41). In its early stages Stanley had the assistance of the classical scholar John Pearson, later bishop of Chester, whose detailed annotations of Stanley's copy of a 1557 edition of Aeschylus formed the basis of many of Stanley's notes and textual emendations. As well as seeking to establish a reliable text, Stanley is primarily concerned with providing in his edition 'a full and scholarly illustration of the plays' (ibid., 40, 43). Stanley continued working on Aeschylus after the publication of his edition, and eight volumes of detailed notes, presumably intended for a second, revised edition, are extant (CUL, MS Gg.iii.7-14). Stanley's Aeschylus remained the standard edition for many years, and when the Revd Samuel Butler published a revised and enlarged edition, based on that of Stanley, in 1809-16, he eulogized him in the following terms: 'Stanley was the greatest scholar of his age in this country, the greatest ornament to the University of Cambridge; he was a liberal, a candid and an upright scholar, yet wholly free from vanity, from envy, and from self-importance. I venerate the memory of such a man. (Flower, 143)' In addition to his notes on Aeschylus, there are a number of other manuscripts by Stanley which attest to his scholarly interests, indicating projects for further publications which, perhaps for reasons of ill health, never came to fruition. He was particularly interested in the poet Callimachus (his annotated copy of a 1577 edition of Callimachus is in the British Library, and two further volumes of notes in Cambridge University Library), and may also have planned an edition of the plays of Euripides (Flower, 143, 169-70). A volume of Adversaria or notes, primarily textual, on Sophocles, Euripides, Theocritus, Juvenal, Persius, Theophrastus, and other Greek and Latin authors is in Cambridge University Library, along with a second large volume containing notes on Demosthenes, a translation of Sophocles' 'Philoctetes', with notes on the play, and a lengthy treatise (over 100 pages) on St Paul's 'Epistle to the Hebrews'. Stanley was elected to the Royal Society in 1661 and became a fellow in 1663, remaining active in the Royal Society at least until 1670. 
Stanley was a generous patron to poets and translators during the 1650s and the 1660s: one of many volumes dedicated to him speaks of him as 'the true Lover of all good Learning' (Flower, 142). He seems to have been in straitened circumstances in the late 1650s, partly as a result of inheriting the debts of his royalist father-in-law, and after the Restoration he petitioned the king several times for redress, with the last appeal in 1663 being successful. His principal residence in his later years continued to be Rushden Manor in Hertfordshire, though he seems also to have maintained a London residence. From the mid-1660s to his death in 1678 he suffered from poor health, and may have been diabetic. The dedication to 'Scarron's Novels... Rendered into English' (1665) by John Davies of Kidwelly, a recipient of Stanley's patronage, refers to 'a general report of your death' that year after a serious illness. Letters by John Hall suggest that even in the 1640s Stanley's health was not good, and there are several references to illness in letters by and to Stanley during his later years, as well as a poem by one of his friends praising the doctor who has given 'Balsome to Stanleys Life' ('Poems and Translations', xxxiii). He died on 12 April 1678, in Suffolk Street, Strand, his London residence, and was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields. He was survived by his wife. The 1743 'Life' speaks of him as 'a Gentleman of a comely Aspect, and exceeded by none of his Time for Modesty, Candour, and Learning' ('Account', sig. b2'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 26282


Stanley, Sir William (c.1435-1495), administrator and landowner, was the second son of Thomas Stanley, first Baron Stanley (1406-1459), and Joan, daughter of Sir Robert Goushill and his wife, Elizabeth Fitzalan, dowager duchess of Norfolk. He was probably born about 1435, that is, some two years after his brother, Thomas Stanley, second Lord Stanley. He grew to manhood in the increasingly bitter factional politics of the 1450s, in which his father had balanced his early involvement with the Suffolk regime by collaboration with the duke of York and the Nevilles. In 1459 Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury, crossing from Yorkshire to join with York at Ludlow, sought support from the Stanleys against the Lancastrian regime. While his elder brother, Thomas, refused to commit his troops, William joined Salisbury's standard, took part in the action at Bloreheath (23 September), and probably fled overseas with the Yorkist leaders. In the Coventry parliament in November Thomas begged the king's pardon, but William was attainted as a traitor. 
William Stanley's prospects were wholly transformed by the accession of Edward IV in 1461. On 1 May he was appointed chamberlain of Chester, constable of Flint Castle, and sheriff of Flintshire, offices that he was to hold for some thirty-five years. He was knighted in July, and through summer and autumn he was prominent in the establishment of Yorkist rule in north Wales. In the following years he assisted in the suppression of the Lancastrians in the north, participating in the siege of Alnwick (1462) with 400 archers. After the battle of Hexham (1464) he was rewarded with a grant of the lordship of Skipton, Yorkshire, and other lands forfeited by John, Lord Clifford (died 1461). In 1465 he married Joan Beaumont, widow of John, Lord Lovell, securing the custody of the Lovell lordship of Longdendale in Cheshire. Despite his connections with the Neville clan, William Stanley did not follow the earl of Warwick when he turned against Edward IV and drove him from the kingdom in 1470-71. On Edward's return from exile in 1471, he was among the first to declare himself for the house of York, meeting him at Nottingham with 300 men. Joan Stanley having died in August 1466, her husband's credit at court was presumably instrumental in securing, by the end of the year, Elizabeth Hopton, widow of John Tiptoft, earl of Worcester (died 1470), as his second wife. 
In the 1470s William Stanley was a pillar of the Yorkist regime. When Edward's eldest son became prince of Wales and earl of Chester, he was appointed steward of the prince's household. His position at court, the offices he held in Cheshire and Flintshire, and his activities as a patron and arbiter of disputes helped him to secure a powerful following among the gentry of the region. His ambition was to build up a territorial lordship which would extend the Stanley domination of Lancashire and Cheshire into north Wales. Local power and influence secured a foothold in the lordship of Bromfield and Yale, where he was acting in the capacity of steward from about 1467 and was probably already in residence at Holt Castle. He and his brother successfully resisted efforts by Richard, duke of Gloucester, to extend his power into Lancashire. Indeed, in 1475 William obtained from the duke the lordship of Chirk, immediately south of Bromfield and Yale, in exchange for that of Skipton. In the same year he led a retinue of two lances and twenty archers in Edward IV's expedition to France. 
In 1483 the Stanleys reluctantly acquiesced in the usurpation of Richard III. At the time of the duke of Buckingham's rebellion in October of that year they were with the king in the north, and had little room for manoeuvre. In any event they joined in the suppression of the revolt, and shared in the spoils of victory. William Stanley succeeded Buckingham as chief justice of north Wales, and was granted his lordship of Thornbury in Gloucestershire. In 1484 he finally acquired from the crown the castle of Holt and the lordship of Bromfield and Yale, partly by purchase and partly in exchange for the surrender of Thornbury. 
None the less the Stanleys played a pivotal role in the overthrow of Richard III and the accession of Henry Tudor in 1485. Lord Stanley was the stepfather of the Lancastrian pretender, but Sir William may well have been motivated primarily by loyalty to Henry Tudor's proposed bride, Elizabeth of York, eldest daughter and (assuming the deaths of the princes in the Tower) heir of Edward IV. While only the ballad tradition, especially 'Bosworth Field' and the 'Song of Lady Bessy', offers detail, it seems clear that the Stanleys made undertakings to Henry Tudor before his invasion in 1485. After landing with a small force in south-west Wales, he headed north and then east, evidently relying on assistance from the Stanleys. According to the 'Song of Lady Bessy', Sir William was stationed at Holt Castle, waiting for the south-westerly wind that would signal the invasion. 
On receipt of news of the rebels' advance through Wales William Stanley sent a message to the town of Shrewsbury ordering their admission, and, in co-ordination with Lord Stanley who was advancing in force from Lancashire, he set out at the head of a company about 3000 men strong, attired according to the ballads in red-and-white jackets bearing his insignia of the hart's head. While the Stanleys declined to declare themselves openly until the last moment, Sir William is presented in the ballads as actively assisting the rebels from the outset, meeting with Henry near Stone and at Lichfield, and covering his advance through Staffordshire. At the battle of Bosworth (22 August) it was Sir William who at a critical stage committed his forces against Richard III. Polydore Vergil has William Stanley saving Henry's life, the great chronicle of London has him crowning Henry VII on the battlefield, and an early tradition has him being granted the spoils of the field by the grateful victor. 
On the accession of Henry VII Sir William Stanley was appointed chamberlain of the king's household. He was loyal to the regime during the Lambert Simnel conspiracy of 1487, and he raised a large company in 1489 to assist the king in the suppression of a rising in Yorkshire. He was well rewarded for his support, but seemed to Polydore Vergil 'more mindful of the favours he had given than of those he had received' ('Anglica historia', 77). He was reputedly the richest commoner in England. Common fame had it that he enjoyed a yearly income from land and office of $3000, and had treasure worth 400,000 marks. He may indeed have been disappointed in not being raised to the peerage like his brother, who was rewarded in 1485 with the title of earl of Derby. None the less his arrest, trial, and execution for treason early in 1495, following the earlier arrest of other household men involved in treasonable correspondence with the pretender Perkin Warbeck, shocked contemporaries as a most spectacular fall from grace. 
The charge was that on 14 March 1493 William Stanley discussed with Robert Clifford the claims of Perkin Warbeck to be Richard, younger son of Edward IV, and sent Clifford to Brabant to enter his service and give assurances of support. According to Vergil, Sir William had declared that if Warbeck was indeed the son of Edward IV 'he would never take arms against him' ('Anglica historia', 75). The chief witness was Clifford himself, now turned king's evidence, and it is tempting to suspect that the charges were to some degree manufactured. Henry VII certainly enriched himself and restored discipline in his household by destroying the over-mighty chamberlain. None the less the charge has plausibility. Sir William had demonstrated conspicuous loyalty to Edward IV, and it is significant that the alleged mission to Warbeck followed on news of his reception as her nephew by Margaret of York, duchess of Burgundy. His correspondence with the pretender may have been prompted by considerations of honour as much as by calculation of advantage. 
At his trial Stanley confessed the treason, but apparently bore himself very haughtily. He may well have believed that his treason was relatively minor, a past indiscretion rather than a current conspiracy. Polydore Vergil's view that Stanley's sentiments indicated 'lukewarmness to King Henry rather than treason' ('Anglica historia', 75) may have been widely shared, but is somewhat naive. On 6-7 February, in a trial at which his brother presided as constable of England, he was found guilty of treason and condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered. It seems that the king relented to the degree that he was simply beheaded at Tower Hill on the 16th. His lands and goods were seized into the king's hands. Bromfield and Yale, and other lordships confiscated from Stanley, were worth 1000 marks per annum to the crown in 1500. An inventory drawn up at Holt Castle after his death records some $9000 in money and jewels. He was buried at Syon Abbey, Middlesex, with the costs of the burial at the king's charge. 


@@@@@


doc= 26283


Stanley, Sir William (1548-1630), soldier, was the eldest son of Sir Rowland Stanley ('c'.1516-1612) of Hooton and Storeton, Cheshire, head of the senior branch of the house of Stanley, and Margaret Aldersey. Aged twelve, at Christmas 1560 he married Ann Dutton of Hatton, a bride two years his junior; the union was dissolved in 1565. Records concerning the annulment state that Stanley was educated at the school of Dr Standish of Lathom and had also served in the household of his aristocratic relative Edward Stanley, third earl of Derby. It is probable that William was brought up adhering to the old religion, as his father, a justice of the peace and a former sheriff of Chester, was suspected of being a recusant in 1583. In the late 1560s Stanley pursued a military career, serving until 1570 with the duke of Alva during his coercive governorship of the Netherlands. 
On his return from the Low Countries Stanley went to Ireland and remained there for fifteen years. He came to prominence in the campaign of 1579 against the earl of Desmond. In recognition of the quality of his service Lord Justice Sir William Drury knighted Stanley at Waterford that year. Notable engagements included those at Youghal, Monasternenagh, and Adare. After a short visit to England Stanley was heavily involved in the suppression of Viscount Baltinglass's rebellion in Leinster in 1580. He wrote a vivid eyewitness account of the morale-sapping reverse suffered by ambushed crown forces in Glenmalure at the hands of Fiach Mac Hugh O'Byrne. His subsequent actions against local septs in Wicklow, especially the torching of Fiach Mac Hugh's house at Ballinacor and the slaughter of hundreds of Kavanaghs, earned him high praise from the Irish treasurer, Sir Henry Wallop, and the president of Connaught, Sir Nicholas Malby. 
During another sojourn in England Stanley joined a syndicate run by Sir Humphrey Gilbert and Sir Thomas Gerrard which aimed to plant America with recusants, but he returned to Munster in early 1583 when the project lost momentum. The earl of Ormond, the new lord president of the province, then appointed him constable of Castlemaine and captain of the garrison at Lismore. It is certain that Stanley intended to settle in Munster. In a letter to Sir Francis Walsingham in May that year he wrote of his plans to make Castlemaine 'a town of English' and he unsuccessfully sought lands adjoining the manor of Lismore ('CSP Ire.', '1574-88', 432, 484). His troops played a crucial part in the mopping-up operations that brought the rebellion to a close, notably the pursuit and assassination of the earl of Desmond. In March 1584 he unsuccessfully petitioned Lord Burghley and Walsingham for the presidency of Connaught, vacant following Malby's death. Despite the failure of this suit he held other important offices in Ireland including the sheriffdom of Cork and the reversion of a commission as master of the ordnance. He was entrusted with politically sensitive positions such as keeper of the peace in Munster during the earl of Ormond's absence, and the pro-presidency of Munster while Lord Deputy Perrot's appointee, John Norris, served in Ulster. 
Stanley's reputation for military prowess led to his removal to Antrim in early January 1585, by order of Lord Deputy Perrot, to stave off an invasion of redshanks under the leadership of Sorley Boy Mac Donnell. In this engagement his band was driven from its position near Ballycastle by a force of over 2000 Scots, and Stanley received three severe wounds, which put him out of service for much of the rest of the year. Even as late as June he had to have an arrowhead cut out of his back. In October he returned to England in order to have some lands conveyed to him by his father. 
Following the suppression of the Munster rebellion and the subsequent partition of the Desmond estates it became obvious, for reasons both of financial prudence and political stability, that the province would have to be demilitarized. The earl of Leicester's campaign to defend the United Provinces of the Netherlands against Spain was seized upon as a convenient outlet for the redeployment of the queen's soldiers, especially those who were native Irishmen. In March 1586 Stanley, who had accompanied the earl on his initial Dutch foray the previous December, returned to Ireland to levy over 1000 troops. Stanley's exclusion from the lucrative Munster plantation left him little option but to continue his military career, despite his role in facilitating the preliminary survey of attainted lands. 
By the time Stanley had brought his band to London to be transported to the Dutch wars, he was already being referred to as a Catholic subversive. Gilbert Gifford, a double agent posing as a priest, alleged to the exiled Spanish ambassador Mendoza that Stanley was aware of and complicit in the conspiracy associated with Anthony Babington that aimed to assassinate Elizabeth and enthrone Mary Stewart with the military assistance of Spain. In mid-August 1586 Mendoza expressed to Philip II his hopes that Stanley would use his regiment quartered in London to seize the queen's ships, a step that Philip himself described in his annotations to the memo as 'the most important thing of all' ('CSP Spain', '1580-86', 603-8). By the time Mendoza had written this, however, Stanley had already joined Leicester's forces in the Netherlands. From the very start he played a prominent role in Leicester's attempts to launch a renewed offensive, participating in the seizure of Doesborg and a pyrrhic assault on the heights overlooking the Spanish-held town of Zutphen. At this point the earl turned his attention to Deventer, the third most important mercantile centre in the Netherlands, which lay 5 miles from Zutphen. An anti-Spanish faction within the town was looking for an opportunity to hand Deventer over to the United Provinces. 
On the night of 23 October 1586 Stanley's regiment entered Deventer, which had been left unguarded, in small groups. The town capitulated peacefully the following morning. The magistrates of the Spanish party were imprisoned and a new municipal government, made up of figures amenable to the English presence, was appointed in their place. Despite the protests of the states general, Leicester appointed Stanley governor of Deventer. Before his departure in mid-November the earl, demonstrating antipathy to his deputy Sir John Norris, granted separate commissions to Stanley and Rowland York, captain of the fort at Zutphen sconce. These exempted them from obedience to Norris. In his capacity as governor of the provinces, Leicester also forbade the Dutch council of state from putting aside any of his appointees to the government of towns or forts. 
By December the burghers of Deventer were complaining to the council of state about Stanley's high-handedness as governor. They alleged that he had violently seized the keys of the city's gates, infringed their liberties, and, through his soldiers' constant menacing of the population and firm hold of all fortifications, kept the city in the grip of a reign of terror. It was further rumoured that Stanley's Irish troops were in league with Catholics within the walls to give the city over to the Spanish garrison at Zutphen. Stanley, however, described his conduct as the application of severe justice to ensure his men received victuals from the Dutch, who, he claimed, had a chronic tendency towards disobedience. His entire regiment, at this stage, was forced to live on $3 a day. Matters came to a head on 18-19 January 1587 when Stanley handed Deventer and the most part of his garrison over to Tassis, the Spanish governor of Zutphen. On the same day York gave his fort to the Spaniards. These actions nullified at a stroke the benefits accrued from Leicester's recent campaigning. 
In London the court identified Stanley and his regiment of defectors as a serious threat to English security. This alarm was accompanied by an intense feeling of betrayal, stemming from the high regard Stanley commanded as one of Elizabeth's most skilled military captains. Leicester stated that Elizabeth had been willing to entrust 'whole kingdoms' to the traitor, an indication that Stanley may have been in line to become lord deputy of Ireland. Indeed, throughout the 1590s the privy council in London and the Irish council in Dublin feared that Stanley and his men, 'over well acquainted with the service and state of [Ireland]', might return and undermine England's hold on the country on Spain's behalf. Stanley himself stated that 'in Ireland [he would] open such a game of war as the Queen [had] never seen in her life' ('Correspondentie', ed. Brugmans, 2.86; 'CSP Ire.', '1586-8', 266; Bagwell, 3.162). 
Stanley remained in place as governor of Deventer for a year. In this period he made the acquaintance of the English Catholic community in Flanders. He subsequently came into contact with Cardinal Allen, who in 1587 published an apologia for Stanley's actions aimed at inducing English soldiers to follow his example. Allen, using orthodox thinking on the just war, argued that Stanley ceded Deventer to the Spaniards because he believed it rightfully belonged to King Philip. Therefore England's war in the Netherlands was 'ab initio' unjust, and any soldier participating in it on Elizabeth's side was guaranteed that his soul was in mortal sin. London countered with a pamphlet that accused both Allen and Stanley of bad faith, and asserted the justice of England's involvement in the conflict. Rumours also abounded that the English government sought to eliminate Stanley by poisoning. In 1589 he left the Netherlands and travelled to Spain, no doubt hoping to receive adulation and greater military responsibilities. But he received remarkably little favour in the Spanish court; indeed there are indications that the Spaniards held Stanley's defection to be unchivalric, despite the benefits that resulted from it. Philip II even refused to place his garrison under the direct assistance of the Spanish treasury, thereby making it hard for Stanley to recruit more troops. 
Henceforth Stanley endeavoured to interest Philip in plans to intervene militarily in English affairs. But the Spanish king, despite Stanley's petitions, initially refused to give the regiment any specific project or campaign to engage in. By 1591 Stanley had received some support from Philip for his plan to seize Alderney as part of a post-Armada project to menace England and threaten Henri IV, France's new protestant king, from Flanders and the Channel Islands. But, despite England's intervention in Brittany in 1591 under Sir John Norris, financial constraints and a lack of will combined to make the Spanish council of war reluctant to endorse the enterprise. 
On his return to Flanders in 1591 Stanley found his regiment in disarray and beset by internal tensions. The following year, forecasting further English intervention in Brittany, he suggested that England must be directly attacked as a counterbalance. But this proposal also received little support and Stanley remained with his regiment in the Low Countries. Another opportunity for active employment offered itself in spring 1597, when Philip II suggested to the Archduke Albert that Stanley might raid the English coast from Dunkirk with a fleet of seven ships. This plan, however, did not receive endorsement in Brussels. Subsequently the regiment's membership dwindled to such an extent that it was disbanded and its members distributed among other bands. 
By this stage Stanley's intrigues against England had acquired a more overtly political character. Along with other English exiles, he endeavoured to establish a board in Flanders dealing with English affairs, which could become a court in exile centred around the infanta. The intention was that her claims to the English throne might be advanced, following Elizabeth's death, not by Spaniards but by Englishmen. In the case of a succession dispute Stanley hoped he might lead 3000 men in an attack on England to divert forces away from engaging a fresh Armada. Again these stratagems were put aside. In 1600 Stanley repaired once more to the Spanish court to try and influence the new king Philip III to support direct raids on England from a Flemish base, and also to collect the arrears on his salary. However, the catastrophic Irish enterprise, which foundered with the decisive English victory at Kinsale, was being pursued at the time. In December 1602 the Archduke Albert's council of war unambiguously and finally rejected Stanley's invasion plans, but admitted him to their company, effectively ending his active soldiering career. 
Following the accession of James I, the treaty of London made all Stanley's plans for harrying England obsolete. Nevertheless, following the Gunpowder Plot he was accused by his former standard-bearer Guy Fawkes of continuing to harbour designs to invade England. To placate the English king Stanley was arrested in Brussels. Within a year he was freed, exonerated from all charges, and excluded from the subsequent act of attainder decreed against the conspirators. His return to favour in Flanders was signalled when the archduke sent him to Spain with news of the clandestine alliance between James I and the Dutch estates. During James's reign Stanley seems to have settled into the role of governor of Mechelen and turned to religious matters, becoming a key figure in the foundation of the Jesuit novitiate in Liege. At this time his second wife, Elizabeth Egerton (died 1614), and their son and grandson, left Hooton manor to live with him in Flanders. 
James Wadsworth, in his anti-Jesuit polemic 'The English Spanish Pilgrime', provides a vignette of the elderly captain. He relates that in 1624 Stanley had to go 'cap in hand' to counsellors at the Spanish court in pursuit of a pension six years in arrears. When he obtained the money a Spanish Jesuit deceitfully took it from him. As a result he turned away from the Society of Jesus and entered the Carthusians at Ostend. Allegedly Stanley said 'that if his Majesty [James I] would grant him pardon, and leave to live the rest of his daies in Lancashire with beefe and bagge-pudding' he would be supremely happy (Wadsworth, 68-9). He died in Ghent on 3 March 1630. His funeral at Notre Dame des Malines was a lavish affair. 
Opinion about William Stanley has been polarized since his surrender of Deventer to the Spanish. The question remains whether he was following the dictates of his conscience or reacting pragmatically to short-term privation. Given the personal nature of the decision, it is difficult to determine the degree of foreknowledge and calculation involved. He was assuredly not the only soldier at the time in contact with the Spanish enemy; however he and York were the only such figures to change sides. The same questions hang over his subsequent plots against the English crown, which could either be interpreted as expressions of pure ideology, or as shrewd and cynical bids for financial and social preferment by making himself appear indispensable to Spanish strategy against England. It has been suggested that Stanley was particularly obsessed with the claim to the throne of his relative Ferdinando Stanley, later earl of Derby and the grandson of Mary, sister of Henry VIII. But, as Cardinal Allen indicated, he may have had strong opinions about the legitimacy of the territorial rights of princes. While serving in Ireland, he believed that the brutal suppression of the Desmond rebellion was just retribution for those seeking to overthrow the legitimate monarch of Ireland. By the same token he may have thought of the Dutch revolt as a comparable challenge to the legitimate prince of the Low Countries, a challenge he could not in conscience support. Despite these uncertainties, and given that both his brothers were members of the Society of Jesus, it is likely that Stanley did feel more comfortable, both spiritually and politically, in the continental Catholic camp. 


@@@@@


doc= 26284


Stanley, William (bap. 1647, d. 1731), dean of St Asaph, was baptized on 22 August 1647 at Hinckley, Leicestershire, the son of William Stanley ('bap'. 1618, died 1648) and his wife, Lucy ('bap'. 1629), daughter of William Beveridge DD, vicar of Barrow upon Soar, Leicestershire, and hence the sister of Bishop William Beveridge. Stanley was educated at Ashley, Lancashire, at a school kept by Jeremy Crompton. He was admitted on 4 July 1663 to St John's College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1667, and following his election as a fellow of Corpus Christi College in 1669 he proceeded MA in 1670. He was ordained a priest by Henry Compton, bishop of London, on 22 September 1672, and became a university preacher in 1676. He proceeded BD in 1678 and, following an appointment as curate of Much Hadham, Hertfordshire, he became chaplain to the earl of Essex, who presented him on 20 October 1681 to the rectory of Rayne, Essex. He then moved to St Mary Magdalen, Old Fish Street, London, on 30 October 1682. On 18 September 1684 he became prebendary of Codington Major in St Paul's Cathedral. 
Stanley was created DD by Archbishop Sancroft on 12 November 1685 preparatory to his journey into the Netherlands as chaplain of Princess Mary (later Mary II). One of the works he took with him was 'A Discourse Concerning the Devotions of the Church of Rome' (1685), of which he was reputed to be the author. It may well have come in useful as much of Stanley's time at The Hague was spent supporting the princess against the efforts of her father, James II, to convert her to Catholicism by sending her religious works, and reporting on this and the activities of the exiled Gilbert Burnet at the Orange court to Bishop Compton. Another work, 'The Faith and Practice of a Church of England-Man' (1688), may also have been inspired by his chaplaincy duties. He remained with the princess, with one trip to England, until she returned after the revolution. Thereafter Stanley was named the new queen's clerk of the closet. He became a canon residentiary at St Paul's, and on 30 November 1689 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, serving on the council for several years in the 1690s. Bishop Compton collated him to the rectory of Much Hadham on 13 August 1690, and Stanley retained the benefice until he handed over to his son in 1723. He preached the sermon on 19 January 1692 at the consecration of Tenison as bishop of Lincoln, and duly succeeded Tenison as archdeacon of London on 5 March 1692. He was chosen master of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, on 13 July 1693, remaining so until 1698, and serving as vice-chancellor in 1693-4. On 9 November 1693 he married Mary (1672/3-1758), daughter of Sir Francis Pemberton, lord chief justice. They had three sons. In 1695 he was living in the parish of St Martin Ludgate. 
Stanley was collated dean of St Asaph on 7 December 1706, and installed on 1 March 1707. He preached a sermon on 20 February 1708 before the Society for Propagating the Gospel in Foreign Parts, which he described in his will as 'that truly religious society... I had the happiness to be the beginner' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/648, fol. 56'v'). His loud voice attracted the criticism of 'The Tatler' in 1709 which complained that 'Stentor' was 'accustomed to roar and bellow so terribly loud in the responses', and that he 'drowns the harmony of every hymn and anthem' (Bond, 1.381-2). In the 1714 parliamentary session he provided the financial backing for the act abolishing mortuaries in Welsh dioceses (13 Anne c. 6), which was extended from St Asaph to cover the other Welsh dioceses. Stanley was active in the commission for building fifty new churches in London, attending over sixty meetings between 1711 and 1727. In 1722 he published a catalogue of the manuscripts in Corpus Christi College, which Thomas Hearne described as a 'useful thing', although he thought the author 'very poor'. He continued 'Doctor Stanley hath a great income, and is a very rich man, but has no very great character' ('Remarks', 342-3). Stanley died at Much Hadham on 9 October 1731, and was buried in St Paul's on 15 October. His will referred to landed property in Hertfordshire and Lincolnshire and to his house at Much Hadham 'which I lately rebuilt' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/648, fol. 55'v'), as well as to his many books there and at Amen Corner in Berkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 26285


Alfred Stannard (1806-1889), painter, was born in Norwich in June 1806. He was the brother and pupil of Joseph Stannard. He painted Norfolk landscapes, marine and coastal subjects, often in imitation of his more talented brother. He exhibited with the Norwich Society of Artists in 1820-32, the Society of British Artists in 1825-43, and the British Institution in 1826-60. In 1827 he married Martha Sparkes (1809-1873). Of their numerous children, most of whom did not live to reach maturity, two became artists -- Alfred George (1828-1885), a landscape painter, and Eloise Harriet (1829-1915), a painter of fruit and flowers. From about 1838 much of Stannard's work was taken up with teaching, and his most successful pupil was Henry Bright (1810-1873). Towards the end of his life he received an annual pension of $50 from the Turner Fund of the Royal Academy. He died at his home at St Andrew's Hall Plain, Norwich, on 26 January 1889 and was buried at Norwich cemetery on 31 January. The work of both artists is well represented in the collection of Norwich Castle Museum and Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26286


Stannard, Joseph (1797-1830), marine and landscape painter and etcher, was born on 13 September 1797 in Norwich, and baptized on 17 September at the church of St Michael at Plea, the eldest son of Abraham Stannard (1765-1838), landlord of a public house, and his wife, Mary Bell (1769-1848). When he was still a boy, Stannard was sent to the Norwich school artist Robert Ladbrooke (1769-1842), to learn to paint, and he remained with him for seven years. In 1811 at the age of fourteen he exhibited with the Norwich Society of Artists, and continued to exhibit with them regularly until 1830. His early exhibits included still lifes and landscapes, but about 1819 he seemed to concentrate on figure subjects and portraits. He exhibited in London with the British Institution between 1819 and 1829 and the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists in 1824-5. In 1821-2 he visited Holland where he studied the work of the Dutch masters. The visit seems to have had a profound effect and developed his interest in marine painting. Financial difficulty may have forced him to go to London in 1823, and it may have been while he was there that William Beechey painted his romantic portrait of Stannard (1824; Norwich Castle Museum and Art Gallery). By 1824 he was back in Norwich experimenting in etching and produced some of the finest etchings of the Norwich school. A complete set of eleven Norfolk landscapes and coastal subjects dated between 1824 and 1827 is in the British Museum. Edward Thomas Daniell (1804-1842) also learned to etch in Stannard's studio at this time. 
In 1825 Stannard exhibited with the Norwich Society his masterpiece 'Thorpe Water Frolic -- Afternoon' (Norwich Castle Museum and Art Gallery), in which Stannard shows himself standing in a boat. He was a skilled oarsman and owned a skiff in which he entered rowing races with great success. His knowledge of ships gained him a reputation for accurately depicting rigging in his marine paintings: 'every rope is right' ('Norfolk Chronicle', 6 Oct 1827). He also excelled in swimming and ice skating. From this time his financial position began to improve from the sale of paintings and commissions from local patrons. He worked primarily in oil and found his subjects in the scenery of the Norfolk rivers and coast, especially at Thorpe and Great Yarmouth. His paintings indicate a firm grasp of the work of the seventeenth-century Dutch masters and he ranks highly among the Norwich school artists. He rarely worked in watercolour but produced many sensitive figure and boat studies in pencil and chalk. Some of his works he signed J. Stannard, others with initials, sometimes with the JS conjoined. On 3 January 1826 he married Emily Coppin (1803-1885), an accomplished flower and still-life painter. The couple lived at 5 St Giles Terrace, Norwich, and in 1827 their daughter Emily (died 1894) was born. 
For the last few years of his life Stannard suffered from ill health: 'The consequence of his too intense application was disorder upon the nervous system, and his eyes became alarmingly affected' ('Norwich Mercury', 11 Dec 1830). On 7 December 1830 he died at his home, 5 St Giles Terrace, Norwich, and was buried on 16 December at St John Maddermarket Church, Norwich. 




@@@@@


doc= 26287


Stannus, Sir Ephraim Gerrish (1784-1850), army officer in the East India Company, was the second son of Ephraim Stannus of Comus, co. Tyrone, and Susannah, daughter of Joseph Gerrish of Halifax, Nova Scotia. He went out to India as a cadet in 1799, was commissioned as an ensign in the Bombay army on 6 March 1800, became lieutenant on 26 May, and was appointed to the European regiment (later 2nd battalion Royal Dublin Fusiliers) in 1803. He served in the Kathiawar campaign in 1807, and became captain on 6 July 1811. 
Stannus distinguished himself in the Pindari War of 1817-18, was promoted major on 8 October 1818, and was private secretary to Mountstuart Elphinstone while governor of Madras (from 1819). He was made lieutenant-colonel of the 9th native infantry on 31 October 1822, CB on 23 July 1823, and colonel of the 10th native infantry on 5 June 1829. From 1823 to 1826 he was first British resident in the Persian Gulf. From this he was transferred to the 2nd European regiment (later 2nd battalion Durham light infantry). On 16 October 1829 he married Mary Louisa, widow of James Gordon. They had no children. On 13 March 1834 he was appointed lieutenant-governor of Addiscombe College, and he was knighted in 1837. He was promoted major-general (local) on 28 June 1838. Though just and kindly, he was no administrator, and was systematically irritated by the cadets into extraordinary explosions of wrath and violent language. During the latter years of his rule at Addiscombe the discipline seems to have got very slack; he remained at Addiscombe until his death there on 21 October 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 26288


Stansfeld, Sir James (1820-1898), politician and social reformer, was born at Moorlands, Halifax, on 5 March 1820, the only son of James Stansfeld (1792-1872) and his wife, Emma ('bap'. 1793, died 1851), daughter of the Revd John Ralph, minister of Northgate End Unitarian Chapel, Halifax. The family had long been connected with radical protestant dissent and the legal profession. Stansfeld senior was a solicitor and for some decades a county court judge in the Halifax area. James went to a dame-school at Gateacre, near Liverpool, in 1827, and later attended Mr Voelke's school at Everton, among the sons of leading Unitarian manufacturers. In 1837 he went to University College, London, and was one of the early graduates of the University of London (BA, 1840); he added a degree in law in 1844. 
While at University College and attending South Place Chapel, Finsbury, Stansfeld met William Ashurst, the radical solicitor, and became associated not only with his practice but also with his family and friends, most of whom were Unitarians. On 27 July 1844 he married Ashurst's second daughter, Caroline (1816-1885) ['see 'Stansfeld, Caroline]. He was called to the bar (Inner Temple) in 1849 but never practised. He needed a source of regular income, especially after the birth in 1852 of his only son (named Joseph James after the Italian patriot Mazzini), and in 1850 he joined with his brother-in-law Sidney Hawkes in operating the Swan Brewery, Fulham. He took over completely in 1853 and ran the brewery successfully for some years. This gave him the financial independence to adopt radical stances on social issues in later years. He was the exception among radicals in refusing to come out against the drink trade and was dismissed by some temperance activists as the 'Unitarian brewer'. 
During the 1840s and 1850s Stansfeld's passion was the cause of Italian freedom and unity. This commitment he shared with the Ashursts and their friends, known as 'the Muswell Hill brigade', and members of the South Place Chapel, led by the charismatic Revd W. J. Fox. Stansfeld met many leading figures, including Mazzini and Garibaldi, and by 1849 he had become, with P. A. Taylor, their leading supporter in the Society of the Friends of Italy. Other causes engaged his interest and support: the Anti-Corn Law League, Chartism, anti-slavery. He was a supporter of the Northern Reform Union, founded by Joseph Cowen in 1858 to agitate for manhood suffrage and the ballot. In April 1859 he was elected unopposed as one of the two MPs for Halifax. By then he was already known as 'the faithful friend of oppressed nationalities, and a reformer of whatever was unjust and oppressive in his own country' ('The Inquirer', 136). 
Stansfeld's ability was soon noticed. In June 1862 he moved a resolution, supported by other radicals, in favour of reductions in government spending, and in February 1863 he moved a motion in support of Polish independence. In April 1863 Palmerston appointed him a junior lord of the Admiralty, on the recommendation of Sir Charles Wood, as part of the policy of linking radicals with his ministry. Stansfeld's acceptance of office led to an estrangement from his old ally P. A. Taylor, who thought it would restrict his expression of principle. He appeared destined for early promotion, but his involvement in clandestine fund-raising for Italian agitators proved his undoing. The Greco affair in France, involving the Tibaldi conspirators, led Disraeli to charge him on 17 March 1864 in the House of Commons with being 'in conjunction with the assassins of Europe'. Although defended by Palmerston, Bright, and Foster, he felt obliged to resign in April 1864. 
Stansfeld returned to office in April 1866 as under-secretary for India in Lord John Russell's short-lived administration. He was disappointed not to be included in Gladstone's first cabinet in December 1868 but was made third lord of the Treasury and became financial secretary in February 1869, a most appropriate appointment as Stansfeld had a strong belief in economy in national expenditure; he was also sworn of the privy council. He joined the cabinet in March 1871 as president of the poor-law board. He framed the 'Local Government Act' of 1871, which transferred the board's powers, and much else, to a new Local Government Board, of which he became the first president in August 1871. The period to February 1874 was Stansfeld's notable contribution to administration. His conscience refused to allow him to appoint political friends to office, and in 1873 he appointed the first woman (Jane Senior) as a poor-law inspector, a permanent civil service post, in the teeth of strong opposition. His main task in government was to resist Conservative demands for more payments from the Treasury to reduce the burdens on local ratepayers. 
Stansfeld held his Halifax seat in February 1874, at the fall of Gladstone's administration. Thereafter he campaigned for the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', passed in the 1860s, which subjected women in seaports and garrison towns suspected of being prostitutes to compulsory examination. He joined the ranks of the repealers, led by Josephine Butler, and was subjected to press attacks for doing so. He argued against the acts both on the grounds that they infringed the women's liberty and because they implied state regulation and recognition of prostitution. He spoke for the first time in the Commons on the subject in June 1875. His oratory was of the old-fashioned type reminiscent of his mentor, W. J. Fox: 'There was the fervid utterance, the slightly impassioned gesture, the tone of rather vague generality' ('Christian Life', 115). In June 1879 he became a member of the parliamentary committee on the acts appointed by the Conservative government. When the committee reported in August 1882, a majority favoured retaining the acts. Stansfeld prepared a dissenting minority report, signed by five other members of the committee, putting the case for repeal. By then his personal prospects of political promotion had ended. Gladstone did not include him in his cabinet formed in 1880 and Stansfeld declined the twice-repeated offer of the deputy speakership. 
In April 1883 Stansfeld carried a resolution condemning compulsory examination of women under the 1866 act. His tactics, criticized by some in the repeal movement, worked; the Liberal government, surprised by the large majority in favour of the resolution, hastily announced their intention to end compulsory examination. Stansfeld himself moved the inevitable repeal bill in March 1886; it received the royal assent in the following month. 
On 3 April 1886 Stansfeld, a supporter of Gladstone's Irish home rule policy, returned briefly to the cabinet as president of the Local Government Board and held office until Gladstone's defeat in July 1886. He was not included in the Liberal administration of 1892, when he declined the offer of a peerage. On Lord Rosebery's recommendation he was appointed GCB in May 1895, shortly before his retirement from parliament, when he was made a freeman of Halifax, the town he had represented for so long. 
Following Caroline Stansfeld's death in March 1885, Stansfeld married again on 22 June 1887; his new wife was Frances (1836/7-1926), daughter of Andrew Allan and widow of Henry Augustus Severn. He spent his remaining years at his home in Sussex enjoying the attractions of landscape gardening. Stansfeld died on 17 February 1898 at his home at Castle Hill, Rotherfield, Sussex, and was buried in the village five days later. On the day after his death the Italian parliament passed a flattering tribute, echoing Garibaldi, who had described him 'as the type of Englishman with courage, loyalty and consistency, the friend of Italy in her evil days, and the champion of the weak and oppressed abroad' ('The Times', 18 Feb 1898, 14a). 


@@@@@


doc= 26289


Stanwix, John (bap. 1693, d. 1766), army officer and politician, was baptized on 19 March 1693, the son of the Revd John Roos (died 1704), rector of Widmerpool, Nottinghamshire, and Matilda, the daughter of Thomas Stanwix of Carlisle. In 1706 he was commissioned as ensign and lieutenant, no doubt in part through the influence of his uncle Thomas Stanwix, his father having died in 1704. He became captain in the 28th foot in 1722 and subsequently gained a high reputation as adjutant. Three years later Thomas Stanwix died; John Roos, as his heir, adopted the name Stanwix. He married Ada (died 1754), daughter of Henry Holmes; they had a son and a daughter. 
The years of peace until 1739 produced no record of Stanwix's actions. In 1741 he was a major in the 10th regiment of marines, and in that year he stood for election at Carlisle, where he owned property, in the interest of Sir James Lowther. The mayor, too enthusiastic a supporter, closed the poll before his opponents had a chance to vote; Stanwix was unseated on petition. He was however returned at a by-election in 1746 and at the general elections of 1747 and 1754. He was lieutenant-colonel, with effective command, in the duke of Rutland's regiment raised to combat the Jacobite rising in 1745. Politically he was identified by 1747 with the opposition and became an equerry to Frederick, prince of Wales, in 1749, in which year the regiment was disbanded and he went onto half pay. After the prince's death he edged towards the government again and was made governor of Carlisle Castle in 1753; two years later he was made deputy quartermaster-general of the forces. In 1756, on the outbreak of the Seven Years' War, he volunteered for service in America and was appointed colonel-commandant of the 60th foot, the Royal Americans. 
With the local rank of brigadier-general he commanded the relief of Fort Pitt in 1757 and the advance on Oswego in 1759 (one of the forts established to control the route was named Fort Stanwix). He was back in England next year, with the rank of lieutenant-general in the army and colonel of the 49th foot. In the general election that year he pulled out of the Carlisle contest on the second day; Lowther found him a seat at Appleby. He became mayor of Carlisle in 1763, however, when he was also appointed governor of the Isle of Wight. He was now a thorough government man, supporting the peace preliminaries in 1762 and George Grenville's administration in 1764. On 21 April 1763, at St James's, Piccadilly, he married his second wife, Mary (died 1766), daughter of Marmaduke Sowle of Dublin. They had no children. 
In 1766 Stanwix spent the summer inspecting the forces in Ireland. With his wife and daughter he was drowned when their ship sank in the Irish Sea, probably on 29 October 1766. The death of all three (his son had been killed in America in 1756) occasioned a complex chancery lawsuit, although administration was granted to his 'only next of kin', his nephew, Thomas Connor, on 2 December 1767 (TNA: PRO, PROB 6/143, fol. 68'v'). 
Stanwix was always a follower in his politics, never a force. In his military career, by contrast, he was competent and well respected, learning his craft in peace and successfully applying his skills in war, particularly as an administrator. 


@@@@@


doc= 26290


Stanwix, Richard (1607/8-1656), Church of England clergyman, was born at Carlisle, the second son of James Stanwyx of Carlisle and his wife, Mary Broderick, and was 'educated in the free school there under Mr Thomas Robson, sometime of Queen's college'. It was appropriate then that when Stanwix went up to Oxford University it was to study at Queen's under Charles Robson, the son of his former master. But though 'born of an ancient and genteel family' Stanwix began his career at Oxford as 'a poor serving child' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.427). He matriculated on 21 November 1628, aged twenty, graduated BA on 12 May 1629, became a fellow of the college, and proceeded MA on 24 January 1632. On the recommendation of the former provost of Queen's, Barnaby Potter, Stanwix was made chaplain to Thomas Coventry, the lord keeper. He proceeded BD on 4 July 1639, and the following year was incorporated at Cambridge in that degree. 
After Coventry's death Stanwix was appointed chaplain to his successor as lord keeper, John Finch, Baron Finch. In December 1640, however, following his impeachment by the Long Parliament, Finch found it expedient to retire to the Netherlands, and Stanwix returned for a time to Queen's College, Oxford. On the presentation of Sir Richard Saltonstall, also a graduate of Queen's, he was instituted on 1 May 1643 to the rectory of Chipping Warden in Northamptonshire. On 14 February 1646 at Mollington, Oxfordshire, Stanwix was married to Hester Holbech; they appear to have had no surviving children. 
In 1652 Stanwix issued 'A Holy Life here, the Only Way to Eternal Life Hereafter'. The chief message of the work was that perfection in this life 'is neither impossible, nor indeed so hard' but that both 'the habitual observing of the laws of God, delivered to us by Christ, and change into a new creature' are essential for salvation, though it was conceded that many would object that this was 'too sharp and sour a doctrine' (Stanwix, 2nd pagination, 69-72). Stanwix held the rectory of Chipping Warden until his death on 8 April 1656; he was buried in the chancel of the parish church on the 10th. In his will of 29 March he bequeathed to his wife land in Weston and Weedon and to an array of relatives and servants sums ranging from $30 to 5's'.; to his nephew Robert Dalton, a student at Oxford, he left all the works of Grotius. 


@@@@@


doc= 26291


Stanyan, Abraham (1672-1732), diplomatist, was born -- according to a reference in his father's bible -- on 28 February 1672 at Monken Hadley, Middlesex. He was the third son of the six sons and two daughters of Lawrence Stanyan (died 1725), merchant, farmer, and commissioner of the revenue, of Monken Hadley, and Dorothy (died 1730), daughter and coheir of Henry Knapp of Woodcote, South Stoke, Oxfordshire. Both he and his cousin Abraham carried the first name of their paternal grandfather, a prosperous plasterer who had inherited the post of city plasterer from his father, Edward. The elder Abraham ('c'.1610-1683) fought on the side of parliament as a captain of trained bands in the Red regiment, and later rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel within the Honourable Artillery Company. Two of his sons, John and Lawrence, named their first-born sons after this prosperous progenitor, whose will especially favoured these two grandsons. Abraham Stanyan's cousin and namesake, the son of John, was admitted from Winchester College as a scholar of New College, Oxford, on 14 July 1691, and died of smallpox in 1696. 
Abraham Stanyan himself entered as a student of the Middle Temple in 1690. His commencement in the law gave way almost immediately to employment in the diplomatic service, which became his whole career. In the same year he went as secretary to join Sir William Trumbull in his embassy to Constantinople (August 1687-July 1691). Trumbull thought well of him, while Stanyan early gained a fondness for the display and comfort of such overseas postings. On 10 September 1697, through the patronage of Trumbull as secretary of state for the northern department, Stanyan was appointed secretary of embassy to Charles Montagu, earl of Manchester, who was appointed ambassador-extraordinary to Venice. He arrived in Venice with Manchester early in December 1697 and left in late February 1698. While there he received the news of Sir William Trumbull's resignation, 'my misfortune, which it so much concerned me to know' (BL, Add. MS 28900, fol. 404). Stanyan was unsuccessful in a clumsily expressed application to be allowed to stay in Venice as a resident. 
In 1698 Stanyan was offered, but declined, the post of secretary to Sir William Norris on his mission to India to obtain trading privileges from the Mughal emperor, Aurangzeb. A contemporary report indicates his standing as one of the regular personnel of the office of secretaries of state: 'Mr Stanyan of the Secretaries Office, seems to decline going Secretary to Mr Norris, ambassador to the great mogull, altho' the [Levant] company offer him 40s per diem' (Luttrell, 4.454). More attractive employment became available in the following year. In May 1699 he was made a clerk-extraordinary to the privy council. On 8 June Stanyan was once again appointed secretary to embassy under the earl of Manchester, this time in his posting to France, the two arriving in Paris on 28 June 1699 NS. He entered on his functions at the end of August 1699, when he was particularly on the watch for Jacobite support, keeping a close eye on the movements of suspected Irishmen. Despite his zeal, however, at this early stage of his career Stanyan does not seem to have been especially successful. His correspondence shows two flaws: a tendency to be by turns meddling and reticent in diplomatic business, and an unfortunate manner in his way of seeking patronage. In late June 1700 he left Paris, and for some time seems to have been out of employment. He wanted an overseas posting, and was realistic about his merits, content to rise up the ladder of the service. In 1703 he wrote to John Ellis, under-secretary for the northern province: 'I thank you for the kind offers of Service you make me, and beg your friendship in giving Me timely Notice of any opportunity of going abroad in a Character that I may with Modesty pretend to, for those are the employments I most desire, and I fancy are most easily obtained. (BL, Add. MS 28890, fol. 281)' 

In the event, Stanyan was given the post of envoy, even though to a minor power, and events ensured that the great period of his career came in Switzerland between 1705 and 1714. In late May 1705 he was given credentials as envoy-extraordinary to succeed William Aglionby. His disinclination for routine business soon appeared in his expressions of shock at how much correspondence in his own hand he had to cope with. His love of ceremonious feasting was again evident. The magistrates of Zurich gave entertainments which were at first curtailed, since Stanyan had mistakenly acquired an abstemious reputation: 'T'other day the Magistrates of this Citty invited me to dinner; we sat down just at Noon, and had din'd by Six by a mistake which my Landlord here drew 'em into; for he having observ'd I had hitherto led a very sober life, told them I did not love drinking, so in Complaisance to me they broke off in the middle of their Dinner, which generally lasts till twelve at Night. T'will be my Turn to treat one of these days and then I shall endeavour to retrieve my reputation. (BL, Add. MS 4740, fol. 171)' Soon, however, he settled in Bern, 'which I find to be the great Scene of Negotiation in this Country' (ibid., fol. 181). The great threat to British interests in the region was the encroaching power of France, and Stanyan was keen to stiffen in Basel and Bern a sense of protestant solidarity against any French expansion. He behaved with resolution and address, even in such small but significant ways as insisting, in the ceremonies of reception, on occupying the same quality of chair and dignity of placing as those given to the ambassador of France. 
In 1707-8 came a crisis which at the time was seen as a pivotal episode in the wars with France, and a crucial demonstration of the waning of French power. A succession contest was triggered by the death on 16 June 1707 NS of the duchess of Nemours, princess of the sovereignty of Neufchatel and Vallengin. Stanyan's firm support of the claim of the king of Prussia, seconded by the Dutch envoy, Runckel, bolstered Britain's position in that part of Europe. On 22 July Stanyan arrived in Neufchatel to stiffen the resolve of its council against the French, and three days later delivered to them a memorandum, which he also printed and distributed, addressed to the burghers and clerics. The nub of his argument was that the several French pretenders were all equally dangerous to liberties, while the Prussian king had the best title. In the autumn, together with Runckel, he presented and published another memorial, which painted a lively picture of the inconsistencies and deceit of French policy, and of the threat to religious and political liberty. Two vigorous joint addresses were made in December, stressing the ambition and designs of France, after which the council of Neufchatel accepted the claim of Prussia. 
In January 1708 Stanyan argued to the protestant cantons assembled at Baden that Louis XIV, who had moved 12,000 troops close to the border of Neufchatel, clearly designed to annex it, and that all the cantons were in danger. In response the canton of Bern announced to the French that they would defend Neufchatel if it were attacked, and soon after moved 4500 troops to the frontier. The French threat was removed, and Stanyan had scored a considerable personal victory, not least over the dynamic French envoy, Puisieulx. His standing with the heir to the British throne can be seen in friendly personal letters to Stanyan from the future George I, while he was still elector of Hanover, between 1708 and 1710. In 1710 Stanyan negotiated for Britain a loan of $150,000 by the canton of Bern, a sum which was paid only after some delay, but on which he was granted commission of $750 and a promise from the treasurer of future prompt payments of his allowances. In March 1711 Stanyan was given instructions as envoy-extraordinary to Berlin, and Bolingbroke expressed confidence in Stanyan's ability to control the 'vain & uncertain temper' of the Prussian king. Despite Bolingbroke's intervention, however, Queen Anne would not give Stanyan the title and pay of a plenipotentiary, and, burdened by large arrears of pay, he insisted that he could not live in Berlin on less. In 1712-13 he was special commissioner to mediate between the emperor and the duke of Savoy, but his success with the duke was not matched by the emperor's consent. Stanyan was by now a seasoned professional of 'the office' and apparently discontented with the often inexperienced management of diplomacy in Britain. In April 1712 he presented to Bolingbroke his 'Reflections upon the management of our foreign affairs', proposing the setting up of a committee for foreign affairs, the members of which should have at least seven years' experience of diplomatic service abroad. Stanyan had made himself master of the complex politics, history, and constitution of Switzerland, and on his return to England published an 'Account of Switzerland' (1714). Although this does not seem to have advanced his diplomatic career, it was a highly informed and clear survey which was still seen by Lord Chesterfield, a generation later, as the standard work on its subject: 'Mr Stanyan from a long residence there, has written the best account, yet extant, of the Thirteen Cantons' ('Letters', 68). 
A staunch whig and member of the Kit-Cat Club, and personally on good terms with George I, Stanyan had reason to hope for advancement on the accession of the new king. He was made a lord of Admiralty in 1714, and elected MP for Buckingham in 1715 on the interest of his cousin Lord Cobham. In July 1716 Stanyan was appointed envoy-extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the emperor, and arrived in Vienna in early December. In October 1717 he was made clerk of the privy council, and gave up his parliamentary seat. In November 1717 he was given credentials as ambassador to the Ottoman empire, charged with mediating a peace. In December he had his formal audience of leave in Vienna, from where he set off to Constantinople in March 1718, and arrived there in September. If his successor, Lord Kinnoull, is to be believed, Stanyan's Turkish mission gradually settled into the languorous luxury of an elderly man whose ambitions were over. Kinnoull passed with him three friendly months, surviving daily feasts which he said 'had almost kill'd me'. He had a poor opinion of Stanyan's diplomatic influence and skill: 'Mr. Stanian, is a well behaved complaisant Gentleman, of an indolent temper, has been allways govern'd by those about him, loves Grandeur & show & is very careless in his private affairs, so that I don't believe he is rich, tho he says himself that he has been 25 years in the publick service. He seems to me, either never to have been a man of Business, or to have forgot it. His whole life, for these 12 years past, as I am informed, has been upon a sofa, with the Women. Having, all his Life, been used to a great deal of company, he will be unhappy, if he does not get into some imployment about the Court. (TNA: PRO, SP 97/26, fol. 121)' Before leaving Constantinople Stanyan obtained, with much difficulty, a personal audience with the vizier in which to solicit a personal letter of recommendation on his embassy. Stanyan brought this missive home with him and presented it in person to George II on 29 October 1730 OS, though it was far from a glowing endorsement of his embassy. It says merely that Stanyan 'behaved himself with Prudence and Dexterity in all the affairs recommended to his Care, and discharg'd the Duty of his Embassy, and executed his Commission to the mutual satisfaction of both Nations, and in the most adequate manner' (TNA: PRO, SP 97/26, fol. 57). Though Kinnoull predicted that Stanyan would lobby for a court place, in fact he made no further figure in public life other than a brief tenure as commissioner of the privy seal from January to June 1731. He died, unmarried, in early September 1732. His will had been made in September 1729 before his departure from Constantinople, in case he did not survive the journey home. To Lord Cobham he bequeathed the large diamond brilliant ring he usually wore, a 'small token of my gratitude in acknowledgment of the friendship he has constantly honoured me with'. The wife of the chief dragoman received 2500 dollars 'for friendship', and smaller bequests were made to the secretary and chaplain of the embassy. The residue of Stanyan's estate was left to 'my beloved Brother Temple Stanyan', his sole heir and executor. 
Abraham's younger brother, 
Temple Stanyan was three times married: first to Elizabeth Boys ('nee' Shirley), the widow of William Boys, and second to Susannah Hobbs ('bap'. 1689, died 1725), on 3 January 1721; she died on 23 March 1725 without children. His third marriage was to Grace Pauncefort (1692/3-1768), daughter of Grimbold Pauncefort of Clater Park, Herefordshire. Stanyan died at his seat, Rawlins, Oxfordshire, on 25 March 1752. He was survived by his wife, Grace, who died, aged seventy-five, on 10 June 1768. 


@@@@@


doc= 26292


Temple Stanyan (1675-1752), politician and writer, was born on 8 February 1675 at Monken Hadley, the fifth son of Lawrence and Dorothy Stanyan. He was presumably named in compliment to the child's maternal uncle, Sir Richard Temple, third baronet, father of the first Lord Cobham, who was an important patron to the brothers. Temple entered Westminster School as a queen's scholar in 1691, and on 18 June 1695 matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford. Like Abraham, he does not appear to have taken a degree, and as early as November 1697 the elder brother was trying, unsuccessfully, to have Temple placed in the secretary of state's office as a clerk. Temple must have entered the office at some point before 1715, by which date he had acquired enough experience to be made one of the two under-secretaries in the northern department. In 1717 he was transferred to the southern department, at a time when conditions both at home and abroad were delicate, with divisions within the ministry and the impeachment of Oxford making men in office cautious. Temple told George Bubb: 'I need not tell you how dry our Office News Letters are, and how cautious we Under Ministers here are of saying anything that may give offence' (BL, Egerton MS 2171, fol. 308). He lost this post in 1718, but probably remained involved in the office, as was customary, since he was still receiving correspondence from secretaries of embassies in 1721. Among these letters is one which refers to his reputation for 'doing service to those who are in distress' (BL, Add. MS 22521, fol. 83). In February 1719 he was appointed clerk-in-ordinary to the privy council in the room of his brother: he returned to a southern under-secretaryship in 1724 and then served until 1735. In 1739 he brought out an enlarged second edition of the scholarly book for which he is best known, his 'Grecian History, from the Original of Greece, to the Death of Philip of Macedon', first published in 1707, and which for some decades was a standard work. 


@@@@@


doc= 26293


James Stanihurst (1521/2-1573), speaker of the Irish House of Commons and recorder of Dublin, was himself the son of a mayor of Dublin and chancery official, Nicholas Stanihurst (died 1554), who had shown an interest in literary and medical matters. James proved to be a loyal government servitor in a time of religious and political change, presiding over the restoration of Roman Catholicism in parliament in Queen Mary's reign and supervising the passage of the Reformation legislation in the parliament of 1560. He was speaker of the Irish House of Commons on three occasions. For his efforts he was well rewarded by grants from the crown and the city of leases to extensive properties in counties Dublin, Meath, and Kildare. As well as the Stanihurst city home in the tower that bore their name to the west of Dublin Castle, the family had a county seat and estate at Corduff, north of Swords, county Dublin. James enjoyed the patronage of the chief governor, Sir Henry Sidney, and in his opening speech to parliament in 1570 he strongly supported Sidney's proposals for a national system of secondary and tertiary education. Edmund Campion, the visiting English scholar, who was a guest at Stanihurst's home, recorded the speech in his history of Ireland. James's commitment to reform in public life was reflected in his agency of the printing of the Irish parliamentary statutes for the first time in 1571. Although supportive in public of the religious changes brought about by the Reformation, James's private convictions leaned towards the older religion, a fact that may have impeded his advancement to the office of chancellor of Ireland. After his first wife's death he married a woman named Brereton. He died on 27 December 1573 at the age of fifty-one. 


@@@@@


doc= 26294


Stanihurst, Richard (1547-1618), literary scholar and translator, eldest son of James Stanihurst (1521/2-1573) ['see below'] and his first wife, Anne Fitzsimon, was born in Dublin. His parents belonged to the urban mercantile patriciate which had a proud record of service in civic and state administrations. The couple had two other sons and two daughters, including Margaret who was to become mother of James Ussher, another great Irish polymath. 


About 1556 Richard was sent to the famous grammar school run by Peter White at Kilkenny. White's teaching methods within a humanistic curriculum were vaunted by Stanihurst in a number of places in his works, and among the graduates were luminaries such as Peter Lombard, later archbishop of Armagh, and Thomas White, rector of the Irish college, Salamanca. Stanihurst matriculated at University College, Oxford, in 1563 and graduated BA in 1568. He then studied law at Furnival's Inn and Lincoln's Inn in London before travelling on the continent. Returning to his parents' home in Dublin, he was joined there in 1570 by Edmund Campion, the outstanding fellow of St John's College, Oxford, who had become mentor to the younger man. 
It was Campion who, recognizing a precocious talent, encouraged Richard Stanihurst to press on with the publication of his work on Porphyry. Stanihurst was nineteen years old when he undertook the academic study which culminated in 'Harmonia, seu, Catena dialectica in Porphyrianos institutiones', published in 1570. Dedicated to Sir Henry Sidney, this is probably the first original work by an Irish writer to appear in print. 'Harmonia' is an explication of Porphyry's treatise on Aristotelian logic, the 'Isagoge'. In order to expound fully the logical categories deriving from Aristotle, Stanihurst adduced the commentaries of an impressive array of philosophers and schoolmen, his bibliography listing 109 names or sources. The book contains forty chapters, throughout which the Latin translation of Porphyry is presented seriatim. The synthesis of Aristotelian principles and those of the Greek Neoplatonist catches the spirit of the philosophical eclecticism of the humanist era. 'Harmonia, seu, Catena dialectica' ranks as the first major exposition of Aristotle's logical system to be published in sixteenth-century England. A recent appraisal of Stanihurst's 'Harmonia' describes it as 'by any standards, an impressive piece of scholarship, comparing favourably with the very best work being done on the continent at the same time' (Schmitt, 26). 
As the 'Harmonia' appeared in print in London in 1570, Stanihurst was joined in his Dublin home by Campion. Together they researched the history of Ireland, having access to records in the collection of Richard's father. Before he left Ireland, Campion produced his 'Two bokes of the histories of Ireland' which he regarded as unfinished. Stanihurst took on the task of elaborating and refining his friend's work, and when Raphael Holinshed, seeking a contributor on Ireland for his major chroniculary undertaking, heard of the existing work, he invited Stanihurst's participation. The results are to be seen in the substantial sections on the history and description of Ireland and its inhabitants in Holinshed's 'Chronicles' which, though based on the joint studies of the co-working scholars, are written in Stanihurst's flamboyant and eccentric prose. Among the more prominent features of his work are his absorption with unusual natural phenomena and also his 'parti pris' as an advocate of Old English civility in Ireland in the face of Gaelic Irish cultural expansion. Before the 'Chronicles' were fully distributed, Stanihurst's Irish sections fell foul of the privy council because of derogatory comments about the Butler faction and its adherents, to whom Queen Elizabeth was related. As a result, Stanihurst was interviewed by the councillors, and the publisher, Reginald Wolf, was forced to cancel the offending pages. 
At the time of the publication of the 'Chronicles' in 1577, Stanihurst was living in London in the household of the earl of Kildare, acting as schoolteacher to the earl's son and heir, Garret. Stanihurst's Geraldine sympathies are very clear in his coverage of the history of the earlier Tudor era in Holinshed's 'Chronicles'. Accused of political unreliability and also suspect after his alchemical experiments had been discovered (he was arrested for forgery in London), Stanihurst became unsettled. On 26 August 1579 his young wife, Genet Barnewall ('b'. 'c'.1560), whom he had married about 1575, died while giving birth in London to a stillborn child. Her death, plus that of his pupil, Garret Fitzgerald, and of his mentor, Edmund Campion, may have led Stanihurst to cut his ties and migrate to the Low Countries. He settled first in Leiden and matriculated at the new university there in 1582 as a student of medicine. 
In the same year there appeared from the press of John Pates in Leiden the last of Stanihurst's works in English, 'The First Four Books of Virgil's 'Aeneis' Translated into English Heroicall Verse'. Dedicated to his brother-in-law, Patrick Plunket, Lord Dunsany, Stanihurst's work attempted to put into practice the orthographical principles expounded in the introduction. He wished to show how 'verse' (poetry adhering to fixed metrical patterns) was the proper medium for English poetry, as opposed to 'rhyme' (poetry organized around end-rhymes), and that sound rather than orthography should be the arbiter of stresses in his lines. The particular form of verse that he advocated was the hexameter. 
The result was an amazing display of linguistic virtuosity, entailing strange mimetic, onomatopoeic phrases, slang, intriguing verbal conjunctions, and strange inversions. A storm is described as follows: '
Thee whilst in the skye seat great bouncing rumbelo thundring 

Ratleth: downe powring to sleete thick hayle knob is added. 

The sayls tear tag rag, to the sky the waves uphoysing, 

' while Neptune, addressing the winds as 'cloggy rakehells', chides them thus: '
Dare ye loa, curst baretours, in this my Segnorie regal 

Too raise such raks iaks on seas, and dangers unordered? 
('First Four Books', 21-2)' The diction used by Stanihurst in his translation was one of its most significant features. Indeed over 400 new English words are to be found in print for the first time in his 'Aeneis'. 
Although the work was published in London in 1583 and despite the support of Gabriel Harvey, a fellow believer in the superiority of the hexameter in English, the experiment was adjudged a failure by a succession of critics. Contemporaries such as Thomas Nashe and Barnaby Rich panned Stanihurst's efforts, the latter opining that he had 'stripped Virgil out of a velvet gown into a fool's coat' ('First Four Books', viii). Joseph Hall parodied the work as follows: '
If Jove speak English in a thundering cloud, 

Twick twack and riff raff roars he aloud. 

Fie on the forged mint that did create 

New coin of words never articulate. 
('First Four Books', xx)' Modern commentators have recognized the importance of the 'Aeneis' in terms of prosody and philology but the poetic achievement remains largely unappreciated. The entire text was edited and reprinted at least twice in modern times -- by Edward Arber in 1880, and by Dirk Van Der Haar in 1933. Appended to the translation were various 'poetical devices' including translations of some of the psalms in various metres, epitaphs for friends and relatives, and one original poem, 'A Prayer too the Trinitye', not composed in hexameters. 
The second of Stanihurst's works devoted to Irish history and chorography, 'De rebus in Hibernia gestis', appeared from the Plantin press in Antwerp in 1584. In this more scientific treatment of Ireland, Stanihurst was anxious to reveal its merits to a continental as well as an Irish readership. In the first of four sections he rehearsed his perspective on the physical and human resources of Ireland, displaying therein a more benign attitude towards the Gaelic population. In the other three sections Stanihurst presented a version of Giraldus Cambrensis's account of the Norman invasion and settlement of Ireland in the twelfth century. From his vantage point in the Netherlands, Stanihurst was celebrating the political and cultural heritage conveyed to his own Old English community from Norman times. Also significant was the greater openness to the Gaelic Irish on the part of one who had previously been highly critical of their customs. As he became more absorbed within the Catholic milieu of the Spanish Netherlands, Stanihurst was less inclined to stress cultural or political divisions and, in an effort to present the population as universally faithful to the Roman church, was prepared to see his fellow islanders as joint upholders of the old religion. 
This theme was consolidated in Stanihurst's next published work, 'De vita sancti Patricii libri duo', printed at Plantin's press in 1587. This new biography of Ireland's national saint was dedicated to Alexander Farnese, the duke of Parma, governor of the Spanish Netherlands. By that time Stanihurst was living at Dunkirk and was in receipt of a pension from the Spanish crown, being described as 'very loyal to the king [Philip II], not a soldier but very useful in other ways' (Loomie, appx III, no. 126). By associating the work of Farnese in countering heretics in the Netherlands with the evangelism of Patrick in the face of paganism, Stanihurst was claiming the saint for the European Counter-Reformation with an eye to a continental readership. Also, in boosting the tradition of Irish loyalty to the papacy since Patrician times, Stanihurst was anxious to identify his native land as a bastion of Catholicism under St Patrick's patronage. 
While living in Dunkirk in the later 1580s, Stanihurst became integrated into the community of Roman Catholic exiles from England, and about 1586 married Helen (died 1602), daughter of Sir Thomas Copley of Gatton in Surrey. He was also engaged in chemical medicine, and he concocted a remarkable potion which, it was claimed, was so efficacious that many who were ill, even at the point of death, were restored to health. The effects of the remedy were reported to Philip II who summoned Stanihurst to Madrid in 1591. In a letter to the humanist, Justus Lipsius, whom he befriended at Leiden, Stanihurst described his voyage to Madrid and his arrival there in early 1592. The main purpose of Stanihurst's sojourn at the Spanish court was to conduct scientific experiments in chemical medicine in the laboratory set up by Philip II adjacent to the palace of the Escorial. Although sponsored by the ailing king, the experiments may not have been a success as Philip's medics were opposed to them, but an outcome was Stanihurst's unpublished work, 'El toque de Alquimia', written in Spanish in 1593, and dedicated to the king. Therein Stanihurst explained his scientific principles and castigated the purveyors of black magic who gave alchemy a bad name. 
While resident at the Spanish court from 1592 to 1595, Stanihurst engaged in diplomacy on behalf of the community of English and Irish Catholic exiles who looked to Philip II for assistance and support. He was close to English Catholic activists such as Sir Francis Englefield and Father Robert Persons SJ, and was at one with them in advocating Spanish military intervention in England and Ireland to restore Catholicism. He remained sceptical, however -- at least in the earlier 1590s -- of Gaelic initiatives to draw Madrid into the rebellious activities of the northern Irish chieftains; his letters to Englefield from the Escorial palace in 1593 reflect his dismissive attitude to a unilateral enterprise in Ireland. Also attested in these letters, however, is his consuming interest in furthering Spanish Habsburg political interests throughout Europe, with the islands of Britain and Ireland forming one zone for Spanish involvement. 
For six years after his return to the Spanish Netherlands as a pensioner of the crown in 1595, Stanihurst committed himself to the project for a Spanish succession to the crowns of England and Ireland, ideally in the person of the infanta Isabella, Philip II's daughter. To that end he belatedly embraced the cause of Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, for the overthrow of the Elizabethan protestant regime in Ireland, describing himself as an 'agent' of O'Neill in the negotiations preceding the Spanish landing at Kinsale in 1601. Thereafter his career as diplomat faded, but there was an echo of his zealous anti-Stuart campaigning in 1605. The newly appointed Spanish ambassador at the English court, Pedro de Zuniga, announced that he wished to have Stanihurst as his interpreter, but the proposal gave grave offence to James I, who had been the target of an anti-Stuart tract, entitled 'Beware of the Northern Gate', published in 1598 by the group of exiled Catholics of whom the Irishman was a leading light. 
For the last dozen or so years of his life Stanihurst retreated into the haven of his scholarly and spiritual interests. His second wife, Helen Copley, died in 1602. They had had two sons -- Peter, born in 1598, and William, born in 1600 -- both of whom became Jesuits. Their father had preceded them into the Society of Jesus, being ordained priest in the mid-1600s. He was appointed chaplain to the court of the archdukes, Albert and Isabella, joint governors of the Spanish Netherlands, at Brussels. In that capacity he contributed to the corpus of devotional works reflecting the spirit of the Counter-Reformation. A collection of litanies and prayers to be said before the eucharist had been published by the Plantin-Moretus press in 1598 ('Psalmi litaniae et orationes'). His deep interest in Marian devotion, attested in his correspondence with Justus Lipsius in 1592, bore fruit in two works, one of which, 'Margarita Mariana', remained unpublished (Brussels, Bibliotheque Royale, MS 3816). The other, 'Hebdomada Mariana', was published in 1609. The 'Margarita' was a work of solid patristic scholarship on the theology of the Virgin Mary, while 'Hebdomada', dedicated to Isabella, was a more popular work, consisting of a series of meditations and devotions on the seven principal Marian feasts. In 1614 there appeared at Douai Stanihurst's 'Hebdomada eucharistica'. Written in the same format as the 'Hebdomada Mariana', this work encapsulated Tridentine orthodoxy regarding the sacrament of the eucharist, while providing readers with spiritual exercises for feast days in its honour. 
Besides promoting the piety of the Counter-Reformation in his last years, Stanihurst also defended the Roman Catholic church and the papacy against attack by protestants, and specifically his own nephew, James Ussher. The younger man had enthusiastically espoused protestantism, was ordained in the Church of Ireland, and became archbishop of Armagh. Like his uncle he was a formidable scholar and he shared some academic interests with the older man. He wrote to Stanihurst in Flanders, requesting copies of certain documents for the elucidation of Irish ecclesiastical history. Although ideologically divided from Stanihurst, he admired his scholarship and had read his 'De vita sancti Patricii' and 'Hebdomada Mariana'. It was when Ussher published a work on the corruption of the Roman church, 'The Succession of Churches in the West', in 1613 that Stanihurst was moved to respond in print with 'Brevis praemunitio pro futura concertatione cum Jacobo Usserio', published at Douai in 1615. Using a variety of arguments to undermine Ussher's position, Stanihurst employed patristic sources. He also appealed to his nephew on the grounds of their common Christian inheritance: 'I take my stand in the defence of the Catholic faith in this spiritual duel which sees an Irishman contending with an Irishman, a Dubliner with a Dubliner, and, saddest of all, an uncle with his nephew' (Stanihurst, 'Brevis praemunitio', 1615, 3-4). This utterance summed up the course of his later life. Richard Stanihurst died in 1618 and was buried in Brussels. 
Stanihurst's younger son, 


@@@@@


doc= 26295


William Stanihurst (1600-1663), writer on theology, was baptized in Brussels on 18 June 1600. He studied in Brussels and, following his father and brother, entered the Society of Jesus in Mechelen on 25 September 1617. He resided mainly at Brussels and preached in both English and Flemish. He became known as a voluminous writer of religious works, many of which were translated into many European languages. Among the more popular books were 'Dei immortalis in corpore mortali patientis historia', published in Antwerp in 1660, and 'Veteris hominis per expensa quatuor novissima metamorphosis et nove genesis', published at Antwerp in 1661. These went through several editions in the succeeding century. William Stanihurst died, unmarried, in what is now Belgium, on 10 January 1663. 


@@@@@


doc= 26296


Stapeldon, Walter (b. in or before 1265, d. 1326), administrator and bishop of Exeter, was born on 1 February in a year no later than 1265, the son of William and Mabel Stapeldon of Stapeldon near Cookbury in north-west Devon. There is no evidence of noble ancestry. His elder brother Richard held the manor of Stapeldon and sat in parliament, and there were two other brothers and three sisters. Walter Stapeldon was educated at Oxford and first occurs as 'magister' in July 1286. He appears as rector of Aveton Gifford in September 1294. By 1298 he owned property in the city of Exeter, of which he was admitted a freeman in January 1300. He had become the official of Bishop Thomas Bytton of Exeter in August 1300, while by 1301 he was a cathedral canon, and by 1305 precentor. In April 1306, moreover, he incepted as doctor of canon and civil law, a degree that helped to qualify him for royal, and especially diplomatic, employment; in June 1306 he received protection for royal service in Gascony, probably in connection with the investiture of the prince of Wales with the duchy of Aquitaine. 
Following Bytton's death on 21 September 1307 Stapeldon was elected by the cathedral chapter on 13 November by fifteen votes to eight. He would appear to have owed his elevation primarily to his local connections. Royal assent was obtained on 3 December, but the election was challenged by Richard Plympstoke, an old enemy, who took his case to the Roman curia. Plympstoke withdrew his appeal in January 1308, and on 16 March the king released the temporalities. But Plympstoke then sued for admission as archdeacon of Exeter. Stapeldon refused. The case was dismissed in king's bench in July, but not before the bishop-elect had incurred considerable expense. He was consecrated at Canterbury on 13 October and enthroned at Exeter early in December. 
Stapeldon's legal training made him useful in government. He regularly attended parliament, missing none between 1313 and his death, and was auditor of Gascon petitions there in February 1316 and October 1318. He was appointed to a mission to Gascony in 1310 and as a royal nuncio to the Council of Vienne in 1311. Although nothing came of either, he was subsequently employed on missions to France, usually relating to Gascony, in 1313, 1315, 1316, and 1319; and in 1318 he was sent to the Low Countries, possibly (among other things) to canvass the marriage of Philippa of Hainault to the future Edward III. Such work may have been the spur to the creation of the calendar of principally diplomatic documents that was compiled during his treasurership and that bears his name. It also brought him valuable contacts at court. In 1310, at Gaveston's request, he was excused service in Scotland. A cluster of relatively small grants followed in 1311. In 1315 he was appointed to the king's council and distributed patronage among his fellow administrators in a manner that suggests he was becoming a man of influence. He was present at the meetings in 1317 that led to a breach between Thomas of Lancaster (died 1322) and the court, but took no part in negotiations preceding the treaty of Leake in August 1318. 
Stapeldon's appointment as treasurer on 18 February 1320 was part of a reorganization of government; in January John Salmon (died 1325), bishop of Norwich, had been appointed chancellor and Robert Baldock (died 1327) keeper of the privy seal. All three appointments were made outside of parliament, in contravention of the ordinances of 1311, Stapeldon's being unequivocally 'by the king'. He accompanied the king to France in June 1320, and at the Westminster parliament in October obtained a number of favours. He was one of ten bishops who tried to make peace between the king and those barons who insisted on the exile of the Despensers in the summer of 1321. After the exile had been pronounced, he retired from the treasurership -- which was transferred to Walter Norwich (died 1329) -- on 25 August and returned to his diocese. He did not approve of the Despensers' exile but, in a remarkable correspondence early in 1322, he counselled the king that, since it had been imposed during parliament, it ought only to be revoked in like manner. Edward II replied, expressing irritation that the bishop of whose support he had felt most assured should have responded to him in such a manner, and summoned Stapeldon to his presence. After the royal victory at Boroughbridge on 16 March 1322 the Despensers' exile was revoked by statute at the York parliament in May. On 9 May Stapeldon was reappointed treasurer, and remained in the king's service thereafter. There followed the abortive Scottish campaign of 1322; Stapeldon participated in the negotiations that led to a thirteen-year truce in May 1323. After the escape of Roger Mortimer from the Tower of London in August he held the post of constable until the following November. Stapeldon was already at work on the government records stored in the Tower, a consideration which, added to his political reliability, doubtless explains his appointment to this position. 
The pressures of civil war, war in Scotland, and the War of St Sardos in Gascony ensured that Stapeldon's treasurership saw considerable intensification of the government's efforts to increase its revenue. With this end in view a huge sortation of records was undertaken. The stringent auditing of accounts was hastened; and debts, some of them dating back more than a century, were called in. The Cowick and Westminster ordinances of June 1323 and May 1324 represent major initiatives in these areas, but they were not the only ones. The king frequently demonstrated impatience at the pace of reform, which may account for the scheme of June 1324 to divide the exchequer's administration that is associated with the name of Roger Beler (died 1326). Stapeldon first opposed the scheme, then delayed its implementation, and was roundly reproved by the king. This may explain why in July he was sent to supervise preparations in his diocese for the War of St Sardos. In September 1324 Queen Isabella's lands in the south-west, the bulk of which lay in Stapeldon's diocese, were seized, soon to be followed by those of all French aliens. The queen's humiliation (she was reduced to a meagre allowance) may account for her subsequent hostility towards Stapeldon. 
Stapeldon was replaced as treasurer on 3 July 1325 during parliament. The 'Vita Edwardi secundi', a contemporary source, accusing him of avarice, alleges that this was to allow those wronged by him to bring writs against him. But it may also be that he was being released in order to accompany the prince of Wales, who was being sent to do homage to the new French king, Charles IV, on behalf of his father. This mission materialized in September but, perceiving conspiracy at the French court, Stapeldon fled, leaving the young prince and his mother; he had returned to England by 29 October. He preached at the opening of parliament in the Tower of London on 18 November. In December Queen Isabella wrote to Stapeldon, excoriating him for returning home without paying her household, and attributing his treatment of her to his complicity with the younger Hugh Despenser (died 1326). With an invasion now imminent Stapeldon devoted himself to the defence of the south-west, although, following the murder of Roger Beler in January 1326 he was also again closely involved in exchequer business. After the queen's invasion in September he returned to London, where his association with the Despenser regime and his possible responsibility for the eyre of 1321, which had been aggressively hostile to the privileges claimed by the city, may have made him especially unpopular. There his house was looted and burned, and he himself was set upon, lynched, and decapitated in Cheapside with a breadknife on 15 October. His head was sent to the queen; his body was eventually returned, on her orders, to Exeter Cathedral, where it was buried on the north side of the high altar on 28 March 1327. 
The location of his tomb marks Stapeldon out as virtually the cathedral's second founder. He not only contributed enormous sums to its rebuilding, but his first episcopal statute (1310) obliged all beneficed clergy of the diocese to do likewise. Despite government business, he was a vigorous diocesan bishop, who undertook frequent visitations and enhanced considerably the value of episcopal property. He engaged strenuously in litigation to contest royal claims that the collegiate church of St Buryan in Cornwall was a royal free chapel, while simultaneously asserting his own rights as dean of the royal free chapel of Bosham in the diocese of Chichester. 
Stapeldon's interests extended to scholarship, and he actively promoted learning. In 1326 he set in train plans to endow grammar scholarships at St John's Hospital in Exeter. He granted the highest known rate of licences of non-residence to study issued by any of Edward II's bishops. But his most notable achievement was the foundation in 1314 of Stapeldon Hall in Oxford for a priest and twelve poor scholars from his diocese. He was visitor of the foundation and in 1316 provided it with its first statutes, a distinctive feature of which was the democratic election of new fellows and of the rector by existing fellows. The foundation survives today as Exeter College, Oxford. 


