@@@@@


doc= 26297


Staples, Edward (b. c.1490, d. after 1558), bishop of Meath, was born in Lincolnshire. Little is known of his family background, but he incepted MA at Cambridge in 1514 and supplicated for the degrees of BTh and DTh at Oxford in 1526; he became a canon of Wolsey's Cardinal College, Oxford, in 1525. It was his appointment as chaplain to Henry VIII, however, that plucked Staples from obscurity and paved the way for further advancement. He was presented to the prebend of Wigginton in the collegiate church of Tamworth, Staffordshire, on 7 March 1528, but resigned the position in favour of St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, which he held 'in commendam' until July 1532. At the king's instigation, Clement VII concurrently provided Staples to the bishopric of Meath on 3 September 1529. 
The bishop of Meath had traditionally occupied one of the most influential spiritual and temporal positions in Ireland. Staples, an outsider, who owed his position directly to the king, acquiesced in Henry's bid for ecclesiastical royal supremacy, but incurred the suspicion and enmity of the resident Geraldine interest. Thus, when in 1534 Thomas Fitzgerald, tenth earl of Kildare, rebelled against the crown, Henry was proclaimed a heretic, and John Allen, archbishop of Dublin (and Staples's former colleague at Oxford) was murdered, the bishop of Meath wisely abandoned his see for the safety of England. He returned the following year to a political landscape greatly altered by the destruction of the Geraldines and, presumably, more conducive for reform. Henry entrusted the promotion of his ecclesiastical supremacy to Staples and the newly appointed archbishop of Dublin, George Browne. Yet both men encountered political, cultural, and linguistic challenges in Ireland that compounded the difficulty of their task. 
Their initial failure was met with sharp reproach from Henry who, on 31 July 1537, censured Staples for his slackness and negligence in carrying out his ecclesiastical responsibilities. Staples and Browne, moreover, differed in their approach to the Reformation's introduction into Ireland and quarrelled openly over methodology and influence in the first half of 1538. Browne's religious views were more progressive and he concentrated his efforts on achieving, at the very least, outward conformity within the Englishry. Staples, however, was more conservative on religious matters and emphasized the value of education in winning the internal and lasting support of the Irish for the reformed faith. In June 1538 Staples noted that 'the common voice in the Irishry is that the King's supremacy is maintained only by power, and not reasoned by learning', and recommended 'to have our master recognized King of Ireland the lack whereof doth much hinder... duties to be done' (Brewer and Bullen, 1, no. 123). This recommendation became a reality in 1541 and underpinned Lord Deputy Sir Anthony St Leger's conciliatory strategy for the Gaelic polity's incorporation into the Tudor state. Yet in the short term, the feud with Browne continued; only the collective intervention of Sir Thomas Cromwell and the Irish privy council defused the quarrel. Ultimately, however, it was the king's support for St Leger's conciliatory administration that ensured the victory of Staples's persuasive strategy for the remainder of the reign. 
Staples's religious views evolved apace with events and attitudes in England and in the years following Edward VI's accession he married and preached increasingly vitriolic sermons against the mass. However, his congregation remained staunchly conservative and in December 1548 he pointed to the hatred he had evoked among them by preaching and adhering to the reformed faith. The Edwardian government, however, valued Staples's efforts and the king's continued rule ensured the security of both his position and his influence. Thus with Mary I's accession in 1553 and the restoration of Catholicism, Staples was placed in a compromising position. Though he outwardly supported Mary, his marriage and reputation as a zealous supporter of the reformed faith cost him his bishopric: he was deprived on 29 June 1554. William Walsh succeeded Staples as bishop of Meath in November. Devoid of any political or familial support in England, Staples remained in Ireland, a pariah in his former diocese. His last throw came on 16 December 1558, when he appealed in desperation to Sir William Cecil, principal secretary, for restoration to his former see, claiming that he had been, 'dreven almost to begying, thrust owte of my howse, cast from estymacon, and made a gesteing stocke amongst munkes and freers' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/1/8). The Elizabethan regime, however, did not restore the ageing and sickly Staples to the influential bishopric and he died soon after in anonymity. Staples's emphasis on winning support for the royal supremacy without resorting to coercion formed an integral dimension of St Leger's administration in the final years of Henry's reign, but the drastic political and religious change that characterized the mid-Tudor period made the continued implementation of this strategy impossible and ultimately destroyed the foundation upon which Staples had built his career. 


@@@@@


doc= 26298


Stapleton, Augustus Granville (1800/01-1880), biographer and political pamphleteer, was entered on 18 September 1814 in the register of Rugby School as 'son of John Stapleton, esq., and ward of the Rev. T. Yeoman, Barnstaple, Devon, aged 13' ('Rugby School Register from 1675 to 1867 Inclusive', 1867, 1.120). It was, however, said that he was an illegitimate son of John Parker, first earl of Morley (Jekyll, 226), a close friend of Canning. Stapleton was entered at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, on 22 February 1817, but did not take up his residence there, and on 14 October 1818 was admitted pensioner at St John's College, Cambridge. He graduated BA in 1823. On 30 June 1825 he married Catherine, second daughter of John Bulteel of Flete, Devon, who died at Kensington on 18 June 1856; they had three sons and two daughters. 
After leaving university Stapleton became the private secretary of Canning, and was admitted into his closest confidence, enjoying long conversations in which the statesman recounted his career and explained his policies. In 1827 Stapleton was with Canning when he caught his fatal cold at the duke of York's funeral, and was present at his deathbed at Chiswick. On the personal instructions of George IV, out of respect for the memory of Canning, Stapleton was appointed a commissioner of customs on 31 August 1827. This appointment he vacated in 1831. Stapleton's own parliamentary ambitions were unfulfilled. In 1837 he contested Birmingham in the Conservative interest, and, though he was an able orator, was badly beaten. From 1845 he was a leading figure in the National Club, formed as a focus for political protestantism, but the organization never achieved the degree of prominence Stapleton sought for it. 
Stapleton's main distinction was as a writer, committed above all to upholding the memory of his late employer. In 1830 his 'Political Life of George Canning, 1822-1827' was ready for publication. However, its contents were potentially politically explosive and representations on behalf first of the duke of Wellington and later of Earl Grey caused Stapleton initially to delay and then to make cuts in the work. It eventually appeared in 1831. In 1859 he published 'George Canning and his Times', which, like the previous work, is a valuable primary source for Canning's career. In continuance of the subject, Stapleton subsequently contributed to 'Macmillan's Magazine' (26, May 1872 25-32) an article entitled 'A month at Seaford in 1825 with Canning and Hookham Frere', and three more of his papers appeared in volume 31 (1874-5) of the same periodical. Stapleton also published numerous expositions of his sometimes idiosyncratic opinions in pamphlet form, on Ireland, parliamentary reform, and British foreign policy. In 'The Real Monster Evil of Ireland' (1843), which he considered to be over-population, he advocated a $16 million programme of public works. His 'Suggestions for a Conservative and Popular Reform in the Commons' (1850) was a plea for direct representation of the professional classes and of the arts and sciences. A petition to this effect on behalf of the learned professions was drawn up by Stapleton and George Harris, and presented by Lord Harrowby to the House of Lords on 27 May 1852. It produced a long speech from Lord Derby ('Hansard 3', 121.1181-92; cf. Harris, 184-91). 'Hostilities at Canton (Guangzhou)' (1857) was a concentrated statement of the case against Lord Palmerston's government, and led, in its author's opinion, to the defeat of the ministry. His effusions on foreign affairs were collected in 'Intervention and Non-Intervention, or, The Foreign Policy of Great Britain, 1790-1865' (1866). 
Stapleton was possessed of aristocratic pretensions and a certain arrogance, softened by personal kindness. He was a parishioner and close friend of Charles Kingsley. He died at Drymoor, Warbrook, Eversley, Hampshire, on 26 February 1880. His youngest son, Edward J. Stapleton (1839/40-1896), of the Home Office, edited in 1887 two volumes of 'Official Correspondence of George Canning', the second of which contained numerous letters to and from his father in 1826 and 1827. 


@@@@@


doc= 26299


Stapleton, Sir Brian (c.1322-1394), soldier, of Wighill and Helaugh, Yorkshire, was the third son of Sir Gilbert Stapleton (died 1321) and his wife, Agnes 
(or Matilda; 1297/8-1348)
, daughter and coheir of Brian, Lord Fitzalan (died 1306), of Bedale in the same county. His father prospered in the service of Edward II to become escheator north of the Trent; and until their line died out in 1373 his kinsmen, the lords Stapleton, were summoned as barons to parliament. Yet, despite these influential connections, Brian Stapleton's immediate prospects of inheritance were slight, and he made both his name and his early fortune as a soldier in France. He probably first saw action in 1340, in the royal army at the siege of Tournai; the testimony that he gave much later, in 1386, during a dispute involving his friend, Richard, Lord Scrope of Bolton, begins at this point in his military career. Since, in his own words, he subsequently took part in 'all the great battles and expeditions' of Edward III's reign (Nicolas, 1.104), including the siege of Calais in 1347, it may be assumed that, like his elder brother Sir Miles Stapleton (a founder member of the Order of the Garter), he also fought at Crecy in the previous year. 
Perhaps Stapleton did battle under the banner of his chief patron, William Montagu, earl of Salisbury, whom he accompanied to France in 1359 and later served with great loyalty. Although, in 1369, he enlisted with Edmund of Langley, earl of Cambridge, in the expeditionary force sent to relieve Edward, the Black Prince, in Aquitaine, his association with Salisbury soon assumed paramount importance. In 1373, for example, he sailed with him in the fleet that attacked the coast of Brittany; and it was through him, as governor of Calais, that in February 1380 he became, first, captain of Calais Castle and comptroller of the town, and then, within a matter of days, captain of Guines. Some years earlier Stapleton had witnessed a treaty with the Bretons, and now he himself became a diplomatic envoy, chiefly for the negotiation of a truce with France. While these talks were progressing, in May 1380, Salisbury granted him and his heirs the manors of Bamburgh in Lincolnshire and Bampton in Cumberland, along with other estates in the north-west and in Suffolk, all out of gratitude for faithful service. 
Stapleton had already become a landowner of note, partly through his marriage, by 1360, to Agnes, the widow of Stephen Waleys (died 1350) of Helaugh, who brought him extensive property in Yorkshire. Then, on the death of his kinsman Thomas Stapleton in 1373, an entail brought Sir Brian more land in Yorkshire as well as the manor of Kentmere in Westmorland. Later on he consolidated his holdings by buying Wighill and Quarmby, near Huddersfield, probably investing the booty won on campaigns overseas. Stapleton was made a knight of the Garter in 1382; in the following year he and the earl of Salisbury escorted Richard II's young bride, Anne of Bohemia, to Calais; and in 1383 he held a muster there of the troops led by Bishop Despenser on his abortive 'crusade' against the Flemings. After a fairly successful round of negotiations with embassies from France and Flanders, leading to the truce of Leulinghen, Stapleton returned home. His diplomatic skills were employed on the Scottish border in 1386 and 1388, during which time he was both a commissioner to take evidence and a witness in Lord Scrope's celebrated quarrel with Sir Robert Grosvenor over a contested coat of arms. 
Appropriately enough, one of Stapleton's last public appearances was in 1390 at a tournament staged by the knights of the Garter in London. His reputation in the lists seems to have been formidable, and stories about his exploits were still circulating two centuries later. By then, however, they had become the stuff of legend, describing how he 'slew a saryson [Saracen] in plane batell in the presence of three kings' (Chetwynd-Stapylton, 120), and even how he deposited St Mary Magdalen's right hand in the Dominican friary at York (with which he had no known connection, but where his grandson was buried). He died on 25 July 1394, having requested a lavish funeral, at which his armour and helm were to be displayed by a 'well favoured' man-at-arms on horseback. He was buried, according to his wishes, beside his wife at Park Priory in Helaugh. Brian Stapleton, his young grandson, succeeded him, and fell near Alencon in 1417, fighting in the retinue of Thomas Montagu, earl of Salisbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 26300


Stapleton, Gregory (1748-1802), vicar apostolic of the midland district, born on 7 December 1748 at Carlton Hall, Yorkshire, was the seventh son of Nicholas Stapleton and his third wife, Winifred, daughter of John White of Dover Street, London. After preparatory studies at Esquerchin he proceeded to the English College, Douai, in 1762. On his ordination he became procurator of the college, and left that post twelve years later because of difficulties with its new president, William Gibson. After this he travelled abroad with a pupil; and on his return from Italy, in 1787, he was appointed president of the English College at St Omer, in succession to Alban Butler. 
The revolution of 1789 soon adversely affected British institutions in France. Imprisoned in the French College at St Omer in August 1793 the president, several professors, and fifty-two students were removed to Arras in January 1794, where they were threatened with death, before joining the 'trente-deux' from the Douai college incarcerated at Doullens. When restrictions were lifted, Stapleton travelled to Paris to secure an order from the Directory for the release of the prisoners, and on 2 March 1795 they all arrived back at Dover on board an American ship. Soon afterwards Stapleton, accompanied by Bishop Douglass, sought an interview with the duke of Portland and William Pitt to seek their approval of a plan for converting the school at Old Hall Green, near Ware, Hertfordshire, into a Catholic college. The duke had previously known Stapleton, and he and Pitt gave them encouragement. Stapleton accordingly conducted his students to Old Hall Green, and on 19 August 1795 the first stone was laid of the College of St Edmund. 
Stapleton presided over the college until the autumn of 1800, when, having accompanied the Revd John Nassau to Rome on an important secret mission, he was raised to the episcopate. His appointment as bishop of Hierocaesarea 'in partibus' and vicar apostolic of the midland district, in succession to Charles Berington, was approved by the pope on 29 May 1800, and he was consecrated on 8 March 1801. He took up his residence at Long Birch, near Wolverhampton, and employed John Milner as his secretary. Stapleton died at St Omer on 23 May 1802, on his way with other representatives to reclaim British property after the peace of Amiens, and was succeeded in his vicariate by Milner. The midland district especially felt the loss of his quiet and peaceful temperament. He was buried in the churchyard of the parish church of St Omer. 


@@@@@


doc= 26301


Stapleton, Miles, first Lord Stapleton (d. 1314), baron and administrator, was the son of Sir Nicholas Stapleton (died by 1296), a royal justice, and Margery, daughter and heir of Miles Basset of Haddlesey. He married first, before 1286, Isabel (Sybil), daughter and coheir of Ladereyna, wife of John Belewe, whose inheritance also included a share in the land and possessions of Peter de Brus; she died before August 1301 and he married as his second wife Joan, daughter of Peter Tyndale. Little is known about his early life. He was in Scotland with Roger (III) Mowbray, Lord Mowbray, in 1291 on royal business, and fought in Gascony in 1295, during which time the constable of Richmond Castle was ordered to provide suitable accommodation in the castle for his wife and household. He served in Scotland at Falkirk in 1298 under Henry de Lacy, earl of Lincoln, and at the siege of Caerlaverock in 1300. In the same year Stapleton accompanied the earl on his journey to the papal court, and is described as a knight of his household. From 1302 until at least 1307 he was constable of Knaresborough Castle and forest and keeper of Boroughbridge manor. Some time after September 1303 he was appointed to Prince Edward's household and was, in the prince's own words, 'charged by the king' (Tout, 'Admin. hist.', 2.175) with its direction as steward, a post he held until 1306. In 1305 the prince received a request from Lacy to allow Stapleton to manage the earl's household while he was away on a mission to the papal court, but Edward replied that he dared not do so without the king's permission. In March 1305 Stapleton was appointed with Sir John Byroun to investigate homicides and robberies in Lancashire, but their duties were taken over by the April trailbaston commissioners. 
On Edward II's accession in July 1307 Stapleton transferred to the royal household, and was steward from 9 August of that year until he was replaced in March 1308, during which time he travelled with Edward II to Boulogne for the king's marriage to Isabella, daughter of Philippe IV in January 1308. In 1307 he had received the keepership of the manor of Burstwick in Holderness and of the town of Kingston upon Hull, but in 1308 he was forced to surrender the former to the king's favourite, Piers Gaveston. As bailiff of Holderness Stapleton was asked to send military stores to Berwick to help the king's forces in Scotland. He also received commissions concerning the banks and dykes of the River Humber, and the fresh waters in Holderness and Hull. He was summoned for military service against the Scots in 1311 and 1312, and to the parliaments of 1313, and by virtue of the latter is deemed to have became a baron. Later in the same year he and his family were pardoned, as adherents of Thomas, earl of Lancaster, for any involvement in the death of Gaveston. 
In the years after his father's death, which had occurred by 1296, Stapleton was able to consolidate the family's landed base in Yorkshire. Already in 1291 Roger Mowbray, a neighbouring landowner, granted him 16 acres of waste at Hovingham, while during the 'quo warranto' investigations in the Yorkshire eyre of 1293-4 Stapleton successfully maintained his right to free warren in all his demesne lands of Stapleton, Kirkby Fleetham, Wath, North Duffield, Owstwick, and East and Middle Haddlesey. In 1297 he also held lands at Wimbleton in Yorkshire. By 1300 Stapleton possessed lands worth at least $40 in the county, and was usually styled knight in commissions. In 1303 he was allowed to exchange lands in Middle Haddlesey with the templars for other lands there. In 1309 Roger Mowbray's son, John (I) Mowbray, granted Stapleton 26 acres of woodland in Hovingham Manor, and in 1310 also conveyed to him for life 40 acres of land and meadow there. Stapleton experienced some friction with Walter Fauconberg, who shared lands in common with Marmaduke Thwing and the beneficiaries of Ladereyna Belewe, both Stapleton and Thwing complaining in May 1313 that Walter had wrongly taken wreck of the sea at Coatham, Marske, and Wilton in Yorkshire. Described as overlord at Stapleton in 1307, he also held for life a marsh in Southwark, a messuage in West Haddlesey and Duffield and the manors of North Morton in Berkshire (which he held as a retainer of the earl of Pembroke), Kentmere in Westmorland, Carleton by Snaith and Wath in Yorkshire, together with a third of the manor of West Haddlesey. 
Miles Stapleton was killed at the battle of Bannockburn on 24 June 1314. He was survived by his second wife, Joan, though she too had died by September 1316. Both wives were buried in the Dominican friary at York. His brother, Gilbert Stapleton, king's clerk, was in 1317 designated archdeacon of Berkshire and a prebendary of Salisbury Cathedral. Stapleton's children from his first marriage were Nicholas (1286- 'c'.1343), whose son and grandson died within a year of each other (1372-3); Gilbert (died 1321), who married Agnes (or Matilda), daughter of Brian Fitzalan, and had a son, Miles Stapleton (d. 1364); and Elizabeth, who was still alive in November 1333. He had one daughter, Joan, from his second marriage. In 1299 Stapleton endowed the celebration of masses by two chaplains in the chapel of St Nicholas at North Morton, and in 1310 he endowed a single chaplain to celebrate in St John's Chapel at East Haddlesey. 


@@@@@


doc= 26302


Stapleton, Sir Miles, of Bedale (1320?-1364), soldier, was the elder son of Sir Gilbert Stapleton (1290-1321) and Matilda 
(or Agnes; 1297/8-1348)
, elder daughter and coheir of Brian Fitzalan, lord of Bedale, Askham Brian, and Cotherstone. His paternal grandfather was Miles Stapleton, first Lord Stapleton (d. 1314), who was steward of the household under Edward II. 
It is sometimes impossible to distinguish Sir Miles Stapleton of Bedale from his first cousin, Sir Miles Stapleton of Haddlesey ('c'.1318-1372). Often identified as 'le seigneur', Haddlesey was betrothed to Isabella Vavasour in 1338, but they never married. In 1343 he obtained livery of his inheritance, the manors of Carleton, Southburn, Tibthorpe, and Kentmore. At the battle of Crecy he was in the retinue of Sir John Darcy, and in September 1350 he went on pilgrimage abroad. He was escheator and sheriff of Yorkshire from November 1352 to December 1353, and from November 1354 to March 1356. He was linked to the earl of Lancaster in October 1354. In 1356 he was paid 200 marks for escorting David II, king of Scots from Newcastle to London, and in 1358 he was summoned to parliament, but never attended. He sat on various commissions in Yorkshire between 1352 and 1366. He died on 27 December 1372, leaving one son ('b'. 1349) and one daughter ('b'. 1350). His will is dated 24 August 1372. 
Miles Stapleton of Bedale (sometimes known as Cotherstone) was an infant only child on his father's death in 1321. It was probably he who went overseas in the king's service in September 1342, and the family's historian suggests that he was at the siege of Tournai with his younger brother Brian Stapleton, and then in Brittany. A Miles Stapleton, probably of Bedale, was singled out by the chronicler Adam Murimuth as taking the honours on the first day of a three-day tournament at Windsor which in January 1344 saw the inauguration of the order of the knights of the Round Table. He was given letters of protection to go abroad with Sir John Darcy, the king's chamberlain, in 1345, which may suggest that he was educated in Darcy's household. He was certainly present at the siege of Calais in 1346, and given his later link with the Garter, he almost certainly fought at Crecy in 1346 too. Having become associated with the royal household at about this time, he took part in three further tournaments between October 1347 and January 1348, at Bury St Edmunds, Eltham, and Windsor. An account for the great wardrobe in 1348 describes him as a knight of the chamber, and he became a founder member of the Order of the Garter, sitting on the king's side in the ninth stall ['see also 'Founding knights of the Order of the Garter]. 
In October 1351 Stapleton was sent abroad with William Latimer and then, for a while, the careers of both Miles Stapletons, of Bedale and of Haddlesey, sometimes coincided. In 1354 both witnessed an instrument requesting papal intervention in the Anglo-French war. Stapleton of Bedale was involved in Lancaster's march across Normandy in 1356, and in 1358 he was paid $50 for acting as a messenger to Philippe de Navarre. In 1359 he went abroad again on royal service. In June 1360 he was granted a life annuity of $100, in consideration of his 'laudable service in the king's deeds of war' ('CPR', '1358-61', 429). This makes it likely that he is the Miles Stapleton who was one of the witnesses to the treaty of Bretigny in 1360. Abroad again in June 1361 and January 1362, on the latter occasion he made his brother Brian his attorney for two years. His destination in 1362 appears to have been the Baltic rather than France, since in January 1363 he was one of a group of leading English knights recorded as borrowing money from local merchants at Thorn on the Vistula. The money was to be repaid at Bruges. In March 1361 and August 1362 he served on commissions of peace with the earl of Suffolk. Miles Stapleton of Haddlesey was appointed to a commission of the peace headed by the earl of Lancaster in 1361. 
In January 1364 Miles Stapleton of Bedale took out letters of attorney for three more years, but died on 20 October 1364, probably from wounds or disease after the battle of Auray (29 September 1364). Escheators in Yorkshire, Norfolk, Suffolk, Berkshire, and Wiltshire were ordered to take his lands into their custody on 12 February 1365, a delay of three and a half months, suggesting he died abroad, probably in France. Queen Philippa was granted his lands on 21 February 1365 during the minority of his heir, but this wardship was sold to Brian Stapleton for $1000 in May 1365. 
Miles Stapleton of Bedale is described by the chronicler Geoffrey Baker as a man of great integrity and deep devotion to the Virgin. He married twice. With his first wife Isolda (surname unknown) he had a son, John, who died in childhood. In 1350, Isolda having died, he married again; his second wife was Joan, daughter of Sir Oliver Ingham and widow of Roger Lestrange, with whom she had a son, Roger, and from whom she had dower in Shropshire and Oxfordshire. With Stapleton she had three children: Miles ('b'. 1356), who married the niece of Robert Ufford, first earl of Suffolk; Joan (died 1385), who married Sir John Plays; and Hugh, who married Matilda, widow of Hugh Fastolf. In May 1349 Stapleton was licensed to endow a chantry at North Morton, but following his second marriage his plans became more ambitious, and between 1355 and 1360 his chantry developed into a Trinitarian priory at Ingham, to which Ingham parish church was appropriated. Stapleton was buried in the church, and he and his descendants were commemorated there in a series of splendid brasses: Sir Miles and his second wife were shown holding hands, with the inscription 'Priez pour les almes monseur Miles de Stapleton et Dame Johanne sa femme fille de Monseur Oliver de Ingham fondeurs de cette maison qe dieu de lour almes eit pitee' ('Pray for the souls of Sir Miles Stapleton and Lady Joan his wife, daughter of Sir Oliver Ingham, founders of this house, that God may have pity on their souls'; Gough, 1/2,120). In 1799 the brasses were sold as 'old metal', but rubbings were taken of them before their destruction. 


@@@@@


doc= 26303


Sir Miles Stapleton, baronet (bap. 1626, d. 1707), was baptized on 19 October 1626 at Carlton, the third son of Gilbert Stapleton (died 1634) and his second wife, Eleanor, daughter of Sir John Gascoigne. He came into his father's estates because his eldest brother, Richard, was declared a lunatic while another brother, Gregory, was a monk at Douai. These estates included lands in Yorkshire and Northumberland, the manors of Carlton and Camblesforth, and commercial interests in Bedale. He married Elizabeth (died 1684), daughter of Robert Bertie, earl of Lindsey, probably in 1656; their first child was born on 9 July 1657 but all three of their children died in infancy. He was created baronet on 20 March 1661. 


@@@@@


doc= 26304


Stapleton, Sir Philip (bap. 1603, d. 1647), politician and army officer, was baptized at Wighill, Yorkshire, on 26 April 1603, the second son of Henry Stapleton of Wighill (1574-1631), esquire, and his wife, Mary Shepherd (died 1655), the illegitimate daughter of Sir John Forster of Alnwick, Northumberland. He matriculated from Queens' College, Cambridge, on 16 May 1617 and was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1620. He inherited an estate worth $500 per year, and Clarendon noted how he 'according to the education of that country, spent his time in those delights which horses and dogs administer' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.393). At Scorborough, near Beverley, on 8 October 1629, he married Frances ('c'.1613-1636), the widow of John Gee of Bishop Burton and the eldest daughter of Sir John Hotham of Scorborough, bt. Shortly afterwards he purchased the estate at Warter Priory and in 1636 he bought a further 400 acres from Dame Mary Bethell at nearby Blanch on the Wolds. He was knighted on 25 May 1630, and served as a JP and a member of the East Riding sewers commission. His wife died in May 1636 and on 5 February 1638 he married again, at St Ann Blackfriars in London; his second wife was the Roman Catholic Barbara, daughter of Henry Lennard, twelfth Lord Dacre of Herstmonceux, Sussex. 
Stapleton was elected MP for Hedon in the Short Parliament and in June 1640 signed the petition of the Yorkshire gentry against the forced billeting of royal soldiers in the county. He was returned as MP for Boroughbridge in the Long Parliament and helped John Pym frame the charges against Strafford and abolish the council of the north. He was also appointed to a committee investigating the army plot in May 1641. He resided in London to attend parliamentary business and bought a house near St Ann Blackfriars. On 20 August 1641 he was chosen, along with John Hampden, to attend the king in Scotland. Clarendon believed his activism was procured by Sir Hugh Cholmley and his former father-in-law, Sir John Hotham, 'being much younger than they and governed by them' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.393). Stapleton returned in time for the debates on the grand remonstrance during November 1641. In January 1642 he and Hotham were among the four members chosen by the House of Commons to deliver their answer to the king's demand for the arrest of the five members, and he was among the committee of twenty-five appointed to sit in the Guildhall during the adjournment of the house. 
Early in May 1642 Stapleton was among the five parliamentary commissioners sent to report on the king's actions at York. He returned to London in June but Sir John Hotham, parliament's governor of Hull, requested his return and assistance to rally support in the county. After his appointment to the committee of safety on 4 July, Stapleton accompanied the earl of Holland northwards to present parliament's petition for peace to the king at Beverley on 16 July. He reported that the king had 'noe foot' and that Yorkshire's trained bands would only fight 'faintly' for him (Russell, 518). On his return he was commissioned as captain of the earl of Essex's life guard of gentlemen cuirassiers, and colonel of the lord-general's regiment of horse. He was given leave by the House of Commons to accompany Essex's army on 8 September. Stapleton's troopers helped save parliament's army by completing the rout of the king's infantry at the battle of Edgehill on 23 October 1642. Despite his appointments to the East Riding committees of sequestrations on 27 March 1643 and of levying money on 7 May 1643, he remained in the southern counties where he rallied the defeated parliamentarian cavalry at Chalgrove Field on 18 June 1643. During the first battle of Newbury he had a brief confrontation with Rupert in which he tried to shoot the prince with a pistol. After his appointment on 16 February 1644, he regularly attended the committee of both kingdoms, set up as a joint executive by parliament and the Scottish regime. In July 1644 Essex sent him to London to give a military report and he thereby avoided participation in the catastrophe that befell Essex's army in Cornwall. 
Stapleton was a close friend of Essex and was believed to represent the earl's views in the House of Commons. Despite his impressive war service, he grew more inclined to the 'peace party' desires for a negotiated settlement. From 30 November 1644 he defended Sir John Hotham, who had been arrested for conspiracy to betray Hull, Beverley, and Lincoln to the royalists. In early December Essex invited Stapleton to his house in the Strand to devise a plan to ruin Cromwell by having him indicted as an incendiary. Stapleton strongly objected to the self-denying ordinance, which deprived him of his military command. Some time in 1646 he moved to St Martin's Lane, near Covent Garden. Included in a group of parliamentarian gentry with 'Calvinist sympathies' (Cliffe, 'Yorkshire Gentry', 346), on 11 April 1646 he joined Denzil Holles as tellers for the noes in the debate over whether a petition from presbyterian clergy was breaching the privileges of parliament. By now he and Holles enjoyed considerable influence as leaders of the 'presbyterian' MPs, both acting regularly as tellers against political Independents in the Commons. 
After the first civil war Stapleton was influential with the Scottish commissioners, who relied on him to rally support against the Independents and New Model Army. Baillie recalled that: 'Stapleton and Holles... had been the main persuaders of us to remove out of England and leave the king to them, upon assurance, which was most likely, that this was the only means to get the evill army disbanded, the king and peace settled according to our minds. ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', ed. D. Laing, 3 vols., 1841-2, 3.16)' His involvement in anti-army propaganda and his activism in advocating the army's disbandment ahead of satisfactory arrangements for settling its pay arrears or dealing with other grievances aroused hostility from Fairfax and Cromwell. He attracted further animosity from the army by assaulting Major Tulidah who presented an army petition which parliament desired to suppress. The army secretary, John Rushworth, called Stapleton an incendiary and noted on 9 June 1647 that 'if they had the King, I mean Hollis and Stapleton, &c., the Scots had come in to have crushed this army' (R. Bell, ed., 'Memorials of the Civil War', 2 vols., 1849, 1.353). Stapleton was among the eleven MPs impeached by Sir Thomas Fairfax in the name of the army on 16 June. They were accused of incensing parliament against the army, endeavouring to provoke another civil war, and obstructing the relief of Ireland. Cromwell allegedly reflected shortly after: 'What a sway Stapleton and Holles had heretofore in the kingdom', adding, according to Major Huntingdon, that 'he was as able to govern the kingdom as either of them' (F. Maseres, ed., 'Select Tracts Relating to the Civil Wars in England', 2 vols., 1815, 2.405). 
The eleven members withdrew from the house rather than face impeachment. On 20 July passes were issued permitting their departure overseas but, heartened by the anti-army riots in London on 26 July, Stapleton returned to parliament. On 3 August Fairfax declared that he wanted Stapleton handed over to him to stand trial. On 6 August the resistance of the City collapsed and Stapleton fled with five of the other impeached members. On 14 August they boarded a ship on the Essex coast bound for Calais, but were overtaken and captured by a Captain Lamming. Vice-Admiral Batten subsequently allowed their release and they landed at Calais on 17 August. Feverish and suffering from flux, Stapleton died at Calais in an inn called the Three Silver Lions on 18 August. As his illness was suspected to be plague he was buried immediately in the protestant burial-ground. 
After his death, Stapleton was said to have been 'a true and zealous Protestant, though not in any way new-fangled' (Chetwynd-Stapylton, 459). A puritan chronicler later wrote of him that he was 'a Brave Man who Espoused not the Professors of Religion as such, though he sheltered and laid out his Interest for them' (Morrice MSS, vol. 3). A friend, probably Denzil Holles, recalled 'Sir Philip was of a thin body and weak constitution, but full of spirit... quick of apprehension, sound of judgement, of clear and good elocution' (Chetwynd-Stapylton, 459). Stapleton fathered ten children -- five from each of his marriages -- seven of whom survived him. Despite his moderate landed estate he left a fortune of $1000 to each of his three surviving daughters in his will. His wife, Barbara, also outlived him; his eldest son, John ('c'.1630-1697), succeeded to his lands at Blanch and the manor of Warter. 


@@@@@


doc= 26305


Stapylton, Sir Robert (1607x9?-1669), translator and playwright, was born in Carlton, near Snaith, Yorkshire, the third son of Richard Stapylton (died 1636), and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Pierrepont. The family was staunchly Roman Catholic in an area which had only partially accepted the Elizabethan religious settlement. There is no record of either birth date or baptism. About 1621 Robert was sent to the Benedictine school of St Gregory at Douai (the forerunner of Downside School) where his brother Ralph was already a pupil; Ralph later joined the Douai Benedictines under the name of Dom Epiphanius. Robert was solemnly professed as a Benedictine on 30 March 1625. A year later, he obtained permission from his superiors to return to England for health reasons. When he was ordered to return to St Gregory's in 1629, he appealed to Rome against the validity of his profession, alleging that he had taken monastic vows under pressure and that he had been under the age of sixteen at the time. The appeal failed and he was ordered to return to his convent; if his appeal and rejection are to have any credibility, he must have been sixteen or seventeen in 1625, which would suggest a birth date between 1607 and 1609. Instead, Stapylton remained in England and became a member of the established church and an enthusiastic royalist. It seems that his cousin Henry Pierrepont, Viscount Newark, suggested to Charles I that Stapylton be appointed as gentleman-in-ordinary of the privy chamber of the prince (the future Charles II). 
The British Library conjectures 1634 as the publication date of 'Dido and Aeneas', Stapylton's translation of book 4 of the 'Aeneid'. It is a competent, even attractive, version; its dedication to a distant cousin, Lady Catherine Twisleton of Barley, Yorkshire, whose husband, Sir George, died young in 1635, suggests that this book with its theme of lost love may have been published in that year as a Roman 'consolatio' to a wife grieving over the untimely death of her husband. When civil war broke out, Stapylton followed the king to Nottingham, and was knighted there on 13 September 1642. After the battle of Edgehill he accompanied Charles to Oxford, where Stapylton was awarded DCL on 1 or 2 November. It was while in Oxford that he published a translation entitled 'Pliny's panegyricke: a speech in the senate wherein public thanks are presented to the Emperor Trajan' (1644). His fulsome dedication of the work to Prince Charles compares the boy to Trajan, the Roman general who as emperor brought freedom and sound administration to Rome after the disastrous reign of Domitian. Stapylton had obviously benefited from the rigorous classical education that the Benedictines gave him. The dedication is followed by an excellent account of Trajan and the younger Pliny, and the marginal notes to the translation show a good knowledge of imperial Rome. That same year Stapylton also published 'The first six satyrs of Juvenal... with annotations in clearing the obscure places out of the history, laws, and ceremonies of the Romans', dedicated to Pierrepont. This was the first published English translation of Juvenal, although Barton Holiday, whose own version appeared in 1673, unjustly accused Stapylton of plagiarism. In 1645 came 'The Loves of Hero and Leander', translated from the Greek of Musaeus, annexed with Ovid's 'Heroides' 18 and 19, the imagined letters between the two lovers. 
Stapylton was still in Oxford when it surrendered to Fairfax in May 1645, but left the following year. He then lived quietly as a gentleman scholar, and did not attract the attention of the authorities. In 1647 he republished 'Loves of Hero and Leander' and published a complete translation of Juvenal's satires, lightly revising those satires already published. His preface presents Juvenal as an arbiter of manners: 'I have for my Country's sake taught him our Language, which if you allow him to speake intelligibly and profitably, you may please to naturalize him by your Votes' ('Juvenal's Sixteen Satyrs', sig. A6'v'). Stapylton's 'De bello Belgico: the History of the Low-Countrey Warres' (1650) was an account, from the Latin of the Roman Jesuit, Faminius Strada, of the revolt of the Netherlands against the oppressive rule of Philip II of Spain. It was dedicated to Henry Pierrepont as a history worthy to rank with those of Livy, Sallust, and Tacitus 'in happiness and freedom of expression' (ibid., sig. A2'r'). Stapylton translated Strada's own introduction without adding one of his own, and reproduced Strada's marginal notes adapting them slightly to an English readership. Given the political situation in 1650, Stapylton flies no flags, except to demonstrate his admiration for Strada's objectivity and Latin style. Stapylton's prose has a vigour and epigrammatic point lacking in his verse: 'The bloudy Warre that grievously distempered Europe, still continued between 'Emperour Charles' the fifth, and 'Henry' the second, King of 'France', to whom their fathers with their Crowns had left their enmities and animosities' (ibid., 3). He also wrote complimentary verses for the 1648 edition of the earl of Monmouth's 'Romulus and Tarquine', and the posthumous 1651 collection of William Cartwright's works; though competent, his work does not come up to the standards set by fellow-contributors such as Henry and Thomas Vaughan and Sir Edward Sherburne. 
Evelyn's diary notes that Stapylton, 'the Translator of 'Juvenal'', visited him at Deptford on 16 May 1654; this careful identification suggests that they were not close friends (Evelyn, 3.98). It was probably about this time that Stapylton married Mrs Hope Hammond ('nee' Mainwaring). The complete silence about her suggests she was not of a prominent family. They do not seem to have had any children. 
At the Restoration, Charles II named Stapylton, now resident in London, as one of the gentleman ushers to the privy chamber. In the same year Stapylton's edition of Juvenal was extensively reworked for publication as 'Mores hominum' which, like his Pliny of 1644, had copious marginal notes and commentary. Dryden's description of Holiday as one whose 'Interpretation, and illustrations of 'Juvenal' are as Excellent, as the Verse of his Translation... are lame and pitiful' could equally well be applied to Stapylton ('Works of John Dryden', 4.70). However, Stapylton is linguistically somewhat closer to the original than Dryden's longer and more energetic version, as this comparison of lines from 'Satire I' shows: '
'Tis foolish pity, now so many are 

Turn'd Poets, Paper which they spoil to spare 
(Stapylton, 'Mores hominum', 3)' 
'
But, since the World with Writing is possest, 

I'll versifie in spite; and do my best 

To make as much waste Paper as the rest. 
('Works of John Dryden', 4.93)' Stapylton's career as a playwright had begun in 1653 with 'The Royal Choice', entered in the register of the Stationers' Company on 29 November but never performed. After the Restoration came 'The Slighted Maid' (1663), 'The Stepmother' (1664), and 'The Tragedy of Hero and Leander' (1669) which, taken from his translation of Musaeus for which he seems to have had great affection, was never acted. Pepys saw 'The Slighted Maid' on 29 May 1663, and thought it 'not very excellent but is well acted' (Pepys, 4.163); however, he was impressed enough to see it again on 28 June 1668. Stapylton's reputation as a playwright has not endured. His plots are sprawling and drawn largely from classical sources suitably dressed up. In deference to contemporary taste, the plays contain musical interludes and dancing reminiscent of the court masque. A more serious defect to modern eyes, they have no psychological sense of development of character, and the connection between incidents is not coherent. Though Stapylton figures in a small way in histories of English literature, none of his works has been reprinted since the 1660s, he is not discussed in most histories of English drama, and is very summarily dealt with by those who do mention him. 
Stapylton died in London on 10 or 11 July 1669 as a parishioner of St Martin-in-the-Fields, and was buried on the 15th near the vestry door of Westminster Abbey. Apart from some valuable legacies to members of the Pierrepont family, to his godson, Sir Miles Stapleton ['see below'], and to his servants, he left the bulk of his estate to a widow, Elizabeth Simpson, in gratitude for the care 'she took with mee in my long sicknes', and administrative obligations to his wife who contested the will on 23 November but lost (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/330, fol. 264'r'). He should be distinguished from a contemporary, Robert Stapylton, a graduate of St Alban Hall, Oxford, and MP. 
Robert's nephew, 
Although Sir Miles was known to be a staunch Catholic, he does not appear on the recusant lists. He protected himself by playing a full part in his community. His account books detail the expenses of entertaining and being entertained in his friends' houses; he was generous to local musicians and to small theatre companies who played in the manor; and as local squire he contributed to the upkeep of the parish church, and had a memorial placed there for his first wife following her death. His other line of defence was bribes to local officials to ensure that his family and other local Catholics were not reported to the courts as recusants (Cox, 22). The account books also list expenses for his chapel at Carlton, which dated from before the Reformation. He employed chaplains, and ensured that mass was frequently celebrated and that the chapel was carefully maintained. He also funded a number of priests who served local Catholics, and also a small Franciscan convent in the city of York. There were frequent donations to 'poore Catholickes' and for the relief of Catholics in the York prison awaiting trial for recusancy (ibid., 23-4). 
On 16 June 1680 Sir Miles was arraigned, together with his cousin Sir Thomas Gascoigne, Gascoigne's daughter Lady Tempest, and Thomas Thwing who had been Sir Miles's chaplain, of conspiracy to murder the king. The information had been laid by Robert Bolron, one of Sir Thomas's grooms, an industrious informer who earned himself at least $1000 through his activities. Sir Miles challenged so many jurors that the trial was postponed, and when he was finally tried on 18 July 1681, he was acquitted. Only Thomas Thwing was found guilty, probably because he was a priest. 
Sir Miles's wife, Elizabeth, died on 28 February 1684. He then married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Longueville, who outlived him; they had no children. During the wave of anti-popery that swept Yorkshire after the accession of William of Orange, Sir Miles and some members of his household were seized by an anti-Catholic mob and released only on the intervention of a certain Captain Tankard. Sir Miles died in Carlton in February 1707, and was buried on 19 February in the parish church at Snaith. 


@@@@@


doc= 26306


Stapleton, Theobald (1589-1647), Roman Catholic priest and author, was born in the diocese of Cashel, the son of John Stapleton and his wife, Fionnuala McNamara. He was taught Latin by Maurice Beggan in Tipperary before entering the Irish College in Salamanca in December 1609. A second Theobald Stapleton, also an Irish priest, was a contemporary of the first, and it is not always possible to distinguish between the two. However, it seems the first Stapleton was the student involved in the founding of the Irish College in Seville in 1612. Stapleton himself mentioned that he was ordained in 1616 and said his first mass in the chapel of the Incarnation in the royal palace in Madrid on 25 March of that year. 
It seems that Stapleton returned to Ireland in the early 1620s and spent twelve consecutive years in pastoral work there. During this time he decided to produce an Irish catechism for the proper instruction of the uneducated laity. The work was printed by Hubert Velpius in Brussels in 1639 and dedicated to Cardinal Don Fernando, infante of Spain and governor of the Spanish Netherlands. It is likely that Stapleton was in Flanders at the time of publication, and indeed there is evidence of a Theobald Stapleton in the royal court in Brussels in 1635. The catechism, in Latin called 'Catechismus, seu, Doctrina Christiana Latino-Hibernica', contains parallel columns of Latin and Irish and is in the form of a dialogue between master and pupil. In the preface Stapleton claims that Irish is in decline and blames the literati, who prefer obscurity to intelligibility, and the aristocracy, who, despising Irish, are eager to learn foreign languages. Since the bardic schools had ceased to function after the collapse of the Gaelic order at the beginning of the century, Stapleton's criticism of the learned class is a literary commonplace rather than a reflection of contemporary reality. Protestant devotional works in Irish had already appeared in roman characters in Scotland, but Stapleton's catechism was the first Catholic book in Irish to be printed in roman rather than Gaelic type. It was also the first serious attempt to simplify the orthography of Irish by removing quiescent letters. 
Stapleton returned to Ireland at some time in or before 1647, when he became caught up in the confederate wars. As one of the priests who sought refuge in Cashel Cathedral, he was killed there on 14 September 1647 by troops of Murrough O'Brien, Lord Inchiquin, who successfully sacked the city during that month. 


@@@@@


doc= 26307


Stapleton, Thomas (1535-1598), Roman Catholic theologian, was born at Henfield, Sussex, in July 1535. His father, William, a man of some substance and prominence in the county as steward to the bishop of Winchester, did not sympathize with the religious changes then being introduced into the realm. Although he kept his misgivings to himself, the forename he chose for his son may have had some significance: Thomas More had been executed only days before. The younger Stapleton in any case considered the name he shared with More 'a good omen', and when, toward the end of his life, he composed his 'Tres Thomae', which included a brief biography of the great chancellor, he observed: 'I remember well, and numberless people can testify with me, that the fame of this man and the memory of his martyrdom acted as a stimulus to us young people who wanted to hold fast to the Catholic faith' ('Opera', 4.935). 
Stapleton the boy learned his grammar at Canterbury School and passed from there to Winchester College where, he said, he found the regimen 'more rewarding'. At the age of fifteen he went up to Oxford, and on 18 January 1553 he was elected fellow of New College. At the end of 1556 he was awarded his bachelor's degree. Because of his association with the latter two institutions ('splendid colleges', he called them many years later), Stapleton could assume the proud title 'Wiccamite' (Wykehamist), and he liked to boast that the alumni of William of Wykeham's schools had played a lively role in resisting the Elizabethan religious settlement. 
The need for such resistance, however, was not yet apparent to the young scholar when, early in 1558, he was ordained priest and collated to a prebend in Chichester Cathedral. The change, swift and dramatic, was not long in coming. The unhappy Queen Mary died on 17 November 1558, and by the end of the year it was clear that the new monarch, Elizabeth, had no intention of maintaining the connection with Rome that her sister had re-established. The parliament that assembled in January 1559 passed in due course the 'Acts of Supremacy and Uniformity', which revived the state church and the protestant worship as they had developed in the days of the queen's father and brother. But in contrast to the similar situation created by Henry VIII twenty-five years before, this time more than a few prominent Catholics declined to conform. Some of them, in imitation of the protestants at the beginning of Mary's reign, decided to retire abroad and wait for better times. 
Among these latter was Thomas Stapleton who, late in 1559, departed England for the Low Countries, then under the dynastic sway of the king of Spain. The details of his going are obscure. 'Fearing the contagion of schism in my tender years', he explained vaguely in his 'Compendium', 'I came a fugitive to the learned benches of Louvain' ('Compendium'). Clearly the new protestant bishop of Chichester, William Barlow, considered the flight illegal: 'Misliking the proceedings of the realm, [Stapleton] conveyed himself over the seas without license under the wings of Count Feria' (Birt, 424-5). It is indeed possible that Stapleton left England in the company of the Spanish ambassador, who had married an English wife, Jane Dormer, and included several English clerics in his retinue. Once in Belgium, at any rate, Stapleton obtained the necessary royal warrant which permitted him to reside outside the kingdom for three years. The time was spent, characteristically, in study -- theology at Louvain and linguistics at the University of Paris. Toward the end of this sojourn, he made a pilgrimage to Rome, after which, once back in Belgium, he found letters from his father urgently requesting him to return to England. Whether domestic crisis, government pressure, or some other reason prompted William Stapleton's summons remains uncertain. 'I was scarcely home', his son wrote in his 'Counterblast', 'when I was called before the mock tribunal of the heretic jester to whom fair Chichester had become subject'. He told Bishop Barlow that he would swear that part of the oath of supremacy which acknowledged the queen as 'supreme governor' in temporal affairs, but 'upon refusal of the other [religious] part, he deprived me (as much as lay in him) of my prebend in Chichester Church'. If Stapleton had hoped that during his absence on the continent the clouds of heresy would pass away, and with them the threat to his own career, by early 1563 he knew better. Accompanied by his father and the rest of his family ('all of them very good Catholics, pious and devout'), he emigrated to Louvain. He never saw England again. 
Stapleton spent the rest of his life in the Low Countries. Except for an occasional trip to France and one to Italy, he never left them. He kept in close contact therefore with his fellow English refugees, the bulk of whom had settled in one Belgian town or another and waited, in the pathetic tradition of political exiles, for the day when their enemies at home would be turned out. At first they were sanguine that that day might come soon. After all, the faith that the Tudor family had originally disavowed it had later restored, and perhaps it could be persuaded to restore it again. This optimism, so completely out of tune with reality, inspired an avalanche of polemical writing in English, most of it emanating from presses located in the Netherlands. In this endeavour Stapleton made his controversial debut, or, as he expressed it, 'At this time I began to write my first books against the heretics, but in the vernacular tongue only' ('Compendium'). Indeed, his 'The Fortresse of the Faith' (1565), 'A Returne of Untruthes upon M. Jewelles Replie' (1566), and 'A Counterblast to M. Hornes Vayne Blaste' (1567) earned an honourable place within that recusant literature of the 1560s, which, taken as a whole, was so astonishingly erudite and stylish. Perhaps Stapleton's most enduring contribution to this sparkling collection of prose was his least controversial, a translation (1565) of Bede's 'Historia ecclesiastica'. 
But this literary offensive did not last; warriors, even verbal warriors, need more solid nourishment than dreams. As the first decade of their exile neared its end, the recusants had ruefully to admit that the Elizabethan regime gave no signs of collapse or amendment. Quite to the contrary, the failure of the rising launched by the northern earls (1569) and Pope Pius V's ill-advised excommunication of the queen (1570) appeared to have left her government stronger than ever. Moreover, the very land where the exiles had taken refuge became, after 1566, itself a pivotal battleground in the unhappy wars of religion. Stapleton was an eyewitness of one of the incidents that ignited this deadly contest. 'Coming by chance to town that afternoon', he left a vivid account of the sacking of the Catholic churches in Antwerp on the night of 19-20 August 1566: 'To describe particularly the horrible and outrageous sacrileges of that night, an eternal document of the gospellike zeal of this sacred brotherhood, would require a full treatise of itself' ('Counterblast', fols. 18-21). A result of these hostilities, crucial to the English intellectuals in exile, was the upheaval worked upon the Belgian printing industry. The recusant propaganda effort was thus stifled at its mechanical source, and after 1567 Stapleton never again published a work written in his native language. Given his remarkable literary skills, his decision to compose thereafter only in a rather ornate Renaissance Latin was a loss to English letters at a moment when the language had begun to approach the apogee it would reach in the next generation, with Shakespeare, Spenser, and the King James 'Bible'. But Stapleton knew and cared nothing about such matters; he was absorbed in the great ideological struggle of his time, and, like any author, he needed a public if he were to enjoy any satisfaction from his art. His readers would be thereafter the theological literati of Europe. 
In 1569 Stapleton took up residence in Douai. There, the year before, William Allen had opened the College des Pretres Anglais, an institution intended to prepare missionaries to serve in England the moment the old faith had been restored there. The four original students took their courses in the local university and received their spiritual formation in the two houses provided for them nearby. Ultimately the college became the nursery of heroes: once Allen was convinced that Catholicism at home could not long survive without priestly ministrations, he began to send the young men, variously disguised, into England, even though, if anything, the government's hostility had intensified. By the time Queen Elizabeth died, 450 Douai priests had served on the English mission, and 110 of them had been executed. 
Stapleton's retiring nature and bookish habits inclined him to work within the larger sphere of Douai University rather than in the single-minded ambience of the college. He was an admirer of Allen, but never an intimate or a protege. Both of them received doctorates from the university (10 July 1571), and both of them, once elevated to the faculty, were considered by academic colleagues 'professeurs distingues'. In 1580, however, when the wars in the Low Countries prompted Allen to move the college to Rheims, Stapleton remained behind. 'I am convinced', he wrote in the 'Compendium', 'that I must devote myself to study and literary labour in which alone I can be of service to the Church of God' ('Compendium'). Allen appreciated this attitude and never attempted to draw Stapleton either into the routine work of formation of the college or into the web of political intrigue, that, as the frustrating years passed, came gradually to preoccupy him. Already by 1576 plots were afoot to mount an 'enterprise of England', to enlist foreign intervention, that is, to topple the Elizabethan regime by force. When Stapleton that year departed for Rome, he carried with him a letter from Allen to a fellow conspirator. 'Our master, Dr. Stapleton', Allen wrote, 'is of himself quite eager to undertake the pilgrimage to Rome for the sake of devotion, but he knows nothing at all about the enterprise' ('Diaries of the English College', 307). 
From the time of his arrival in Douai -- during an era in which the European mind was obsessed with religious controversy -- Stapleton established a reputation as a foremost practitioner of the craft. In tract after enormous Latin tract -- his 'De universa justificationis doctrina, hodie controversa' (1581) ran to 350,000 words -- he addressed virtually all the theological issues that so bleakly divided Catholics and protestants. (These works are contained in four large folio volumes, published at Paris in 1620.) His books were verbose, repetitive, and unrelievedly harsh in the language directed against his opponents -- he titled one of them 'Speculum pravitatis haereticae' (1580) and to this 'mirror of heretical depravity' he added later a series of 'Antidota' to 'the poison of Calvin and [Theodore] Beza' (1595, 1598). But they manifested also enormous erudition; Stapleton knew the requisite classical languages, which opened to him the lore of the ecclesiastical past and present. Scripture, the fathers of the early church, the decrees of popes and councils, medieval divines as well as contemporary Catholic thinkers were all mobilized for the struggle. And, despite the verbal abuse he routinely heaped upon them, he paid his Lutheran, Calvinist, and Church of England adversaries the compliment of taking their arguments seriously. What he practised was the new style 'positive' theology; not the deductive, Aristotelian-inspired reasoning favoured by the scholastics but the inductive method of accumulation of evidence, made possible by the rediscovery of long-lost or neglected texts and precedents. The Oxford antiquary Anthony Wood may have reflected local bias when he called Stapleton 'the most learned Roman Catholic of all his time' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.669), but the claim was by no means indefensible. 
The relentless intellectual campaign, however, left psychological wounds. 'Year followed year', Stapleton recalled in the 'Compendium', 'and I grew weary of studies spoiled by contention'. Not that he failed to find an occasional literary diversion, most notably his charming 'Tres Thomae' (1588), biographical sketches of the trio of saintly patrons who bore his own name: Thomas the Apostle, Thomas Becket, and Thomas More. Even so, in 1585, at the age of fifty, he resigned his professorship and: 'longing for a kind of life in which the things of this world count for nothing, I fled to the cool shadows and hid myself in the cloisters of those fathers whom we call by the blessed name of Jesus.' The Jesuits at Douai received the famous theologian kindly though, considering his age, with reservations, which proved justified. 'For almost two years I put my powers to the test', Stapleton declared, but in the end he had to admit an inability to adjust to an entirely different mode of life. His departure caused no bitterness, and Stapleton remained, as he had always been, a stalwart supporter of the Society of Jesus. 
In 1590 Thomas Stapleton resumed his formal academic career by way of appointment to the chair of sacred scripture in the University of Louvain. This prestigious professorship he owed to King Philip of Spain, in whose defence the grateful theologian wrote a stirring pamphlet 'against the calumnies of Elizabeth, Queen of England' (1592). During his tenure in this his last office he published many controversial treatises as before, including the celebrated anti-Calvinist 'Antidota', and most of his equally pugnacious lectures. Yet he also turned his attention to more devotional and liturgical works, such as commentaries on the gospel passages designated to be read at mass on Sundays and feast days. Pope Clement VIII, elected in 1592, was a particular admirer of Stapleton's works and regularly had portions of them read to him. Meanwhile Cardinal Allen's long-delayed 'enterprise of England' had failed with the defeat of the Spanish Armada, and Allen himself died in 1594. From that date rumours began to circulate that Stapleton might be elevated to the Sacred College, now without an English incumbent. Stapleton put little stock in the gossip: 'The favour of his Holiness toward me now seemeth great, but what it may be hereafter is very uncertain, and I build not a jot thereupon' ('Diaries of the English College', 390). The pontiff did indeed promote him to a minor prelacy, but before a final decision could be made about a cardinal's hat, Stapleton died at Louvain on 12 October 1598. He was buried in St Peter's Church there beneath an appropriately fulsome Latin epitaph. Perhaps a better testament he wrote himself in his native tongue when a young man: 'I trust the queen's majesty, once well considering, will graciously bear with the Catholics that do not envy [her titles], but only desire that their consciences may not be straitened for one of them. Which they upon great grounds and they verily think without impairing of her worldly estate, cannot by oath assuredly avouch; which thing they trust they may do without any just suspicion of sedition or rebellion. ('Counterblast', fols. 26-7)' 



@@@@@


doc= 26308


Stapleton, Thomas (1806-1849), antiquary, born on 16 October 1806, was the second of the five sons (there were also three daughters) of Thomas Stapleton (1788-1839) of Carlton Hall, Yorkshire, and his first wife, Maria Juliana (died 1827), daughter of Sir Robert Gerard, ninth baronet. His elder brother, Miles Thomas Stapleton, was the eighth Baron Beaumont. On the death of his father he succeeded to some landed property near Richmond, Yorkshire. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 15 January 1839, and, being a close friend of John Gage Rokewode, its director, he took a keen interest in the society's operations. He was one of its vice-presidents from 1846 to 1850. His most important literary work was his introduction to and edition of the rolls of the Norman exchequer, printed by the Society of Antiquaries as 'Magni rotuli scaccarii Normanniae sub regibus Angliae' (2 vols., 1841-4), which 150 years later remains the authoritative edition of these important twelfth-century records. He also contributed several papers to 'Archaeologia', the Society of Antiquaries' journal. At the meeting of the Archaeological Institute at York in 1846 he read a long memoir on the secular canons of the church of the Holy Trinity, otherwise Christ Church, in York, and its conversion into a priory of Benedictine monks. 
Stapleton became a fellow of the Royal Society. He was also one of the founders of the Camden Society, and undertook one of its earliest works, 'The Plumpton Correspondence' (1839), an important collection of fifteenth-century letters known partially from seventeenth-century transcripts. He edited for the same society in 1846 the chronicle of London from 1178 to 1274, entitled 'De antiquis legibus liber' and the 'Chronicon Petroburgense', which ill health prevented him from completing as he would have wished. It was later issued after the addition of an introduction by a second editor, John Bruce. It was reprinted in 1968. Stapleton died unmarried at Cromwell Cottage, Old Brompton, London, on 4 December 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 26309


Stapley, Anthony (bap. 1590, d. 1655), politician and regicide, was baptized at Framfield, Sussex, on 30 August 1590, the son of Anthony Stapley (died 1606) of Framfield and his third wife, Ann, daughter of John Thatcher of Priesthawes, Sussex. The Stapley family moved from Framfield to Patcham about 1625. Stapley gave $10 to the new building at Christ's College, Cambridge, about 1640, and was probably educated there and at Gray's Inn. In May 1614 he married Ann (died 1637), daughter of George Goring and sister of George Goring, later earl of Norwich. They had three sons and one daughter. After her death Stapley married Anne, 'nee' Harding (died 1654), widow of Sir Edward Clarke of Reading. She died on 15 January 1654. 
Stapley represented the borough of New Shoreham in the parliaments of 1624 and 1625, and the borough of Lewes in that of 1628, having unseated Sir George Rivers by petition. He was returned both for the county of Sussex and for the borough of Lewes to the Short Parliament in 1640, when he chose to sit for the county, and was re-elected by the county to the Long Parliament. He was one of the most prominent godly gentlemen in Sussex during the Caroline period, working with Sir Thomas Pelham to endow a puritan lectureship at Lewes and as fellow guardian of a future parliamentarian grandee, Herbert Morley. In 1639 he refused to contribute to the first bishops' war and in January 1640 he was labelled by one of Laud's chaplains as one of the ringleaders of the 'Puritan faction' on the county bench ('CSP dom.', '1639-40', 386-7). In the Long Parliament he was active against recusants, and as a supporter of 'root and branch' reform of the church. 
During the civil war Stapley received a colonel's commission in the parliamentary army, and was zealous in organizing the war effort in Sussex, particularly through the county committee. In 1643 he was made governor of the garrison at Chichester, where he distinguished himself by challenging the orders of his superiors, as in early 1644 when he raised objections to quartering troops of Sir William Waller. The dispute was referred to a committee of the House of Commons, and finally to the committee of both kingdoms on 26 February. Stapley was ordered by both bodies to observe Waller's commands, and following the passing of the self-denying ordinance in 1645 was succeeded at Chichester by Colonel Algernon Sidney. 
Thereafter, Stapley was intermittently active in both the Commons and the county as a 'war party' Independent, and supported the radical element in the Rump after Pride's Purge. He served as one of the judges of Charles I, attending all of the sessions of the trial and signing the death warrant on 29 January 1649 ['see also 'Regicides]. He was elected a member of the first council of state of the Commonwealth on 17 February 1649 (when he signed the engagement), and re-elected in February 1650, November 1651, and November 1652. He had joined the admiralty committee in January 1649, and was made vice-admiral of Sussex in 1650. His principal allies during the Commonwealth were Sir Henry Vane the younger and Morley, but unlike many republicans Stapley supported Cromwell after the dissolution of the Rump. He was one of Cromwell's council of thirteen (29 April to 14 July 1653), and one of Barebone's Parliament (July to December 1653). Despite his advanced age, he was also returned, for Sussex, to the first protectorate parliament in 1654. He died early in 1655, and was buried at Patcham on 31 January. 


At the Restoration, Stapley contrived to win the king's favour: he was created a baronet on 28 July 1660, knighted on 6 August, and managed to prevent the family estates from being forfeited to the crown for his father's role in the trial of Charles I. He represented Sussex in the Convention Parliament in 1660, and was elected again for the county in 1661. Subsequently he lived largely in retirement in Sussex. About 1651 he had married Mary (1635-1709), eldest daughter and coheir of Sir Herbert Springett of Broyle Place, Ringmer, Sussex, with whom he had two sons, who predeceased him, and several daughters. He died on 22 August 1701, when the baronetcy became extinct, and was buried at Ringmer. 


@@@@@


doc= 26310


Sir John Stapley, baronet (bap. 1628, d. 1701), royalist conspirator, his second but eldest surviving son, was baptized at Patcham on 29 June 1628 and educated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge. He represented the county of Sussex in the parliaments of 1654 and 1656 and in 1654 was appointed 'custos rotulorum' in Sussex. His sympathy with royalism had been clear since 1648, when he signed the Sussex petition sympathetic to the king's cause, and in 1657 he became entangled in a plot hatched by a group of royalists and presbyterians for the return of Charles II. At the house of his kinswoman Lady Campion he had come under the influence of John Hewit and John, Lord Mordaunt. Ostensibly with a view to expiating his father's guilt, he promised to venture his life and fortune for the royal cause. In June 1657 he received through Hewit a commission from the exiled king to raise a troop of horse and six colonels' commissions, to be distributed at his discretion. His interest in the county was considered to be great, and his promises of support to the royalist party were confident. Doubts were, however, thrown upon his ability to carry out all his plans, not least by Ormond. Such suspicions were confirmed when the plot began to unravel in April 1658, partly through the treachery of one of Stapley's men, and due to the efficiency of Cromwell's intelligencers and spies. Stapley was quickly arrested, and protected himself by means of abject apologies to Cromwell, and by implicating his co-conspirators, leading to the arrests of Hewit, Mordaunt, and Sir Henry Slingsby. Cromwell, however, dismissed Stapley with a reproof, presumably on account of his friendship with his father. Stapley appeared as a witness against Mordaunt at his trial on 2 July 1658 but, according to Clarendon, answered 'in so disorderly and confused a manner that it appeared that he had much rather not have said it' ('Clarendon State Papers', 6.63). His younger brother Anthony, who was also concerned in the plot, saved himself by similar means. 


@@@@@


doc= 26311


Stark, Adam (1784-1867), bookseller and antiquary, was born on 24 February 1784 in Edinburgh. His parentage has not been established. According to his great-grandson he attended Edinburgh high school, and in 1803 or 1804 went into partnership with his cousin John Stark as a printer and bookseller in Edinburgh. He was to remain in this trade all his working life, but did not stay long in his native city; he moved first to Manchester, then ('c'.1807) to Hull and to Lincoln, before settling in Gainsborough in 1814. In Lincoln he published the short-lived 'Hull and Lincoln Chronicle' in 1809, and in the same year married Jane Trotter ('b'. 1788), of Lincoln, with whom he had four children, two of whom survived infancy, before she died in 1813. Once settled in Gainsborough, Stark married, on 22 February 1815, Harriet, the second daughter of John Mozley and sister of the bookseller Henry Mozley, to whose business he appears to have succeeded in that year. (Harriet was the aunt of James Bowling Mozley, Thomas Mozley, and Anne Mozley.) In addition to his bookselling and printing business in Gainsborough market place Stark acted as postmaster for the town, served as a churchwarden from 1820 to 1822, and was prominent in many of the urban movements and improvements of the period. He satisfied his journalistic ambitions by becoming north Lincolnshire news-gatherer for the 'Lincoln, Rutland and Stamford Mercury', the leading county newspaper, whose moderate liberal politics probably suited his own views. He was also the author of several publications, but is chiefly remembered for his 'History and Antiquities of Gainsburgh' (1817; 2nd edn, 1843). 
An industrious antiquary, Stark sought out and used a range of local manuscript sources, but was not familiar with the major national collections, and today his work is most valuable for its portrait of Gainsborough as an improving early nineteenth-century town and port, taken from his personal knowledge and experience. Harriet Mozley died in 1835, having had ten children, and in 1838 Stark married his third wife, Sarah Wooton, of Newington, Kent. She died in 1842. Stark died at Gainsborough on 31 December 1867, and his library was sold the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 26312


Stark, James (1794-1859), landscape painter, was born on 19 November 1794 in the parish of St Michael Coslany, Norwich, the youngest of four children of Michael Stark (1749-1831), a dyer from Fife, Scotland, and his wife, Jane (1757-1843), daughter of John Ivory, a Norwich stonemason. Stark attended Norwich grammar school, and during this time he became a frequent visitor to the painting room of Norwich school artist John Crome (1768-1821) through his friendship with his son John Berney Crome (1794-1842). In 1811 he was articled to John Crome for three years. George Vincent (1796-1832) was also a pupil of Crome at this time. At the end of his apprenticeship in 1814 Stark moved to London to study figure drawing. He remained in contact with Crome, who in his famous letter dated 1816 (1817?) advised his former pupil 'Brea[d]th must be attended to, if you paint but a muscle give it brea[d]th' (BL, Add. MS 43830, fol. 73). In 1817 he entered the Royal Academy Schools. He was at the time living at 85 Newman Street with another Norwich artist, Joseph Clover (1779-1853), who painted his portrait, to which Stark added the landscape background (1818; Norwich Castle Museum and Art Gallery). In 1818 he was awarded a premium by the British Institution for his painting 'Lambeth, Looking towards Westminster Bridge' (Yale Center for British Art, New Haven), bought by the Countess De Grey. 
Even at this early stage in his career Stark had an impressive list of patrons, but by 1821 a painful illness forced him to return to his family in Norwich. Poor health, probably caused by kidney stones, was to affect him for the rest of his life and initially prevented him from painting for three years. In 1821 he began experimenting with etching. Only six etchings are known (British Museum, London), two of which are dated April 1821. On 17 July 1821 he married Elizabeth Dinmore (1792-1834) of King's Lynn. They had three surviving children. Their son, Arthur James Stark (1831-1902), became a landscape and animal painter. From 1809 Stark had been a regular exhibitor with the Norwich Society of Artists, and continued exhibiting with it until 1832. He became its vice-president in 1828 and 1829 and president in 1830, and in 1827 he read an essay to its members 'on the moral and political influence of the Fine Arts' urging public support for the arts ('Norwich Mercury', 26 May 1827). Also in 1827 he began issuing thirty-six engravings in four parts of 'Scenery of the rivers of Norfolk, comprising the Yare, the Waveney, and the Bure. From pictures painted by James Stark, with historical and geological descriptions by J. W. Robberds, jun. esq.' (published in a single volume in 1834). The plates were engraved by sixteen different engravers. In 1830 Stark and his family returned to London and took a house at 14 Beaufort Row, Chelsea, but in 1834 Stark's wife died of consumption. He moved to 10 York Place, Windsor, in 1840 and for the next ten years found subjects for his paintings in the wooded landscape of the royal park. In 1849 he moved back to London to lodgings at 35 Norfolk Street, Strand, to allow his son to pursue his training in art, but Stark 'had by this time become too ill to paint, and the two were leading a hand-to-mouth existence on the proceeds of [Arthur Stark's] exhibits' (J. A. Stark, New Dudley Gallery exhibition catalogue, London, 1907). 
Despite his delicate health, Stark's exhibits indicate wide travel throughout Britain. His earlier paintings of glades or grove scenes typify the Norwich school landscape and show the predominant influence of Crome and the Dutch school, particularly Hobbema. Following his move to London in 1830, his touch became lighter with fresher colours and more open compositions, as in 'Cromer' ('c'.1835; Norwich Castle Museum and Art Gallery), while his Windsor paintings have more dashing brushstrokes. He did not usually sign his work. His watercolours, which are freely drawn with a use of clear, green colour, were frequently unfinished. His work is well represented in the collection of Norwich Castle Museum and Art Gallery. Stark exhibited widely in Norwich and in London with the Royal Academy (1811-59), the British Institution (1814-59), the Royal Watercolour Society (1817-19), and the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists (1824-48), as well as in other major cities in Britain. His pupils were Samuel David Colkett ('c'.1806-1863), Alfred Priest (1810-1850), Henry Jutsum (1816-1869), and his son Arthur James Stark, who on occasion painted the animals in his father's landscapes. Stark had a wide circle of artist friends including William Collins (1788-1847), Edward William Cooke (1811-1880), with whom he went on several sketching trips, and John Sell Cotman (1782-1842). James Stark died on 24 March 1859 at his home, 9 Mornington Place, Hampstead Road, London, of disease of the kidneys and bladder, and was taken back to Norwich to be buried in the Rosary cemetery on 28 March. He died intestate with an estate of less than $200. 


@@@@@


doc= 26313


Stark, William (1740-1770), physician, born in Birmingham in July 1740, was the eldest son of Thomas Stark, a merchant of Manchester. He studied philosophy at Glasgow University, where he graduated MA in 1758, and then proceeded to Edinburgh, where he became friends with William Cullen. He moved to London in 1765, and concentrated on the study of medicine, entering as a pupil at St George's Hospital. He studied anatomy under John Hunter (1728-1773), and undertook experiments on blood and other animal fluids. On 2 September 1766 he graduated MD at Leiden, publishing his thesis, 'Specimen medicum inaugurale septem historias et dissectiones dysentericorum exhibens' (1766). 
In June 1769 Stark began a series of experiments on diet, in which he was greatly encouraged by Sir John Pringle. The keenness with which Stark tried these experiments on himself ruined his health, and he died on 23 February 1770. 'The works of the late William Stark... consisting of clinical and anatomical observations, with experiments dietetical and statical' (1788) were edited by his friend James Carmichael Smyth. Stark recorded his diet, together with any weight loss or gain and his mood. This final experiment involved a diet of honey and flour, which he lived on for several days, until his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 26314


Starke, Mariana (1762-1838), traveller and writer, was born in the last week of September 1762 and baptized at Epsom, Surrey, on 23 October; she was the eldest daughter of Richard Starke (1719-1794), of Hylands House, Epsom, and his wife, Mary (1734/5-1816), daughter of Isaac Hughes of Banstead, Surrey. Her father, born in Madras, was an officer of the East India Company and was deputy-governor of Fort St David, Madras, from 1752 to 1756, when he returned to England. Her younger brother, Richard Isaac Starke ('b'. 1768), acquired through marriage Laugharne Castle, Carmarthenshire; her sister Louise died in Nice in 1791. 
Brought up at Hylands House, Mariana Starke wrote two plays on themes of Anglo-Indian life, 'The Sword of Peace' (1789) and 'The Widow of Malabar' (1791), but there is no evidence that she ever visited India. A third play, 'The Tournament' (1800), was in imitation of an earlier German one, and her first, 'The British Orphan', was unpublished. The Indian plays are known to have been performed briefly. She is also thought to have been the author of 'The Poor Soldier' (2nd edn, 1789), an account in verse of Charles Short, American loyalist of South Carolina. 
Mariana Starke spent seven years in Italy, from 1792 to 1798, attending a consumptive relative; her father died in Pisa in 1794 and was buried in Leghorn. This residence and her considerable linguistic abilities that prompted her next publications, particularly the travel guides on which her fame was later to rest. 'Letters from Italy' (2 vols., 1800) reached a second edition and was translated into German. She moved to Exmouth, Devon, before the publication in 1811 of 'The Beauties of Carlo Maria Maggi', but revisited Italy in 1817-19 and published 'Travels on the Continent' (1820) and 'Information and Directions for Travellers on the Continent' (1824), which went to several editions and translations before being enlarged and republished as 'Travels in Europe' (1832). The various editions and versions enlarged the geographical scope of their predecessors, and brought up to date the very detailed practical advice on accommodation, expenses, food, and itineraries she gave to travellers. Pirated editions appeared as the fame of the books spread. Her publisher, John Murray, realized the success of the genre and used the format as the basis of his famous guides from 1836 onwards. The books convey the impression of the immense complexity of travel in the early nineteenth century, the huge quantities of traps which travellers -- particularly those who suffered ill health -- felt obliged to haul about with them, the dangers and discomforts (real or imagined) which they faced, and the benefits they hoped to derive. Mariana Starke died, aged seventy-six, at Milan on a journey from Naples to England at the end of April 1838. 


@@@@@


doc= 26315


Starkey, George (1628-1665), alchemist, medical practitioner, and writer, was born George Stirk on 8 or 9 June 1628 in Bermuda, the first child of George Stirk or Stirke ('c'.1595-1637), a Scottish minister of Calvinist persuasions who had settled there in 1622, and Elizabeth Painter. In or before 1650 he changed his name to Starkey. He had at least four siblings: Sibill or Elizabeth ('bap'. 1629), Mary ('bap'. 1632), Agnes ('bap'. 1633), and Samuel ('bap'. 1635). Before 20 May 1650 he married Susanna Stoughton (died 1662), the daughter of the prominent Colonel Israel Stoughton of Dorchester, Massachusetts, and the sister of William Stoughton, future governor of Massachusetts. Their marriage seems to have been childless. 
Early in life Starkey displayed some interest in natural history, for his entomological observations of Bermudan mayflies, silk-spiders, and horse flies were later collected by his English colleagues. He left Bermuda some time after his father's death in 1637 and in 1643 entered Harvard College, where he was tutored by college president Henry Dunster; he graduated AB in 1646 and AM about 1649. He was introduced to alchemical theory as part of the Harvard curriculum, and, accompanied by his classmate John Alcocke (died 1667), soon took up its practical application under the guidance of Richard Palgrave (died 1651), a physician of Charlestown. Starkey established a close friendship with Dr Robert Child (1613-1654), an important member of the Hartlib circle, and was in close contact with the younger John Winthrop, who lent him laboratory apparatus and reagents. 
In the autumn of 1650 Starkey emigrated to England, despite having set up a profitable medical practice in the Boston area. On his arrival in London he joined the loose circle of friends and correspondents of Samuel Hartlib, who were interested in scientific, economic, and educational reform. Lodging at first in Hosier Lane, he soon moved in with one Webbe, an associate of Hartlib, probably to be identified with the brewer and chemist Francis Webbe. He met Hartlib's friend John Durie and his wife, and appears to have undertaken, in 1652, the manufacture of perfumes with Durie at St James's Palace, where Durie was library keeper. He also seems to have lived there for a time. 
The Hartlib circle was a major centre for interest in chemical technology of all sorts, but above all in the works of J. B. Van Helmont. Robert Boyle was a member of the group and he promoted Starkey's ventures in the areas of metallic transmutation and the manufacture of pharmaceuticals -- particularly those which followed Van Helmont. The two men collaborated on the production of a drug called 'ens veneris', a copper compound of Helmontian provenance, during the early 1650s. At the same time Boyle took a keen interest in Starkey's 'sophic mercury' (to be identified with Boyle's 'incalescent mercury' described in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of 1675). The sophic mercury, made from an amalgam of antimony, silver, and mercury, is described in a letter written by Starkey to Boyle in 1651 (part of this letter, called the 'Clavis', was later transcribed by Isaac Newton). The sophic mercury dissolved gold and underwent metallic 'vegetation' -- the formation of dendritic crystals -- when heated in a sealed container with the precious metal. The end result of this slow heating was supposed to be the production of the philosopher's stone, an agent for transmuting base metals into noble ones. 
Although Starkey's sophic mercury was sufficiently remarkable to impress Boyle, and later to interest John Locke and Isaac Newton, it appears that his excessive claims led him into serious debt. Thus Hartlib wrote to Boyle in February 1654 that Starkey had been imprisoned as a debtor, that he had fled to Rotherhithe, and that he was 'altogether degenerated'. Starkey's financial situation never recovered its former level, and his reputation with Hartlib sank accordingly. 
After his release from prison Starkey lived in Bristol from about April 1655 to April 1656. At the urging of one Dux Watson, he worked as a refiner of unspecified ores there, perhaps also practising medicine. On his return to London he published two Helmontian treatises, 'Natures Explication and Helmont's Vindication' (1657), dedicated to the regicide mayor of London, Robert Tichborne, and 'Pyrotechny Asserted and Illustrated' (1658). At the time of writing 'Pyrotechny' he was lodging at the White Swan in Foster Lane. 'Natures Explication' adopts a strikingly invective tone, and in the book Starkey challenges the 'Galenical tribe' -- mainly the orthodox members of the College of Physicians -- to a sort of duel. Rejecting their humoral medicine and its purgative therapies, Starkey suggests that a sample of clinical patients be divided up into respective groups of ten, to be treated either by himself or his opponent. The opponent must pay Starkey an unspecified amount for each patient cured by Helmontian means, while Starkey will pay twice that amount for each one brought to health by Galenical methods. This uncompromising assault on the College of Physicians brought unspecified retributions, and may have contributed to a damaging lawsuit by William Currer, another medical practitioner. None the less, 'Natures Explication' and 'Pyrotechny' were fairly popular even into the eighteenth century, having been translated into French, Dutch, and German. Starkey's Helmontian diatribes were even read by the young J. W. von Goethe, who says in his 'Dichtung und Wahrheit' that he perused one or more of these medical texts while suffering from a chronic illness during his student years. 
Although these books were fairly successful, Starkey's real fame sprang from a series of manuscripts circulated initially within the Hartlib circle. These texts, written under pseudonyms such as Eirenaeus Philalethes ('a peaceful lover of truth'), Eirenaeus Philoponos Philalethes, Anonymus Philalethes, Agricola Rhomaeus, and Philosophus Americanus, contain elaborately veiled recipes for the sophic mercury described openly in Starkey's 'Clavis'. The most famous of the Philalethan works, the 'Introitus apertus ad occlusum regis palatium' (published in 1667), was written between 1651 and 1654, at the height of Starkey's Hartlibian association. The 'Introitus' was calculated to arouse interest among Hartlib and his group, and contains numerous allusions to their chiliastic and reformatory goals. About the same time Starkey produced his 'De metallorum metamorphosi, Brevis manuductio ad rubinum coelestem', and 'Fons chemicae philosophiae' (published as 'Tres tractatus' in 1669), and a number of commentaries on the fifteenth-century alchemist George Ripley, which were published in 1678 as 'Ripley Reviv'd'. All of these works, along with the verse 'Marrow of Alchemy' (1654-5), were attributed to Philalethes. 
Starkey spread the rumour that Philalethes was a young friend of his, still living in America, who had discovered the philosopher's stone. (A biography of this Philalethes was included in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' together with that of Starkey.) Because it was widely believed that the philosopher's stone could cure disease as well as transmute base metals, Philalethes was said to have rejuvenated a withered peach tree and restored an elderly woman's hair and teeth. When Philalethes' works were published, mostly after Starkey's own death, they met with huge success. The 'Introitus apertus' went through at least nine Latin editions, and appeared in English, French, German, and Spanish as well. Philalethes' 'Opera omnia' were collected, and published in the unlikely setting of Modena in 1695. Isaac Newton, now known to have written over a million words on alchemy, numbered Philalethes among his favourite authors. There is good reason to believe that Newton's theories about the corpuscular microstructure of matter and the chemical affinities operating among those corpuscles owe a significant debt to Starkey's Philalethan writings. Newton's arch-rival Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, another devoted student of alchemy, also read Philalethes, and Georg Ernst Stahl, founder of the phlogiston theory of combustion, had a profound knowledge of Philalethes' alchemical writings. Though Stahl ardently opposed dissembling alchemists, he did not deny the possibility of metallic transmutation, and praised Philalethes highly in his own 'Philosophical Principles of Universal Chemistry' (1730) as 'that candid and ingenuous author'. 
Despite the immense popularity of Philalethes' works, few readers suspected that Starkey was the real man behind the mask. Only the most recent scholarship has definitely proved that he and Philalethes were one. In the late seventeenth century it was widely believed that the 'American philosopher' was still living in the New World, long after Starkey's demise in the London plague of 1665. Ironically, the success that Starkey sought was visited more lavishly on his literary creation than on himself. Indeed, subsequent commentators on Philalethes often portrayed Starkey in unflattering terms as a drunken and dishonest rogue who schemed to extract his master's secrets. 
Starkey's undesirable reputation was surely bolstered by the pamphleteering activities in which he engaged during and after the Restoration. Despite the fact that 'Natures Explication' was dedicated to Tichborne, Starkey wrote three pro-monarchy treatises in 1660, 'The Dignity of Kingship Asserted', 'Britains Triumph', and 'Royal and other Innocent Bloud Crying Aloud to Heaven for due Vengeance'. These earned him the reputation of being a trimmer, although his conciliatory position towards Charles II was not inconsistent with the mood of other Presbyterians. 'The Dignity of Kingship Asserted' in fact contains a defence of Presbyterianism, and suggests an alliance between Anglicans and Presbyterians in favour of the Restoration. At this time Starkey was dwelling in St Thomas Apostles 'next door to Black-lyon-Court'. 
The same year saw the beginning of Starkey's embroilment in a number of pamphlet wars with other medical practitioners. One Richard Matthew or Mathew had in 1655 acquired secret recipes for 'Starkey's pill', a compound employing salt of tartar to detoxify opium. In 1660 Matthew marketed the pill as his own in a book entitled 'The Unlearned Alchymist his Antidote'. Following Matthew's sudden death, subsequent editions of this work and advertising broadsheets were brought out by Anne Matthew, his widow. In response Starkey published complaints against the Matthew concern in his 'The Admirable Efficacy and Almost Incredible Virtue of True Oyl, which is Made of Sulphur-vive' (1660), and 'George Starkey's Pill Vindicated' (undated). The success of Matthew's pill continued unabated. Starkey, meanwhile, entered a period during which he frequently moved -- five times in the period from January 1663 to June 1664 (from Fleet-yard to an uncertain address, then to Blackfriars, back to St Thomas Apostles, and finally to Bartholomew Lane and Broadstreet). It is likely that he was fleeing his creditors and possibly persecution from the medical authorities. 
A more bitter exchange soon took place between Starkey and Lionel Lockyer (died 1672), a chymical empiric who had great success marketing a 'Pill Extracted from the Rays of the Sun' (an antimony compound). Feeling threatened by the encroachment of unlettered practitioners such as Lockyer on his market niche, Starkey denounced the antimonial pill in a 'Brief Examination and Censure' published in 1664. This was met with a sharp reply by one 'G. S.', accusing Starkey of gross improprieties. Starkey rebutted this attack in 'A Smart Scourge for a Silly, Sawcy Fool' (1664), which was met by a counter-attack attributed to 'Philo-Chemicus', and called 'Aut Helmont aut asinus'. Philo-Chemicus alleges, probably correctly, that Starkey had furnished himself with a spurious medical degree, and that he was a heavy drinker. 
Starkey's dedication to drink, which is corroborated by his own 'A perfect day booke' or diary, was believed by his contemporaries to have contributed in a surprising fashion to his death. When the great plague began in London in the spring of 1665, most of the established medical profession fled. The buildings housing the College of Physicians at Amen Corner were abandoned, and sacked by thieves. The chymical physicians of London, however, viewed this dereliction as an opportunity to show the superiority of their Helmontian plague remedies to the ineffectual medicines of the Galenists. Under the leadership of Thomas O'Dowde, a courtier and author of 'The Poor Man's Physician' (1665), an attempt had already been started to establish a Society of Chemical Physicians as an iatrochemical counterpart to the college. With the support of the duke of Buckingham and the archbishop of Canterbury, O'Dowde made a petition for letters patent. Among the signatories were such Helmontians as George Thomson, Jeremiah Astell, and George Starkey, all of whom remained in London during the epidemic. Starkey and other followers of Van Helmont believed they had discovered an effective therapy, the use of a preparation called 'xenexton', consisting principally of a dried toad (sometimes pulverized) hung about the neck. The toad corpse supposedly emitted plague-attacking atoms that penetrated the body of the patient. Starkey's friend Thomson relates in his 'Loimotomia' (1666) that the New Englander tried to cure himself when he realized that he was infected with plague, but found that his prior consumption of an inordinate quantity of small beer had caused his pores to contract, rendering the 'xenexton' incapable of penetrating his skin. He died that very night, in the late summer of 1665, probably in penury. 
Starkey's historical significance has been little appreciated until recently, in part because of his use of pseudonyms, and in part because his major area of interest, alchemy, was long vilified by historians of science. Despite his nineteenth-century reputation as a minor quack or charlatan, he was the first English-speaking native of the New World to be widely read on the European continent, and became the most famous scientific figure of Anglophone America until Benjamin Franklin. His colourful cures and the flamboyance of his fictive adept, Eirenaeus Philalethes, have done much to obscure the genuine significance of his work, yet it is clear that his writings were an important vehicle for spreading the influential doctrine that chemical phenomena can be explained as the interaction of insensible particles accompanied by powers or forces. 
Starkey's various foibles were common to the times. The use of seemingly bizarre medicines was widespread in the seventeenth century, as was the use of pseudonyms, especially among alchemists. What is unusual about Starkey is the wide dispersion of his works and their influence even into the eighteenth century. His example throws serious doubt on the widespread belief that New England's intellectual attainments in the seventeenth century were of a strictly parochial character. 


@@@@@


doc= 26316


Starkey, Sir Humphrey (d. 1486), justice, was the son of Richard Starkey and his wife, Margaret, of Northwich, Cheshire, and also had connections with Essex. He was living in London in 1445, and had perhaps entered the Inner Temple by 1451, although he is first mentioned as a lawyer in the year-books only in Hilary term 1454. In 1471 he was elected recorder of London, in succession to his friend Sir Thomas Urswyck, and in Trinity term 1478 became a serjeant. He resigned the recordership on being appointed chief baron of the exchequer during the short reign of Edward V, on 15 June 1483. On the accession of Richard III he was knighted, and was continued in his office. He also acted as a justice of the common pleas during the reign of Richard III and was continued in both his offices by Henry VII. The last fine levied before him was at midsummer 1486. 
Starkey married Isabel (possibly 'nee' Walden). He died on 21 or 27 August 1486 and was buried at St Leonard, Shoreditch, where a lost monument commemorated him and his wife, with their three sons and eight daughters. By the time of Starkey's death only one son, Richard, and four daughters (Emma, Anne, Katherine, and Elizabeth) survived. He left money for Richard to be educated at Clifford's Inn and then to go to the Temple or one of the other inns of court. Richard may instead have attended Pembroke College, Cambridge, to which he bequeathed his 'Bible' in 1492; he was unmarried at his death and his heirs were his sisters and their children. Starkey's widow later married William Denton, esquire, of Babraham, Cambridgeshire, where she willed burial at her death in 1496. As well as land in Shoreditch and London, Starkey held the manors of Germains in Kelvedon and Slades in Navestock, Essex, and the manors of Hever and Little Woldham in Kent. The latter, where he built a house, was later known as Starkeys. 


@@@@@


doc= 26317


Starkey, Ralph (d. 1628), archivist and merchant, was the second but eldest surviving son of John Starkey (died 'c'.1613) of Darley Hall, Cheshire, and his wife, Alice (died 1620), daughter of Ralph Dutton of Dutton, Cheshire. His family was distantly related to that of Thomas Starkey ('c'.1498-1538), humanist and royal servant. While nothing is known of his education, Starkey was knowledgeable in English law, history, and politics, and skilled in trade. Ralph is said to have been defrauded of his estates on his father's death about 1613 by his younger brother Henry (died 1653), who destroyed their father's will ('CSP dom.', '1623-5', 313). He petitioned the House of Lords in 1626 to settle the disputed will in the chancery because Henry wished to have it adjudicated in the court of the county palatine of Chester, where he had local influence. The Lords ruled in Ralph's favour (J. S. Hart, 'Justice upon Petition', 1991, 44). Starkey married Winifred, daughter of Richard Poynter of Whitchurch, Hampshire, and his wife, Susanna. They had a son and two daughters. While he became a minor London merchant, he devoted his career to the collection and transcription of state papers and other manuscripts. He also attended several law readings at the inns of court, where he took notes. 
An avid collector of old deeds, manuscripts, and coins, Starkey was also interested in collecting contemporary letters and official documents throughout his career. Since many of these were controversial, this occasionally caused problems for him and his family. In 1612 his wife wrote to Sir Robert Cotton for assistance against his 'enemies' (BL, Harley MS 7002, fol. 205). By 1619 he had acquired many important and confidential papers that had belonged to William Davison, secretary of state to Queen Elizabeth. The government, wanting to keep the papers secret, issued a warrant to Sir Thomas Wilson on 10 August 1619 authorizing him to search Starkey's house and seize Davison's papers. Wilson did this on the 14th, delivering to the government a sack containing forty-five parcels. 
The more important manuscripts that Starkey collected for the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries included letters from Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, Sir Philip Sidney, and Francis Walsingham, papers on the laws, customs, and constitution of England, state papers, acts of the privy council, patents and charters, contemporary law cases, and papers concerning the economy. Many of his state papers were not included in the later collection of state papers domestic. He also left many family and personal papers. He copied numerous manuscripts from Cotton's library, which he initialled while residing there, lending Cotton many manuscripts that were not returned. The authorship of some of the parliamentary diaries of James's reign, extant in Starkey's hand, are still in dispute (K. Sharpe, 'Sir Robert Cotton', 1979, 251-2), however he did compose a treatise on the high court of parliament. The treatise was similar to many others under the same title in the period, and it is not altogether clear how much of it was his own work. A collection of precedents and procedural devices, it was intended perhaps for a London audience. It was used throughout the parliamentary debates of the first half of the seventeenth century, which accounts for the survival of so many copies in various archival collections. 
Starkey died in October 1628 at his Bloomsbury residence. According to a commission for the execution of his will issued to his daughter Elizabeth at his house in St Giles-in-the-Fields, Middlesex, he left goods and chattels valued at $58 2's'. 4died There was competition for his papers, and D'Ewes bought most of them for $140 in an agreement with Arthur Barnardiston, Ambrose Scudamore, and Nicholas Bragge on 22 October 1628. D'Ewes's grandson sold them to Sir Robert Harley, and they are now in the Harley collection at the British Library. Others went to Sir Edward Dering, and ended up in the Additional MSS collection. According to D'Ewes, Starkey was 'an ignorant, mercenary, indigent man' ('Autobiography', 1.391). This was an uncharitable comment from the benefactor of a lifelong collector, and may have more to do with Starkey's success, nurtured by an independent career as a London merchant. 


@@@@@


doc= 26318


Starkey, Thomas (c.1498-1538), humanist and royal servant, was born in Cheshire to another Thomas Starkey, probably at Wrenbury, where the family was prominent. His father probably held office in Wales and was wealthy enough to pay for his son's education. His mother, Maud, was a daughter of Sir John Mainwaring, one of the wealthiest men in the palatinate. 
Starkey may have gone to Magdalen College School before taking both his BA (30 June 1516) and MA (18 March 1521) at Magdalen College, Oxford. From 1518 to 1522 he was a fellow of Magdalen. He was friendly with the noted grammarian Robert Whittington, and also knew Edward Wotton, Thomas Lupset, and, above all, Reginald Pole, at Oxford, to all three of whom he became very close. Starkey may have absorbed from Whittington the Ciceronian vocabulary that was fundamental to his later political thought. In 1522 Starkey gave his regent lectures on natural philosophy and Thomas Wolsey appointed him a university proctor for six months. Possibly through Lupset, Starkey came in contact with John Colet's Pauline and Augustinian ideas about disdain for the world in preference for a Christian community, as well as about the need for justification by faith followed by an active life. 
Probably in 1523 Starkey went with Lupset to Padua, where he is certainly recorded on 10 April 1525 when he witnessed Wotton's MD examination. Although there is no direct evidence that he joined Pole's household, he knew Pole's principal tutor Niccolo Leonico well. It looks very much as if Starkey must also have known Pietro Bembo, former papal secretary and one of the most important poets and theorists of language of the early sixteenth century; Bembo was one of the first people Pole had met in Padua. It may be that Bembo's 'Prose della volgar lingua' (1526; 'On prose written in the vernacular') inspired Starkey's decision to write his most important work in English. Leonico included Starkey together with his old friends Cuthbert Tunstall and William Latimer in a greeting of March 1529. By then Starkey had certainly entered Pole's service as secretary. Starkey accompanied Pole to Paris in 1529-30 (immediately after their return Starkey became rector of Great Mongeham, Kent, on 31 July 1530), and at that time and during Pole's retirement to Sheen thereafter, Starkey drafted his most famous work, the 'Dialogue between Pole and Lupset'. It was largely completed in its single manuscript -- probably not the first draft -- by 1532, with a few later touches added. 
A broad and syncretic humanist education manifests itself throughout the 'Dialogue'. Starkey's dialogue, the first in English to deal with serious matters of the commonwealth, was nevertheless a playful creation. Carefully honed rhetorical skills allowed Starkey to play constantly with language, fulfilling the humanist demand for copiousness. Key terms were repeatedly defined in slightly different fashion, as Starkey used language as much to coax a new world into existence as to analyse an existing one. The work rested on the most extensive use known of the slippery metaphor of the body politic, reflecting Starkey's twin interests in natural philosophy and civil science. Originally intending the work for his patron Pole in order to persuade him to take his proper place at (or near) the head of the English commonwealth, Starkey later changed his aim and tried unsuccessfully to redirect the work to Henry VIII. This change of audience produced several major instabilities in the work's interpretation, since Henry in no way resembled the elective monarch surrounded by his properly trained noble counsellors that Starkey had in mind. 
Starkey derived his system of interlocking councils designed to check royal (and papal) power from a typically complex set of sources. One was the Venetian government, making Starkey's perhaps the earliest use of a model that would become pervasive in seventeenth-century England. He almost certainly knew the Florentine republican exile Donato Giannotti's explication of the Venetian constitution, written in Padua during Starkey's time there and with Leonico cast as the principal speaker. He must also have been familiar with the ideas behind the work of Pole's patron Gasparo Contarini, 'De magistratibus et republica Venetorum' ('On the magistrates and republic of the Venetians'). Native late medieval English ideas of baronial government probably also entered in. This mixture produced an apparent precocity that has often led the central ideas in Starkey's work to be fathered on Marsilio of Padua, the fourteenth-century political thinker who developed a naturalistic view of civil society designed to exclude papal power. In fact, Starkey had no need of Marsilio's example, since they drew in common on Aristotle, whose idea that the mixed constitution was superior because of its combination of all three of the perfect forms of government (monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy) undergirded the 'Dialogue'. Like Aristotle, he placed greatest emphasis on the aristocratic component. Starkey further drew from Aristotle the tenet that happiness depended on the unity of body and soul, and required both friends and material goods for its completion. 
In addition to its proposals to restrict the monarch's power, the reformist edge of the 'Dialogue' most sharply challenged the nobility. Noble education needed a complete overhaul in order to fit it for service to the common weal. Perhaps Starkey's most radical individual proposal was that civil law should replace common law, thereby effectively overthrowing the Norman yoke, a concept with which he was familiar, even if he did not yet use the term. Only the gentry and nobility were to be trained as lawyers; dissolved monasteries, especially St Albans, rich and convenient to London, would become their academies. Starkey proposed a similar scheme for ecclesiastical government where an aristocratic mixed constitution would limit the pope's power in the same way as the king's. This, too, has been blamed on Marsilio, but again Starkey had no need of his ideas since, as before, they were working in a common tradition in which the latter's position was much more conservative and mainstream. Starkey was especially well acquainted with Parisian conciliarism, a school of thought stressing the importance of general councils to the church's government, and was exposed to it at just the time he began to write his work. Starkey's commitment to conciliarism later led him to propose resolving Henry's divorce through the council's agency, which may have been a scheme originally floated in Pole's circles, given Henry Cole's suggestion of the same solution. 
While Starkey continued to polish the 'Dialogue' for another year or two, he also acted to put its principles into effect in his own career. In company with Pole, he went to Avignon in 1532 and began to study civil law, probably with Gianfrancesco Sannazaro della Ripa, who like Starkey viewed the church as an oligarchy. Pole proceeded to Padua, where Starkey rejoined him and studied privately probably with Marco Mantova Benavides. Mantova belonged to the vibrant Paduan tradition of conciliarism taken straight from its most distinguished representative, Francesco Zabarella, light of the Council of Constance (1414-17) and in philosophy with Marcantonio de Genova, a leading Aristotelian. Starkey moved in the highest circles of the Paduan and Venetian intellectual aristocracy, having as friends the prominent Ciceronian Lazzaro Bonamico (object during Starkey's stay of a dispute involving Pole over whether Bonamico should become a theologian); Benedetto Lampridio, a noted Greek poet, much in demand as tutor in both Padua and Mantua; Contarini; Giovanni Battista Egnazio, a Venetian educator and early polygraph; and the Fleming Jan van Kampen, whose lectures on biblical hermeneutics Starkey undoubtedly attended. All of these friends and teachers as well as Pole, with the possible exception of Bonamico, shared with Starkey similarly evangelical (but not protestant) religious views, which may account for the marked turn towards religion in the last part of the 'Dialogue'. 
Starkey must have continued in Pole's household, given his close friendship with many of its inmates. These included Henry Cole and George Lily, the second of whom, while rejecting Starkey's advice to study civil law nevertheless demonstrated for Starkey that he thought ancient Rome the perfect model for England. He also knew Richard Morison, who was on the fringes of Pole's circle. Morison repeatedly begged Starkey for patronage after Starkey's return to England, and Starkey acted as intermediary for Morison to his own patron, Henry's chief minister, Thomas Cromwell. Starkey was especially close to Pole's butler Bernardino Sandro, copyist of many Greek manuscripts including a large number belonging to Pole, and to whom Starkey entrusted his books when he left Venice, and the unofficial English ambassador to Venice, Edmund Harvel. 
Although lacking a patron in England, Starkey returned home in late 1534. Pole evidently recommended him to his mother, the countess of Salisbury, and her eldest son, Henry Pole, Lord Montague, in whose house in Dowgate, London, Starkey lived for a time. In early 1535 he caught Cromwell's eye, and became a royal familiar, in an unknown capacity. A royal chaplaincy may have come about the same time. Cromwell used Starkey in two capacities: he handled intelligence from Italy, for which he constantly badgered his correspondents; and he wrote propaganda for use in England. Starkey's most important assignment in the first role was a lengthy correspondence with Pole beginning in February 1535 in the course of which Starkey tried to get Pole to give his opinion of Henry's divorce and the supreme headship. In the second role, Starkey began with a failure when he could not persuade the Carthusian Richard Reynolds to cease his opposition to the royal supremacy. Starkey made good use of ideas he had developed in the 'Dialogue' in both cases. Cromwell was well enough satisfied to ask Starkey to describe for him 'What is policy after the sentence [opinion] of Aristotle'. Starkey converted this task into a rhetorical exercise, making 'What is policy' into an oration intended for popular consumption. The speech was constructed around the body politic and Aristotle's mixed constitution, but Starkey wisely omitted the dangerous implications he had drawn from them in the 'Dialogue'. 
Throughout late 1535 and early 1536 Starkey's career flourished. He succeeded in inducing Pole to begin writing his 'Pro ecclesiasticae unitatis defensione' ('De unitate'; 'Defence of the unity of the church'), although it turned out to be scarcely what Henry or Cromwell wanted, and he continued to write himself. He began 'An Exhortation to the People Instructing them to Unity and Obedience' (1536) in summer 1535, without a commission. Cromwell, eager to quiet the discontent following on the executions of John Fisher and Thomas More, soon took an interest. The work argued a religious case for civil obedience drawn from the apostle Paul. Starkey grounded his point in the concept of 'adiaphora', things indifferent or morally neutral, and claimed that the prince therefore had the right to command them without inspiring opposition from his subjects. Following Cromwell's lead, Starkey deployed the fundamental Aristotelian concept of the mean, arguing that England had set out to strike just such a balance intermediate between the pope's Catholicism and more radical protestantism. Starkey, no more than Cromwell, did not worry much about doctrine, contenting himself with arguing on the most disputed question the Coletian conclusion that both faith and works were necessary, and suggesting, in a rather Erasmian turn, that the most succinct formulation of faith was best. For Starkey, this was the Nicene creed. Not by coincidence, this statement derived from the Council of Nicaea in which the emperor Constantine, one of Henry's favourite ancient precursors, had taken a leading role. This precedent naturally evolved into an extended attack on papal primacy during which Starkey argued that most of the pope's power should be shifted to secular rulers and, echoing the preamble to the 'Act in Restraint of Appeals', to 'a whole congregation and perfect... our nation'. 
Starkey's development of the 'via media' in the 'Exhortation' has been taken as one of the fundamental documents of this peculiarly Anglican concept, yet the idea was in wide circulation before 1535, and most of the incentive to build it into the work came from Cromwell. The reception of the 'Exhortation' underscores its long-term lack of importance. The Elizabethans never mentioned it, nor did their late Stuart and Georgian successors, who gave a great deal of attention to the 'via media'. Even in the short term, 'An Exhortation' was overshadowed by Morison's pithier (and shorter) propaganda aimed at the Pilgrimage of Grace. Starkey's efforts to write propaganda against the pilgrims amounted only to a three-page draft, perhaps because of latent sympathy with them. 
Shortly after the publication of 'An Exhortation', the manuscript of Pole's 'De unitate' arrived in England. Its violent attacks on Henry caused Starkey difficulties, but Cromwell accepted Pole's suggestion that Starkey be included in a committee to read the work. Henry suspected Starkey of having prevaricated about his knowledge of Pole's thinking, and Cromwell accused him of both duplicity and seditious preaching. Nevertheless, Starkey still hoped to put some of his plans into effect, and drafted a long letter to the king about the opportunities open to him in the wake of Anne Boleyn's disgrace, especially how he might use the proceeds of the dissolution of the monasteries, and perhaps about now dusted off the 'Dialogue' for Henry. But just to be safe, Starkey had then withdrawn to his benefice of warden of St Mary's chantry (held since 13 May 1531) in Bosham, Sussex. Henry restored Starkey to his good graces faster than Cromwell did, if indeed that ever happened. In December 1536 the king gave him the mastership of the important collegiate church of St Laurence Pountney in London, not far from Dowgate; the patron could have been the marquess of Exeter, although the wealthy London alderman Paul Withypoll probably had more to do with the appointment. 
His standing with Cromwell largely destroyed, Starkey turned his writing in other directions and went back to Latin instead of the vernacular. He planned two massive projects in the last biennium of his life, although neither got past the stage of notes. Both seem intended to steer a personal 'via media'. The first, a florilegium from the 'Old Testament', may have been collected in preparation for an opening to Pole, perhaps even a defence of him. It is in keeping with the tone of Starkey's final conciliatory letter to Pole of 16 January 1537. Henry did not get off so lightly. The work contains various criticisms of royal policy, most of them resting on the exegetical principle that what the prophets had said about kings still applied, a dangerous echo of one of Pole's basic strategies in 'De unitate'. For example, Starkey wrote that 'God admonished kings [through] prophets, but they did not hear, whence they perished. Manasseh sinned and shed much innocent blood' (Mayer, 256). Ezekiel had promised 'punishment for those who kill citizens without mercy', which must be an at least implicit response to the recent executions of Fisher and More. One of the most explicit morals was drawn from King David who 'fell into sedition and hatred and infinite evils on account of one sin', adultery (ibid., 257). The parallel to Henry could hardly be clearer. Starkey, moving ever closer to the conservatives, insisted that 'the status of the commonweal must not be changed on account of errors and abuses' (ibid., 250). In a marked parallel to Pole's work, Starkey went out of his way to draw from Pole's favourite prophet 'Ezekiel' the maxim that bad princes were a divine punishment; but unlike Pole, Starkey left no remedy against them, not even the nobility of the 'Dialogue'. The only recourse was penance, as it had been for David, the same point Pole had reached. The most important purpose of these notes, however, was to record the completion of Starkey's turn to a spiritual religion and profound faith in divine providence, once again the same point that Pole reached at the same time. The colophon, dated 14 October 1537, flatly rejected Starkey's earlier interest in natural science. He did not therefore give up his Coletian criticism of the clergy nor his allegiance to conciliarism, neither in the 'Old Testament' sketch, nor more importantly in another outline for a refutation of Albert Pighe's 'Hierarchiae ecclesiasticae assertio' ('Assertion of the ecclesiastical hierarchy') (1538). Pighe worried the English because he had made Henry and his divorce a special target, and the 'Assertio' particularly alarmed Starkey because of its full-scale assault on conciliarism. His notes are also significant since Pighe said a great deal about Marsilio, and Starkey largely ignored it. 
Starkey preserved a semblance of a public career as well. In March 1537 the king ordered him to confer with the bishops about some of the articles to be included in the 'Bishops' Book'. In January 1538 he served on a commission investigating a case of witchcraft, before preaching for the king in March. Probably shortly thereafter Starkey left London and went to North Petherton, Somerset. His motive was almost certainly prudential. As emerged from the investigation of the so-called Courtenay conspiracy, Starkey was deeply involved in leaking information about moves against Pole to his brothers Henry and Sir Geoffrey Pole. The investigators focused on Starkey in their second and third interrogations of Sir Geoffrey. They learned that he had passed on the official response to 'De unitate' and the warning that only the king could prevent Cromwell's vengeance on the Pole family. It also emerged that Starkey's servant had carried letters from abroad for the exile John Helyar, who would be attainted in the same act as the Courtenay conspirators. Starkey's name was singled out in the margin of the transcript in the same fashion as were those of all the others later indicted. Somehow he escaped. He died on 25 August 1538, perhaps of plague, naming his servant Robert Sigbroke and Wotton, who also received all of Starkey's books, as his executors. His largest bequest, $40, went to his father in repayment for his education. He requested burial in the chancel of St Mary's, North Petherton, where a small brass of a cleric may be his memorial. Perhaps because of uncertainties arising out of the Courtenay conspiracy investigations, his will did not pass through probate until 1544. 


@@@@@


doc= 26319


Starkie, Thomas (1782-1849), barrister and jurist, eldest son of the Revd Thomas Starkie, vicar of Blackburn, Lancashire, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Thomas Yatman, was born at Blackburn vicarage on 12 April 1782. He was educated at Clitheroe grammar school and St John's College, Cambridge, where he was entered as a pensioner on 2 January 1799. He was senior wrangler and first Smith's prizeman in 1803, in which year he graduated BA; he proceeded MA in 1806. He was elected to a fellowship of St Catharine's College, Cambridge, in 1803, which he relinquished on his marriage in 1812 to Lucy, eldest daughter of the Revd Thomas Dunham Whitaker, vicar of Whalley, Lancashire. 
After being a pupil in the chambers of Joseph Chitty the elder (1775-1841), Starkie was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 23 May 1810, and immediately joined the northern circuit. He also practised as a special pleader as well as in the common-law courts, and was KC at Lancaster before obtaining the rank of QC at Westminster Hall. In 1823 he was elected Downing professor of law at Cambridge. Although allowing students to attend his lectures without paying a fee, he generally attracted very small numbers, and he abandoned giving lectures within a couple of years of his appointment. In 1833 he gave lectures at the Inner Temple, but although his learning and range were great, he was not regarded as a good lecturer, even in comparison with his contemporary John Austin, and both sets of lectures were sparsely attended. 
In 1833 Starkie was appointed as a member of the royal commission set up by Lord Henry Brougham to codify the criminal law, which produced eight reports between 1834 and 1845. He also sat on the subsequent royal commission for revising and consolidating the criminal law, which produced five reports, the last appearing in 1849, after his death. Starkie played a leading role on these commissions, although disagreeing with his fellow commissioners over some points of principle. One of his colleagues, Bellenden Ker, complained to Brougham of Starkie's 'childish' moods and his 'desultory and wayward' habits, and the way he muddled his papers 'into a crumpled heap in his breaches pocket' (Brougham MSS). Starkie was also for some time a law reporter, and the author of 'Practical Treatise on the Law of Slander, Libel, and Incidentally of Malicious Prosecutions', first published in 1812. This was the most important work of its time on its subject, and was praised for its strong grasp of general principles and great power of arrangement. He also published 'A Practical Treatise on the Law of Evidence' in 1824, which became a standard work in its field. 
Starkie was originally a tory in politics, and strenuously opposed the 'Roman Catholic Emancipation Bill'. However, his politics later changed, and in 1840 he stood as a Liberal candidate for the borough of Cambridge, but lost the election to his Conservative opponent, Sir Alexander Grant. In 1847 he became judge of the Clerkenwell small-debts court, which had jurisdiction over the greater part of Middlesex. He died in his rooms in Downing College, Cambridge, on 15 April 1849. He had five children, of whom two daughters survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26320


Starley, James (1831-1881), bicycle manufacturer, was born on 21 April 1831 at Woodbine Cottage, Albourne, Sussex, the fourth of five children of Daniel Starley (1804-1856), a farmer, and his wife, Ann Stenning (1800-1852). He began working on his father's farm when he was only nine but did not find agricultural labour to his liking so ran away to London, where he found work as a trainee gardener with a Mrs Bower at Lewisham. While there his ability in mending clocks and sewing machines in his spare time attracted the attention of John Penn, an eminent marine engineer. Penn persuaded Starley to become his gardener and, observing at close hand his mechanical skill over two years, encouraged his friend, Josiah Turner, a midland businessman and partner in Newton Wilson, engineers, in Holborn, London, to employ him. 
Starley's career with the London firm began with repairing and making minor improvements in sewing machines, especially in improving the treadle mechanism, and during this time he took out a patent on a machine of his own invention, the European. Turner was quick to recognize Starley's talent and, at the former's suggestion, both broke away from Newton Wilson and moved to Coventry where they formed the Coventry Sewing Machine Company in 1857. Starley was appointed foreman of the new venture and he continued to manufacture the European with the help of four skilled men. Over a number of years he invented and patented many kinds of sewing machines, including the Godiva, the Express, and the Swiftsure. At the end of the 1860s the firm began to face competition from cheaper imports and Turner and Starley actively sought alternative products. Inspiration came from Turner's nephew, Rowley, who after seeing an exhibition of velocipedes in France, obtained an order for 400 and persuaded his uncle and Starley to produce them. So successful was this venture that the firm changed its name to the Coventry Machinists Company. 
The first bicycle produced was the C Spring and Step machine, or the Coventry Model, whose principal selling feature lay in its curved spring, its small rear wheel, and a step for mounting. This was followed by the Ariel bicycle which was developed jointly with William Hillman, a former employee. From then onwards new inventions and subsequent improvements followed in quick succession. Among Starley's improvements were advances in spoke technology. The intention was to develop lighter cycles and he initially experimented with spokes made of brass and then of steel strips, before moving on to hairpin wire spokes. These innovations culminated in the Tangent wheel in 1874, which had spokes set aslant, allowing it to be set at different tensions. 
Amid this activity Starley ceased to be a partner in the Coventry Machinists Company and set up on his own in St John Street, Coventry. However, he continued to make the Ariel bicycle as well as sewing machines (including the well-known Europa model). Subsequently he entered into partnership with Borthwick Smith, and the firm of Smith and Starley was formed and opened for business in St Agnes Street in Coventry's Cheylesmore district, where production of the Ariel was refined, including the development of a side saddle mounting for ladies. Starley's agile mind was always active and in the later 1870s he produced a series of further inventions. The first of these was the chain driven, single-drive Coventry Lever Tricycle which proved extremely popular. The initial steering of the machine, patented in 1876, was tiller driven, but this was replaced early on with a rack-and-pinion device. Other developments included the Royal Salvo cycle with its differential gears (1877), followed three years later by the Compressor, a folding bicycle. Other new products included the Meteor cycle, as well as his masterpiece, the Salvo quadricycle, which entranced Queen Victoria when she encountered one on the Isle of Wight. In 1881, Starley presented the queen with two tricycles and in return was presented with a watch. 
Starley married Ann Todd (1826-1900), a sewing maid five years his senior, at the Union Chapel, Greenwich, on 22 September 1853. They had three sons, James, John Marshall, and William, all of whom joined the cycle trade. His nephew, John Kemp Starley, also lived with the family and learned the business with him. Starley died from liver cancer at his home in Upper Well Street, Coventry, on 17 June 1881, and was buried in Coventry cemetery on the 21st. Three years later a monument was erected to his memory in Coventry's Queen's Road. Although his inventions did not make him a wealthy man, Starley's achievement was to make bicycles popular and capable of general use; his business helped make Coventry the centre of the UK cycle trade. 


@@@@@


doc= 26321


Statham, Nicholas (d. 1472), lawyer, was the third son of John Statham (died 1454) of Morley, Derbyshire. He had become a member of Lincoln's Inn by 1449, serving as pensioner of the inn in 1455-6 and as a governor intermittently from 1456. The Statham mentioned as a member of the inn in 1420 may have been his father. Nicholas Statham was a bencher by 1466, and his only recorded reading, during Lent 1472 (a few months before his death), was probably his second; an undated reading on the 'Statute of Marlborough', 'secundum Stathum', is still extant. From 1458 until his death he was a justice of the peace for Derbyshire, and he served twice in parliament (for Old Sarum in 1467-8, and for an unknown constituency in 1470-71). He was admitted to the Mercers' Company in 1468 as a man of court. Although he attained the important post of attorney-general to the duchy of Lancaster, he held it only for one year before his early death in July or August 1472. He had by then already been appointed second baron of the exchequer in reversion, but he died before the reversion fell in. Clearly he was a lawyer of some promise, cut off in his prime. His wife, Anne, 'nee' Shelley, and an infant daughter of the same name survived him. 
Statham is chiefly remembered for an abridgement of cases printed anonymously in Rouen, for Richard Pynson, about 1490. This book, the first example of a printed abridgement, and the first major enterprise by Pynson, bears no title; but it has been known since early Tudor times as 'Statham' and there is no other candidate for the attribution. The abridgement is of a type which became common in the 1450s, and contains no material later than 1461. It could have been a book merely owned by Statham; and yet a legal joke from Derbyshire (concerning the miller of Matlock), under the heading 'Toll', might be taken to afford some confirmation of Statham's involvement in its compilation. The abridgement was never reprinted, being soon overtaken by the larger abridgements of Fitzherbert and Brooke. Stow recorded a monument formerly in St James Garlickhythe, where Statham was buried, in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 26322


Staunton, Edmund (1600-1671), ejected minister and college head, was born on 20 October 1600, the third son of Francis, later Sir Francis, Staunton (died 1639) of Birchmore in Woburn, Bedfordshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Edmund Staunton. He attended Eton College from 1613 until 1615, when on 9 June he matriculated from Wadham College, Oxford. On 4 October of the same year he was admitted scholar of Corpus Christi College, and in March 1617 he was transferred to a probationary fellowship. Staunton's religious conversion is said to have followed a serious illness at about the age of eighteen and a narrow escape from drowning about 1620. That year he graduated BA, and on 8 August was admitted to Gray's Inn. He proceeded MA in 1623. 
After brief employment as a lecturer at Witney, Oxfordshire, on 19 April 1627 Staunton was instituted rector of Bushey, Hertfordshire. While serving there he married the daughter of a Mr Scudamore of Watford, but she soon died. In July 1629 he married Mary Balthorp of Bushey. In February 1633 Staunton became vicar of Kingston, Surrey, having exchanged Bushey for Kingston with Dr George Seton in settlement of a lawsuit between them. At Kingston he became known as 'the searching preacher', who, according to his biographer Richard Mayo, catechized the 'younger and ignorant sort of people' and 'taught them also from house to house', and who: 'within a little time, partly by his powerful Preaching, partly by his holy and exemplary life... wrought a general reformation throughout the Town, both amongst Magistrates, and people; he was lov'd by all those that were Godly, and fear'd by those that were wicked. (Mayo, 11)' Having proceeded DD in 1634, Staunton was suspended from Kingston on 24 January 1635 for his refusal to read the 'Book of Sports', the suspension lasting approximately three-and-a-half years. He supported parliament on the outbreak of civil war, and was among the first ministers to be nominated to the assembly of divines. He was an influential member of the assembly, and was particularly involved in the work of its committee for the catechism. He preached before parliament several times, and was one of the six regular preachers in Westminster Abbey. He was instrumental in setting up a regular Thursday meeting of Surrey ministers at Kingston, and was active in moves to establish a classical presbyterian system in the county. His last years at Kingston were troubled by conflicts with religious radicals, most notably when the Kingston separatist and future Quaker John Fielder sought reparations from the town's authorities for his arrest in 1645 for holding conventicles and working on the sabbath. The arrest in Kingston in 1648 of the future Digger William Everard, and the subsequent dispute between Gerrard Winstanley and local ministers, is, however, most likely to have taken place just after Staunton's departure from the town. 
Staunton was appointed president of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 22 May 1648, following the ejection of Dr Robert Newlyn. Although he retained the incumbency of Kingston, and in 1649 signed the 'Vindication of the Ministers of the Gospel' in protest against the king's execution as pastor of Kingston, his place as minister in the town was filled by Richard Mayo. At Corpus Staunton was noted for his presbyterian zeal and for his imposition of greater discipline in the college, but also for his failure to produce learned works, being reckoned, as James Metford noted, 'a man that had parts but idle' (Fowler, 217). Metford also claimed that Staunton 'labourd not to augment Learning, nor urged any other Authors but the Assemblers Catechisme: which was an ungratefull taske put on the Scholars' (ibid., 217). However, many acknowledged him to be an efficient president, and an improvement on his predecessor. From June 1652 until 1654 he also served on the university's new board of visitors. 
Following the Restoration, Newlyn was reinstated to his former office and Staunton was ejected from Corpus on 3 August 1660. He retired to Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire, where he continued preaching until silenced in 1662. In later years he preached privately in and around St Albans, and occasionally in London and Kingston. The meeting-house at Salters' Hall, London, was said by Robert Watts to have been built for him. His final place of residence was Bovingdon, Hertfordshire, where he compiled his will in April 1669. The manor or grange of Caldecott, in the parish of Bow Buckhill, Buckinghamshire, which he had purchased with his father in November 1628, he left in trust for the maintenance of his wife, Mary. The trustees included two ejected ministers, Dr John Conant of Northampton and Henry Cornish of Stanton Harcourt, as well as Ambrose Upton of Highgate, to whom he left his commonplace books and sermon notes. Mary was allowed to select twenty of his books in English for her own use, the bulk of the rest of his books being left to their son Francis, who was also named executor. Francis was the only one of their children to survive into adulthood, three daughters and seven sons having been buried in Kingston church before the move to Oxford. Staunton died on 14 July 1671, possibly, as Wood was informed, 'under a hedg, suddenly in a journey' (Clark), and he was buried in the chancel of Bovingdon church. 


@@@@@


doc= 26323


Staunton, Francis French (c.1779-1825), army officer in the East India Company, went to India as a cadet in 1797 and was commissioned as ensign in the Bombay army on 21 September 1798. He became lieutenant on 6 March 1800 and captain on 18 June 1807. He served in the Anglo-Mysore War, including the storming of Seringapatam, and in the campaign of 1801 in Egypt. His outstanding achievement was the action at Koregaon, in which he repulsed the army of the 'peshwa', Baji Rao, on 1 January 1818. He was ordered from Sirur to Poona to reinforce Colonel Burr with 500 men of the 2nd battalion 1st Bombay native infantry (Bombay Grenadiers) -- his own regiment -- 300 irregular horse, and 24 men of the Madras artillery, with two 6-pounders. After a night march of 27 miles he reached the Bhima at 10 a.m., and found the army of the 'peshwa' drawn up on the opposite side: reportedly 5000 infantry and 25,000 cavalry. He placed his men in the village of Koregaon and there they fought all day without food or water. The British troops (all native except the artillery) lost nearly 200 men in killed and wounded, including six out of the seven English officers, but they held out until night. Next morning they found that the 'peshwa' had retreated upon news of the approach of reinforcements. A stone obelisk marked the spot. The battalion was made a grenadier battalion, and Staunton was nominated CB and aide-de-camp to the governor-general. He was promoted major on 15 April 1819, and lieutenant-colonel on 28 September 1823. Sailing from Bombay to England, he died on board the 'Florentia' on 25 June 1825. 


@@@@@


doc= 26324


Staunton, Sir George Leonard, first baronet (1737-1801), physician and diplomatist, was born at Cargin, co. Galway, on 10 April 1737, the only son and heir of George Staunton (1700-1780), landowner and colonel of militia, and his wife, Margaret ('c'.1700-1784), daughter of John Leonard of Carra, co. Galway. In 1753 he was sent to complete his education in France at the Jesuit college in Toulouse and a year later he joined the school of medicine in Montpellier, whence he graduated MD in 1758. In October the following year he arrived in London and acquired a reputation as a writer on medical subjects. He counted Dr Johnson among his friends, and Boswell quotes a farewell letter from Staunton to Johnson on his departure for the West Indies in 1762. There he practised as a physician and held several official appointments, being at one time secretary to the governor of Dominica. Having acquired a large fortune he purchased an estate in Grenada, where he took up the legal profession. 
In 1770 Staunton returned to England, and on 22 July 1771 he married Jane (1753-1823), daughter of Benjamin Collins (bap. 1715, d. 1785), banker and newspaper proprietor of Milford House, near Salisbury, and his second wife, Mary Cooper (1725?-1808). They had two sons, George ('b'. 1775), who died in infancy, and George Thomas Staunton (1781-1859), Sinologist and politician. His interests being neglected by agents Staunton was obliged to return to the West Indies in 1772. He remained there until 1779 and became a member of the legislative council and attorney-general for Grenada. In 1774 he began his lifelong friendship with George Macartney (afterwards Earl Macartney), who that year had been appointed governor of Grenada and Tobago. When Grenada was attacked by the French in 1779 Staunton, as colonel of militia and aide-de-camp to the governor, took an active part in the defence. Following capitulation he and his wife were among the hostages sent to Paris. He left the West Indies a ruined man, his plantations having been pillaged by the freebooters following the French fleet and army. During his detention in France he managed to enjoy an active social life; he was also able to negotiate an exchange of prisoners that released Lord Macartney from his parole, and in 1781, when Macartney was appointed governor of Madras, Staunton accompanied him as private secretary. In this capacity he proved a very able assistant and performed several important missions for Macartney, who was often in dispute with Warren Hastings. 
In 1782 Staunton was dispatched to Calcutta for a confidential conference with Hastings but failed to improve relations between him and Macartney. In 1783, secret information having been received from England of the near conclusion of peace with France, Staunton was appointed to negotiate with the marquis de Bussy and Admiral Suffren for a suspension of hostilities. In September that year he was sent, with a small party of sepoys, to arrest the commander of the Madras troops, General James Stuart, who had defied the governor's authority. Later in the year, with two other envoys, he was appointed to treat with Tipu Sultan; after protracted negotiations a treaty of peace was signed at Mangalore on 11 March 1784. Lord Macartney's appreciation was conveyed in a letter of 28 July 1784 to the court of directors of the East India Company. On the same day, in a private letter to Charles James Fox, he wrote that Staunton's 'sound head and singular talents peculiarly fit him for public business' ('Private Correspondence of Lord Macartney', 224). 
Staunton was sent back by Macartney to England in 1784 with official dispatches and letters to several prominent politicians about the state of affairs in India. The court of directors awarded him in 1785 a pension of $500 a year for life and a grant of $500 to pay for his return to India. He received an Irish baronetcy from the crown on 31 October 1785 and that year took possession of his father's estate at Cargin, on paying the balance of the sum for which it had been conveyed for a term of years to Robert French. 
In February 1787 Staunton was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and on 16 June 1790 he was made an honorary DCL at Oxford, probably in recognition of the comparison of English and French literature that he had written for the 'Journal Etranger' during his time in France. He remained in England, without public employment, until 1792. During this period he enjoyed the confidence and friendship of Edmund Burke, who looked to him for advice, for instance before he made his famous speech in parliament on the nawab of Arcot's debts. Burke recommended him to Lord Charlemont as 'the first among the few persons who have done real credit and real service to this Nation and its government in the East Indies. His abilities are great and unquestioned and not more so than his Virtues' ('Correspondence of Edmund Burke', 5.219). 
In 1792 Staunton was appointed principal secretary to Lord Macartney's embassy to China (and provisionally minister-plenipotentiary in the event of his death). The embassy sought to improve commercial relations with China, through Canton (Guangzhou), and to establish regular diplomatic relations between the two countries. Though Macartney and Staunton had an audience with the emperor their proposals were rebuffed. Macartney kept a detailed journal of his embassy, while in 1797 Staunton published his own, well-known account of this unsuccessful mission, which was later translated into French and German. While at Rio de Janeiro, on the voyage out, Macartney wrote in his diary that 'Staunton, whose curiosity and activity are seldom repressed by difficulty or fatigue thought of little else than visiting... the highest pinnacle of the mountain' (Robbins, 198). In China he closely observed and noted all that he saw, and during expeditions he was able to collect botanical specimens. His son, George Thomas, then just twelve years old, accompanied him to China as page to Lord Macartney, and was the only member of the mission who bothered to learn Chinese. 
Soon after his return from China Staunton suffered a stroke, which caused him to be paralysed down one side and his speech to be severely affected. He died after this lingering illness, on 14 January 1801 at his home, 17 Devonshire Street, London, the leasehold of which he had purchased in September 1795. He was buried on 23 January in the north aisle of Westminster Abbey, where a monument by Chantrey was erected to his memory some years later. His widow died on 16 June 1823 and was buried at St Marylebone, Middlesex, on 24 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 26325


Staunton, Sir George Thomas, second baronet (1781-1859), Sinologist and politician, was born on 26 May 1781 at Milford House, near Salisbury, Wiltshire, only surviving child of Sir George Leonard Staunton (1737-1801), diplomatist, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Collins (1753-1823). His father imposed peculiar educational notions on the boy; he was educated at home under his father's eye and lived entirely in adult society, developing precocious abilities at languages and natural history. In 1792 he attended the turbulent national assembly in Paris while accompanying his father to Naples to recruit Chinese interpreters. He was instructed in Chinese by two native missionaries, these lessons continuing on his voyage with his father later in 1792 as part of Lord Macartney's diplomatic mission to China. Staunton, who was nominally a page to the ambassador, was able to write Chinese characters, and was the only member of the embassy who could speak Chinese to the emperor. 
In 1797 Staunton was entered as a fellow-commoner of Trinity College, Cambridge, but his father soon withdrew his name in disgust at the supposed injustice of the college examinations. He then obtained his son's appointment as a writer in the East India Company's factory at Canton (Guangzhou) (1798). Staunton returned to China in 1799 to endure the two gloomiest years of his life. He inherited his father's baronetcy in 1801, and advanced to be supercargo (1804) and chief interpreter (1808) at Canton. He was the first Englishman at the factory to have studied Chinese. The climate, business life, and his companions were all irksome to Staunton, but he devised for himself constructive avocations. He translated into Chinese and printed George Pearson's treatise on vaccination (1805) and translated China's penal code (published London, 1810). He was disappointed when his proposed appointment as ambassador to Peking (Beijing) was abandoned in 1809. 
In January 1816 Staunton was promoted to be chief of the Canton factory, and in July was appointed to accompany Lord Amherst's embassy to Peking. It was intended to protest to the emperor at the mandarins' conduct towards the Canton merchants, but the embassy returned in January 1817 without obtaining an imperial interview. Staunton was delicate and incapable of great physical exertion, but displayed courage and determination on various occasions: despite being threatened with detention by the Chinese he insisted to Amherst that the British envoys must not 'kowtow' before the emperor. 'Having accomplished my favourite object, of revisiting Pekin in a diplomatic capacity; and, having accumulated a competent fortune in addition to my patrimonial inheritance... I rejoiced to find myself able to terminate the period of my banishment, at the early age of six-and-thirty' (Staunton, 73-4). He reached England in June 1817. 
Staunton, a liberal tory, was elected MP for the close borough of Mitchell, Cornwall, in 1818, but left the borough in 1826 after differences with its patron over Roman Catholic emancipation, which Staunton supported. He was returned for Heytesbury, Wiltshire, in 1830 and 1831. Following parliamentary reform, he was elected with Palmerston in 1832 for the new constituency of South Hampshire, but was defeated there in 1835 and 1837. He finally represented Portsmouth through three parliaments (1838-52). Staunton was a Canningite until 1827, and generally supported Lord Liverpool, but opposed ultra-tories upon the Roman Catholic question. After Wellington's declaration of opposition to parliamentary reform (1830), he gave independent support to the Liberals. He was nominated to the East India committee (1830) and tea duties committee (1834) of the House of Commons. He supported Ashley's motion against the opium trade (1843) and spoke on colonial issues. 
Staunton's life in England was contented, though he desired government employment and felt aggrieved at not being promoted to the privy council. He had inherited 1200 acres at Clydagh in Galway, but seldom visited Ireland, and bought Leigh Park in Hampshire in 1819. He added a 'gothick' library to the house, and constructed hothouses for his rare flowers and exotic fruits. Between 1818 and 1850 he travelled extensively in Europe. Staunton was FRS (1803), DCL of Oxford (1818), and sometime foreign secretary of the Royal Academy, parliamentary trustee of the Hunterian collection, and vice-president of the British Association of Science. In 1823 he was a founder of the Royal Asiatic Society, to which he presented his collection of 3000 Chinese volumes. His 'Miscellaneous Notices Relating to China' (1822) contains interesting if digressive accounts of the Canton factory and Amherst's embassy. Among other scholarly publications he edited a history of China for the Hakluyt Society (1853). Staunton was modest and amiable, with shy, awkward manners; his memoirs were privately printed in 1856. Staunton died, unmarried, after several paralytic seizures, on 10 August 1859, at his London home, 17 Devonshire Street, Marylebone and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery; his baronetcy then became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 26326


Stanton, Hervey (c.1260-1327), justice and administrator, was probably born at Stanton in Suffolk, about 9 miles north-east of Bury St Edmunds, the son of Nicholas of Stanton, a freeholder there. The abbey of Bury St Edmunds probably provided him with part of his education. He may also have attended the University of Cambridge. Stanton probably then entered the service of John of Northwold, abbot of Bury. He received his first living (Great Saxham) at Northwold's presentation in 1288, and when the abbot went abroad in 1290 Stanton was one of his general attorneys. He then became a clerk of the common bench, perhaps as early as 1291 and certainly by 1293. The law reports show him playing an active role in the hearing of litigation along with the justices of the court from 1293 onwards. The crown started to entrust him with administrative responsibilities in 1297, and he began to receive appointments to special oyer and terminer commissions in 1301. In the winter of 1300-01 he went on a trip to the Roman curia and when his old patron John of Northwold died in 1301, he acted as one of his executors. 
Stanton was appointed a justice of the Cornwall eyre in 1302 and in 1303 he became a regular assize justice in the south and south-west of England. In 1304 he travelled overseas with the future Edward II. He was appointed a justice of the common bench in April 1306 and remained one of its justices until Easter term 1313, when he was commissioned to head the eyre of Kent. When the eyre was over he did not return to the common bench but began a new phase of his career in the exchequer. He served as a baron until 1316 and then as chancellor of the exchequer until the summer of 1326. During this period he also presided as chief justice at the London eyre of 1321, and served for less than a year in 1323-4 as a temporary chief justice of king's bench. His tenure of the office of chief justice of the common bench (during Michaelmas term 1326) was even briefer. He was attacked by a city mob, no doubt moved by bitter memories of the deeply unpopular eyre of 1321, while attending a meeting of the council at Blackfriars in London in October 1326. He seems then to have withdrawn to his prebend in York Minster (Husthwaite, granted in 1319), which is where he probably died early in November 1327 (on either the 2nd or the 5th). 
Stanton must have inherited some of the lands in Stanton and the neighbouring villages of Hepworth and Bardwell which he resettled in 1310 on himself in fee tail, with successive remainders over, also in fee tail, to his eventual heir (Alexander Walsham, the son of his father's sister, Avice) and various others, perhaps more distant relatives. At the same time he made a similar resettlement of lands at Felsted and elsewhere in Essex, most of which he had bought for 500 marks in 1297. Hervey also acquired a substantial holding in Pakenham and elsewhere in Suffolk from John, son of William of Pakenham, in or before 1306, but may have been acting in co-operation with the abbey of Bury in doing so. In 1307 the abbey acquired a reversion to this holding after his death. It then gave him a life interest in the Bury manor in his home village of Stanton in return for immediate possession of these lands. In 1317 Stanton acquired the London house at Aldersgate that had previously belonged to chief justice Roger Brabazon, who died in that year. 
During the last years of his life Stanton founded the Cambridge college of Michaelhouse (later absorbed into Trinity) and drew up statutes for his new foundation. He also bequeathed vestments, relics, and devotional and religious books to the college. He chose to be buried in the church of St Michael in Cambridge, whose advowson he had acquired and given to his college. 


@@@@@


doc= 26327


Staunton, Howard (1810-1874), chess player and literary scholar, born probably in Westmorland in April 1810, was dubiously alleged to be the natural son of Frederick Howard, fifth earl of Carlisle (1748-1825); officially, his father was William Staunton. He had little or no formal education, but apparently received a legacy (from Carlisle or another), which he rapidly spent. He was devoted to the stage, and claimed to have acted in his early days Lorenzo to the Shylock of Edmund Kean. Later he sought to support himself by writing on chess and (increasingly a more profitable subject) the Shakespearian drama. 
Staunton played chess from an early age, and soon acquired a skill in the game approached only by Alexander Macdonnell and J. H. Blackburne among British players. For some twenty years a great part of Staunton's time was spent in playing the game and in writing upon it. From 1836 he frequented the Divan, Huttmann's, and other public chess resorts. Between 1840 and 1851 he made his reputation, notably by beating in 1843 (at the second attempt) St Amant, a player perhaps over-rated but representative of the hitherto dominant French school. Staunton's victory did indeed bring Britain to the fore in the chess-playing world and made him 'unofficial chess champion of the world' (Sergeant, 57); he sought to underline this by organizing the innovative 1851 international tournament in London. Distracted by administrative pressures, he was beaten by Anderssen and by Williams; to the latter he had given odds not long before. 
In 1853 Staunton met one of the greatest players of any period, Baron von Heydebrand und der Lasa of Berlin, and was defeated by five games to four (with three draws). He also negotiated -- imaginatively, if prematurely -- with the chess-playing German diplomatist for an internationally recognized set of rules, including much-needed time limits. Weakened by heart disease since a bout of pneumonia in 1844, Staunton played little in public after 1853. Unfortunately, he still liked to be considered a champion, which could give rise to unpleasant misunderstandings -- as when the American prodigy Paul Morphy visited Britain in 1858 in the belief that Staunton had agreed to a match, but this was first put off and then abandoned. 
Meanwhile Staunton was energetically turning his knowledge of the game to account as a journalist. In 1840, the year in which his supremacy as a player was first recognized, he projected the monthly periodical the 'Chess Player's Chronicle', which he owned and edited until he sold it in August 1854. About 1844 he took charge of the chess column in the 'Illustrated London News', which had been started two years earlier, and he ran it until his death. For some time he also edited a chess column in 'The Era' newspaper. Unfortunately, he might allow 'his own chess ambitions greatly to influence his judgement upon others' ('The Field', 17). He became involved in vendettas, such as that against Harruitz into which he sought to enlist Johann Loewenthal. He was also a prime mover in a quarrel between the St George's and London chess clubs -- partly because the latter was jealous of the former's organization of the 1851 tournament, but also perhaps because Staunton found the latter to contain an inferior class of member. 
Staunton compiled some valuable manuals on the game. Bobby Fischer enthusiastically found Staunton 'the most profound opening analyst of all time' (Hooper and Whyld, 391). 'The Chess Player's Handbook' (1847, repr. 1985) long deserved, and still longer retained, the reputation of being the best English treatise on its subject. His 'Chess: Theory and Practice' was left in manuscript at his death, and was edited in 1876 by R. B. Wormald, who succeeded him as editor of the chess column of the 'Illustrated London News'. 
Staunton's name was conferred on the set of chess pieces designed by Nathaniel Cook which are recognized as the standard type in the English-speaking world. Add this to his successful invention of the international tournament and his far-seeing ideas about standard laws, and it may well be said: 'Staunton may not have been the greatest player of all time, but he probably left a deeper mark on the game than any other' (Coles, 20). 
From 1854 Staunton largely devoted his attention to the study of Shakespeare, of whose works he had been from youth an enthusiastic admirer. Between November 1857 and May 1860 he issued, with Messrs Routledge, a new edition of Shakespeare in monthly parts, with 824 illustrations by Sir John Gilbert (3 vols., repr. 1979). Staunton's text was based on a collation of the folio editions with the early quartos and with the texts of modern editors from Rowe to Dyce, rejecting the falsifications of J. Payne Collier. The conjectural emendations, which were usually sensible, were kept within narrow limits, and showed great familiarity with Elizabethan literature and modes of speech. In 1864 Staunton issued a photolithographic facsimile of the 1600 quarto of 'Much Ado about Nothing' from the copy in the Ellesmere collection, and in 1866 one of the first folio edition of Shakespeare's works of 1623. Subsequently, between October 1872 and his death, he contributed a series of nineteen articles on 'Unsuspected corruptions of Shakespeare's text' to 'The Athenaeum' (cf. 'Notes and Queries', 6th ser. (1881), 4.264). His only other literary undertaking was a carefully compiled account of the 'Great Schools of England' (1865; 2nd edn, 1869), sceptical of rote learning, corporal punishment, and excessive emphasis on the classics. 
Staunton was a brilliant talker in congenial society, prolific in anecdote and in apt quotation from Shakespeare. He married, on 23 February 1849, Frances Carpenter, 'nee' Cates or Keates (died 'c'.1882), widow of W. D. Nethersole, a solicitor, who was some years his senior. He died from a heart attack, after a history of heart trouble and bronchitis, while sitting in his library at his home, 29 Elgin Road, Kensington Park, London, on 22 June 1874. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26328


Staveley, Sir Charles William Dunbar (1817-1896), army officer, was the eldest son of Lieutenant-General William Staveley (1784-1854) and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Thomas Mather. He was born at Boulogne on 18 December 1817, educated at the Scottish Naval and Military Academy, Edinburgh, and commissioned as second lieutenant in the 87th (Royal Irish Fusiliers) on 6 March 1835. He became lieutenant on 4 October 1839, and captain on 6 September 1844. From July 1840 until June 1843 he was aide-de-camp to the governor of Mauritius, where his regiment was stationed, and where his father was acting governor for part of the time. He was subsequently stationed at Glasgow, and risked his life saving a boy from drowning in the Clyde. 
Staveley exchanged to the 18th foot on 31 January 1845, and to the 44th on 9 May. From 15 June 1845 to 11 May 1847 he was aide-de-camp to the governor-general of British North America. An admirable draughtsman, his sketches proved useful during the settlement of the Oregon boundary question in 1846. He was assistant military secretary at Hong Kong, where his father was in command, from 20 March 1848 to 27 February 1851. 
Staveley had become major in the 44th on 7 December 1850, and went with it to Turkey in 1854. When the regiment embarked for the Crimea he was to have been left behind on account of illness, but he hid himself on board until the vessel sailed. He was present at Alma and at Balaklava, where he acted as aide-de-camp to the duke of Cambridge. On 12 December 1854 he became lieutenant-colonel in his regiment. The 44th was in Sir William Eyre's brigade, and took part in the attempt on the dockyard creek on 18 June 1855, and in the capture of the cemetery. He was mentioned in dispatches and made CB. He received the Mejidiye (fifth class). 
Staveley commanded the regiment from 30 June 1855. It returned to England in July 1856, embarked for Madras in August 1857, and went on to China in March 1860. He had become colonel in the army on 9 March 1858, and on 28 April 1860 he was made brigadier-general, and was given command of a brigade in Michel's division during the Anglo-French expedition to Peking (Beijing). He was present at the capture of the Taku (Dagu) forts, and was mentioned in dispatches. 
Staveley commanded the British troops remaining in China in 1862 during the Taiping uprising. The rebels threatened Shanghai, and in April Staveley marched against them with a force of about two thousand men, of which about one-third were French and English seamen and marines. He shelled them out of their entrenched camp at Wongkadze, and stormed Tsipu, Kahding (Jiading), Tsingpu (Qingpu), Nanchao (Nanqiao), and Cholin (Zhelin) in April and May. But the Chinese imperial troops were unable to hold all the towns recovered, and he had to withdraw the British garrison from Kahding. In the autumn Kahding and Tsingpu were again taken, and the 30 mile radius cleared of the rebels. 
In December Staveley was asked by Li Hongzhang to name a British officer to replace the American Burgevine as commander of the Chinese force which had been formed by the American Frederick Townsend Ward and which came to be known as the 'Ever Victorious Army'. Staveley named Charles George Gordon, who had been chief engineer under him in the recent operations. They had served together before Sevastopol, and Staveley's sister was the wife of Gordon's brother. In March 1863 ill health obliged Staveley to resign his command and go home. 
In March 1865 Staveley was made KCB and was appointed to command the 1st division, Bombay army. On 25 September 1867 he was promoted major-general, and in November, at Sir Robert Napier's request, was given command of the first division of the force sent to Abyssinia. He organized the base at Annesley Bay, and he conducted the fight on the Arogee plain, which immediately preceded the capture of Magdala. Napier in his dispatch praised Staveley's conduct, and he received the thanks of parliament. In 1864 he married Susan Millicent, daughter of Charles William Minet of Baldwyns, Kent. They had several children and she survived him. 
Staveley commanded the western district for five years from 1 January 1869. He was commander-in-chief at Bombay from 7 October 1874 to 7 October 1878, with the local rank of lieutenant-general, which became his substantive rank on 29 April 1875. On 1 October 1877 he became general. He was given the colonelcy of the 36th foot on 2 February 1876, and transferred to the 44th (1st battalion, the Essex regiment) on 25 July 1883. He retired on 8 October 1883, and received the GCB on 24 May 1884. Staveley died at his home, Aban Court, Cheltenham, on 23 November 1896, and was buried at Brompton cemetery on the 27th. 


@@@@@


doc= 26329


Staveley, Thomas (bap. 1626, d. 1684), antiquary, was born at East Langton, Leicestershire, and baptized at the neighbouring parish of Church Langton on 26 November 1626, the eldest of twelve children of William Staveley (1596-1652), rector of Cossington, Leicestershire, and his wife, Anne (1605-1680), daughter of Thomas Babington of Rothley Temple, Leicestershire, and his wife, Catherine. He was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 14 April 1644 and to the Inner Temple on 2 July 1647. He was called to the bar in 1654. 
In 1656 Staveley married Mary (died 1669), the daughter of John Onebye of Hinckley, Leicestershire. Their children included Thomas (died 1676), William (1662-1723), and George (1665-1709), later rector of Medbourne, Leicestershire. Staveley lived for all but the last six or seven years of his life at the parsonage in Belgrave, Leicestershire, and his wife was buried in the church there on 12 October 1669. He practised the law, serving as a magistrate and, in succession to his father-in-law, as steward to Leicester corporation from 1662. 
Staveley's only publication during his lifetime was politically inspired: 'The Romish horseleech, or, An impartial account of the intolerable change of popery to this nation' (1674) was published anonymously, with a provocative title supplied by others, and with 'An Essay of the Supremacy of the King of England' annexed; ironically, his son William became a Roman Catholic. However, his abiding interest was in antiquarian research. His 'History of Churches in England' was eventually published in 1712 and much of his research, which survives in part as a manuscript history of Leicester (BL, Add. MS 15917, and Leics. RO), was largely incorporated by John Nichols in his 'Bibliotheca Topographica Britannica' and 'History and Antiquities of the County of Leicester'. Staveley was well liked and regarded as honest in his legal work. He was mild-mannered despite occasional fits of gout. 'Having passed the latter part of his life in the study of English history, he acquired a melancholy habit; but was esteemed a diligent, judicious, and faithful Antiquary' (Nichols, 'History and Antiquities', 2.2.677). Staveley died at his house in Friar Lane, Leicester, on 2 January 1684 and was buried in the church of St Mary de Castro, Leicester, on 8 January 1684. 


@@@@@


doc= 26330


Staveley, William (1784-1854), army officer, born at York on 29 July 1784, was the son of William Staveley of York and Henrietta, 'nee' Henderson, a native of Caithness. He was commissioned as ensign in the Caithness legion in 1798, served with it in Ireland during the 1798 rebellion, and when it was disbanded obtained a commission in the Royal Staff Corps on 14 July 1804. He became lieutenant on 21 April 1808, and joined Wellesley's army at Porto in May 1809. He served on the staff of the quartermaster-general throughout the Peninsular War, and was present at Talavera, Fuentes de Onoro, Vitoria, the battle of the Pyrenees, and Toulouse, as well as at the sieges of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz, and many minor actions. At Ciudad Rodrigo he volunteered to act as guide to the stormers of the light division, and was one of the first to reach the top of the smaller breach. He was stunned by an explosion as the troops made their way along the ramparts, and was picked up for dead. On 6 May 1813 he was given a company in the Royal African Corps, and on 15 December 1814 a brevet majority. 
Staveley returned to the Royal Staff Corps on 12 January 1815, and went with a detachment of it to the Netherlands in April. He was on the headquarters staff at Waterloo, and rode with messages between Wellington and Blucher. He was made brevet lieutenant-colonel and CB (June 1815), and subsequently received a reward for distinguished service. 
Staveley was one of two officers sent into Paris to carry out the terms of the convention of 3 July 1815, and was wounded in a skirmish with French soldiers in the Paris suburbs. He remained in France during the occupation, and returned to England in 1818. He married, on 23 January 1817, Sarah, daughter of Thomas Mather; among their children was Sir Charles William Dunbar Staveley. 
In 1821 Staveley was sent with his company to Mauritius. He remained there twenty-six years, being appointed deputy quartermaster-general and commandant of Port Louis on 29 September 1825, and acting as governor for several months in 1842. When he left the colony he received an address from the inhabitants, to whom he had always shown himself 'juste, impartial, affable, bienveillant envers chacun'. 
Staveley was promoted colonel on 10 January 1837 and major-general on 9 November 1846. A year afterwards he left Mauritius for Hong Kong, where he commanded the garrison for three years. In March 1851 he took command of a division of the Bombay army, and in 1852 held the post of commander-in-chief for several months. In August 1853 he was given the colonelcy of the 94th regiment, and was appointed commander-in-chief at Madras, with the local rank of lieutenant-general. He took up this command on 27 October. He died suddenly on 4 April 1854 at Tippicadoo, on his way to the Nilgiri hills, and was buried at Ootacamund. The inhabitants of Mauritius put up a tablet to his memory in the protestant church at Port Louis, and another was erected in the cathedral at Madras. 


@@@@@


doc= 26331


Stawell, Sir John (1599/1600-1662), royalist army officer, was born in Cothelstone in Somerset, second of the four children and heir of Sir John Stawell (died 1603) and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1662), daughter of George Touchet, earl of Castlehaven, who later married (1604) Sir Thomas Griffin of Dingley in Northamptonshire. A king's ward during his minority, Stawell was educated at the Queen's College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 25 October 1616. He married on 9 December 1617 Elizabeth (died 1657), daughter of Sir Edward Hext (died 1624) and widow of Sir Joseph Killigrew (died 1616). They had two daughters and nine sons, including John, Edward, and George, all of whom fought for the king in the civil war, and Ralph, who was created Lord Stawell of Somerton in 1683. 
Sir John Stawell, who was first elected MP for Somerset in 1625, was again returned both in 1640 for the Long Parliament and in 1661 for the Cavalier Parliament. An energetic leader in the county, he served as a justice (from 1620), deputy lieutenant (from 1625), and sheriff (1628-9), acting also as a member of various county commissions. He was knighted at the coronation of Charles I (1626) and praised for employing himself 'heartily in the service', despite suffering 'envy, reproaches and the raking of ill tongues' ('CSP dom.', '1625-6', 445). 
Stawell was a man of mediocre ability, whose interest in chemistry and medicine led him to a belief that eating breakfast was bad for the stomach. His irritable temper and impulsive behaviour frequently led him to overstep the mark in county politics, particularly in his support of Lord John Poulett's bitter feud with Sir Robert Phelips. He was, for instance, accused in 1627 of vindictive use of power in pressing into army service the bailiff of Phelips's closest ally; and in 1628 of interfering with not only the Taunton election, by using troops to intimidate the corporation, but also the county election, by physically and verbally abusing the sheriff (for which he was fined $200 in Star Chamber). He twice reported Phelips to the council, once for questioning the legality of trained band musters (1628) and later for undermining the sheriff's collection of ship money (1636). After Stawell had been censured on the first occasion for falsifying evidence and on the second for raising frivolous charges, the king urged both antagonists to work harmoniously together in future for the royal cause. 
Both Stawell and Poulett (to whom he was totally subservient) had long since professed to champion the king's service, though their support was tempered by self-interest. Their real objective was to gain supremacy in Somerset, not through courting popular support within the county (as did Phelips), but by achieving status at court. Stawell's underlying indifference to the king's interest before the civil war was illustrated by his readiness to abandon it whenever he became wary of county hostility: hence his lukewarm support for the king's plan to drain and enclose Sedgemoor in the 1630s and his refusal to act as deputy lieutenant in 1640 in halting mass desertions and disorders in the army bound for Scotland. 
Nevertheless Stawell's personal contribution to war service was impressive. In 1639 he contributed $100 towards the cost of the expedition to Scotland, followed by a bond for $1000 to help secure the 1640 loan. A man of considerable wealth, he generously helped to fund the king's war effort in 1642 by raising large numbers of troops at his own expense. In March of that year he absented himself from the Commons, before accompanying the marquess of Hertford into the west with the king's commission of array in July, for which he was disabled from sitting in parliament on 8 August. Having joined Hertford at the royalist headquarters in Wells (28 July), he intercepted and routed John Pyne's parliamentary force at Marshall's Elm, near Street, on 4 August, before eventually retreating into Cornwall with Sir Ralph Hopton in September. In 1643 Stawell was appointed not only governor of Taunton (5 June), but also a king's commissioner for Somerset -- duties which saw him granted leave of absence from the Cavalier Parliament in Oxford. In 1644 he played a leading part in the king's recruitment drive on King's Moor, near Ilchester, on 23 July, and later launched his peace campaign with a petition to the king at Sturminster Newton in September -- a campaign he revived in Oxford a year later under the slogan 'One and all'. His sincere but naive plan was that the king should win over the country, weary of his soldiers' oppressions, by putting himself as peacemaker at the head of a popular movement -- whereupon thousands of substantial countrymen would accompany a peace petition to parliament. The scheme, however, was twice rejected in favour of renewed military pressure. On 21 July 1645 his regiment fought in vain to save Bridgwater from the New Model Army, before Stawell himself fled to Exeter, which he helped to defend against siege (28 October 1645 - 9 April 1646). Whatever his limitations as a military commander, he was praised by Clarendon as a person of 'notorious courage and fidelity' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.426). 
After the fall of Exeter Stawell was taken to London (15 July 1646), hoping to compound under the terms of the Exeter articles. When, however, he appeared before the committee for compounding on 4 August, he refused to subscribe to the national covenant or take the negative oath; and he was committed by the Commons a prisoner at Newgate for high treason nine days later. Although his intended trial at the Somerset assizes never took place, he was finally removed to the Tower of London in July 1650 and tried by the high court on 17 December. The court, however, gave no judgment, referring his case back instead to parliament (April 1651), where it remained undetermined. Although he was briefly given parole (25 May 1653) his estates had been sold in 1651 for about $64,000. His wife and children were permitted to live in the ruined Cothelstone Manor, receiving a fifth part of his income for support (about $500 per annum). Stawell frequently petitioned parliament about the injustice of his treatment, but without success. Although he remained a prisoner until May 1660 he regained his estates in full after the Restoration. His re-election to parliament in April 1661 was, however, short-lived. Broken in health through years of close confinement, he died on 21 February 1662 at Netherham, before burial in Cothelstone church on 23 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 26332


Stawell, Sir William Jonas Foster (1815-1889), lawyer and politician in Australia, the third son of Jonas Stawell (1769-1840) of Oldcourt, Cork, and his wife, Anna Elizabeth (died 1833), the daughter of William Foster, bishop of Clogher, was born at Oldcourt on 27 June 1815. Educated from 1832 at Trinity College, Dublin, as a pensioner, he graduated BA in 1837. He then studied law both at King's Inns, Dublin, and Lincoln's Inn, and was called to the Irish bar in 1839. A big man of over 6 feet in height, he was described by his wife as 'ruddy and of fair countenance' with 'wonderfully expressive eyes of a bright chestnut colour' (M. Stawell, 21). 
After practising for a time at the bar in Dublin, Stawell emigrated to Melbourne in 1842, was admitted to practice at the local bar, and quickly obtained a reasonable share of the work. He also joined in some pastoral pursuits with a cousin, J. L. F. V. Foster (later Foster-Vesey-Fitzgerald). He rapidly became one of the leading members of the bar. He took an active part in politics, helped to form the Anti-Transportation League, and strongly supported the separation of the Port Phillip district from New South Wales. 
In 1851 Stawell became a member of the nominated legislative council and the first attorney-general of the newly erected colony. He held this office until 28 November 1855, drafting and conducting through the council the early laws of the colony. He also took an active part in the preparation of the new 'Constitution Act' in 1854-5. To him are due the names 'legislative council' and 'legislative assembly' for the two chambers. As attorney-general Stawell was in the forefront of the government's handling of the rebellion on the goldfields which culminated in the Eureka stockade in 1854 and in the prosecutions which followed. He met with much opposition and obloquy, but his strength and patience triumphed over attacks. Henry Samuel Chapman thought him almost the only efficient member of the government, and many considered that his firmness saved the state. 
In 1856 Stawell married Mary Frances Elizabeth (died 1921), the daughter of Lieutenant William Pomeroy Greene RN, of Woodlands, Victoria. 
The new constitution came into force in November 1855, but it was almost a year before the first elected parliament assembled. Stawell was elected to the legislative assembly as member for Melbourne. He took office at once as attorney-general, but on 25 February 1857 he retired from political life on becoming the second chief justice of Victoria. He was knighted later that year. Apart from his judicial duties, he devoted his time during the following years chiefly to furthering the progress of the Church of England and of education in the colony. He was a staunch supporter of Bishop Charles Perry, by whom he had been converted from an agnostic to a devout churchman, and drafted a constitution for the church in Victoria which introduced for the first time anywhere in the world participation by the laity in the government of the Church of England. In 1879 he became one of the first lay canons of St Paul's Cathedral. 
In 1873 Stawell went on leave to England for nearly two years. In 1875, and again in 1877, he acted as governor of the colony, and on the second occasion was confronted with an unusual problem. The conservative Kerferd government applied to Stawell for a dissolution but was refused. Kerferd resigned and Stawell sent for Berry, who, being unable to carry his tariff proposals, applied for a dissolution which was also refused. Berry resigned and a short-lived government was formed by Sir James McCulloch. There was much contemporary controversy about Stawell's decisions. He again acted as governor from March to July 1884. In August 1886 he resigned his office as chief justice, and in the following year was appointed lieutenant-governor of Victoria. In January 1889 he left for Europe in order to reinvigorate his health, but he died at Naples on 12 March, and was buried in the English cemetery. He was survived by his wife, six sons, and four daughters. 
Stawell was a fair judge with a strong sense of justice, and a sound lawyer. For many years he was one of the most prominent figures in public life in Victoria. He was an enthusiastic promoter of exploration. He was president of the Philosophical Institute (afterwards the Royal Society) of Victoria in 1858-9, and was closely associated with the foundation of Melbourne University in 1853 (for a short time he was its chancellor). He was a trustee of the public library, and president of the Melbourne Hospital and other charitable organizations. He became LLD of Dublin in 1873 and of Melbourne in 1875, and KCMG in 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 26333


Stayley, George (b. 1727, d. before 1780), actor and playwright, was born at Burton upon Trent on 1 March 1727, the son of William Stayley and his wife, Elizabeth Monk. He was baptized at St Modwen's Church, Burton, on 10 March 1727. According to his 'Life and Opinions of an Actor', in 1745 he was adopted by his mother's brother, an attorney, who wished him to study law; however, after five years his kinsman, perceiving that he had no aptitude in that direction, left him to his own devices. 
After two years of idleness Stayley landed in Ireland on 29 May 1752, and became an actor at the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin. There he wrote several short pieces as well as full-length comedies, which included 'The Court of Nassau' (1753) and 'The Rival Theatres' (1759), which mocked the rivalry between Sheridan at Smock Alley and Barry and Woodward at Crow Street. Although a good actor, he was inordinately vain and had an unfortunate knack of irritating people. In 1760 Henry Mossop, the new lessee at Smock Alley, discharged him for giving political toasts while playing Lovel in James Townley's farce 'High Life'. Shunned by the Dublin managers, Stayley sought to vindicate himself with 'The Life and Opinions of an Actor' (1762), part autobiography, part anthology of interludes, interspersed with tall stories and comic patter, all wrapped up as a parody of Sterne's 'Tristram Shandy'. 
Unable to re-establish himself in Ireland, Stayley moved to Scotland. At the beginning of 1766 he proceeded to Edinburgh, where he joined the Canongate Theatre. He staged a successful production of Allan Ramsay's 'The Gentle Shepherd' there, but the manager, David Beatt, refused to re-engage him the next year despite his popularity. The so-called Stayley riot ensued on 24 January 1767, and the theatre was wrecked. Although disliked by managers, Stayley continued to write and perform where he could, and he also taught elocution. He died in obscurity before 1780. 


@@@@@


doc= 26334


Stayner, Sir Richard (1624/5-1662), naval officer, was one of several children of Roger Stayner of Tarrant Gunville, Dorset, and in his early life served in the Newfoundland fisheries trade. He married Elizabeth (1635?-1662), daughter of Thomas Hebbe of Loughborough; they had two children, Richard and Elizabeth. Stayner was said to have been the most junior of three Dorset men brought into the Commonwealth navy, probably by Roger Martin, one of their number. Martin commanded the 'Providence of Poole' during the first civil war, on which Stayner could well have gained his earliest fighting experience. He is first mentioned on 25 August 1649 as captain of the prize 'Elizabeth' convoying five ships bound for Hull from the Thames to Yarmouth. He also commanded her in the summer fleet of 1650 and in April he took a prize. The 'Elizabeth' was the largest of the four ships posted 'among the sands' in the Thames estuary in the winter of 1650-51 ('JHC', 1650, 6.473b). In the summer of 1651 he was appointed captain of the sixth rate 'Cygnet' but he was already earmarked for the fifth rate 'Mermaid' which was in the course of being built and to which he moved as soon as she was launched. The following winter she was one of the squadron patrolling the eastern channel. 
When the First Anglo-Dutch War began in 1652 Stayner was still in command of the 'Mermaid'. She was one of Blake's squadron during the skirmish off Dover, the first action of the war. Subsequently Stayner went with the fleet under Blake's command which sailed to the Shetland Islands to intercept the Dutch East India ships. The 'Mermaid' was probably one of the frigates which attacked the Dutch squadron protecting their herring busses though she is not mentioned by name. On his return Stayner was promoted to the fourth rate 'Foresight'. His ship was among those which fought at the battle of Portland in February 1653 and appears to have been in Blake's own squadron. The 'Foresight' was part of the main fleet under Monck and Deane which left Portsmouth during April. At the beginning of June Stayner was in Penn's division during the battle of the Gabbard. After the victory he escorted twelve disabled ships, eleven prizes, and 1350 prisoners back to the Thames. He also had on board the body of General Deane who had been killed in the fighting. 
The 'Foresight' went to sea again on 23 July 1653 with Stayner still in command, and rejoined the fleet in time to take part in the battle off Scheveningen. During September his ship was in the squadron under Lawson which blockaded the coast of the Netherlands until he was forced, by defective masts, to come home. Stayner was promoted to the new third rate 'Plymouth' in the spring of 1654 and he was soon in action, taking part in the capture of a Dutch East Indiaman during April. In September 1654 the war with the United Provinces being over, Stayner sailed with Blake's fleet to the Mediterranean. One of the objectives of the cruise was to come to an agreement with the dey of Tunis which would prevent further attacks on English shipping. The dey, however, proved obdurate and when Blake sailed away to Trapani the dey thought he had won. He was soon undeceived, for the English returned and destroyed a squadron of Turkish ships at Porto Farina. The 'Plymouth' was one of five ships which remained on patrol during Blake's absence and helped provide covering fire by bombarding the shore installations while boarding parties burnt the ships. 
Blake returned to England in September 1655 but war with Spain had been declared and a new fleet under Blake and Mountagu was soon equipping to blockade Spain's Atlantic coast. Stayner was again present when the fleet sailed in April 1656, this time in charge of the 'Speaker', the most powerful of all the third rates. In the following September Stayner was left with a squadron of six ships off Cadiz while Mountagu was at Sale and Blake was with the rest of the fleet revictualling at Lisbon. During their absence Stayner sighted the plate fleet, which consisted of seven Spanish ships and a Portuguese prize. Only three of his squadron were in a position to engage but they performed so effectively that only two of their eight opponents escaped. Of the remainder two were captured, two were sunk, and two ran aground and were lost. The 'Speaker' took the rear-admiral's ship, commanded by Don Juan de Hoyos, and the 'Tredagh' took a rich merchantman. 
Shortly afterwards Mountagu returned home with the booty and the heavier ships but Stayner stayed out with Blake. The following spring Blake learned that the 1657 plate fleet had reached the Canary Islands. He sailed to Tenerife to intercept it. The English fleet attacked the Spaniards as they lay at anchor in the harbour of Santa Cruz. While Blake and the larger vessels provided covering fire, twelve frigates under Stayner's leadership attacked the ships themselves. All seventeen Spanish ships were destroyed without any English loss. Stayner was the last out, his ship severely battered but still afloat. He was knighted in 1658 on his return to England and appointed rear-admiral of the fleet in home waters. Between March and September 1659 he was rear-admiral of an English fleet which sailed to the Sound to counteract the influence of a Dutch fleet which was surreptitiously supporting Denmark in her war with Sweden. By the time it returned the protectorate had fallen. Stayner's attitude to the political upheaval of 1659-60 which followed was rather ambiguous but, like most of the senior fleet officers, he managed to make his peace with Charles II. He went as rear-admiral in the fleet under Mountagu which brought Charles back from the United Provinces and was rewarded by a royal knighthood on 24 September 1660 to replace his Cromwellian one, invalidated by the Restoration. 
Early in 1661 Stayner was again in command in the Downs, and in June he was appointed rear-admiral of the fleet commanded by Mountagu (now earl of Sandwich), sent to Portugal for Catherine of Braganza, who was to be Charles II's queen. Stayner was given the task of occupying Tangier, part of her dowry, which he accomplished successfully. Subsequently he supervised the arrangements for the landing of an English army to help the Portuguese in their war against Spain. He fell ill at Lisbon and died there of a fever on 15 October 1662, only thirty-seven years old. His body was embalmed and brought back to England because he had wished to be buried beside his wife, who had died earlier that year. He was interred at St Alfege, Greenwich, on 28 November 1662. On 30 May 1663 Stayner's son Richard was petitioning for the repayment of $300 which his father was said to have advanced for the state's service. 
Stayner was a brave and dashing subordinate but his flaws militated against his becoming a great commander. Details of the embezzlement of part of the money captured in the Spanish plate fleet in 1656 have never surfaced but Stayner's protestations of innocence have a hollow ring. At Tenerife Blake had to send orders three times to prevent him endangering the operation by trying to tow ships out as prizes. He had no fixed political or religious principles. In 1654 Blake commended him as a 'godly' man and in 1657 he employed Samuel Oates as his chaplain, who had been involved in the Overton plot to overthrow the protectorate. Yet he accepted the succession of Richard as protector when Oliver Cromwell died. In October 1659 he tried to negotiate a compromise between the military junta and the fleet. But when it became clear that a restoration was inevitable he allowed Mountagu to make his peace for him with the king. Pepys's judgement that he was sorry for his death 'he being a very stout seaman -- but there will be no great miss of him for all that' (Pepys, 3.249) may well have been echoed outside royalist circles. 


@@@@@


doc= 26335


Stebbing, Henry (bap. 1687, d. 1763), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was baptized at Malton in Suffolk on 19 August 1687, the fourth son of John Stebbing (1647-1720), a grocer of Malton, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1652-1721), daughter of Richard Kenington. Educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, he entered St Catharine's College, Cambridge, as a sizar on 24 February 1705, and graduated BA in 1709, MA in 1712, and DD in 1730. He was elected a fellow of his college on 19 October 1710, but resigned in 1713, when he was presented to the rectorship of Lower Rickinghall, Suffolk. In or before 1716, when his eldest son was born, Stebbing married the daughter of Robert Camel, of Eye, in Suffolk; they had two sons. From 1718 to 1726 he served as rector of Wortham in Norfolk, and on 31 May 1726 he was instituted rector of Garboldisham, in the same county. He was appointed a lecturer at St Mary-le-Bow, London, in 1731 and, on 14 July of that year, preacher to Gray's Inn. He was chaplain-in-ordinary to the king in 1732 and was installed archdeacon of Wiltshire on 19 July 1735, becoming chancellor of Sarum in 1739. He was Boyle lecturer between 1747 and 1749, and was made rector of Redenhall with Halston, Norfolk, in 1748. 
Stebbing was a fearless controversialist who wrote against latitudinarian divines, dissenters, and Methodists, as well as deists and freethinkers. A strict high-churchman, he vigorously opposed a number of prominent clergymen who dissented from his particularly tenacious variety of Anglican orthodoxy. He took the high-church side in the Bangorian controversy, opposing the latitudinarian views of Benjamin Hoadly, bishop of Bangor, whom he saw as encouraging a dangerous degree of religious independence which would vitiate the chances of salvation that Stebbing insisted could only be attained through belief in, and visible commitment to, the doctrines of Christ's church on earth. The first of the tracts he devoted to this matter, 'Remarks upon a position of the right reverend the bishop of Bangor concerning religious sincerity' (1718), contained a preface in his support by Thomas Sherlock, then dean of Chichester. He continued the attack on Hoadly's anti-authoritarianism with some asperity in 'A defence of the first head of the charge of the committee of the lower house of convocation against the right reverend the lord bishop of Bangor' (1718) and in 'Miscellaneous Observations' (1718). The latter was condemned in turn for obscurantism by Thomas Pyle in 'An Answer to Mr. Stebbing's Miscellaneous Observations' (1719), provoking Stebbing to a testy and very closely argued reply in which he argued the case for an established faith against that for religious independence. Towards the close of his reply Stebbing accurately remarked, 'Now I am at last got through a piece of Work, the most tedious of any I ever yet undertook in my whole Life' (H. Stebbing, 'The True Meaning and Consequences of a Position of the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Bangor Concerning Sincerity', 1719, 70). John Balguy, writing under the pseudonym Silvius, wrote two short tracts that lamented Stebbing's uncharitable brand of orthodoxy and thereby sounded a note that was to become familiar among Stebbing's numerous opponents, both Anglican and dissenting. 
Aside from ill-tempered encounters with Quakers, largely over the nature of baptism, Stebbing next clashed with Dr James Foster, whom he accused of excusing heresy as a form of religious sincerity. In 'A Letter to Mr. Foster on the Subject of Heresy' (1735) he claimed 'I do not love 'hard Words', Sir, nor will I run the Hazard of burning my Fingers' (p. 15), to which Foster replied that he at least would argue his case with decency, attributing to Stebbing a style and a manner that revealed 'captiousness, and petulance, 'dictatorial' airs, and 'academic' pertness and puerility' (p. 2). The controversy between the two men continued in this vein into 1737, and large excerpts from their entertainingly vituperative exchange of pamphlets appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1735 and 1737. The opportunity that this gave for anticlerical comment in the religiously contentious 1730s was seized upon by several writers, both satirically and regretfully. An anonymous poem attributed to a Quaker author, Mrs Drummond, but much more likely to be the work of an anonymous freethinker, identified the 'fierce' Stebbing as 'nothing but a 'Fleshly Priest'' whose defence of orthodox doctrines was hypocritically self-interested and confessionally disastrous ('The Female Speaker, or, The Priests in the Wrong', 1735, 7-8). In 'St Paul's Heretic' (1735) Caleb Fleming similarly called on both Stebbing and Foster to promote the true interests of Christianity by being gentle with one another and meek with all other men. 
Stebbing reserved his greatest anger for a series of encounters with William Warburton in the 1740s. In 'An examination of Mr. Warburton's second demonstration, in his projected demonstration of the divine legation of Moses' (1744) he sought to undo Warburton's controversial claim that the doctrine of a future life was not declared to the Jews in the 'Old Testament', contending that in promoting it Warburton had done wrong to religion and given ground to unbelievers. In reply Warburton observed of Stebbing's characteristic style of reasoning: 'This puts me in Mind of the 'Constable', who being called in to appease a Quarrel, first knock'd down every one he met; and then said, 'Thus much to prevent Disorder'' (W. Warburton, 'Remarks on Several Occasional Reflections in Answer to the Reverend Doctors Stebbing and Sykes', 1745, 69). Stebbing continued his assault on Warburton's readings of the 'Old Testament' in 'The History of Abraham' (1746), a text which also condemned the tone of Warburton's sermon on the Jacobite rising in 1745 in an implicit comparison with his own, delivered at Gray's Inn in 1745. This provoked a further reply from Warburton, who dismissed Stebbing as a high-flying divine, an outdated follower of Henry Sacheverell, whose ideas stood for nothing more in his 'Gothic System, than the Monkey-faces in your old Cathedral at Sarum' (W. Warburton, 'An Apologetical Dedication to the Reverend Dr Henry Stebbing', 1746, 7). Their fractious exchanges continued into the 1750s; Warburton identified Stebbing as one of the 'Inspectors General over Clerical faith' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 6.571). The Hutchinsonian divine Julius Bate had celebrated Stebbing's part in the battle with Warburton in his tract 'The Faith of the Ancient Jews in the Law of Moses' (1747), which, unusually, defended Stebbing's argument, style, and decency but went on to criticize his notions of ancient Judaism. 
Like Warburton, however, Stebbing had been an inveterate enemy of Methodism and freethinking. His 1739 sermon 'A Caution Against Religious Delusion' proved popular, reaching six editions within a year. It met with a long reply from George Whitefield and a shorter one from John Wesley, and provoked Stebbing to further defences of orthodox notions of repentance and forgiveness. Stebbing devoted a great deal of energy to the repudiation of 'natural religion', which he read as a Hobbist variant of atheism. His first tract on the theme, 'A Discourse Concerning the Use and Advantages of the Gospel Revelation' (1730), originally delivered in a fashionable London chapel, was a reply to Tindal's 'Christianity as Old as the Creation', a text to which he returned in 'A Defence of Dr. Clarke's Evidences of Natural and Revealed Religion' (1731). Stebbing took on Thomas Chubb, the Salisbury freethinker, in his 'Charge Delivered to the Clergy of the Archdeaconry of Wiltshire' (1739), to which Chubb replied in turn. The doctrine of providence was a particular favourite of Stebbing, and he returned to its powers in refuting freethinking in a sermon on the Lisbon earthquake in 1756, which he extended in 'A Discourse Concerning the Governing Providence of God' (1757). The Boyle lectures, which he delivered between 1747 and 1749, were dedicated to an attempted refutation of freethinking; they appeared in print in 1750, with a notable reply to Middleton's critique of miracles, as 'Christianity Justified upon the Scripture Foundation'. 
Stebbing was convinced that freethinking would undermine the nation's morals, a subject with which he was much engaged in his style of churchmanship, as evinced in such early works as 'A rational enquiry into the proper methods of supporting Christianity, so far as it concerns the governors of the church' (1720) and 'An essay concerning civil government, considered as it stands related to religion' (1724); he continued to apply this in the sermons which he originally preached to the lawyers of Gray's Inn and later published in two volumes as 'Sermons on Practical Christianity' (1759-60). He played his part in the debate over Lord Hardwicke's 'Marriage Act' (1753) in 'A dissertation on the power of states to deny civil protection to the marriages of minors made without the consent of their parents or guardians' (1755). This proved a contentious deployment of the natural law arguments of Grotius and Pufendorf, and several replies appeared in quick succession; Nathaniel Forster's manuscript reply is in the British Library (Add. MS 11276). Stebbing had also published 'A Brief Account of Prayer, and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper' in 1739, which acted as a defence of religious duty against the fashionable onslaughts of infidelity. 
Stebbing died at Gray's Inn on 2 January 1763 and was buried in Salisbury Cathedral, where a mural monument with a Latin inscription was erected to his memory. The elder of his two sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 26336


Henry Stebbing (1716-1787), Church of England clergyman, was, like his father, educated at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he too became a fellow. In 1749 he succeeded his father as preacher to Gray's Inn. Ordained priest in December 1741, he served as vicar of Coton, Cambridgeshire (1744-8), and as rector of Gimmingham and Trunch, Norfolk (1748-87). He died on 13 November 1787. His 'Sermons on Practical Subjects' (1788-90) was published posthumously, edited with a memoir by his son Henry, a barrister. The elder Henry Stebbing's younger son, Robert (1719-1800), was a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, and ended his clerical career as the long-serving rector of Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 26337


Stebbing, Henry (1799-1883), author and Church of England clergyman, was born on 26 August 1799 at Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, the son of John Stebbing (died 1826) and his wife, Mary Rede ('c'.1760-1843), who was from a prominent Suffolk family. By the time he went up to St John's College, Cambridge, in October 1818 he was already a published author, having in August produced 'The Minstrel of the Glen and other Poems', which, while patently romantic juvenilia (in one poem a sun sets in the east), attracted favourable notice in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. Stebbing graduated BA from St John's (having migrated briefly to Sidney Sussex in 1819/20) in 1823 and MA in 1827; he was a DD in 1839 and was admitted 'ad eundem' at Oxford in 1857. He was ordained deacon by Bishop Bathurst of Norwich (a family friend) in 1822 and priested the following year, and then undertook duties as a curate in three parishes, including that of Felthorpe, Norfolk, reputedly riding 40 miles each Sunday to serve his churches. 
In 1824 Stebbing was appointed perpetual curate of Ilketshall St Lawrence, Suffolk, the same year in which he married, on 21 December, Mary Griffin (1805-1882), a daughter of William Griffin of Norwich, with whom he had nine children who survived infancy. These included Henry Theophilus (1825-1863), who assisted Stebbing in his literary labours; John (1829-1885), who translated Humboldt and Thiers; Thomas Roscoe Rede Stebbing (1835-1926), a divinity lecturer at Worcester College, Oxford, who became a Darwinian apologist and a fierce critic of orthodox Christianity; and William Stebbing (1831-1926), a barrister and assistant editor of 'The Times' in the 1870s. Two of his daughters, Beatrice (later Batty) and Grace ('fl'. 1876-1888), also achieved renown as authors. During 1825 Stebbing supplemented his income by taking the duties of evening lecturer at Bungay, Suffolk, and during 1825-6 served as usher under Richard Valpy at Norwich grammar school, where he was remembered as a popular master. 
Stebbing's life took a decisive turn when, as one obituarist believed, thirsting 'for access to London publishers and London literary society' ('The Athenaeum', 29 Sept 1883, 400), he transferred his family to London, probably in 1827. He continued his clerical career, from 1829 serving as alternate morning preacher at St James's Chapel in Hampstead Road, St Pancras, the funeral chapel for St James's, Piccadilly. In 1834 he assumed the duties of chaplain to University College Hospital (a post he retained until 1879), and after serving for less than a year as incumbent of Hughenden, Buckinghamshire, on the nomination of John Norris, Stebbing returned to London in 1836 to take charge of St James's -- in effect as a proprietary chapel. He seems to have been a diligent pastor, and claimed to have conducted more than 18,000 funerals. In 1849 he assumed responsibility for the parochial district added to the chapel, establishing a district school and attending the local workhouse when other local clergy refused. 
It was as a literary figure, however, that Stebbing now established his reputation. Although he later told potential patrons that his writing was a burden undertaken to support his large family, it is clear that he relished both authorship and the literary circles into which he was absorbed, the Thackerian aspects of which he would later recall, along with his Norwich years, in his novel 'Near the Cloisters' (1868). His career as a contributor to periodical literature commenced with a review for the evangelical 'Christian Review and Clerical Magazine' in 1827, but only a year later he was a key figure in the foundation of 'The Athenaeum', serving as working editor after the first few numbers, and contributing editorials and many reviews of books 'of the contents of which I knew little, and of the meaning less' ('Athenaeum in 1828-30', 88), until he was succeeded as editor by F. D. Maurice. 
Between 1830 and the mid-1850s Stebbing produced a continuous stream of publications, many on a considerable scale. He published more of his poetry; produced a three-volume 'Lives of the Italian Poets' (1831), dedicated to and much admired by Samuel Rogers; briefly conducted a periodical, the 'Christian Enquirer and Literary Companion' (1848); and produced popular editions of the 'Book of Common Prayer' and the 'Bible', which long remained in currency on both sides of the Atlantic, as well as theological works and sermons, histories, and editions of Defoe's works. The most significant element of his work, much of it contributed to popular series such as Lardner's 'Cabinet Cyclopaedia' or his own thirty-volume 'Library of English Sacred Classics' (1834-6), conducted with R. Cattermole, consisted of editions of major English theologians and religious literature (including Bunyan, Cowper, and Milton), translations of religious travel literature and history, and his original contributions to the history of the church. These began with a history of the crusades (1829-30) and embraced studies of the primitive church (1845), the medieval church (1833-4, 1849), the Reformation (1836-7), and the period between the diet of Augsburg and the eighteenth century (1839-42). 
The apparent contradiction between a clerical career and the literary activity through which he came to know Southey, Coleridge, Scott, Dickens, and Thomas Campbell was recognized but deplored by Stebbing, who argued in 'The Athenaeum' and elsewhere that the divorce between contemporary literature and the Church of England was a significant weakness in the religious life of the nation. This argument was partly fuelled by Stebbing's resentment at the failure of the literary labours, which in 1845 earned him a fellowship of the Royal Society, to win him ecclesiastical preferment, despite a series of pleading letters to both Gladstone and Bishop Blomfield. By the late 1840s he was sufficiently disenchanted publicly to demand reform of the patronage system and a tax on dignities, and to support the radical Edward Horsman's opposition to the creation of a Manchester bishopric (a later radical moment would see him protest against the Crimean War). In 1857, however, the new bishop of London, A. C. Tait, offered Stebbing the City living of St Mary Somerset with St Mary Mountshaw, a preferment accepted by Stebbing in an almost hysterical letter. After this he seems to have scaled down his literary activities, although he still complained of his inadequate income. In consequence he sub-let, rather than totally severed his connection with, St James's, Hampstead Road, and he remained resident in its parsonage for the remainder of his life. His parochial responsibilities were increased by the addition to his parish of the churches of St Nicholas Cole Abbey and St Nicholas Olave in 1866, and then of St Benet Paul's Wharf in June 1879. 
In 1844 Stebbing was described to the editor of 'The Times' as 'decidedly low church' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. c. 290). He might have resented this, for although clearly an evangelical committed to the Reformation as a landmark in the history of the advance of both truth and true religion, his theological, pastoral, and historical writings reveal a complicated position incompatible with evangelical partisanship, not least in an overwhelming commitment to religious tolerance which underpinned criticism of both Calvin and the English Reformers where they had persecuted their religious opponents. Moreover, Stebbing encouraged his flock at St James's to observe at least fast and saints' days if not the daily service, and strongly valued the visible church. The final chapter of his 'History of the Church from the Diet of Augsburg' (1842) is remarkable for his sympathetic account of the origins of the Tractarian movement as in part a reaction to evangelical deficiencies. The fact that he adopted the evangelical practice of extemporary preaching was more a response to the demands of his other literary activities than an indication of party alignment. Stebbing was always a popular preacher, however, and he continued to preach until shortly before his death at St James's parsonage, Hampstead Road, on 22 September 1883, his family linking his decline to the death of his wife the previous year. He was buried on 27 September in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26338


Stedman, Charles (1753-1812), military historian, was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the second son of Alexander Stedman (1703-1794) and Elizabeth Chancellor, daughter of a colonist originally from Somerset. His father, who had worked in Scotland as an advocate, fled with his two brothers after the Jacobites' defeat at the battle of Culloden. They settled in Philadelphia where he was appointed a supreme court judge. Following the outbreak of the American War of Independence he returned to Britain, and he died at Swansea in 1794. It was through his father that Charles Stedman claimed descent from the Scottish naval commander Andrew Barton (died 1511). 
Charles Stedman was educated in law at William and Mary College in Virginia. Like his father he remained loyal to the British crown, and on the outbreak of hostilities he was appointed commissary to the troops under the command of Sir William Howe. His knowledge of the German language assisted him both as interpreter with the German auxiliaries and afterwards as commander of a rifle corps of colonists from the Palatinate. He was twice taken prisoner, and sentenced to be hanged as a rebel, but on each occasion he managed to escape, once from the same prison that held the ill-fated Major Andre. He was also twice severely wounded. 
On the conclusion of peace in 1783 Stedman retired to England on the half-pay of a colonel, and was appointed to examine and settle the claims of the American loyalists. In 1794 his 'History of the Origin, Progress, and Termination of the American War' was published in London and Dublin: it was well reviewed and remained the standard work on the subject for the next century. It was dedicated to Lord Rawdon, earl of Moira, his former commander-in-chief. Shortly after it appeared Sir Henry Clinton printed 'Some Observations upon Mr. Stedman's History', which questions the author's accuracy on minor points. 
Through the influence of Marquess Cornwallis, Lord Rawdon's predecessor in the command, Stedman was appointed in 1797 to the office of deputy controller and accountant-general of the revenue of stamps, with reversion to the chief controllership, though this failed to materialize. He married Mary Bowen and they had one son, John, who became judge of the court at Gibraltar and compiled a genealogical memoir of the family in 1857. Stedman died on 26 June 1812, and was buried at Paddington, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 26339


Stedman, John Andrew (1778-1833), army officer in the Dutch service, was born in 1778, at Zutphen in the Netherlands, the only son of William George Stedman. Both his father and grandfather, who belonged to the same family as Charles Stedman and John Gabriel Stedman, were officers in the Scots brigade in the service of the states general of the United Provinces -- a corps whose history extended from 1570 to 1783. Both married Dutch wives of noble blood. In 1783, when the Scots brigade was formed into Dutch regiments, and most of the officers resigned their commissions, Captain Stedman chose to be naturalized in the country of his adoption. 
John Andrew received a commission in the Dutch army when still a child. At the age of sixteen he first saw service with the allied forces, under the duke of York and the prince of Orange, which in 1794 were on the northern frontier of France. His next service was in 1799, when the Batavian republic was in alliance with France, and the duke of York commanded the opposing army at Bergen. In 1809 he again served against the British at Walcheren. Meanwhile he had held important staff appointments and, on the incorporation of the kingdom of Holland with France, became general of brigade in the French army. In this capacity he served for two years in Italy, and was present at the battles of Bautzen and Dresden. 
In 1814 Stedman attached himself to the prince of Orange, afterwards King William of the Netherlands, and commanded the Dutch troops in reserve at Waterloo, with the rank of lieutenant-general. He married Nicola Gertrude van de Poll, granddaughter of the last reigning burgomaster of Amsterdam. Stedman died at Nijmegen in 1833. His only son, Charles John William Stedman, became a Prussian subject, settling at Besselich Abbey, near Koblenz. He was a member of the national assemblies of Frankfurt and Erfurt, and received the title of 'Freiherr', or baron. He had a large family, of which nearly all the sons entered the Queen Augusta regiment of guards; they reverted to the original family name of Barton. 


@@@@@


doc= 26340


Stedman, John Gabriel (1744-1797), army officer and author, was born on 4 April 1744 in Dendermonde, the Netherlands, the eldest of the five children of Robert Stedman (1701-1770), a Scot and a lieutenant-colonel in the Scots brigade, a mercenary unit, and his wife, Antoinetta Christina (1710-1788), the daughter of Nicholas van Ceulen and his wife, Johanna de Heron Reygersman, of Bergen op Zoom. After early years spent following his father's regiment from one Dutch fort to another he was sent to Dunfermline, Fife, in 1755 to be tutored by his stern uncle, John Stedman MD (1710-1791), the author of 'Laelius and Hortensia' (1782), and had an unhappy two years there. Our knowledge of the first twenty-eight years of Stedman's life stems largely from the retrospective diary that he wrote while in retirement at Tiverton, Devon, from 1785 to 1786. A rollicking account of amorous adventures mimicking the style of 'Tom Jones' and 'Roderick Random', it depicts a fearlessly iconoclastic and rebellious youth, jumping from one merry prank or drunken brawl to the next, and from one (often married) woman's bed to another. 
On 14 July 1760, aged sixteen, Stedman became an ensign in General John Stuart's regiment in the Scots brigade and spent the next eleven years defending outposts in the Low Countries while continuing his 'scandalous life' (diary, 29 Nov 1785), consistently 'studying to be singular in as much as can be so' (Stedman, '1786', 20). In 1771, saddened by the death of his father and in debt, he responded to a call for volunteers to put down a slave rebellion in the wealthy South American colony of Surinam. He sailed from the Netherlands, with the rank of captain, in December 1772, and arrived in Surinam in February 1773. 
Soon after his arrival Stedman married, by local custom, Joanna (1757-1782), a beautiful fifteen-year-old mixed-race slave, but he was ultimately unsuccessful at obtaining her freedom. They had a son, Johnny (whose freedom Stedman bought), who was educated at Blundell's School, Tiverton, and was drowned at sea off Jamaica in 1792 as a midshipman in the British navy. Joanna, who remained in Surinam when Stedman left, died -- possibly by poisoning -- on 5 November 1782. Stedman left Surinam on 1 April 1777, returned to the Netherlands, and rejoined Stuart's regiment. At Maastricht on 2 February 1782 he married Adriana (1764-1829), daughter of Adrian Wierts van Coehorn, and they had five children. Stedman was promoted lieutenant-colonel by the prince of Orange in 1783, but he sold his commission the same year when, as a consequence of the Fourth Anglo-Dutch War, the Scots brigade was disbanded, and he settled with his family in England. 
Stedman wrote one of the most detailed descriptions ever written of an eighteenth-century slave plantation society, his 'Narrative, of a Five Years' Expedition, Against the Revolted Negroes of Surinam' (1796). His intimate dealings with members of all social classes, from the governor and the wealthiest planters to the most oppressed slaves and maroon rebels, gave him unique opportunities to describe the full panorama of colonial life -- the mistreatment of slaves by sadistic masters, the courage of the rebels in battle, the daily lives of Indian and African slaves, and exotic flora and fauna. 
Stedman's 'Narrative' has been published in nearly thirty editions and in six languages. It was often called into service for the anti-slavery cause, but it is now known that the first edition in fact represented a significantly altered version of the manuscript Stedman had submitted to his publisher, Joseph Johnson, in 1790. For, unbeknown to the author, Johnson had passed the manuscript to William Thomson (1746-1817), a professional editor and ghost writer, who caused the work to be 'mard intirely' (diary, 24 June 1795). Thanks to Stedman's diverse diaries, notebooks, and other papers (now in the James Ford Bell Library, Minneapolis), it has been possible to reconstruct the history of the 'Narrative', from its beginnings in the form of a log kept in Surinam in the 1770s, sometimes jotted down on cartridges or even on 'a 'Bleached bone'' when paper was unavailable, through the various stages of writing, editing, and negotiating with Johnson that led to the first edition. 
Stedman considered himself a gifted artist, and presented his publisher with 106 drawings, mainly watercolours, most made on the spot in Surinam. Johnson employed a number of engravers for the book's eighty-one plates, including Francesco Bartolozzi, who signed Stedman's self-portrait frontispiece, and William Blake, who was responsible for sixteen plates that 'have long been recognized as among the best executed and most generally interesting of all his journeyman work' (Keynes, 98). Each of Blake's arresting engravings successfully blends his own inner vision with Stedman's. The often-reproduced slave tortures (pl. 11, 35, 71) convey extraordinary power and pathos, the wonderfully humanoid monkeys and the skinning of the giant anaconda (pl. 18, 42, 19) sprightly humour, and his emblematic representation of 'Europe Supported by Africa & America' (pl. 80) demure but unmistakable sensuality. 
The heavily edited first edition distorted Stedman's views on race, slavery, and social justice, and turned them more towards a pro-slavery position. Softened or deleted in the 1796 publication were his admiration for Africans -- their institutions, morals, hygiene -- including the rebel slaves; his frank depiction of sex between European men and African women; and many of his remarks about the pervasiveness of misconduct and debauchery of European planters. None the less, the 'Narrative' had significant contemporary impact. Upon its publication the 'Critical Review' observed that 'we have never opened any work which is so admirably calculated to excite the most heart-felt abhorrence and detestation of that grossest assault on human nature -- domestic slavery' ('Critical Review', January 1797, 53). 
After having settled in England, Stedman was confirmed in his rank by the British in 1796. He lived at Hensleigh House, near Tiverton, where he died on 1 March 1797. He was buried in St Mary's churchyard, Bickleigh, Devon, on 7 March, though not, as he had wanted, close to Bamfylde Moore Carew, the 'King of the Beggars'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26341


Stedman, Rowland (d. 1673), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Corfton, in the parish of Diddlebury in Shropshire, the son of Henry and Mary Stedman, who were both still living at the time he signed his will in 1667. He matriculated from Balliol College, Oxford, as a plebeian, on 12 March 1649 but migrated to University College on obtaining a scholarship there in the same year. He graduated BA on 16 October 1651 and proceeded MA on 22 March 1656; by the latter date, however, he had already begun his ministerial career. On 18 November 1653 he was presented under the great seal as rector of Pontesbury, Shropshire, but by July of the following year he was at the rectory of Hanwell, Middlesex. In 1659 he was curate of Wokingham, Berkshire, remaining there until his ejection. In his will Stedman would leave books to Mrs Elizabeth Hawes, of Wokingham, in grateful acknowledgement of 'her love and care of my welfare during my residence there' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/343, fol. 106'r'). 
Probably after his ejection in 1662 Stedman married Margaret, daughter of William and Anne Jemmatt; there were no surviving children of the marriage in 1667, when he drew up his will at Neasden in the parish of Willesden, Middlesex. The following year he published 'The Mystical Union of Believers with Christ' with an epistle dedicated to Dame Eleanor Roberts of Neasden, and a second preface to 'my dearly beloved friends, the inhabitants of the town and parish of Wockingham' from whom he had been separated: 'You are, many of you, a people under convictions' in whom 'the clear light of the gospel' shone, even though they are 'most of you, a people of low estate, and poor in the world'. He asks them not to despair 'in the worst times. And think not the worse of religion because it is despised and set against. It is condemned indeed of pride and humour; of faction, sedition and turbulency'. But its opponents are 'men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth'; and 'will a traveller be turned out of his road, because of some dogs and curs, that bark at him?' (Stedman, preface). Probably a little later, Stedman was able to move closer to his old congregation while serving as a chaplain to Philip, Lord Wharton (1613-1696), at Wooburn, Buckinghamshire. On 22 July 1672, following receipt of a letter on his behalf from Richard Steele, he was granted a licence as a presbyterian teacher at the house of Samuel Clark (died 1701) at Winchendon in the same county. Stedman died at Wooburn on 14 September 1673, and was buried on 16 September at Wooburn church; his wife survived him. His will, dated 24 October 1667, was proved on 8 October 1673. In it he let it be known 'that in my not conforming to the Ceremonies and other Impositions I have not been led by Humour, faction or any carnal interest whatsoever but as really judging such conformity sinful' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/343, fol. 106). 


@@@@@


doc= 26342


Steel, Sir Scudamore Winde (1789-1865), army officer in the East India Company, was the son of David Steel (died 1803), barrister, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Scudamore Winde, judge of the supreme court of Jamaica. He was appointed a cadet in the East India Company's service in 1805, and became lieutenant in the Madras army on 11 September 1806. In 1808-9 he served under Colonel Doveton in Berar against the Pindaris. He took part in the Anglo-Maratha War of 1817-18 as assistant quartermaster, and was slightly wounded in the capture of one of the hill forts. He became captain in the army on 27 March 1821, and in the 51st native infantry on 1 May 1824. He was employed on the quartermaster-general's staff at Nagpur, and in the First Anglo-Burmese War in 1826. He was promoted major in his regiment on 15 December 1832, and was secretary in the military department at Madras from 1832 to 1845. He planned and took part in the operations for the capture of Coorg in 1834. He was made lieutenant-colonel in the army on 28 July 1835, and of the 24th native infantry on 9 April 1838. On 20 July in that year he was made CB. He married the eldest daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel William Read; she died in 1849. 
In 1845 Steel was appointed military auditor-general, on 13 September 1847 colonel of the Madras fusiliers, and on 8 March 1849 colonel of the 18th native infantry. He commanded the Madras division of the army engaged in the Second Anglo-Burmese War in 1852-3, was mentioned in dispatches, and directed the column sent to Martaban in January to operate on the Salween. He was made KCB on 9 December 1853, and was appointed to the command of the Pegu division and the Martaban provinces, being promoted major-general on 28 November 1854. Steel returned to England in 1856, became lieutenant-general on 2 September 1861, and died at his home, 101 Gloucester Terrace, Hyde Park, London, on 11 March 1865. 


@@@@@


doc= 26343


Steele, Anne (1717-1778), hymn writer and poet, daughter of William Steele (1689-1769), timber merchant and Baptist pastor, was born at Broughton, Hampshire. In 1769 the family moved from the village to Broughton House nearby. The view from the terrace walk in the garden is said to have inspired her poem 'A Rural Meditation', beginning 'What soft delight the peaceful bosom warms!' Her health was delicate, after a hip injury at the age of eighteen; and she suffered a great shock when her fiance (probably), James Elcombe, was drowned shortly before their intended wedding. This gave rise to the idea of Anne Steele as the prototype of the tragic unmarried hymn writer, turning her sorrow into song. However, she subsequently received a proposal of marriage from the Baptist pastor and hymn writer Benjamin Beddome, which she refused. She led a quiet and unremarkable life thereafter, though communicating freely with friends and other writers. 
Steele is notable for being one of the first of British women hymn writers, and the first to become widely known. In the nineteenth century she was widely regarded as an example to other women, not only in her poetical devotion but also in the supposed preference for an uneventful life: 'the duties of friendship and religion occupied her time, and the pleasures of both constituted her delight' (Evans, preface). In 1760, using the pseudonym Theodosia, she published 'Poems on Subjects Chiefly Devotional': it included metrical versions of forty-seven psalms, together with religious poems and hymns. Many of them were concerned with responses to affliction, such as 'Desiring Resignation and Thankfulness', 'Desiring a Cheerful Resignation to the Divine Will', and 'The Presence of God the only Comfort in Affliction'. In 1780 Caleb Evans, hymnologist and Baptist minister from Bristol, added prose exercises of a religious kind in 'Miscellaneous Pieces in Prose and Verse'. These include short essays on human life, on death, on the frailty of humanity, and on the mercy of God. Evans, introducing the book, said that 'Her life was a life of unaffected humility, warm benevolence, sincere friendship, and genuine devotion' (preface). Her complete works were published in the USA (Boston, 1808), with a preface by Evans, and in Britain by Daniel Sedgwick (1863), with a verbose memoir by John Sheppard. 
Steele herself was modest about her work, and gave away her profits to worthy causes. She became well known in her own lifetime, and was visited by Hannah More. Her hymns remained in use until recent times, the best-known being: '
Father of mercies, in Thy word 

What endless glory shines! 

' She read widely, and acknowledged debts to Alexander Pope, Thomas Gray, and Isaac Watts, often echoing Watts, as in 'When I survey life's varied scene', or in her poems about the created world, such as 'There is a God, all nature speaks'. This hymn was printed in the fourth edition of J. Ash's and C. Evans's 'A Collection of Hymns Adapted to Public Worship' (1781), over the signature 'T' (Theodosia). That volume contained no fewer than fifty-five of Anne Steele's hymns; 'Father of mercies' is the only one that survived into recent times, and even that has disappeared from modern hymn books. The reason is that she was probably not quite original enough in her hymns. Her dependence on the example of Isaac Watts is clear, as in 'A Dying Saviour', when she describes the crucified Christ: '
See, from his hands, his feet, his side, 

Runs down the sacred crimson tide. 

' Steele's brief fame as the great female writer of hymns was probably due to the championship of her work by Caleb Evans, and her hymns began to be lost in hymnbooks during the flood of new writing in the nineteenth century. But she deserves a place in the history of hymnology because she was a woman writer who was able, at least for a hundred years, to articulate the movements of the feeling heart in response to the passion and death of her Saviour. Her own experience of grief gave her an insight into suffering, and the sense of a need for peace: again and again her hymns stress the importance of mercy and the peace to the soul which it brings. That these things were articulated more memorably and dramatically by Charles Wesley does not invalidate her own achievement, nor does it excuse the present-day church for its neglect of her work. Anne Steele died at Broughton House on 11 November 1778 and was buried in Broughton. 


@@@@@


doc= 26344


Steele, Christopher (bap. 1733, d. 1767), portrait painter, was baptized on 9 July 1733 at Acre Walls, Widdeker, St Bees, Cumberland, the second of the six children of John Steele ('c'.1700- 'c'.1770), tallow chandler, and his wife, Katherine Denton, daughter of Christopher Denton, rector, and his wife, Isobelle Sherwin. His artistic precocity caused his parents to send him to study art under the marine painter Richard Wright of Liverpool in the late 1740s. He then studied in Paris under Carle van Loo, brother of Jean Baptiste van Loo, for a year or more, returning with the dandified extravagant manners and dress which earned him the sobriquet 'the Count', or 'Count Steele'. 
Having unsuccessfully tried to set up a studio in York, Steele went to Kendal in the Lake District about 1750 and took a room in Redmayne's Yard, from Alderman Redmayne, whose nephew was the painter Daniel Gardner. Gardner was a neighbour of John Romney, whose son George was showing some artistic talent. Both Gardner and George Romney came to work in the studio under Steele, the latter being apprenticed on 20 March 1755 for four years at a fee of $21. The two young men worked together, each having an influence on the other. Their similarities in style are evident in their clarity of line and pure fresh flesh tones, and in their depiction of textiles. Steele then fell in love and eloped with another pupil, Amy Grundy (died 1761), and moved for nine months to York, where he painted Laurence Sterne. Romney joined him in York but a shortage of commissions led to the termination of his apprenticeship when Romney waived the debt of $10 owing to him. In July 1757 Steele moved to Lancaster and then to Dublin, setting up studios in both places, though no work has been found from his time in Ireland. From 1758 Steele and his wife travelled for two years between Liverpool, Egremont (Cumberland), and Manchester. In 1760, together with the artist's sister Isabella, they bought The Woodcocks, a house near Middlewich, Cheshire. Steele's debts increased and on 30 December 1761 Amy Steele died. In 1762 he made a will in favour of Isabella, with instructions for the income to go to his father for his lifetime, and set sail for the West Indies. He returned to Egremont in 1767 and died on 1 September. He was buried in Egremont. Because of his carefree and generous attitude Steele had often been described as extravagant and even 'drunk'. However, a letter from his younger brother Peter Steele ameliorates the 'unfriendly plaistering' Steele received from Mr Cumberland in the 'European Magazine' (43, 1803), acknowledging that while his brother was 'poor and frequently distressed' and that this 'proceeded from too great generosity and want of proper economy' he also suffered from 'a debility of mind and body which produced epilepsy and all its concomitants so that he died a little above 30' (Burkett, 202). 
Up to thirty-eight portraits by Steele have been identified, some by signature, or on stylistic or other grounds. Most were painted between the years 1750 and 1760 and are in private ownership; however, 'Giles Moore' ('c'.1758) is in the Newark Museum, New Jersey, while Abbot Hall Art Gallery, Kendal, owns 'Elin Machell' ('c'.1753), 'Thomas Machell' ('c'.1755), and 'Portrait of a Child'. On four paintings appear the letters 'a.r.g.c.', for which no explanation has been found. In addition to his consistently well-painted 'oeuvre' (which includes delightful portraits of children such as 'Martha Rodes' of 1750, 'Mary Wilkinson', and 'John Wilson of Evening Hill', all priv. coll.), Steele is also to be remembered for his influence on George Romney. 


@@@@@


doc= 26345


Steele, Joshua (c.1700-1796), plantation owner and writer on prosody, was born at the start of the eighteenth century but where and to whom is not known. Although his later writings suggest that he was educated, it is not known where or when. He may have lived for a time in Ireland before spending most of his adult years in London. 
About 1750 he married Sarah, the widow of Robert Osborne, an absentee owner of a substantial plantation on the Caribbean colony of Barbados. The couple had no children and when she died in 1757 Steele became the owner of a 1068 acre estate. In 1756 he was elected to the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce. Through his membership Steele, a specialist in the theory of music, promoted the study of speech as music. In 1775, besides writing two essays on musical instruments, he published 'An essay towards establishing the melody and measure of speech, to be expressed and perpetuated by peculiar symbols'. Arguing that speech has melody and rhythm, Steele had developed a notational system for transcribing the phonetic features of English. Through this publication, reprinted four years later as 'Prosodia rationalis', he became a major contributor to prosody, the study of the pronunciation of words including tone, accent, pitch, stress, pauses, and volume. 
Increasingly frustrated by the poor returns from his holding on Barbados, Steele sailed for the island in 1780. Repelled by the vicious treatment of slaves and the idleness of the poor white population on the island, he resolved to improve conditions for both. The owner of more than 300 slaves, he eschewed violence as a way to improve their productivity. Rather than permit beatings, he established a court of elder slaves to judge plantation offences. He also offered financial rewards. By 1789 Steele had begun to rent land to slaves and pay them wages. In 1781 he founded an organization similar to the London Society of Arts. Serving variously as president and vice-president, Steele led the society's effort to develop local industries for poor white people including the manufacture of cotton yarn, lace, stockings, fibre for making rope, and pottery. The society became less active after 1789, but there is no direct evidence to suggest that it was dissolved under pressure from Steele's opponents. 
As he attempted to ameliorate work conditions on Barbados, Steele held a number of offices on the island: sheriff of his parish, a member of the council, and judge. Despite his rise in political influence his efforts to rehabilitate poor white people had little effect on their unemployment and few planters followed his lead in improving the lives of their slaves. Nevertheless, Steele earned an enduring reputation as a reformer who sought more humane treatment of exploited workers, black and white. He died in Barbados on 27 October 1796. William Dickson published Steele's letters to prominent slave-trade opponent Thomas Clarkson describing his reforms and estate management in an 1814 volume entitled 'Mitigation of Slavery, in Two Parts'. Two mixed-race children named Catherine and Edward whom he sent to England to be educated survived Steele. 


@@@@@


doc= 26346


Steele, Richard (1629-1692), nonconformist minister, was born at Claycroft in Barthomley, Cheshire, on 10 May 1629, the son of Robert Steele, a local husbandman. He was educated at Northwich grammar school and went up to Cambridge in 1642, matriculating as a sizar from St John's College on 1 April. Steele graduated BA in 1650 and proceeded MA in 1651. He later moved from Cambridge to Oxford, becoming the chaplain of Corpus Christi College, and in July 1656 was incorporated MA at Oxford. 
A supporter of parliament's cause during the civil wars, Steele was made an assistant to the parliamentary commission for north Wales in 1654. He was admitted to the living of Hanmer in Flintshire on 21 June 1654, but as Henry Newcome visited him there on 10 June of that year it is probable that he was administering to the congregation at an earlier date. Steele believed in the unity of the church and was a presbyterian in practice, associating his parish with the fourth Shropshire classical presbytery. Although the classis system, instituted by act of parliament in 1647, was generally stillborn in the country, the Shropshire classis was active, and Steele was among the presbyters of the classis who ordained the minister and diarist Philip Henry on 16 September 1657. Steele and Henry would be lifelong friends, and Steele's belief in the validity of the presbyterian system of ordination is shown by the ordination of Henry's son, Matthew, at Steele's house in London in May 1687, twenty-seven years after the Restoration abolished the parliamentarian classis system. 
Steele was an early sufferer from the conservative backlash that occurred with the restoration of the monarchy in 1660. In September of that year he was presented before the Flint assizes with Philip Henry for not reading the 'Book of Common Prayer' but was saved by the terms of the king's declaration of Breda from further prosecution. He was again before the court in March 1661 for the same offence. The decision of the bishops to re-establish the Church of England on exclusive grounds meant that Steele, like most moderate presbyterians, could not subscribe and so he chose to resign his living in August 1662. On 17 August he preached his farewell sermon as a minister of the Church of England against the intolerable situation that subscription to the (as yet uncirculated) prayer book placed him in. However, he did not separate from the Church of England and still took communion at Hanmer. This he did in the pre-civil war tradition of sitting, refusing to take the sacrament in the 'idolatrous' kneeling position. Steele and Philip Henry were again arrested and briefly imprisoned in October 1663, on suspicion of treason. Steele had a brief sojourn in London in August 1664, where he preached to a meeting at the Golden Goat in Cheapside. However, he returned to Flintshire in 1665 and in April was again arrested. The authorities seized his diary, and Calamy contends that they misread passages to smear Steele's name, taking a reference to 'a carnal account' to be 'some woman design'. This act seems to have been successful 'to his great reproach and injury' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.708). 
With the imposition of the 'Five Mile Act' in 1666 Steele was forced to move away from Hanmer, and lived in or near the town of Betley in Staffordshire. By 1672 he was living in London and was licensed during the indulgence as a presbyterian at Westmoreland House. He supported the indulgence and acted as an agent for his former friends and colleagues in the west, obtaining licences for them in London whether they requested it or not. Although Steele still had connections in his home town of Barthomley, he used his time in London for the profit of nonconformity, preaching to a morning gathering at Armourers' Hall in Coleman Street and to an afternoon congregation in Hoxton. He remained in London, moving to a meeting at Bartholomew Close by 1678, and was fined $20 in April 1683 by the Guildhall sessions for preaching to that congregation; he was also a regular preacher at the nonconformist morning exercises. When the revolution of 1688 brought toleration he registered as a preacher at Hoxton. 
As a result of his humble background Steele was well suited to writing works of popular piety. In 1668 he wrote 'The Husbandman's Calling', which was succeeded by 'The Tradesman's Calling' in 1684. Both these works commended the godly life to the lower orders and sought to teach farmers and shopkeepers how labouring in their calling could be used to find proof of the grace of God; the latter work was one of the first to be given away by the Society for Promoting Religious Knowledge. He also wrote 'A Discourse Concerning Old Age' (1688) to assist those facing their last years to obtain religious certainty. 
Steele died in London on 16 November 1692 and was buried at the London church of St Bartholomew-the-Great, where his friend and successor George Hamond preached a funeral oration. He left money to found a school in his home town of Barthomley and to assist the widows of nonconformist ministers. Steele was survived by his wife, Frances, two sons, Richard and John, and two daughters, Abigail and Hannah. 


@@@@@


doc= 26347


Steele, Sir Richard (bap. 1672, d. 1729), writer and politician, was born in St Bride's parish, Dublin, and baptized at the parish church on 12 March 1672, the second child and only son of Richard Steele, an attorney, and Elinor Symes, 'nee' Sheyles. His grandfather, also Richard Steele, an explorer in Persia and India, and known to Samuel Purchas and Thomas Coryat, had been awarded a pension by Charles I for his services and acquired land around Ballinakill in Queen's county (co. Laois) and near New Ross in co. Wexford. Steele was thus born into the protestant gentry, and his primary education seems to have been private -- as appropriate to that class. His contemporary Jonathan Swift was born into precisely the same segment of society: this fact was the fuel of the personal animosity between the two later in life. 
Richard, the father, was in declining health and died when Steele was still a child, probably about 1676 or 1677. The care of Steele and his sister Katherine, born in 1671, was assumed by their paternal aunt Katherine Steele Mildmay, widow of Sir Humphry Mildmay, who in 1675 married Henry Gascoigne, private secretary to the first duke of Ormond. Ormond, twice viceroy of Ireland, was succeeded in that office in 1684 and returned to England with his entourage. Gascoigne and his wife lived in Fulham and on 17 November 1684 Richard Steele was entered in the Charterhouse School, then in its location in central London. Steele's admission was no doubt on the interest of Ormond, who was a governor of the institution. In 1686 Joseph Addison enrolled at the Charterhouse and the basis was laid for one of literature's most celebrated collaborations. 
The Charterhouse curriculum aimed to prepare students for the universities. In 1689 Steele, judged proficient enough in Greek and Latin, went up to Oxford and on 21 December signed the entry book at Christ Church. The dean, Henry Aldrich, had been tutor to the second duke of Ormond, the first duke's grandson, who had elected to support William in the revolution of 1688. Aldrich had received his appointment as dean largely as a reward for his earlier opposition to James II's attempts to augment Catholic influence in the university. 
Steele's friend Addison was enjoying some intellectual celebrity as the holder of a demyship at Magdalen College and in August 1691 Steele migrated to Merton College as a scholar on the foundation. The expectation was that, like Addison, he would eventually proceed to a fellowship. Many years later Steele recalled Merton as 'that college I am more particularly obliged to' ('The Englishman', 22 Dec 1713). His stay there, however, was comparatively brief: in May 1692 he took his final meals in college and departed, in his own account, to plant 'himself behind King 'William' the Third, against 'Lewis' the Fourteenth' ('The Theatre', 11, 6 Feb 1720). Nothing more is known of Steele's decision to leave Oxford without a degree. 
Probably in the summer of 1692 Steele enlisted in the second troop of Life Guards, commanded by the duke of Ormond. Troopers in this elite regiment were referred to as 'private gentlemen' and addressed as 'Mister'. It was, however, a combat unit and during the summers of 1692 and 1694 engaged in active operations in Flanders. 
In April 1695 Steele saw published, no doubt at his own expense, a small pamphlet in folio entitled 'The Procession. A Poem on her Majesties Funeral', 'By a Gentleman of the Army'. The poem, in pentameter couplets, which describes the funeral ceremonies for Queen Mary the preceding month, has significance only as Steele's first published work and because it was dedicated to John, Baron Cutts (1661-1707), commanding officer of the 2nd foot guards, the Coldstream regiment. Some time in 1695 Steele left the Life Guards and joined the Coldstream, probably as a 'gentleman of the company' until his commission as ensign in Cutts's own company came through in April 1697. As such, Cutts was the titular and Steele the actual company commander, with the brevet rank of captain. The sobriquet by which he was known for many years, Captain Steele, thus dates from April 1697. 
In addition to his military duties Steele was serving as private secretary to Lord Cutts, a post which perhaps broadened his acquaintanceship in London society. Some time in these years Steele involved himself in alchemical experiments, with the hope of a quick financial return but the reality of lost money and credit in the refining fires. He fathered an illegitimate daughter about this time; the mother, Elizabeth, was the unmarried daughter of Richard Tonson the bookseller. Steele saw to the care of the child, named Elizabeth Ousley; the Tonson family seem to have borne him no ill will because Elizabeth's brother Jacob Tonson in later years became Steele's principal publisher. In June 1700 Steele attracted further notoriety by fighting a duel with another Irishman in Hyde Park and almost killing his opponent, probably an officer of the Queen's regiment of dragoons named Henry Kelly. Later, in his plays and essays, Steele became one of the most vocal critics of duelling. In the same year he contributed a poem in defence of Addison to a collection entitled 'Commendatory Verses'. The volume was a reply to Sir Richard Blackmore's 'Satyr Against Wit', which had attacked Dryden and his followers, including Addison. Captain Steele was in effect announcing his literary ambitions and associating himself with the wits. 
The immediate products of Steele's ambitions were his first major publications: 'The Christian Hero', a quasi-philosophical tract, and 'The Funeral', a stage comedy. Both appeared in 1701. Steele's pamphlet, which ran to some twenty editions in the century, decries neostoicism with its emphasis on pagan virtues and celebrates, as the title indicates, the Christian hero, especially as exemplified by the soldier king William. 'The Funeral' was published by Jacob Tonson in December (with the date 1702 on the title-page), to coincide with the opening of the comedy at the Drury Lane Theatre in that month. The principal players -- Robert Wilks, Colley Cibber, Anne Oldfield -- were to be associated with Steele for the rest of his life, in his career as playwright and theatre governor. With incidental music by Daniel Purcell, 'The Funeral' had 'more than expected Success' (Cibber, 153). Years later Steele looked back on his triumphant debut: 'Nothing can make the Town so fond of a Man as a successful Play' (Steele, 'Apology', in 'Tracts', 339). The play, with its patriotic motifs, apparently attracted the favourable attention of the king himself. As renewal of the wars with France approached in 1702, Steele received a captaincy in the newly formed 34th foot. 
To his chagrin Steele's company, recruited by him in Essex and Norfolk, was assigned to Landguard Fort, a dilapidated structure guarding the approaches to Harwich in Suffolk. Steele spent his time repairing the fabric of the old fort and drilling his green recruits, but also in learning Harwich politics at the grassroots. The new member for Harwich, John Ellis, had been an associate of Henry Gascoigne in the Ormond circle and Steele began supplying him confidential information on the electorate. Steele was also writing another play, according to plausible local tradition working on it at the Queen's Arms in Harwich. 'The Lying Lover', produced at Drury Lane in December 1703, ran for only six performances, producing two benefit nights for the author but little else. Steele's dedication of the printed play, published by Bernard Lintott, was to the second duke of Ormond, then raising a new regiment of dragoons. The dedication secured him no appointment. Distress over this denial of preferment or perhaps the death in January 1705 of the 34th's commanding officer, Lord Lucas, may have precipitated Steele's decision to leave the army. He had no prospects of promotion at Landguard Fort under a stranger's command. 
Whatever his motivation, Steele was back in London to stay in the spring of 1705, witnessing the production of his third play and preparing to marry for the first time. 'The Tender Husband', a comedy, had a brief initial run, and only one author's benefit performance in April 1705. It returned to Drury Lane for performances later in the year and remained a staple of the London stage repertory for many decades, without remuneration for the author. It is significant that Steele did not have another new play produced until many years later when he was a partner in the Drury Lane management and thus able to reap rewards both as author and as manager. 
Addison was also in London and according to Steele contributed 'many applauded Stroaks' to the play ('Spectator', no. 555). Well constructed, 'The Tender Husband' is thought by many to be the best, though not the most influential, of Steele's stage comedies. Of biographical interest is the hero, Captain Clerimont, a young army officer in marital pursuit of an heiress. In April or May 1705 Captain Steele himself pursued and married an heiress, Margaret Stretch, 'nee' Ford, a widow formerly of Barbados. Her estate there including sugar plantations was let two years later for $850 a year. Steele had married a considerable fortune, which he immediately, and characteristically, began entangling in his own indebtedness. By December 1706 Margaret Stretch was dead. A single reference to her in a letter from Steele (to his second wife's mother) constitutes all that is known about Steele's feeling for her or hers for Steele: 'My Late Wife had so extreme a Value for Me that she by Fine Convey'd to Me Her whole estate Situate in Barbados' ('Correspondence', 201). Her burial place is unknown. 
Steele met Mary Scurlock (1678-1718), a young woman of Irish descent living in Wales, at his first wife's funeral. He pursued her with the ardour of a Captain Clerimont, assuring her in a letter of courtship that 'Instead of saying, I shall die for you, I professe I should be glad to Lead my life with you; you are as Beautiful as Witty as prudent, and as good humoured as any woman breathing' ('Correspondence', 190). The couple were married at St Mary Somerset in the City on 9 September 1707. 
In his public life meanwhile Steele had been achieving, in small ways, some recognition. The parliamentary elections of May 1705 had strengthened the position of the junto whigs. Probably about this time Steele was admitted to the whig Kit-Cat Club, of which Addison was already a member. Steele wrote the prologue to John Vanbrugh's new play, 'The Mistake', in December. Vanbrugh, architect and playwright, was an important Kit-Cat. In the summer of 1706 Steele's 'Prologue to the University of Oxford', written for the opening of a series of dramatic performances, was read there. In August he received his first civil preferment, an appointment as gentleman waiter to Queen Anne's husband, Prince George of Denmark, with a stipend of $100 a year, free of taxes. 
More preferment was forthcoming. The junto whig Charles Spencer, third earl of Sunderland, was sworn in as secretary of state for the southern department in December. His under-secretary was Joseph Addison. In late April or early May 1707 Steele, doubtless on Addison's recommendation, was appointed editor of the 'London Gazette', the official government news medium, at a salary of $300 a year. This was Steele's introduction to periodical publication and important training for his future ventures in the field, but it was not inspiring work; he later recalled that he had laboured 'to keep that paper very innocent and very insipid' (Steele, 'Apology', in 'Tracts', 339). His proposal that the 'Gazette' appear three times instead of twice a week, to meet increased demand by the public for news, was ignored. Prince George died in October 1708 and in December Steele was passed over for the vacant position of under-secretary of state, Addison having gone to Ireland as secretary to the lord lieutenant. It may have seemed to Steele time for a change. His creditors were, as usual, pressing him on every side. 

'The Tatler', which appeared in its first issue on 12 April 1709, was very much Steele's own creation, even as he drew on editorial techniques and printing technology already being used in London. These he had learned from directing 'The Gazette''s operations and observing those of its competitors. 'The Tatler' would, for example, appear 'three' times a week, to coincide with the postal service leaving London for the provinces, which also carried competing manuscript newsletters directed to subscribers there. The price would be competitive as well: gratis for the first four issues and thenceforth a penny. The low price was possible because of the paper's format: a folio half-sheet, printed on both sides, the cheapest form possible. Distribution at the beginning was direct to the London public by way of hawkers, an order of salespersons almost exclusively women and referred to by Steele, in the paper's first advertisement ('Tatler', no. 4, verso) as 'Running Stationers'. Steele's publisher was the trade publisher John Morphew, who purveyed ephemera, anonymous pamphlets, and the like. Jacob Tonson, who had already published two of Steele's plays, declined to publish, if he was offered, what must have appeared a most marginal enterprise. The printer was John Nutt, who did not get around to registering the copyright until 2 May 1710, perhaps indicating his own reservations about the new paper. 
Yet 'The Tatler' was an immediate and continuing success. The supposed author or editorial persona, 'Isaac Bickerstaff', had become known to London readers as a participant in the elaborate literary hoax invented and pursued by Jonathan Swift and others in Bickerstaff's name a year earlier. In the first 'Tatler' 'Bickerstaff' indicated that he intended to supply information for the male readers and entertainment for the female, a refurbishing of Horace's famous dictum. In the event he supplied both to both; it was a condition of the paper's success. 
Another condition of that success was Steele's ability to attract other contributors to the paper. Swift, for example, appearing as Humphrey Wagstaff, 'an Ingenious Kinsman of mine', provided his 'Description of the morning' for the ninth 'Tatler'. Addison began sending excellent material from Ireland. By drawing on his friends Steele was making a virtue of necessity because in that spring of 1709 he was editing two periodicals simultaneously, and seeing five issues of them through the press every week. 
Though Steele introduced political material from time to time, as in his allegorical presentation of the junto whig leadership in no. 4, he did not make politics a major element of the paper. Nor, after the opening weeks, was news offered, in the sense of diurnal chronicling. Theatrical criticism was presented in no. 1 and continued regularly thereafter. In the paper's early days Steele used the 'departments' which he had formed in the first issue; this made for short entries of a few hundred words under each by-line. Soon the paper evolved toward the single essay of some 1500 or 2000 words that would fill both sides of the half-sheet, minus the advertising. This was the informal essay, descended ultimately from Montaigne, which became in 'Tatler' form the periodical essay and gave the name to its vehicle, the essay periodical. 
The Steeles' first child, a daughter named Elizabeth, was born in March 1709, and their first son, Richard, in May 1710. The whig Charles Montagu, Lord Halifax, stood as godfather for young Richard. Steele reaped one more sinecure from his association with the junto: in January 1710 a commissionership at the stamp office, with a stipend of $300 a year. The strength of the whigs was declining, however, in 1710, and that of Robert Harley and his tory coalition waxing. When Steele published an overtly political 'Tatler' (no. 130) in favour of the whig government, the new tory paper, 'The Examiner' (31 August 1710), warned Bickerstaff: 'No more of your politick Lucubrations'. In mid-October Steele resigned from 'The Gazette', as Harley consolidated his position, and on 2 January 1711 Steele wound up 'The Tatler' with no. 271, signing his name at the close. Ending the paper may have been Harley's price for allowing Steele to continue as stamp commissioner; 'The Tatler' and its editor had become identified with the whigs. 
Addison was back in London, permanently, and as a whig out of office had time on his hands. The two planned a new periodical, to be called 'The Spectator', with some care; it was probably Addison's prudential counsel that led them to adopt a non-partisan stance for it, leaving Steele free to write elsewhere for the party as he wished. In the first number (which appeared on 1 March 1711) the spokesman Mr Spectator declares that he will 'observe an exact Neutrality between the Whigs and Tories, unless I shall be forced to declare my self by the Hostilities of either Side'. In no. 2 he describes the club of which he is a member and introduces his fellows: these are intended to replace in a sense the different departments of 'The Tatler', offering Addison and Steele the opportunity to move in various directions with respect to content and at the same time separating the authors from their materials. Sir Roger de Coverley, that is, can mouth tory platitudes and Sir Andrew Freeport purvey whig truisms without associating Addison and Steele with either position. With respect to editorial tone 'The Tatler' was both model and source for 'The Spectator'. Mr Spectator spoke like Isaac Bickerstaff: learned, witty, affable, faintly patronizing. 

'The Spectator' appeared six times a week, daily except Sunday. This required refining and expanding the advertising and distribution arrangements Steele had instituted for 'The Tatler'. By mid-March Addison could report a daily distribution of more than 3000; at 1died per copy the paper was then grossing more than $300 a month, not including revenue from extensive advertising and, in a few months, from collected reprints. Steele was the general editorial supervisor, responsible for seeing 'The Spectator' through the press, in two printing shops. Both Addison and Steele supplied copy, as eventually did several of their acquaintances, among them Alexander Pope. 
In November 1711 Jonathan Swift published his pamphlet 'The Conduct of the Allies', which sought to discredit the departed whig government and their ally the duke of Marlborough. Steele replied, writing as Scoto-Britannus in 'The Englishman's Thanks to the Duke of Marlborough' ('Tracts', 66-71). This was the first of many political pamphlets written by Steele over the succeeding ten years. When his second son was born on 4 March 1712, the Steeles named him Eugene, in honour of Marlborough's fellow soldier Prince Eugene of Savoy. By the end of that year Addison and Steele were ready to close out 'The Spectator' and did so with no. 555, of 6 December 1712, in which Steele acknowledged over his signature some of those who had helped. He was not associated with the paper's brief revival in 1714. 
Steele initiated another essay periodical, 'The Guardian', on 12 March 1713, with an editorial persona named Nestor Ironside. Jacob Tonson was now the publisher of this paper, signalling the escalating prestige and profits of essay periodicals. The fictional Lizard family of Lizard Hall, Northamptonshire, friends of Ironside, seems to have been designed to take over the functions of Mr Spectator's club, but 'The Guardian' is chiefly remembered for the quality of the contributors on whom Steele drew, including Edward Young, George Berkeley, Alexander Pope, and of course Addison; and for the device he invented to receive letters to the paper: a lion's head set up in Button's Coffee House. A 'lion' Steele had earlier identified as a 'great Man's Spy'. Steele himself wrote letters to the editor, under various disguises, as he had been doing since 'Tatler' days. All these expedients were necessary to keep the paper appearing on the six issues a week timetable. 
In the spring of 1713 Steele reassessed his situation. Early in the year his daughter Mary had been born, on the day his wife's mother, Elizabeth Scurlock, died. Mrs Scurlock left the Steeles a substantial estate in Carmarthenshire. This legacy may have emboldened Steele to enter politics directly. During the summer of 1713 Steele chose to sever all remaining ties with the tory ministry and run for parliament in the general elections approaching in the autumn. He resigned his preferments including his earliest, the pension as gentleman waiter to Prince George. Early in August Steele published a fiery political 'Guardian' (no. 128), in which he arraigned the government's conduct concerning the destruction of Dunkirk in the recently concluded treaty of Utrecht. Spokesmen on Harley's payroll, including Daniel Defoe, chose to interpret the paper as an attack on the queen. 'The Examiner' on 21 August 1713 called Steele's paper a 'scandalous libel'. In the face of the government's displeasure Steele was elected a member of parliament for the borough of Stockbridge in Hampshire. 
Elated no doubt by his election, Steele turned 'The Guardian' over to Addison in September and on 22 September published a pamphlet over his signature called 'The Importance of Dunkirk Consider'd', which marked his full-time entry into the propaganda wars. The pamphlet sold well, going to a third edition within a week, and the tories determined to strike back at Steele, along two lines of attack. The first was to find ways of expelling him from his seat in parliament; the second was by direct answers to his pamphlet. Defoe published an anonymous reply that month, and Swift his masterly 'ad hominem' assault on Steele, 'The Importance of the Guardian Considered', also anonymous, in October. 
By then Steele, on 1 October, had ended 'The Guardian', without notice or explanation. He began a new essay periodical within the week, styled 'The Englishman', the narrator of which related that he had 'purchased the Lion, Desk, Pen, Ink, and Paper... of NESTOR IRONSIDE, Esq.'. This was intended to be a political journal, however, and it remained so, with a few exceptional issues -- such as the account in no. 26 of Alexander Selkirk's marooning on Juan Fernandez Island, a paper often cited as a source for 'Robinson Crusoe'. 
Steele continued publishing 'The Englishman' in November and December and was at the same time preparing a pamphlet on the present situation, as the whigs saw it, to be titled 'The Crisis'. The crisis in question was that of the royal succession: Queen Anne's health, never hearty, had worsened, and rumours were widespread that the Catholic Pretender might be introduced on her death. Tories took the position that there was no crisis and that Steele's allegations constituted sedition. When 'The Crisis' was published with his name on the title-page, it had a sensational sale: a hostile writer estimated that 40,000 copies were sold. No masterpiece of prose, 'The Crisis' nevertheless made its point as whig propaganda. In retrospect its importance may be seen as a landmark, the earliest use of mass printing, advertising, and distribution techniques in a political context. Steele lent his encyclopaedic knowledge of printing and distribution to the whig cause: the employment of co-ordinated multiple printing presses and distribution networks, which had been invented to manufacture and circulate his periodicals, both within London and to the provinces, was here devoted to political rather than literary ends. 
In the tory reply, 'The Publick Spirit of the Whigs', Swift met Steele's arguments by blandly denying that the Hanoverian succession was in danger at all, and proceeding against the whig author himself, branding his doubts about the situation 'sedition'. This was a key term: Harley's ministry intended to punish Steele by charging him with sedition. Unlike most political writers of the day he had signed his name to his propaganda, providing a convenient handle to his enemies. The result was a foregone conclusion: the ministry had the votes in the House of Commons to make the charge stick. Although ably defended by Robert Walpole, Steele was expelled from the house on 18 March 1714 by a vote of 245 to 152. 
That spring Steele occupied his newly found leisure by writing and editing two more periodicals, 'The Lover' and 'The Reader'. 'The Lover', edited by one 'Marmaduke Myrtle, Gent.', was, as Marmaduke describes it in the first number of February, designed 'to trace the Passion or Affection of Love'. It was a topic on which Steele could pronounce with some authority. He had occasional assistance for this thrice-weekly publication but 'The Lover' was essentially his own. It includes some of his most effective essays. The paper, which ran for forty issues, was highly regarded in Steele's day: five collected editions appeared during his lifetime and four more before the end of the century. 'The Reader', entirely devoted to politics -- that is, the succession crisis -- lasted for only nine issues in April and May. 
With the death of Queen Anne in August 1714 and the accession of George I, Steele's political fortunes changed abruptly. The tories were turned out of office and the whigs began a long period of political dominance. The cavalry veteran Steele was named surveyor of the royal stables at Hampton Court. In October he was offered and accepted the governorship of the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane, with a stipend of $700 a year. This was a political reward, of course, but Steele was in fact seen by many as uniquely qualified for the post: he had known the London theatrical scene since his days as a schoolboy at Charterhouse, first as a member of the audience, then as a practising playwright, finally as a working journalist. Under the terms of the licence, day-to-day conduct of the theatre's affairs remained in the hands of three actor-managers, Robert Wilks, Colley Cibber, and Barton Booth. They had invited Steele to seek the appointment in the first place, conscious, as Cibber later put it, that 'many Days had our House been particularly fill'd, by the Influence, and Credit of his Pen' (Cibber, 290). 
Steele intended to undertake an active role as governor and perhaps write plays and see them produced but the pull of political life proved too strong. A safe seat in parliament was found for him, Boroughbridge in Yorkshire, to which he was duly elected in 1715. On 9 April of that year he was knighted by George I. This was a political reward, bestowed not on the essayist and dramatist but on the pamphleteer and member of parliament, and Sir Richard understood this. 
Steele was busy in parliament, sitting on more than a dozen committees during his first year of service in the house. The government called on him to start a periodical that would be used to discredit the fallen tories, a group which included his former commanding officer, the duke of Ormond. In June 1715 the impeachment of Harley was moved; in the next month Steele began his new paper, called 'The Englishman' like his periodical of 1713-14, but published anonymously. It was an undertaking that Steele did not relish -- he esteemed personally both Ormond and Harley -- but he dutifully wrote and edited the twice-weekly propaganda sheet and even made money at a break-even point of 240 copies sold per issue. News that the Pretender's supporters had risen in Scotland injected life briefly into 'The Englishman'. The defeat of a Jacobite army at Preston early in November signalled the beginning of the end and Steele wrapped up his paper, probably with relief, with no. 38 of 21 November. 
Steele's next essay periodical, 'Town Talk. In a Letter to a Lady in the Country', first appeared early in December 1715 and consisted essentially of current theatrical criticism, which Steele had virtually invented in 'The Tatler'. Steele writes about the importance of producing plays of merit, and Drury Lane was then mounting a total of eight plays by Shakespeare during the season. He discusses Addison's new play, 'The Drummer', as an example of the encouragement of good living writers. 'Town Talk' ended with the ninth number. 
In June 1716 Steele was named to the commission which would administer and sell the estates of noblemen involved in the Pretender's rising, at a stipend of $1000 a year. That spring Steele suffered a severe seizure, leaving him helpless and immobile, which his physician Dr John Woodward diagnosed as gout, but which must in fact have been a stroke. Steele, during his convalescence, was investing energy and money in a scheme, ultimately unsuccessful, called the Fish Pool, which sought to deliver live fish to the London market. 
During the autumn of 1717 Steele was well enough to travel to Edinburgh for the meeting of the forfeited estates commission. He reported to his wife that he 'never lay better ate or drank better, or conversed with men of better sense than there' ('Correspondence', 384). On 26 December 1718 Lady Steele, 'Dear Prue' always to her husband, died, probably of complications during pregnancy, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. 
Another chapter in Steele's life ended the following year on an equally sad note. During a parliamentary debate concerning representation in the House of Lords, the 'Peerage Bill', Steele found himself in opposition. Addison represented the government in a periodical called the 'Old Whig'. Steele, in his new periodical, 'The Plebeian', alleged that Addison was only masquerading as a whig: 'I am afraid he is so 'old a Whig' that he has quite 'forgot his Principles'' ('Tracts', 470). The famous friendship ended in a political wrangle. Addison named James Craggs his literary executor -- a pointed affront to Steele -- and died on 17 June 1719. 
In retribution for his part in opposing them, the government, represented by the duke of Newcastle as lord chamberlain, moved to revoke Steele's licence as manager of Drury Lane. Steele began what was to be the last of his periodicals, 'The Theatre', on 2 January 1720. He pleaded his side of the case in the new paper but also called on long editorial expertise to produce a lively publication, mingling comment and anecdote in his familiar manner. The paper succeeded beyond the printer's expectations, requiring reprints to meet the demand. Steele was, however, effectively excluded from the Drury Lane enterprise. When he ended 'The Theatre' with no. 28 on 5 April 1720 and prepared to go to Scotland for the commission meetings it seemed that his career in the theatre might be over. But in 1721, in the aftermath of the South Sea scandal, Steele's friend Robert Walpole took control of the ministry and had Newcastle restore Steele to his place in the management of Drury Lane. There Steele saw the opening of his latest play, 'The Conscious Lovers', on 7 November 1722. It was his greatest success in the theatre, though not his best play, and its place in theatrical history -- with its pathetic, or tragicomic, main plot and comic subplot -- is still the subject of critical debate. 
Steele's health began to decline markedly about then. In order to pay his debts and leave something to his two surviving daughters he retired to Carmarthen, where he had inherited a house from his wife. There he worked on a comedy, 'The School of Action'; surviving fragments of the manuscript are preserved in the British Library. But Steele knew that his days were numbered; the play was never finished. He retired first to Hereford, and then to Carmarthen, where he lived chiefly at Ty-Gwyn, a farmhouse overlooking the Towy. He died at a house in King Street, Carmarthen, on the night of 1 September 1729 and was buried in St Peter's Church there on 4 September. 
Steele was a successful playwright. It may be that his principal dramatic legacy was not the much debated sentimental comedy but rather the gallery of broad comic roles he created in his plays. Some of his essays have stood the test of time as well, but from the twenty-first century's perspective it is probably his mastery and employment of the emerging techniques of print culture -- a number of which he originated himself -- that represent his most enduring achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 26348


Steele, Thomas (1788-1848), political activist, was born at Derrymore, co. Clare, on 3 November 1788. He belonged to an old Somerset family which had settled in Ireland in the seventeenth century. His father, William Steele, who died while he was an infant, was the younger brother of Thomas Steele of Cullane, the owner of a large property in co. Clare, to which Steele succeeded at an early age. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1810, and subsequently at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he graduated MA in 1820. A man of ardent and even quixotic disposition, his whole life was one of action and adventure. In the Spanish war of 1823 against Ferdinand VII, he joined the patriot army and impoverished his estate by raising $10,000 on mortgages to provide military stores for the insurgents. He was present at the battle of the Trocadero, and it was not until the evacuation of Cadiz by the French that he abandoned a hopeless contest. In 1824 he published an account of his share in the struggle entitled 'Notes of the War in Spain'. 
On his return to Ireland, Steele threw himself into the campaign for Catholic emancipation. Although a protestant, he was one of the earliest members of the revived Catholic Association. He seconded O'Connell's nomination for County Clare in 1828, and it was largely by his advice that O'Connell was induced to stand on that occasion. Steele opened the electoral campaign in Clare by expressing his readiness to fight any landlord who should conceive himself aggrieved by his interference with his tenants. His position as a protestant landlord made him peculiarly valuable to O'Connell. He was appointed by his leader to the position of 'head pacificator', an odd post for a man of his character, and was often instrumental in preventing outrages among his followers. John O'Connell, when asked 'Why did Dan make a semi-lunatic his head pacificator?', is said to have replied 'Why, indeed! Pray, who the devil else would take such a position?' (Duffy, 399). At O'Connell's second election for County Clare, Steele challenged and fought William Smith O'Brien, who had not then embraced popular principles, for asserting that O'Connell was not supported by any of the gentry of co. Clare. 
After the passing of Catholic emancipation Steele took a less prominent part in politics, though he remained a staunch adherent of O'Connell, to whom he was personally devoted, declaring that if the latter ordered him to sit on a mine he would obey. He was one of those arrested and tried with O'Connell in 1843. In the dissensions between O'Connell and the Young Irelanders, he took the side of his old chief. Steele was much distressed by O'Connell's death in May 1847 and, his fortune having been completely drained by his sacrifices for the causes with which he was associated, attempted suicide by throwing himself into the Thames in London off Waterloo Bridge. Although rescued from drowning, he died at Peele's Coffee House, Fleet Street, a few days later, on 15 June 1848. Lord Brougham was among those who attended his deathbed. His remains were taken to Ireland, and buried beside O'Connell's in Glasnevin cemetery. 
Steele's is one of the most picturesque figures in the history of Irish popular movements. Although his actions were often wild and his principles extreme, he appears to have been a man of absolute sincerity, and was known through his career as Honest Tom Steele. He took much interest in his property and in the condition of the people, and in 1828 published a book entitled 'Practical Suggestions for the Improvement of the Navigation of the Shannon'. It marks the oddity of Steele's character that in the same volume he published an animated essay on the widely different subject of the treatment of the Irish Catholics after the treaty of Limerick. He was also the author of 'An analytical exposition of the absurdity and iniquity of the oaths, when taken by protestants, that the sacrifice of the mass and the invocation of saints are superstitious, idolatrous, and damnable' (1829). 


@@@@@


doc= 26349


Steele, Sir Thomas Montague (1820-1890), army officer, was born on 11 May 1820 in Guilsborough, Northamptonshire, the eldest son of Major-General Thomas Steele, of Guilsborough, and Elizabeth Montagu, second daughter of the fifth duke of Manchester. After Sandhurst he was commissioned ensign in the 64th foot on 10 January 1838. He exchanged into the Coldstream Guards on 20 July, became lieutenant and captain on 29 March 1844, and captain and lieutenant-colonel on 31 October 1851. From 25 July 1842 to 23 February 1848 he was aide-de-camp to the governor of Madras. He was appointed military secretary to Lord Raglan on 23 February 1854, and (with the exception of one month, 5 July to 6 August 1855, during which he was assistant adjutant-general) he held that appointment under Raglan and his successor until 16 November 1855. He was at the Alma, Balaklava, Inkerman, and at the fall of Sevastopol, and was mentioned in dispatches. Made brevet colonel on 28 November 1854 and CB on 5 July 1855, he received the Mejidiye (third class), the Legion d'honneur (fifth class), and the order of St Maurice and St Lazarus (second class). He was also made aide-de-camp to the queen on 29 June 1855. In 1856 he married Isabel (died 1858), daughter of E. M. Fitzgerald, and in 1865 married his second wife, Rosalie Malvina, daughter of T. M'Carthy of New York. Steele became major in his regiment on 13 December 1860, and lieutenant-colonel on 8 November 1862. He retired from it to half pay on 24 November 1863, and was promoted major-general on 17 August 1865. He commanded the troops in the Dublin district from 1 April 1872 to 31 March 1874. On 7 January 1874 he became lieutenant-general, and on 23 September he was given the colonelcy of the Gloucestershire regiment. He commanded the division at Aldershot from 14 April 1875 to 30 June 1880, becoming full general on 1 October 1877, and from 1 October 1880 he commanded the forces in Ireland for five years. On 11 May 1887 he was retired. He was made KCB on 20 May 1871 and GCB on 21 June 1887, and was made colonel of the Coldstream Guards on 7 August 1884. He died at his home, Frimley Park, Farnborough, on 25 February 1890; his second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26350


Steele, William (1610-1680), lord chancellor of Ireland, was the second child and eldest of the three sons of Richard Steele of Giddy Hall, Sandbach, Cheshire (died after 1631), and his wife, Laetitia ('nee' Shaw). He was admitted to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1627, entered Gray's Inn on 13 June 1631, and was called to the bar on 23 June 1637. On 15 March 1638 he married Elizabeth Godfrey of Wye in Kent; they had a son, Richard. After the outbreak of civil war Steele associated himself with the radical group in London, was appointed deputy recorder, and actively promoted the petition and remonstrance to common council and to parliament (30 March 1643) in which the radical programme was presented. On 17 August 1644 he was appointed a parliamentary commissioner for the execution of martial law. Some years later he conducted the prosecution for treason of Captain John Burley, who was executed for his quixotic attempt to rescue Charles I from captivity in Newport in January 1648. 
On 10 January 1649 Steele was chosen by the high court of justice as attorney to present the case against the king. His plea that illness prevented him from doing so was accompanied by an assurance that 'it is an addition to his Affliction, that he cannot attend this Court, to do that service that they have expected from him, and as he desires to perform' (J. Nalson, 'The Trial of Charles the First', 1740, 21), and he recovered in time to prosecute Hamilton, Holland, Goring, Capel, and Owen at the second high court of justice on 9 February. His argument in Hamilton's case was published on 4 June. On 27 July 1649 parliament appointed him a member of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in New England, of which he was elected president annually until 1660, and on 25 August he succeeded John Glyn as recorder of London. On 26 March 1650 he was nominated to a new high court of justice, set up to prevent a 'new and bloody war' by proceeding against 'Enemies of this Commonwealth' (C. H. Firth and R. S. Rait, eds., 'Acts and Ordinances of the Interregnum', 3 vols., 1911, 2.364). He was a prominent member of the Hale commission on law reform established in January 1652 and a judge at the trial of John Lilburne in July 1653. 
Steele's career was uninterrupted by the transition to the protectorate: he became serjeant-at-law on 25 January 1654 and formally welcomed Cromwell to London on 8 February. He accepted a place on yet another high court of justice, established to try the royalist conspirators Fox, Gerard, and Vowell on 25 June and was appointed a member of the Irish council on 27 August at the insistence of Charles Fleetwood on his appointment as lord deputy. He represented London in the parliament that convened on 3 September. In 1655, after an assize circuit in Essex had been cut short by service on a special commission to the troubled south-west in March, he was made chief baron of the exchequer on 28 May. In that capacity he attended the conference convened at Whitehall in December to consider Manassah Ben Israel's petition for the readmission of the Jews to England and joined John Glyn, now chief justice of the upper bench, in advising that readmission would be lawful. Though he had drawn his annual salary of $1000 as an Irish councillor, it was not until after his appointment as lord chancellor of Ireland on 26 August 1656, which carried remuneration of a further $1000, that he took up his duties. 
Once in Ireland, Steele quickly established himself as the leader of the Independents. Having first opposed Henry Cromwell's appointment as lord deputy in 1657 he then patronized him, dealing with him 'as a tutor or guardian to a minor' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 7.199), and subsequently obstructed his policies, pressing for freedom of conscience for Baptists and others and resisting Henry's attempts to reconcile former episcopalians to the regime. He defended the novel system of ministers' salaries which Henry was trying to replace with the reintroduction of tithes, while insisting that ministers should be salaried 'without enquiry made into their principles' (BL, Lansdowne MS 1228, fols. 9-10). The respect in which he was held in England, where he was summoned to the upper house in December 1657, strengthened his position, but Henry's policy prevailed and Steele considered retirement. He seems instead to have turned his attention to the legal reforms which had been part of his original brief, and a new set of rules and orders for chancery was published on his authority in 1659. Though his role in their preparation is unrecorded, the new arrangements were informed by the same concern with expedition and procedural improvement as the earlier recommendations of the Hale commission. After the fall of Richard Cromwell and the recall of Henry, Steele was one of five commissioners appointed to govern Ireland by the restored Long Parliament on 7 June 1659. When that parliament was again expelled by the army he was named as a member of the committee of safety which took office on 26 October. He seized the opportunity to return to England, but declined to serve on the committee and urged the army leaders to leave constitutional matters to parliament. In December 1659, after Dublin Castle was captured and the regime overthrown, the impeachment of the commissioners and their ally Edmund Ludlow, commander-in-chief of the army in Ireland, was demanded, but the once more restored Long Parliament failed to respond. 
Ludlow believed that as lord chancellor Steele had been 'generally esteemed to be a man of great prudence and uncorrupted integrity'; opponents alleged that he had been the 'principal discountenancer of ministers and of the very ministry itself' and had used his office to cast out 'honest men' from the commission of the peace and put in Anabaptists, Quakers, and their like instead ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 2.152-3; 'Leyborne-Popham MSS', 141). Although he was not excepted from the provisions of the 'Act of Indemnity', Steele took refuge in the Netherlands after the Restoration. How long he remained abroad is unknown, but he was resident at Hatton Garden in London when he made his will on 17 September 1680. He was dead by 19 October, when the will was proved by his second wife, Mary Harvey (formerly Mellish), sister-in-law of William Harvey, to whom he was married before 1663 and with whom he had three children, William, Benjamin, and Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 26351


Steell, Gourlay (1819-1894), animal painter, was born in Edinburgh on 22 March 1819, the son of John Steell ('fl'. 1800-1829), a well-known woodcarver, and his wife, Margaret Gourlay. Like his elder brother, John Steell (1804-1891) the sculptor, he began his art studies under the guidance of his father, and continued them in the school of the board of manufacturers under William Allan, and in the studio of Robert Scott Lauder. At the early age of thirteen he exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy a model of a greyhound (1832) and in 1835 a life-sized study, 'Portrait of a Cape of Good Hope Bloodhound'. From that time forward works by him were seldom if ever absent from the annual exhibitions of that body, of which he was elected an associate in 1846 and an academician in 1859. In his earlier years he was much employed as a draughtsman on wood for book illustration, and he devoted himself a good deal to modelling, of which he was for some years teacher in the Watt Institute, Adam Square, Edinburgh, in succession to his father. He also modelled many groups of horses, dogs, and cattle, which were afterwards cast in silver by Edinburgh silversmiths. 
Steell was a good shot and a keen angler, and throughout his life was fond of outdoor amusements. On 8 April 1840 he married Jemima Gowan, but following her early death he married, on 30 September 1852, Jessie Anderson. With his second wife he had two daughters and two sons, the eldest of whom, David George (1856-1930), also became a painter of animal and sporting subjects. In 1857 Steell exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy 'Llewellyn and Gelert', a picture which attracted much attention, as did also a 'Highland Raid, or, How the MacGregors Lived and Died a Hundred Years Ago' (exh. Royal Scottish Academy 1858), representing the Macgregors defending the cattle which they had raided against an attack of the royal troops. The latter was purchased for their prize distribution by the Royal Association for the Promotion of the Fine Arts. Perhaps his best-known work is 'A Cottage Bedside at Osborne' (1865; exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1880), depicting Queen Victoria reading the 'Bible' to a sick fisherman, which became very popular through the engraving by William Henry Simmons. Following the death of Sir Edwin Landseer in 1873, Steell was appointed animal painter to Queen Victoria for Scotland. He painted the royal dogs and horses, as well as 'The Pass of Leny: Cattle Going to Falkirk Tryst' (1876; Royal Collection) and a replica of 'Llewellyn and Gelert' (1880; Royal Collection). He held a similar office with the Highland and Agricultural Society and had a virtual monopoly of animal and sporting commissions in Scotland. 
Steell's reputation further increased with 'A Challenge' (exh. RA, 1877) and 'The Trysting Place, or, Garhonzie Bridge, Callander' (exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1882; Glasgow Museum and Art Galleries). 'Dandie Dinmont and his Terriers' (exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1867?), engraved by James Stephenson, was one of many pictures suggested by incidents in Scott's 'Waverley' novels. As well as many portraits of favourite pets and prize animals, Steell painted two large hunt pictures: one of the earl of Wemyss (1863) and another, 'Equestrian Portrait of Colonel Carrick Buchanan, Accompanied by his Huntsman and Fox-Hounds' (exh. RA, 1871; exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1872), which were both engraved. He also painted several equestrian portraits, including 'The Earl of Eglinton and Winton' (exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1877) and 'Andrew Gillon of Wallhouse Esq., Late Master of the Linlithgow and Stirlingshire Foxhounds' (exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1878), and one of his best designed works was 'Lord President Inglis and a Shooting Party at Glencorse, or, A Shooting Party' (1868; exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1869). 
Many of Steell's later works were large studies of animals executed in oil, tempera, and charcoal, chiefly for the decoration of highland mansions, of which he was an admirable draughtsman, and highland cattle were a favourite for his uncommissioned works. He succeeded William Fettes Douglas as curator of the National Gallery of Scotland in 1882. Steell died at his home, 23A Minto Street, Edinburgh, on 31 January 1894, and was interred in the cemetery at Morningside, Edinburgh. His wife had predeceased him. His last picture, entitled 'Lochaber No More' (exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1894), which he left nearly finished, was rendered doubly pathetic by the artist's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 26352


Steell, Sir John Robert (1804-1891), sculptor, was born on 18 September 1804 at Aberdeen, eldest son of John Steell ('fl'. 1800-1829), a woodcarver and gilder, and his wife, Margaret Gourlay of Dundee. He was the elder brother of the animal painter Gourlay Steell. Within a year of his birth Steell's family moved to Edinburgh where he was apprenticed as a woodcarver to his father and attended classes at the Trustees' School of Design. On the completion of his apprenticeship in 1824 Steell went into business with his father at 6 Hanover Street, Edinburgh. Two years later, on 30 November 1826, he married Elizabeth Graham, the daughter of an Edinburgh merchant, and the following year he received his first important independent commission. This was for a colossal oak statue of St Andrew for the facade of the Edinburgh office of the North British and Mercantile Insurance Company (dem.). In 1829 Steell studied in Rome for several months before returning to Edinburgh and establishing his own practice as a sculptor. 
The work that first brought Steell to public notice was his 1832 equestrian group 'Alexander and Bucephalus'. For this work he was awarded a special prize of $50 from the board of manufactures (the governing body of the Trustees' School of Design) and in 1833 was granted a special public exhibition of the work for six weeks at the Royal Institution, Edinburgh. When exhibited in London later in the year the work attracted the attention of Sir Francis Chantrey who encouraged Steell to move to London and offered him help to do so. Steell declined the invitation and chose instead to stay in Edinburgh to devote himself to the improvement of art in Scotland. 
In Edinburgh, Steell's rapid rise to success continued under the influence of early patrons such as Thomas Thomson, Lord Meadowbank, and the fifth earl of Buccleuch. He became the first sculptor resident in Scotland to obtain royal patronage when in 1838 Queen Victoria granted him several sittings at Windsor Castle for a portrait bust and statue (freestone, completed 1844; Royal Institution, Edinburgh). In the same year he became the first Scottish artist to receive a public commission for a marble statue, that of Sir Walter Scott (completed 1846) for the Scott monument in Edinburgh. This was followed immediately by a commission for a statue of Professor Blaikie (completed 1844) for Aberdeen, which became the first statue in marble completed in Scotland. As well as introducing large-scale marble carving to Scotland, Steell was also responsible for the first pediment group in stone that was carved in Scotland, his 1839 representation of the wise and foolish virgins for the Standard Life Assurance office at 3 George Street, Edinburgh. Of even greater importance, between 1848 and 1852 Steell introduced artistic bronze casting to Scotland when he established a foundry at Grove Street, Edinburgh. This was built initially to cast his equestrian statue for the Scottish national memorial to the duke of Wellington (1852; Princes Street, Edinburgh), but it was later used to cast all of his bronzes and was also used by other artists for the casting of their work. 
John Steell was the most outstanding nineteenth-century Scottish sculptor. His early work tended to allegorical and narrative subject matter and he was frequently commissioned for wood- or stone-carving for architectural projects. During the 1830s he attracted increasing numbers of influential Scottish patrons, most of whom commissioned portrait works either in the form of a classicizing bust or funerary monument. By the mid-1840s he had established an international reputation and in doing so he brought unprecedented recognition to sculpture in Scotland. Throughout his lifetime Steell received at least twenty-eight commissions for large-scale commemorative monuments. These include 'Robert Burns' (1874) and 'Sir Walter Scott' (1870) for New York; the 'Marquis of Dalhousie' (1863) and the 'Rt Hon. James Wilson' (1865) for Calcutta; 'Lord de Saumarez' (1854) for Greenwich Hospital; and a kneeling effigy of the countess of Elgin (1849) for Jamaica, as well as monumental portrait statues of sixteen of his most notable compatriots for the streets and gardens of Edinburgh, Aberdeen, and Dundee. His public statues in Edinburgh include 'Dr Chalmers' (1878), 'Allan Ramsay' (1865), and 'Professor John Wilson' (1865) as well as 'Lord Justice General Boyle' (1860) and 'Lord Jeffrey' (1855) for the Faculty of Advocates. In Dundee he is represented by full-length statues of Sir David Baxter (1863), Robert Burns (1880), George Kinloch MP (1872), and the second Viscount Melville (1857). In addition Steell was a consistent supporter of annual art exhibitions. He exhibited at the Royal Institution for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts in Scotland from 1828 to 1830, at the Royal Scottish Academy between 1827 and 1880, at the Glasgow (later Royal Glasgow) Institute of the Fine Arts in 1864 and 1865, at Kirkcaldy in 1876, and at the Royal Academy on six occasions between 1837 and 1876. In addition his work was shown at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1889, 1916, and 1926. 
A fusion of classical and contemporary elements characterizes Steell's work. His subjects are usually represented in contemporary dress which includes a garment that in form and fall is reminiscent of classical drapery. His portraiture tends to accurate likeness in which the more distinctive features are subtly refined and idealized. Many of his major works were reproduced in small-scale bronze and Parian marble versions. Two hundred such statuettes of his 'Sir Walter Scott' and 100 copies of 'Professor John Wilson' were distributed. 
In the 1820s Steell was elected an associate of the Royal Institution for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts in Scotland and became a member of the Royal Scottish Academy on the amalgamation of the institution and the Scottish academy in 1829. In 1838 the honorary position of sculptor-in-ordinary to her majesty for Scotland was created for him. He was knighted for his services to Scottish art in 1876 after the unveiling of his largest project, the 'Scottish National Memorial to the Prince Consort' (1876; Charlotte Square Gardens, Edinburgh). In 1884 a bronze of his 'Alexander and Bucephalus' was erected in the City Chambers Courtyard, High Street, Edinburgh, as a public testimony to him. 
From 1887, in poor health and the recipient of a civil list pension of $100 per annum, Steell lived in complete retirement. A public sale of all his models and studio effects was held in March of the following year. He died at his home at 24 Greenhill Gardens, Edinburgh, on 15 September 1891 and was buried in the old Calton cemetery. He was survived by his daughter and two sons. His wife had predeceased him in 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 26353


Steere, Edward (1828-1882), bishop of central Africa, son of William Steere of the chancery bar, and Esther, 'nee' Ball, his wife, was born in Charles Street, City Road, London, on 4 May 1828. He was educated in London first under Alexander Allen at Hackney and then from 1842 at University College School; he proceeded to University College in 1844 and graduated BA of the University of London in 1847, LLB in 1848, and LLD with gold medal for law in 1850, the year when he was called to the bar at the Inner Temple. He also showed a liking for philosophy and theology, and came under the influence of the Tractarian revival. 
Living chiefly in London, Steere was deeply impressed by the need for earnest work among the poor. To this end he organized the Brotherhood of St Mary, which in May 1854 joined a small society known as the Guild of St Alban. Steere had already learned the art of printing, and he set up a private press from which he issued the guild's monthly magazine. On receiving a small legacy from an uncle, later in 1854, he gave up his chambers, and in May 1855 he founded in connection with the guild a sort of brotherhood at The Spital, near Tamworth, Staffordshire. The scheme did not flourish, however, and in response to the appeals of friends he was ordained at Exeter Cathedral on 21 September 1856. 
Steere's first curacy was at King's Kerswell, Newton Abbot, Devon. In the summer of 1858 he was invited to undertake the sole charge of Skegness and the curacy of Winthorpe, in Lincolnshire, by the vicar of Burgh-cum-Winthorpe, William George Tozer. He was admitted priest at Lincoln Cathedral. At Skegness, then a straggling village long without parochial care, Steere made his reputation among the fishermen as a 'downright shirt-sleeve man and a real 'Bible' parson'; the Wesleyans 'came to church in the morning to please him'. In the autumn of 1859 he became rector of Little Steeping, at the foot of the Lincolnshire wolds. In the summer of 1858 he had married Mary Bridget, daughter of Henry Langford Brown of Barton Hall, King's Kerswell. She never accompanied him on his later travels abroad and died at Lincoln in 1883, leaving no children. 
Towards the close of 1862 Steere obtained leave of absence in order to accompany his friend Tozer, the new missionary bishop of the Universities' Mission to Central Africa (UMCA), to the Shire. On 19 May 1863, after narrowly escaping being drowned, he landed at the mouth of the Zambezi. The newcomers failed to make much progress until in August 1864 they fixed their headquarters at Zanzibar, then the centre of the slave traffic. Here the missionary work was begun with a few slave boys, and by the middle of 1866 it had so well advanced that Steere was about to return home; at this point the bishop fell ill and was ordered to England. Steere was left in charge of the mission. Uneasy with English-language teaching, he had already compiled a handbook to the Swahili language, reduced to writing the dialect of the Usambara country, and produced a Shambala (Shambaa) grammar, which he printed with the aid of local boys. Having thus overcome the linguistic difficulties, he inaugurated a mission on the mainland; he arrived in August 1867 at Vuga (Vugha), the capital of the Usambara country. A year later he sailed for England. 
On settling down again in Lincolnshire, Steere's spare time was at first entirely occupied with the Swahili translations for the Bible Society. At the church congress at Nottingham in 1871 he delivered an important address on the duty of the church regarding the slave trade. When news came in 1872 of Bishop Tozer's ill health, Steere volunteered to return to Zanzibar. He sailed in the 'Abydos', with the Livingstone search expedition, and instructed its members in the local African language. By December 1872, following Tozer's breakdown and departure, Steere was left almost alone to run the mission. Yet a year later he had made good progress both towards erecting an English cathedral on the site of what had formerly been the Zanzibar slave market, and in re-establishing the mission on the mainland at Magila. 
Conscious that he lacked the money and Oxbridge connections characteristic of the mission, it was only after several refusals that Steere accepted nomination as bishop of central Africa; he returned to England and was consecrated at Westminster Abbey on 24 August 1874. The rest of that year was spent in gathering new workers and rousing fresh interest; based in Euston Square, London, he frequently lectured or preached in provincial towns. He left England on 11 February 1875. One of his earliest efforts, driven partly by his widely shared concern to stop the spread of Islam, was to bring the Nyasa district within his scope; he started his journey with a party but was compelled to continue alone, from the coast inland to Mwembe, the residence of Chief Mataka. The journey occupied him from August 1875 to February 1876. Later that year he visited one of the mainland missions, and started on the expedition which resulted in the founding of the Masasi station, from which he returned in ill health in January 1877. In February he sailed for England, and, once recovered, devoted himself with considerable success to promoting the mission. Sixty recruits joined the mission during his episcopate. At Oxford he was made DD; at Cambridge he was appointed Ramsden preacher. 
Steere returned to Zanzibar in November 1877, and found the mission work steadily growing; but his own health was impaired, and he was worried by pecuniary difficulties. In 1879 he issued his complete translation of the 'New Testament' and prayer book in Swahili, and on Christmas day of the same year he presided at the opening of the cathedral church at Zanzibar. In 1880 and 1881 he pressed on, though not in person, with the establishment of the mission settlement in the district near Lake Nyasa. Early in 1882 his health obliged him to return to England. He resumed work in August, but died of a stroke at Mkunazini, Zanzibar on 27 August. He was buried in Christ Church, Zanzibar. 
Steere was a consistent high-churchman, but his width of view won the esteem of men of every persuasion. Insignificant and plain in appearance he was also a monotonous preacher, but he compensated for these disadvantages with his intellect, wit, and sympathy. His high reputation as a missionary was due in great measure to his building up and extending the mission, and to his versatility in throwing himself into all kinds of occupation, both practical and intellectual, the 'architect' bishop scorning none of the industrial occupations he was anxious to teach the Africans. He also shared the concern, common among UMCA clergy, to preserve where possible the cultural identity of different African communities. His linguistic power was great; he carefully studied Swahili and Yao, and devoted much attention to other African languages; he also spoke French, German, and Portuguese, and had some acquaintance with Italian, Spanish, Arabic, and Hebrew, as well as Latin and Greek. 
Besides editing Bishop Butler's 'Analogy' (1857) and 'Sermons and Remains' (1862), Steere displayed his theological and ecclesiastical interests in 'An Essay on the Existence and Attributes of God' (1856), written originally for the Burnett treatise competition; 'An Historical Sketch of English Brotherhoods' (1856); and 'An Account of the Persecutions of the Early Church under the Roman Emperors' (1859; 2nd edn, 1880). Several lesser works related to the mission in central Africa. His laborious study of east African dialects resulted in 'Short Specimens of the Vocabularies of... Gindo, Zaramo, and Angazidja' (1869), and collections for handbooks of several other languages: of Yao and of Nyamwezi in 1871, and of Makonde in 1876. But his chief attention was directed to the Swahili language, notably in his 'Handbook of Swahili' (1870; 8th edn revised and enlarged by A. C. Madan, 1908). As well as his translation into Swahili of the 'New Testament' and prayer book, he made revisions and also translated much of the 'Old Testament', and various hymns and primers. 


@@@@@


doc= 26354


Steevens, Charles (bap. 1705, d. 1761), naval officer, baptized at the parish church of West Hanningfield, Essex, on 17 February 1705, was the fifth son of John Steevens, a captain in the army, and his wife, Elizabeth. His brother George Steevens was the father of the Shakespearian commentator, also George. Charles was promoted a lieutenant in the navy on 19 March 1729. For the next two years he was on half pay, and in February 1731 he was appointed to the 'Salisbury', in which he served for upwards of five years, both on the home station and afterwards in the Mediterranean. In December 1737 Steevens was appointed first lieutenant of the 'Falmouth', commanded by Captain William Douglas, which sailed for the coast of Guinea with Captain George Anson. 
On 28 May 1738, at St Iago off the Cape Verd Islands, the 'Falmouth' was detached to go to Jamaica. Anson, for reasons never explained, gave Steevens a copy of Douglas's orders. The next day Steevens, after holding a council of the commissioned and warrant officers of the ship, and in 'conjunction' with them, confined Captain Douglas in his cabin 'for the preservation of their lives', he being 'disordered in his senses' (TNA: PRO, ADM 51/4187, log of the 'Falmouth', 29 May 1738). On arriving at Jamaica (20 June) Steevens reported the circumstance to Commodore Charles Brown, the commander-in-chief. Brown went on the 'Falmouth' on 21 June and released Douglas from confinement. Douglas then demanded that Steevens and the other officers should be tried for mutiny; but there were many difficulties in the way of holding a court martial, not least the absence of Anson. Brown, too, was convinced that Steevens had acted in good faith; and finally Douglas consented to receive an apology, which was formally given on 6 July on the 'Falmouth''s quarterdeck before Brown and all the captains then in port, when 'Lt Stevens in his name and the name of all the officers of the ship asked my pardon for they having unjustly confined my person and upon which everything was brought to its proper state and tranquility' (log of the 'Falmouth', 6 July 1738). None the less, the next day Steevens was moved into the 'Sheerness'; soon afterwards all of the other officers, as well as some of the midshipmen and seamen, were moved into other ships. Douglas remained in command of the 'Falmouth' until his death in May 1741. 
In May 1740 Steevens was moved into the 'Princess Louisa', and on 25 March 1741 he was promoted by Vice-Admiral Edward Vernon to the command of the fireship 'Cumberland', in which he was present at the unsuccessful attack on Cartagena. On 12 June he was moved into the fireship 'Phaeton', and on 14 October he received an order to command the 'Ludlow Castle', to which he was formally commissioned on 11 January 1742. In 1743 he was commanded to convoy the trade to North America and England. On 8 October, in a heavy sea, the 'Ludlow Castle' sprang a leak. Steevens ordered that the mizzen mast be cut away and that the upper deck guns be thrown overboard, but still she made 6 to 10 feet of water every hour. He eventually managed to get the ship into St Johns, Antigua, where she was condemned and converted into a hulk. 
Steevens made his way back to England and in October 1744 was appointed to the 'Portland' (50 guns). On 9 February 1746 he captured the French ship 'Auguste' (50 guns), in the entrance of the channel, and on 19 November he captured the French warship 'Subtle' (26 guns). On 14 October 1747 he took part, under Rear-Admiral Edward Hawke, in the defeat of M. de l'Etenduere, and on 31 January 1748, in company with Captain Robert Harland, he captured the 'Magnanime' (74 guns). After the peace Steevens commanded the guardship 'Tiger' for three years; and in January 1755 he was appointed to the 'Lichfield', in which in March he was sent to the Leeward Islands as commodore and commander-in-chief. He returned soon after and was appointed to the 'Oxford', one of the channel squadron under the command of Vice-Admiral John Byng. In her on 14 November he captured the French 'Esperance' (74 guns) which Byng ordered be destroyed on account of her dilapidatory state. 
In January 1757 Steevens was appointed to the 'Elizabeth', in which he went out to the East Indies with a commodore's broad pennant, in command of a small reinforcement. Having gone in the first instance to Bombay, he did not join Vice-Admiral George Pocock at Madras until the end of March 1758. In the actions of 29 April and 3 August Steevens commanded in the second post; in the latter he was wounded by a musket-ball in the shoulder. On 6 July he was promoted rear-admiral of the blue, but he did not receive the news until the end of the year. In the spring of 1759 he moved his flag into the 'Grafton', having as his flag-captain Richard Kempenfelt, and in her he commanded in the second post, under Pocock, in the action of 10 September. When, early in the following year, Pocock left the station, Steevens remained as commander-in-chief, and in September undertook the blockade of Pondicherry, in co-operation with the land forces under the command of Colonel Eyre Coote. On 15 January 1761 the place surrendered. 
The threat to Madras now seemed to have passed and Steevens took his squadron with a small number of soldiers to take Tellicherry on the Malabar coast. When he arrived there on 16 March he found that the fort was already in British hands so he sailed on to Bombay to clean, repair, and refit his squadron. He arrived at Bombay on 11 April 1761, but died there, probably on the 'Norfolk', on 20 May, and was buried in Bombay on the following day. He seems to have been unmarried. Steevens's will (PROB 11/875, fol. 222) makes no mention of a spouse, though he did have an illegitimate daughter, Anne Lake. In his will Steevens left his cabin furniture to his brother George, a master of a merchant ship. 


@@@@@


doc= 26355


Steevens, George (1736-1800), literary editor and scholar, the only son of George Steevens (1701-1763) and his wife, Mary Perryman, was born at Poplar, London, on 10 May 1736 and was baptized at Stepney parish church nine days later. His father, although described simply as 'mariner' in the baptismal register, was the captain of a ship who, when he retired from active service, lived in a substantial residence at Poplar, was elected a vestryman in 1746, obtained a seat as a director of the East India Company, and died on 14 June 1763 ('GM', 1763, 314). George attended a school at Kingston, Surrey, and went on to Eton College. Admitted a fellow-commoner of King's College, Cambridge, on 29 March 1753, he matriculated on 14 April and resided in college until the summer of 1756. He left university without a degree. 
Steevens settled in London in 1756, at first apparently in chambers in the Temple. On his father's death he inherited a competence and property in the neighbourhood of Poplar, but he soon bought a house (formerly a tavern named the Upper Flask) in Hampstead, near the summit of Hampstead Heath. For the rest of his life a cousin, Mrs Mary Collinson, and her daughters, kept house for him, and he left her $300 in his will. His daily routine was to walk into London before seven in the morning, paying visits to friends, bookshops, and publishing offices, and walk back early in the afternoon to spend the rest of the day at home. 
While it is not known exactly when Steevens met Samuel Johnson, it could have been at any time between April 1758, two years after Steevens left Cambridge and the date at which Johnson first mentioned an appendix to his edition of Shakespeare's plays, and October 1765, when the edition was published. Since Johnson lived in Inner Temple Lane from August 1760 to July 1765, and Steevens maintained chambers at least until the end of 1765, it may be that their first meeting came between those two dates. In any event Steevens added a list of the extant Shakespeare quartos to the end of volume 8 and forty-nine notes to the appendix of the 1765 edition. The fact that he added notes to the plays in volumes 1-4 of the edition does not necessarily mean that his contributions were early ones. Most of his notes corrected those of previous editors, an early indication of things to come. Two days after the edition came out, Thomas Birch, in a letter to Lord Hardwicke, wrote that: 'Mr. Steevens, a Gentleman of a very considerable Fortune in the Temple, to whom the public owes the completing of Johnson's edition of Shakespeare, and without whose Assistance that Work would probably not have appear'd these twelve Months, is reprinting the old 4to Editions of that Poet's plays, with all possible Exactness, even to the Errors of the Press. (Sherbo, 'Birth', 15)' Soon after the notes to Johnson's edition, therefore, Steevens's already advertised edition 'Twenty of the Plays of Shakespeare... Printed in Quarto' (1766) was published in four volumes, bare of commentary except for textual notes where more than one quarto of a play was extant. Shakespeare's sonnets were printed without notes and the 'Chronicle History of King Leir and his Three Daughters' was added. 
The known facts of Steevens's life, other than the details of his editorial labours and the litany of his enmities and the various deceptions he practised, are few. In 1767 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and of the Society of Antiquaries. Shortly thereafter the 1773 revision of Johnson's edition of Shakespeare was published. His name was on the title-page with Johnson's, and Johnson's acknowledgement of his part in the edition was added in a paragraph to the preface: 'Of what has been performed in the revisal, an account is given in the following pages by Mr. Steevens, who might have spoken both of his own diligence and sagacity, in terms of greater self-approbation without deviating from modesty or truth.' Steevens's account of what was performed in the revisal ran to a ten-page advertisement. He was elected to the Club, later known as the Literary Club, in February 1774; Johnson was his sponsor. The social highlights of Steevens's life were the various annual visits in the autumn to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, with his friend Isaac Reed; there they joined Richard Farmer, master of the college, in the many activities afforded by Cambridge and some of the nearby villages. Notable among these were the plays put on by a provincial company of actors at the famous Stourbridge fair. Steevens enjoyed the theatre, when in London attending early performances before walking back to his home in Hampstead. 
It is unfortunate that Steevens should be remembered for his hoaxes and for his attacks on various of his contemporaries rather than for his valuable additions to Shakespeare scholarship. But his wit and the associated learning having earned him the name of the Puck of Commentators, his puckishness -- a mild term -- must be chronicled. The earliest of his literary hoaxes was a forged letter, purportedly by George Peele, describing his meeting at the Globe Theatre with Shakespeare and other dramatists. As with his later deceptions, the letter was accepted as genuine, was enshrined in Dr John Berkenhout's 'Biographia litteraria' (1777), in which he had a hand, and surfaced in the twentieth century in Sir Sidney Lee's 'Shakespeare and the Modern Stage' (1906). The most elaborate of his hoaxes originated in a grudge against Richard Gough, one of the best-known antiquaries of that time -- author of, among other works, 'Sepulchral Monuments of Great Britain' (1786). Steevens had offered to exchange some books for four rare plates by Hogarth owned by Gough, so that he, Steevens, might add them to his already large collection. When Gough refused, Steevens had a block of marble engraved by aquafortis with some Anglo-Saxon words, had it placed in the window of a Southwark shop, and saw to it that his fellow members of the Society of Antiquaries were informed that it, the tombstone of Hardecanute, had been recently dug up in Kennington Lane. A drawing of the stone was made by Jacob Schnebbelie, draughtsman to the society, engraved by James Basire, and published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1790, 217). Samuel Pegge, another fellow of the society and himself a well-known antiquary, presented a paper upon it to the society in December 1789. Unfortunately for him, Gough, and others, the hoax was revealed by Steevens himself, writing as 'An Antiquary' and as 'Annius Anglicanus' in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (ibid., 217-18, 290-92). But the stone lived on, Steevens having given it to Sir Joseph Banks, who exhibited it at his assemblies in Soho Square. Hearsay has it that Steevens often visited Sir Joseph, daily presenting him with flowers from Hampstead attached to his cane. For whatever undiscovered reasons, Steevens wrote several notes of dubious propriety, if not downright bawdy, to two Hampstead neighbours, Mr Collins and the Revd Mr Richard Amner. 
Erasmus Darwin, physician and scholar, a figure of some standing in botanical science and the author of several botanical works including 'The Loves of the Plants' (1789), was another of Steevens's victims. The 'London Magazine' for December 1783 (pp. 511-17) carried Steevens's description of the upas tree of Java which could kill all life within a distance of 15 to 18 miles, his source being an entirely fictitious Dutch traveller. Darwin was taken in and admitted the upas tree into his 'Loves of the Plants', from which Coleridge derived information for two notes (Sherbo, 'Achievements', 61-2). Nor did Steevens spare his friends: he produced an Eastern romance which he named 'The boke of the Soldan' and gave it to Bishop Percy, who never questioned its authenticity. There were other minor deceptions, notable among them being a letter to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1782, 276, 288) with two drawings by him of the non-existent poets Chedder and Turgot, thought by the Rowleians to have inspired the equally non-existent medieval poet Thomas Rowley, Chatterton's creation. Steevens was not, however, taken in by William Henry Ireland's forgery of Shakespearian manuscripts, criticizing him harshly in the pages of the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. 
Besides the victims of his various hoaxes, who had sufficient reason to dislike and to asperse him, Steevens made himself obnoxious to others of his contemporaries. He satirized Garrick for his part in the Shakespeare jubilee of 1769, although he was on terms of some intimacy with him at least a few years before 1765; Garrick evidently forgave him, as is clear from their subsequent correspondence, at least up to 1775. But after Garrick's death Steevens severely criticized several of his plays and especially his alteration of 'Hamlet', using the medium of his friend Reed's 'Biographia dramatica' (1782). He also contributed to that work a number of sarcastic remarks on Charles Macklin, Frederick Pilon, Dr Ralph Schomberg, Robert Jephson, and Miles Peter Andrews, among others. However, he did make serious and valuable contributions. He locked horns with the irascible Joseph Ritson, who published some damning criticism, aimed chiefly at Steevens's notes, in his 'Remarks' on the 1778 'Shakespeare' in 1783, but the two were reconciled as early as 1785. 
As with Garrick, so with Sir John Hawkins, whom Steevens helped with the history of music upon which Sir John was working and which was published in 1776. Sir John reciprocated with a few notes on Shakespeare for the appendix to the 1773 Johnson-Steevens edition of Shakespeare, notes Steevens had solicited with some insistence. Steevens was accused by Laetitia Matilda Hawkins, Sir John's daughter, of theft and the attempt to seduce the wife of a friend, but these charges lack substance. In any event Sir John gave Steevens more notes on Shakespeare for the 1778 Johnson-Steevens 'Shakespeare', despite Sir John's suspicion that Steevens had written a parody of one of the footnotes in his history of music in the 'St James's Chronicle', a periodical in which Steevens at one time had a share. Steevens also criticized Sir John's life of Johnson, having taken again to the pages of the 'St James's Chronicle' in 1785 before the biography was published, and to the pages of the 'European Magazine', edited by Reed, very soon after publication of the biography in 1787. 
James Boswell was ambivalent in his feelings about Steevens, although he tended to adopt the prevalent view that Steevens was a disagreeable fellow, one who had seen fit to criticize his, Boswell's, 'magnum opus', the life of Johnson, just as he had also criticized Hawkins's biography of Johnson, at the same time as he insisted in print that Boswell was best qualified to write the life of Johnson. Steevens evidently had a proprietary feeling about Johnson and all that pertained to him, one that extended to the works of Shakespeare, almost surely because of his early aid in Johnson's 1765 'Shakespeare'. It was this latter feeling that prompted him to take critical issue with Edward Capell and Charles Jennens -- Capell a competent editor of Shakespeare, Jennens an eccentric who richly deserved the treatment accorded him. Steevens again availed himself of Reed's 1782 'Biographia dramatica', in which both men were severely mauled. Steevens, who at one time would seem to have believed in the existence of Chatterton's medieval poet Thomas Rowley, wrote a series of fifteen anti-Rowleian letters to the editor of the 'St James's Chronicle' in the first four months of 1782, the year in which the Rowleian controversy came to the boil. He thus incurred the everlasting enmity of the chief proponents of the pro-Rowleian party, Jacob Bryant, Dean Jeremiah Milles, and Dr Robert Glynn. While Steevens's friends were not legion, he was, however, on intimate terms with Johnson, Reed, Farmer, Nichols, and Thomas Tyrwhitt, with the last of whom he collaborated in an edition of the poems of Thomas Rowley (1777). Among others of his friends was Bishop Percy, with whom he was sometimes at odds, but whom he helped in an edition of Surrey's poems and those of earlier writers of blank verse. He also had an extensive acquaintance in Cambridge. 
Despite the many attacks on him, from some who had no fondness for him and from those who were indifferent to him, Steevens was praised for his generosity. He helped in one way or another, often with money, one of Oliver Goldsmith's relatives, as well as Henry Fuseli, Chatterton's mother, Dr Gloster Ridley, and others. John Nichols, writing as 'Etonensis' in the February 1800 'Gentleman's Magazine''s obituary notice of Steevens's death, stated that 'though he was not seen to give eleemosynary six-pences to sturdy beggars or sweepers of crossings, few persons distributed Bank-notes with more liberality' ('GM', 1st ser., 70, 1800, 178). And there are the many instances of his friendly assistance to the works of other scholars. Although he helped Sir John Hawkins with his history of music, he did the same for Sir John's rival, Dr Charles Burney, with his history of music. The assistance he afforded Isaac Reed in Reed's edition of Robert Dodsley's 'Select Collection of Old Plays' (1780), in Reed's 'Biographia dramatica' (1782), and in Reed's 1803 'Shakespeare' was virtually enough to qualify him as co-editor of the first and third of these works. John Nichols's 'Biographical Memoirs of William Hogarth' (1781), with a much enlarged edition in 1785, and a final edition in three quarto volumes (1808-17), now titled 'The Genuine Works of William Hogarth', was assisted by Steevens to an extent beyond which he had assisted any of the others. His name appeared on the title-page of the edition, and Nichols was most generous in his acknowledgement of Steevens's predominant part in the work. 
If Johnson be acceptable as judge in the case of society v. George Steevens, then the sentence would be light, possibly probation, for Steevens was guilty, to a degree, of some -- not all -- of the crimes and misdemeanours imputed to him. Johnson much relied on him, for had it not been for Steevens, Johnson's 1765 'Shakespeare' would surely have borne a later date, and there would almost equally surely not have been a 1773 revised edition, virtually the sole endeavour of Steevens. Steevens helped Johnson in his lives of the English poets, among other things 'castrating' (Johnson's word) Rochester's poems, and he may have helped him with his 'Dictionary'. He attended Johnson's morning levees, and they spent many 'social hours' together. Johnson borrowed books from him, and they enjoyed a display of fireworks together. And Steevens was among those who visited Johnson on the day of his death. Johnson allegedly said of Steevens that 'he leads the life of an outlaw' (Boswell, 'Life', 2.375 and n. 3), but when Topham Beauclerk said that the unnamed Steevens was 'malignant', Johnson replied that he was not 'malignant', but 'mischievous'. 'He would do no man an essential injury; he may, indeed, love to make sport of people by vexing their vanity' (ibid., 3.281). When, again conjecturally, Steevens was accused of 'attacking people by anonymous paragraphs in newspapers', Johnson replied, 'Come, come, this is not so terrible a crime; he means only to vex them a little', adding that he would not do so himself (ibid., 4.274 and n. 7). There are no adverse remarks on Steevens in Johnson's letters. 
Steevens died in his home at Hampstead on 22 January 1800 and was buried in the chapel of Poplar (later St Matthias's Church) beside other family members. He was unmarried, but his name had been linked by one of his contemporaries with that of the actress Frances Kemble, Mrs Siddons's youngest sister, the affair being much embroidered upon long after his death. His very considerable library, rich in rare books, was sold by the auctioneer King in May 1800, the 1943 lots (not individual titles) fetching $2740 15's'. The sale catalogue of the library, 'Bibliotheca Steevensiana', includes mention of many of Steevens's manuscript remarks upon various items in the sale, now widely dispersed. 
Steevens's major achievements lie in the contributions he made to Shakespeare scholarship, to the study of early English drama, and to the study of Hogarth's work. He resurrected twenty of the Shakespeare quartos in 1766; some thirteen years later John Nichols printed, at Steevens's suggestion, 'Six old plays on which Shakespeare founded his 'Measure for Measure', 'Comedy of Errors', 'Taming the Shrew', 'King John', 'Henry IV' and 'Henry V', and 'King Lear'' (1779). George Colman the elder reviewed the edition in the 'Monthly Review' for October 1779 (1st ser., 61.296-9), writing that: 'The perusal of these old plays will rather serve to raise than to depreciate his [Shakespeare's] genius in the estimation of his readers, and will shew that the delicacy of his taste and the soundness of his judgment, were almost as remarkable as the richness of his fancy. (p. 296)' The edition was obviously considered a valuable addition to the study of Shakespeare's plays. 
By 1779 Steevens had already acquired a well-deserved reputation as an editor of Shakespeare, because of his help not only with Johnson's 1765 'Shakespeare' and his, Steevens's, revision of the 1773 edition, but also with the later 1778 Johnson-Steevens 'Shakespeare', in which Johnson corrected or added to some of his earlier notes, adding but one new note. The reviewers for the 'Monthly Review' and the 'Critical Review' praised Steevens's efforts; almost nothing was said of Johnson. Hard on the heels of the 'Six Old Plays' came Steevens's virtual co-editorship, with the anonymous Reed, of the twelve-volume edition of Robert Dodsley's 'Select Collection of Old Plays' (1780). Steevens contributed 543 notes. The same year saw Edmond Malone's two-volume supplement to the 1778 'Shakespeare', with its printing of seven apocryphal plays and the sonnets. In his advertisement to the edition Malone wrote: 'To the friendship to Mr. Steevens I am indebted, not only for the numerous observations that are subscribed with his name, but also for many judicious hints for the conduct of the present work by which... it has been rendered less exceptionable than it would otherwise have been. (Sherbo, 'Achievements', 7-8)' Steevens took part in the commentary on the plays, the canonical as well as the apocryphal, and on the sonnets, on the worth of the last of which he and Malone disagreed. A scant two years later Reed revised David Erskine Baker's 'Companion to the Playhouse' (1764), under the title of 'Biographica dramatica' (1782), to which Steevens contributed 53 notes. 
Reed edited the so-called Johnson-Steevens 'Shakespeare' of 1785, Steevens contributing about 440 notes, although he had earlier disclaimed any part in it. Malone's own edition of Shakespeare's works appeared in 1790; Steevens contributed relatively few notes, almost surely having begun work on his own edition, published three years later in 1793. John Boydell, a publisher of prints, projected an illustrated edition of Shakespeare's plays; Steevens was eventually responsible for the text and correction of the press, although the edition was not published until 1802, two years after his death. His penultimate contribution to Shakespeare scholarship came with his 'Shakespeare' of 1793, in sixteen volumes, with two volumes of prolegomena, a glossarial index at the end of volume 3, and the sixteenth volume devoted to Samuel Ayscough's elaborate index to Shakespeare's plays. When Steevens died he was engaged on another edition of Shakespeare's plays. He left his notes and the completion of the edition to Reed, who wrote that the edition contained 'the last improvements and corrections by Mr. Steevens, by whom it was prepared for the press' (Sherbo, 'Achievements', 199). Steevens's additions to the edition were almost 1000 in number, 202 of them being new notes. The three great eighteenth-century editors of Shakespeare were, in chronological order, Steevens, Malone, and Reed. When one adds the name of Samuel Johnson, whose edition of Shakespeare's plays was to be the point of departure for the more scholarly editions of Reed and Malone, one has what is Steevens's greatest contribution to Shakespeare studies -- the invaluable assistance he gave to all three. Indeed Malone's first essay into Shakespeare studies came at Steevens's invitation, to help complete the 1773 Johnson-Steevens 'Shakespeare'. He accepted, turned his back on the law as a career, and devoted himself thereafter to literature. Steevens's own contribution to Shakespeare studies was the wealth of illustrative quotations from rare works that he brought to the annotation of the plays. 


@@@@@


doc= 26356


Steevens, George Warrington (1869-1900), journalist, son of James Steevens and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Wright, was born at 40 Rowland Grove, Wells Road, Sydenham, Kent, on 10 December 1869. His father was a bank clerk and his family were Plymouth Brethren. He grew up in Clapham, attended a private school, and in 1882 won a scholarship to the City of London School, where he was outstandingly successful. He was captain of the school in 1887-8, and in 1887 won a classical scholarship at Balliol College, Oxford, where he studied from 1888 to 1892. In 1889, through a school friend at Cambridge, he became a friend of Oscar Browning, fellow of King's College. Browning, who knew many young men, wrote that Steevens was 'one of the most brilliant young men I ever knew' (Browning, 327) and tried to help his career. By early 1890 Steevens had broken with his family's Brethrenism, and he described himself as 'a discontented atheist' (Steevens to Browning; Oscar Browning MSS). 
At Oxford, Steevens's success was such that he was called 'the Balliol prodigy': firsts in classical moderations and 'literae humaniores' and, at the same time, a London BA with 'highest honours', then in 1893 a fellowship at Pembroke College. At school and Oxford he was radical in politics. When an undergraduate he visited Whitechapel and criticized slum landlords, and at Pembroke he was, according to W. E. Henley, 'rather gloomy and socialistic' (Henley, xiv). In 1892 he helped Browning's Gladstonian election campaign in East Worcestershire, against the Chamberlain interest. 
Befriended by W. E. Henley, Steevens wrote for the 'National Observer' and the 'New Review'. In 1893 he was employed by Henry Cust, editor of the Conservative 'Pall Mall Gazette', for which he wrote 'the funny paragraphs' and articles on foreign policy. He also contributed to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', 'M'Clure's', and 'Harper's'. His political beliefs apparently shifted to the right, and became imperialist and concerned with defence. In 1895 Cust quarrelled with the paper's American owner, W. W. Astor, and resigned, as did Steevens. 
On 25 August 1894 Steevens married the much older Christina Adelaide Ethel Athanasia (1838-1911), daughter of Duncan Stewart and widow of James Alexander Rogerson of Wamphray, Scotland, whom she had married in 1862. She had been involved in the Crawford divorce case which ruined Sir Charles Dilke's political career, and was a contributor to 'Blackwood's Magazine'. She was, according to Grant Richards, 'a forceful lady' who 'possessed still a fascination that made most young men her slaves' (Richards, 212-13). Eccentric and allegedly mendacious, she entertained lavishly with jugs of iced champagne at their residence, Merton Abbey, and tried to boost Steevens's career. They had no children, and she survived him. 
In 1896 Steevens published 'Naval Policy', a competent restatement of navalist orthodoxy warning of British naval vulnerability. In the same year he joined Alfred Harmsworth's new 'Daily Mail'. Exceptionally successful in vivid descriptive writing, he worked for it for the rest of his life and became its star reporter. In 1896 he reported the United States presidential election; in 1897 the Graeco-Turkish War -- his first experience as a war correspondent; in 1897-8 Egypt; in 1898 the Sudan War and India, and in 1899 the retrial of Dreyfus at Rennes. From his reports he compiled books, of which the most successful was 'With Kitchener to Khartum' (1898). His reporting and books made him famous. He was a favourite of Harmsworth: 'the schoolboy in Alfred went out to meet the schoolboy in Steevens' (H. H. Fyfe, 'Northcliffe: an Intimate Biography', 1930, 90). He continued to contribute to 'Blackwood's' and other journals: two key statements were his 'Blackwood's' pieces 'The new humanitarianism' (1898) and 'From the new Gibbon' (1899). 
In 1899 Steevens was sent to South Africa, arriving in October, before the war began. He accompanied Sir George White's army in Natal, reported the battles of Elandslaagte and Nicholson's Nek, and was besieged in Ladysmith. He sent his reports through the Boer lines by native runner, and edited and contributed to the 'Ladysmith Lyre', a spoof newspaper. He died, aged thirty, of typhoid on 15 January 1900, and was buried in Ladysmith cemetery. His South African reports were published posthumously in the book 'From Capetown to Ladysmith' (1900). 
Steevens was 'a thin, pale man in glasses' (Lionel James, 'High Pressure', 1932, 62), charming and witty company with 'a wayward brilliance and amusing tendency to paradox' ('DNB'), and also brave. He was a perceptive and vivid writer with a distinctive style, but much of what he wrote was hurried journalism: insufficiently researched, impressionistic, dogmatic, and sometimes biased. Although after his death there was public controversy over what he himself had believed, his published message was proud patriotism, imperialism, navalism, bellicism, social Darwinism, and anti-decadence. Some criticized him: his schoolfriend Anton Bertram, possibly jealous, wrote in 1898 that 'he has made himself the hero of the British clerk & shopkeeper... his most prominent qualities seem to me those of the jingo, the cynic, & the philistine' (Bertram to Browning, 26 Dec 1898; Oscar Browning MSS), yet this was exceptional. Praised in his lifetime, at his death Steevens was eulogized. Sidney Lee expressed the general opinion when he wrote that 'his premature death prevented the fulfilment of his high literary promise' ('DNB'). Yet he had already achieved much. A leading war correspondent, he was also among the most influential propagandists of late Victorian imperialism. 


@@@@@


doc= 26357


Steevens, Richard (1653-1710), physician and benefactor, and 
Steevens practised as a physician in Dublin, amassing a considerable fortune of $12,000, which must have been from his practice as his family was not wealthy. He remained unmarried and lived in lodgings in William Street. He was named a fellow of the Irish College of Physicians in their 1692 charter and held several offices in the college, including being twice elected president, in 1703 and 1710. He died before the close of his second year of office, on 15 December 1710, in Dublin, where he was buried privately late at night in St Peter's Church, near his mother's grave. 
By his will Steevens bequeathed the bulk of his property to his sister Grizell for her life, and directed that upon her death it should be used in building, and subsequently maintaining, a hospital in Dublin 'for maintaining and curing from time to time such sick and wounded persons whose distempers and wounds are curable'. Grizell Steevens, being 'desirous that the said charitable bequest of her dear brother should begin to take effect in her lifetime', surrendered her estate to the trustees in 1717, keeping only $100 a year out of an income of $600, together with apartments in the hospital when built. She also gave $2000 towards the cost of building. It took sixteen years before the institution known as Dr Steevens' Hospital was completed, in 1733, at a cost of $16,000. It was the first public hospital established in Dublin, where it became one of the foremost institutions of its kind. Dean Swift was one of its earliest governors, and Stella (Esther Johnson) in her will bequeathed $1000 towards the maintenance of a chaplain of the hospital, so long as the Church of Ireland should remain established. Another benefactor was John Sterne, bishop of Clogher. Grizell Steevens died in Dublin on 18 March 1747. By her will she bequeathed the residue of her property to the governors of the hospital. Her remains were interred in the hospital chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 26358


Stenhouse, John (1809-1880), chemist and inventor, was born on 21 October 1809 at Glasgow, the eldest son and only surviving child of William Stenhouse, a calico printer of Barrhead, Glasgow, and his wife, Elizabeth Currie (died 1860). He was educated at Glasgow grammar school and at Glasgow University (1824-8), where he studied chemistry under Dr Thomas Thomson. He continued his studies at Anderson's University under Thomas Graham and at Giessen (1837-9) under Liebig with Lyon Playfair and Robert Angus Smith. In 1839 he returned to Glasgow, where he remained until he lost his inherited fortune when the Commercial Exchange failed and was thus led to seek employment. 
In 1850 Aberdeen University made Stenhouse LLD, and in the same year he was an unsuccessful candidate for the chair of chemistry at Owens College, Manchester. In 1851 he went to London as lecturer on chemistry at St Bartholomew's Hospital, but resigned his post in 1857, owing to an attack of paralysis. During his tenure at St Bartholomew's, August Kekule (1829-1896), later a leading German organic chemist, was a visiting assistant there; Stenhouse and he did research together. After his resignation he went to Italy, where he resided with his mother until her death in 1860. Returning to London, he fitted up a laboratory and pursued a vigorous programme of scientific investigation. In 1865 he succeeded A. W. Hofmann as non-resident assayer to the Royal Mint. He held the post until it was abolished in 1870, when he was granted a civil-list pension. 
In November 1871 Stenhouse was awarded the Royal Society's royal medal. He was one of the founders of the Chemical Society in 1841, was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1848, and became a fellow of the Institute of Chemistry in 1877. During the last four years of his life Stenhouse suffered a form of rheumatism of the eyelids, which compelled him to live in a darkened room, but he always bore his infirmities with patience. He died on 31 December 1880 at his home, 17 Rodney Street, Pentonville, London, and was buried in the High Church new cemetery, Glasgow, on 6 January 1881. 
Stenhouse wrote more than a hundred papers on chemical subjects, many of them in conjunction with C. E. Groves. He was primarily interested in the organic compounds derived from plants, especially lichens, and was the discoverer of betorcinol, a homologue of orcinol. He patented many ingenious and useful inventions in dyeing, waterproofing, sugar manufacture, and tanning, but he was principally known for his application of the absorbent properties of wood charcoal to disinfecting and deodorizing purposes in the form of charcoal air-filters and charcoal respirators, which proved useful in many contexts. 


@@@@@


doc= 26359


Stenhouse, William (1773-1827), musical antiquary, was a native of Roxburghshire. He became an accountant in Edinburgh, where, in 1806, he published 'Tables of Simple Interest and of Commission, Brokerage, or Exchange'. He died in Edinburgh on 10 November 1827 and was buried in St Cuthbert's churchyard. 
Stenhouse was an antiquary with strong musical leanings. He is best known for his notes in the 1839 (Edinburgh) reprint of James Johnson's 'The Scots Musical Museum', which he edited. These notes, invaluable though inaccurate in many particulars, have been extensively quoted by biographers of Robert Burns and by editors of Scottish songs. They amount to more than five hundred pages, and were reprinted, with additions, in David Laing's 1853 edition of the 'Musical Museum'. Much of the criticism of Stenhouse's work (especially that of William Chappell in his 'Popular Music of Olden Time', 1855-9) is thoroughly misplaced. Stenhouse broke new ground as well as contributing much from his own musical background in the borders. On the other hand, James Hogg, writing to Blackwoods (the publishers of his 'Jacobite Relics') on 20 November 1820, complained 'I care not for the running copies of the relics. Stenhouse has spoiled all by altering the tunes' (A. L. Strout, 'The Life and Letters of James Hogg', 1946). 


@@@@@


doc= 26360


Stennett, Joseph (1663-1713), Seventh Day Baptist minister, was born at Abingdon, Berkshire, the third (but second surviving) son of eight children of Edward Stennett (1627/8-1705), physician, and his wife, Mary ('bap'. 1626?), who was probably the daughter of Richard Quelch of the parish of St Michael-at-the-Northgate, Oxford. His father, of a Lincolnshire family, had belonged to the Fifth Monarchist John Pendarves's Baptist congregation at Abingdon and adopted sabbatarian views during the 1650s. He moved from Abingdon to Wallingford in 1670 or 1671 and led a Seventh Day Baptist congregation at Wallingford for many years. Joseph was educated at Wallingford grammar school and also by his father and by his elder brother, Jehudah, who wrote and published a Hebrew grammar in 1685. He became proficient in several languages, ancient and modern. In 1685 he settled in London as a schoolmaster and on 27 November 1686 joined the Seventh Day Baptist congregation at Pinners' Hall, Old Broad Street, where his father assisted in the ministry. He was sometime evening lecturer to the Seventh Day Baptist congregation at Devonshire Square, London, and on 4 March 1690 he was ordained pastor at Pinners' Hall. For a period he was Sunday lecturer to the General Baptist congregation at Paul's Alley, Barbican, where in 1700 his hearers protested against his Calvinist preaching. 
On several public occasions Stennett was the trusted representative of the whole body of Baptists. In 1704 the Baptists in London invited him to compile a history of Baptists; he collected much material but the project did not come to fruition. A conscientious pastor and fluent preacher with a low, musical voice, his sermon celebrating the victory at Blenheim found favour with Queen Anne. Nahum Tate, the poet laureate, and Mordecai Abbot were among his friends. His 'Works', published posthumously in 1732, mainly consists of sermons, but also hymns and poetry. Not included are 'An Answer to Mr David Russen' (1704) and several translations from the French. He printed anonymously political satires in verse; some are said to be in the 'Poems on State Affairs'. 
On 29 July 1688 Stennett married Susanna, younger daughter of George Guill (or Gill), a refugee Huguenot merchant, and so became brother-in-law to Daniel Williams, Presbyterian minister and founder of the library now in Gordon Square, London, who married Susanna's widowed sister, Jane Barkstead, in 1701. Stennett died on 11 July 1713 at the home of his brother-in-law William Morton, at Knaphill, Buckinghamshire, and was buried in Hughenden churchyard, where his tombstone bears a Latin inscription by John Ward. He was survived by his wife and four of their children, the eldest of whom was 
In 1714 Stennett married Rebekah (Rebecca) Davies (died 1744), whose father, Nathaniel Morgan, was a Baptist preacher living at that time in Usk Castle. She died in 1744, having borne eleven children in thirteen years, of whom five survived her. She was buried in Bunhill Fields. On 25 April 1750, in the parish of All Hallows London Wall, Stennett married Elizabeth Haley (died 1771). He was assisted at Little Wild Street by his sons Joseph and Samuel. In 1750 he was a founder member of the non-denominational Society for Religious Knowledge among the Poor. He published fourteen sermons. He died in Bath on 7 February 1758 and was succeeded as pastor by his son 


@@@@@


doc= 26361


Joseph Stennett (1692-1758), Baptist minister, who was born in London on 6 November 1692. Educated by Dr Robert Ainsworth and Dr John Ward at Gresham College, he ministered to Baptists at Abergavenny and Leominster (1714-18), Exeter (1719-37), and Little Wild Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields (1737-58), while being sabbatarian in private practice. During the Jacobite rising of 1745 he was the author of a loyal address, and in 1754 he was made a DD of Edinburgh University at the instigation of the duke of Cumberland. 


@@@@@


doc= 26362


Samuel Stennett (1727-1795), Baptist minister, who was born at his parents' home in Exeter on 1 June 1727. He was educated by John Hubbard of Stepney and John Walker of Mile End Academy, and on 1 April 1763 he was made DD by King's College, Aberdeen. He was a man of broad views and considerable public influence; the philanthropist John Howard attended his church when in London. Sabbatarian in personal devotion, he also took morning service at Cripplegate Seventh Day Baptist Church, which had once been his grandfather's congregation, having migrated from Pinners' Hall. He was assisted by his son Joseph, the fifth in a succession of ministers from father to son. On 20 March 1750 he married Elizabeth Marsom (1723/4-1795), daughter of Samuel Marsom, a Baptist minister in Luton, Bedfordshire. They had at least three children: Haley, Joseph (who also became a minister), and Elizabeth. Shortly after the death of his adored wife, he died at Muswell Hill on 24 August 1795 and was buried in Bunhill Fields. His works, chiefly sermons, were collected in three volumes in 1824 by William Jones, with a memoir appended. His hymns, rarely found in modern collections, are thought not equal to those of his grandfather. 


@@@@@


doc= 26363


Philip Francis Stephanoff (1787/8-1860), painter, the younger brother of James Stephanoff, was also born in Brompton Row, London. He entered the Royal Academy Schools in December 1801, when his first name was recorded as Philliter and his age as thirteen. At the age of sixteen his 'The Lay of the Last Minstrel', a subject from the poem by Sir Walter Scott, was much admired by the sculptor Thomas Flaxman. Philip Stephanoff became a popular painter of historical and genre subjects and of fruit paintings, working in both oils and watercolours, and exhibited at the Royal Academy and the British Institution from 1807 to 1845, with the Associated Artists in Water colours in 1809 (of which he became a member in 1811), and with the Old Watercolour Society from 1813 to 1820. Joseph Farington recorded in his diary that Stephanoff was a candidate for election to the Royal Academy in 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 26364


Stephanoff, James (c.1786-1874), watercolour painter, was born in Brompton Row, London, the son of Fileter N. Stephanoff (died 'c'.1790), a Russian who settled in England and painted decorative ceilings, stage scenery at the Haymarket and at the circus in St George's Fields, and made portraits and tinted landscape drawings. Of an unstable temperament, F. N. Stephanoff committed suicide about 1790. Stephanoff's mother, Gertrude, of German descent, was an accomplished flower painter, much patronized by Sir Joseph Banks. She taught drawing to young ladies, including, presumably, her daughter M. G. Stephanoff, also a flower painter. Gertrude Stephanoff died at Brompton on 7 January 1808. Stephanoff entered the Royal Academy Schools in February 1801, and from about 1808 exhibited with several institutions and societies, including the Associated Artists in Water Colours (of which he became a member in 1811), the Royal Academy (from 1810), and the Old Watercolour Society (OWCS, of which he was elected an associate in 1819 and with whom he continued to exhibit until 1859). Many of his exhibited works drew on literary and art historical subjects, and some of these were engraved for the annuals. With his wife, Lucy Allen, he had two sons and two daughters. 
James Stephanoff excelled in the representation of public ceremonies and historical incidents that required the skilful grouping of large numbers of figures. These included 'The Fair Held in Hyde Park in 1814'; 'The Interior of the House of Lords during the Important Investigation of 1820' ('The trial of Queen Caroline'; engraved by J. G. Murray); 'Interior of the House of Commons during the Reform Era'; and 'Reception of the Queen by the Lord Mayor on 9 Nov. 1837'. With Charles Wild and A. C. Pugin he produced drawings for W. H. Pyne's 'The History of the Royal Residences of Windsor Castle, St. James's Palace, Carlton House, Kensington Palace, Hampton Court, Buckingham House and Frogmore' (1819), a work that has subsequently been drawn on by architectural and design historians for its detailed recording of interior design and furnishing. With his brother Philip Stephanoff ['see below'], and separately, he contributed drawings to Sir George Nayler's sumptuous 'The Coronation of His Most Sacred Majesty George IV' (1824, 1837), including, with A. C. Pugin, who worked on the architectural parts, a large watercolour of the coronation. In 1830 he was appointed historical painter in watercolours to William IV. 
Stephanoff was a member of the Sketching Society after its reformulation by the Chalon brothers in 1808. He was much interested in antiquarian matters and made drawings of St Cuthbert's stole, at Durham, for the Society of Antiquaries. Mallalieu noted, however, that Stephanoff 'was among the first to paint historical scenes as pictures rather than as engravers' material -- although many prints were in fact made after his work' (Mallalieu, 'Watercolour artists', 246). His most important works of this kind were the series of six watercolour drawings, exhibited at the Old Watercolour Society between 1817 and 1845, of Greek and Roman antiquities at the British Museum. In his article 'James Stephanoff and the British Museum' Ian Jenkins noted that 'they do not show real views of the museum interior; instead, antiquities are placed in idealized settings, more glamorous than the actual arrangements', that offer 'a colourful insight into contemporary taste' (Jenkins, 174). The first of the series, entitled 'The Connoisseur' (exh. OWCS, 1817; ex Sothebys, 13 July 1979, drawings, lot 97), features many of the contents of the Townley Gallery. (Stephanoff's link with the collector Charles Townley is further indicated by drawings in the British Museum of Townley's antiquities signed 'Stephanoff del.') Two other views in the series, 'An Apartment Containing the Phygalian Marbles' (exh. 1818; BM) and 'The Virtuoso' (1833; BM), include, in the former, marbles recovered from the ruins of the temple of Apollo at Bassae, which arrived at the museum in 1815, and, in the latter, the Elgin marbles, purchased by Lord Elgin in 1816. 
James Stephanoff resigned his membership of the Old Watercolour Society in 1861 and retired to Bristol, where he died at his home, 6 Frederick Place, Clifton, on 4 July 1874. Examples of his work are also to be found in the Cartwright Hall, Bradford; the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh; and the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford. 


Stephanoff's historical and subject pictures included 'Gil Blas Dismissed with Contempt by the Archbishop of Granada' (exh. British Institution, 1816; ex Sothebys, 13 July 1988, lot 196); 'The Trial of Algernon Sidney'; 'Cranmer Revoking his Recantation at Oxford' (exh. RA, 1835; ex Sothebys, New York, 1981); 'Poor Relations'; and 'The Reconciliation', all of which were well engraved. He also produced many graceful and domestic designs for 'The Keepsake' and other annuals. For Nayler's 'Coronation of... George IV' he drew in watercolours a series of costume portraits (V&A); these record details of elaborate ceremonial costume and are richly coloured, elegant, and highly finished. He also made a series of historical drawings in watercolours entitled 'The Field of the Cloth of Gold: an interview between Henry VIII and Francis I'. Stephanoff having failed to find a publisher, the series was sold and was eventually acquired by the British Museum. At the competition to design frescoes for Westminster Hall, in 1843, Stephanoff won a prize of $100 for a scene from Milton's 'Comus' (exh. RA, 1844). His royal portraits include 'George IV while Regent' (ex Phillips, 3 June 1986, lot 58) and 'Queen Victoria when Princess, at Archery Practice in the Grounds of Windsor Castle' (ex Bonhams, 23 November 1983, lot 169). 
Added to the lasting effects of a fall on his head when a child, the sudden death of his wife, Selina, 'nee' Roland, whom he had married on 2 August 1828 at St Alfege, Greenwich, and that of his young son seriously affected Stephanoff's health. In 1850 he moved to Bristol to live with his brother; he gave up painting many years before his death, which occurred on 15 May 1860 at his home, Hanham Lodge, Hanham, Gloucestershire. He was reputed to have been a man of learning and an excellent musician. Examples of his work are also to be found in Exeter Museum and the Castle Museum, Nottingham. 
Both Philip Francis and James Stephanoff executed portraits of their contemporaries. However, it is their interest in historical subjects and their recording of elaborate historicized costumes, architectural interiors, and antiquities that make their work of interest to historians of the period. They gave visual expression to intense contemporary interest in antiquarian and historical subjects brought about by the arrival in Britain of the Elgin marbles, by the novels of Sir Walter Scott and his arrangements for the visit of George IV to Edinburgh in 1822, and by George IV's attempt in his coronation to rival that of Napoleon when he was crowned emperor. Their richly coloured work illustrates a romantic view of history that found its fullest expression during the Regency period. 


@@@@@


doc= 26365


Stephen (c.1092-1154), king of England, was the third son of Etienne (VI), count of Blois-Chartres, and Adela, daughter of William I. Stephen's father was one of the leaders of the first crusade, and achieved some notoriety for not coming to the relief of the besiegers of Antioch in 1098, and returning home. He went back to Jerusalem in 1101 and in 1102 he was killed at the battle of Ramlah. In one of his letters home from crusade Etienne bade Adela 'keep well, govern your land excellently, and deal with your sons and your men honourably' (Davis, 3). Adela did all these things: she lived until 1137, when she died as a nun at Marcigny, proved an admirable administrator, and provided well for her sons. The sons were a remarkable group of men, and of them all Stephen was to prove the most adventurous. 
Stephen was probably born about 1092, but it is not until the period 1100-10 that he is mentioned in charter attestations. The earliest of these was to a charter of not later than 1101 in favour of the cathedral of Chartres, with his elder brothers, Guillaume and Thibaud; and he occurs with them also 'c'.1102 in a charter for the abbey of Molesme, identified as 'their brother' (Laurent, 2, no. 18). It was the second son, Thibaud, who became count of Blois in 1107; and 'c'.1108 Adela issued a charter for the abbey of Conques with Thibaud 'and my other sons' (Desjardins, no. 486). The boys' schoolmaster was Guillaume the Norman, mentioned in 1107 as recently dead. The fourth son, Henry de Blois, was sent as a monk to Cluny. In 1109 and 1110, first at Chartres and then at Etampes, Stephen attested a diploma for the abbey of Bonneval as 'the brother of the count of Blois' (Bautier and Dufour, 1, no. 46). In all these charters Stephen appears in a family context, and his position in the world was defined by his relationship to other members of his family. He was particularly closely identified with Thibaud (who died in 1152) throughout their careers. He was, however, to make his own way within the Anglo-Norman world. 
The responsibility for this lay with Henry I, whom Stephen would succeed as king of England. Stephen first occurs in this new context in 1113, in documents relating to the monastery of St Evroult, suggesting that he had by this time been appointed as count of Mortain. At the same time, or shortly thereafter, he acquired other lands in England, including the honours of Eye and Lancaster; and after 1120 a part of the honour of Eudo Dapifer. Mortain was a frontier lordship, and Stephen was brought almost immediately into warfare with the Capetians and the count of Anjou, one phase of which lasted from 1116 to 1119. In this conflict the ambition of the house of Blois, Stephen's family, and that of Henry I, Stephen's lord for his large estates, were intertwined. Stephen was active throughout this period as a military commander, coming 'at the head of a host' to protect Brie in Thibaud's absence (Suger, 184-5), and arriving 'with a force of knights' to rescue Thibaud at L'Aigle early in November 1118 (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 6.204-5). This was followed by an engagement at Alencon, an important border fortress, which commanded the main route from Anjou into Normandy. According to Orderic Vitalis, Sees and Alencon, and a number of border castles, were given by Henry I, after the forfeiture of Robert de Belleme, first to Count Thibaud. Thibaud then 'with the king's permission granted that honour to his brother Stephen in return for his share of the ancestral inheritance in France' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 6.196-7). 
For Stephen this was to prove a poor bargain. The townsmen of Alencon rebelled against their treatment by Stephen's garrison, were forced to give hostages, and called for help from Foulques, count of Anjou. Foulques came promptly and besieged the castle, and when Stephen and Thibaud, 'eager for glory' (Halphen and Poupardin, 156), brought up troops to relieve it they were defeated in battle outside the town walls. Alencon surrendered to the count of Anjou, who claimed a major victory, and Stephen's interest in it ceased. In the following year Stephen was one of those in command of 'a very large force of Normans' who attacked and burned Evreux (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 6.228-9). He was with the royal court when it crossed from Normandy into England in late November 1120. On this crossing the 'White Ship' went down, and the king's only legitimate son, William, was drowned. Stephen had disembarked from the ship, shortly before it sailed, 'because he was suffering from diarrhoea' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 6.306-7). Stephen was in England in December 1120 and in January 1121, when the king married again, but the charters of the early 1120s show him mainly in the context of Normandy. 
In 1125 Stephen was married to Matilda, the daughter and heir of Eustace (III), count of Boulogne. Boulogne was a small county within Flanders, and so formally subject to the king of France, but it was largely autonomous, and the counts of Boulogne had considerable estates in south-east England. Stephen's marriage moved him to the centre of Anglo-Norman political life. 
It may be that about the time that his marriage was being arranged Stephen was Henry I's preferred successor: he was Henry's protege; he was a grandson of William the Conqueror; and he was not William Clito, the son of Robert Curthose, duke of Normandy (Henry I's eldest brother), whom many favoured but whom Henry would under no circumstances accept. The situation changed when Matilda, Henry's daughter, empress of Germany, was widowed in 1125. In the following year the empress was brought back to England, and on 1 January 1127 at London a great council of magnates accepted that Matilda should be Henry's successor. The king insisted that the magnates swear an oath in support of the empress's claims, and Stephen was the first lay noble to do so. This was a determining event in Stephen's career: it hung over him throughout his period as king, and it haunts his reputation to this day. 
In March 1127 Charles the Good, count of Flanders, was assassinated, and William Clito was elected count in his place. Henry again called on Stephen as his agent, using him as his intermediary in constructing a coalition of magnates, who included the duke of Louvain and the count of Hainault, against Clito. In southern Flanders, in particular, the opposition of Stephen was troublesome for the new count: in his charter of 14 April 1127 for the burgesses of St Omer he said that when he was able to make peace with Stephen he would ensure that the burgesses secured freedom from toll at Wissant. It was only in late summer that the two men came to terms, 'because they were kinsmen' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 6.372-3), and concluded a three-year truce. Within a year William Clito was dead, and the Empress Matilda had been married to Geoffrey, count of Anjou. 
Stephen remained close to the king. The pipe roll of 1129/30 records that 'the count of Mortain' had been pardoned geld in twenty counties, and indicates that he had urban properties in Southwark, Winchester, Bedford, and Colchester (the English centre of the honour of Boulogne). In the early 1130s he was at court on a number of occasions: at Windsor at Christmas 1132; at Woodstock, Winchester, and Westminster during 1133; and at Rouen in 1135, where he witnessed the king's enactment promulgating the Peace of God. 
Henry I died during the night of 1 December 1135. He had never persuaded the magnates that the empress should rule in her own right; he had been unsympathetic to any suggestion that she should act as regent for her son; and so the process of election became crucial in determining who was to be king. Stephen moved rapidly: in the county of Boulogne when he heard of the king's death, he crossed immediately from Wissant to Dover, and made first for London. Here he was received by the citizens, who claimed a role in the election of the king. He went next to Winchester where his younger brother Henry had been bishop since 1129. It was Henry who was the main agent of Stephen's success, securing the support of Roger of Salisbury (died 1139), the head of the English administration, and of William de Pont de l'Arche, the royal treasurer. Stephen made a range of promises to the church, to follow what it defined as best practice in church-state relations, including canonical election to senior church offices. The concessions made to the lay magnates were more limited, but Stephen did make a limited concession on the extent of the forest, and was reported as having promised wider reforms, including the abolition of geld. In return for this, Stephen was crowned king by Archbishop William of Canterbury on 22 December 1135. At the time of his coronation, he promised to all his men of England 'all the liberties and good laws' that they had enjoyed under his predecessors ('Reg. RAN', 3, no. 270). 
On the other side of the channel the situation was initially less clear, for the barons of Normandy had elected as their ruler not Stephen but his elder brother, Thibaud of Blois; but when news of the coronation reached Normandy they accepted Stephen instead. The pope was informed of the coronation, and of the promises that had been made, and he confirmed Stephen's election on receiving news of them. The new king had solid support. He was a well-known and well-respected figure in the Anglo-Norman world, and also a very popular one: 'when he was count', said William of Malmesbury, 'he had by his good nature and the way he jested, sat and ate in the company even of the humblest, earned an affection that can hardly be imagined' (Malmesbury, 18). 
Henry I was buried at Reading Abbey on 5 January 1136 in Stephen's presence. On hearing of Henry's death David, king of Scots (died 1153), had moved south and captured several important towns, including Carlisle and Newcastle. Stephen, drawing on the ample resources of the English treasury, was able to muster a large army, and moved north to Durham, where he arrived in mid-February. A settlement was reached between the two kings. David kept Carlisle. Henry, his son, was granted the honour of Huntingdon and other English lands; he did homage for these to Stephen at York; and he accompanied Stephen to England, where he was present at the Easter court. This court was a splendid affair, the most impressive in living memory. By this time all but a handful of the magnates had come to terms with the king. 
The most notable absentee from the Easter court was the empress's half-brother Robert, earl of Gloucester (died 1147). He joined the royal entourage in early April as it moved up the Thames valley to Oxford; there he 'received everything that he wanted' ('Gesta Stephani', 14-15), according to the king's party, and paid homage. At Oxford also the king issued what has become known as his charter of liberties, in which he confirmed the promises he had made at the time of his coronation, while reserving 'my royal and lawful dignity' ('Reg. RAN', 3, no. 271). Another absentee from the court, closely identified with Henry I, was Baldwin de Revieres (died 1155), who fortified Exeter Castle against the king. Stephen conducted the siege of the castle in person. It lasted for three months, over a hot summer, after which the garrison surrendered, and was allowed to go free. This was a high-profile siege, conducted 'before the eyes of all the barons' ('Gesta Stephani', 38-9), and the divided counsels among the magnates, and the king's leniency, were its lasting memory. Later in the year the king was at Brampton in Huntingdonshire, and he spent Christmas at Westminster. 
Stephen spent most of the year 1137 in Normandy. He crossed the channel in mid-March, and probably spent Easter at Rouen. At some point soon after his arrival Stephen came to Evreux to meet his brother Thibaud, and granted him a pension of 2000 marks a year, to compensate him for any claims he might still have on the English crown. In May Stephen met with the king of France, and his eldest son, Eustace, did homage for Normandy. This diplomatic activity was intended as the prelude to military endeavour. May was also the month in which Geoffrey of Anjou invaded Normandy; and in June the king came to Lisieux hoping to besiege Argentan, which the Angevins controlled. 'His magnates, however, were opposed to a battle of this kind, and resolutely dissuaded the king from fighting' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 6.484-5). The magnates were divided among themselves. The king travelled in the early months of his reign with a large number of mercenary troops, under the control of the Fleming William d'Ypres (died 1165). Tension between them and the Normans was increased by suspicion of the loyalty of Robert of Gloucester. Robert claimed to have discovered a plot to capture him, and Archbishop Hugh of Rouen mediated between him and the king. Stephen's forces dissolved, and he was forced to conclude a truce with Geoffrey of Anjou in July. Geoffrey was also granted a pension of 2000 marks a year, and the first year's money was paid to him on the spot. There followed a desultory late summer and autumn, in which little was achieved. 
Stephen returned to England in December 1137. His immediate agenda in England had been set for him in Normandy, and it seems to have been instigated by the most influential of his counsellors, the Beaumont twins, Waleran, count of Meulan (died 1166), and Robert, earl of Leicester (died 1168). Bedford Castle was taken from Miles de Beauchamp after a five-week siege, and command of it given to Hugh Poer, younger brother of the Beaumonts. On hearing news of further Scottish incursions in Northumbria, in breach of the treaty made in 1136, Stephen again went north. Arriving early in February 1138 he drove the Scots back, and moved into and 'harried and burned a great part of the land of the king of Scotland' (Ric. Hexham, 155). His supply lines were overextended, however, and he returned south, spending Easter 1138 at Northampton. 
'After Easter the abominable madness of the traitors flared up' (Huntingdon, 712-13). There was a series of risings against the king throughout the west of England, from Geoffrey Talbot at Hereford to William de Mohun (died 1145) at Dunster. The key defection was that of Robert of Gloucester, who renounced his fealty to Stephen, claiming a breach of the agreements made with him, and asserting the justice of the empress's cause. In May and June the king took part in the siege of Hereford, which was surrendered to him. He then moved to attack Robert of Gloucester's stronghold at Bristol. It was heavily fortified, and the siege was abandoned, the king preferring easier targets. He took Castle Cary and Harptree in Somerset, and then moved north to Shrewsbury, which also he took after a siege. Here for the first time, aware of criticisms of his leniency with rebels, Stephen executed a number of the garrison: 'five men of rank were hanged' ('Chronicle of John of Worcester', 51). While the king was thus engaged, 'good fortune smiled on him in another part of the realm' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 6.522-3). A Scottish army under King David was halted and defeated immediately it had crossed the River Tees, by northern forces under the leadership of Archbishop Thurstan of York (died 1140). The engagement, on 22 August 1138, became known as the battle of the Standard (named from the saints' banners, borne by local militias, mounted together as an emblem of resistance). 
In autumn 1138 the king returned to Westminster, where a church council was convened by the papal legate Alberic of Ostia. This met in December 1138, and appointed Abbot Theobald of Bec (died 1161) archbishop of Canterbury. The legate, assisted by Stephen's queen, brokered a peace with the Scots, and this was subsequently ratified by the king at Nottingham shortly before Easter 1139. Although the Scots had been defeated in battle they made further gains in the peace, including Newcastle and the earldom of Northumbria. The king, it was said about this time, was prone to settle business more to the advantage of his opponents than himself. 
Stephen had to make concessions because his title to rule continued to be under challenge. The case for the Empress Matilda was made at the Lateran Council held in Rome at Easter 1139, her representatives arguing that Stephen was a usurper and a perjurer, and that he should be deposed. The pope adjourned the case, which was tantamount to a victory for the king. What the empress could not achieve diplomatically she now had to seek to achieve by military means. Rumours of her imminent arrival in England caused further divisions to open up within Stephen's camp. 
At midsummer 1139 the royal court met at Oxford. The king, on a flimsy pretext, and clearly influenced by his lay councillors (chief among them the Beaumont twins and Earl Alan of Richmond), arrested Roger of Salisbury and his two nephews, Alexander, bishop of Lincoln (died 1148), and Nigel, bishop of Ely (died 1169). The bishops were required to surrender their castles as security for their good behaviour. The king gained thereby, as he had planned, several strong and strategically placed castles, including Sherborne and Devizes, but he antagonized the leading churchmen, on whom up to this point he had relied heavily. Henry of Winchester, who had recently been appointed papal legate, convened a council at Winchester at the end of August 1139. The king and his supporters, chief among them Archbishop Hugh of Rouen and Aubrey (II) de Vere (died 1141), sustained the main point of their case, that in time of war the crown should have the right to garrison strategic fortresses. Roger of Salisbury's disgrace was followed shortly afterwards by his death in December 1139. Stephen moved quickly to Salisbury, confiscated the bishop's treasure, conveniently piled up on the high altar of the cathedral church, and spent Christmas there. 
Stephen now confronted a direct challenge to his crown, from the empress in person. She had landed in the autumn of 1139, with Robert of Gloucester, and sought refuge at Arundel with Henry I's widow, Adeliza of Louvain (died 1151). Stephen moved along the south coast from Corfe, which was held against him by Baldwin de Revieres, to confront the threat. Adeliza withdrew her protection. Henry of Winchester, always sure of his opinion and subtle in arguing its acceptance, persuaded the king to allow the empress a safe conduct to Bristol, to help contain the Angevin threat in one place. This reasoning was a good deal too subtle for most who heard the story of the empress's escape: 'quite incredible' was the view of a source normally supportive of the king ('Gesta Stephani', 88-9). 
While the empress was allowed to strengthen her grip on the west country, Stephen tried, with only limited success, to weaken his opponents in other areas. His itinerary in the first six months of 1140 gives an indication of how after the empress landed he lost the political initiative, and was thereafter 'dragged hither and thither all over England' ('Gesta Stephani', 68-9). He commemorated Henry I's anniversary at Reading early in January; he besieged Bishop Nigel at Ely, and drove him from his diocese; he then marched the length of England to Cornwall, where the empress had appointed her half-brother Reginald as earl. Probably at Easter Stephen was at Winchester, and then returned to Worcester, where he had been on a number of occasions both in 1138 and 1139, having granted the earldom to Waleran, count of Meulan. He then travelled via Oxford to London, where he was at Whitsuntide, with only the most exiguous court to celebrate the feast. This was followed by an expedition to East Anglia, where the king took Hugh Bigod's castle at Bungay. The king was responding to emergencies as they arose. 
With the west country lost to the empress, and with the Scots in control of the northern counties of England, the north midlands became established as the frontier zone between Stephen and his opponents. The key figure in the region was Ranulf (II), earl of Chester (died 1153). Ranulf inherited through his mother, the Countess Lucy, claims to the castle of Lincoln. Shortly before Christmas 1140 the king met Ranulf at Lincoln and went some way to accepting these claims. Shortly after the feast day, however, acting on complaints from the citizens, Stephen returned to Lincoln and commenced a siege of the castle. Robert of Gloucester (Earl Ranulf's brother-in-law) brought forces from the west country, including 'a dreadful and unendurable number of Welsh' ('Gesta Stephani', 110-11). There followed the one significant set-piece battle of the reign, the battle of Lincoln, fought on 2 February 1141. The king had a large army, but not all his supporters expected to fight, and many of them fled the field. The king, dismounted, fought bravely, wielding a double-headed Norse axe to good effect, and gained some renown thereby; but he was captured, and, having been brought before the empress, was taken to Bristol Castle. There he was kept in increasingly strict confinement. 
The expectation was that Stephen's captivity would be permanent. In this expectation the empress was accepted by the church as legitimate ruler, and given the title 'lady of the English' ('domina Anglorum'). Those acting for Stephen, most notably his queen, sought his release, on condition that he enter religion or remain abroad; and, with more confidence, sought the grant to Eustace of the lands his father had held before he became king. The empress's intransigence on this matter was one factor which drew the legate back to his brother's side. Having followed Stephen's path to the crown, taking the two capital cities of Winchester and London, the empress was driven from each in turn. In the retreat from Winchester in mid-September Robert of Gloucester was captured. After complex negotiations it was agreed that the king and the earl be released in exchange one for another, each party thereafter to maintain its cause as it had done before. Stephen was released on 1 November, and early in December a further church council restored him to power and excommunicated his opponents, 'excepting only the lady of the Angevins herself' (Malmesbury, 63). Stephen spent Christmas 1141 at Canterbury, and the routine crown wearing on the feast day took on a new significance. The king had come once more into his kingdom. 
If King Stephen had regained England, however, he was in the process of losing Normandy. He had had no effective control of the duchy since 1137, and his chief Norman agents had become sucked into the civil war in England: these included William d'Ypres, Richard de Lucy (died 1179), and William de Roumare (died 1161). Orderic wrote movingly and at length of the deteriorating condition of the duchy: 'she suffered continually from terrible disasters and daily feared still worse, for she saw to her sorrow that the whole province was without an effective ruler' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 6.492-5). The Normans, however, resisted the Angevins until they had news of Stephen's capture at the battle of Lincoln. This was the turning point: 'when he had news that his wife had won the day' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 6.546-7), Geoffrey of Anjou invaded the duchy again, and invited its magnates to accept him. Again they turned to Thibaud of Blois. When he declined, many of them (most notably Waleran, count of Meulan) felt they had no choice but to come to terms. The conquest of Normandy involved several campaigns. In 1142 Geoffrey captured Lower Normandy, the centre and west of the county, including Stephen's own lordship, the county of Mortain, in taking which he was assisted by Robert of Gloucester. In 1143 he moved through Upper Normandy, and in January 1144 he came to Rouen, where in April he was invested as duke of Normandy. His title was accepted by the church and by the French king. 
Geoffrey of Anjou's control of Normandy was never challenged by Stephen, who struggled to maintain an effective lordship within England. The empress's party remained strongly in control of Bristol and Gloucester, and since the majority of the marcher lords supported her the king had no influence in Wales. The 'Gesta Stephani' describes the west country as a region of peace under the lordship not of the king but of Robert of Gloucester. A similar situation applied in the northern counties, where English lordship was disputed by the Scots. The treaty of 1139 had allowed the northern baronage to accept the lordship of the Scottish king, 'and this many of them did' (Ric. Hexham, 177-8). David of Scots issued his own coin at Carlisle and Newcastle, just as the empress did at Cardiff, Bristol, and elsewhere. Stephen was only secure in south-east England, where he had the support of the towns and enjoyed a strong territorial lordship. Only here could he collect taxes; and, since money and power were synonymous, only here could he maintain his regality. 
With his lordship restricted, and with his financial backing severely depleted, Stephen needed the support of the magnates if he was to make any headway. To do this it was essential that he harness their private ambitions to his own ends. In the 1140s, although he had some isolated successes, he failed in this overall objective. His first campaign after his release, in the early months of 1142, was in Yorkshire, where he sought to impose his authority on the local earls, William d'Aumale, earl of York (died 1179), and Alan of Brittany, earl of Richmond. This was cut short by illness, the king being detained at Northampton between Easter and Whitsun, and forces he had mustered there had to be dispersed. It is interesting to note that the empress was reported as being indisposed at very much the same time, and tempting to suggest that each of these illnesses was as much psychological as physical. The strains of fighting a civil war were taking their toll. 
The empress was now based at Oxford, and it was there that hostilities were resumed. Stephen, having earlier taken the earl of Gloucester's castle at Wareham in Dorset, came to Oxford in late September 1142, and blockaded the empress within the castle. After a siege of three months, just before Christmas, the empress managed to effect her escape, and the garrison surrendered. In 1143 the campaigning moved south into Wessex. Robert of Gloucester recaptured Wareham, and Stephen's efforts to take it a second time were unsuccessful. Henry of Winchester committed troops on the king's side, but at a battle on 1 July 1143 he and the king were routed at Wilton. They escaped unharmed, but William Martel was captured, and Sherborne was surrendered to effect his release. 
In the autumn of 1143, with the loss of Normandy imminent, and possibly in fear of a subsequent Angevin invasion, Stephen moved against Geoffrey de Mandeville, earl of Essex and custodian of the Tower of London. Geoffrey was arrested at court at St Albans, and, following a pattern that was becoming familiar, only released when he surrendered his castles. In his place, and into several of his offices, the king promoted Richard de Lucy, who became his most influential counsellor, and later enjoyed similar status under Henry II. Mandeville on his release went into revolt, fortifying Ramsey Abbey and a number of castles within the fenland, and Stephen was forced to follow him there: this revolt collapsed with Mandeville's death in mid-September 1144. While the king was thus occupied, Robert of Gloucester's men attacked the garrisons at Malmesbury and at Oxford, royal castles whose positions rendered them exposed. In 1145 Faringdon was set up as a siege-castle against Oxford, and the king took it. 
After the capture of Faringdon, in the view of some commentators, 'the king's fortunes began to change for the better and took an upward turn' (Huntingdon, 746-7). One of the sons of Robert of Gloucester, Philip, surrendered Cricklade to the king and accepted his authority. A more significant move was that made by Ranulf of Chester. Stephen had moved more than once to try to recapture Lincoln Castle. In 1145-6 Ranulf came to terms with the king at Stamford, and helped him to recapture Bedford Castle and to attack Wallingford. He sought the king's help against the Welsh, but the residue of distrust against him among the royal courtiers led to his being arrested at Northampton, and compelled to surrender his castles. The most important of these was Lincoln, and there at the scene of his earlier defeat Stephen kept the Christmas court of 1146. The king had emerged as the stronger of two weak adversaries, who lacked the resources to mount major campaigns. 
In the late 1140s the accidents of mortality worked for a time in the king's favour. Robert of Gloucester died on 31 October 1147, and the empress, who had relied on him for both material and moral support, left for Normandy early in 1148. The focus of the ambition of both parties was now on the next generation. Eustace was knighted in 1146-7, and given the title count of Boulogne; he had his own household, and the opportunity to demonstrate his leadership qualities. The empress's eldest son, Henry, who was two or three years younger than Eustace, chafed to assert his own independence, and gain recognition in England that he was 'the lawful heir' to the throne ('Gesta Stephani', 204-5). He came to England on his own initiative in 1147, attacked his renegade cousin Philip of Gloucester at Cricklade, but had no success and soon ran out of funds. It was Stephen, 'always full of pity and compassion' ('Gesta Stephani', 206-7), who sent Henry the money to pay off his troops and return home. This escapade, revealing of both parties, went almost unnoticed. 
Henry returned to England again in the spring of 1149, and went north to Carlisle, where he was knighted by his uncle David, king of Scots. Ranulf of Chester was there at the same time, and in an agreement with David was granted control of the honour of Lancaster, one of Stephen's own lordships. The intention was to attack Yorkshire, and then move south, but Stephen, forewarned of this, moved an army to York, where he remained throughout August. Henry made his way south via the marches, and Eustace followed him there. Within the area under Angevin control, and particularly in Gloucestershire and Wiltshire, the king's party adopted a scorched earth policy, 'taking and plundering everything that they found' ('Gesta Stephani', 220-1). Henry returned to Normandy early in 1150, having not materially altered the balance of power between the two sides. 
The lack of confidence in policy and of trust in individuals, manifest in secular affairs during the 1140s, came to spread to the church also. All parties, sick of civil war, wanted the matter settled, but they had differing views as to how this should be done. Stephen wanted Eustace to succeed, and sought to secure this by following Capetian custom, which would have allowed his son to be crowned in his lifetime. The coronation would need the support of the church, but this he could no longer rely upon, in large part because his reputation as a reformer had come into question. The promise of free election at the time of his coronation did not prevent Stephen from following custom and taking a close view of church appointments. He and Henry of Winchester actively promoted the interests of their relatives. The king's own illegitimate son Gervase was made abbot of Westminster in 1138; Henry de Sully, the son of his elder brother William, became abbot of Fecamp in 1140; and Hugh, an illegitimate son of his elder brother Thibaud, became abbot of St Benet of Hulme in 1141. Among the secular clergy whose interests were fostered, Hugh du Puiset (died 1195), the son of his sister Agnes, was appointed treasurer of York in 1143, and became bishop of Durham in 1153, while Hugh's predecessor as treasurer of York, William Fitzherbert (died 1154), was Stephen's candidate for the archbishopric of York after the death of Thurstan in 1140. 
After the loss of Henry of Winchester's legation in 1143 the easy coincidence of family and national interest proved more difficult to justify. William Fitzherbert's election to York was disputed, and in 1147 Henry Murdac (died 1153) was consecrated despite Stephen's opposition. In the same year the king's shortlisting of the abbots of Westminster, Fecamp, and St Benet as his candidates for the vacant see of Lincoln was brushed aside by the pope, Eugenius III, 'indignantly and with harsh language' ('Letters and Charters of Gilbert Foliot', no. 75). Stephen, blaming Archbishop Theobald for these reverses, refused to allow him to attend the Council of Rheims in March-April 1148. Theobald went none the less, and his intercession alone saved Stephen from the excommunication that the pope stood ready to pronounce. Stephen relented his opposition only early in 1152, when he accepted Henry Murdac in the hope that the papacy in return would favour the coronation of Eustace. Theobald and the English hierarchy played for time, declining to crown Eustace because this would set a precedent, which should not be done while the rights remained in dispute. The dispute was now close to resolution. 
The key events of the early 1150s took place within Normandy. When Henry returned from England, early in 1150, he was invested by his father as duke of Normandy. The French king, Louis VII ('r'. 1137-80), seeing the potential for the growth of a new power in northern France, was initially hostile, but in late August 1151 he accepted Henry's homage for the duchy. Henry immediately made preparations to invade England, but he was detained by the death of his father early in September, after which he became additionally count of Anjou. A further invasion of England was planned early in 1152, on the urgent pleas of his supporters there, who claimed the king's party were gaining the upper hand. Henry, however, was again delayed, for the marriage of Louis VII and Eleanor of Aquitaine was in the process of being annulled by the church, and in May Henry was married to Eleanor. 
Henry of Anjou had gone in just two years from landless adventurer to lord of half of France, but he had made many enemies, and Louis VII formed an alliance against him, which included his younger brother Geoffrey, who had claims on Anjou, and Eustace, his rival for the English crown. For a while all hung in the balance: 'almost all of the Normans thought that Duke Henry would rapidly lose all of his possessions' ('Chronica Roberti de Torigneio' in 'Chronicles', ed. Howlett, 4.165-6). Henry's rivals had separate ambitions, however, and his control over Normandy could not be shaken. This proved decisive. When Henry sailed for England in January 1153 he had proved himself in diplomacy, and now had the resources to back up the hereditary claim that many in England accepted. He alone offered the prospect of the reunion of England and Normandy. 
Stephen no longer had anything to gain by diplomacy, and he sought battle. He confronted Henry first at Malmesbury, but he found his support drifting away, and was informed that several of the leading magnates 'had already secretly sent envoys to make their peace with the duke' ('Gesta Stephani', 234-5). Stephen was forced to make a truce, and following this Henry went first to Bristol and Gloucester, and then commenced a largely triumphal passage through the midlands. In this region Stephen was still for the most part the nominal lord, but the peace had been kept by a series of magnate treaties. The impetus towards a more general peace became irresistible. The two armies confronted each other once more at Wallingford early in August. Here the protagonists were persuaded to allow negotiations on the details of a peace to begin. 
It seems likely that the main outline of a peace settlement had been clear for some time, for there had been discussions in 1140, in 1141 (while Stephen was in captivity), and again in 1146. Its essential feature was that Stephen should remain king for his lifetime, for he was the anointed king, but that Henry should succeed him, since he was generally viewed as 'the lawful heir' ('Gesta Stephani', 204-5, 214-15, 222-5). The agreement was ratified at a meeting of the two parties at Winchester on 6 November. By this time Eustace was dead, and his agreed rights to his father's territories as they had been before 1135 had passed to the last surviving son, William. 
The peace settlement was carefully constructed, and some parts of the agreement were set down in a written instrument. Stephen adopted Henry as his heir, and Henry then did homage to Stephen; William did homage to Henry for extensive territories that were carefully specified; and the baronage of each side did homage to Stephen and to Henry if they had not done so before. The ritual of the exchange of homages was important, for it recognized the good faith of both sides, and prevented the wholesale expropriation of the losers that so often follows from civil war. The main castles not already under Angevin control were entrusted to custodians who swore to release them to Henry on Stephen's death, and until that time, Stephen's charter concluded: 'Everywhere in England I will act with the advice of the duke, but throughout England I will exercise royal rights' ('Reg. RAN', 3, no. 272). It was agreed also that many recently built castles, the most visible symbols of the civil war, would be destroyed, and that all foreign mercenaries should be repatriated. There were to be several meetings at which homages were sworn, and the progress of the peace reviewed. At one of these Henry protested at the slow pace of demolition of castles. 
For most people the clearest sign of change was the circulation of a new coinage, with its distinctive bearded effigy of the king. Henry returned to Normandy at Easter 1154. Stephen went on progress in northern England, 'encircling the bounds of England with regal pomp, and showing himself off as if he were a new king' (William of Newburgh, 'Historia rerum Anglicarum', ed. R. Howlett, Rolls Series, 1884, 94). He may already have been a sick man, for there is a distinct lack of incident and of urgency in his last months. Meetings with the count of Flanders suggest a preoccupation with the concerns of his territorial lordship. After one of these, on 25 October 1154: 'the king was suddenly seized with a violent pain in his gut, accompanied by a flow of blood (as had happened to him before), and after he had taken to his bed in the monks' lodgings [Dover Priory] he died. ('Works of Gervase of Canterbury', 1.159)' 

Stephen's queen, Matilda, had died in May 1152. This was more than a private reverse for the king, for the queen, 'subtle and steadfast' ('Gesta Stephani', 122-3), had been his constant companion and resolute supporter. In the years of struggle she took an active role, bringing troops to besiege Dover Castle in 1138, and mustering an army on the south bank opposite London in the summer of 1141. She took a prominent part in all the peace negotiations during the reign, including those with the Scots in 1138-9. She was lady of the honour of Boulogne, and the charters she issued -- of which at least thirty survive -- show her own voice, at times peremptory, and her involvement in the detail of estate management. There was no call for a formal regency, other than in the particular circumstances of the summer of 1141, but the charters show an easy confidence that she could act for her husband. She was frequently in the company of Archbishop Theobald in her last years, and she was the most credible of those who argued for Eustace's succession. 
There is every indication, though no positive proof, that the marriage of Stephen and Matilda was close and affectionate. They had five children that are recorded, three boys and two girls. The eldest son was Eustace, who is mentioned in a charter that must date from before summer 1131. The other sons were William and Baldwin: William became Earl Warenne on his marriage to the heir of the honour 'c'.1148 and died in 1159; Baldwin died young, and was buried in London. The daughters were Mary of Blois and Matilda. Mary was professed and died a Benedictine nun, but her career in the intervening period was not without incident: she came first to the house of Stratford atte Bow, bringing with her the manor of Lillechurch in Kent and a collection of nuns-in-waiting; evicted from there they retreated to Lillechurch, where Mary became the first prioress of a new house; after her father's death, in 1155, she became abbess of Romsey. With the death of William in 1159, however, the male line failed, and she was brought out of the cloister, made countess of Boulogne, and married to Matthew, brother of the count of Flanders, with whom she had two daughters; she then went back to the cloister, and died in 1182. Matilda's story was as sad as Mary's was colourful: born 'c'.1134, she was betrothed two years later to Waleran, count of Meulan, but she died soon afterwards, and was buried in London. 
The order of birth of the children cannot be established with certainty, but Eustace was certainly the eldest son, and Matilda may have been the youngest child. A possible order is: Mary, Eustace, Baldwin, William, and Matilda. In addition three illegitimate children of Stephen are known, a distinctly modest tally by the standards of Henry I. The eldest was certainly Gervase, who cannot have been born much later than 1110, since he became abbot of Westminster in 1138, after which his mother, Dameta, was ensconced in some style in the abbey manor of Chelsea. There were also William, 'the earl's brother', who occurs in the entourage of William, Earl Warenne, in the 1150s, and an unnamed daughter married to Herve, count of Leon. 
Stephen was a conventional man, and his piety seems to have been conventional too. As count of Mortain he was influenced by the neighbouring reformed monastery at Savigny. As lord of Lancaster he founded a Savignac house at Furness, which became the most important house of the congregation in England, and as count of Boulogne he was associated also with the Savignac foundation of Coggeshall in Essex. Several other Savignac houses were founded in England in the early part of Stephen's reign. The links with the mother house in southern Normandy, however, proved problematic when Normandy was lost to the Angevins in the early 1140s. A schism followed within the order, and it merged with the Cistercians in 1147. Stephen's church patronage was redirected. He and Matilda were already associated with the templars, and with several London houses, including Bermondsey Priory and Holy Trinity, Aldgate, where two of their children were buried. The prior of Bermondsey became the first abbot of a new Cluniac monastery at Faversham in Kent, commenced in 1147, on the model of Henry I's foundation at Reading. There Matilda was buried in 1152, there Eustace in 1153, and there Stephen in 1154. It was to be the mausoleum not of a dynasty but of a nuclear family, and its possessions needed special protection in the peace agreement of 1153. When the monasteries were dissolved in the reign of Henry VIII, Stephen's tomb was stripped for its lead, and his bones cast in the neighbouring creek. 
Stephen had risen in the court of Henry I through high birth, loyal service, and impeccable manners. He was a model courtier. As king he was in the public eye, and a good range of chronicles allows an insight into his attitudes. He was a good-natured man, not easily given to anger. When his anger was roused it was directed at those who did not meet his standards of loyalty and proper behaviour. In 1137 in Normandy he was angry when some of the leading men left court without taking their leave of him; in 1138 the bishop of Bath was given custody of Geoffrey Talbot but then released him, and 'when this reached the king's ears he was livid' ('Chronicle of John of Worcester', 50); he was similarly irate when the empress landed in 1139, not with her but rather with those 'whose duty it was to guard the ports' ('Chronicle of John of Worcester', 55); while in 1146 he was recorded as highly displeased when Reginald, earl of Cornwall, who was one of his opponents, was captured while enjoying safe conduct. 
Stephen appears to have been a man very concerned about appearances, preoccupied with feudal etiquette, with proper behaviour in the very structured environment of the Anglo-Norman court. He was conscious of his royal dignity: his crown wearings were splendid affairs. He was particularly tenacious of rights over castles, and, granted his long apprenticeship in northern France, he may have seen these rights as being as much customary as regalian. It was in pursuit of castles that he was accused, on several occasions, of acting against the expectations of the chivalric order in arresting men at court. He agonized over such decisions. He felt personally the disloyalty of those who renounced his lordship. According to William of Malmesbury, the king would say to his supporters: 'When they have chosen me king, why do they abandon me? By the birth of God, I will never be called a king without a throne!' (Malmesbury, 22). If anywhere in the contemporary sources, here is the man. He never would be a king without a throne. But as his reign progressed, increasingly he became a king with little else, with the shadow not the substance of regality. 
Stephen in the historical literature has always been seen as a weak king, at times almost a cipher, when compared with his predecessor, Henry I, and his successor, Henry II. There was no peace in his day. Early in the following reign, the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' wrote memorably of the nineteen years 'when Christ and his saints were asleep' ('ASC', 200). In the late nineteenth century, when the modern study of Stephen's reign may be said to begin, the disorders of the reign were subsumed in one word, 'anarchy'. In subsequent scholarship the phrase 'the anarchy', without qualification, is invariably synonymous with the reign of Stephen. The reasons for the disorder have been much debated, from the twelfth century onwards. For Henry II, and for those who wrote while his lineage ruled England, Stephen was a usurper, who had seized power in despite of a public oath, and that alone was enough to explain his ultimate failure. The selfish ambition of the baronage, when combined with the king's weakness, would reduce England to civil war. 'When the traitors saw that he was a mild man, and gentle, and good, and did not exact the full penalties of the law, they perpetrated every enormity', said the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' ('ASC', 198-9); and this tradition of interpretation has long remained influential. 'The barons were in earnest only for their own interests', according to William Stubbs (1.327), and following him J. H. Round produced what was intended as an exemplary study of Geoffrey de Mandeville, 'the most perfect and typical presentment of the feudal and anarchic spirit that stamps the reign of Stephen' (Round, 'Geoffrey de Mandeville', v). 
In studies of the later twentieth century the barons have come to be seen less as leaders than as followers, increasingly passive observers of a power struggle between two dynasties. Reflecting this tradition of historical writing, and particularly influential in establishing a wide public interest in a messy period of English politics, have been the novels of Ellis Peters (Edith Pargeter), which deal with the adventures of her monk-detective, Brother Cadfael. Here in a surprising series of best-sellers, with the merest hints of sex, and the very minimum of necessary violence, is depicted the impact of the civil war on local communities, and the problem of loyalty for individuals when both Stephen and the empress could claim to be the legitimate successor of Henry I. Conflicts between kinsmen, as contemporaries recognized, were the most difficult of all to resolve: they were indeed the very devil. The conflict between Stephen and the empress, between Eustace and Henry, was settled by agreement not warfare; and for this all the parties, the protagonists and the baronage, can take some credit. When Henry II succeeded Stephen as king of England he had much yet to do, but in terms of his title he had nothing left to prove. 


@@@@@


doc= 26366


Whitby, Stephen of (d. 1112?), abbot of Whitby and of St Mary's, York, was one of the leading figures in the revival of monastic life in the north after the Norman conquest. Almost all that is known of him derives from a narrative account which allegedly came from his own hand. The authenticity of this has been much debated, but scholarly opinion now tends to favour acceptance of the narrative as the genuine tradition preserved at St Mary's. Stephen was probably of noble birth, but his first recorded appearance was as a monk at the newly revived monastery at Whitby ('c'.1078), and shortly afterwards he was elected abbot, taking control of the community from the hermit Reinfrid. However, within a few years hostility from Whitby's lay patron, William de Percy (died 1096), forced Stephen and a section of the community to move to the former monastery at Lastingham, granted by William I at Stephen's request as a secure retreat from pirate attacks. By 1086 they had moved again, to the outskirts of the city of York. Stephen had taken the advice of Count Alan, of Brittany and Richmond -- a man who had been well known to him before his conversion -- that an urban location would be advantageous for attracting endowments, and had accepted his offer of the church of St Olave in Marygate. 'Domesday Book' records the abbot of York, unnamed, as a Yorkshire landholder. Two years later, in 1088 or 1089, Stephen secured an even greater success when William II took the community into royal patronage, and provided a larger site adjacent to St Olave's, where the king himself is said to have cut the first turf in preparation for the building of St Mary's Abbey. 
The creation of a powerful monastic corporation close to the city brought Stephen into conflict with Archbishop Thomas (I) of York (died 1100), and William II stepped in to resolve the dispute and compensate the archbishop for losses that he claimed to have sustained as a result of the foundation of St Mary's. Other sources attest a close relationship between Stephen and his royal patron. William entrusted Stephen with the task of arresting Abbot Benedict of Selby, and during the primacy dispute with Canterbury Archbishop Thomas (II) (died 1114) requested Stephen to use his influence with Henry I to favour York's cause. Stephen took a leading role in ecclesiastical affairs, and with Abbot Hugh of Selby and other prominent churchmen attended the translation of the relics of St Cuthbert at Durham in 1104. Stephen probably died in 1112, and was certainly dead by 1113, when he had been succeeded by Abbot Richard. 
A key figure in the formative years of what was to become the premier religious house in the north, during his lifetime Stephen was described by Simeon of Durham as an energetic and efficient abbot of his monastery. He maintained excellent relations with successive kings, and charter evidence attests to the success which St Mary's enjoyed during his abbacy in attracting endowments from all the major barons of the region. 


@@@@@


doc= 26367


Tours, Etienne de (d. 1193), administrator, was a member of the lesser baronage of the south Touraine. He appears as a royal chamberlain in the pipe roll of 1158, and was keeper of the king's treasure at Chinon. He became seneschal of Anjou in 1163, and still held that post on 12 June 1189, when he fired Le Mans to defend it from Philip Augustus. Richard I, on his accession, imprisoned Etienne and compelled him to surrender the royal treasure in his charge. Richard of Devizes, who calls him Etienne de Marcay, says that he was imprisoned at Winchester, and had to pay a heavy fine for his release ('Chronicon Richardi Divisensis', 4-5). William of Newburgh relates that he had been raised from a humble position by Henry II, and was after his release kept in authority by Richard I. Believing that Richard would never return from the crusades, and relying on the prophecy of a wizard, Etienne exercised his power in an arbitrary fashion. The wizard foretold that he would die 'in pluma', and he duly met his death at a fortress of that name in 1193, shortly before Richard's return. Etienne has sometimes been identified wrongly with Stephen of Thornham (d. 1213/14). 


@@@@@


doc= 26368


Exeter, Stephen of (b. 1246, d. in or after 1275?), annalist, is the presumed author of the work known as 'Annales domus Montis Fernandi ab anno XLV usque ad annum MCCLXXIV', the annals of Multyfarnham. The original manuscript is in Trinity College, Dublin. According to the annals, Stephen was born in 1246, and entered the religious life in 1263; the mendicant entries of that period indicate that he joined the Franciscan order. He was probably a member of the family of Richard of Exeter, justiciar of Ireland, who is mentioned eight times in the annals (these include his three marriages, the birth of his son John, and his assumption of the position of justiciar of Ireland). The only association with Multyfarnham (Westmeath) is that, according to James Ware, the manuscript may have been in the library of Sir Francis Shane, who sacked the friary there in 1601. The annals expand after 1261 and internal evidence suggests a date of composition of 1272-4 and a Connacht origin. An explanation for the cessation of the annals in 1274 may be that the author was absent from the country; in 1274-5 a Franciscan friar, Stephen of Exeter, was sent by the justiciar of Ireland, Geoffrey de Geneville, to the king to report on the state of Ireland. He returned to Ireland in 1275; it is not known when he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 26369


Stephen, Sir Alfred (1802-1894), judge and politician in Australia, was born on 20 August 1802 at Basseterre, St Kitts, West Indies, the fourth son of the ten children of John Stephen (1771-1834) and his wife, Mary Anne, 'nee' Pasmore (1774?-1863). His father, the youngest brother of James Stephen (1758-1832), practised law at St Kitts, London, and New South Wales, where he was appointed solicitor-general in 1824 and judge in 1825. 
Alfred Stephen went to England in 1804 with his mother. He was for a year (1810) at Charterhouse, and afterwards at school in Martock, Somerset, and at Honiton grammar school, Devon. In 1815 he returned with his father to St Kitts, where he was a lieutenant in the militia and read a little law. In 1818 he was sent to London, entered Lincoln's Inn, and became a pupil successively of his cousins Henry John and James Stephen junior. He was remarkable for his high spirits and good humour, which led him into adventures at Vauxhall and elsewhere, but he did not neglect his professional training, and was called to the bar on 20 November 1823. At the church of St George the Martyr, Holborn, on 22 June 1824 he married Virginia, the daughter of Matthew Consett. In August of that year they sailed in the 'Cumberland' for Van Diemen's Land. 
On the separation of that colony from New South Wales in May 1825 Stephen was appointed solicitor-general with the right of private practice. He took part in framing the new laws and organizing courts. A cocksure young man, in 1828 he questioned the validity of all land titles in the colony (made in the name of the governor rather than that of the sovereign) and later exposed extensive land jobbery. He found difficulty in discharging both his public and his private duties, but complained that his salary was insufficient for him to give up private practice. The introduction of trial by jury, which he supported, involved a long struggle, but was effected in 1834. During a visit to England, in January 1833 Stephen was appointed attorney-general. Afterwards he framed more than a hundred statutes, some of which were adopted in other colonies. 
The loss of his wife in childbirth (leaving seven children) and the death of a brother, both in 1837, left Stephen very ill, and he resigned his position. He married, on 21 July 1838, Eleanor Martha Pickard (died 1886), the daughter of the Revd W. Bedford, in St David's, Hobart Town, and practised at the bar until 1839, when he was appointed judge of the supreme court of New South Wales and moved to Sydney. In 1844 he was made acting chief justice (confirmed in office on 2 June 1845). As a judge he was distinguished for courtesy and firmness. His decisions were often models of lucidity and showed his versatility over the whole range of the law, but were also pragmatic and narrow in application, rarely forming precedents. He would on occasion sit in court until 6 a.m. and begin a summing-up at 4 a.m. with a perfectly fresh memory. As a judicial administrator of great ability he made the law respected in New South Wales in the face of such obstacles as personal antipathies between the judges, antique procedure, excessive litigation, and inadequate accommodation. 
Every year Stephen went on circuit, involving difficult and dangerous journeys on land or by sea. Although a humane man, he had a reputation for judicial severity. He supported the retention of capital punishment, which he believed to be the only penalty dreaded by criminals, and in the upsurge of bushranging in the 1860s persuaded the government to carry the 'Felons Apprehension Act' (1865), which made it a felony to harbour or assist a bushranger. His retirement in 1873 was received with strong expressions of sympathy from his colleagues and a gift of 1000 guineas, raised by public subscription. 
As the first president (1856-7) of the nominated legislative council after responsible government, Stephen had carefully prepared all the rules and forms of the house. He was again a member of the council from 1875 to 1890. Improving legislation that came up from the assembly, acting as unofficial parliamentary draftsman, and serving on sundry standing and select committees afforded him ''much' pleasure' (A. Stephen to H. Parkes, 18 March 1879, Parkes MSS). 
In 1870-72 Stephen chaired the law reform commission. The 'Criminal Law Consolidation Bill', one of the three measures recommended by the commission, was, according to J. M. Bennett, 'profoundly influenced by Stephen alone and by the stimulus he had derived from reforms to the English criminal law effected by Sir James Fitzjames Stephen' ('A History of the Supreme Court of New South Wales', 1974, 73). The bill was improved by Stephen during its long passage and eventually became law in 1883. 'The Criminal Law Manual', comprising the act, was published by Sir Alfred and Alexander Oliver that year. 
In 1879 Stephen opposed a divorce bill introduced in the legislature, but observation of the numerous cases of hardship caused by the desertion of wives led him to change his mind. In 1886 he introduced a bill permitting divorce for desertion, habitual drunkenness, imprisonment for at least seven years, and assault on the petitioner, which was carried the following year, but the measure was refused the royal assent in London. Stephen replied to W. E. Gladstone upon this question in the 'Contemporary Review' for June 1891. In spite of a strong opposition, especially from the clergy, the 'Divorce Extension Act' was assented to by the queen in council in July 1892. 
Having administered the government in 1872 after the departure of Lord Belmore, Stephen was lieutenant-governor from 1875 until 1891, and on three further occasions acted as governor. He served on the council of education from November 1873 until its suppression in 1882, on the senate of the university, and on the councils of many other public institutions; he was an enthusiastic trustee of the National Art Gallery of New South Wales. He was knighted in 1846, was made CB in 1862, KCMG in 1874, GCMG in 1884, and became a privy councillor in 1893. 
Stephen visited England again in 1860, but otherwise never left the Australian colonies, where the vigour of intellect which he retained until the end and his charm of character gave him the position of a venerated patriarch, notwithstanding 'his great failing in meddling in matters that did not concern him' (Roger Therry to James McArthur, 11 Jan 1861, McArthur MSS). Stephen himself regretted having 'said too many things in the excitement of debate, & speaking in Court wh: I have found to be quite mistaken' (A. Stephen to H. Parkes, n.d., Parkes MSS). Continuing to read widely, he was full of intellectual interests, and welcomed many distinguished visitors to Australia; J. A. Froude, in 'Oceana' (1886), observed that Stephen shared 'the family perception of the ridiculous and humorous side of things' (p. 162). Stephen kept up a close correspondence to the last with his English relatives, including Leslie Stephen, his godson. In his last years he wrote some interesting 'Jottings from Memory' (privately printed, 1889 and 1891) describing his early life. His frame was spare and very active and he remained interested in many charities, especially in the Industrial Blind Institution. He died at his home, 24 College Street, Sydney, on 15 October 1894 and was buried in St Jude's churchyard there on 16 October amid many demonstrations of respect. 
Stephen and his first wife had five sons and four daughters (two children died in infancy), while he and his second wife produced four sons and five daughters; his descendants at the time of his death numbered over a hundred. One of his sons, Alfred, was a canon of the Anglican cathedral in Sydney, and another, Matthew Henry, became judge of the supreme court in the colony. 


@@@@@


doc= 26370


Stephen, Edward Jones (1822-1885), composer, was the son of Robert Jones and Jane Stephen of Rhyd-y-sarn, near Maentwrog, Merioneth, where he was born in November 1822. He was baptized Edward Jones at St Michael's Church, Ffestiniog, on 15 December 1822, but adopted his grandfather's name Stephen as an additional surname when he was at Bala Congregational college because there was another student there called Edward Jones. After a few years' attendance at Penrallt-goch School he was apprenticed to his brother, a clothier. About 1841 he began preaching, and in 1843 entered the Bala Congregational college where he remained for three years. In 1847 he was ordained pastor of Horeb Chapel at Dwygyfylchi, near Penmaen-mawr, Caernarvonshire, but in November 1856 he moved to take charge of another pastorate at Llanllechid, Bangor, where he lived at a house called Tanymarian, the name by which he was thereafter chiefly known. He died on 10 May 1885, leaving a widow, Eliza, and several children, and was buried in Bethlehem Chapel graveyard, Tal-y-bont, Llanllechid. 
In music, Stephen was entirely self-taught. A series of articles on music that he contributed to 'Y Cronicl' in 1848-9 raised him into sudden popularity, which he further increased by delivering lectures on the subject, interspersed with vocal illustrations that he sang himself. Between January 1821 and May 1852, while at Dwygyfylchi, he composed his oratorio 'Ystorm Tiberias', which was published at Bethesda in seven parts in 1855. It was the first oratorio of its kind by a Welsh composer, but it had no distinctively Welsh characteristic and was influenced mainly by Handel. Its strength lies in its choruses, some of which, especially 'Dyma'r gwyntoedd yn ymosod', became popular with Welsh choirs and were adopted as eisteddfod test pieces. The airs had numerous defects, which Stephen more or less remedied in the revised score that was published posthumously at Dolgellau in 1887 under the editorship of D. Emlyn Evans, with improved English words by the Revd J. H. Johnes. 
Apart from his oratorio, Stephen's fame rests chiefly on the service he rendered to congregational singing among the Congregationalists of Wales, as John Roberts (1822-1877) did among the Methodists. In 1859 he became editor of the musical portion of the Welsh hymnal 'Cerddor y cyssegr' (Bethesda, 1860), which contains several melodies harmonized by Stephen but no tune of his own composition. This was superseded by the publication at Wrexham in 1868 of a new hymnal, 'Llyfr tonau ac emynau', under the joint editorship of Stephen and Joseph David Jones of Ruthin, the chief burden of the work falling on the latter. This was followed in 1879 by a supplement edited by Stephen alone, containing six tunes of his own, the best known being 'Tanymarian'. This edition also carried the first publication of Joseph Parry's 'Aberystwyth'. The completed hymnal contains more than 300 tunes and 900 hymns, and was widely used by Welsh Congregationalists. 
Between April 1861 and May 1863 Stephen edited 'Greal y corau'. He was a noted singer as well as a composer. His hymns are the most lasting part of his output but he also produced a number of art-music works, the most significant being a requiem (Bethesda, 1858) on the death of the Revd John Jones (1796-1857) of Tal-y-sarn (Talsarn). Stephen, who was also an amateur geologist, wrote several papers in Welsh on geology, and his collection of specimens was presented to the University College of North Wales, Bangor. 
The Welsh memoir of Stephen, edited by W. J. Parry, 'Cofiant Tanymarian' (1886), contains two portraits of him. There is appended a selection of his prose and poetical compositions, together with several anthems and partsongs. 


@@@@@


doc= 26371


Stephen, Sir George (1794-1879), lawyer and slavery abolitionist, was born on 17 January 1794 on St Kitts, West Indies, the fourth son of James Stephen (1758-1832), later master in chancery, and his wife, Anna ('bap'. 1758, died 1796), the daughter of Henry Stent. His parents returned to England with him when he was an infant. He was educated at private schools at Clapham Common and Cheam. At the age of fifteen he began training under a surgeon to qualify for an army medical appointment, but on the prospect of peace in 1813 he was sent to Magdalene College, Cambridge, with a view to becoming a physician. He showed more taste for hunting than for study, however, and was removed after two years and placed in the office of J. W. Freshfield, afterwards solicitor to the Bank of England. On 17 March 1821 he married Henrietta (1797-1869), the daughter of Revd William Ravenscroft; they had seven children. 
During five years' articles, Stephen managed his firm's extensive bankruptcy business and, when he began practice on his own, the firm handed much of that business to him. During the parliamentary inquiry in 1820 into the conduct of Queen Caroline he was employed by the government to collect evidence against her on the continent. 
In 1826, declining remuneration, Stephen was retained by the House of Commons to investigate allegations that slaves were being traded at Mauritius. That had been made unlawful in 1807, but slavery itself was still prevalent in some British colonies, notably in the West Indies. Stephen, following his father, had become prominent in the Anti-Slavery Society and was its honorary solicitor. Hitherto, the committee had worked towards abolition by direct persuasion of parliamentarians; in 1831 Stephen proposed appealing to the people. His proposal was rejected by the committee but taken up by James Cropper and others, who provided funds. A small working group, including Stephen, employed agents to arrange and address public meetings and to inspire press publicity, the formation of local societies, and the promotion of petitions. The ensuing agitation persuaded the government: the act to abolish slavery in British colonies was passed in 1833. Stephen was knighted in 1838 for his services. 
Stephen was solicitor in a scheme for the relief of paupers in contempt of court, without remuneration, and also acted for a society for the purchase of reversions; however, he quarrelled with the directors and was dismissed, losing a considerable sum. Disliking aspects of his profession, resenting its inferior social status, and struggling somewhat in his practice, he decided in 1847 to abandon it. He was called to the bar at Gray's Inn on 6 June 1849 and settled at Liverpool, where he acquired a fair practice in bankruptcy cases. 
But Stephen's work fell away on a change in the system, and in 1855 he emigrated to Melbourne, Victoria, where he joined his two younger sons. He was admitted to practise as a barrister there on the same day (9 August 1855) as was his eldest son, James Wilberforce (1822-1881), who emigrated with him and afterwards became a judge of the supreme court of Victoria. 
Stephen built a house named Helenslea (now a school) in Glen Eira Road, Caulfield, near Melbourne. He obtained some practice, principally in insolvency work, and was appointed queen's counsel on 12 June 1871. A prominent Anglican, he died on 20 June 1879 at Helenslea and was buried in St Kilda cemetery, Melbourne, on 23 June. 
Stephen was a man of considerable abilities and force of character. He was upright and outspoken, but a hot temper and a talent for seeing the worst side of people and his profession involved him in many disputes and injured his career. He wrote many books and pamphlets, mostly on aspects of religion, law, or slavery. 'Adventures of a Gentleman in Search of a Horse' (1835), a light exposition of the relevant law, and 'Adventures of an Attorney in Search of Practice' (1839), shrewd and wryly amusing, were particularly successful. His 'Anti-slavery Recollections' remains a major authority. 


@@@@@


doc= 26372


Stephen, Henry John (1787-1864), serjeant-at-law, was born at St Kitts in the West Indies on 18 January 1787, the second son of James Stephen (1758-1832), lawyer and abolitionist, and his wife, Anna, 'nee' Stent ('bap'. 1758, died 1796). His brothers included Sir James Stephen, under-secretary for the colonies, and Sir George Stephen, also a lawyer and abolitionist. He was thus uncle of Leslie Stephen. He went up to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1802 but did not graduate. He was called to the bar from Lincoln's Inn on 24 November 1815. In 1814 he married his cousin, Mary Morison. After the death of his stepmother, the sister of William Wilberforce, he kept house for his father in Kensington Gore, London, from 1815 to 1832. 
Stephen was a man of nervous and retiring disposition, and, though an accomplished lawyer, obtained no great professional success. He became known, however, by a treatise on pleading, published in 1824. There was no want of practical treatises on the subject. The aim of Stephen's book was to develop systematically the principles of the 'science' and exhibit them as part of a general scheme. The systematic reduction of law to a set of principles was then a novel enterprise, and one which, according to his nephew A. V. Dicey, Stephen executed with clarity and economy. The merits of the treatise, which went into seven editions in England and eight in the USA, gave him a claim to promotion. Stephen became a serjeant-at-law in 1828, and was a member of the common-law commission appointed in that year. His influence on the commission's second report, which extolled the merits of special pleading, is evident. It led to the controversial 'new pleading rules' of Hilary term 1834. Ironically, their application brought the whole subject matter of the 'science' Stephen had developed into disrepute, hastening its abolition in 1852. 
Stephen's fellow commissioners all became judges; and it is said, on doubtful authority, that a judgeship was offered to Stephen by Lyndhurst, and declined on the grounds that he could never bear to pass a capital sentence (Stephen, 46). In 1834 he published a 'Summary of the Criminal Law', which was translated into German. In 1841 appeared the first edition of his 'Commentaries', partly founded on Blackstone's 'Commentaries' but with much additional matter and, according to Dicey, a logical power lacking in the original. The book enjoyed a high reputation from the first, and its adoption for the Law Society intermediate examination ensured its commercial success. The last edition was in 1950, changes in legal education finally making its approach outmoded. In 1842 Stephen was placed on a commission for inquiring into the forgery of exchequer bills, and in the same year became commissioner of bankruptcy at Bristol; Matthew Davenport Hill was his colleague. He lived at Cleevewood, near Bristol, until his retirement from this post in 1854, and afterwards lived at Clifton until his death. During his retirement he speculated on the prophecies and the theory of music. Though courteous and kindly, he was not sociable. His diffidence prevented him from obtaining the reputation as a writer or the position in his profession which he might fairly have claimed. 
Stephen died on 28 November 1864 at 3 West Mall, Clifton, Bristol, Gloucestershire. His wife and a daughter died before him. He left two children. His daughter Sarah, born on 28 June 1816, was author of a religious story called 'Anna, or, The Daughter at Home', which went through several editions, and one of the founders of the Metropolitan Association for Befriending Young Servants. She died on 5 January 1895. His son James, born on 16 September 1820, was recorder of Poole, professor of law in King's College, London, and afterwards judge of the county court at Lincoln. He edited later editions of the 'Commentaries' and 'Questions for Law Students' on the same. He died on 25 November 1894. 


@@@@@


doc= 26373


Stephen, James (1758-1832), lawyer and slavery abolitionist, was born on 30 June 1758 at Poole, Dorset, the second of seven children of James Stephen ('bap'. 1733, died 1779), dealer and conveyancer, and his wife, Sibella (1738-1775), daughter of William Milner. He attended a series of schools, most of them for only brief periods of time on account of his father's indebtedness. In 1773 he was sent to Winchester College, but soon dropped out and returned to the family home at Kennington, London. There he was responsible for nursing his mother in the last stages of tuberculosis. Her death on 21 March 1775 was a profound psychological blow to her son, who religiously commemorated the anniversary of her passing. James now secured his father's permission to study law with the idea that he would practice in St Kitts, the residence of his uncle and godfather. He entered Lincoln's Inn on 23 September 1775 and studied at Marischal College, Aberdeen, for two years, until financial difficulties brought an end to his training. On his return to London he assisted with his father's meagre practice as a conveyancer. 
Following his father's death in September 1779, Stephen became a reporter for the 'Morning Post', a position which he was to hold for 'little more than a year' (probably from August 1780 to September 1781). His chief task was to report the debates of parliament, but also out of session to review books, plays, and exhibitions, and to cover important trials. He had two memorable assignments: the one to report Lord George Gordon's trial for high treason in February 1781, the other the notorious case of sexual assault in Somerset House involving Lord Edward Onslow in May 1781. Stephen returned to finish his legal education with the assistance of money inherited from his recently deceased uncle. After passing the bar on 26 January 1782 he made no serious effort to practise, but continued his studies and attempted to collect a legal library. On 17 June 1783 he married Anna, 'nee' Stent ('bap'. 1758, died 1796), at St Leonard, Shoreditch; they had seven children, including Henry John Stephen (1787-1864), legal writer, James Stephen (1789-1859), civil servant and abolitionist, and George Stephen (1794-1879), lawyer and abolitionist. 
In October 1783 Stephen sailed for St Kitts to be followed by his wife and family, stopping first in Barbados in December. At Bridgetown he witnessed a portion of the trial of four slaves accused and convicted of murder, an event which profoundly altered his life. The manifest injustice of the proceedings, the obvious innocence of the accused, and the knowledge that there was good reason to believe that a white man was the murderer led Stephen to vow never to own a slave and to become a committed opponent of slavery. In the West Indies Stephen made only a modest living. Much of his income came from defending American traders whose cargoes and ships had been seized for violations of the 'Navigation Acts'. From these cases he seems to have saved enough to manage a trip home to England with his family in the winter of 1788-9. After the outbreak of war with France in 1793, the seizure of neutral ships engaged in trade with the French colonies provided the basis for an enlarged practice, and Stephen was able to afford to return permanently to London in September 1794. He then took up practice in the prize appeal court of the privy council, where he remained until his appointment, on Spencer Perceval's influence, as master in chancery on 20 February 1811, the appointment having been delayed by Lord Chancellor Eldon. 
The death of Stephen's wife in December 1796 led to a deepening of his religious convictions. In the following year he moved from Sloane Square to Clapham, where William Wilberforce, Henry Thornton, and several other prominent members of the Clapham Sect were resident. It was through this group that Stephen met Wilberforce's sister, Sarah (died 1816), the widow of Thomas Clarke. The couple married on 15 May 1800 and enjoyed a happy relationship. Stephen afterwards referred to his second wife as the 'friend of his Soul', whose frank criticism enabled him to see his faults and correct them. Her death on 18 October 1816 was to leave him deeply grieved. 
Although Stephen made his living as a lawyer, his reputation and historical importance are derived from his association with Wilberforce and the Clapham Sect and his distinguished service to the anti-slavery movement. His first known pronouncements on the subject came at a debating society at the Coachmaker's Hall, Foster Lane, London, on 28 October 1779. As he later recorded in his 'Memoirs', the subject of whether slavery 'could be defended on principles of humanity and justice' was then new to him. Having carefully prepared his remarks and having been inspired by new anti-slavery arguments which occurred to him while listening to another speaker, Stephen gave 'the best and by far the best received' speech of his life to intermittent 'thundering bursts of applause'. The audience condemned slavery by an overwhelming majority. He first became involved with Wilberforce while visiting England in 1789 and the two men formed a lasting friendship. 
Back on St Kitts, Stephen supplied Wilberforce with information about the slave trade and the conditions of slavery. From 1794 he contributed anti-slavery propaganda to the 'Morning Chronicle', and in 1799 he served as counsel for the Sierra Leone Company, presenting evidence before the House of Lords, in its unsuccessful effort to abolish the slave trade off the coast of that colony. He was elected a member of the London Abolition Committee on 23 May 1804 and worked steadily with that group until the achievement of its goal in 1807. In 1805 he helped to draft an order in council passed by Pitt's government on 15 August to prohibit the importing of slaves into the recently conquered Dutch colony of Guiana. In the following year Stephen provided Lord Grenville with the draft of a bill to abolish the foreign slave trade, which parliament passed and which effectively outlawed over three-quarters of the existing trade. Stephen's memorandum on the pros and cons of introducing a measure to abolish the British slave trade in 1806, in which he recommended an early dissolution of parliament, probably influenced the government to postpone the measure until a dissolution could take place. After the enactment of abolition on 25 March 1807 Stephen helped to organize the African Institution, intended to promote the civilization and trade of Africa and to enforce abolition, and served as one of its vice-presidents. 
As the chief advocate and architect of the policy of blockading France, which the British government implemented by orders in council issued in January and November 1807, Stephen became invaluable to the government of the duke of Portland, who secured his election to parliament for the close Irish borough of Tralee on 25 February 1808. In 1812 he changed seats, becoming MP for East Grinstead, Sussex. Acutely aware of his want of a classical education Stephen spoke infrequently in parliament, mainly on issues relating to the anti-slavery movement and religion. As a parliamentary speaker Stephen lacked polish, wit, and humour, and was frequently too vehement in tone. Perhaps his greatest speech, and the only one to be published, came on 6 March 1809, in defence of the government's orders in council. Stephen later admitted that he was mistaken in this policy, which led eventually to war with the United States in 1812. Arguably Stephen's greatest contribution to the anti-slavery movement was his advocacy of slave registration and his drafting of the proposals for registering slaves on the island of Trinidad. This order, as finally passed on 26 March 1812, was later extended to the islands ceded by France at the end of the Napoleonic wars -- Mauritius, St Lucia, and Tobago. It also served as a model for the proposed registration of slaves in the older slave colonies. 
The failure of Lord Liverpool's government in 1815 to support Wilberforce's 'Registration Bill' led Stephen to resign his parliamentary seat in protest on 14 April 1815. His resignation freed him to write 'The Slavery of the British West India Colonies Delineated' (2 vols., 1824, 1830) which gives a comprehensive and detailed picture of the British West Indian slave system in the early nineteenth century, and became the chief textbook for supporters of the anti-slavery movement. In 'Crisis of the Sugar Colonies' (1802) Stephen had portrayed the financial distress of the older slave colonies and advocated that Trinidad be developed by free rather than slave labour. His most influential pamphlet remains 'War in Disguise' (1805), which was significant in influencing the government's decision to revive the Rule of 1756, which prevented neutral traders from trading with the enemy when they could not do so legally in peacetime. 
Stephen's 'Memoirs', published in 1954, provide the best source for his life up to the departure for St Kitts, and an insight into his character and religious views. Strongly influenced by his mother he had a powerful sense of divine providence watching over and guiding human affairs, and seems to have relied heavily on private prayer for guidance. According to his son Sir James, Stephen was scarcely orthodox in his religious views, perhaps a Socinian. But his views were unorthodox in other ways as well. At a time when the Church of England did not offer prayers for the dead, he strongly believed in them and apparently had his own doctrine of purgatory. Like other prominent evangelicals, Stephen was an active member of the Church Missionary Society and the Bible Society. 
In later years Stephen lived comfortably on the income from his office as master in chancery. From 1819 he maintained a second residence at Missenden, Buckinghamshire, and visited Bath from time to time for his health. In his last public act Stephen presided over a crowded meeting of the Anti-Slavery Society at Exeter Hall on 12 May 1832 and spoke with great effect. He died at Bath on 10 October 1832. Burial followed at Stoke Newington churchyard in a tomb which also contained the remains of his father, mother, two wives, and two daughters who died in infancy. 
Described as a 'high-minded fanatic' by Henry Adams, a 'third-rate debater' by Lord Brougham, and 'the most learned, bitter, and extreme of anti-slavery pamphleteers' by W. L. Mathieson, Stephen has until recently been underestimated. His role in the anti-slavery movement is now more justly appreciated by historians than at any time since his death. Thanks to the work of Roger Anstey, R. G. Thorne, and others, we have a much clearer picture of his active involvement in shaping the policy of the anti-slavery movement and his important role in the councils of the London Abolition Committee, the African Institution, and the Anti-Slavery Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 26374


Stephen, Sir James (1789-1859), civil servant, was born at Lambeth, London, on 3 January 1789, the third son of James Stephen (1758-1832) and his first wife, Anna, 'nee' Stent ('bap'. 1758, died 1796). 
Stephen lived with his parents for five years at St Kitts in the West Indies, when an attack of smallpox permanently weakened his eyesight, so after his family returned to England he was sent not to a large school but to a variety of small, private ones. In 1806 he enrolled at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, but lived in a hotel, perhaps an indication of his intense shyness, and said later that a move to Bond Street 'would not have deprived me of any aids for intellectual discipline or for acquiring literary or scientific knowledge' (quoted in L. Stephen, 31). In November 1811 he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn, and the following year he took his LLB degree. Having received some help from his father, he began to practise in the court of chancery, and in 1813 was appointed legal adviser to the Colonial Office. On 22 December 1814 he married Jane Catherine (1793-1875), the daughter of John Venn ['see under 'Venn, Henry (1725-1797)], rector of Clapham, a leading member of the Clapham Sect and one of the founders of the Church Missionary Society (CMS), whose committee Stephen joined and served on for nine years. 
At first Stephen's work at the Colonial Office was to review all acts passed in the colonies. He did this for fees which totalled between $600 and $800 a year, while he came to earn more than $1500 a year in his private legal practice; however, in time the office became more demanding, asking for help on questions concerning the colonies ceded by France and Holland, in drafting the complex 'New South Wales Act', and many other matters. The result was a breakdown through overwork in 1822, the year his eldest son, Herbert Venn (1822-1846) -- the first of the Stephens' five children -- was born; Stephen resigned from the CMS committee and told the under-secretary at the Colonial Office, Robert Wilmot-Horton, the following April that he could not 'execute to my own or your satisfaction the various duties which you have entrusted to me' (Young, 60). So he gave up his private practice in return for 'an assurance of permanency' and a salary of $1500 -- as well as, according to his colleague and friend Henry Taylor, with a view to gaining influence on the slavery question. During the next twenty-four years he was to develop his position as an important adviser on colonial policy, being appointed assistant under-secretary in 1834 and permanent under-secretary in 1836, at a salary of $2000, just as he was beginning to grow stout and his reddish hair was turning white. 
In modern terminology Stephen was a 'workaholic'. In 1826 Wilmot-Horton said Stephen was working ten hours a day, and twenty years later the latter was recording in his diary that he worked eleven hours -- 'write, read, read, write or rather dictate all day, and weary eyes in the evening... without any partner. It is only by starvation and seclusion that I am able to get through it' -- but he laboured on, even adding to his work between 1838 and 1842 by dictating, usually early in the morning, articles for the 'Edinburgh Review', which he published as 'Essays in Ecclesiastical Biography' in 1849. Here he indicated his belief in 'the Divine intervention of the Supreme Ruler of the Universe' (J. Stephen, 2.342). History, he wrote, was 'but the incoherent rhapsody of wild joys and maddening sorrows if not regarded as the progressive fulfilment of the Supreme Will' (2.344); the field of ecclesiastical history was 'reverently tracing the footsteps of Divine Providence moving among the ways and works of man, imparting dignity to events otherwise unimportant and a deep significance to occurrences in any other view trivial' (2.291-2), since providence might employ 'the evil passions of man as reluctant instruments of the Divine mercy', and it was by 'antagonistic passions, prejudices and follies that the equipoise of this most belligerent planet is chiefly preserved' (1.250). Stephen must have believed that he was contributing to the 'consummation of the designs of Providence' (2.454), for, as he urged settlement in the north of Australia, for example, he insisted that its colonization was 'one of those vast schemes of national policy into which Great Britain has been drawn and... which must be regarded as one of the most impressive movements of Divine Providence in the government of this world' (minute on Sir John Barrow to Stephen, 11 Jan 1843, CO 201/329, fols. 46-7). 
One reason for his long hours was that Stephen was unwilling, if not unable, to delegate work. Taylor thought he 'preferred to engross it into his own hands and not to be much helped' (Taylor, 1.233); certainly in May 1846 he opposed a plan of Gladstone's to reorganize the office and reduce his burdens -- 'it would spell the word of doom to my official importance', he wrote in his diary. So he read every incoming dispatch, and minuted them all, dictating instructions such as 'put by' or 'to the Treasury' on even the most trivial or routine, though on some he would dictate lengthy minutes or draft replies. He rarely took a holiday, and when he did he would take an amanuensis to the country with him so his reading and dictating could continue. This meant that he was keeping an eye on all the colonies, watching their expenditure and their administration, and recalling precedents, where his extraordinary memory stood him in good stead. He was always on the lookout for maladministration, as governors such as Sir John Franklin and Sir John Eardley-Wilmot among others discovered, and would examine with great care cases of minor officials that were reported to him. He improved the routine of the office in London, but taking so much into his own hands did not properly exploit its resources. 
As had appeared at Cambridge, Stephen was very shy -- 'shy beyond all the shyness you could imagine in anyone whose soul had not been pre-existent in a wild duck', wrote Taylor in his autobiography, and in any interview went on in 'a continuous stream of discourse, as if afraid to stop, not knowing what might happen' (Taylor, 2.303-4). He preferred writing to face-to-face discussion, and for this reason failed to settle interdepartmental disputes quickly, failed to speed up interdepartmental delays when his written communications proved ineffective, and, though he admitted that the extent of Treasury business was often responsible for its delays, never tried to establish a working relationship with a department almost next door. 
Stephen's own industry and abilities produced a contempt for those less hard-working, less conscientious, or less talented. According to his 1846 diary, of the twelve secretaries of state under whom he served, he thought only two, Huskisson and Lord John Russell, were not 'common place men in high stations' -- apparently including Stanley (fourteenth earl of Derby), Gladstone ('the poorest and feeblest of all my Downing Street rulers'), and Grey ('hard, cold, peremptory and self-willed'). Of his departmental colleagues and subordinates, he wrote that 'not one of them but Murdoch deserves his salary', and in 1854 he asserted that most of them had possessed 'only in a low degree, and some of them in a degree almost incredibly low, either the talents or the habits of men of business, or the industry, the zeal, or the knowledge required for the effective performance of their appropriate functions. (Young, 256-7)' It was not surprising that he was known as 'Mr Over-Secretary Stephen' or 'King Stephen'. 
Some historians have done Stephen's reputation a disservice in asserting, like some of his contemporaries, that, as Taylor put it, he 'virtually governed the colonial empire' (Taylor, 1.233). He was an administrator, not a policy maker. He would give advice based on special knowledge, experience, and precedent rather than on ideology. He usually gave it tentatively and it was not infrequently overridden. For example, he strongly objected to the plans of the Wakefieldian South Australian and New Zealand companies, but the government on the whole supported them. He opposed suggested controls for emigrant ships, but governments carried the 'Passenger Acts' of 1828, 1835, and 1842. His minutes frequently note that reference is to be made to the secretary or under-secretary of state for instructions in such matters as colonial defence, religion and church establishments, education, the affairs of New Zealand, or, as he minuted in 1844, if the subject involved 'questions of Rural, Commercial or Political Economy, with which I am not conversant'. Though in 1845 he might tell Under-Secretary Hope, partly in jest, that he was 'the only Professor in England of my art -- the art of understanding everything connected with the Constitution, Charters and Laws of some forty Colonies' (quoted in Buckner, 'Responsible Government', 32), and though his son James insisted that he had 'all the special knowledge which his position required... and which no other man in England possessed to anything like the same extent' (L. Stephen, 88), yet speaking of Australia in 1830 he had admitted that 'had I the understanding of Jeremy Bentham himself I should distrust my judgement as to what is really practicable in such remote and anomalous Societies' (quoted in Shaw, 'Convicts and the Colonies', 239) and was to ask his diary as late as 1846, 'who is the prodigy that understands affairs colonial'? 
Perhaps Stephen's greatest contribution to colonial affairs was his recognition of the difficulty of controlling colonies from London. In this sense his other nickname -- 'Mr Mother-Country' -- was a misnomer. Attempts to run affairs from London 'cannot but terminate in defeat', he wrote as early as 1828 (TNA: PRO, CO 323/45, fols. 198-200); 'we are almost always worsted', he would repeat in 1841. He also thought that as a general rule the imperial government should support local governors. 'The wisest Governor may judge erroneously but the wisest stranger to the Country must guess erroneously -- at least the chance of guessing right is so slight as to be evanescent' (quoted in Knaplund, 261). 
Stephen developed these general attitudes over time, in the light of experience. At first he had been rather more interventionist, particularly on the slavery question. Here he had been brought up on the views of his father, his mother, his stepmother and her father, and his own mentor, William Wilberforce, and the anti-slavery societies were trying to follow the abolition of the slave trade in 1807 with measures to improve the lot of the slaves. Reviewing colonial legislation Stephen was able regularly to reveal defects in the many slavery registration acts and to have them disallowed, until an 'Imperial Act' was passed in 1820 to end such disputes. In the subsequent struggle over the 'melioration' policy, in 1824 Stephen drew up a model order for the treatment of slaves in the crown colonies and thereafter examined the colonial codes minutely against its provisions. His analysis led to the latter being frequently disallowed, and though, when prime minister in 1828-30, the duke of Wellington objected to reports coming from 'a partisan of abolition', over time they helped to educate ministers, politicians, and the public about the conditions of the slaves. As the popular campaign for slave emancipation strengthened, the reforming whig government decided to legislate, and in 1833, after Stanley, the secretary of state, gave up the task of drafting a bill, it fell to Stephen to do so. Of necessity working over the weekend -- allegedly on one of only two occasions in his life on a Sunday -- he produced the complex bill, covering twenty-six pages, in forty-eight hours, playing the part of the perfect public servant in helping his minister to implement his policy and making an enormous contribution to its success. 
Chronologically the next important colonial problem was in Canada, where by 1836 unrest had been simmering for some time. Here, Stephen's advice was inconsistent, a memorandum in December 1837 being distinguished for 'clarity of analysis and futility of planning', according to John M. Ward ('Colonial Self-Government', 60), though a month earlier in a letter to Sir George Arthur he had deplored 'such putting off, such dawdlings, such panics... such a paralysis... I never before saw or imagined, much less partook of', adding that 'a resolute stand by a resolute man a few weeks ago would have subdued this violence.... Even yet there is time to stem the torrent by opposing a stern and uncompromising front to the Agitators' (quoted in Burroughs, 92) -- which is hardly what he had been advocating previously. 
While the Canadian troubles were going on, Stephen made what turned out to be perhaps his greatest contributions to colonial government, which sprang from the need to confirm the dismissal of a minor official in South Australia. Following precedents in Van Diemen's Land in 1832 and New South Wales in 1836, and the recommendation of the Gosford commission in Canada in 1837, in this case and then more significantly in Canada, in a dispatch on official tenure, Stephen persuaded Lord John Russell to lay down the principle that a colonial governor could dismiss his officials for reasons of policy, without proving them guilty of any offence. This allowed a governor to get rid of the incompetent or simply the unpopular if he wanted to, so that he could -- and in future would -- change ministers at the wish of a representative assembly; though that was not what either Stephen or Russell had in mind at the time, it opened the door to the policy of lords Elgin and Grey in Canada a few years later. This, together with his belief that, on the whole, colonial governors should be trusted and given a large measure of freedom from instructions from London, paved the way for colonies to become self-governing as governors came to take the advice of colonial ministers; as a result they would remain within the empire, without becoming independent as quickly as he forecast. 
Stephen's attitude to the empire changed over time and varied according to circumstances. At the time of the Canadian uprising he wanted to uphold British power in North America. But having, according to his son, 'a morbidly vivid perception of possible evils and remote dangers' (L. Stephen, 51), by 1843 he was fearing this was impossible. Though rebellions were over, a terrible democracy seemed inevitable: 'All those things must float to the surface of Society which one would wish to keep out of sight.... Canada is... a theatre for selfish conflicts under the specious pretext of Public Spirit... Mere democracy must triumph there, and the ultimate catastrophe is not difficult to foretell. (quoted in Shaw, 'Sir George Arthur', 225)' In 1846 he thought Elgin's appointment as governor-general might be the last ever made. However, in retirement in 1850 he thought that 'relaxing the bonds of authority' as had been done in Canada had been the right course, and though in time the colonies 'would cut the last cable that binds them to us' that day was not to be feared (quoted in C. Stephen, 143-4). Sometimes the colonies were 'wretched burdens'. 'If we acquire the whole of Africa it is a worthless possession', he wrote in 1841; to settle in Natal would cost money and lead to 'the consumption of treasure, the waste of human life and a warfare alike inglorious, unprofitable and afflicting' (quoted in Morrell, 141). On the other hand, he had wanted to colonize New Zealand in the 1830s in order to protect the Maori, and he appreciated the 'great territorial settlements' in North America. He also wanted to use the empire to promote Christianity. Even though he thought that 'human reason must toil in vain for demonstrative certainties' (Stephen, 1.200), he was convinced that 'he who should induce any heathen people to adopt the mere ceremonial of the Church... and to recognize the authority of its Divine head would confer on them a blessing exceeding all which mere philanthropy has ever accomplished' (minute, 7 Feb 1846, CO 54/223, fol. 302). Hence his opposition to assisting Indian immigration to the West Indies, which would lead to the 'introduction of many thousand idolaters trained from infancy in the barbarous and obscene rites of Hindoos superstition'; hence his objection to protecting the lands of Buddhist priests in Ceylon because they practised 'abominations to which not merely the revealed law of God but the general conscience of mankind is irreconcilably hostile' (quoted in Morrell, 529 and n. 4), though in both these cases his views were ignored. 
Eventually Stephen's long hours of work had their inevitable effect. Journeys to London from Windsor, where he lived between 1842 and 1846 while his younger sons James Fitzjames Stephen (1829-1894) and Leslie Stephen (1832-1904), the future editor of the 'Dictionary of National Biography', were at Eton, increased his fatigue, and the death of his eldest son in Dresden in October 1846 made him, according to James, 'a changed man' (his influence on his sons is discussed in their articles). He began to think of retirement, and a severe illness the following year forced him to take sick leave. He was appointed a privy councillor on 30 October 1847; in 1848 he resigned, and on 27 April was appointed KCB. In 1849 he returned to colonial work, advising Grey on the constitutions he was proposing for the Australian colonies and then serving on the privy council committee appointed to consider them. Later that year he was appointed regius professor of modern history at Cambridge, a position seen at that time as largely honorific. He lived in Cambridge for a time and twice delivered a course of lectures on the history of France, but ill health and allegations by a number of dons that the epilogue to the published edition of his 'Essays' was heretical, casting doubts on the belief in the eternal damnation of the wicked, prompted him to leave. In 1853 he settled in Westbourne Terrace, London, and was professor of history at the East India Company's Haileybury College at Hertford from 1855 until it was abolished in 1858. The following January he hurt himself when out walking, and a visit to Homburg for his health in the summer had no benefit. He died at Koblenz on the way home on 14 September, and was buried at Kensal Green. He was survived by his wife (who died in 1875), two of his sons (James Fitzjames and Leslie), and his daughter and biographer, Caroline Emelia Stephen (1834-1909), his elder daughter, Frances Wilberforce (1824-1825), having died in infancy. 
Contemporary attacks on Stephen damaged his reputation, though they should have been directed at the ministers responsible for making policy, but in the first half of the twentieth century his defenders reacted too strongly. More recent writers have been more ready to recognize his limitations as well as his strengths. He was a distinguished public servant, but he was not a policy maker like some other so-called statesmen-in-disguise -- Edwin Chadwick, Rowland Hill, James Kay-Shuttleworth, and others. However, there can be no doubt that he helped to improve administration both in London and in the colonies, and his emphasis on the limits of imperial control undoubtedly had a good effect on those that followed him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26375


Stephen, Sir James Fitzjames, first baronet (1829-1894), judge and writer, was born on 3 March 1829 at Kensington Gore, London, the second of the four children of Sir James Stephen (1789-1859), colonial under-secretary, and his wife, Jane Catherine Venn (1793-1875). Leslie Stephen was his younger brother and biographer. 
Stephen's formal education began at the age of seven at the Revd Benjamin Guest's school, Brighton, followed from April 1842 by three years at Eton College. His parents' discovery of his deep dislike of Eton led to his completing his pre-university education at King's College, London. Here, among the more purposeful offspring of the professional and business middle classes, life was again 'most happy', bringing with it a good measure of academic success. Stephen went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1847, where being one of the 'most unteachable of human beings' ('Autobiographic fragment', 37-8) ensured an undistinguished BA in classics (1851). Nevertheless, Stephen's powerful, if unscholastic, intellect enjoyed peer recognition through long-remembered appearances at the Cambridge Union, where he became 'a terror to the shallow and wordy' and a 'merciless exposer of platitudes and shams': performances which won him the appellation 'British Lion' (Stephen, 98). Intellectual independence and originality coupled with an energetic contempt for all varieties of humbug and wind-baggery gained him election to the exclusive Apostles society. His proposer was the young Henry Maine, recently appointed regius professor of civil law, and thereafter a lifelong close friend of Stephen. Gatherings of the Apostles not only tested intellect but also a young man's nerve and self-confidence. Competitive and combative discussions were fought out to almost legendary levels between Stephen and, particularly, William Harcourt, a future Liberal Party grandee; they were 'a pair born for mutual conflict, each equipped with a powerful understanding, vigorous expression and a boldness bordering on arrogance' (Gardiner, 41). 
As a member of the Inner Temple, Stephen was called to the bar in January 1854. Around this period Maine's chambers became a frequent, casual meeting-place for a clutch of fledgeling barristers including Stephen, Harcourt, M. E. Grant Duff, and Frederic Harrison. Unusually for the day, Stephen read for a law degree at London University and for the first time seriously encountered the works of Jeremy Bentham. Despite already being thoroughly familiar with John Stuart Mill's 'Logic', Stephen had hitherto lacked an appreciation of utilitarianism's immediate relevance to legal structure and substance as expounded in Bentham's elaborate legislative schemes. 
On 19 April 1855 Stephen married Mary Richenda (1829-1912), daughter of John William Cunningham, vicar of Harrow, editor of the 'Christian Observer', and a friend of Stephen's father. The marriage produced three sons and at least four daughters surviving to adulthood, but only one grandchild, James Alexander Stephen (1908-1987). The eldest daughter was Katharine Stephen, later principal of Newnham College, Cambridge. Marriage and the lean pickings of a young barrister combined to boost Stephen's strong attraction towards journalism, which in turn led to his recruitment to the recently established 'Saturday Review'. With a coterie of regular contributors, including Maine, Harcourt, Grant-Duff, Goldwin Smith, G. S. Venables, and occasionally G. H. Lewes and Walter Bagehot, the 'Saturday Review' rapidly gained a reputation for a unique blend of abrasiveness with a stinging irreverence towards popular heroes and institutions. Its self-assigned mission was to stir up controversy, to focus debate, and broadly to generate the right intellectual and moral climate -- goals demanding writers with a rock-solid confidence in their own infallibility. During the 'Saturday Review''s first decade, Stephen contributed more than 300 articles on literature, religion, law, ethics, and history. According to the contemporary critic and editor T. H. S. Escott, 'Stephen did not only help make the 'Saturday Review'. He 'was' the 'Saturday Review'' (Escott, 222). 
Stephen's legal career developed at a more moderate pace than his reputation as a journalist and controversialist, partly as a consequence of journalistic diversions but also because of a distaste for the 'hardened vulgarity' and 'buffoonery' of circuit life. In July 1858 he was appointed secretary to the royal commission on popular education, a post he held until 1861. His reputation, gained through the 'Saturday Review', as one well versed in ecclesiastical controversy was, no doubt, a factor in his being sought out to defend the Revd Rowland Williams at his trial in the court of arches (December 1861 and January 1862) for heretical contributions to 'Essays and Reviews' (1860). Not only did Stephen's legal career benefit from the exposure given by the case's public prominence, but the work also spawned his rapidly executed 'Defence of the Reverend Rowland Williams' (1862). During this period Stephen's determined rationalism made him increasingly ill at ease with established religion and, latterly, particularly with Newmanism. In trenchantly unravelling the nature of John Henry Newman's system of reasoning set out in the latter's 'Apologia' (1864) and 'Grammar of Assent' (1870), Stephen also peeled away the dead or dying layers of his own religious convictions. Along with Frederic Harrison, Herbert Spencer, John Morley, Thomas Huxley, and his own brother Leslie, he penned a steady flow of articles in which religious scepticism led into agnosticism, initially in the columns of the 'Saturday Review' and 'Fraser's Magazine', and later in the 'Contemporary Review' and the 'Nineteenth Century'. The substance of his participation in the debates of the illustrious Metaphysical Society during the 1870s placed Stephen firmly on the agnostic benches alongside the likes of T. H. Huxley, W. K. Clifford, and other 'scientifics'. 
Stephen's publication of his 'General View of the Criminal Law' in 1863 established him as a legal commentator of considerable originality. Earlier articles in the 'Edinburgh Review', 'Saturday Review', and 'Cornhill Magazine', along with a 'Cambridge Essay', had already shown Stephen's particular interest in criminal law theory. The 'General View' was a pioneering attempt to analyse not merely the nature and relationship of the principal theoretical elements of criminal law but also to emphasize the wider social scientific setting in which law might be advantageously studied. It was an approach in which the influences of Bentham, Austin, and Mill were evident rather than dominant. In the manner of Blackstone's 'Commentaries', the 'General View' was written not only for lawyers but for any interested observer of society. Yet although he was enjoying a rising reputation as an advocate, the more prominent features of Stephen's professional life were of an irregular nature. Much in the quirky vein of his earlier representation of Rowland Williams, Stephen's most visible professional role of the mid- and late 1860s came through his brief from Mill's 'Jamaica committee' in its attempted prosecution of Governor Eyre for murder in the course of his brutal quelling of a Jamaican riot, which had culminated in mass executions. 
Throughout this period journalism continued to run in parallel with Stephen's legal career. His opportune good fortune in being in at the founding of the 'Saturday Review' was repeated with the 'Pall Mall Gazette', first published in 1865. The 'Gazette''s initial team of regular writers was as formidable as that of the 'Saturday Review'. In addition to Stephen (the most frequent contributor over the first five years), the 'heavy guns' were Maine, R. H. Hutton, Harrison, G. H. Lewes, and Matthew Higgins, while occasional contributors included George Eliot, Charles Kingsley, Anthony Trollope, Leslie Stephen, Matthew Arnold, and J. A. Froude, by then a close friend of Stephen. During the 'Gazette''s first four years, Stephen maintained a phenomenally high journalistic output. In addition to cultivating his bar practice and publishing legal and other occasional magazine contributions, he produced over 800 leading articles and nearly 200 notes for the 'Gazette'. Echoing Escott's verdict on the 'Saturday Review', in its early years Stephen ''was' the 'Pall Mall Gazette'', according to Sir Courtenay Ilbert. 
Stephen's devotion to journalism was not only a consequence of its intrinsic appeal and financial rewards, it was also a necessary intellectual diversion from the path of a conventional legal career. Though the normal signposts of professional advancement soon appeared, with the recordership of Newark in 1859 and the taking of silk in 1868, Stephen became increasingly occupied by a strong desire for something of greater substance and more enduring significance than circuit life. Early in 1869 he failed to secure election to the Whewell chair of international law at Cambridge, victory going to his old rival, William Harcourt. However, in the summer of that year he was appointed legal member of the Indian viceroy's council on the recommendation of Maine, the retiring holder of that post. The prospect of succeeding men of the standing of Macaulay and Maine, coupled with the opportunity of shaping the legislative future of the subcontinent, proved irresistible. Stephen was in India from December 1869 until April 1872. He piloted through three legislative provisions of considerable importance -- the 'Evidence Act', the 'Contract Act', and a revised code of criminal procedure -- along with a very substantial cluster of other enactments, each unselfconsciously embodying European juristic and moral notions, and organized in a fashion manifesting Benthamite influence. According to a later occupant of the post, Stephen 'left the Legislative Council breathless and staggering, conscious that they had accomplished unprecedented labours' (Ilbert, 222, 224). Although Stephen attracted a degree of justified criticism for an 'impatience with technicalities' and sometimes failing to round off 'raw edges', the legislation proved workable and durable. Stephen retained an interest and involvement in India which endured throughout the remainder of his life, sustained by his intimacy with high-ranking Anglo-Indian officials, and particularly through a close friendship with Lord Lytton, viceroy from 1876 to 1880. To the end, Stephen remained among the staunchest supporters of a high-minded, visionary form of colonial domination which was later vigorously espoused by Lord Curzon. Many years earlier, at Eton, Curzon had been mesmerized by the literary society's guest speaker on India: 'a vivid recollection [of] the vast head, the heavy pendulous jaw, the long and curling locks of Sir James Fitzjames Stephen as he stood at the desk' (Coleridge, 225). 
Stephen's passage home from India was largely taken up with rereading and rethinking Mill's essays 'On Liberty' (1859) and 'Utilitarianism' (1863) in preparation for a series of articles initially appearing in the 'Pall Mall Gazette' and soon after published as 'Liberty, Equality, Fraternity' (1873), a work regarded by John Morley, Mill's intellectual lieutenant, as the 'first effective attack on Mill's pontifical authority' (Morley, 55). Yet Stephen's critique manifests a strong adherence to much Millite social philosophy and to utilitarianism, though of a cruder Benthamite hue. The fundamental parting of company from Mill occurred in the area of practical deductions for the mechanisms of social and political government. Essentially, Stephen viewed the democratization of the political process as dangerously misguided because it rested on inappropriate social sentiments and was set against the compelling utility of recognizing the patently plain differences and abilities of society's social strata. In August 1873 he came last in the polls as one of three Liberal candidates contesting the parliamentary seat of Dundee. 
Stephen's Indian codification experiences heightened a long-standing inclination, partly fuelled by the works of Bentham and Austin, to recast English criminal law in a codified form. Indeed, Stephen maintained that 'to compare [Macaulay's] Indian penal code with English criminal law is like comparing cosmos with chaos' (address to the Social Science Association, Nov 1872). For the remainder of the 1870s Stephen's professional energies were largely engaged in codificatory enterprises. Restructuring the law's form would, Stephen believed, go beyond simply enhancing certainty; more importantly it would facilitate substantive developments and refinements. Stephen's experiences with two abortive bills (evidence, 1872, and homicide, 1872/1874) convinced him that he himself could provide some of the necessary initial impetus for statutory reforms. This was at least part of his motivation in producing his digests on evidence (1876) and criminal law (1877), for he hoped that these might serve as the basis of codifying measures, as well as enhance his reputation as a legal draftsman and writer. Their publication was followed by Stephen's proposals for a full-scale draft criminal code; these were taken up by Lord Chancellor Cairns in August 1877, and eventually referred to a specially established commission composed of Lord Blackburn, Mr Justice Barry, Lord Justice Lush, and Stephen. The code bill was ultimately lost in April 1880, primarily through a combination of a government change and the implacable public hostility of Lord Chief Justice Cockburn. 
In recognition of his service to the cause of law reform and particularly to codification work, Stephen was appointed to a High Court judgeship in January 1879, a position he had for some time coveted as offering the unmatched combination of professional standing, financial security, and the opportunity to appease his ever-present literary cravings. Stephen was particularly anxious to complete his most extensive and exhausting work, 'The History of the Criminal Law' (1883). Ranging over the origins, growth, and development of the criminal law, courts' structure, punishment, and procedures, the 'History' was of considerable originality and a great advance on anything of a similar nature previously produced. His treatment of the substance and relationship of the elemental requirements of criminal responsibility, along with the function of punishment, was unrivalled. Although in some respects deficient judged by later techniques of historical scholarship, the 'History' has endured as a standard work of authority and reference for both lawyers and theorists. Together, the 'History' and 'General View' established Stephen as the nineteenth century's most significant contributor to the conceptualization and exposition of English criminal law. 
In contrast, Stephen's thirteen years on the bench were unimpressive when put alongside his intellectual vigour and achievement in other fields: a measurable shortfall existed between expectations and outcome. Yet Stephen's failure as a judge was relative rather than absolute. As a judge he produced a very respectable collection of criminal first-instance and appeal judgments, whose analytical quality was, when compared with those delivered by contemporary members of the bench, of a relatively high order. Yet when measured against a broader span of significant instances of judicial creativity beyond criminal law, none of Stephen's contributions could be regarded as of fundamental conceptual importance. Undoubtedly, his low boredom threshold with the intricacies of procedure and the laborious sifting of evidence took its toll, as did the powerful diverting pull of literary pursuits. 
Stephen's closing years were marred first by physical and then steady mental decline following illness in 1885. Despite largely unwarranted suggestions of unfairness and bias in relation to the murder trials of Lipski (1887) and Maybrick (1889), Stephen continued performing his judicial duties until 1891. He also produced 'The Story of Nuncomar and Sir Elijah Impey' (1885), the second edition of the 'General View' (1890), and a collection of earlier 'Saturday Review' articles, published as 'Horae sabbaticae' (1892). However, by early 1891 his declining capacity to exercise judicial functions had properly become a matter of press comment, and following medical advice Stephen resigned in April of that year. Yet even during his final days on the bench, Stephen is reported to have been 'brief, terse and to the point, and as lucid as in the old days'; having lost his intellectual stamina, however, 'as the hours wore on his voice dropped almost to a whisper' ('Law Times', 370). He died of chronic renal failure on 11 March 1894 at Red House Park, a nursing home near Ipswich, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. His wife survived him. Stephen's principal honours were a knighthood (KCSI), in January 1877, and the award of a baronetcy on his retirement from the bench. Academic distinctions included honorary membership of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, honorary doctorates from Oxford (1878) and Edinburgh University (1884), an honorary fellowship of Trinity College, Cambridge (1885), and election to the position of 'corresponding member' of the Institut de France (1888). 
In describing Stephen as 'the last of the Benthamites', 'The Times''s obituarist was accurate in respect of Stephen's almost irresistible tendency to confront opposing notions of thought in a head-on, unflinching, and sometimes unsubtle fashion. Like Bentham, Stephen held many moral and intellectual beliefs which, even when they were unassailable, were often too cleanly stripped of irreducible human foibles to make their straightforward social application anything other than illusory. With this was coupled a distinctly jaundiced view of democratic institutions which he shared with Carlyle, his long-standing close friend and, in some senses, spiritual mentor. Yet, unlike Carlyle, any misanthropic streak in Stephen was firmly checked by a powerful personal optimism which had ensured a more direct and formative engagement with the passing events of the age. No distillation of him can be bettered than that of Lytton Strachey, whose first-hand observation suggested that Stephen 'preponderated with a character of formidable grandeur, with a massive and rugged intellectual sanity and colossal commonsense'. 
Stephen's three sons all became lawyers. The eldest, Herbert Stephen (1857-1932), who succeeded to the baronetcy, was an authority on criminal law and practice. Harry Lushington Stephen (1860-1945), the third son, was judge of the high court of Calcutta (1901-14) and was knighted in 1913; he later succeeded his eldest brother as third baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 26376


James Kenneth Stephen (1859-1892), the second son, was born on 25 February 1859. Educated at William Browning's School, Thorpe Mandeville, until 1871, and then at Eton, where he showed legendary prowess at the wall game, he gained a scholarship at King's College, Cambridge, in 1878; this was followed by election to a fellowship in 1885. Like his father, he enjoyed both recognition as an Apostle and a high reputation as a speaker at the union, of which he became president in 1880. The same year he was admitted at the Inner Temple, and he was called to the bar in 1885. In 1889 he became clerk of assize on the south Wales circuit in succession to Henry Maine's recently deceased son. However, literary and journalistic interests increasingly absorbed his attention, with contributions to the 'St James's Gazette', the 'Saturday Review', and the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. At the same time the effects of a severe blow to the head, sustained in 1886 from a windmill-driven water-pump, were becoming steadily more evident in frequent periods of violent excitement and depression. In April 1891 it appears that Lord Lytton, then British ambassador in Paris, intervened to secure his release from police custody. Stephen returned to live in Cambridge in the spring of that year, successfully lecturing on constitutional history and speaking at the union. In his pamphlet 'Living Languages' (1891), he defended Greek as a compulsory element of the Cambridge entrance and degree examinations, and in the same year he also published two volumes of verse, the much admired 'Lapsus calami' and 'Quo musa tendis?' The former went through five editions and was later jointly republished with the latter as 'Lapsus calami and other Verses' (1896) by his brother Herbert. James Kenneth Stephen died at St Andrew's Hospital, Northampton, on 3 February 1892 and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26377


Stephens, Alexander (1757-1821), biographer, was born in Elgin where his father, Thomas Stephens, was provost from 1770 to 1771. His mother's maiden name was Fordyce. At the age of eighteen he left Aberdeen University for the West Indies, and stayed for some time in Jamaica. On his return he bought a commission in the 84th regiment, but never joined it as the regiment was reduced. At twenty-one he entered the Middle Temple, London, but gave more time to literature than to law, conducting a legal journal called 'The Templar', although he is said to have pleaded successfully before the House of Lords the claim of a distant relative, James Innes-Ker, duke of Roxburghe, to the title. 
Stephens's first literary attempt was a poem on Jamaica. In 1803 he published a 'History of the Wars which Arose out of the French Revolution'. In 1813 appeared his chief work, the 'Memoirs of John Horne Tooke', based on original letters and papers, as well as upon an acquaintance of several years. It deals with the quarrel between John Wilkes and Tooke in detail, and also examines the 'Junius' affair closely. Reports of Tooke's conversation are included. The work was regarded in the nineteenth century as the best life of Tooke available. 
Stephens was a frequent contributor of literary and biographical articles to the 'Analytical Review' and the 'Monthly Magazine'. He edited the first five volumes of the 'Annual Biography and Obituary' (begun in 1817) and contributed most of the contents of the first nine volumes of 'Public Characters', issued by Sir Richard Phillips in 1823. He published numerous anonymous pamphlets, including in 1817 a brief memoir of John Philpot Curran. Despite his having very marked whiggish views, his biographies were considered fair and important. 
In 1792 Stephens married Miss Lewin, daughter of Samuel Lewin, of Broadfield House in Hertfordshire; they had three children. He lived near Primrose Hill, Hampstead, where he wrote a brief autobiographical sketch which was published in the 'Annual Biography and Obituary' a year after his death. Later he built Park House in Upper Church Lane, Chelsea, London, where he lived until his death there on 24 February 1821. He was buried in the new burial-ground, New Church, Chelsea. Between October 1821 and August 1824 the 'Monthly Magazine' published 'Stephensiana', a series of articles consisting of anecdotes of his contemporaries collected by him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26378


Stephens, Catherine (1794-1882), singer and actress, was born at 85 Park Street, Grosvenor Square, London, on 18 September 1794, the daughter of Edward Stephens ('c'.1768-1827), a carver and gilder. Her choice of career was probably influenced by her elder sister Elizabeth (later Mrs J. Smith), who performed in Liverpool and then at Drury Lane from 1798 until around 1806. According to Oxberry, the two Misses Stephens 'mutually assisted each other' ('Oxberry', 123), but Catherine was soon to supersede her sister, to become one of the most popular English singers of her generation. 
In 1807 Catherine's father articled her for five years to Gesualdo Lanza, a respectable singing-master, who gave her a thorough grounding in Italian vocal technique. Lanza introduced her to musical society at concerts in Bath, Bristol, Southampton, Ramsgate, and Margate, sometimes billing her as Miss Young. In 1812, presumably with Lanza's blessing, she began her London career in evenings of music and recitation at the Freemasons' Tavern (The Museodeum). She was also engaged to sing in burlettas presented by an Italian opera company at the Pantheon: she appeared as Cherubino in their production of Mozart's 'Le nozze di Figaro' (2 May 1812), the first staging of this opera in London (acts I and II only were given); her duet with Teresa Bertinotti-Radicati, probably 'Aprite, presto, aprite', was encored consistently. Stephens gave her final performance as Lanza's pupil at a concert given by Samuel Wesley and Samuel Webbe in Ramsgate on 3 October 1812: after this, to Lanza's dismay, her father transferred her to Thomas Welsh, who had heard her at a private concert. Welsh launched her at concerts in Manchester on 17 and 19 November. 
Stephens made her Covent Garden debut as Mandane in Arne's 'Artaxerxes' (23 September 1813). Her great success, particularly in the airs 'Checked by duty, racked by love' and 'The soldier tired of war's alarms', invited comparison with Angelica Catalani and Elizabeth Billington: both divas attended her performance in this role, and afterwards 'paid her their joint tribute of admiration of her vocal powers' ('Morning Chronicle', 10 Nov 1813). Stephens was courted by London's Italian Opera Company at the King's Theatre following Catalani's departure, but lack of fluency in Italian led her to decline this and subsequent offers of engagement from that theatre. 
Stephens continued to succeed that season as Polly in 'The Beggar's Opera', as Clara in 'The Duenna', and as Rosetta in 'Love in a Village'. Hazlitt's reviews were particularly enthusiastic, and his account of her performance as Polly led Stephens to visit the offices of the 'Morning Chronicle' in person to express her thanks. Her newly acquired fame provoked a dispute in the press between Lanza and Welsh, each of whom claimed the honour of having instructed her. She played Ophelia to the Hamlet of Young and J. P. Kemble, and continued to sing leading roles at Covent Garden with few interruptions until 1824, when, following disagreements with the managers, she transferred to Drury Lane and the English Opera House. There she sang in Henry Bishop's 'Aladdin', put on to rival Weber's 'Oberon' at Covent Garden; Weber saw it, and wrote approvingly of Kitty Stephens's performance. She only returned to Covent Garden in 1828. 
Out of season, Stephens toured the British Isles. In August and September 1816 she appeared at the Crow Street Theatre, Dublin, and the 'Freeman's Journal' declared, 'we do not recollect that any other performer, in so short a time, became so great a favourite with a Dublin audience' (7 September 1816). She returned to Ireland again in the latter half of 1818 (when she performed in Dublin, Limerick, Kilkenny, and Cork), and again in July 1821 and 1825. The diary of her brother Edward Maxwell Stephens, who seems to have acted as her manager from around 1817, details her performances throughout Britain, a trip to France in November 1821 (including many visits to the Paris Opera), financial affairs, and social life until her marriage in 1838. 
Stephens's voice was full and rich, but for some critics she lacked expression and dramatic fire. Though often considered deficient in the bravura style, she was deeply admired in 'ballads and songs of simple declamation', which she performed with little embellishment in a 'purely English' manner: 'it is impossible for any thing to be more pure, more chaste than the simplicity with which Miss Stephens gives such songs as 'Auld Robin Gray'' ('Quarterly Musical Magazine and Review', 3.62-3). Her acting skills were limited, as W. C. Macready recalled: 'in all the various characters allotted to her she represented only one: but the magic spell of that was never known to fail' ('Macready's Reminiscences', 1.133). 
Despite her popularity on the stage, therefore, many thought Stephens at her finest in concert. She sang at the Concerts of Ancient Music for two decades from 1814, and it was probably here that she was 'instructed in all she knew of the sacred school by William Knyvett' (Phillips, 1.144). She also made her debut at the Philharmonic concerts in 1814, and performed there regularly until 1827. In April 1821 she sang at the royal concerts at Brighton under George Smart, but, as the latter noted, her voice did not please the king. 
Stephens seems to have had a penchant for Mozart, and often selected numbers from his operas as concert items. She sang Zerlina and Susanna in the first English-language adaptations of Mozart's 'Don Giovanni' (1817, Covent Garden) and 'Le nozze di Figaro' (1819, Covent Garden). She was also one of three who sang Agnes (Agathe) in Hawes's English adaptation of Weber's 'Der Freischutz' (1824, English Opera House). Weber himself composed for Stephens a setting of 'From Chindara's warbling fount I come', which she had chosen from Thomas Moore's 'Lallah Rookh'. This was to be Weber's final composition: she sang it at his benefit concert on 26 May 1826, when the composer improvised a piano accompaniment he did not live long enough to commit to paper (a sketch, with complete vocal part, survives in manuscript). 
Oxberry described Stephens as about 'medium height' with a figure 'more pleasing than excellent'; 'her hair and eyes are dark; and her countenance is fascinating, though not strictly speaking handsome' ('Oxberry', 135-6). She apparently looked older and graver than her years. Lord Milton and the duke of Devonshire were said to have been among her suitors, but the general consensus was that her conduct remained as 'pure' and 'chaste' as her singing: 'this pretty English ballad-singer... was, in every relation of life, simply admirable,... her reputation was as unblemished as the new-fallen snow' (obituary, unidentified newspaper, BL, Add. MS 35027, fol. 90'r'). 
By 1835 Stephens's voice had become thin and her intonation unsteady, and she retired from the stage having amassed considerable wealth (the 'Quarterly Musical Magazine and Review' estimated that by 1822 she was netting $2500 each winter season from private parties alone). On 14 April 1838, aged forty-four, she married George Capel-Coningsby, fifth earl of Essex (1757-1839). The octogenarian earl was a 'distinguished patron of the drama', whose estranged wife had died three months earlier ('Era Almanack', 67). A testament to the purity of her reputation was her reception at court by Queen Victoria, who recorded in her journal that Lord Essex had been ''excessively' pleased' by her 'having called up Lady Essex... at the Ball and having spoken to her'. The queen and Lord Melbourne agreed 'she was a very nice person' (Esher, 1.374). Following Lord Essex's death on 23 April 1839, Catherine continued to live at 9 Belgrave Square, the house in which she had been married, until she died of bronchitis on 22 February 1882. She was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 28 February. She left her entire personal estate, valued at more than $70,000, to her unmarried niece Esther Mathilda Johnstone, with whom she had often sung duets. It seems that in her retirement Stephens missed the theatrical life: she observed to Macready 'that she had never been so happy as when she was on the stage' ('Macready's Reminiscences', 2.58). 


@@@@@


doc= 26379


Stephens, Charles Edward (1821-1892), composer and instrumentalist, was born at 12 Portman Place, London, on 18 March 1821, the nephew of the soprano Catherine (Kitty) Stephens, countess of Essex. He began to study music at an early age, and, like his brother Samuel John Stephens (1819-1889), was taught the piano by Cipriani Potter, harmony by J. A. Hamilton, and the violin by Henry Blagrove. The Society of British Musicians, of which he was a member, rehearsed an overture of his in January 1842; he also played second violin in the society's quartets. Two of his string quartets (G minor, 1843, and F major, 1844) were published, and he won both the first and the second prize for quartets offered by Trinity College, London, in 1879. 
Stephens became a member of the Royal Society of Musicians in 1843, and in the same year was appointed organist of St Mark's, Myddelton Square. In 1846 he was elected organist of Holy Trinity, Paddington, followed by St Mark's, Hamilton Terrace (1862), St Clement Danes, Strand (1864), and St Saviour's, Paddington (1872); he resigned this last post in 1875. He occasionally played in public as a pianist, but spent most of his time teaching. He was founding member of the Musical Association (1874), and treasurer of the Philharmonic Society (1880) and the south-eastern section of the National Society of Professional Musicians. In 1885 he was appointed one of the examiners for degrees in music at Cambridge University. 
Stephens was an accomplished teacher and musician. His numerous compositions included five overtures and two symphonies, one of which, in G minor, was performed in Birmingham on 24 April 1890 and at a Philharmonic concert on 19 March 1891. He wrote a large quantity of piano, organ, and chamber music, as well as church services and anthems. He was an editor of 'The Choir Chant Book' (1882) and author of the article on the Philharmonic Society in the first edition of Grove's 'Dictionary of Music and Musicians' (1879-89). He died at his residence, 37 Howley Place, Maida Hill, London, on 13 July 1892 and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26380


Stephens, Edward (d. 1706), pamphleteer and moral reformer, was the son of Edward Stephens, of Cherington, Gloucestershire, and Mary, daughter of John Raynerford, of Staverton, Northamptonshire. The Stephens family owned several estates in Gloucestershire. Edward followed a number of relatives to the Middle Temple bar, practising as a lawyer during Charles II's reign. He later left the bar and was ordained, although he held no living. After 1671 he married into another prominent Gloucestershire family, becoming the second husband of Mary Adderley, the widowed daughter of Sir Matthew Hale. Richard Baxter, who wrote a memoir of Hale at the request of Stephens, said the great lawyer and his son-in-law were close friends. On Hale's death in 1676 Stephens edited and published the former chief justice's 'Contemplations Moral and Divine' with a preface justifying breaking Hale's injunction against posthumous publication. The work appeared in several editions. Stephens himself wrote more than fifty pamphlets on political and religious issues, the first in 1674 but the majority between 1689 and 1691 and in the ten years before his death in 1706. Several were published under the name Socrates Christianus. Thomas Hearne observed that Stephens was 'a good, pious, sincere and religious man' but that he had 'singular opinions' ('Remains', 361-2). Stephens's first tract, 'A Discourse Concerning the Original of the Powder-Plot' (1674), introduced a recurring theme, arguing that the laxity of preferment-seeking Anglican clergy was driving zealous Christians to join the sects and weakening resistance to Rome. Stephens later wrote and debated against London nonconformists, particularly the Quakers, but he respected their sincerity and religious commitment, contrasting this with the 'cold' formalism of the Church of England. He opposed coercive uniformity as divisive and contrary to primitive Christianity. 
In 1688-9 Stephens welcomed the 'wonderfull Revolution', hailing William of Orange as the instrument of God's providence in a series of pamphlets in 1689, including 'Reflections on the Occurrences of the Past Year' and 'The True English Government, and Misgovernment of the Four Last Kings'. In 'Authority Abused by the Vindication of the Last Years Transactions' (1690), Stephens spoke of having joined William at Sherborne, Dorset, in 1688 and he pledged the support of himself and five sons (some of whom were probably stepchildren). His argument justifying this support emerged most clearly in 'An apology for Mr. R. Stafford, with an admonition to him and such other honest mistaken people' (1690), in which Stephens urged the taking of the oath of allegiance to William while observing that men owed a higher duty to God and 'the intire State according to the true Constitution'. He argued that English kings were originally elective and still required the people's consent to confirm their 'mutual Contract'. James had broken this 'Publick Trust for the Common Good', seeking to be absolute and arbitrary, and his overthrow was therefore not rebellion but a just war against what Stephens characterized as 'King-Craft' (pp. 4-10, 13). 
Stephens believed the revolution would lead to national reformation and reverse the growth of impiety and debauchery, which he wrote against in 1688, but by 1690 he was already voicing disillusion that church and government under William had embraced rather than opposed vice and corruption. In that year he drafted a bill for the 'Reformation of the Manners of the People of this Nation', but claimed it was prevented from being introduced into parliament by the bishops. His campaign against sin and vice led Josiah Woodward to name him among a number of 'worthy Divines' whose actions gave rise to the Society for the Reformation of Manners in the 1690s (Woodward, 73). Stephens himself claimed to have been the movement's main founder and he criticized the membership for failing to 'follow your Leader' during the decade. He became alienated by what he saw as excessive caution in the face of parliamentary and episcopal pressure, and accused the reformers of sinking into 'empty Formality, Affectation and Vanity' (E. Stephens, 'A Seasonable and Necessary Admonition to the Gentlemen of the First Society for the Reformation of Manners', 1700, 4, 6). 
Stephens transferred his energies to leading a London religious society, 'a small Company of Poor People... bearing a Testimony for God', while in his writings assailing bishops, clergy, MPs, government ministers, Catholics, Quakers, republicans, Erastians, latitudinarians, deists, Calvinists, and the 'promiscuous Multitude' (E. Stephens, 'A Kind Invitation to the People called Quakers', 1696, 4; Stephens, 'Letters and Papers'). He also published learned treatises on the ancient church for use by the society, notably 'The Liturgy of the Ancients Represented, as Near as Well may be, in English Forms' (1696). Stephens repeatedly denounced the 1552 'Book of Common Prayer' as representing the curtailing of true reformation by Archbishop Cranmer, the 'False Prophet' of 'that Beast, Hen. 8th' ('Seasonable and Necessary Admonition', 6). He argued for a return to ancient liturgical forms, which he felt were to some degree better represented by the first 'Book of Common Prayer' of Edward VI's reign and the Scottish prayer book of 1637. In particular, Stephens believed that there should be a daily celebration of holy communion to express devotion and foster religious observance, using terms which clearly acknowledged the saving reality of the body and blood of Christ in the eucharist. The religious society he formed began daily communion at a private house on 6 January 1694, moving in the following year to a church in the City of London and continuing to meet into the eighteenth century, despite official disapproval. Stephens also urged closer communion between English and Greek churches and, according to Hearne, he regularly delivered the sacrament to the biblical scholar Johann Ernst Grabe 'after the manner of the Greek church'. Hearne recalled that his piety led some to call him Father Stephens or Abbot Stephens, although Stephens complained that he was also branded Madman Convert ('Remains', 323, 361; Stephens, 'Letters and Papers', 2.4). In the preamble to a collection of tracts which he gathered in 1702 and gave to the Bodleian Library, Stephens protested that recent works which he intended for use by members of convocation had been suppressed, and in the year of his death he said court proceedings arising from his writings against Roman Catholicism had cost him $3000. 
In 1704 Stephens observed that he had lived 'above the ordinary Age of Man' and had now left the employments of the world (Stephens, 'Letters and Papers', 4.1). He died in April 1706 and was buried at Enfield by his son-in-law, the Revd Dr Udall. The nonjuror Hearne claimed that Stephens too had died a nonjuror, despite his having sworn loyalty to William and Mary in 1689 and urged others to do the same. In 1701 Stephens wrote that he would abide by his oath to the king but added that 'I refuse to take it again' for 'good reasons'. The reasons were not specified, although elsewhere he attacked civil authority over the church and latitudinarian acceptance of the 'secular Deprivation' of clergy (Stephens, 'Letters and Papers', 2.2; E. Stephens, 'An Abstract of Common Principles... Against the Politick Machinations of Erastian Hereticks', 1700, 2). 


@@@@@


doc= 26381


Stephens, Edward Bowring (1815-1882), sculptor, was born at Exeter, Devon, on 10 December 1815, the son of James Stephens (1777-1849), a statuary mason. His artistic training began under the guidance of John Gendall, a local draughtsman and landscape painter, but in 1835 he went to London and became a pupil of the sculptor Edward Hodges Baily. In 1836 he won a silver medal from the Society of Arts for a model of a figure and in that year became a student at the Royal Academy Schools. His earliest exhibited works there were three ideal subjects and a bust (all 1838). These were followed in 1839 by 'Diana' and another bust. That year he went to Italy and worked for some time in Rome, returning nearly three years later to Exeter, where he executed a life-size statue in marble of Lord Rolle. He returned to London in 1842, and in 1843 was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Academy for a small relief titled 'The Battle of the Centaurs and Lapithae'. On 24 July 1845 he married, in the parish church of Crediton, Devon, Jane Harris Emes (1814/15-1888), daughter of James Emes, a serge manufacturer. 
In 1846 Stephens carved a marble chimney-piece for Buckingham Palace. His two groups 'Satan Vanquished' and 'Satan Tempting Eve' attracted notice in the Great Exhibition of 1851. Apart from his busts, whose subjects included Lord Palmerston, Bishop Phillpotts, the earl of Devon, Earl Fortescue, and Viscount Ebrington, he contributed many groups and statues to the exhibitions of the Royal Academy, for example 'Eve Contemplating Death' (1853), 'The Angel' (1861), 'The Earl of Lonsdale' (1863, mausoleum, Lowther Castle, Westmorland), 'The Bathers' (1877), statuettes 'Ophelia' and 'Lady Godiva' (both 1879), and 'Shielding the Helpless' (1882). He also exhibited at the British Institution from 1838 to 1853, and his 'Preparing for the Chase' was shown at the Manchester Art Treasures Exhibition in 1857. 
Besides these works in 1862 Stephens executed a colossal marble statue of Sir Thomas Dyke Acland, placed on Northernhay, Exeter. Exeter has further examples of his work including an imposing marble statue of Earl Fortescue in Castle Yard, a statue of the earl of Devon in Bedford Circus, and one of the prince consort (1870, Royal Albert Memorial Museum and Art Gallery). His bronze group 'The Deerstalker', exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1876, is generally regarded as his finest work. Purchased by public subscription, it was placed at the entrance to Northernhay in Exeter. He also produced public statues of Alfred the Great, for the Egyptian Hall of Mansion House, London; Alfred Rooker, for Guildhall Square, Plymouth, Devon; Sir John Cordy Burrows, for Brighton, Sussex; and a recumbent figure of Elizabeth, countess of Devon, for her monument in Powderham church, Devon. These were well received and greatly increased his reputation. In 1873 he executed the statues of Leonardo, Wren, and Reynolds on the facade of Burlington House, Piccadilly, London. 
Stephens was elected an ARA in 1864, but it was generally believed that his election was due to his having been confused with Alfred Stevens, the sculptor of the Wellington monument in St Paul's Cathedral. He died at his home, 110 Buckingham Palace Road, London, on 10 November 1882, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 26382


Stephens, George (bap. 1799, d. 1851), playwright, was born in Chelsea, London, and baptized at St Luke's, Chelsea, on 2 January 1799. He was the son of Hugh Stephens and his wife, Anne. Although he evidently had some education, nothing is known of his early life, except that he evinced an interest in writing, especially dramatic composition, from late boyhood. His earliest publication, an unacted tragedy entitled 'The Vampire' (1821), was written in association with Hugo John Belfour, under the pseudonym St John Dorset. This was followed by a further collaboration in the same terms, 'Montezuma, a Tragedy in Five Acts, and other Poems' (1822), the second edition of which was dedicated to William Charles Macready. 
In 1835 Stephens's three-volume romance 'The Manuscripts of Erdely' attracted some attention for its imaginative qualities and erudition, but his second novel, 'Pere la Chaise, or, The Confessor' (1840), was a comparative failure. Stephens's main aspiration was to be a dramatist. Although self-characterized as of a retiring disposition, he was keen to be introduced to leading playwrights of the day. William Charles Macready, whom Stephens liked to think of as a friend, introduced him to Thomas Talfourd in 1837, and he also made the acquaintance of James Sheridan Knowles, Robert Browning, and Bulwer Lytton. His first solo tragedy, 'Gertrude and Beatrice, or, The Queen of Hungary' (3 editions, 1839), set in thirteenth-century Buda, was heavily Elizabethanized in style and difficult to penetrate. Macready, whose opinion was solicited on its suitability for stage production, commented: 'Went through [the play] with some attention, though I 'could' not read word for word... This gentleman, in my mind, with very superior abilities, has a warp in his mind or taste, which nullifies his best efforts' ('Diaries', 1.498). According to the preface to the published play, Macready opined that the love intrigue in Act 4 between Count Rodna and Beatrice, sister of the queen, 'must be fatal' to the possibility of representation. Stephens's belief that the episode could be easily ''expurgated' to any required degree of decorum, without in the least affecting the development of the plot' failed to recognize that the real problem was that the play was undramatic. Its more or less inevitable rejection in 1840 by all three patent theatre managements left Stephens 'very sore upon it -- as all authors are' (ibid., 2.98). 
Stephens's only publicly performed play, 'Martinuzzi, or, The Hungarian Daughter' (2 editions, 1841), was a version of his dramatic poem of the subtitle (also 1841). It was staged at the Lyceum Theatre twice in 1841: in May as 'Martinuzzi, or, The Patriot' and in special circumstances on 26 August, under the title as published. On both occasions Samuel Phelps and Mary Warner took the leading roles. Sponsored by the ponderously styled 'Council of the Dramatic Authors Theatre established for the full enfranchisement of English Living Authors' ('The Times', 27 Aug 1841), the revival formed a key element in the campaign against the theatrical monopoly (eventually abolished by act of parliament in 1843) which restricted the performance of the legitimate drama in London to the three patent houses. Converted into a music drama or burletta by the simple addition of songs, Stephens's tragedy evaded the law while demonstrating the absurdity of it. Despite inadequate rehearsal, there was much goodwill towards the play and the curtain fell, according to 'The Era', 'amid stentorian cheers, sufficient to have unroofed the theatre' ('Remarks upon the presentation of the tragedy of 'Martinuzzi'', Stephens, 2.400). However, the old faults of over-writing and opacity persisted and 'The Times' declared that Stephens's 'fervent and beautiful poetry' was overshadowed by 'his inordinate predilection for metaphors... We sigh through whole scenes for a single natural expression' (27 Aug 1841). Critical opinion could hardly have been more divided: 'Fraser's Magazine' bracketed it with ''Damned' Tragedies' (May 1842), while 'The Monthly' made immoderate comparisons with Aeschylus. After twenty-seven performances the run ended on 25 September 1841, the theatre being required for promenade concerts. A revised and longer version of the play appeared as 'The Patriot' in 1849. 
Stephens's aspirations as an acted dramatist were never fulfilled. In the 'Advertisement' to his privately printed 'Dramas for the Stage' (2 vols., 1846), the bitterness of failure through the constant rebuffs of the managers is evident. Each of the eight plays (a mixture of contemporary and historical, comedy and tragedy, verse and prose) is dedicated to contemporaries such as Macready, Knowles, and Talfourd; and the comedy 'Rebecca and her Daughters' is 'respectfully inscribed' to Dickens. Set in south Wales in 1843 at the height of the assaults on toll-gates in the name of 'Rebecca', it advocates harmony between the classes and asserts that property brings obligations as well as rights: the first duty is to cherish '
England's ['sic'] bold peasantry, their country's pride, 

who, once destroyed, can never be supplied. 
(Stephens, 2.259)' As with the rest, there was no expectation of performance; but the play's treatment of sensitive political issues would probably have guaranteed the censor's veto.Stephens believed that the stage was second only to the pulpit 'for bettering nations and individuals' (Stephens, vi); and a proportion of his other writing was of a religious or theological nature, notably the introduction to the 'Church of England Quarterly Review' (1, 1837, 1-34) and a compilation entitled 'The Voice of the Pulpit, being Sermons on Various Subjects' (1839). The significant political dimension in Stephens's work includes not only some of the plays but a late ethical piece, 'The justification of war as the medium of civilisation' (1850), and his most successful work in print, 'Political Prophecy Fulfilled, or, 'Ireland'' (6 editions, 1839). More intense than most, his concerns for the state of Ireland were animated by direct connections with the country through his Irish-born wife, Ellen (1810/11-1866). 
Stephens appears to have had no paid work except that of author. At various periods he resided in Hertfordshire and Essex but returned to London after about 1846, having suffered a decline in health and fortune. He had acquaintances in the dramatic world, but no close friends. He died from dysentery at 25 College Street, Camden Town, London, on 15 October 1851. He was survived by his wife and a son and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 26383


Stephens, George (1813-1895), philologist and runologist, son of John Stephens (1772-1841) of Ongar, a Methodist minister, and his wife, Rebecca Eliza Rayner (died 1852), was born at Liverpool on 13 December 1813. His brother was Joseph Rayner Stephens (1805-1879). George was educated at private schools and at University College, London, where he was one of the earliest students. In 1834 he married Maria (1808-1896), daughter of Edward and Elizabeth Bennett of Brentwood, and in the same year he took up residence in Stockholm, where his brother had settled in 1826, and where he found employment as a teacher of English. His earliest publications reflect his own pedagogical interests and needs: 'An Outline Sketch of Shakspere's 'Tempest,' with Remarks' (1836); 'Conversational Outlines of English Grammar' (1837); an edition of Washington Irving's 'Voyages and Discoveries of the Companions of Columbus' (1837), intended as a reading book for Swedish students of English; and an English-Swedish dictionary (1841). 
It was his brother Joseph who first directed Stephens's attention to Scandinavian languages and literature. In 1839 he published an English verse translation of Esaias Tegner's popular 'Frithiofs saga', together with a translation of the medieval Icelandic saga on which the poem was based. This was the first English translation of a complete Icelandic saga ever published. He was a founding member of the Svenska Fornskriftsallskapet (Society for the Publication of Ancient Swedish Texts), established in 1843, for which he was to edit from manuscripts several important works of early Swedish literature. In 1844 he was associated with G. O. Hylten-Cavallius in the publication of a collection of Swedish popular tales, and he initiated a pioneering scheme for the investigation of popular antiquities in Iceland which was adopted by the Northern Antiquarian Society in Copenhagen in 1845. 
Stephens's translation of a newly discovered Old English poem, 'The Phoenix', published in 'Archaeologia' in 1844, was written in what seemed to many a highly idiosyncratic style, retaining the alliteration of the original verse, and wherever possible using Anglicized forms of old-northern rather than Graeco-Roman and French vocabulary. Thereafter Stephens's publications tended to favour 'forewords' rather than 'prefaces', 'betterings' rather than 'corrections', and a 'wordhoard' rather than a 'vocabulary'. His own often thunderous prose style is reminiscent of Wulfstan's sermons. His linguistic and stylistic preferences, desire to reform the English spelling system, and choice of texts for editing, were driven by a distinctive politicized philology. He was throughout his life implacably hostile towards what he regarded as German military and philological imperialism. He refused to use the German-derived (as he regarded it) term 'Anglo-Saxon', preferring 'Old English'. He believed that the language and literature of pre-conquest England were essentially 'old-northern' or 'Scando-Anglic' in origin, rather than Teutonic. Elementary grammar appeared to contradict him, however: whereas the Old Icelandic language featured infinitives ending in -a, middle-voice verbs, and suffixed definite articles, Old English had neither of these latter two elements, and -an infinitives. Stephens claimed that such apparent differences were misleading, arguing that both Old English and Old Icelandic were the late clerkly 'book-tungs' of ninth-century Wessex and thirteenth-century Iceland, subsequently fossilized in Victorian grammar books. In earlier centuries, he maintained, the 'Scando-Anglic folk-tung' introduced to Mercia and Northumbria by the first wave of Scandinavian invaders and settlers after AD 200 had shared common grammatical features with all other 'Scando-Gothic' dialects, before Old Icelandic and Old English developed their local variations. It was this 'Scando-Gothic' language which survived in the early British and Scandinavian runic inscriptions which he collected and published. Stephens claimed that, just as the limitations of the Roman alphabet had muted the sonic richness of old-northern English, so the traditions and 'iron laws' of nineteenth-century Teutonic philology were in danger of obscuring Britain's old-northern heritage. His later residence as an Englishman in Denmark led him to identify residual old-northern continuities between rural language in the two countries. Unlike their urban contemporaries, the unlettered farm labourers of northern England and Jutland could (he claimed) communicate effortlessly with each other in their cognate dialects. Driven by these philological principles and prejudices, it was natural for Stephens to be appalled by the 1864 German annexation of Schleswig-Holstein, the modern Danish homeland of England's early old-northern settlers; he felt that it severed by force of arms the cultural links which his philological research had re-established. 
Stephens's residence in Denmark had begun in 1851, when he was appointed lector in English language and literature at the University of Copenhagen, or Cheapinghaven, as his philological sensitivities led him to name it. In the following year he was appointed lector in Old English. A collection of the historical and legendary ballads of Sweden, prepared by him in collaboration with G. O. Hylten-Cavallius, appeared in 1853. In 1855, having previously become a Danish subject, he was appointed professor at the university. During the next few years he published many works promoting his old-northern philological sympathies. Among them was a five-act chamber drama, 'Revenge, or, Woman's Love' (1857), set in ancient Mercia and Sweden; in 1860 he published for the first time a fragment of the Old English poem 'Waldhere', discovered by Professor E. C. Werlauff in the university library; and the same year saw the publication of Stephens's edition of 'Sir Amadace: a Middle-Northern-English Metrical Romance from the Thirteenth Century'. 
In 1866 there appeared the first volume of the work on which Stephens's modern reputation is principally based, 'The old-northern runic monuments of Scandinavia and England, now first collected and deciphered'. Later volumes appeared in 1868, 1884, and (edited by S. O. M. Soderberg) in 1901. An abridgement of the first three volumes was published in 1884. The energy which Stephens devoted to securing accurate copies of the inscriptions is remarkable, and as a storehouse of materials for runic studies the volumes remain invaluable. For over a hundred years it represented the only attempt to produce anything approaching a full corpus of English runes: some of the items were published for the first time in the volumes, and Stephens remains a primary authority for a number of provenances. His own contributions to the interpretation of the inscriptions are unreliable, however. His philological preconceptions and misguided enthusiasms led him into frequent error, most spectacularly when deciphering the inscription found at Brough in Northumbria, which he translated in the belief that it was written in Anglian runes; he later acknowledged that the inscription was written in Greek hexameters. 
The sheer volume of Stephens's published work is formidable: the bibliography in T. H. Erslev's 'Forfatter-Lexicon', which extends only up to 1868, fills ten closely printed pages. He was an indefatigable contributor to many periodicals, both Scandinavian and English, including the 'Gentleman's Magazine', 'Foreign Quarterly Review', and 'Notes and Queries'. Many of his articles deal with questions of political and philological controversy. He proved to be an opponent of hereditary aristocracy as well as of popular revolution. He added a large number of quotations, principally from the literature of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, to the materials assembled for what eventually became the 'Oxford English Dictionary'. 
Stephens was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and a member of many learned societies in Scandinavia and Britain. He was awarded a PhD by the University of Uppsala and an LLD by the University of Cambridge. He was a knight of the orders of the northern star, St Olaf, and the Dannebrog. He resigned his professorship in 1893, and died in Copenhagen on 9 August 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 26384


Stephens, Henry (1795-1874), writer on agriculture, was born at Keerpoy, Bengal, on 25 July 1795, the son of Andrew Stephens, an East India Company surgeon, who died at Calcutta on 26 August 1806. He went to Scotland and was educated at parish and grammar schools in Dundee; at Dundee Academy, under the rector, Thomas Duncan, he also studied mathematics, natural philosophy, and chemistry, from 1809 to 1811. In 1812-13 he attended lectures on chemistry and agriculture at the University of Edinburgh and in 1815 he boarded himself with George Brown of Whitsome Hill, 'one of the best farmers of that well-farmed county'. In the preface to his 'Book of the Farm' (1852), Stephens described how for two years there 'I laboured with my own hands at every species of work which the ploughman, the field-worker and the shepherd must perform in the field, or the steward and the cattle-man at the steading: and even in the dairy and poultry house.' After a third year spent in managing the farm, he made an agricultural tour of Europe, gaining an insight into continental methods. 
Shortly after his return home in 1820 Stephens took over the 300 acre run-down farm at Balmadies in the parish of Rescobie, Forfarshire, already probably in the possession of the family. He transformed the holding with new buildings and roads, thorn hedges, and stone dykes; he also enlarged and regularized the small fields which had been subject to flooding, and introduced the stall feeding of cattle and the folding of sheep in turnip-fields, with nets instead of hurdles. His use of furrow drains, filled with small stones, anticipated the Deanston plan of James Smith (1789-1850). Stephens is said to have raised the value of the holding from $150 to $400 a year. Some of these improvements were described in his earliest articles on agriculture, written at Balmadies from January 1828 onwards, which appeared in the first volume of the new 'Quarterly Journal of Agriculture', in 1829. Stephens then made an agricultural tour of the north-east part of Ireland and described it in the third volume of this journal, in 1832, and he became its editor in the same year. He had been an ordinary member of the Highland and Agricultural Society since 1826; later he was a member of its council and he edited the society's 'Transactions' until 1852. 
By the early 1830s Stephens had been forced to relinquish Balmadies, having lost all his investments in the failure of an Indian company. He moved to the Edinburgh area where by 1837 he was settled at Redbraes Cottage, Bonnington Road, Edinburgh. He had decided perforce to devote his career to agricultural journalism, rather than practice, believing from his own experience that there was a great need of instructive literature for young farmers. A chance meeting with William Blackwood, the publisher of the 'Quarterly Journal', proved fortuitous, and his publishing house was to issue all Stephens's subsequent writings. 
In the thirty years from 1842 Stephens, with the aid of illustrators and sometimes other collaborators such as James Slight, Robert Scott Burn, and William Seller, had ten titles published, of which the first and most influential was 'The Book of the Farm' (editions in his own lifetime were printed in 1842-4, 1849-51, and 1871). This work rapidly became accepted as the standard work on practical agriculture. Its success was inspired by its logical arrangement, following the seasons of the farming year (unlike the alphabetical layout of dictionaries and encyclopaedias) and by the detail in which every operation and implement was described. It was illustrated with numerous high-quality engravings, including the remarkable silhouette drawings of Gourlay Steell. 'The Book of the Farm' was still consulted at the end of the twentieth century as a source for Victorian farming, though it must be remembered that in its details it reflects the mixed farming practice of lowland Scotland. Like all Stephens's works it was extensively grounded not only on his own practical experience but on a wide reading of contemporary research in agricultural science. 
With his collaborators Stephens went on to produce other titles in 'The Book of the Farm' series, including 'The Book of Farm Implements and Machines' (1858) and 'The Book of Farm Buildings' (1867), and he wrote a summary version, 'The Catechism of Practical Agriculture' (1855). Other studies included 'A Manual of Practical Draining' (with editions in 1846-8), 'The Yester Deep Land Culture' (1855), and 'Physiology at the Farm' (1867), which examined animal nutrition and food plants. A number of his works were translated into several European languages and 'The Book of the Farm' appeared in several editions in the USA. 
Stephens was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1843 and he became a corresponding member of a number of overseas agricultural societies (listed on the title page of 'The Book of the Farm', 3rd edn, 1871). He received gold medals from Tsar Nicholas I of Russia and from Emperor Napoleon III at the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1855 where he was a judge. In his later years he made annual visits to the spa at Bad Homburg, Hesse, and to the vineyards of the Rhineland, where he investigated the techniques of cultivation. He remained unmarried, and died at Redbraes Cottage, Bonnington Road, on 5 July 1874, of pneumonia following accidental coal-gas poisoning, which may have aggravated an existing heart condition. He was buried at Rosebank cemetery, Leith, on 8 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 26385


Stephens, James Francis (1792-1852), entomologist, was born on 16 September 1792 at Shoreham, Sussex, the only son of the naval captain William James Stephens (died 1799) and his wife, Mary Peck Stephens (afterwards Mrs Dallinger). He was educated at the Blue Coat School, Hertford, and at Christ's Hospital, London, to which he was presented by Shute Barrington (1734-1826), bishop of Durham. He entered the school on 15 May 1800, and quit it on 16 September 1807, when he was placed by his uncle, Admiral Stephens, at the Admiralty office, Somerset House. He was a clerk there for many years. 
Stephens's love for entomology began during his schooldays, and he also had some interest in electricity and natural philosophy. His 'Catalogue of British Animals' was issued in manuscript between 1808 and 1812. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society on 17 February 1815, and of the Zoological Society in 1826. He was also a member of the entomological societies of London and France. Between 1815 and 1825 Stephens's spare time was devoted mainly to ornithology; he contributed volumes nine to fourteen (on birds) to 'General Zoology', a series begun by the naturalist George Shaw (1751-1813) in 1800. Stephens's other interests around this time included electricity, British shells, and insects. In 1818, at the request of the trustees of the British Museum, he was granted leave from his office to assist the naturalist William Elford Leach (1790-1836) in arranging the museum's insect collection. In 1822 he married Sarah, daughter of a Captain Roberts. The couple did have children, but they all died young. 
Around this time, Stephens devoted himself more especially to British insects (he removed all non-indigenous specimens from his cabinet), and prepared a catalogue and a descriptive account of them. On completion of his work at the British Museum, he returned to the Admiralty to resume his duties. However, the 'animosity of his superiors' (Jarvis, 95) at the Admiralty must have influenced his decision to retire early, despite the consequent loss of part of his pension. After his retirement Stephens worked, unpaid, at the British Museum until his death; he undertook the considerable task of arranging and cataloguing the collection of Linnaean Phalaenae (around 7000 specimens). It is believed that he described some 2800 species native to Britain, a considerable expansion on the earlier efforts of the entomologist Thomas Marsham (1747/8-1819). Stephens was unusual in his work practice since he regularly preferred a pocket lens to a microscope, and refused to kill specimens by impaling them, using instead a killing bottle and 'crushed laurel leaves' (ibid., 96). 
The first part of Stephens's chief work, 'Illustrations of British Entomology' (1828-46), was supplemented in 1829 by 'A Systematic Catalogue of British Insects', and in 1839 by 'A Manual of British Coleoptera'. Besides twenty-three papers, he was also author of 'The Nomenclature of British Insects' (1829; edn 1833), 'An abstract of the indigenous Lepidoptera contained in the Verzeichniss bekannter Schmetterlinge, by Hubner' (1835), and 'Catalogue of British Lepidoptera' (1850-52; edn 1856). In addition, he wrote the entomological articles in the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana'. 
In 1832 Stephens took up copyright litigation with the naturalist James Rennie (1787-1867), whose 'Conspectus of the Butterflies and Moths Found in Britain' (1832) reportedly pirated Stephens's 'Illustrations'; but he lost his case. The feeling, however, among his scientific friends was so strongly in his favour that a subscription was raised towards covering the hefty legal expenses, and when in July 1833 the economic entomologist John Curtis (1791-1862) attacked him, Edward Newman (1801-1876), another naturalist, came to his defence. In the same year, Stephens met with a group of friends, fellow enthusiasts of entomology, who resolved to establish an 'Entomological Society of London'. Of this newly founded society, Stephens became a vice-president. Despite believing his work had been pirated, he persevered with the 'Illustrations' up until 1837, when eleven volumes had been completed (a supplement was issued in 1846). 
Stephens's friends attempted to secure him a civil-list pension, but were unsuccessful. He died at Kennington, London, on 22 December 1852, and was survived by his wife. His collections were purchased by the British Museum, and his fine library was acquired by Henry Tibbats Stainton (1822-1892). Stainton continued Stephens's practice of allowing fellow entomologists to use his library on Wednesday evenings, until both Stephens's library, and some of Stainton's own books, were presented to the Entomological Society of London. Stainton also produced a catalogue of Stephens's books in 1853, under the title 'Bibliotheca Stephensiana'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26386


Stephens, Jane Tryphoena (1812?-1896), actress, kept a tobacconist's shop at 39 Liverpool Road, Islington, London, before taking up a career on the stage in 1840. By that date she was married to Joseph Stephens, a solicitor's clerk, though she was sometimes billed as Miss Stephens; her maiden name is unknown. Her first appearance was on 8 February 1840 at the Olympic Theatre, London, then under the management of Samuel Butler, as Betty in 'Mr and Mrs Grubb'. After playing other soubrette parts in London she worked hard outside the capital for nearly three years, playing everything and anything. On her return to London in 1847 she was engaged for 'boys and walking ladies' by Phelps at Sadler's Wells. Here, with the exception of one season with Mrs Warner at the Marylebone, she remained until 1852. In 1853 she joined the company of Charles Mathews at the Lyceum, where in 1854 she was Mrs Crab in a revival of 'Hush Money' and in March 1857 she supported Robson as a country servant in 'Daddy Hardacre' and in Palgrave Simpson's rendering of 'La fille de l'avare'. 
From 1858 to 1867 Jane Stephens was at the Olympic, playing fourteen seasons under four different managements, including that of Alfred Wigan. There she won her first great success as the original Mrs Willoughby in 'Ticket of Leave Man', Taylor's adaptation of 'Leonard'; the 'Morning Herald' of 1 June 1863 named her as one of the very best character actresses of the day. This type of part was to be her forte. On the opening of the Globe Theatre on 28 November 1865 she was the original Miss Pamela Grannet in Byron's 'Cyril's Success', a schoolmistress part where she showed a great hatred of men, which she hoped would be inculcated into her acquaintances. On 31 August 1867 she played, at the Adelphi, the Nurse in 'Romeo and Juliet' on the occasion of Kate Terry's farewell performance. 
Stephens moved to the Holborn and in October 1867 was Mrs Mountflathwoult in Robertson's unsuccessful 'For Love'. She was then at the Globe until 1872, playing among other parts, on 27 March 1872, Madame Valamour in 'Broken Spells' by Westland Marston and W. G. Wills. She returned to the Olympic for three seasons under Neville from October 1873. She then moved to the Criterion in 1879, to the Princess's in 1881, and by March 1884 to the Prince's, where she was Miss Ashford in the 'Private Secretary', an adaptation by C. H. Hawtrey of 'Der Bibliothekar' of von Moser. She then played other similar parts. Her farewell to the stage was on 9 July 1889 at an afternoon performance at the Shaftesbury Theatre, in which she appeared as Mrs Stonehenge Tattle in 'Truth'. When she died of bronchitis at her home, St Bernard's, North Side, Clapham Common, London, on 15 January 1896 she was a widow in her eighty-fourth year; she was cremated on 20 January at Woking, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 26387


Stephens, Jeremiah (1591-1665), scholar and Church of England clergyman, was born and baptized on 17 October 1591 at Bishop's Castle, Shropshire, the eldest son of Walter Stephens ('b'. 1547, died in or before 1630), the rector there. According to his will made in 1629 Walter Stephens was aged 'I think' eighty-two, and had been rector of Bishop's Castle for fifty-two years. In his will he referred to his son Jeremy. Stephens entered Brasenose College, Oxford, on 29 March 1610, matriculating on 19 June, graduating BA on 1 July 1612, and proceeding MA on 3 May 1615. In December 1615 he was ordained deacon, and a year later he was ordained priest and appointed chaplain of All Souls College. He was presented to the rectory of Quinton, Northamptonshire, by Prince Charles, being installed on 24 January 1622. On 11 October 1624 he was made clerk of Oxford market. Charles I also presented him to the rectory of Wootton, Northamptonshire, where he was installed on 11 July 1626. Stephens proceeded BD on 11 November 1628, and was licensed to preach on 17 December 1628. 
Stephens's first scholarly publication was 'B. Gregorii Magni episcopi Romani, de cura pastorali liber vere aureus, accurate emendatus, et restitutus e vet. MSS cum Romana editione collatis' (1629). Two other works quickly followed, 'Notae in D. Cyprian. de unitate ecclesiae' (1632), and 'Notae in D. Cyprian. de bono patientiae' (1633). From 1632 Stephens was in regular contact with the ageing antiquarian Sir Henry Spelman, in effect acting as his assistant on Spelman's mammoth work, 'Concilia', the first part of which was published in 1639. Spelman paid tribute to Stephens in the preface as 'a man born for the public good, by whose assistance this my first volume comes out, and on whom the rest is founded' ('DNB'). Thomas Hearne concurred, describing Stephens as 'a complete scholar, and a great assistant to Sir Henry Spelman' ('Remarks', 2.33). In 1642 a son was born to Stephens and his wife, Mary. 
Stephens's reward for his assistance to Spelman was to be nominated by Archbishop Laud (during the suspension of Bishop Williams) to a prebend of Lincoln. He was instituted on 3 July 1639, but was displaced by the previous incumbent, Lambert Osbaldeston, when the latter was pardoned by the king in May 1641. Stephens's troubles were increased on 16 June 1641 when a number of his Wootton parishioners petitioned the House of Lords complaining of his oppressions and praying for redress. 
Stephens was sequestrated from his livings by a parliamentary committee sitting at Northampton in 1644. On 13 February 1645 he petitioned the House of Lords claiming that his prebend was the result of his labours with Spelman, and other antiquarian work in Oxford begun under Sir Thomas Bodley and Archbishop Abbott 'to compare exactly the Popish editions of the Fathers works with the old books and manuscripts remaining in all the libraries of the colleges' ('Calamy rev.', 284). 
Stephens was able to obtain one-fifth of the income from Wootton in March 1645 to maintain his wife. He also received $10 p.a. from John, first Viscount Scudamore, a noted benefactor of Anglican clergymen. In 1647 Stephens was accused by his Wootton parishioners of trying to resign the living simoniacally, but their accusation was not pursued. Stephens published Spelman's 'Tithes too Hot to be Touched' (1646), which subsequently appeared as 'The Larger Treatise on Tithes' (1647). Stephens also edited Spelman's 'Apologia pro tractatu de non temerandis' (1647), and his 'Aspilogia' (1650). 
The lord commissioners of the great seal appointed Stephens to Wootton on 30 April 1653, but 'the instrument stayed by order' ('Calamy rev.', 285). Other polemical tracts by Stephens remained unpublished as they were overtaken by the Restoration, apart from 'An Apology for the Ancient Right and Power of the Bishops to Sit and Vote in Parliaments' (1661). Stephens's rival at Wootton, Lemuel Franklin, remained in dispute over the living until after the Restoration. Stephens was restored to his livings in 1660; on 20 August 1660 he was collated to a prebend of Salisbury, being installed by proxy on 13 September, and collated again on 8 October 1662. 
Stephens died at Wootton on 9 January 1665 and was buried there. An inventory of February 1665 revealed goods worth over $300, including a study of books worth $40. A sum of $290 was paid to Anne Stephens (presumably his sister born in 1603) in 1670. His son, Robert, was rector of Wootton in 1667. His daughter, Frances, married Thomas Singleton, rector of Wootton, in 1681. 


@@@@@


doc= 26388


Stephens, John (fl. 1611-1617), satirist and playwright, was the son and heir of John Stephens of Gloucester and member of a prolific Gloucester family. He must be distinguished from the John Stephens (died 1613) who was attorney-general to Henry, prince of Wales, and also from John Stephens of Minsterley, Herefordshire. On 11 November 1611 he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn, where he practised common law, but he held no office there. 
In 1615 Stephens published 'Satyrical essayes, characters, and others, or, Accurate and quick descriptions fitted to the life of their subjects'. When it went to a second edition in the same year, he added 'a new Satyre in defence of Common Law', and the third edition of 1631 boasted still more 'New Essayes and Characters' (the 'Essay on a worthy poet' was once, rather unconvincingly, suggested as a portrait of Shakespeare). Stephens wrote to congratulate his friend Henry Fitzgeffrey, also a member of Lincoln's Inn, on the discernment rather than malice which characterized his 'Satyres and Satyricall Epigrams' (1617), and to commend the fact that they were in English; this, and his presentation of a poet in his sole play, show his conception of the nature and importance of the satirist's role. Another poem to Fitzgeffrey deplores inconstancy, and his tragedy 'Cinthia's Revenge, or, Maenanders Extasie' (1613) is described in the dedication to 'his constant friend, 'Mr. Io. Dickinson'' as a 'Modele of Inconstancie'. It was not entered in the Stationers' register, but was published surreptitiously, and in the first instance anonymously, with commendatory verses by F. C., G. Rogers, Tho. Danet, and Ben Jonson. In the play, which owes much to Lucan and Ovid, the goddess Cynthia, resenting the fact that her cult has declined in Sparta and been left the preserve of women, maddens the men. There is no record of performance, which its great length, lack of dramatic interest, and weak versification make unlikely, but it is of some interest for its representation of gender and its exploration of similar themes to 'The Maid's Tragedy' of Beaumont and Fletcher. 


@@@@@


doc= 26389


Stephens, Joseph Rayner (1805-1879), social reformer, was born on 8 March 1805 in Edinburgh. He was the sixth child of John Stephens (1772-1841) and Rebecca Eliza Rayner (died 1852), of Wethersfield, Essex. His father, a native of St Dennis in Cornwall, was a prominent Methodist minister, who served as president of the Wesleyan conference in 1827. Three of Joseph Rayner's brothers also rose to prominence: John as a newspaper editor, Edward as a banker, and George Stephens as a professor of Scandinavian studies. Stephens was educated at Woodhouse Grove Methodist School, near Leeds ('c'.1813-1815), and later at Leeds and Manchester grammar schools. In 1823 he began to teach at a school in Cottingham, in the East Riding of Yorkshire. Soon he became a local preacher in the Beverley circuit and in 1825 offered himself for the ministry. The following year he was ordained and appointed to a mission station in Stockholm, under the auspices of the Wesleyan Missionary Society. He found his assignment to be a difficult one. Restrictions on non-Lutheran missionary enterprises prevented him from evangelizing on a wide scale. Samuel Owen, an English shipbuilder, provided initial support for Stephens's efforts, and he soon came to the attention of Benjamin Bloomfield, the British envoy to Stockholm, who invited him to serve as an unofficial domestic chaplain at the embassy. He also developed a close friendship with the son of the French ambassador, Count Charles de Montalembert. The probationary period of Stephens's ministry was concluded and he was received into full connexion when he returned from Sweden in 1829. 
Stephens served briefly in Cheltenham and Newcastle upon Tyne before being appointed to the Ashton under Lyne circuit in 1832. Dissenters' grievances and the cause of disestablishment attracted many advocates in the Ashton area, particularly following the earl of Stamford's refusal to grant land in the centre of town for a new Congregational chapel. Stephens became a strong proponent of church disestablishment and served as a secretary of the Church Separation Society. These activities brought him into conflict with the Wesleyan hierarchy, and he resigned from the connexion under charges in 1834. In the wake of his departure from the local Wesleyan circuit many others seceded. In November 1834 Stephens consented to become minister to a group of separatists in Ashton. Also, at this time, he was making plans to be married to Elizabeth Henwood (died 1852), the niece of a noted Wesleyan layman, James Henwood. The marriage took place on 28 January 1835 in Hull. 
Stephens's encounters with Charles Hindley, the Liberal-radical cotton manufacturer, coupled with a fresh look at industrial circumstances upon his return from missionary service, led to a radicalization of his political views. He joined Richard Oastler in the campaign to improve factory conditions and, by the beginning of 1836, emerged as one of the prominent leaders of the movement. He also became one of the most vocal critics of the new poor law. He travelled extensively and drew large audiences as he inveighed against the predicament of the poor; reportedly, he was a gifted and powerful orator. In explaining his motivation Stephens said he always sought to 'apply the rule of God's commandments to various institutions of the social system' in order 'to bring the operations of the manufacturers, the commerce and legislation of this professedly Christian land to the standard of God's Holy Word' (J. R. Stephens, 'The Political Preacher', 6 Jan 1839, 13-14). Stephens became associated with the Chartist movement though he rejected being labelled as a Chartist. Yet he owned twenty shares (each worth $1) in the Chartist 'Northern Star' and figured prominently in public meetings to promote the various radical causes of the day. His weekly sermons were published as 'The Political Pulpit' (1839) and he frequently contributed to other radical publications including the 'Christian Advocate', edited by his brother John. In the 1837 general election he made an unsuccessful bid to enter parliament for Ashton. 
Stephens's reputation for violent speeches and sermons eventually led to his arrest on 27 December 1838. The indictment contained a list of charges: intending to disturb the public peace on 14 November 1838, making a seditious speech at Hyde, and two counts of riot and one of being present at an unlawful assembly. The case was finally tried at the Chester assizes on 15 August 1839. Stephens represented himself at the trial and, lacking legal experience, provided only a weak defence. After a very brief deliberation and verdict from the jury, he was sentenced by Mr Justice Pattison to eighteen months' imprisonment at Knutsford house of correction, followed by a five-year period in which he had to find sureties for good behaviour. In the event, confinement in Chester Castle was substituted for Knutsford. 
By his own reckoning, Stephens's itinerant activities in Scandinavia had inured him to hardship, and he found prison 'as little irksome and unpleasant as possible' ('DNB'). But while incarceration did not seem to alter his commitment to the poor, it clearly changed his perspective on how his convictions should be expressed, and his language and activities were much more restrained after his release in 1840. He committed himself to the cause of factory reform but rejected Chartism: the revolutionary zeal with which he pursued his goals in the 1830s was absent. While he resumed preaching, he seemed to exhibit a preference for written expression and became involved with a number of literary ventures: 'Stephens's Monthly Magazine' (1840), the 'People's Magazine' (1841), the 'Ashton Chronicle' (1848-9), and 'The Champion' (1850-51). Perhaps the clearest sign of his change in outlook was his election as a poor-law guardian in 1848. Even though he remained adamantly opposed to the new poor law he was willing to work from within the system to champion individual cases of distress. Following the death of his first wife in 1852 he married Susanna (1838/9-1920), daughter of Samuel Shaw of Derby, on 19 May 1857. In his later years he became involved in educational enterprises, trade unionism, and agitation on behalf of the unemployed. His activities were in time restricted by severe gout. He died at his home, The Hollins, Stalybridge, Lancashire, on 18 February 1879 of a kidney ailment coupled with persistent vomiting and exhaustion, and was buried on 1 March at St John's Church, Dukinfield, Cheshire. He was survived by his second wife and several children. 


@@@@@


doc= 26390


Stephens, Nathaniel (1606/7-1678), clergyman and ejected minister, son of Richard Stephens, vicar from 1604 of Stanton St Bernard, Wiltshire, was born in Wiltshire. On 14 March 1623, at the age of sixteen, he entered Magdalen Hall, Oxford, graduating BA on 14 February 1626 and proceeding MA on 25 June 1628. Stephens was described as 'a good scholar and... a very hard student' ('Journal of George Fox', 1.394), reportedly devoting sixteen hours a day to study. On leaving the university Stephens was appointed curate at Stanton and was ordained on 23 May 1630. On 26 July 1638 he was instituted to the rectory of Fenny Drayton, Leicestershire, at the instance of the powerful local Purefoy family. Driven from Fenny Drayton by the outbreak of the civil war in 1642, he took refuge in parliamentarian Coventry, where he subscribed the presbyterian solemn league and covenant, became morning preacher at St Michael's Church, and formed a lasting friendship with Richard Baxter, with whom he discussed Calvinist theology. He returned to Fenny Drayton in 1645 and ministered to the puritan father and family of George Fox, founder of the Quakers, who later recalled 'I knew this preist from a childe' (ibid., 1.253). 
Stephens initially thought highly of George Fox, discussed with him religious topics including Christ's death, and preached on subjects from their talks, a practice which Fox came to resent. In 1649, while Stephens was giving a sermon in Market Bosworth, Fox interrupted him. Stephens shouted out that he was mad, and Fox, driven out of the town by a mob, recorded the clergyman as his foremost persecutor in his native county: according to Fox, Stephens co-ordinated hostile receptions for him in Leicestershire in 1651 and 1654 and alarmed Fox's family with reports that the Quaker founder 'was taken uppe above the Clouds & after found again full of gold & sylver' ('Journal of George Fox', 1.14). Public debates between Fox and Stephens in 1654 captured the opposition between Fox's radical, anticlerical form of Christianity and Stephens's orthodox, academic, and clerical Calvinism. Stephens had similar confrontations with Gerrard Winstanley and with Baptists. 
The 1650s were Stephens's most active decade of authorship in the defence of mainstream Calvinist churchmanship. In 1651 he published a defence of infant baptism, 'A Precept for the Baptisme of Infants out of the New Testament', which elicited a riposte from John Tombes in 'Antipaedobaptism, or, No Plain... Scripture Proof of Infants' Baptism' (1652); in 1653 Stephens was planning with Baxter a full reply to Tombes. Stephens also demonstrated his essential orthodoxy, moderation, and fairness in 'Defence of the Doctrine of Original Sin' (1658) and in a major work (1656) in the English protestant eschatological tradition. 
Following the Restoration, Stephens was ejected from the rectory of Fenny Drayton under the 1662 'Act of Uniformity', and he made way for his successor on 29 January 1663. He continued to preach to small groups but his services were often interrupted. Having been driven out of Fenny Drayton on several occasions, he was ministering to a small presbyterian congregation in Hinckley in Leicestershire in 1669 and subsequently moved to Stoke Golding, 3 miles from Hinckley, where his house was licensed for presbyterian worship under the declaration of indulgence in 1672, preaching there until lameness confined him to his chair. Stephens was reported 'in his old age pleasant [humorous] and chearful' ('Journal of George Fox', 1.394) and it may have been a fondness for whimsicality that helped alienate him from the humourless Fox. Stephens was buried on 24 February 1678 in the churchyard of Stoke Golding. His wife, Joan, vehemently supported his religious views; they had two daughters and four sons, one of whom, Nathaniel (died 1687), was recorded as an active nonconformist in 1672. 


@@@@@


doc= 26391


Stephens, Sir Philip, baronet (1723-1809), Admiralty official, was the third and youngest son of Nathaniel Stephens (1679-1730), rector of Alphamstone, Essex, and Ellis, 'nee' Deane (died 1762). He was born on 11 October 1723 in the neighbouring village of Bures and educated in the free school at Harwich. His eldest brother, Tyringham (1713-1768), went into the victualling office and the second son, Nathaniel (1721-1748), was a captain in the navy. Philip was said to have followed his brother into the victualling office, but on 3 July 1739 was certainly appointed to the Navy Office as a clerk of storekeepers' accounts. On 21 January 1741 he was transferred to the ticket office, again part of the Navy Office, and he remained on the books in this post for ten years. During this time he caught the eye of George Anson, just returned from his voyage around the world. There are grounds for thinking that the young ticket office clerk impressed the commodore by sorting out the considerable pay problems of his seamen after the voyage; in any event he became Anson's secretary. By 1748 Stephens was handling the very large sums of prize money due to Anson and Sir Peter Warren. On 6 April 1751 he was made first clerk of the Admiralty, according to one observer 'over clerks' heads who have been 24 and 26 years in the office' (M. E. Matcham, 'A Forgotten John Russell', 1905, 323). He went to sea with Anson in 1752, when the first lord had to escort the king across the channel, and for four months in 1758, when Anson had hurriedly to replace Edward Hawke as commander-in-chief of the Channel Fleet. Stephens was active at this time as a prize agent, acting for others, including George Bridges Rodney, and clearly made a great deal of money by doing so. 
Stephens was made second secretary on 16 October 1759 and on the death of John Clevland was appointed secretary on 18 June 1763, it being 'usual in time of peace to have but one secretary', as the Admiralty minutes put it (TNA: PRO, ADM 3/71, 4 July 1763). It was a position which he occupied for twenty-two years, serving ten first lords of the Admiralty. Although it is difficult to gauge Stephens's personal influence, particularly as he appears to have preferred to remain in the background, the position of Admiralty secretary was pivotal and the effort that was required was remorseless. No significant decision was taken without his presence. Apart from his responsibility for the office as a whole, it was he who regulated the business which went to the board. Stephens's illness in the winter of 1775-6, probably from overwork, was the subject of anxious comment from Lord Sandwich and Sir Hugh Palliser. When by 1779 tempers became frayed, Sandwich complained to Lord Mulgrave, at the same time as demonstrating his complete dependence on his secretary: 'I have no doubt but that Sir Charles Hardy's fleet can be manned immediately; but today I could not get Stephens to do anything... all this would be easily managed if we could get things clearly stated to us, but Stephens is growing so exceedingly fractious of late, that it takes off all my means of doing business with him: I know that I can get quick to the point if I have materials; but if those who are to furnish that aid, do not do their part, my talents (such as they are) become totally useless. (24 May 1779, Mulgrave Castle, MS VI, 11/62)' Charles Middleton, the irascible comptroller of the Navy Board, was frustrated at several points, aware of Stephens's power. 'Unless your Lordship', he wrote to Sandwich in 1781, 'who is the first mover, will condescend to read the Navy Board correspondence yourself... we shall never be free of disappointment... Mr. Stephens cannot act of himself' ('Private Papers of... Sandwich', 4.385). In spite of these irritations, it was to Stephens that Sandwich turned at any crisis; when the French and Spanish fleets united in the channel in 1781, Sandwich went immediately to Stephens at his home to draft the orders for his admirals. The earl of Bristol had no doubts, for when he was attacking Sandwich in parliament in 1779 he called Stephens 'the most diligent, most intelligent, and indefatigable man in business I ever knew; and from whose absence on sickness, I am not at all surprised at anything that may happen to go wrong' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 2.439). 
Stephens was seen as indispensable to whichever government was in power, though it was inevitable that he became embroiled in political differences. He was criticized by Samuel Barrington, for instance, reflecting the differences between that admiral and Sandwich, and in 1778 he exchanged sharp letters with Augustus Keppel; but when Keppel became first lord in 1782 Stephens remarked to the earl of Hardwicke, 'It is impossible for anyone to be more cordial or friendly than Admiral Keppel is to me' (1 April 1782, BL, Add. MS 35619). Stephens served as member of parliament for Liskeard from 1 December 1759 to 1768, when he represented Sandwich until 1806. There is no record of him having spoken in forty-five years, although he had a reputation for looking after his constituents. 
More positive evidence of Stephens's personal influence can be traced in his encouragement of exploration, which started from James Cook's first voyage. Stephens had known of Cook since the early 1760s and it was he, with Hugh Palliser, who made possible the decision to select Cook. From the middle of 1768 Stephens was cultivated by the shrewd Joseph Banks, who correctly saw him as the means of circumventing the unco-operative first lord, Sir Edward Hawke, when the 'Endeavour' was being fitted out. There is anecdotal evidence that Cook was a frequent visitor to Stephens's home in Fulham. Cook repaid the compliment by the naming of Cape Stephens and Stephens Island in the Cook Strait in New Zealand during the first voyage. Stephens was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 6 June 1771, a month before Cook returned, by which time it was known that Cook had succeeded. At the dinner early in 1777 at which, according to Andrew Kippis, Cook agreed to command the third voyage, Stephens was also present, with Sandwich and Palliser. In the 1790s James Colnett dedicated to him his journal, 'Voyage Round Cape Horn', and George Vancouver named an island in Chatham Sound after him. Stephens also played a key preparatory role when Alexander Dalrymple was appointed to head the hydrographic office, a decision completed just after he had resigned the secretaryship on 3 March 1795, aged seventy-one. He was created a baronet on 13 March. 
The final chapter in Stephens's career concerns his membership of the Board of Admiralty, when he again served under a large number of first lords. Six in eleven years is an indication of a stormy period of politics, including the trauma of Lord St Vincent's administration, when at one point in 1803 both Admiralty secretaries tried to resign. Stephens's role was unlikely to have been central, though, for instance, he appeared at the bar of the house with the estimates in December 1803, and his experience was clearly appreciated. When Viscount Melville took over as first lord in 1804 the king pressed him to keep Stephens as a commissioner, by then over eighty, and Melville agreed, as he 'already had means of observing and availing himself of the long experience of Sir Philip in the detail of naval arrangements' (Melville to George III, 29 May 1804, George III, 'Later Corr.', 4.183). Stephens finally resigned on 23 October 1806 and was granted a pension of $1500 per annum. 
Stephens served the navy for sixty-seven years and he represented the tradition of continuity of expertise, for there had been, in contrast to many other offices of state, only four secretaries since 1694. Though a shadowy figure, presiding over an office of great political power and wealth, at the same time he set high standards of administrative stamina. He was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, elected on 8 March 1792, and one of his sponsors was Joseph Banks. Stephens died on 20 November 1809. He was a wealthy man who had lent money to the penurious Lord Sandwich; he lived in style in Fulham, owning more than 50 acres there and three houses, one of which was occupied by Lord St Vincent during his time as first lord. But Stephens's last years were especially tinged with tragedy. He had remained unmarried, but he had an illegitimate daughter, Caroline, who married Viscount Ranelagh in 1804; she died in childbirth on 17 June 1805. (It was after Caroline that William Broughton, when crossing the Pacific, had named Caroline Island, in the Southern Line group, later part of the republic of Kiribati.) In 1790 he had already lost his illegitimate son, then aged twenty, in a duel. The next generation of his family had all predeceased him, and the baronetcy became extinct. Stephens was buried in All Saints, Fulham parish church, next to his daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 26392


Stephens, Robert (1665-1732), literary editor, was born in Eastington, Gloucestershire, the fourth son of Richard Stephens (died 1668), lord of the manor of Eastington, and his wife, Ann Cholmley, daughter of Sir Hugh Cholmley of Whitby, Yorkshire. 
In May 1681 Stephens went from Wotton School to Lincoln College, Oxford. In November of that year he was admitted to the Middle Temple and was called to the bar on 14 June 1689. His name is listed among the founders of the Society of Antiquaries of London at its revival in July 1717. 
Stephens married Mary Cholmley, the daughter and heir of a later Sir Hugh Cholmley of Whitby and the widow of Nathaniel Cholmley of Leicester. Stephens praised her for her 'zeal to serve an incumbred family' by reducing her condition in order to marry him (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/656). 
Stephens was appointed solicitor of the customs, and held the post until August 1725, when he signified to the commissioners of the customs his intentions of resigning the office 'in respect of some difficulties and disabilities he found himself under' (BL, Add. MS 36135, fols. 370'r'-373'v'). The commissioners, recognizing that his experience would benefit his successor, appointed Stephens as their assistant at a yearly salary of $150. When Thomas Madox died in January 1727 Stephens succeeded him as historiographer royal, a position he was granted 'for a Testimony of his Fidelity' (Bigland, 1.541). 
In 1702 Stephens published an edition of the letters of Sir Francis Bacon transcribed from original manuscripts held in private collections. Some of these were probably held by his cousin Robert Harley, later earl of Oxford, to whom he wrote in April 1702 urging him to advertise the edition to his friends by informing them that he had seen the letters and believed them to be genuine. In the preface to this edition Stephens requested access to similar material to furnish a supplementary edition. He appears to have received only one response to this request, which produced insufficient material for a new edition. Some time later, however, his cousin Robert gave him access to further papers, among which Stephens discovered more letters written by Bacon. He believed that it was on these papers that Bacon's chaplain, Dr Rawley, had based his seventeenth-century edition of his works. 
Stephens had prepared his supplementary edition of Bacon's letters for the press by the summer of 1732, when ill health forced him to retire to his home in Gloucestershire. John Locker took over the work of editing and correction, and the supplement was eventually published by Stephens's widow in 1734. Before his retirement Stephens had written a preface to the edition in which he castigates at length 'a learned and eminent Gentleman' who had employed a 'reverend Divine to reduce all the Lord Bacon's works into just Volumes, and print them'. This, according to the preface, was done for profit 'rather than the honour of the Author' and the volumes contained material 'not fit for publick view'. These volumes were probably those edited by John Blackbourne and printed in 1730 by R. Gosling. 
On 12 November 1732, shortly after his retirement to Grovesend, Gloucestershire, Stephens died. He was buried in the parish church at Eastington, where his widow erected a monument in his memory. 
His manuscript collection passed to Locker, who died in 1760, and in 1764 it was purchased by Dr Thomas Birch, who used the papers in his own editions of Bacon's works; the collection is now housed in the British Library (Add. MSS 4258-4262). 


@@@@@


doc= 26393


Stephens, Thomas (1549-1619), Jesuit and missionary, was born at Bushton, Wiltshire, the son of Thomas Stephens, a well-to-do merchant, and Jane, who died in 1575. His brother, Richard (died 1586), studied at Douai and taught theology after his ordination. Stephens did his humanities privately and also studied at Oxford. He then joined Thomas Pounde, a wealthy gentleman of Belmont, and both, inspired by the lives of Jesuit missionaries in India, sought to work their way to the east. Eventually Stephens went to Rome alone and at the age of twenty-six entered the Jesuit noviciate at Sant' Andrea on 20 October 1575. 
Having been allowed to go to India as a missionary, Stephens reached Lisbon at the end of March 1579 and left on 4 April on a fleet of five ships bound for the subcontinent. He reached Goa on 24 October of that year. Soon after arriving he wrote a letter to his father, dated 10 November 1579, wherein he speaks of Goa as a place where they were all 'received with passing great charity'. He also wrote about the sea, the rough weather, and the shipmen, soldiers, and children. His letter is important since it helped awaken the interest of the London merchants in the India trade. Stephens also wrote to his brother, Richard, on 24 October 1583, and told him how, owing to the scarcity of priests, he had been ordained and sent to Goa. He described the martyrdom of Rudolf Acquaviva and his companions in Cuncolim (Goa) in 1583. 
Stephens was thirty years of age when he arrived in Goa and, after a brief period of theological studies in Old Goa, was sent to the Salcete mission in south Goa, which by 1580 had a college, a hospital, and six churches with about 8000 Christians. Stephens had a love for his fellow Englishmen and when Fitch, Newbury, Leeds, and Story, merchants, who had reached Hormoz by the overland route in December 1583, were arrested by the Portuguese and sent to Goa, it was he who had managed to get them bail and their freedom. 
Stephens spent a total of forty years in the Salcete mission. He was rector of the Rachol College, then minister of the professed house at Old Goa, and assistant to the visitor; he also served as parish priest at Rachol, Mormugao, Margao, Benaulim, Bassein, Loutolim, and Navelim. He was said to have had an outstanding missionary talent and apostolic zeal. He had a robust constitution, enjoyed good health, and was energetic, vivacious, and optimistic by nature. One of the Jesuit documents lists him as 'of very good wisdom, good judgement and prudence... and of a very good talent for conversions'. He professed his vows as spiritual coadjutor in Goa in February 1589. 
In the beginning of the seventeenth century the Jesuits at Goa began writing Christian 'puranas' (epics) in order to satisfy the desire of the recent converts, who were accustomed to listen to their own esteemed epics. Stephens with his 'Purana Christao' satisfied this urge of theirs and thus showed the value of inculturation in transmitting the Christian message. He also wrote a Konkani language grammar and a catechism in Konkani. His main work was acclaimed as a masterpiece and the Christians in their enthusiasm insisted on having readings from it in the churches after mass on Sundays and feast days. 
Besides his work as epic writer and grammarian Stephens was also involved in the running of the houses and properties under his charge. There were occasional complaints against him, as a letter of Joao da Cunha states. He wrote that the English priest had appropriated to the college of Salcete the rents of the palmgrove and lands which actually belonged to the church of St John the Baptist, for that was the intention of the donor. Stephens also had an interest in the country and the environment, and once sent a map of the island of Goa, and of Bardez and Salcete, to Europe that 'there will be a better understanding of this region'. He hoped also to send an improved one to the father-general. 
Stephens died at Salcete in 1619. He has lived on in his works, principally in his 'Grammar' and his 'Catechism' (composed for his fellow missionaries), but pre-eminently in his 'Purana Christao'. Until the end of his life he remained an extraordinary missionary in Goa, by nature humble, and a man with a great literary output in Konkani. 


@@@@@


doc= 26394


Stephens, Thomas (1821-1875), historian, born at Pontneddfechan, Glamorgan, on 21 April 1821, was the son of Evan Stephens, a shoemaker, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of William Williams, minister of the Unitarian church at Blaen-gwrach. Stephens was educated at a private school at Neath. Early in 1835 he was apprenticed to a chemist at Merthyr Tudful, where subsequently, on his own account, he successfully carried on the business until his death. On 11 September 1866 he married his cousin, Margaret Elizabeth Davies, a granddaughter of William Williams of Penrheolgerrig. They had no children, and she outlived him. 
From his earliest days Stephens devoted himself to the study of Welsh history, literature, and institutions. His interest was first stimulated by eisteddfod competitions, in which, from 1840 and almost annually until 1859, and thereafter in 1862, 1866, and 1872, he was awarded prizes for essays on historical, literary, and social subjects. In 1848 he produced 'An essay on the literature of Wales during the twelfth and succeeding centuries', which won him the prize offered in the name of the prince of Wales at the Abergavenny eisteddfod, thereby defeating Thomas Price (1787-1848), a Welsh historian of repute in his day. The essay was published at the expense of Sir John Guest as 'The Literature of the Kymry' (1849), and was enthusiastically received by the best Celtic scholars, including Hersart de la Villemarque, Henri Martin, and Professor Albert Schulz, many of whom afterwards corresponded regularly with Stephens. In later years Matthew Arnold praised this work in 'The Study of Celtic Literature' (1867). Schulz, under his pseudonym of San Marte, brought out a German translation of the work, published in Halle in 1864. A second edition, with the author's additions and corrections, was posthumously published, under the editorship of the Revd D. Silvan Evans, in 1876, with a biography by B. T. Williams. 
After 1848 Stephens won prizes for historical essays at every eisteddfod at which he chose to compete, being, for example, awarded three prizes at the Abergavenny eisteddfod in 1853. For the eisteddfod held at Llangollen in 1858 he wrote an essay in which he proved the unhistorical character of the Welsh claim to the discovery of America by Madog ab Owain Gwynedd; but the eisteddfod committee, influenced by John Williams ab Ithel, one of the eisteddfod organizers, whose own essay was awarded second place in the competition, withheld the prize from Stephens on the quibbling pretext that he had written on the non-discovery instead of the discovery by Madog. This essay was published in 1893 under the title 'Madoc: an Essay on the Discovery of America by Madoc ap Owen Gwynedd in the Twelfth Century', edited by Stephens's friend and scholarly colleague Llywarch Reynolds. Stephens did not again compete at the eisteddfod, though, at the request of that institution, he subsequently drew up a report, along with R. J. Pryse (Gweirydd ab Rhys), on a standard of Welsh orthography, 'Orgraff yr iaith Gymraeg' (1859). He contributed a series of valuable articles in Welsh on the triads (ancient Welsh classifications of names and legendary references, tripartite in form) to the periodical 'Y Beirniad' (1861-3), in which he established their medieval as opposed to their prehistoric origin; and in the course of seven articles in English in 'Archaeologia Cambrensis' (1851-3) he critically examined the poems traditionally ascribed to Taliesin. Other important articles in 'Archaeologia Cambrensis' (1858, 1872) revealed the spurious character of Coelbren y Beirdd, the so-called bardic alphabet, and of the 'Book of Aberpergwm'. He left a large number of unpublished essays, one of which, probably the most important, was edited by Professor Thomas Powel of University College, Cardiff, for the Cymmrodorion Society, and published in 1888 under the title 'The Gododin of Aneurin Gwawdrydd: an English Translation... [with] a Life of Aneurin'. 
Stephens was one of the first native Welsh scholars of the nineteenth century (and before the establishment of the University of Wales) to apply a rigidly critical method to the study of Welsh history and literature. His approach was sceptical and iconoclastic, and it made him highly unpopular with Welsh enthusiasts and romantics who accepted Iolo Morganwg's fantastic accounts of Welsh literary history. But his unbiased, questioning attitude gained him the confidence of competent critics. His opinions in other respects were also often unpopular, both nationally and on local issues. He evoked the hostility of dissenters by advocating, from 1847 onwards, a state-aided system of secular education. His attitude towards the Welsh language was ambiguous. In 1840 he had cast doubt on the importance of preserving the language, but nevertheless he became, in 1847, a passionate opponent of the opinions voiced in the report on the state of education in Wales, the 'blue books'. In politics he was a philosophical reformer rather than a radical. Among the institutions at Merthyr which largely owed their origin to him was the public library, of which he acted for twenty-five years as honorary secretary, and to which he bequeathed a valuable collection of books. He was high constable of the town for 1858, and in 1864 undertook the management of the 'Merthyr Express'. 
In 1870 overwork brought on paralysis, which, after repeated attacks, ended in his death on 4 January 1875 at 113 High Street, Merthyr Tudful. He was buried at the nearby Cefn cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26395


Stephens, William (1649/50-1718), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Richard Stephens of Worcester. He matriculated from St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 1 July 1664, aged fourteen, graduated BA in 1668, and proceeded MA in 1671. The latter degree was incorporated at Cambridge in 1671, and he proceeded BD at Oxford in 1678. He was preacher at the churches of St Laurence's, Hinksey, Oxfordshire, and St Martin's, Carfax, Oxford, and served at an unknown date as a schoolmaster in Bristol. He was instituted as rector of Sutton in Surrey on 26 July 1690. His patron was Lady Ann Mason, either Anna Margaretta, the widow of Sir Richard Mason MP, or their daughter, who was then the wife of Charles Gerard, Lord Brandon, radical whig and future earl of Macclesfield. 
Stephens preached a sermon before the lord mayor of London on 30 January 1694, the anniversary of the execution of Charles I. It was duly published with a dedication to the mayor, the Presbyterian Sir William Ashurst. In 1696 Stephens published 'An Account of the Growth of Deism', a tract severely critical of the clergy, and in 1698, in 'A Letter to King William III', expounded a whig view of the foundation of the monarchy. He was reputedly the editor of the 'Select Sermons of Dr Whichcote' (1698) by the third earl of Shaftesbury, and he certainly was a regular visitor when Shaftesbury was in residence at Chelsea in 1700-01. 
On 8 January 1700 Stephens was invited to preach before the Commons on the 30 January anniversary. The invitation was backed by Sir Rowland Gwynne, but was issued only after a fierce debate in which Sir Richard Onslow, MP for Surrey, had spoken in Stephens's defence following allegations of improprieties while a schoolmaster. Stephens's sermon explicitly declined to discuss Charles I's execution, 'a superfluous labour', but instead sought to remove from the church the 'scandal... as if she has laid any obligation upon her sons in opposition to the present constitution', and to debunk the use of the anniversary 'to flatter princes with notions of arbitrary power' (Kenyon, 73). The tories denounced the sermon, and the Commons refused to vote their thanks to Stephens, or to ask him to print his sermon, and then voted that in future only deans or doctors of divinity should preach before them. Stephens later had his sermon printed privately. The earl of Peterborough offered him a living of $150 per annum, which was refused because it was 'against his principle to hold plurality of benefices' (Luttrell, 4.615). 
In December 1705 Stephens again courted controversy, with the publication of 'The Letter to the Author of the 'Memorial of the State of England'', which was a reply to a tract by John Toland (himself a friend of Stephens). Its tone was critical of the duke of Marlborough and Secretary Robert Harley, and as such a search was made for the author. On 18 January 1706 Charles Davenant reported the discovery of Stephens, 'a hairbrained Whig, and he owned the book, tho' parts of it are plainly above his capacity' (Downie, 255). Others suspected of contributing to the pamphlet were 'Trenchard, Rawlins and his Republican Club', and even though Stephens was examined by Harley and bail set at $1000, he was remarkably sanguine about his prospects of escaping prosecution. The grand juries of London and Westminster did not present him on 22 January 1706, but when Stephens appeared before queen's bench on 14 February an information was read against him for libel. He publicly apologized in the 'Flying Post' on 23 March and although he was sentenced on 6 May to stand in the pillory, the duchess of Marlborough intervened with the queen and the sentence was commuted. One consequence of this action was the loss of Shaftesbury's patronage, the earl being infuriated that Stephens should use his name in an attempt to avoid prosecution. 
Stephens continued to publish his sermons, including those in 1711 and 1712 to the protestants of Ireland, and one commemorating George I's arrival in Britain in September 1714. He also wrote the dedication and preface to Bishop Hacket's 'Life of Archbishop Williams' in 1715. He made his will in April 1712, making his wife, Susanna, who survived him, sole executor; his will referred to three children, and also to another daughter, Sarah Burridge, to whom he left only a shilling. He died on 30 January 1718. 


@@@@@


doc= 26396


Stephens, William (1672-1753), politician and colonial official, was born on 28 January 1672 at Bowcombe Manor, near Newport on the Isle of Wight, the eldest son of Sir William Stephens, baronet (died 1697), the island's former lieutenant-governor, and his wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of Henry Hillary, a Dorset grazier. He was educated at Winchester College, at King's College, Cambridge (graduating BA in 1684 and MA in 1688), and in 1691 at the Middle Temple, though he later did not practise. In 1696 he married Mary, the daughter of the mining entrepreneur Sir Richard Newdigate, second baronet, and his first wife, Mary, 'nee' Bagot; the couple had seven sons and two daughters, four of whom survived their parents. 
In 1702 Stephens entered parliament as MP for Newport. He represented the constituency for twenty years, gaining in time a reputation as an opponent of the Hanoverian administrations and as a possible tory sympathizer with the Jacobite cause. During this period he also served as a JP, a victualling commissioner in Cowes (from 1712), and a colonel in the Isle of Wight militia. At the general election of 1722 he was returned as member for Newtown; however, allegations of financial impropriety while victualling commissioner, coupled with the squandering of his inheritance and the subsequent sale of the family estate, meant that he failed to win re-election five years later. 
Two years on Stephens gained a position in Scotland with the York Buildings Company through a recent friend, Colonel Samuel Horsey, MP and company director, but his period of impoverishment endured, prompting his return to London in 1734. Once more Horsey offered Stephens a new career opportunity as a surveyor of his grant of land on the Savannah River in South Carolina, and he went there in 1736 with his son Thomas. There he met General James Edward Oglethorpe, one of the founding trustees of the Georgia corporation's new colony, and he accompanied Oglethorpe to England. On the general's recommendation Stephens was appointed secretary for Georgia by the trustees, who, increasingly suspicious of Oglethorpe's activities, and in particular of his dilatory approach to reporting to the board, charged Stephens to deliver regular statements on the colony's fortunes. Stephens returned to America, reaching Savannah, Georgia, on 1 November 1737, where he lived until his move to a 500 acre estate, known as Beaulieu (or Bewlie), at the mouth of the Vernon River, 12 miles south of Savannah. The estate, the gift of the trustees, came, as Stephens put it, as a 'ray of light' and enabled him to restore his reputation and atone for past mistakes in public life. 
Stephens quickly realized that many of the problems facing settlers in Georgia stemmed from mistaken decisions, principally regarding land and slave holding and agricultural production, taken by the trustees. Initially sympathetic to the trustees' position, by 1738 Stephens urged the board to lift the restrictions, which were prompting many settlers to quit the colony for neighbouring South Carolina's plantation system. However, not all of the landholders' grievances, including the restrictions on slave ownership and the consumption of rum, were accepted by Stephens; his report 'The State of the Province of Georgia' (1740) was criticized by many, including his son Thomas, for providing an overly optimistic depiction of colonial life. Further criticism of the trustees by way of a petition to George II and parliament prompted a partial repeal of the restrictions on rum but not on slave ownership; it also led to a breach between Stephens and his son, who led this latest set of complaints against his father's employers. 
Between 1741 and 1743 Stephens was president of one of the two counties, Savannah, into which the trustees divided the colony. Following Oglethorpe's return to England, Stephens assumed control of both counties (Oglethorpe having presided over the second, Frederica) and took over the general's responsibilities for civil and military authority for the whole colony as its president and 'de facto' governor. With the substitution of fee simple for tail male ownership of land (1743) and the legalization of slavery (1749), Stephens's presidency witnessed Georgia's transition from the philanthropic settlement intended by the trustees to a colony resembling South Carolina; other reforms during his presidency included the licensing of Native American traders through Savannah rather than Charles Town. Throughout this period Stephens maintained a journal (started in 1737 and ended in September 1749) which, initially intended for board trustees, became a valuable source for scholars of early Georgian colonial history. 
Aged seventy-eight, Stephens relinquished the colony's presidency in 1750 and retired to his estate in April the following year. He died and was buried at Beaulieu in mid-August 1753. Six years later Thomas Stephens published a biography of his father. Stephens's early journals (1737-40) were first published in the fourth volume of Allen D. Chandler's 'Colonial Records of Georgia' (1906); those for the remaining years, edited by E. Merton Coulter, appeared in 1958-9. 


