@@@@@


doc= 26397


Stephenson, George (1781-1848), colliery and railway engineer, was born at Wylam, 8 miles from Newcastle upon Tyne in the county of Northumberland, on 9 June 1781. He was the second son of Robert Stephenson, foreman at the Wylam colliery pumping engine. His mother, Mabel, was the daughter of Richard Carr, a dyer of Ovingham, and his paternal grandfather is reported to have come from Scotland as a gentleman's servant. Steady and honest in his work, Robert Stephenson was fond of children and possessed a great love of birds. Both of these traits were inherited in full measure by George. 
George Stephenson's first employment was herding cows and leading horses at the plough. He commenced colliery work as a 'picker', clearing out stones from coal, and then became driver of the horses working the colliery gin at Black Callerton colliery. At the age of fourteen he was appointed an assistant fireman to his father at Dewley colliery. Thereafter, Stephenson served in a similar capacity at the 'Duke's Winning' pit near Newburn and the adjacent Mid Hill Winning pit. When he was seventeen years old he moved to the position of 'plugman', or engineman, to a new engine erected by Robert Hawthorn at Water Row colliery, to the west of Newburn. Coincidentally, his father was appointed fireman. In 1801 George was appointed 'brakesman' at the Dolly pit at Black Callerton, responsible for driving and maintaining the winding mechanism. At this stage in his life Stephenson was interested in acquiring the rudiments of education. In 1799 he had begun to learn to read and write in his spare time. He also received instruction in arithmetic, a subject which he mastered quickly, although theoretical calculation remained beyond his capacity. Writing, too, proved to be a persistent difficulty, and in later life he was obliged to employ a secretary to write for him. 
While working at the Dolly pit, Stephenson lodged at a neighbouring farm where he met Frances Henderson (1769-1806), a farm servant and herself the daughter of a small farmer at Capheaton. The couple were married on 28 November 1802 at Newburn church, and on 16 October of the following year, their only son, Robert Stephenson, was born. By that time George was brakesman of a newly installed engine at Willington Quay to the east of Newcastle, responsible for emptying ballast from coal ships returning unladen from London. In order to supplement his income he began to repair shoes, clocks, and watches, acquiring considerable proficiency in the latter. In 1804 the Stephenson family moved to Killingworth following George's appointment as brakesman to the West Moor colliery engine. It was there, on 14 May 1806, that Frances Stephenson died of consumption soon after giving birth to a daughter who did not long survive. 
Following these bereavements, Stephenson travelled on foot to Montrose to take charge of a Boulton and Watt steam engine at a spinning mill. Staying for little more than a year in Scotland, he returned to the north-east of England in 1808 when he entered into a joint contract with two other men to work the engines of the Killingworth pit. This was a fraught period in Stephenson's life due to family misfortune and financial problems: his father was blinded in an accident and Stephenson himself was drawn for the militia which involved paying for a substitute. In despair at his prospects he contemplated emigration to North America, following his sister, Anne. His spirits recovered out of concern for his son and also as a result of a painstaking commitment to self-education in the practical aspects of mechanical engineering. In the latter respect, Stephenson devoted each Saturday to dismantling and then reassembling one of the colliery engines so that he could master the techniques of construction. 
Stephenson's frequent changes of employment at an early stage in his working life produced the considerable benefit of acquired expertise: by the time he moved to the Killingworth pit, he was well versed in the operation of colliery steam engines, old and new, in a variety of operating conditions. His practical experience as an enginewright, together with qualities of dogged persistence in the face of obstacles, were to stand him in good stead, resulting in 1811 in a decisive improvement in his fortunes. In that year, the Newcomen pumping engine at the recently sunk Killingworth High pit was subject to periodic breakdown: Stephenson identified the design defects, rectified them and was rewarded with a payment of $10. The significance of this episode is that the High pit was owned by the 'grand allies', a long-standing combination of aristocratic and gentry landowners with considerable mining interests in the north-east of England. In consequence of his exertions Stephenson was placed in charge of machinery at all of the grand allies' collieries at a salary of $100 per annum. 
Before assessing Stephenson's contribution to the development of railway technology it is instructive to note that his inventive capacity was applied first to a safety lamp for underground mineworkers. In the early nineteenth century pit explosions, in response to the exposure of inflammable gases to naked light, were a constant occurrence, and it is to Stephenson's credit that in the years after 1811 he began to ponder the need for a miners' safety lamp. By 1815 his mind was fixed on a design whereby the entry of air to support combustion was controlled by means of small tubes for the gases to pass through. The prototype lamp was tested at Killingworth on 21 October 1815 and improved forms were tested on 4 November and 30 November. During the third test Stephenson, equipped with his lamp, entered and left gaseous parts of the colliery workings in perfect safety. It remains to be said that unknown to him, Sir Humphry Davy had been working on the same subject via the application of scientific analysis. By coincidence, the two approaches -- practical empiricism and the deployment of the scientific method -- bore successful fruit at the same time. In 1816 Davy received a public testimonial of $2000 and Stephenson the relatively paltry sum of 100 guineas. The immediate furore at the apparent unfairness resulted in a local subscription fund for Stephenson. $1000 was raised and presented at a public dinner attended by colliery owners and managers, as well as civic dignitaries from Northumberland and Durham. 
It is salutary to remember that the development of the steam railway was inextricably bound up with the transport needs of the expanding coal industry of the early nineteenth century. The breakthrough to the mechanical haulage of coal from the pit head was made in two stages, the first in 1787 with James Watt's development of rotary motion, and the second in 1804 when the brilliant Cornish engineer Richard Trevithick produced his first high-pressure steam engine. The 'Achilles' heel' of the latter -- and one which was to plague other early locomotive builders -- was its excessive weight in relation to the available wooden track. It was this defect which caused Christopher Blackett, the owner of Wylam colliery in Northumberland, to refuse delivery of a Trevithick-type locomotive which had been built at John Whinfield's foundry in Gateshead in 1805. The Wylam colliery's horse-drawn wagonway was of traditional wood construction and Blackett recognized immediately that it would be damaged irreparably by locomotive haulage. 
Even in this very early phase of locomotive development Trevithick's endeavours had highlighted one of the most critical factors in railway economics, namely the interrelatedness of a specialized capital stock. It was simply not possible to employ locomotives to advantage without incurring additional and proportionately much greater expenditure on a purpose-built metal track, and this acted as a powerful deterrent to further experiments in locomotive haulage. The obvious solution was the introduction of heavier and better designed track, preferably of wrought-iron construction. But to the extent that this would have entailed the scrapping of an existing investment giving an adequate return with horse haulage, it was financially unattractive to colliery owners. 
An interim solution to the problem of achieving a reasonable tractive effort in a locomotive sufficiently light to operate on a flimsy track was provided by John Blenkinsop, agent to Charles Brandling, the owner of Middleton colliery near Leeds. In 1811 Blenkinsop patented a Trevithick-type engine with a cogged driving wheel. At the same time an existing wooden tramway was replaced by a cast-iron track with one of the two edge-rails carrying a projecting rack. This 'cog and rack' transmission enabled the locomotive to exert a tractive effort five times greater than Trevithick's original engine even though it was no heavier. By 1813 three engines were at work at Middleton and it is a tribute to Blenkinsop's reputation that others were to be found at Orell colliery in Lancashire and at the Coxlodge and Fawdon wagonway near the Tyne. According to contemporary accounts these locomotives proved reliable in service, at least as employed on the Middleton line where they operated until the early 1830s only to be replaced by horses. In a longer term perspective this was a retrograde step since the locomotive had by then reached a state of operating efficiency far superior to that provided by horse haulage. But in the short term it was a rational response to the falling cost of fodder which fully outweighed the advantages of cheap coal at the Middleton colliery pit head. This did not apply, of course, in 1813 when the price relationships were reversed due to the effects of war. Indeed, the high cost of horse feed was an important factor underpinning Blenkinsop's calculations of the projected savings arising from the transition to locomotives. 
Whether Blenkinsop's achievement inspired other engineers to greater efforts is questionable since several exercises in locomotive building, notably in the north-east coalfield, were also taking place in 1812-13 at the time of the early Middleton colliery experiments. These included the self-hauling 'chain engine' of William Chapman, patented in December 1813 and placed on the Heaton wagonway in 1813, and William Brunton's 'mechanical traveller', first patented in May 1813 and commencing work on the Newbottle wagonway in the final months of 1814. Both of these engines were of eccentric design, mechanically unreliable, and expensive in operation. 
A more orthodox approach to locomotive development, in conformity with the practice of Trevithick and Blenkinsop, was adopted by William Hedley and George Stephenson. The former, a colliery viewer in the employment of Christopher Blackett's Wylam colliery, was effectively prevented from adopting Blenkinsop's rack-rail system by the fact that the Wylam wagonway had only recently been relaid as a metal plateway. He therefore designed and built his own Trevithick-type locomotive, ultimately resolving the problem of excessive weight by doubling the number of axles to four. As with Blenkinsop's Middleton locomotives, the 'Wylam Dilly' type of engine proved reliable in service, although it did suffer from the prevailing defect of an inadequate supply of steam, and initially, at least, relied upon a clumsy arrangement of teeth or flanges attached to the wheels and entering the ground on either side of the rails in order to increase the tractive effort. 
In the case of George Stephenson a clear distinction must be drawn between his misplaced reputation as 'the father of the locomotive', as portrayed by Samuel Smiles, ably assisted by Stephenson himself, and his very real achievement in advancing the design and construction of the locomotive to its modern form in essential details. By the time Blenkinsop was beginning his experiments on the Middleton wagonway Stephenson was working for the grand allies at Killingworth colliery. He was certainly familiar with the work of Chapman and Hedley, and it seems likely that he had observed at close quarters the Blenkinsop rack-rail locomotive at work on the Coxlodge and Fawdon wagonway. Indeed, Stephenson's own engine, the 'Blucher', constructed at the West Moor colliery workshop during the first half of 1814, followed Blenkinsop's design in detail. But since the Killingworth wagonway was laid with wooden edge-rails with a metal strip surface this meant that the 'Blucher' had two critical operational weaknesses. In the first instance its single straight-flue boiler offered limited steam-raising powers when compared with the Trevithick-type return-flue installed in the Wylam engines, and in the absence of the rack-rail transmission its tractive effort was relatively poor. It also proved too heavy for the wooden track, although this aspect can hardly have been a fatal one in view of the construction of a second locomotive early in 1815. 
It was perhaps the fortuitous combination of these defects with Stephenson's abilities and personality -- his remarkable engineering talents and qualities of dogged persistence -- which transformed the Killingworth wagonway into the focal point of railway experiment and design after 1815. The problem of poor tractive effort was soon alleviated, but by no means solved, by the simple expedient of increasing the diameter of the boiler flue and applying the power directly to the wheels by connecting rods, thus reducing the need for crudely manufactured gearing, while further developments were directed towards increasing the longevity of the track. One approach was to reduce the damage inflicted by the engine itself and to this end Stephenson collaborated with William Losh, the senior partner in the iron-making firm of Losh, Wilson, and Bell of Newcastle, to produce the so-called 'steam spring', an arrangement of pistons on each axle bearing the weight of the boiler and its attachments. Far more effective were his patent improvements to the track, involving a new method of jointing and more sophisticated rail chairs. These too were produced in association with Losh and by the end of 1818 the Killingworth wagonway had been relaid with cast-iron edge-rails bearing the Losh-Stephenson patent. 
It was Stephenson's unique achievement that he alone of the early locomotive builders proved capable of viewing railway development as an entity. In perceiving the vital link between locomotive and track he succeeded in demonstrating the economic and practical advantages of mechanical traction. The smooth edge-rail was superior in the engineering and technical sense to both the tram plate and Blenkinsop's rack-rail, and the Stephenson-Losh design improvements practically reconfirmed the principle first established by Trevithick that the weight of a locomotive was sufficient to provide the necessary adhesion on the rails. The 'Blucher' may have been far less sophisticated in its boiler design to the Trevithick and Hedley engines, but in its mode of operation it ranks as the first 'modern' locomotive, reliant upon the force of adhesion via flanged wheels. When it was put to work on the Killingworth wagonway the number of horses was reduced from fifty to thirty and by 1820, when the cast-iron track was relaid with wrought-iron edge-rails, haulage by horses had all but disappeared. 
Stephenson's claim to fame as the most able of the early locomotive builders was responsible for his recruitment to the Stockton and Darlington Railway project, inaugurated by act of parliament in 1821 in order to link the collieries of south-west Durham with the mouth of the River Tees. Appointed as engineer to the line at a salary of $300 per annum, Stephenson strongly urged the advantages of steam locomotives over horse traction. He re-surveyed the whole of the proposed line, and early in 1823 a new parliamentary act was obtained with alterations to the original route conducive to locomotive haulage. On 23 May 1823 the first rail was laid. Stephenson advocated the use of malleable iron rails rather than 'inferior' cast iron and he succeeded in persuading the railway company's management committee to form the line with two-thirds of the former. 
At the same time, Stephenson began to consider the supply of locomotives and other steam engines, and in this respect he viewed it as essential to assemble a trained staff of workers if techniques of construction were to be improved. He therefore decided to establish his own manufacturing establishment -- Robert Stephenson & Co. of Newcastle upon Tyne -- with the help of substantial financial contributions from Edward Pease and the latter's cousin, Thomas Richardson. Work commenced in August 1823 and by the time the Stockton and Darlington line opened for traffic on 27 September 1825, four winding engines had been delivered together with a fully operational steam locomotive: 'Locomotion No.1', weighing 8 tons, hauled a train of goods and passengers along the entire line on the opening day, on occasion obtaining speeds of 12 to 16 miles per hour. This historic engine was preserved and is now exhibited in the North Road Railway Museum, Darlington. 
It is an indication of Stephenson's increasing stature as an engineer beyond the confines of the north-east of England that from the mid-1820s onwards he began to receive numerous invitations to assist in the projection of other railway schemes. Already, in 1824, he had taken the far-sighted decision to establish 'an office for Engineering and Railway Surveying' with his son Robert, Edward Pease, and Michael Longridge as partners. By far the most important of Stephenson's early projects was the Liverpool and Manchester Railway. The rapidly increasing trade between these two towns in consequence of the growth of the cotton industry had outgrown the facilities of the local canal network, and as early as 1821 schemes were mooted for connecting them by a railway. 
In 1824 a company was organized, and Stephenson, after several visits of the promoters to the Stockton and Darlington line then under construction, was employed to undertake surveys and the preparation of plans. Stephenson's surveyors, however, encountered fierce opposition from the farmers and proprietors of the great estates through which the proposed line was to run, and were often subjected to actual personal violence; hence, proper surveys could not be made. A bill was introduced into parliament in 1825 and, after a stubborn fight, was eventually rejected, mainly on the grounds of admitted inefficiency of the plans. Stephenson was subjected to the most searching cross-examination by the counsel for the opposers, especially as to his method of crossing the Chat Moss, and the speed he proposed his engines should attain. 
In 1826 the promoters again introduced a bill. The new plans were drawn on surveys made by the civil engineers George Rennie and his brother Sir John Rennie. Another long struggle ended in their victory. Stephenson was appointed engineer, and work was at once begun. The most important constructional works on the line were the crossing of Chat Moss and the execution of the great Olive Mount cutting. By distributing the load of the track over a considerable surface of the Moss, Stephenson was enabled, in effect, to float the line over this treacherous bog, and thus overcome the chief difficulty. 
While the line was being constructed extended consideration was given to the question of motive power, and for a time, influenced by a report given by outside engineering experts, the directors were in favour of haulage by the use of fixed engines distributed at intervals along the line. Stephenson fought strenuously for locomotive power, and eventually the directors decided to test his advocacy by means of an open competition, the prize offered being $500. The chief condition insisted on was that a mean speed of 10 miles per hour should be obtained with a steam pressure not exceeding 50 lb per square inch. There were also restrictions as to the weight of the engine in comparison with the load it hauled, the constructional price, and other details. The trial was fixed for 1 October 1829. 
In the light of operating experience with his early locomotives on the Stockton and Darlington Railway, Stephenson calculated that if the new form of traction was to be successful, a means had to be devised of increasing the heating surface of the boiler of his locomotive. On the advice of Henry Booth, the secretary of the Liverpool and Manchester company, and with the encouragement of his son, Robert, he adopted tubes passing through the cylindrical barrel and connecting the firebox with the smoke box. Several tubular boilers had been made previously by Trevithick, Sir Goldsworthy Gurney, and others; and Marc Seguin in France, in 1828, had applied the tube principle to a locomotive. 
Stephenson's engine for the trial, named the 'Rocket', was built at the Newcastle works under the direct supervision of Robert Stephenson, and, after numerous failures, the problem of securing the tubes to the tube-plates was mastered. The boiler was a cylinder 6 feet long and 40 inches in diameter, with twenty-five 3 inch copper tubes, the firebox being 2 feet by 3 feet, secured to the front and surrounded by water; there were two cylinders, each placed obliquely to the axis. The weight of the locomotive was 41/4 tons. Three other engines entered the competition in addition to the 'Rocket' -- the 'Novelty' (the only real competitor) by John Braithwaite (1797-1870) and John Ericson, the 'Sanspareil' by Timothy Hackworth, and the 'Perseverance' by Timothy Burstall. 
The place of the trial, Rainhill, near Liverpool, was a 2 mile level piece of line, and each engine was to run at least 70 miles in a day, backwards and forwards on this course, at a mean speed of at least 10 miles per hour. The contest, which created considerable public interest and excitement, began on 6 October 1829. On the opening day the 'Rocket', the only engine ready to time, ran 12 miles in fifty-three minutes, and was eventually awarded the prize, the 'Novelty' experiencing several mishaps during the various tests. 
Stephenson's triumph was complete: former opponents henceforth became ardent advocates of his civil and mechanical engineering abilities and the true dawn of the 'railway age' of the nineteenth century may be said to date from 15 September 1830 when the new line was officially opened in great state, a procession of eight locomotives, with their attendant carriages, passing over it. The duke of Wellington, then prime minister, and most of the distinguished men of the day were present. The opening ceremonies were, however, marred by the fatal accident to William Huskisson, president of the Board of Trade. Despite this misfortune it is a notable fact that the subsequent prosperity of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway (the annual dividend to shareholders averaged 9.5 per cent per annum during its independent existence) was underwritten by a combination of goods and passenger traffic. In the latter context the line created a demand that had not been thought to exist, insofar as the time and cost of travelling between two rapidly growing towns was halved. 
From 1830 onwards until 1845, when he decided to retire completely from active work, Stephenson's life was a history of the railway progress of the country. The locomotive underwent further improvements. When Gurney's steam jet was applied to the 'Rocket', that engine attained a speed of 29 miles per hour. Indeed, the engines designed and built by Robert Stephenson & Co. proved to be the dominant and enduring type in the face of alternative schools of locomotive building. As for his involvement in major construction projects, Stephenson was chief engineer to the Grand Junction line connecting Birmingham with Liverpool and Manchester, begun in 1833 and finished by Joseph Locke, his pupil. He was also chief engineer to the following railways: Manchester to Leeds, Birmingham to Derby, Normanton to York, and Sheffield to Rotherham, and others, all begun in 1836. The Derby to Leeds Railway (afterwards called the North Midland line) was commenced under his supervision in 1837. 
In fact, there was hardly a railway scheme in which Stephenson was not consulted, or an important line built without his help and advice. In effect, therefore, George and his son together left an overwhelming imprint on railway construction and working for decades to come. The characteristics of that imprint are readily summarized under three headings -- an unwavering commitment to the 'standard' gauge of rail spacing (4 ft 81/2 in.), the avoidance of heavy gradients for main lines, and a pragmatic approach to locomotive haulage. 
The standard gauge had been deployed by Stephenson first in the north-east coalfield, and in the early years of railway development, when gauges from 4 ft 4 in. to 7 ft 0 in. were being laid down, he was sufficiently far-sighted to envisage a unified national rail network. Different gauges between adjacent companies would raise transhipment costs significantly, thereby eroding one of the principal economic benefits of railways -- lower delivery costs and final prices. So too in the matter of gradients and motive power, Stephenson was concerned to reduce operating costs: avoidance of severe gradients would eliminate the need for double-headed trains, while in certain circumstances (principally short-haul mineral railways) horse haulage and stationary engines could be used with greater advantage than steam locomotives. 
In all of these respects, Stephenson ranks as an engineering genius, a judgement validated by the fact that his principles and practices soon spread overseas. By 1870, the standard gauge, general uniformity of practice, and incremental advances in railway technology in the light of thorough testing and practical experience had been adopted on a global scale. Such a result undoubtedly rested on Stephenson's personal qualities -- that combination of innate curiosity, profound common sense, and sheer practical ability that marks him out as the greatest of railway pioneers. 
After the completion of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway Stephenson removed his home to Alton Grange, near Ashby-de-la-Zouch. He had married again on 29 March 1820; his second wife was Elizabeth (died 1845), daughter of Thomas Hindmarsh, a prosperous farmer at Black Callerton; the marriage did not produce any further children. He opened large coal pits in this neighbourhood, and spent much time and energy in developing its mineral resources. During the construction of the midland line he took a lease of Tapton House, near Chesterfield, and lived there until his death. 
In 1838 Stephenson was elected vice-president of the mechanical science section of the British Association at its Newcastle meeting. He took a keen interest in the foundation and support of mechanics' institutes. During the great railway mania of 1844 he kept aloof from the worst speculative excesses, and used all his influence to check the mania. The remarkable development of railways and the locomotive in the fourteen years which had elapsed since the Rainhill trial was shown by the fact that Stephenson travelled from London to Newcastle in 1844 to attend a railway banquet in the then remarkably short time of nine hours. 
Stephenson's last great parliamentary struggle was in 1845 in the battle between the supporters of the locomotive and the upholders of the atmospheric railway system, led by I. K. Brunel, which arose in connection with the extension of the railway from Newcastle to Berwick. Though the Board of Trade were inclined to support Brunel in his challenge to the steam locomotive, Stephenson's party won a great parliamentary victory, and settled the matter for ever. This was the final attempt to dispute the supremacy of the locomotive. 
In 1847 Stephenson became president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, which was founded by him that year in Birmingham. He remained notably aloof, however, from the more conservative Institution of Civil Engineers, founded in 1818 and a body dominated by London-based canal and turnpike engineers. He paid several visits to Belgium in connection with railway work, and received in 1835 the honour of knighthood from Leopold I. In 1845 he also visited northern Spain in connection with a proposed railway. Stephenson consistently refused all proffered honours in England, however, declining a knighthood on two occasions. He also declined to enter public life as a member of parliament even though he was offered a safe seat at South Shields. 
Stephenson's last years were devoted to horticultural pursuits at Tapton House, in which he developed particular interests in the values of various manures, stockbreeding, artificial incubation of eggs, and accelerated fattening of chickens. He took great pleasure in growing straight cucumbers by the simple expedient of enclosing the immature growths in a cylindrical glass tube. Inclined to occasional intemperance, Stephenson was prone to remind visitors of his long struggle to promote and develop the steam locomotive, all the more so in the light of his modest origins and lack of formal education. A similar message was conveyed in his infrequent speeches to mechanics' institutes in which he consistently proclaimed his own singular contribution to the development of railways. Never one to suffer any fool gladly, Stephenson never deferred to his social betters. To the end of his life he remained an inveterate and dogmatic deliverer of advice, often while waiting at railway stations telling engineers how to improve the efficiency of their locomotives, and demonstrating to labourers the most effective way to use a shovel and barrow. 
Stephenson's second wife died in 1845, and on 11 January 1848 he married his housekeeper, Ellen Gregory, the daughter of a farmer of Bakewell. But his strength was failing, and he died of pleurisy at Tapton House, Tapton, near Chesterfield, on 12 August 1848. He was buried on 17 August in the churchyard of Holy Trinity Church, Chesterfield. The foundation stone of a fine memorial hall was laid at Chesterfield by Lord Hartington on 17 October 1877, and the building was opened in July 1879. A festival in celebration of the centenary of Stephenson's birth was held at Newcastle on 9 June 1881, when a medal was struck in his honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 26398


Stephenson, Henry Palfrey (1826-1890), civil engineer, son of Major John Stephenson of the 6th dragoon guards, was born at Portobello, near Edinburgh, on 27 March 1826. He was educated at a private school at Twickenham, and in 1842 became a student at the College for Civil Engineers, Putney. When this was forced to close Stephenson established the Putney Club, with the aim of encouraging young students in the profession; it later became the Society of Engineers. Elected an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in May 1853, he became a full member in February 1864. 
Stephenson's early professional work consisted mainly of the designing of docks and iron railway bridges, and of arbitration work. Realizing the importance of coal-gas lighting for towns, however, from 1858 he began to design and supervise the construction of gas works in Britain, and also in Germany and the Netherlands. He also served for a number of years as a director of the Crystal Palace and Croydon gas companies. Stephenson died at his home, The Hermitage, Duppas Hill, Croydon, on 30 April 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 26399


Stephenson, James (1808-1886), engraver and lithographer, was born at Manchester on 26 November 1808, the son of Thomas Stephenson, a boot and shoe maker. He was educated at a school kept by Thomas Rain, adjoining Oldham Street Chapel, and before the end of his schooldays was apprenticed to John Fothergill, an engraver, of Prince's Court, Market Street. While there he met the artist Henry Liverseege, and it was probably on the latter's advice that he went to London at the expiry of his apprenticeship and entered the studio of William Finden. There he gained the silver medal of the Society of Arts for an original design of a figure engraved in line. It was during this period that many of his book illustrations were undertaken, a number of them being landscapes for travel books such as Thomas Roscoe's 'Tourist in Spain: Granada' (1835). 
About 1838 Stephenson returned to Manchester and established himself as a historical and landscape engraver in Ridgefield, and afterwards in a studio in St Ann Street. He worked mostly as a metal-engraver and lithographer, but he also produced wood-engravings for 'Clever Boys' and 'Wide Wide World', and made drawings in crayon. Besides furnishing illustrations for B. Love's 'Manchester as it is' (1839), for Charles Swain's 'The Mind and other Poems' (1841), and for other books, he engraved the members' card for the Anti-Corn Law League and executed for Agnew & Sons large engravings of portraits of prominent members, among others Sir John Bowring, Edward Baines, and John Heyworth. He also engraved C. A. Duval's portrait of Richard Cobden, George Patten's portrait of John Frederick Foster, and John Boston's portrait of Daniel Grant, one of the original Brothers Cheeryble in Dickens's 'Nicholas Nickleby' (1839). In 1842, for the British Association, he executed a portrait of the chemist John Dalton (1766-1844). These, together with large engravings for the print publishers, took up much of his mature working life. 
About 1847 Stephenson moved to London, and from 1852 his plates were published in the 'Art Journal'. He exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy from 1856. He engraved title-page vignettes after A. H. Gray for J. Timbs's 'Curiosities of London' (1867), and these illustrate his mastery of the vignette form. Among his later engravings, some published by H. Graves, were 'The Day of Wrath', 'The Last Judgment', and 'The Plains of Heaven', after John Martin; 'The Highland Whiskey Still', 'The Taming of the Shrew', and 'The Queen at Osborne', after Landseer; 'Ophelia', after Millais; and 'Portrait of Lord Tennyson', after George Frederick Watts, published in the 'Art Journal' (1874). He also engraved pictures by Maclise, Gilbert Stuart Newton, Thomas Faed, and Sir John Watson Gordon. Many of his best-known works are after Scottish subjects, and he is represented in the City of Edinburgh collection by eight engravings. Stephenson died at his residence, 29 Dartmouth Park Road, London, on 28 May 1886. Among his contemporaries he was regarded as one of the finest line engravers in the country, and he was described by W. A. Chatto as 'a skilful engraver on steel' ('A Treatise on Wood Engraving', 2nd edn, ed. H. G. Bohn, 1861, 600). 


@@@@@


doc= 26400


Stephenson, Robert (1803-1859), railway and civil engineer, was born on 16 October 1803 at Willington Quay, near Newcastle upon Tyne, the only son of George Stephenson (1781-1848), colliery and railway engineer, and his wife, Frances Henderson (1769-1806), a farm servant. In 1804, after his father's appointment as brakesman to the West Moor colliery engine, the family moved to Killingworth, where on 14 May 1806 Stephenson's mother died of consumption. 
Stephenson's first elements of education were acquired at Tommy Rutter's village school at Long Benton. In 1814 his father, regretting his own limited education, decided that Stephenson should obtain formal instruction. As a salaried employee of the 'grand allies', a combination of aristocratic and gentry colliery owners, Stephenson senior had the means at his disposal and he sent his son to Bruce's academy at Newcastle upon Tyne and made him a member of the Newcastle Literary and Philosophical Society. On leaving school in 1819 Stephenson was apprenticed to Nicholas Wood, viewer of Killingworth colliery. In 1821 he assisted his father in the survey of the Stockton and Darlington Railway, and then in 1822 spent six months studying natural philosophy, chemistry, and natural history at Edinburgh University. There he met, as a fellow student, his lifelong friend and fellow engineer, George Parker Bidder, with whom he afterwards carried on much of his professional work. 
On leaving Edinburgh, Stephenson settled in Newcastle upon Tyne to manage Robert Stephenson & Co., the famous locomotive building establishment which his father had founded there in 1823 to build stationary and locomotive engines with his partners Edward Pease, Thomas Richardson, and Michael Longridge. Within a year, however, Stephenson had left England on a three-year engagement as engineer to the Colombian Mining Association, charged with the responsibility of leading an expedition to establish gold and silver mines in the area of Santa Ana on the Magdalen River in Colombia. The reasons for Stephenson's decision to leave Newcastle are unclear, historical speculation having focused on health problems and a possible rift with his father. What is certain is that the Colombian venture was funded in part by Thomas Richardson, a wealthy Quaker financier, a shareholder in the Stockton and Darlington Railway, and partner in Robert Stephenson & Co. It seems reasonable to presume, therefore, that Richardson was in some way connected with Stephenson's decision to leave. 
Stephenson left England in June 1824, and was absent for three years, creating problems for the company. In 1827, however, deficiencies in the financial management of Robert Stephenson & Co., together with poor scheduling of contracts, led to a request for him to return; on the journey home he met Richard Trevithick, one of the early pioneers of steam traction, also on his way back to England, a penniless, broken man. Stephenson reached England in the midst of the controversy as to the most suitable system of traction for use on the projected Liverpool and Manchester Railway. The famous 'Rocket' locomotive was eventually built under his direction at the Newcastle works; the manufacture of its innovative multitubular boiler plates gave rise to considerable difficulties before they were overcome. Most of the improvements in locomotive technology and methods of production achieved by Robert Stephenson & Co. in the 1830s were due to Robert Stephenson's own engineering skill and ability. In the Rainhill locomotive trials, held in October 1829, to determine the best means of propulsion on the Liverpool and Manchester line, the 'Rocket' was the outright winner, conforming fully to the Liverpool and Manchester company's engineering specifications and exceeding them generously in terms of performance. 
From 1827 to the early 1830s Stephenson assisted his father generally in the civil engineering of the Liverpool and Manchester line, in the Leicester and Swannington line, and in other minor lines. From 1833 onwards, however, he began to establish a reputation in railway engineering and surveying independent of his father. Indeed, immediately after the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, he took the major responsibility for surveying the line of the proposed London and Birmingham Railway. This was an ambitious project, providing for more than 100 miles of double track, traversing numerous roads and canals and entailing the construction of a sequence of complex cuttings and tunnels. Stephenson was ultimately appointed chief engineer at a salary rising from $1500 to $2000 per annum. Opening for traffic in 1838 (by which time the Grand Junction Railway continuing the line northwards from Birmingham was under construction), the London and Birmingham Railway was an engineering triumph: there had been substantial cost overruns in response to significant underestimates for heavy engineering works. Stephenson's success in dealing with the quicksand and ground water problems encountered in driving Kilsby Tunnel is one of the great civil engineering achievements of the early railway age. There can be little doubt that construction costs would have been higher but for Stephenson's superb organizational skills. In this respect, his detailed and precise drawings set standards for subsequent railway contracts, as did his ability to recruit assistants of the calibre of John Birkinshaw, G. W. Buck, John Crossley, Frank Forster, and T. L. Gooch. Known as the 'Stephensonites', they were bound to Stephenson by ties of loyalty and shared expertise. 
In the 1840s Stephenson joined with his father as an active participant in the 'battle of the gauges' which was fought out in parliament, and also in the struggle between the rival advocates of the locomotive and of the atmospheric system. In both contests he deployed a powerful and clear intellect to justify the technological choices which subsequent experience demonstrated to be the right ones. From 1838 until the end of his life he was engaged on railway work, not only in Great Britain, but all over the world; railways were constructed either under his own direct supervision or under his advice which later became the trunk lines of the countries in which they were laid down. It is also pertinent to note that the principal classes of locomotive produced by Robert Stephenson & Co. before 1850 became the dominant types, at least in Great Britain, where the quality of their design, construction, and performance, was of a sufficiently high order to defeat rival schools of locomotive building. Notable among Stephenson locomotives was the long-boilered engine in which all wheels were placed ahead of the firebox so that there was no restriction on its size. Unsuitable for main line express service, the type was remarkably successful in the carriage of heavy freight where a reservoir of steaming capacity could be used with advantage. 
By the later 1830s Stephenson had amassed a small personal fortune as a result of his professional fees as an engineer and the receipt of profits from Robert Stephenson & Co. Ironically, it was the failure of a relatively obscure railway project with which he had been associated in the earlier part of the decade which very nearly resulted in his financial ruin. This was the Stanhope and Tyne Railway, completed in 1834 and linking the limestone quarries of Upper Weardale with the port of South Shields. Built on the wayleave principle (the private purchase of land) rather than via an act of parliament, the company encountered financial difficulties almost from the outset on account of high wayleave rentals and the costs of operating a line which utilized every form of motive power then known. After the projection of the Brandling Junction Railway in 1835, the Stanhope and Tyne Railway was vulnerable to substantial loss of traffic, an eventuality which occurred in 1839. By that time the latter was in a parlous financial condition and although this situation was known to Stephenson in his capacity as a shareholder, he assumed that his personal liability extended only to the amount of his fee. In December 1839, however, he received a demand for non-payment of an account by the Stanhope and Tyne company on behalf of an aggrieved creditor. On consulting his solicitor, Charles Parker, Stephenson discovered that as a shareholder in an unincorporated company, his personal liability was limitless, all the more so since he had been identified as a relatively wealthy investor in the company. In the event, the Stanhope and Tyne line and its debts were taken over by a new incorporated company -- the Pontop and South Shields Railway, capitalized at $400,000. Stephenson himself contributed $20,000, a sum obtained in part by the sale of half his interest in Robert Stephenson & Co. to his father. 
The greatest civil engineering works which Stephenson carried out were his railway bridges, constructed on a scale sufficient by themselves to guarantee his professional reputation in perpetuity. The high-level bridge over the Tyne at Newcastle and the Royal Border Bridge at Berwick were two of his earliest and most successful examples of this branch of engineering. In the design of both he was assisted by T. E. Harrison. The former, carrying two levels of decking for the railway and road traffic, traversed a 100 foot deep valley entailing the construction of four spans over the river. It comprised six bowstring truss spans each of 125 feet. Bridges of this form had been used by Stephenson on the London and Birmingham Railway. Steam hammers supplied by James Nasmyth were used for the considerable foundations rammed into the river bed. Even more impressive was Stephenson's design for the Britannia Bridge over the Conwy and the Menai Strait. This was part of the Chester and Holyhead Railway project inaugurated in 1844. Paradoxically, this railway had represented the nadir of Stephenson's civil engineering career when the Dee Bridge failed on 24 May 1847 causing fatalities. Stephenson, as engineer of the bridge, was fortunate not to be charged with manslaughter. The bridge comprised nine cast iron girders in combination with wrought iron ties, which proved a flawed design. The failure gave further impetus to the development work for the Britannia Bridge. Eventually, in response to an Admiralty requirement for a 100 foot clear passage above the river, Stephenson after much research decided upon the 'tubular' form. This entailed the construction of wrought iron tubes to encompass the railway track itself, with the tubes themselves providing the principal source of stability. It was this type of railway bridge which would always remain inseparably connected with Stephenson's name. Assisted by Eaton Hodgkinson and William Fairbairn, his designs were carefully worked out and every step tested by experiment, including the construction of a scale model subject to testing with weights. The engineers' efforts were eventually crowned with success when the Britannia Bridge was opened for traffic on 5 March 1850. Fairbairn later claimed to have been primarily responsible for the bridge's construction, and published his own account of the project in 1849. 
Stephenson proposed a bridge on similar lines -- the great Victoria Bridge over the St Lawrence River at Montreal, which was begun in 1854 and completed in 1859 after his death. With a span of 6650 feet it was for many years the longest bridge in the world. In connection with the Alexandria-Cairo railway, which featured tubular spans, Stephenson also designed swing-bridges at Benha and Birket al-Saba. For his invention of the system of tubular-plate railway bridges Stephenson was awarded the gold medal of honour by the council of the Paris Exhibition of 1855. 
On 17 June 1829 Stephenson married Frances (1803-1842), daughter of John Sanderson of London. There were no children, and Frances died at Hampstead on 4 October 1842, aged thirty-nine. On 30 July 1847 Stephenson was elected MP for Whitby. He represented the town until his death, being re-elected in July 1852, March 1857, and April 1859. He was a high tory and protectionist, believing that the adoption of free trade was an unwarranted leap in the dark, a paradoxical view, perhaps, for a person responsible for far-reaching economic and social changes consequent upon the development of railways. He rarely spoke in the house except on railway administration and engineering matters. In the latter respect, he was an opponent in the house of the Suez Canal scheme, in the belief that although it was technically feasible it was commercially unsound. In 1830 he became a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, and a regular contributor to its discussions. He was eventually elected president, occupying the chair during 1856 and 1857. Although he declined a knighthood, he accepted numerous foreign distinctions, including the order of Leopold from the king of the Belgians in 1841 and the grand cross of St Olaf of Norway in 1848. He was elected FRS on 7 June 1849, and on 24 June 1857 he was created a DCL of Oxford University in company with his friend I. K. Brunel and Dr Livingstone. 
For an individual of prodigious talents which were acknowledged publicly in his lifetime, Stephenson was remarkably modest and, unlike his father, lacking in self-confidence. Careless of his own health and inclined to overwork, he was unfailingly kind and considerate to subordinates. As a professional engineer he surpassed his father's achievements, notably in the field of civil engineering. The works that he accomplished were on an altogether larger scale than anything connected with his father and were characterized by an approach to design and construction rooted in the scientific method of careful observation and calculation. This applied also to the development of the locomotive after the innovation of the 'Rocket'. Apart from his numerous reports on professional matters, Stephenson undertook little literary work, his only important work being the article 'Iron bridges' for the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (8th edn, 1853-60). 
Stephenson's health had been unsatisfactory since at least the later 1840s, perhaps accounting for an increasing tendency towards melancholy and irritability. Afflicted by Bright's disease he was advised to stop all work in 1859 and embark on a cruise in his yacht 'Titania'. In September 1859 he left for Norway, but after a temporary rally he rapidly grew worse following a severe attack of jaundice and was brought back in great haste to die at his own home at 34 Gloucester Square, London, on 12 October 1859. He was buried on 22 October in Westminster Abbey, by the side of Thomas Telford. With the assent of the queen, the funeral cortege was permitted to pass through Hyde Park: crowds lined the route and on the Thames, Tyne, Wear and Tees, all shipping displayed flags at half-mast. In Newcastle upon Tyne the 1500 employees of Robert Stephenson & Co. were allowed to march through the streets to a memorial service at the church of St Nicholas. He was mourned generally throughout the engineering world. 


@@@@@


doc= 26401


Stephenson, Samuel Martin (1742-1833), physician and minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster, was born at Straidballymorris, in the parish of Templepatrick, co. Antrim, the third and youngest son of James Stephenson, a farmer, and his wife, Margaret Martin. Educated at the school of John Rankin, Presbyterian minister at Antrim, in 1763 he went to Glasgow University, where he studied under William Leechman and attended lectures given by Adam Smith and Thomas Reid. Having been licensed in 1767 by Templepatrick presbytery he taught in the diocesan school at Monaghan. In August 1773 he received a call from the congregation of Greyabbey, co. Down. His trial sermon, preached on 19 April 1774, raised suspicions about his orthodoxy that were confirmed by his refusal to subscribe to the Westminster confession. Several ministers objected to his appointment, and on 31 May he was admitted to ordination by a majority of one only after his supporters had threatened to join either the Southern Association or the presbytery of Antrim. He was ordained by the Bangor presbytery on 21 June; those of his congregation who opposed his ordination seceded and formed the presbytery of Antrim. Stephenson justified his non-subscribing position in two pamphlets that were published in Belfast, in 1774 and 1775. 
At Monaghan, Stephenson had lodged for two years with an apothecary named Braddock, and this had persuaded him to study medicine at Dublin and Edinburgh universities. On 12 June 1776 he graduated MD from Edinburgh University, after defending a thesis on typhus, and returned to Greyabbey to practise on a salary of $50 in addition to his ministerial stipend from the 'regium donum'. On 1 August 1785 he resigned his charge and was succeeded by James Porter. He settled in Belfast, where he gained a considerable reputation as a physician, especially for his treatment of fever cases. In conjunction with James McDonnell MD he founded the city's first dispensary in 1792 and the fever hospital in 1797. A member of the Belfast Literary Society, he also helped found the Linenhall Library and the Academical Institution (later Royal Academical Institution), which opened on 1 February 1814. In 1808 he published a paper that he had written for the literary society on the Belfast linen industry, and wrote brief histories of the parishes of Templepatrick and Greyabbey, published respectively in 1825 and 1828. In recognition of his charitable works the General Synod of Ulster reinstated his name on the ministerial roll, though he had exercised no clerical duties for over thirty years. 
Stephenson married Mary, the daughter of James Armstrong (1739-1779), Presbyterian minister of Portaferry, co. Down. They had at least four sons -- James Armstrong (died 1839), Samuel Martin (died 1834), George Alexander (died 1864), and Robert (died 1869) -- two of whom, Samuel Martin and Robert, qualified as doctors of medicine. In 1821 Stephenson resigned his public offices in favour of his son Robert and pursued farming in retirement. He died on 13 January 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 26402


Stephenson, Thomas (1552-1624), Jesuit, was born of Catholic parents in Windleston, co. Durham; his father was also named Thomas. He received a good education before entering the English College, then at Rheims, on 22 June 1581. He was ordained priest at Soissons on 23 December 1581 and sent to England on 13 April 1583, but was arrested exactly ten months later and committed to the Tower of London. He was tried and condemned on 4 May 1584 but was kept in prison until deported with nineteen other priests and one layman on 21 January 1585. 
During Stephenson's imprisonment he probably came into contact with Jesuits such as Thomas Pounde, whose biography Stephenson later wrote. Once on the continent he applied to join the society, was accepted, and completed his two-year noviciate at Brno. From 1588 to 1599 he taught Hebrew, Greek, and rhetoric and held various other offices at Jesuit colleges in Vienna, Olomouc, Prague, and Chomutov. From 1600 to 1602 he was at the English College in Rome, then staffed by Jesuits, where he assisted the rector, Robert Persons, and began to translate at least one of Persons's books into Latin, a task he continued on his return to England about 1604. He is also said to have written a catechism and a history of the world from creation to the coming of Christ, neither of which is extant. He was back on the continent again late in 1621, as confessor at the noviciate in Watten. After two years in Liege he returned to Watten where he died on 23 March 1624. 


@@@@@


doc= 26403


Stepney, Catherine, Lady Stepney (1778-1845), novelist, was born at Grittleton, Wiltshire, on 23 December 1778, the daughter of Thomas Pollok (died 1801), rector of Grittleton, and his wife, Susannah (died 1802), daughter of Charlton Palmer of London. She was first married to Russell Manners, and under that name published two Gothic historical novels, 'Castle Nuovier, or, Henry and Adelina' (1806) and 'The Lords of Erith' (1809). At Edinburgh on 8 June 1813 she married Sir Thomas Stepney, ninth and last baronet, of Prendergast, Pembrokeshire, groom of the bedchamber to the duke of York. He had succeeded his brother, Sir John Stepney, in the baronetcy in October 1811. Sir Thomas died childless on 12 September 1825. 
Catherine Stepney wrote in later life four 'silver fork' novels: 'The New Road to Ruin' (1833); 'The Heir Presumptive' (1835); 'The Courtier's Daughter' (1838, 1841); and 'The Three Peers' (1841). They show careful observation of London society (her house was a meeting place for many authors and artists). She also contributed to the fashionable annuals; but Mary Mitford declared that everything under Lady Stepney's name was rewritten by Letitia Elizabeth Landon, 'or the grammar and spelling would have disgraced a lady's maid' (L'Estrange, 3.94). Lady Stepney died at her home in Henrietta Street, Cavendish Square, London, on 14 April 1845. 


@@@@@


doc= 26404


Stepney, George (1663-1707), diplomatist, born in Westminster, London, was the son of George Stepney, groom of the chamber to Charles II, and his wife, Mary, the eldest daughter and coheir of Sir Bernard Whetstone, knight, of Woodford, Essex, and the grandson of Sir Thomas Stepney, knight, cupbearer to Charles I. He was descended from the Stepneys of Prendergast in Pembrokeshire. 
In 1676 Stepney was admitted to Westminster School, where he was a king's scholar. There he met James Montagu and Matthew Prior and developed a close friendship with Charles Montagu, later earl of Halifax, that lasted throughout his life. Having matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1682, he went on to be elected a scholar in 1683, and to receive his BA in 1686, his MA in 1689, and a fellowship in 1689. At Cambridge he acquired a reputation as a poet for his translations of the classics, such as Juvenal, and for his political verses, such as those on the marriage of Princess Anne or on the death of Queen Mary. A persuasive pamphleteer and a member of the Kit-Cat Club, he joined William's side in the revolution of 1688. In 1697 he became a fellow of the Royal Society and was appointed a commissioner of trade and plantations, a position he held until his death. 
Stepney's importance, however, rests mainly on his diplomatic service, which began in 1687 and which made him the most well-known career diplomat of William III's reign. With the help of Montagu, he was appointed secretary to Sir Peter Wych at Hamburg. He later served as secretary to James Johnson at Berlin (1691); charge d'affaires at Berlin (1692); secretary at Vienna (1693); commissary and deputy to Saxony (1693-4); minister to Hesse-Cassel (1694-5) and Saxony (1695); and envoy-extraordinary to Cologne and Mainz (1695-6), Hesse-Cassel, the Palatinate, and Treves (Trier) (1695-7), Saxony (1698), Prussia (1698-9), and again to the Palatinate (1701). 
Because of his extensive service in the Holy Roman empire Stepney had a grasp of German affairs that few could equal. Macky's remark that 'no Englishman ever understood the affairs of Germany so well and few Germans better' ('Memoirs of the Secret Services', 142) reflected Stepney's reputation among his contemporaries. That reputation led to his appointment as envoy-extraordinary (1701-5) and then envoy-extraordinary and plenipotentiary (1705-6) at Vienna, where he played a crucial role during the early years of the War of the Spanish Succession (1702-14). Stepney had professed himself delighted with the appointment in spite of all the endless drinking and negotiating with German princes, which he jokingly remarked 'might make as doleful a chapter as that wherein St. Paul enumerates his Labours and Sufferings' (TNA: PRO, SP, Germany, 105/65, Stepney to Godolphin, Vienna, 10 May 1702). Still he admitted that he would 'not quit this post for anything in Europe' (TNA: PRO, SP, Germany, 105/63/214-15, Stepney to Halifax, Vienna, 17 Aug 1701). Stepney's 'Essay upon the Present Interest of England' (1701), which had contended that England must reduce the 'overgrown power' of France and must not allow Louis XIV to delude England into a false sense of security (Scott, 11.195-218) made him initially popular at court. 
Unfortunately, only the allies' mutual fear of and desire to limit Louis XIV's power held the coalition together. Conflicting war aims and strategies eroded the grand alliance and undermined Stepney's position. Leopold I particularly resented the maritime powers' pressure to negotiate with the elector of Bavaria, who had allied with France, and with Rakoczi, who led an insurrection against him in Hungary. Austrian mistrust of Stepney largely vitiated his usefulness and ultimately led to his recall. In 1705 he wrote that he was 'heartily weary of drudging on in this laborous and ungratefull employment' (TNA: PRO, SP, Germany, 105/75, Stepney to Blathwayt, 1 April 1705). In May 1706 Stepney welcomed the opportunity to take possession of Mindelheim, the lordship recently conferred on Churchill. Stepney needed the reprieve, for by late 1706 his position had so deteriorated that he could remark that he was 'very lucky to have escap'd Vienna which is now the most disagreeable Station We have abroad and will become more so every day' (BL, Add. MS 7075, fol. 59, Stepney to Raby, The Hague, 2 Dec 1706). He arrived on 9 November 1706 at his next post at The Hague, where he served as envoy-extraordinary and plenipotentiary. In February 1707 he went on a special mission to the landgrave of Hesse-Cassel to renew the treaty on troop deployment. 
Stepney received leave to return to England in August of that year, and died, unmarried, at Chelsea of what contemporaries referred to as the 'bloody flux' on 26 September 1707. Many regretted his demise. Charles Whitworth, who had served his diplomatic apprenticeship under Stepney, mourned the loss of 'a most tender Father... the best of friends and Masters' (BL, Add. MS 37355, Whitworth to Stepney's sisters, 30 Nov 1701). In his will Stepney left $50 to Matthew Prior in cancellation of a long-standing debt, a golden cup and a hundred volumes of his library to the earl of Halifax, the remainder to a Mr Lewis, and a silver basin and ewer to Adam Cardonnel. The rest of his estate, the largest part of which was a Treasury debt of over $7000, went to his two sisters. He was buried with great pomp in Westminster Abbey, where a bust was later erected to his memory. A portrait of him by Kneller survives. Macky described Stepney as 'short in stature, with a pleasant Countenance' ('Memoirs of the Secret Services', 142). He was a man of wit, humour, and intelligence, whose career underscores the growing importance of a body of capable and dedicated civil servants. 


@@@@@


doc= 26405


Sterling, Sir Anthony Coningham (1805-1871), army officer and historian, was born in January 1805 at Dundalk, the eldest son of Captain Edward Sterling (1773-1847) ['see under 'Sterling, John] and Hester (1783-1843), daughter of John Coningham of Londonderry. John Sterling was a younger brother. After attending school at Greenwich, Glasgow University (1821-3), and keeping some terms at Trinity College, Cambridge (admitted pensioner, June 1823), he was on 18 February 1826 gazetted an ensign in the 24th foot. He married in 1829 Charlotte (died 10 April 1863), daughter of Major-General Joseph Baird. From 21 March 1834 to 5 December 1843 he was a captain in the 73rd foot, and was then placed on half pay. 
Sterling served in the Crimean campaign of 1854-5, first as brigade major and afterwards as assistant adjutant-general to the Highland division, including the battles of the Alma, Balaklava, and Inkerman, and the siege of Sevastopol. He received the Legion d'honneur and the fourth class of the Mejidiye. 
On 17 October 1857 Sterling sold his commission, retiring with the rank of colonel, but during 1858-9 he was again employed as military secretary to Colin Campbell, Lord Clyde, in the suppression of the Indian mutiny. In 1861 Campbell accused Sterling of wilfully neglecting to insert the name of Colonel Pakenham in a list of persons recommended for the KCB at the close of the mutiny. This led to many letters, which are given in 'Correspondence Concerning Charges Made by Lord Clyde Against Sir Anthony Sterling, March 1861' (privately printed, 1863). He was gazetted CB on 5 July 1855 and KCB on 21 July 1860. 
Sterling's publications included 'Letters from the Army in the Crimea, Written by a Staff Officer' (1857) and 'The Story of the Highland Brigade in the Crimea, Founded on Letters Written during 1854, 1855, and 1856' (1895). Sterling died at his home, 3 South Lodge, Knightsbridge, London, on 1 March 1871 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26406


Edward Sterling (1773-1847), journalist, and his wife, Hester Coningham (1783-1843). Edward Sterling's father, the Revd Anthony Sterling ('b'. 1739), was subdean of Waterford Cathedral. Edward was born at the deanery, Waterford, on 27 February 1773, and following family tradition matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1788. Admitted to the Middle Temple in 1791, he was called to the Irish bar in 1794 but joined the Loyal Irish Volunteers and fought at Vinegar Hill in 1798. After the rising he accepted a commission as captain in the 2nd regiment, Royal Lancashire militia, and in 1799 in the 16th Buckinghamshire regiment of foot. In summer 1803 he moved to the 8th battalion reserve and was quartered in Londonderry. There he met Hester Coningham whom Carlyle called 'the queen of the scene, and of the fair world in Derry' (Carlyle, 'Life', 17). Hester, the only daughter of the merchant John Coningham, married Edward on 5 April 1804 in Fehan church, and their first son, Anthony Coningham Sterling (1805-1871) was born in the following January at Dundalk. Edward inherited a small pension from his father and drew half pay on reserve, but the family moved to Scotland where the Coninghams had a distant connection with the earls of Bute. Of the couple's seven children only Anthony and John survived into adulthood, and John remembered being a sickly boy. 


@@@@@


doc= 26407


Sterling, James (1701-1763), Church of England clergyman and poet, the son of James Sterling, a captain in the British army, and Patience Hansard, was born in Downrass, King's county, Ireland. He attended Trinity College, Dublin, from 1716 to 1720. Sterling's poetic drama 'The Rival Generals' was performed in Dublin and published in three editions in 1722. He married Nancy Lyddell, who acted in the play, and in 1723 the couple travelled to London, where Nancy made her first appearance on 2 October 1723 at Lincoln's Inn Fields as Desdemona. Sterling had three of his poems published in 'Miscellaneous Poems' (1724) edited by Matthew Concannen, and the following year the couple returned to Dublin, where Nancy acted regularly in the Smock Alley Theatre until poor health forced her to give a farewell performance on 22 May 1732 as Polly Peachum in John Gay's 'Beggar's Opera'. 
After Nancy's death Sterling graduated MA from Trinity College in 1733 and took holy orders. He served as chaplain to the king's 'own Royal Regiment of Foot', during which time he published 'The Poetical Works of the Rev. James Sterling', volume 1 (1734). Sterling's play 'The Parricide' was published in 1736 and performed three times at Goodman's Fields (which was then managed by his former wife's brother-in-law Henry Gifford). Sterling received the royal bounty for going abroad as a missionary on 16 September 1737. Precisely two months later he became minister of the parish of All Hallows, Anne Arundel county, Maryland. On 26 August 1739 he accepted the call to St Paul's, Kent county, Maryland, where he lived at Chestertown. Sterling married Rebecca Holt, widow of the Revd Arthur Holt, on 19 September 1743; a daughter, Rebecca, was born on 22 November 1744. Sterling married his third wife, Mary Smith, on 7 September 1749. While in Maryland Sterling produced a number of elegies and other occasional poems (published in local periodicals), including prologues and epilogues for the travelling Hallam Theatre Company. His long poem 'An Epistle to the Hon. Arthur Dobbs' (1752) was printed in Dublin and London. 
On 16 April 1752, while on a visit to London, Sterling and a group of merchants appeared before the lord commissioners of trade seeking a grant for the right of exclusive trade on the Labrador coast. In attempting a monopoly Sterling betrayed the trust of Benjamin Franklin and a group of Philadelphians who were financing an exploratory trip to Labrador. The Board of Trade rejected Sterling's request because of the Hudson Bay Company's rival petition. Sterling also presented a plan to the lords of the Treasury that proposed the creation of a new Maryland customs district. Sterling was appointed to the collectorship on 12 May 1752 at an annual salary of $80. Sterling now decided to return to Maryland and for the second time received the royal bounty for travelling overseas as a missionary. Leaving London early in June 1752 he arrived in Annapolis on 7 August. After an outbreak of fighting on the frontier the governor, Horatio Sharpe, called a special meeting of the Maryland legislature for 13 December 1754 and requested Sterling to deliver a sermon on the occasion. Three hundred copies of 'Zeal Against the Enemies of our Country' (1755) were printed at the legislature's expense. It was also reprinted in London. 
Sterling died in Chestertown on 10 November 1763; his third wife and his daughter, Rebecca, who married William Carmichael (died 1795), the diplomat and adventurer, survived him. An obituary and an epitaph appeared in the 'Maryland Gazette' on 17 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 26408


Sterling, John (1806-1844), writer and poet, was born on 20 July 1806 at Kames Castle on the Isle of Bute, the son of 
In autumn 1809 Edward Sterling moved his family to a cottage in Llanblethian near Cowbridge in Wales, in order, Carlyle speculates in his memorial 'Life of John Sterling' (1851), to be nearer his occupations in Dublin and London and to obtain better schooling for his sons. From this refuge Edward began publishing spirited letters and pamphlets on military and political issues that earned him notice in London. Late in 1812 Edward accepted appointment as a staff writer for 'The Times', and for the next twenty-eight years did much to establish its tone on leading issues. Edward moved to France in May 1814 and was joined by his family. In the following March he remained in Paris for just long enough to witness Napoleon's return, while his family fled by carriage to Dieppe. Over the next four years the family moved about London -- to Russell Square, Queen Square, Blackfriars Road, and The Grove in Blackheath. During these years Edward cultivated his powerful connections and rose to become co-proprietor of 'The Times'. Carlyle portrays Edward as the 'thunderer' of 'The Times', which was his 'express emblem' (Carlyle, 'Life', 304). Edward retired from active journalism soon after 1840, and died on 3 September 1847 at South Place, Knightsbridge. 
John Sterling's poor health prevented him from attending public school, but he studied at Greenwich School, Blackheath School, and finally Christ's Hospital. He was sent to Glasgow University from 1822 to 1824, where he befriended fellow student William Jacobson, later regius professor of divinity at Oxford. Sterling was admitted at Trinity College, Cambridge, in February 1824. In that same month he was elected to membership in the newly reactivated Union Society, increasingly a centre of lively intellectual debate. Sterling rose through the offices of the Union Society, becoming president in Easter 1827. Carlyle and J. C. Hare diverge in their accounts of his Cambridge years, though as his tutor Hare certainly knew Sterling better at this time and did much to guide the development of his ideas. In November 1825 Sterling was elected to the recently formed Cambridge Conversazione Society, better known as the Cambridge Apostles. Between the union and the Apostles, Sterling forged bonds of friendship with many of the most influential leaders of the rising generation. 
Torn between careers in law, politics, the church, and literature, Sterling migrated to Trinity Hall in March 1826. F. D. Maurice and Sterling founded the 'Metropolitan Quarterly Magazine' on the model of the great journals of the day. Though short-lived, it became the collective product of the Apostles, and especially of the Coleridgean faction among them, styled 'the mystics'. In August 1827 Sterling first visited Coleridge at Highgate, there beginning his life's most important intellectual association. Later that year Sterling left Cambridge and settled in London, briefly acting as secretary for a free-trade association. In support of a popular uprising in Spain he published a fiery paper, under the pseudonym Jacob Sternwall, called 'Thoughts on the Foreign Policy of England' (1827). He was admitted to the Inner Temple in April 1828 but does not appear to have kept terms. John Stuart Mill recalls the appearance at this time of Sterling and Maurice in the London Debating Society, where they represented 'a second Liberal and even Radical party, on totally different grounds from Benthamism and vehemently opposed to it; bringing into these discussions the general doctrines and modes of thought of the European reaction against the philosophy of the eighteenth century. (Mill, 'Autobiography', 128)' This reaction was nowhere more evident than in the early numbers of the weekly 'Athenaeum', founded by James Silk Buckingham in January 1828, but over the next several years owned, edited, and written largely by Sterling, Maurice, and other Apostles. 
John Sterling thus became a writer as well as an orator. He translated French and Spanish poetry, and wrote original prose tales and essays, some of which were later collected by Hare. After a swift trip to France and Italy in 1828 he began his novel of spiritual crisis, 'Arthur Coningsby', set during the French Revolution and published anonymously four years later by Effingham Wilson. Admired by Mill, Coleridge, and Carlyle, the novel was warmly received by contemporary reviewers. Sterling's literary and political concerns intersected in the plight of the Spanish exiles then so prominent in London. Sterling forced the issue among the Apostles and was instrumental in equipping the ill-fated coup led by General Torrijos. Sterling invested all the energy in this campaign that the former generation of English poets had invested in the French Revolution. He visited Wordsworth in the Lake District at this time and continued frequent meetings with Coleridge, portions of whose 'Table Talk' and 'Confessions of an Inquiring Spirit' he preserved. 
In spring 1830 after the inauspicious launch of the Spanish expedition, described by Carlyle, Sterling could do nothing but wait. His friendships grew with Mill and his circle, especially Sarah Austin, who taught him German. Maurice had gone up to Oxford to prepare for the church, but other Cambridge friends remained, among them Richard Chenevix Trench, J. W. Blakesley, Charles Buller, Arthur Henry Hallam, Alfred Tennyson, John Mitchell Kemble, and Charles Barton. For a period he courted Fanny Kemble, but by autumn 1830 he had discovered Susannah Barton (1801-1843), eldest daughter of Lieutenant-General Charles Barton (1760-1819) of the 2nd Life Guards and his wife, Susannah Johnston, of the family of Bordeaux wine merchants. Carlyle portrays her as 'a stately blooming black-eyed young woman' (Carlyle, 'Life', 83), qualities borne out by a surviving sketch. Sterling and Susannah were married on 2 November 1830 in Christ Church, Marylebone. Sterling planned to return to Cambridge to take his degree and then study in Germany, but he fell seriously ill early in the winter. When he recovered he accepted a proposal to emigrate to the West Indies; there his mother's uncle Walter Coningham had established a prosperous sugar plantation at Colonarie Vale in St Vincent, part of which Sterling inherited. The couple sailed in May 1831, weathered the hurricane of 11 August, and on 14 October, during the rebuilding, had a son, Edward Coningham Sterling, who was born at the neighbouring Munro plantation. 
The fifteen months Sterling spent in St Vincent were turbulent in England. Some of his correspondence analysing the conditions of slaves and slave owners appeared in parliamentary reports and the pages of 'The Times'. He worked to establish better schooling for his slaves, and when he returned to England with his family late in summer 1832 he planned to engage a good schoolmaster and return to the islands. His wife had a difficult crossing, though, and seven months later in March 1833 gave birth to a daughter, Anna Charlotte, at Knightsbridge. Encouraged by Coleridge to immerse himself in German literature and philosophy, in May 1833 Sterling took his family to Bonn, where he stayed with in-laws and joined the circle of A. W. Schlegel. In June he met J. C. Hare who was completing a continental tour prior to assuming the family living at Herstmonceux in Sussex. Hare mentioned the availability of his curacy, and Sterling set his course toward this end. That autumn he began keeping the necessary terms at Cambridge, and in the following year he took his BA and was ordained deacon at Lincoln's Inn Chapel on 22 June 1834. Sterling always considered the clergy to be what Coleridge called more broadly a 'clerisy' -- a distinction Carlyle, for one, seems not to have accepted. When Coleridge died that summer, Sterling made the journey to Highgate to join the small party at the funeral, and afterwards he and Hare were entrusted with Coleridge's unpublished theological manuscripts. The Sterlings' third child, Katherine Susan, was born at Herstmonceux that May. For sixteen months Sterling lived and worked in a parish of 1400 people, months which Hare remembered affectionately in his memoir and which Sterling regarded as 'the one sabbath of my life' (Hare, lix). When in London to consult the doctors in February 1835 Sterling first met Carlyle at Mill's office. There followed a lively correspondence, much of which in highly edited form Carlyle prints in his biography of Sterling. 
From his next home in Bayswater, Sterling combined imaginative literature with essays born of his study of the Germans, especially Schleiermacher and Tholuck. He hoped for an appointment either to the English chaplaincy in Rome or by his friend Henry Taylor in the Colonial Office to inspect schools in the West Indies. Another daughter, Julia Maria, was born in March 1836, and Sterling's pulmonary complaints returned, forcing the whole family in the late summer to Bordeaux, where Susannah's maternal uncle kept an estate. Both Carlyle and Hare disparage Sterling's poetic achievements over the next years, but they were praised by many, including John Wilson in 'Blackwood's Magazine'. Sterling read and wrote furiously, completing his long Wordsworthian tale 'The Sexton's Daughter', which still retains emotional power. In summer 1837 he journeyed to Clifton to visit his wife's mother and sister Anna Barton who was thus engaged to marry Maurice. On his return to France he faced an outbreak of cholera and moved swiftly with his family to London, determining to leave them at South Place, Knightsbridge, and spend the winter by himself in Madeira. He sailed in October 1837 accompanied by a host of literary and theological ambitions. In the ensuing months he placed varied works in 'Blackwood's', philosophic dialogues and aphorisms, prose fantasies, translations, reviews, poetry, and a novella called 'The Onyx Ring' which Carlyle approved and in which he, Hare, and Goethe supply characters. In Madeira he befriended Dr John Mitchinson Calvert, nephew of Wordsworth's benefactor Raisley Calvert. Rejoining his family in April 1838 he settled briefly in Blackheath and then in Hastings, but travelled often to London both to promote his growing literary reputation and to rekindle his large circle of friendships. At this time began the monthly dinners of what came to be known as the Sterling Club, later a source of much indignation in the religious press for its supposedly impious activities. Mill had recently become proprietor of the 'London and Westminster Review' where he welcomed Sterling's articles on Montaigne and Simonides and a poem on Abelard later in 1838. 
In autumn 1838, accompanied by Calvert, Sterling travelled to Rome under medical orders of Sir James Clark. He met and toured with Mill, also recuperating. His fifth child, Charles Frederick Everland, was born prematurely at Hastings in March 1839 but died within the month, before Sterling could manage his hasty return. In June 1839 he moved his family to Clifton, where his friends soon came to include the Stracheys, Dr John Addington Symonds, and Francis W. Newman, then of Bristol College. In October 1839 Mill published Sterling's splendid controversial essay on Carlyle. In that same month 'Blackwood's' began to serialize his translation of Goethe's 'Dichtung und Wahrheit' and his contributions started appearing in Maurice's 'Educational Magazine'. As he was collecting his poetry for the volume Moxon published at the end of the year, he also began research for his verse drama 'Strafford', and he initiated correspondence with Ralph Waldo Emerson in America. 
Symptoms of consumption returned, and early in 1840 Sterling retreated to Falmouth while awaiting the ship to Madeira. The milder climate and stimulating society induced him to postpone his departure, though. The journals of Barclay and Caroline Fox abound in accounts of Sterling's impact on their community. Reaction to his volume of poems was not as general as he had hoped, though Emerson applauded and Henry Nelson Coleridge reviewed them approvingly in the 'Quarterly Review'. Sterling returned to Clifton in early April having written a dozen or so essays in the winter, but finding theological controversy increasingly unrewarding. Despite poor health in September he reported having finished a draft of the book that became his delightful verse narrative 'The Election', published anonymously by Murray the following summer (1841) to high praise from Mill and Carlyle. On 12 October 1840 John Barton Sterling was born in Clifton, and in November Sterling resolved to begin the winter in Torquay. After more than a month of freezing weather Sterling returned to his family at Clifton, having worked out the draft of his political verse tragedy, 'Strafford'. His father, Edward, had at this time begun to retire from journalism, and John Sterling became more involved, publishing controversial pieces in 'The Times' and the 'Morning Chronicle'. Towards the end of April 1841 he bought a house in Falmouth and moved his family from Clifton late in May. Here he lectured to acclaim at the Royal Cornwall Polytechnic Society, founded a decade earlier by the Fox family. Word came that Emerson wished to produce a revised edition of Sterling's poems in America, and Sterling set about updating his collection. He also began composing a long poem in 'ottava rima', 'Coeur-de-Lion'. 
At the beginning of 1842 Calvert died in Falmouth, and Sterling felt the loss acutely. Sterling had also lost financially in the collapse of an American canal company and sought revenue from his writing. Carlyle solicited reviews on behalf of John Forster for the 'Foreign Quarterly Review'. Increasingly poor health drove Sterling to leave for Malta and Italy in April. He returned with a week's journey across France in early June. He spent the latter half of June in London, visiting the Carlyles, Foxes, Mill, and other friends -- among them John Lockhart, editor of the 'Quarterly Review', for whom he produced a favourable review of Tennyson's 'Poems', published in September, distressing J. W. Croker who opposed Tennyson from the beginning. 
Early in 1843 Sterling suffered a haemorrhage while helping a maid to move a table, and was bedridden for some months. His mother also fell ill in London, and his wife neared her term with their seventh child. He made a brief visit to his mother's bedside and returned to his wife's late in March. On Good Friday, 14 April 1843, Hester Isabella Sterling was born at Falmouth, but on Easter Sunday Sterling's mother died in London, and within minutes of the news having reached her, Susannah lost consciousness, dying on 18 April. Sterling was devastated. A month later he met Anna Barton Maurice in London, where she helped arrange the children's education. To get nearer to London, Sterling moved to the Isle of Wight, where he began rebuilding a house at Hillside near Ventnor. In July he returned to Falmouth for a week and then to London, where Moxon published 'Strafford' with its dedication to Emerson. More than once Sterling's proposed meetings with Tennyson were abandoned, though he did entertain Theodore Parker and Henry James senior from America. The latter reflected on his new acquaintances: 'Mr Mill was the best of the whole lot, except Sterling, who was the truest man I ever met... Sterling was a perfectly delightful man, just the antipodes of Carlyle and the only man Carlyle had any sincere attachment to. Sterling was the only man in England who seemed like an American in spirit and manners. He was then near the end of his life. He talked freely, was jocund, very full of life, and was dying in perfect confidence. ('Boston Sunday Herald', 17 April 1881)' By the end of December Sterling had finished much of 'Coeur-de-Lion', to which Carlyle responded, 'if a man 'would' write in metre, this sure enough, was the way to try doing it' (Carlyle, 'Life', 321). In January 1844 Sterling proposed marriage to Caroline Fox, and the bright, lively young woman declined, led by her parents' concerns about a man of such uncertain health who was not a Quaker. This, too, deadened Sterling's spirits in his long last winter at Hillside. Early in April he haemorrhaged badly. Though bedridden, he completed an extraordinary sequence of letters to his son Edward, at school in London. In August he began his valedictory letters. He died at Hillside, on 18 September 1844 and was buried in the churchyard at Bonchurch. A number of his works were published posthumously, and he was memorialized scores of times in decades to come. 


@@@@@


doc= 26409


Stern, Henry Aaron (1820-1885), missionary, the son of German Jewish parents, Aaron and Hanna Stern, was born in the village of Unterreichenbach, near Gelnhausen in the grand duchy of Hesse and by Rhine, Germany, on 11 April 1820. When he was twelve years old his family moved to Judengasse, the Jewish quarter of Frankfurt am Main. His father hoped he would become a doctor, but he begged to be allowed to go into commerce. At the age of seventeen he was sent for business training in Hamburg. There he met a representative of the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews, and, in 1839, was offered a good commercial post in London. On reaching England he found that the company had failed. Reluctant to return home admitting defeat, he turned to the London society's chapel in Palestine Place and was baptized on 15 March 1840. He was placed in the society's Operative Jewish Converts' Institution and became a skilled printer; in 1842 he entered the society's Hebrew College, to become a missionary to the Jews. 
Stern began his missionary career in 1844 when he was dispatched to 'benighted' Asia Minor. He travelled by way of Palestine, where he was ordained deacon by the Anglican bishop of Jerusalem, Michael Alexander, another Jewish convert. Later that year he proceeded to Baghdad, and visited Babylon and Basrah. In 1847 he embarked on a missionary tour of Persia, giving sermons to both Muslims and Jews. He returned to England in 1849 and was ordained a clergyman by the bishop of London, in the Chapel Royal, Whitehall, on 23 December. He returned to Baghdad in 1850 and remained there until 1853. During this time he completed his 'Dawnings of light in the East: with biblical, historical, and statistical notices of persons and places visited during a mission to the Jews, in Persia, Coordistan, and Mesopotamia' (1854). In 1853 he was promoted head of his society's establishment in Constantinople, where he stayed for three years. Then, after the Crimean War, he proceeded to the Crimea, visiting the little-known Caraite Jews; later he undertook a missionary expedition to the Jews of San'a' and elsewhere in Arabia. He returned to Constantinople in 1856, where he remained three more years, during which he wrote his 'Journal of a Missionary Journey into Arabia Felix' (1858). On his travels he was accompanied by his British-born wife, Charlotte Elizabeth, second daughter of Charles Henry Purday, of Hunter Street, Brunswick Square, London, whom he married on 2 April 1850. 
The most important phase of Stern's life began in 1859 when his society turned its attention to the Falashas, or Judaic Ethiopians. Travelling by way of Jerusalem, Cairo, and the Sudan, he reached the camp of the reforming Ethiopian emperor, Tewodros II, early in 1860. The monarch received him kindly, and allowed him to preach, subject to consent from the 'abun', or patriarch, Abba Salama. This was readily given, on the understanding that Falasha converts would be baptized into the Ethiopian church. Stern, an arrogant bigot, was not appreciative. He had a poor opinion of both leaders, and referred to Tewodros, derogatorily, as 'his black majesty'. He later established his headquarters at Janda, and visited Falasha settlements in north-western Ethiopia before returning to Britain, where he completed his 'Wanderings Among the Falashas in Abyssinia' (1862); he went back to Ethiopia towards the end of 1861 and appointed four Ethiopians to teach as his subordinates. 
This was a critical time in Anglo-Ethiopian relations. Tewodros, influenced by what he had heard of Britain from a previous British consul, Walter Plowden, wrote to Queen Victoria in November 1862, proposing to send her an embassy. The British Foreign Office, unwilling to offend Tewodros's enemy, the Ottoman empire, ignored his letter. The emperor, never a man to be trifled with, was incensed. His anger against the British government extended to Stern, whom he summoned to Gondar in October 1863. Stern and a fellow missionary, H. Rosenthal, were beaten and chained. They were imprisoned at Gondar, and later at Tewodros's mountain fortress of Maqdala (Magdala). The British consul Charles Duncan Cameron and several other Europeans were likewise incarcerated and chained. Stern, considered insolent, received particularly harsh treatment and was indicted for passages in his 'Wanderings Among the Falashas', which threw doubt on the emperor's royal descent and stated that his mother had sold the traditional Ethiopian tapeworm medicine, the taenicide 'kosso'. 
The position of Stern and his fellow captives seemed about to change in July 1864 when Hormuzd Rassam, the assistant to the British political resident in Aden, arrived at Massawa with a letter from Queen Victoria. Rassam's coming was delayed until 28 January 1866, after which Stern and the other prisoners were freed from their chains, on 24 February. They were then brought, on 12 March, to Qorata by Lake Tana, where Rassam was encamped, prior to their expected departure from Ethiopia, on 13 April. Unfortunately, Rassam had failed to resolve the dispute between Tewodros and the British government; instead of releasing the prisoners the monarch therefore sought to use them to exact concessions from London. He tried the captives in public and dispatched them again to Maqdala. They arrived on 12 July and four days later were put in chains. Closely guarded, they were nevertheless able to communicate with British officials and with their families and friends, from whom they received ample funds. 
The detention of Stern and his companions was widely publicized by Mrs Stern. The imprisonment of Cameron and Rassam was, however, politically more important, for it caused the British government to decide on military intervention. An expedition commanded by Sir Robert Cornelis Napier was dispatched from Bombay in the summer of 1867. News of the British landing at Annesley Bay (Zula) was joyfully received by Stern and his party on 13 December. The British crossed northern Ethiopia without opposition. The first engagement took place below Maqdala, on 10 April 1868, when Tewodros's army was overwhelmed by British superiority in weapons. The emperor, wishing to make peace, released Stern and the other Europeans, but Napier decided to storm Maqdala, on 13 April. Tewodros, to escape capture, committed suicide. Maqdala, to Stern's satisfaction, was burnt to the ground on 17 April, after which the British expedition withdrew from Ethiopia. 
Stern immediately returned to Britain. He wrote an account of his experiences in 'The Captive Missionary: Being an Account of the Country and People of Abyssinia' (1868), and lectured widely on the subject. The London society opened a subscription for him which raised $336. In poor health and unwilling to venture again far from home he devoted himself to the conversion of Jews in Britain. His society appointed him its senior London missionary on 1 January 1871. He took up residence at Palestine Place, superintended the society's Wanderers' Home, and preached many sermons to would-be Jewish converts. The archbishop of Canterbury later conferred a doctorate of divinity on him, in 1881, and his society elected him a member of their council in 1884. His first wife, Charlotte, having died on 1 January 1874, he married Rebecca Davis, daughter of S. D. Goff, of Horetown, co. Wexford, on 3 March 1883. He died two years later, on 13 May 1885, at his home, 5 Cambridge Lodge Villas, Mare Street, Hackney, London, and was buried on 18 May in the City of London cemetery at Ilford, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 26410


Stearne, John (1624-1669), physician and founder of the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland, was born on 26 November 1624 at Ardbraccan, co. Meath, the son of John Stearne of Greenacre, co. Down, and his wife, Mabel Bermingham of Ballogh, co. Dublin, a niece of primate James Ussher of Armagh and great-niece of primate Henry Ussher, the first fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, nominated in the charter of Queen Elizabeth. John Stearne was a direct descendant of James Stanihurst, who was speaker of the Irish House of Commons in the reigns of queens Mary and Elizabeth and it was he who first proposed the founding of a college and university in Dublin. Stearne's father was from Stapleford in Cambridgeshire and came to Ireland as officer to Theophilus Buckworth, bishop of Dromore. 
Stearne became a student at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1639 and two years later he was awarded a scholarship. His study was interrupted by the rebellion of 1641. Stearne took refuge in Cambridge, where he studied at Sidney Sussex College, which was at that time the favoured college for students interested in medicine. During his time at Cambridge he collected material for his book 'Animi medela' (1653). He graduated BA in 1643 and MA in 1646. He spent a short period in Oxford before returning to Trinity in 1651. Stearne had been made a fellow of Trinity in 1643 but had been ejected by the Rump; he was restored on his return to Trinity. There is no record of his having taken any degree in Dublin but it is almost certain that he took his doctor's degree in both laws and medicine. He was appointed registrar of Trinity College in 1652 and he also began to practise as a physician in Dublin. 
In 1654 Stearne proposed to Trinity College, Dublin, that he should be appointed president of Trinity Hall, which stood in Trinity Place, off Dame Street, a short distance from the college, and which had served as a hall of residence for students before the rebellion. The hall was in a ruinous state at the time and Stearne was to be allowed accommodation in it provided he repaired the building from his own resources and made space available in it for physicians to meet as a fraternity or college of physicians. However, Stearne was not able to develop the proposal fully at this stage, probably because of the political instability. Stearne was appointed as the first lecturer in Hebrew at Trinity College in 1656 and at the time he was also professor of physic. Arrangements appertaining to the Hebrew lectureship did not go smoothly and Stearne had a disagreement with the provost and senior fellows of the college. It may have been this dispute together with political considerations that prompted Stearne to resign his fellowship of the college in 1659. 
On the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 Stearne was nominated to fellowship and he was also appointed public professor of laws. Stearne renewed his former proposal to the board of Trinity College with regard to Trinity Hall and a college of physicians. The proposal was approved in 1661 and six years later the physicians received a charter from Charles II. This charter decreed that John Stearne should be the first president of the College of Physicians and that he should hold the office for life. Sir William Petty was one of the original fourteen fellows of the new college. The provisions granted in the charter were similar to those already enjoyed by the London college. In 1662 Stearne was also elected public professor of medicine and in the following year he was granted $60 a year as a payment for his professorship. 
Stearne was the author of several published works. His book 'Animi medela' (dedicated to Henry Cromwell) discusses the best cure ('medela') for the troubled mind which would enable an individual to live serenely despite great physical deprivations. In general his works cover a range of theological, philosophical, and medical subjects reflecting the interests of the author. He drew his inspiration primarily from the work of the stoics and he was particularly influenced by Seneca, Epictetus, and Antonius. Stearne's conversion to stoicism occurred just before his return to Dublin when his peaceful life in Cambridge had been wrecked by the political turmoil of the period, and when he found that the same upheaval was likely to happen at Oxford. He did not become a partisan in the religious debates raging at the time and his works reveal a tolerant mind. He believed that every man had a right to his opinion and that a wise man would not openly challenge the wish of the multitude. He advocated a private rather than a public life and recommended the study of the misfortunes of society purely as an intellectual exercise. Stearne himself adapted to different political regimes during his lifetime, managing to find favour with both puritans and royalists. 
Stearne married Dorothy, daughter of Charles Ryves, examiner in the chancery of Ireland, in 1659, and after their marriage they moved into the refurbished Trinity Hall. They had three daughters and a son, John Stearne (1660-1745), who became dean of St Patrick's Cathedral and vice-chancellor of Trinity College, Dublin. He founded and endowed the university printing house in 1734. 
Stearne died in Dublin on 18 November 1669 and was buried in the chapel of Trinity College. A marble plaque which marked the site was preserved when the church was demolished in 1798. It was subsequently placed within the porch of the rebuilt chapel on the left of the entrance door. It was inscribed with an epitaph by his friend Henry Dodwell the elder, who described Stearne as 'Philosophus, Medicus, Summusque Theologicus Idem'. The new Trinity College medical library at St James's Hospital was named the John Stearne Library in 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 26411


Stearne, John (1660-1745), Church of Ireland bishop of Clogher and benefactor, was born in Dublin, the only son of John Stearne (1624-1669), physician, and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of Charles Ryves. He was educated at Mr Ryder's school in Dublin and entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 2 April 1674. He graduated BA (11 February 1678), MA (12 August 1681), and DD (1693). Having been ordained deacon in October 1682 by Anthony Dopping, bishop of Meath, he served for a time as Dopping's domestic chaplain. About 1688 he was made vicar of Trim; in October 1692 he was instituted to the rectory of Clonmacduffe, and in June 1703 to that of Killary, both in the diocese of Meath. On 11 September 1702 he was installed chancellor of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. Upon the death of his mother's relative Dean Jerome Ryves, Stearne was elected dean of St Patrick's Cathedral by the chapter, largely, it was said, owing to the exertions of Jonathan Swift, then prebendary of Dunlavin. Stearne retained with the deanery the curacy of St Nicholas Without, which Swift afterwards maintained Stearne had promised to make over to him as a reward for his support. In July 1707 Stearne was instrumental in the election of Swift to represent the Dublin chapter in the Irish convocation. Soon afterwards he joined a small social club which included Swift and Esther Johnson. Swift's letters from this period contain numerous references to Stearne; Swift took an interest in the building operations at the deanery, offered advice on the layout of the garden, and exhorted Stearne to set an example to the Irish bishops by opposing the repeal of the 'Test Act'. 
Having been helped by Swift to obtain the deanery of St Patrick's, Stearne likewise owed his promotion to the episcopate to him. On 28 October 1712 Swift wrote to Esther Johnson that if he were asked who would make a good bishop he would name Stearne before anybody else. When the vacancy of the diocese of Dromore occurred, and before he had any idea of the deanery for himself, Swift accordingly recommended Stearne to Lord Bolingbroke and to the second duke of Ormond. Stearne was consecrated bishop of Dromore on 10 May 1713, and on 30 March 1717, following the departure of St George Ashe to the diocese of Derry, he was translated to the diocese of Clogher. A well-respected churchman, in 1729 Stearne received the praise of William King, archbishop of Dublin, who hinted at the possibility (unrealized) of Stearne becoming his successor. 
In 1721 Stearne had been appointed vice-chancellor of Trinity College, Dublin, and, in 1726, he presented a sum of $1000 for a university printing house and press, which was established in 1734. Stearne died at Clogher, unmarried, on 6 June 1745. He was buried there. By his will, dated 13 May 1741, he generously endowed a large number of local charities, especially Dr Richard Steevens's Hospital and the Blue Coat Hospital, Dublin; he also left $600 to Dean Swift's hospital for lunatics. He rebuilt the episcopal mansions at Dromore and Clogher, as well as St Patrick's deanery, and he left $1000 for a granite spire to be added to St Patrick's Cathedral. In addition he left $500 or $2000, at the discretion of his executors, towards finishing the cathedral of Clogher. He provided $50 per annum in exhibitions to Trinity College, Dublin, with preference to be given to poor scholars from the diocese of Clogher. Stearne also donated the rarer books in his library to Marsh's Library in Dublin; the remainder of his books were distributed by lot among the poor curates of the diocese. His manuscripts, including the depositions of the 1641 uprising, were left to Trinity College, Dublin. Stearne's only published work of importance, his 'Tractatus de visitatione infirmorum' (1697), was reprinted in England throughout the eighteenth century and was translated, in 1840, as 'The Curate's Manual'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26412


Sterne, Laurence (1713-1768), writer and Church of England clergyman, was born on 24 November 1713 in Clonmel, Ireland, the second of seven children of Roger Sterne ('c'.1692-1731), an army ensign, and Agnes Nuttall (died 1759), daughter of an army provisioner. 
The family had seen far better days in the seventeenth century, when Sterne's great-grandfather Richard Sterne ('c'.1596-1683) rose to become archbishop of York. Richard's second son, Simon Sterne (died 1703), of Elvington and Woodhouse, Yorkshire, married Mary Jaques, a local heiress; Roger was the second son of this marriage; his elder brother, Richard, inherited the estate, while the younger brother, Jaques, rose in the York ecclesiastical establishment. Roger, without resources, and with a disposition his son described as 'so innocent in his own intentions, that he suspected no one; so that you might have cheated him ten times in a day, if nine had not been sufficient for your purpose' (Sterne, 'Memoirs', 15), pursued an army career, never rising very far in the ranks and dying in Jamaica in 1731, probably of a fever; Sterne would later apply these words to Uncle Toby in 'Tristram Shandy'. 
Roger married Agnes Nuttall in 1711; they had their first child, Mary (died 1734?), a year later, and Laurence a year after that. Sterne's infancy was spent on the family estate at Elvington, but in one of the tenant houses and not in the hall. In 1715 Roger was ordered to Dublin, and the family moved with him; for the next nine years they lived the unsettled life of a military family, constantly on the move, primarily in Ireland. During this period Agnes gave birth to four more children, none of whom survived childhood. A final daughter, Catherine, became an ally of Agnes in her later quarrels with Laurence. 
When Sterne was ten he was sent to live with his uncle Richard at Woodhouse, in order to attend school in the village of Hipperholme close by. In the second part of the biographical notes he compiled for his daughter he recounted one schoolboy experience: '[The school-master] had the cieling ['sic'] of the school-room new white-washed -- the ladder remained there -- I one unlucky day mounted it, and wrote... in large capital letters, LAU. STERNE, for which the usher severely whipped me. My master was very much hurt at this, and said, before me, that never should that name be effaced, for I was a boy of genius, and he was sure I should come to preferment. (Sterne, 'Memoirs', 17-18)' During this period Sterne lived either at school or with Richard's family; when his father died he was briefly reunited with his mother, but she returned to Ireland while he remained in Yorkshire until 1733, when, in his twentieth year, he entered Jesus College, Cambridge. It is noteworthy that a writer so often praised for one of the most carefully drawn family circles in English literature should have lived away from his parents after the age of ten. 
Archbishop Sterne had been the master of Jesus College from 1634 to 1644, and other Sternes, including uncle Jaques, had also attended. Sterne's education was intended as preparation for taking clerical orders, and when he left Cambridge in 1737 with his BA, he had a licence to fill the assistant curacy of St Ives, Huntingdon. The decision to enter the church may have depended on social and economic considerations, but evidence also suggests that Sterne was dedicated to his vocation; and, indeed, for the next twenty-two years he remained focused, for the most part, on his church career. In the autumn of 1738, through the intervention of his uncle Jaques, already a power in the York establishment, he assumed the vicarage of Sutton on the Forest, a village 8 miles north of York which remained his home until 1760. Sterne thus spent almost his entire adult life serving a rural parish. 
Nineteenth-century readers of Sterne often found his clerical career culpably at odds with his penchant for bawdy innuendo and sexual indulgence. His friendship at Cambridge with John Hall, later Hall-Stevenson (1718-1785), serves to highlight this conflict: amid his clerical preparation, Sterne established a cordial relationship that endured throughout his life with a man of dubious tastes, as his dreadful literary scribblings attest. They spent much time together and enjoyed one another's company. Sterne introduced his friend into both 'Tristram Shandy' and 'A Sentimental Journey' as Eugenius. Surely, Victorians reasoned, Sterne could not have taken his Anglicanism seriously. 
Twentieth-century critics, on the other hand -- less concerned with moral or religious culpability, but almost always sceptical that intelligent persons could take religion seriously -- equally down-played Sterne's clerical career, not because of perceived hypocrisy, but because they could conceive no connection between the genius of 'Tristram Shandy' and Sterne's Christianity; his friendship with Hall-Stevenson and his rakish circle best defined an increasingly existential Sterne. There were, to be sure, dissenting voices, evident in comments such as Herbert Read's that 'This paradox of a moral Sterne will be found more acceptable when the world begins to read that neglected half of Sterne's genius -- his Sermons' (Read, 134), but it was only toward the end of the century that the particular character of Sterne's theology, imbibed at Cambridge in the 1730s, was seriously included in discussions about his literary writings. 
In 1740 Sterne received his MA from Cambridge, and a year later on 30 March 1741, after a one-year courtship, he married Elizabeth Lumley (1714-1773). Sterne's biographer Arthur H. Cash quotes a characterization of her by a cousin, the famous bluestocking Elizabeth Montagu: 'Mrs. Sterne is a Woman of great integrity & has many virtues, but they stand like quills upon the fretfull porcupine' (Cash, 'Early and Middle Years', 84). Sterne and Elizabeth, Cash concludes, 'would not have a happy life together' (ibid.). The couple had a daughter, Lydia, born on 1 December 1747. 
During the 1740s and 1750s Sterne barely emerges from the obscurity of domesticity and a rural parish. There was, however, a brief flurry of political writing at the beginning of this period, and some pieces have been identified in surviving issues of the 'York Gazetteer', a paper representing whig interests. This short career, prompted by Sterne's uncle Jaques, was chronicled by Lewis Perry Curtis in 'The Politicks of Laurence Sterne' (1929); sixty years later, in the first issue of 'The Shandean: an Annual Volume Devoted to Laurence Sterne and his Works' (1989), Kenneth Monkman, in the first of a series of essays, offered arguments for augmenting Curtis's attributions with numerous additional items of ephemeral political writing. Monkman -- the moving force in restoring Sterne's Shandy Hall in Coxwold, 12 miles north of York, where Sterne relocated in 1760, and its first curator -- spent many years searching Yorkshire archives for these materials, but they have not been widely accepted as Sterne's. 
One noteworthy result of Sterne's brief participation in eighteenth-century provincial politics was a letter he wrote in 1742 to the rival 'York Courant', in which he exhibited his desire to find the proper perspective from which to view the passions of the moment: 'Sir, I find by some late Preferments, that it may not be improper to change Sides; therefore I beg the Favour of you to inform the Publick, that I sincerely beg Pardon for the abusive Gazetteers I wrote during the late contested Election.' Years later in 'Tristram Shandy', Sterne would have Tristram eschew both 'Zeal' and 'Anger': 'And till gods and men agree together to call it by the same name -- the errantest TARTUFFE, in science -- in politics -- or in religion, shall never kindle a spark within me' (Sterne, 'Tristram Shandy', 'Florida Edition', 8.2.657). Sterne maintained throughout the rest of his life this refusal to become involved in the pressing issues of his own day, as well as a concomitant toleration of the opinions and foibles of others. However, this posture existed in tension with an opposing characteristic, a persistent awareness that human values and conduct could -- and should -- be measured by standards readily available in his own time and place. 
These standards were of course provided by Christianity, and Sterne's second area of public exposure between 1738 and 1759 was the separate publication, in York, of two sermons, 'The Case of Elijah and the Widow of Zerephath' in 1747 and 'Abuses of Conscience' in 1750. The latter is particularly noteworthy because nine years later Sterne included it almost verbatim in 'Tristram Shandy'. The sermon's point is that the conscience is inadequate and untrustworthy as a moral guide, easily swayed by the passions and interests of the individual, a fallen creature whose self-judgement is too susceptible to negligence, self-deception, and corruption. The solution is to 'call in RELIGION and MORALITY... What is written in the law of GOD?' (Sterne, 'Sermons', 4.261). Sterne's argument is traditional, and, indeed, several key passages are borrowed from Jonathan Swift's sermon on the same subject. Their version of the fallen conscience, however, had lost adherents as the century progressed, a casualty of increasing secularism and the 'moral sense' school, which maintained the infallible judgement of the conscience and perfectibility of the moral sense, independent of religion and revelation. 
Sterne's political writings did not prevent the victory of the opposition (although his withdrawal from politics did result in the enmity of his uncle Jaques, and prevented further advancement), and his two published sermons did not change the course of theology. Had Sterne died in his forty-fifth year, he would have done so unnoticed by the world then -- and certainly unrecognized by the world today. Hence the year 1759 was truly an 'annus mirabilis', a year of sudden and surprising achievement that carried Sterne from his country pulpit to the centre of London's literary life. 
Before then, Sterne had lived the quiet life of a village vicar with an income of about $200; it never seemed enough and Sterne supplemented it with farming enterprises and a great willingness to serve as a substitute preacher for his fellow clergymen at the usual fee of $1 per sermon. The quarrel with his uncle was compounded when Jaques took the side of Agnes Sterne, who began to press Sterne for more support; this quarrel was held against Sterne from one end of the nineteenth century to the other, but more careful research has since established that Sterne did all that was feasible in meeting his mother's often unreasonable demands. That he seriously performed his duties as a cleric is evidenced by his answer, deemed 'unique' among the hundreds of responses examined, on a 1743 visitation questionnaire: 'I Catechise every Sunday in my Church during Lent, But explain our Religion to the Children and Servants of my Parishioners in my own House every Sunday Night during Lent, from six o'clock till nine' (Cash, 'Early and Middle Years', 124). 
On the other hand, it was clear to Sterne's neighbours that the marriage was not going well, and rumours abounded that his frequent visits to York were for romantic trysts. Rather than being shocked at the vicar's inconsistency, however, it might be sensible to remember that Sterne's Christian beliefs were designed to comfort sinners rather than celebrate saints; it was, after all, the fall of the first Adam that made the second Adam (Christ) necessary -- as John Locke points out at the beginning of 'Reasonableness of Christianity' (1695). Sterne's religion, as it emerges in his forty-five surviving sermons, is the centrist Anglicanism of his century, 'latitudinarian', but only if that misused label is understood to indicate 'latitude' in toleration, not doctrine. His sermons are balanced invocations of reason and emotion, the head and the heart, 'and' of religion (the institution) and revelation (scripture). He is rarely if ever innovative, certainly not about doctrine or truth, nor would he have wanted to stray from established positions. He attacks Roman Catholics and enthusiasts (Methodists) with some meanness, but little fire; he celebrates the congregation's virtues when he seeks charitable contributions, and highlights its vices when preparing them for communion. Above all he denies the possibility of happiness or morality without religion, and asserts the providential design of the world (and the special providence accorded England), from Adam's fall to Christ's redemptive sacrifice. That this preaching follows the lead of the great Restoration preachers, most particularly John Tillotson, in its embrace of plainness, simplicity, practical moral teaching, and a quiet yet sincere emotionalism, has deceived some readers of Sterne into equating this mode of Anglicanism with Socinianism, deism, and even secularism, but nothing could be further from its own sense of itself as the continuation of Christ's original church, now flourishing under His guidance, and, after a century of religious warfare, amid the growing prosperity and peace of eighteenth-century England. 
One of Sterne's most characteristic gestures occurs in 'A Sentimental Journey', where Yorick notes that 'there is nothing unmixt in this world' and then tempts us to deplore his 'mixt' nature by suggesting that the greatest human enjoyment terminates ''in a general way', in little better than a convulsion' (Sterne, 'Sentimental Journey', 116), a typically Shandean bit of bawdiness, although in this instance significantly derived from Montaigne. But precisely the notion that humanity is a mixed affair of good and bad produces in Sterne not merely a tolerance of human foibles, but a perceptive and persistent attack on those who judge the world rather than live in it, those who take pleasure in condemning the conduct of others while blind to their own, perhaps different, follies. This is not secular indifference to evil, nor moral relativism, but a perception central to Sterne's eirenic Christian faith: 'And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?' ('Matthew' 7:3); 'He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone' ('John' 8:7). Sterne's fiction roots itself in a self-awareness that renders almost impossible the certainties and aggressions which enable people to condemn others; the only unforgivable evil is hypocrisy. This is an important message in his sermons as well. 
In January 1759 a pamphlet entitled 'A Political Romance' was being readied for publication in York. It was a local satire based on incidents in an ongoing dispute over prerogatives within the York church establishment, but unlike the dull pamphlets that had previously appeared, this was a witty reduction of the issues and personalities. It was also a clear indication that the author, Sterne, who had earlier argued the case of one party in the quarrel, had again found that 'proper' perspective exhibited in his 1742 letter to the 'York Courant'. The argument was a petty one, so Sterne reduced the archbishop to the parson of the parish and the dean of York to a parish clerk. 
Sterne's satire brought the conflict to a halt. Its publication was suppressed (only six copies are known to have survived; a facsimile edition was published in 1971), as both sides concluded that their quarrel, seen in the light cast by 'A Political Romance' (often reprinted in Sterne's collected works as 'History of a Good Warm Watch-Coat'), was indeed a sad commentary on their stations. For Sterne, however, the satirical pamphlet was the beginning, not the end; within the year he was able to offer to Robert Dodsley a manuscript of what eventually became the first two volumes of 'Tristram Shandy'. While there is not overwhelming evidence in the 'Romance' of heretofore hidden genius, it is possible to identify interests that persist in Sterne's subsequent work; its motto, for example, is taken from Horace: '
Ridiculum acri 

Fortius et melius magnas plerumque secat Res. 
(Ridicule often cuts hard knots more forcefully and effectively than gravity.)' It is obvious also that Sterne had been reading Rabelais, to whom he alludes, and, equally important, that Sterne's reduction of the ambitions of churchmen to a proper perspective surely had Swift's kingdom of Lilliput behind it. 
Yet another interest evident in 'A Political Romance' is Sterne's minute observation of human action and interaction, including the first sign of the 'hobby-horse', an idea central to 'Tristram Shandy'. In the 'Key' each character offers an interpretation of the 'Romance' based on an obvious prior interest or 'ruling passion' (to invoke Swift's satiric compatriot, Alexander Pope): the tailor is fascinated by the shape of trousers, the lawyer by legalisms. Each character, Sterne writes, 'turn'd the Story to what was swimming uppermost in his own Brain' (Sterne, 'Political Romance', 45), a wry insight concerning human behaviour that lies at the centre of everything Sterne would subsequently write. 
What then happened is conjecture, but it has been suggested that Sterne's next creative effort was to be another satire, in imitation of Pope's 'Peri bathous, or, The art of sinking in poetry' (1727). The first two chapters of such a work, the 'Fragment in the Manner of Rabelais', survive. They were first published by Sterne's daughter Lydia in a bowdlerized version in volume 3 of her edition of Sterne's 'Letters' (1775); a careful text from Sterne's holograph appeared in the 'Publications of the Modern Language Association of America', 87 (1972), 1083-92. The idea of a Pope-like parody of Longinus's 'Peri hupsous' ('On the sublime'), designed as an 'Art of Sermon-Writing', is combined with the tone and diction of the piece in the aptly named protagonist, Longinus Rabelaicus; a second protagonist is the preacher Homenas. Surrounding the two is a genial group of Rabelaisian namesakes, Panurge, Gymnast, Triboulet, Epistemon; Sterne's head-note to chapter 2 promises 'an Historical, Dramatical, Anecdotical, Allegorical and Comical Kind of Work', and tells of Homenas's attempts to write his weekly sermon, his seeking help by raiding his library shelves (as did Sterne), and his fall from the library balcony: ''Alass' poor 'Homenas'', Sterne intoned. 
After this came, in Sterne's forty-sixth year, the beginning of his masterpiece, 'The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman' (1759-67), in which one certain guise for the author is the village parson Yorick, a name with which Sterne felt extremely comfortable, since he used it again when his sermons were published under the title 'The Sermons of Mr. Yorick' (1760, 1766 -- a ploy that Owen Ruffhead, in the 'Monthly Review', May 1760, labelled 'the greatest outrage against Sense and Decency, that has been offered since the first establishment of Christianity'), and yet again when he named the protagonist of 'A Sentimental Journey'. On the one hand, Yorick is the king's jester; on the other, he is a jester who appears in 'Hamlet' only as a skull to be contemplated in the famous gravediggers' scene in act V. In 'Tristram Shandy' the death of Yorick occurs early in volume 1 and is dramatically marked by a black page; but because the chronology of the work moves backward as well as forward, Yorick reappears in later volumes, always as the jester's embodiment of shrewd observation and good sense in a world gone mad. Somewhere between 'A Political Romance' and the 'Rabelaisian Fragment' Sterne found not only a comfortable identity as the jester- 'memento mori' (Yorick first appears astride a horse significantly compared to Quixote's Rosinante, contemplating ''de vanitate mundi et fuga saeculi''), but discovered as well his need to 'bury' that identity in order to bring to life a voice that would sustain him for eight years and nine volumes, the voice of a busily intrusive narrator named Tristram Shandy. 
Some version of 'Tristram Shandy' was ready by 23 May 1759, when Sterne sent a manuscript to Dodsley. 'The plan', he wrote, 'is a most extensive one, -- taking in, not only, the Weak part of the Sciences, in which the true point of Ridicule lies -- but every Thing else, which I find Laugh-at-able in my way' (Sterne, 'Letters', 74). Dodsley responded negatively, and Sterne spent the summer rewriting, still with Dodsley in mind, for in October he again wrote to him: 'I propose... to print a lean edition, in two small volumes... at my own expense, merely to feel the pulse of the world... The book shall be printed here, and the impression sent up to you... (ibid., 80)' Two months later, at the end of December, the first edition of volumes 1 and 2 was printed in York. The title-page nowhere indicates this, thus concealing its provincial origins. Indeed, Sterne was busy orchestrating a London reception -- asking his most recent romantic interest, a singer, Catherine Fourmantel, to pass on a copy and letter to David Garrick -- that in a very short time answered his fondest hopes. 'Tristram Shandy' was an immediate success, as can be deduced from Dodsley's willingness in early March 1760 to pay Sterne $250 for the copyright in order to publish a second edition, as well as $380 for the next instalment. John Croft, whose unreliable memoir formed the basis of much of the anecdotal misinformation about Sterne in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' entry, reported -- plausibly enough, in this instance -- that when Sterne returned from the bargaining he 'came skipping into the room, and said that he was the richest man in Europe' (Cash, 'Later Years', 10). 
The second edition appeared early in April 1760, with the additions of a dedication to William Pitt, then prime minister, and an illustration (solicited by Sterne) by William Hogarth, which shows Corporal Trim reading the sermon; two more editions were required during the year to meet the demand. Then, on 22 May, Dodsley published two volumes of 'The Sermons of Mr. Yorick', having paid Sterne another $200 for the privilege of doing so; they appeared with a frontispiece of Sterne from a painting by Sir Joshua Reynolds and a subscription list with more than 660 names, including dukes and duchesses, six bishops, and, among the notables, Charles Burney, Lord Chesterfield, Garrick, Hogarth, Reynolds, William Warburton, and John Wilkes. The portrait, considered one of Reynolds's best, shows Sterne in a contemplative posture, a forefinger to his brow, but something of a sly grin on his face. It provides -- along with a portrait by de Carmontelle ('c'.1762), stressing Sterne's lanky thinness, a caricature by Thomas Patch (1765), which plays with his facial angularity, and a life-size bust by Joseph Nollekens (1766) -- a good idea of Sterne's appearance. All these icons have been frequently reproduced. 
Sterne spent the winter and spring of 1760 in London, socializing with his new friends, although he soon antagonized Bishop Warburton, then perhaps the leading literary power in Britain. It was rumoured that Sterne intended to include the bishop in later volumes as Tristram's tutor, and that Warburton forestalled such an eventuality with a purse. Sterne denied this, but clearly he was annoyed when Warburton took it on himself to urge restraint of his bawdy wit, a suggestion that Sterne not only ignored, but parodied in subsequent volumes. In many ways 'Tristram Shandy' may be read as a battle with the forces of tartuffery which Sterne found embodied in Warburton. 
James Boswell was also in London at this time, and he wrote for Sterne a 'Poetical Epistle': '
Who has not 'Tristram Shandy' read? 

Is any mortal so ill bred? 
(A. B. Howes, ed., 'Sterne: the Critical Heritage', 1974, 82)' But perhaps Sterne most cherished his meeting with the elderly Lord Bathurst; years later he recalled it with pride: 'He came up to me, one day, as I was at the Princess of Wales's court. 'I want to know you, Mr. Sterne; but it is fit you should know, also, who it is that wishes this pleasure. You have heard,' continued he, 'of an old Lord Bathurst, of whom your Popes, and Swifts, have sung and spoken so much: I have lived my life with geniuses of that cast; but have survived them; and, despairing ever to find their equals, it is some years since I have closed my accounts... : but you have kindled a desire in me of opening them once more before I die; which I now do; so go home and dine with me.' (Sterne, 'Letters', 305)' 

Finally, at the end of May 1760, Sterne returned to Yorkshire, to a new home in Coxwold, the gift of a Yorkshire admirer, Thomas Belasyse, Lord Fauconberg. Shandy Hall still stands in this beautiful village 12 miles north of York; restored in the 1960s by Kenneth and Julia Monkman, it contains perhaps the largest collection of Sterneiana in the world. By November Sterne had finished two more volumes, and he again departed for London to see them through the press -- a practice he assiduously followed. This second instalment appeared at the end of January 1761, with a frontispiece by Hogarth, illustrating Tristram's baptism. A second edition was called for within the year, but as knowledge spread that the author was a clergyman, the reception of Sterne's work was influenced more and more by a sense of outraged decorum. Sterne acknowledged this when he wrote to a friend: 'One half of the town abuse my book as bitterly, as the other half cry it up to the skies' (Sterne, 'Letters', 129). Moreover, the stream of insipid, often lascivious, imitations that had started immediately after the first two volumes was becoming a flood. A few titles suggest the cottage industry that came into being as a result of Sterne's popularity: 'Explanatory Remarks upon... Tristram Shandy by Jeremiah Kunastrokius, M.D.'; 'The Clockmakers Outcry Against the Author of... Tristram Shandy'; 'The Life and Amours of Hafen Slawkenbergius'. So annoying did this flood of bad imitations become that Sterne personally signed 'L. Sterne' on the first page of text of every copy of volumes 5, 7, and 9 to validate their authenticity. 
By June 1761 Sterne was back in Coxwold and he worked on the next instalment throughout the summer. Volumes 5 and 6 appeared in December 1761, but were dated 1762. For reasons still not fully known, Sterne cut his ties with Dodsley and was now using T. Becket and P. A. De Hondt, his publishers until his death. Two weeks later Sterne left England for France in pursuit of better health. His illness was tubercular; it had been with him intermittently since his college days, and although he experienced some periods of relief during the remaining six years of his life, there seems little question but that his health was deteriorating. Sterne's illness plays an important part in both his life and his writing; like Tristram in volume 7, Sterne might well have considered himself in a perpetual 'flight' from death. 
Had Sterne kept to the schedule he had established, volumes 7 and 8 would have appeared in January 1763; but the journey to France took its toll. He at first spent several months in Paris visiting the most famous salons of the day and meeting the likes of Denis Diderot and Baron d'Holbach -- his own reports suggest he was as lionized in Paris in 1762 as he had been in London in 1760. By May he had a relapse, reporting that he had 'bled the bed full' when a vessel in his lungs broke (Sterne, 'Letters', 180). He spent the summer recuperating in Toulouse, but in October had yet another set-back. Typically, he announced his recovery with zest: 'I am now stout and foolish again as a happy man can wish to be -- and am busy playing the fool with my uncle Toby, who I have got soused over head and ears in love' (ibid., 186). Clearly this alludes to the contents of what became volume 8, but January passed without his having enough to fill two volumes. Indeed, the next January (1764) passed as well, and still the Sternes stayed in France, Laurence continuing to have intervals of high spirits between dreadful bouts of illness. 
Sterne was losing patience, however, with France and French doctors, and in February he began the journey back to England, leaving Elizabeth and Lydia behind; he arrived in Coxwold in June 1764. The writing was a struggle, and in September he was still at work on Toby's amours. At last, in a letter dated 11 November 1764, he reveals his solution to the problems that had delayed progress for two years: 'I will contrive to send you these 2 new Vols... as soon as ever I get them from the press -- You will read as odd a Tour thro' france, as ever was projected or executed by traveller or travell Writer, since the world began. (Sterne, 'Letters', 231)' Volumes 7 and 8 were published at the end of January 1765, volume 7 containing the heteroclite tour of France that Sterne's motto insists is not a digression but the work itself, and volume 8 the amours of Toby he had begun three years earlier. 
Sterne's letters during 1765 suggest a frantic pace in London, in Bath, in Coxwold. He prepared two more volumes of sermons for the press and carried on (or gave every impression of carrying on) numerous flirtations that belied his married state, his age, his health, and his cloth -- but not, perhaps, his encounter with death. It was the period of his life that most shocked Victorians such as William Makepeace Thackeray. 
In October 1765 Sterne again left England, not only to visit Elizabeth in France, but to undertake a tour of Italy as well. By July 1766 he was back in Coxwold -- still without his family -- with a plan in mind to write one more instalment (or perhaps only one more volume, as became the actuality) of 'Tristram Shandy' and then begin 'a new work of four volumes' based on his travels (Sterne, 'Letters', 284). Volume 9, but no volume 10, appeared at the end of January 1767. While the nature of Sterne's narrative method would have allowed him to develop a sequel with no difficulty, it does seem, as Wayne Booth has argued, that volume 9 brings to a conclusion the several promises, concerns, and themes of the work as it had appeared in eight volumes during the previous seven years. It may safely be affirmed that for Sterne 'Tristram Shandy' was a finished work (W. Booth, 'Did Sterne complete 'Tristram Shandy'?', 'Modern Philology', 48, 1951, 172-83). 
The 'new work' to which Sterne now turned had actually been in his mind since his first sojourn in France. Some of its contents, certainly, had been used in volume 7 of 'Tristram', but Sterne's travels had opened to him scenes and personages not available to the rural parson who had created the Shandy family, and a new vehicle was required. In addition, the initial popularity of 'Tristram Shandy' had waned. Even had Sterne been willing to withstand the criticisms of the tartuffes who found his work -- and life -- reprehensible, he was far from willing to return to obscurity or poverty. Moreover, the critics were now joined in a significantly uniform chorus: the redeeming value of Sterne's writings was to be found in sentimental episodes like the death of Le Fever (volume 6). Sterne never abandoned his bawdiness, and, indeed, in the final volume of 'Tristram Shandy', he flaunts it, from the early discussion of courtship in a sausage shop to his final joke on the 'cock and bull story' that is 'Tristram Shandy'. Nor can 'A Sentimental Journey' be read as pure sentiment; there are simply too many 'crowns' and 'cases', 'purses' and 'pulses'. Sterne did, however, find a new voice for his final work, the voice of yet another Yorick, in whom good sense becomes sensibility and frankness becomes ambiguity. 
Before Sterne started his new work, however, he spent the first months of 1767 in London, gathering subscriptions among the great and paying assiduous attention to a young married woman, 
The 'Journal' has been characterized as mawkish and immoral, and without doubt Sterne's dream of marriage to Eliza once their spouses have been removed by convenient deaths, and his desperate attempts to elevate this young woman into a health-giving, salvation-producing goddess must strike readers as excessive. But Sterne's wife and daughter were in France, and he clearly was haunted by the vision of dying alone. Eliza was only one of several women to whom he turned to fill an emptiness that plagued him in his later years, perhaps best represented by the famous final gesture of 'A Sentimental Journey', Yorick frozen for all time in reaching for the female across an intervening space. The correspondence with Eliza is epitomized in that scene. Late in July letters from her reached Sterne, and although he enters ecstatic comments in the journal, he completely stops writing it a few days later. Clearly, whatever he had constructed in his mind about Eliza was not reciprocated, and he abandoned the effort. Eliza stayed in India until 1776 when she returned to England (having left her husband some three years earlier) and became 'something of a cult figure' (Cash, 'Later Years', 346); she died on 3 August 1778 and was interred in Bristol Cathedral, where a monument to her was later constructed. Considering that Sterne's 'Eliza' was spun almost whole-cloth from his imagination, Elizabeth Draper attracted far more attention in the century following her death than was called for. 
By the end of the twentieth century the notion of Sterne's incompleteness and fragmentariness, his celebration of the interruption or aposiopesis, had become as familiar as his warm sentimentalism and wicked licentiousness had been in the nineteenth century. From the perspective of 1768, however, 1767 was Sterne's final year, and it must be wondered whether he felt the impending closure in his worn body, if not in his mind. With all his dalliance with unendingness, his own end, he knew, was assured -- and was conveniently summarized by the creed he had preached for twenty-five years as the four last things: Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell. When, late in 'A Sentimental Journey', Yorick asserts, despite all the books 'with which materialists have pester'd the world', that he is positive he has a soul (Sterne, 'Sentimental Journey', 151), he is not merely asserting a feeling heart, but the belief that he is constituted of immaterial as well as material substance; since what is immaterial cannot die, it must spend 'eternity' somewhere. Sterne called 'A Sentimental Journey' his 'work of redemption', and that has been taken to mean, most often, that he heeded his critics' advice to mine his sentimental vein and thus atone for the bawdiness of 'Tristram Shandy'. But it is equally possible that Sterne's redemptive intention in his final work has more to do with the death and judgment he anticipated; 'Journey' and 'Bramine's Journal' perhaps represent an attempt at self-justification for his life and his writings, a final effort to find the proper equation between human and divine love (more broadly, between human appetites and spiritual injunctions) -- a problem that had dogged Sterne throughout his life. 

'A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy' was published in late February 1768; once again illness had slowed Sterne's progress, and indeed the projected four volumes of a tour through France 'and' Italy appeared as only two volumes, located, with one exception, in France. Three weeks later, on 18 March 1768, at 44 Old Bond Street, London, Sterne died. He was buried on 22 March in St George's burial-ground in Paddington. David Garrick provided an epitaph: '
Shall Pride a heap of Sculptur'd Marble raise, 

Some unmourn'd, worthless, titled Fool to praise? 

And shall we not by one poor Grave-stone learn, 

Where 'Humor', 'wit' and 'Genius' sleep with Sterne? 

' However, his body was stolen from the grave, probably in the night after its burial, and taken to Cambridge to be anatomized. It is said that the professor of anatomy, Dr Charles Collignon, recognized the body and had it sent back to Paddington to be reburied. No marker was placed on this new burial place. In 1969, just prior to the indiscriminate disposal of the remains when the site was to be redeveloped, Kenneth Monkman recovered what is believed to be Sterne's skull (with the top sawn off, indicating purchase by medical students), and this was reburied in the graveyard of St Michael's Church, Coxwold, just across the road from Shandy Hall (see 'The Shandean', 10, 1998, 45-79). 
Sterne died without a will, leaving Elizabeth and Lydia with debts and with only a relatively meagre income of about $100. Lydia, however, proved as resourceful as her father in soliciting subscriptions, first a private subscription ($800) and then more than 700 subscribers for the remaining three volumes of sermons that Sterne had left behind for the purpose. Soon after the sermons appeared in June 1769 the two women departed for France, where Elizabeth died in 1773. Lydia had married a Frenchman, Jean-Baptiste Medalle, the year before; their only child died at the age of five. Lydia returned to England one last time, in the spring of 1775, when she gathered 114 letters for her three-volume 'Letters of the Late Rev. Mr. Laurence Sterne, to his most Intimate Friends', published in October 1775. She was an unconscionable editor, as the twentieth-century editor of Sterne's correspondence, L. P. Curtis, has amply demonstrated; Curtis's edition of 1935, of 222 letters, will be replaced by an edition for the 'Florida Edition' of the works of Sterne (volume 7) augmented with some 25 letters discovered since 1935. 
Early in 'Tristram Shandy' Sterne chides the reader for her failure to grasp his meaning and sends her back to reread the chapter more carefully. It is an appropriate warning to readers of Sterne because his works lack the structural clues provided by an orderly, sequential plot, and because his language is replete with the ambiguities and allusions, ironies and ambivalences more usually associated with poetry than with prose. It must be remembered that Sterne wrote 'Tristram Shandy' over a seven-year period during which his life changed dramatically. The clear-cut satiric origins of the work clearly evolved during this period, although never into the sort of connected narrative of character commonly associated with the novel. 
Thus, although many twentieth-century critics have striven to see Sterne as the heir of the origins of the novel in Daniel Defoe, Samuel Richardson, Henry Fielding, and Tobias Smollett, because he too wrote prose fiction, the fact is that Sterne never mentions the first three at all; as for Smollett, he parodies him as Smelfungus, alluding to his grumpy 'Travels through France and Italy' (1766), but never mentions his novels. It is possible to reduce 'Tristram Shandy' to certain narrative lines -- the history of Tristram's birth, Toby's battles and amours, Tristram's struggles to write -- but to do so simply highlights the work's contrasts with fictions dominated by plot and character development. 
It was the dominant trend for the first half of the twentieth century to read 'Tristram Shandy' as an 'eccentric' novel, an 'anti-novel' before the genre had even achieved a traditional form. Viktor Shklovsky's famous quip was often cited, ''Tristram Shandy' is the most typical novel of world literature' ('A parodying novel: Sterne's 'Tristram Shandy'' in 'Laurence Sterne', ed. J. Traugott, 1968, 89). Replacing this approach more recently has been a greater focus on a very different literary tradition available to Sterne. Sterne's favourite authors were Rabelais, Cervantes, Montaigne, Robert Burton, Swift, even Ephraim Chambers, because Sterne definitely enjoyed using borrowed wisdom from encyclopaedias. These authors led him into an alternative path of narrative, not into story-telling, but into modes of satire. 
Rabelais was his model of the bold, sharp-tongued, bawdy, and irreverent satirist who reflected on the hypocrisies of church and state, the professions, and, most importantly, human nature itself. Sterne's contemporaries first compared him to Rabelais, and, far from repudiating the association, Sterne has Yorick carry 'Gargantua' in his 'right-hand coat pocket' (Sterne, 'Tristram Shandy', 'Florida Edition', 5.28.463). Cervantes, on the other hand, provided Sterne with a model for intrusive narration, the posture of ironic gravity that the entire century identified with Cervantes, and with, in Sterne's own words, the 'GENTLE Spirit of sweetest humour' (ibid., 9.24.780) that the century more and more came to discover in the character of Don Quixote. 
Montaigne's 'Essays' (1580) gave Sterne an example of unabashed self-examination ranging over the widest possible sweep of subjects. In addition, Sterne certainly learned from Montaigne a reverence for the minute detail, the close observation of human behaviour. Montaigne's systematic scepticism casts, perhaps, a more significant light on Sterne than the philosophical will-o'-the-wisps critics have pursued in believing Locke to be the centre of 'Tristram Shandy' -- certainly the hobby-horse that has thrown many a modern critic. It should be noted that alluding to Locke in 1760 was roughly equivalent to alluding to Freud in 1960 -- it could be done without much thought about -- or reading in -- primary texts. It is noteworthy, perhaps, that Sterne borrows as much or more from a work that might be thought of as diametrically opposed to Locke's 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding' (1689): Burton's 'Anatomy of Melancholy' (1621), a brilliant example of 'scientific' enquiry prior to the 'new science'. This literary tradition (identified as 'learned wit' by D. W. Jefferson, 'Essays in Criticism', 1, 1951, 225-48, and the 'anatomy' by Northrop Frye, 'Anatomy of Criticism', 1957), best accounts for Sterne's interest in these authors -- and accounts as well for the fact that among British writers Sterne's favourites were not the novelists, but the writers of the Scriblerian tradition, Swift and Pope most specifically. 
The real community of the Shandy world, perhaps, is not the Shandy brothers or the Shandy household but rather the authors and books summoned by Sterne, all the documents and cultures and artefacts from which he erects his edifices; in short, all that illustrates to humans what it means to live in a world written by God (not man), and hence always approximated -- but never finalized -- by the same human endeavour. At times the documents are necessarily ludicrous, as is so much human effort in the face of the infinite, but at other times they are useful and perhaps even profound, as human effort can also be. Sterne keeps the reader aware of both possibilities and aware above all that while every attempt to create a world of certainty and truth will fail, the attempt is what ties each individual to the community of humanity, what offers each the equivalent of communion with a common legacy. 
When 'Tristram Shandy' first appeared, Sterne was heralded as a second Rabelais, Cervantes, or Swift and was condemned, especially when his clerical profession was disclosed, as an immoral hypocrite. Controversy continues about the precise nature of Sterne's contribution to literature, but no one any longer denies him a place among the most important eighteenth-century writers. It might indeed be argued that he was the most influential eighteenth-century British fiction writer among twentieth-century authors -- Marcel Proust, Virginia Woolf, James Joyce, Thomas Mann, Samuel Beckett, Salman Rushdie, Carlos Fuentes, Juan Goytisolo, Milan Kundera, and Italo Calvino have all paid tribute to Sterne. It is Sterne, more than any other author of his time, whose work has seemed of contemporary interest. It does not seem to matter whether they are realists or surrealists, formalists or symbolists, interested in psychology or philosophy or metacommentary, modernists or post-modernists: writers seem to find in Sterne's fiction something that reflects their own experimentations. 
But even in Sterne's own day -- and in the following century, which responded to him, for the most part, negatively -- Sterne could attract the best minds of each generation. As his work was translated into the various languages of Europe, the list of his champions grew. Diderot and Voltaire were early admirers, while Jean Paul and C. M. Wieland spread the so-called Lorenzo cult of sensibility in Germany and beyond in the last decades of the eighteenth century (cult members exchanged snuff-boxes as Yorick and the monk Lorenzo did in 'A Sentimental Journey', wept at mock burials of Maria, and, in a variety of other ways, played at being 'men of feeling'). In the nineteenth century Samuel Taylor Coleridge and Walter Scott, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Nikolay Vasilyevich Gogol, and Lev Tolstoy, Charles Dickens and Friedrich Nietzsche were among those most favourably inclined toward him -- and were influenced by him. Nietzsche's tribute to Sterne is delightfully excessive: 'How, in a book for free spirits, should there be no mention of Laurence Sterne, whom Goethe honoured as the most liberated spirit of his century! Let us content ourselves here simply with calling him the most liberated spirit of all time, in comparison with whom all others seem stiff, square, intolerant and boorishly direct. (F. Nietzsche, 'Human, All Too Human', 1968, 238)' 



@@@@@


doc= 26413


Sterne, Richard (1595/6-1683), archbishop of York, was the son of Simon Sterne of Mansfield, Nottinghamshire (whose father, William, is said to have migrated there from Suffolk), and his wife, Margery, daughter of Gregory Walker of Mansfield. He was educated at the free school in the town, and on 8 July 1611, aged fifteen, matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge. He was admitted scholar on 6 May 1614, graduated BA early in 1615, and proceeded MA in 1618. Having been elected fellow of Corpus Christi College in 1620, he proceeded BD in 1625 and was incorporated BD at Oxford on 10 July 1627. He contributed verses to the Cambridge University collection 'Genethliacum illustrissimorum principum Caroli & Mariae' (1631). 
Sterne became chaplain to Archbishop William Laud, probably in 1633, and on 17 November that year was chosen by him to preach at Paul's Cross. On 7 March 1634 he was elected master of Jesus College, Cambridge, and in the same month he was collated by Laud to the rectory of Yeovilton, Somerset. The following year he proceeded DD, and in December 1638 he was made a royal chaplain in ordinary. His wholehearted identification with Laudianism is evident in the support he gave as head of house to two Cambridge zealots, Sylvester Adams, who in 1637 had asserted the necessity of auricular confession in a sermon at Great St Mary's, and William Norwich, who in 1640 claimed that works as well as faith had a part in justification. In 1641 Sterne himself faced charges which included bowing towards the altar, promoting ceremonialism, and teaching the invocation of the saints; he also contributed verses to the Cambridge collection celebrating King Charles's peaceful return in November from Scotland, 'Irenodia Cantabrigiensis' (1641). 
In 1642 Sterne became rector of Harlton, Cambridgeshire, but as an active royalist he did not enjoy his living long. In August that year he arranged for the dispatch of large quantities of college plate to the king, but Oliver Cromwell, engaged as one of the Cambridge burgesses in securing the town for parliament, had him arrested on 11 August with John Barwick and William Beale. They were taken to London -- a journey during which they were subject to hostile demonstrations -- and, on the order of the House of Commons, committed to the Tower of London. Sterne remained there for nineteen weeks until 12 January 1643, when he was ordered to confine himself to Lord Petre's house in Aldersgate Street. After seven months' imprisonment he was placed on an Ipswich coal ship in the Thames. Shut down beneath the hatches he suffered great privation, and one MP allegedly argued for his transportation to America or Algiers as a slave. After ten days, however, he was put on shore and confined in Ely House. 
Meanwhile Sterne was sequestered from his livings, and in March 1644 he was ejected by the earl of Manchester from the mastership of Jesus College. On 7 January 1645, at Laud's request, he was permitted by parliament to attend the archbishop in the Tower, and he was with him from 8 January until his execution on 10 January. Notes of Sterne's conversations with Laud during this time were printed in Laud's 'Works', and the written address which Laud read from the scaffold was handed to him by Sterne, under whose supervision it was eventually printed at the end of Laud's 'Summary of Devotion' (1667). 
Soon afterwards Sterne regained his liberty. He maintained himself over the next fifteen years by keeping a school at Stevenage, Hertfordshire. Lord Scudamore allowed him $20 a year, and on 4 December 1646 his wife, Elizabeth (1616/17-1674), was allowed by the committee for plundered ministers a fifth of the profits of Harlton and Yeovilton. Elizabeth, whom he had married at an unknown date, was the daughter of Edward Dickinson, lord of the manor of Farnborough; they had thirteen children, including Richard (died 1700) and Simon, grandfather of Laurence Sterne (1713-1768), the novelist. Sterne continued to engage in scholarly activity: in 1649 he published, as the work of 'a reverend divine of pious memory', 'A Brief Commentary upon the ciij Psalme', and he assisted in the preparation of Brian Walton's 'Biblia sacra polyglotta' (1657). The canard that he was also associated with the popular manual of piety 'The Whole Duty of Man', first published in 1658, has long been laid to rest, and that book is now ascribed to Richard Allestree. 
At the Restoration, Sterne was singled out for preferment. He was reinstated in the mastership of Jesus College, but treated his predecessor with civility and left him in effective control for several months. On 9 October 1660 he was elected bishop of Carlisle; he was consecrated on 2 January 1661 and enthroned on 4 January. Green describes him as one of the 'hardliners' appointed to the episcopate to reassure the episcopalian zealots (Green, 97). From April to July 1661 he attended the Savoy conference. Wrote Richard Baxter: 'Among all the bishops there was none who had so promising a face as Dr Sterne, the bishop of Carlisle. He look'd so honestly, and gravely, and soberly, that I scarce thought a face could have deceived me; and when I was entreating them not to cast out so many of their brethren through the nation, as scrupeled a ceremony which they confessed indifferent, he turn'd to the rest of the Reverent Bishops and noted me for saying 'in the nation'. 'He will not say 'in the kingdom'', saith he, 'lest he own a king'. This was all I ever heard that worthy bishop say. But with grief I told him that half the charity which became so grave a bishop might have sufficed to have helpt him to a better exposition of the word. ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 2.305)' On 5 March 1662 convocation entrusted the revision of the 'Book of Common Prayer' to Sterne, Bishop George Griffith of St Asaph, and Bishop Brian Walton of Chester. 
As bishop of Carlisle, Sterne reckoned that he had forgone $1800 in fine income to augment the stipends of some of his clergy. However, he left the bishopric in some disarray. His successor, Edward Rainbowe, began a lawsuit against him over dilapidations at Rose Castle, the bishop of Carlisle's palace. Archbishop Gilbert Sheldon's letter-book contains papers on the case which began in August 1669, produced a commissioners' report in 1671, and concluded with an order to Sterne to pay $400 towards rebuilding the castle's chapel in June 1672. 
In 1664 Sterne was translated to the archbishopric of York, being elected on 28 April and confirmed on 10 June. His archiepiscopate has apparently left little record beyond his visitation articles, published in 1669. He was loyal to the church and monarchy, an assiduous attender at the House of Lords, and a zealous supporter of the duke of York. Such toryism ensured an extremely hostile notice from Gilbert Burnet, who accused Sterne of being 'a sour ill-tempered man', interested only in the enrichment of his own family, and of being such a Yorkist that he was suspected of popery ('Burnet's History', 2.430-1). Little of this is to be regarded as reliable testimony. 
Elizabeth Sterne died in London on 6 March 1674, aged fifty-seven, and was buried at Farnborough. Archbishop Sterne himself died at Bishopthorpe, aged eighty-seven, on 18 June 1683, and was buried in St Stephen's Chapel, York Minster. His bequests were generous. He left plate to York Minster, $1850 towards the rebuilding of St Paul's Cathedral, $40 a year to found four scholarships at Jesus College, Cambridge, and $20 a year to found two scholarships at Corpus Christi. His 'Summa logicae' appeared in 1685. 


@@@@@


doc= 26414


Sternhold, Thomas (d. 1549), author of metrical psalm paraphrases, belonged to a family who probably had their origins in Gloucestershire, since Sternhold is an unusual name appearing mainly in that county, and Sternhold himself had a number of Gloucester connections later in life. However, John Bale (in 1557) assumed that Sternhold was born in Hampshire. 
Anthony Wood asserted that Sternhold matriculated at Christ Church (formerly Cardinal College), Oxford, and such a connection might explain Sternhold's route into the service of Thomas Cromwell, who was receiver-general of Cardinal College. The earliest evidence for Sternhold's career is Cromwell's list of 1538, naming him one of the gentlemen 'most mete to be daily waiters' upon Henry VIII ('LP Henry VIII', 13, pt 2, p. 497). Cromwell's accounts list a payment of 40's'. to 'Sternholde' in September 1539. By December 1540 he appears to have entered the king's household since he signed a receipt for 3 yards of kersey for the king's surgeons. From this period until his death Sternhold served Henry VIII and then Edward VI as a groom of the robes. His court position provides the context for all his other known activities and acquaintances. 
Sternhold's protestant beliefs and sympathies were manifested in 1543 when 'Sternall', Philip Hoby, and Thomas Weldon (all of the royal household) were sent to the Fleet prison in London by order of the privy council (17-18 March) upholding the six articles. It is not clear how long Sternhold was imprisoned, but Hoby was released on 24 March. In September they were pardoned (with others and several of their wives) of all heresies committed at New Windsor when they 'abetted, aided, favoured, counselled and consented' with one Anthony Parson, clerk, there, 'lately condemned and burnt for heresies against the Sacrament of the Altar' ('LP Henry VIII', 18, pt 2, p. 140). 
Sternhold appears to have married Agnes (or Anne) Horswell (died 1559?) by 1543. In January 1545 he succeeded James Horswell as a member of parliament for Plymouth; a letter dated 20 October 1542, from Horswell (at Exeter) to Sternhold (at court), indicates their close friendship. Sternhold and George Ferrers (poet, lawyer, and member of the royal household) represented Plymouth until this parliament was dissolved at Henry VIII's death, in January 1547. 
This rise in social status reflects that of many other minor Tudor courtiers who accumulated fees and property dispersed from church and monastic institutions. On 5 March 1541 Sternhold was granted a twenty-one year lease of Bodmin Priory, Cornwall. In 1544 he was listed as one of those required to go in person to France with the king and to supply two demi-hakes on foot. This modest requirement reflects the relatively low value of his property before 1545 when he was listed among those receiving fees as chamberlains and receivers of the court of general surveyors and became receiver-general of landed property in Yorkshire forfeited by the abbot of Jervaulx, the prior of Bridlington, and Thomas, Lord Darcy, among others. Some time after 30 June 1547 he bought the manor of Slackstead, Hampshire (formerly belonging to Hyde Abbey, Winchester), from Sir Ralph Sadler, to whom it had been granted by the crown. On 26 May 1547 he was listed among Gloucester commissions for the peace and on 21 September 1547 he was granted the lucrative office of master, 'custos', and governor of St Bartholomew's Hospital, Gloucester, where a Walter Sternold had been named one of the proctors of the infirm, in leases of 1508 and 1510. In February 1548 Sternold was listed among commissioners for colleges and chantries which had come to the crown in Gloucestershire and Bristol. Henry VIII's will made Sternhold (with other councillors and servants) a bequest 'in token of special love and favour'; he received 100 marks by warrant dated 12 February 1549. 
Sternhold's chief claim to fame and historical significance is literary. His first collection of nineteen psalm paraphrases in English ballad metres, printed by Edward Whitchurch, a royal printer of English bibles and a personal friend of Sternhold's -- 'Certayne Psalmes Chosen out of the Psalter of David, and Drawen into Englishe Metre' (1549?) -- suggests that he may have selected texts for specific reasons. 'Psalms' 1-5 emphasize instruction and divine support for the godly man facing persecution. These tendencies are reinforced by the further selection of 'Psalms' 20, 25, 28-9, 32, 34, 41, 49, 73, 78, 103, 120, 123, and 128. In the last years of Henry VIII's reign such themes would have seemed important to any convinced protestants; in 1549 they might be most appropriate to supporters of Edward Seymour, the king's uncle. The peace and confidence for the future voiced in 'Psalm' 128 are a fitting conclusion for the early collections dedicated to the boy king. In 1549 William Baldwin described how Sternhold brought the psalms into 'fine englysh meter', which the king caused 'to be song openly before [him] in the hearyng of all' (W. Baldwin, 'Canticles or Balades of Salomon', dedication dated 1 June, sig. A3'v'). 
Sternhold died on 23 August 1549, probably at his house in Westminster. His will (dated the previous day) made his wife, Agnes, his sole executor, principal heir to his property for life and to all his goods and chattels. His infant daughters are named in the will as Judith and 'Philipp[a]'. The witnesses included Robert Huyick, the king's physician, and Edward Whitchurche. His widow seems to have married William Hoby, if she is the 'Sternholds wife' and 'hobbies make', Anne ('sic') Horswell, commemorated in verse on a monumental brass (dated 1559), in Hursley church, Hampshire. 
After Sternhold's death Whitchurch published an enlarged edition of thirty-seven metrical psalms by Sternhold, including 'Psalms' 6-17, 19, 21, 43-4, 63, and 68 ('Al such Psalmes... as Sterneholde... Didde... Draw into English Metre', 1549). Added, in a separate sequence, are seven psalms by I[ohn] H[opkins]. The immense popularity of Sternhold's psalms is indicated by the fact that at least twelve editions survive from between 1549 and 1553. Sternhold's dedication indicates that he sang his psalms to Edward VI as a form of pious recreation; it never denigrates secular lyrics. However, later writers who adapted his texts in different contexts frequently deplored secular songs for encouraging immorality and promoted metrical psalms as devotional antidotes. 
During the reign of Mary Tudor English protestant exiles in Geneva revised the forty-four texts of the Whitchurch collection and under the direction of William Whittingham made them the basis for the Anglo-Genevan metrical psalter used in English churches from 1562 until 1696. (Attributions of versions of 'Psalms' 18, 22, 23, and 66 to Sternhold in John Day's 1562 edition of 'The Whole Booke of Psalmes' are unsafe.) Thus Sternhold's English psalm paraphrases not only reflect the literary and religious sensibilities of the late Henrician and Edwardian court but also became the models for metrical psalms in Elizabethan and seventeenth-century English liturgies. Thereafter, the Sternhold psalm type influenced a wider range of English hymns. 


@@@@@


doc= 26415


Nathaniel Sterry (d. 1698), Church of England clergyman, Peter's younger brother, entered Emmanuel College on 19 July 1644. A Cromwellian supporter, in 1649 he was appointed a fellow of Merton College, Oxford, where he wrote 'Direction for a good & profitable proceeding in study by Mr. N. Sterry E. C.', in which he encouraged students to read Edmund Spenser and Samuel Daniel to perfect their 'mother tongue' (Pinto, 49n.). He proceeded MA on 31 May 1651, and in December gave the congratulatory oration at the appointment of Jonathan Goddard as warden of the college. He worked closely with his brother during the protectorate, for which he was paid the sum of $100 in August 1658. After the Restoration he conformed to the new religious settlement and was appointed rector of Stuston, Suffolk, in 1662. In the same year he received a pass to take two of Sir Thomas Liddel's children on the grand tour of Europe. With the support of Archbishop Sheldon he became dean of Bocking, Essex, in 1674 and proceeded BD on 24 March 1675. He remained unmarried until his death on 10 November 1698 in Bocking. 


@@@@@


doc= 26416


Sterry, Peter (1613-1672), Independent minister, was born on 14 September 1613 in St Olave, Southwark, and baptized there on 19 September, the son of Anthony Sterry (1584-1632), a cooper originally from Ruardean, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Julia. He probably grew up in Horsleydown Lane, Southwark, and on 21 October 1629 entered the puritan Emmanuel College at Cambridge, where he came under the influence of the Platonist Benjamin Whichcote ['see also 'Cambridge Platonists]. On 15 April 1637 he was elected fellow but two years later he left Emmanuel and became a chaplain to Robert Greville, Lord Brooke, a leading member of the parliamentarian opposition. In February 1641 he married Frances Asheworth (died 1682), a widow in Lord Brooke's household, with whom he had four children. 
In May 1643 Sterry was nominated to the Westminster assembly of divines and by December he was listed by Robert Baillie, the Scottish commissioner, as one of the leading Independents in London. He developed a close association with Sir Henry Vane the younger and, along with Moses Wall, was examined on 24 January 1644 in regard to an exchange of letters between Vane and Lord Lovelace about matters relating to the 'public peace' ('Sixth Report', HMC, 3). On 26 November 1645 Sterry delivered his first sermon to the House of Commons, after which he became a popular Independent preacher at St Margaret's, Westminster. 
On 16 February 1649 Sterry was appointed preacher to the council of state and in June he was given lodgings at Whitehall. On 1 November 1649 he delivered an influential sermon in defence of the saints' millennial kingdom, and he congratulated Cromwell on the Worcester victory in a letter on 3 September 1651 and in another millenarian sermon on 5 November. Sterry was growing into a figure of authority, with enemies and supporters: in 1650 he was attacked for his millenarianism and in 1652 he was accused by the separatist David Brown of preaching a sermon despite the presence of a naked woman among the congregation; a year later he was praised by the Fifth Monarchist John Rogers and by the Welsh writer William Erbury. He was consulted on political and religious matters from as far away as Wales and Scotland by Morgan Llwyd and Colonel John Jones between June 1651 and September 1656: they queried him on Jakob Boehme, the Ranters, the Rosicrucians, and the 'present Power'. In 1654 Sterry was nominated to the board of commissioners, the 'triers', which Cromwell had set up to ensure political and religious conformity among preachers, and in September he started preaching at Whitehall on a fortnightly basis. In December 1655 he was appointed to negotiate with Menasseh ben Israel over the readmission of the Jews to England and in January 1656 he was appointed to a committee headed by Richard Cromwell to help the distressed protestants in Piedmont. 
Despite becoming a powerful member in Cromwell's inner circle, Sterry still cared for the lesser people: in March 1654 he gave a certificate of good conduct to the porter at Whitehall and another to Robert Mossom, who had been sequestered, testifying 'to his good conduct as a schoolmaster' ('CSP dom.', '1655-6', 134). He continued to be so closely associated with Cromwell that upon the latter's death he was reported to have said that Cromwell was at 'the right hand of Jesus Christ, there to intercede for us, and to be mindful of us on all occasions' ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 2.45) -- a statement that led his detractors to describe him as 'a cringing Court-chaplain' ('A Second Narrative', 42). 
On 1 January 1660 Sterry preached his last sermon at Whitehall. After the Restoration he went into hiding in Ironmonger Lane in Southwark. On 9 November 1660 he received a pardon from the king, and began serving as chaplain to Philip Sidney, Viscount Lisle, at West Sheen near Richmond. Although his days of political influence were over, Sterry transformed his experience of defeat into intellectual and devotional productivity. At West Sheen he started the Lovely Society, a close-knit group consisting of his wife, Frances, and their children Frances, Joseph Lee, Peter, and Gratiana, along with Lord Lisle's family and some pupils. This society was described in 'Alumni Cantabrigienses' as a 'conventicle', but it was actually modelled on Honore D'Urfe's druidic community in 'Astrea' (3 vols., 1657-8). Sterry instructed pupils in proper writing, and wrote letters, devotions, poems (including the first English poem on the druids), and allegorical treatises. His work is strikingly free of polemic against the ruling power and shows the influence of figures as different as Henry More and George Herbert, Boethius and Ficino, Titian and Van Dyck, and Ralph Cudworth and John Milton, whom he had known as early as 1650. 
A nonconformist during the great persecution, Sterry could preach only to small communities in 1666; in 1663 he had a residence at Chelsea where he kept part of his library, and in 1668 he was at Hackney, where the returns of conventicles compiled by Bishop Henchman included his name, along with those of his former associates John Owen and Thomas Goodwin. Summaries of two sermons preached in March and May 1670, in the wake of the second 'Conventicle Act', were published by a member of his flock and show Sterry's adoption of the doctrine of realized eschatology (possibly under the influence of the Quakers). Here he rejected his earlier belief in establishing the kingdom of God through militaristic means and in a futuristic worldly context in preference to its realization in the souls of the saints enduring the Anglican persecution. After the declaration of indulgence in March 1672, Sterry applied for licences to preach in Hackney, Little St Helen's, Bishopsgate, and Berkhamsted. Upon falling ill in May, however, he began dictating to his daughter Frances a verse rendering of the canticles and, with John Donne in mind, a treatise on the 'ars moriendi', 'The state of a saints body and soul in death'. He died in the parish of St Helen's on 19 November 1672 and was buried on the 24th in the chancel of St Helen, Bishopsgate. 
Sterry's works were published posthumously by his friends in 1675, 1683, and 1710. His manuscripts also circulated widely, as the records kept by his son Joseph Lee show. A few months after the publication of 'Discourse of the Freedom of the Will' (1675), Richard Baxter attacked Sterry's determinist fallacy: 'overlooking and undervaluing God's Design in Making and Governing free Intellectual agents, by his Sapiential Moral Directive Way' (W. Lamont, 'Puritanism and Historical Controversy', 1996, 168), but an anonymous writer immediately came to Sterry's defence, with 'a candid Testimony to Mr. Sterryes learned and accurate Discourse' ('A Letter Found in Utopia', 1675, 1). He was still admired in 1712 when Jeremiah White, the editor of the last posthumous publication, mentioned how he still spoke to his admirers 'tho' he be dead' (White, 201). Sterry's unpublished writings remain in manuscript at Emmanuel College Library, Cambridge, and although no likeness has survived, there is a fine 1884 stained glass window of him in the Emmanuel College Wren chapel. 




@@@@@


doc= 26417


Steuart, Sir Henry Seton, first baronet (1759-1836), landowner and agriculturist, born on 20 October 1759, was the second but eldest surviving son of James Steuart ('b'. 1715), tenth of Allanton, Lanarkshire, an agriculturist and scholar. His mother, Margaret, was a daughter of Henry Steuart Barclay of Collernie, Fife. The family claimed descent from Sir John Steuart of Bonkill, lord high steward of Scotland, who was killed at Falkirk in 1298, and whose sixth son, Sir Robert of Daldowie, was asserted to have been the progenitor of the Stewarts of Lennox, Darnley, and Castlemilk. Sir Henry Steuart supported this contentious pedigree in the face of considerable opposition. 
Steuart completed his education at Hamburg, and returned to Scotland when about seventeen. In 1778 he entered the army as a cornet in the 13th light dragoons. Three years later he exchanged into the 10th light dragoons, and accompanied to Ireland his kinsman General Sir James Steuart of Coltness as aide-de-camp. In 1787 he retired from the army, and married Lilias (died 1835), daughter and heir of Hugh Seton of Touch-Seton, Stirlingshire. Of their two daughters, only one, Elizabeth Margaret ('b'. 1790), survived infancy and succeeded to her mother's estates. She married Reginald Macdonald of Staffa ['see below']. Steuart settled at Allanton, dallied with literary pursuits, and energetically set about the improvement of his estate, engaging Thomas White the elder between 1788 and 1805 to lay out his park. His winters he usually spent among Edinburgh society. 
In 1801 Steuart published a pamphlet advocating the construction of a canal from the Lanarkshire coalfields to Edinburgh in order to cheapen and improve the coal supply of that city, and proposed supplying Ireland, the Isle of Man, and even some foreign ports with fuel from the same district. In 1806 he published a competent edition of Sallust's works for which he was awarded the degree of LLD from Edinburgh University, and was also elected FRSE. He occasionally contributed to the 'Anti-Jacobin' and other periodicals, and at his death left in manuscript fragments of a 'History of the rebellion of 1745' and of a history of Scotland. He handed over to Chambers the materials he had collected for a history of the rebellion. He was created a baronet of Great Britain in 1815. 
Owing to bad health Steuart abandoned most of his literary work, and arboriculture became the chief interest of his life. In September 1823 a deputation from the Highland and Agricultural Society, which included Sir Walter Scott and lords Belhaven and Corehouse, visited Allanton, and reported on the improvements effected there by Steuart's system of transplanting large trees: his success lay in his earlier design of a device -- a wheeled cradle -- in which the tree and its root-ball could be supported and transported without damage. Though Steuart had had to contend with an unfavourable soil and an exposed position, Scott reported that 'he exercises wonderful power, certainly over the vegetable world, and has made his trees dance about as merrily as ever did Orpheus' ('Letters', 8.91). In fact Scott disliked Steuart, 'the knight of Allanton', whose advice he was obliged to seek for his Abbotsford estate. Steuart extended and replanted his own estates. His scheme was unremarkable but impressed Cobbet when he arrived in 1832. About 1826 Steuart gave courses in tree-planting and would send his own workmen to other estates. He also managed Touch, the Stirlingshire estate of his absentee brother-in-law. 
Largely from his own experience, Steuart wrote his 'Planter's guide, or, A practical essay on the best method of giving immediate effect to wood by the removal of large trees and underwood' (1828); Scott reviewed it enthusiastically but anonymously in the 'Quarterly Review' and it was favourably received elsewhere. Reprinted in 1828, a New York edition of 1832 had a large circulation in America. However Steuart's claims to have sought to apply the principles of physiology to practical arboriculture, and to have created the new science of phytology, were disputed, although his method was followed with success on estates in Ireland and England. A posthumous edition of the 'Planter's Guide', with additional material compiled before Steuart's death, was issued in 1848, with dedication to Queen Victoria. Steuart died on 11 March 1836, and was buried in the family vault at Camnethan, Lanarkshire. 
Steuart's son-in-law, 


@@@@@


doc= 26418


Stewart, Sir James, of Goodtrees (1635-1713), politician and judge, was born on 23 August 1635, probably in Edinburgh, possibly in North Berwick, the fourth of seven children of Sir James Stewart of Kirkfield and Coltness (1608-1681) and his first wife, Anna Hope (died 1646), niece of Sir Thomas Hope (d. 1646), lord advocate. His father, a staunch covenanter and successful Edinburgh banker and merchant, was elected lord provost of Edinburgh first in 1648 and again in 1649, 1658, and 1659, and was commissary-general and treasurer of the excise under the covenanter regime. Dismissed and charged (probably falsely) for embezzlement after the Restoration, Kirkfield was imprisoned twice, gaining his final release in 1670 and remission in 1671. 
A devout covenanter, the younger James Stewart matriculated at Leiden University in 1657, studying law, and received an MA from Glasgow in 1659. He was called to the bar in November 1661. His first major case was in defence of his father, which brought him royal opposition. In 1667, with the covenanting minister James Stirling, he anonymously published 'Naphtali, or, The Wrestlings of the Church of Scotland', a review of persecution of Presbyterians since the Restoration and a religious and legal defence of the Pentland rising (November-December 1666), to which Stewart was a remote accessory; Stewart wrote the legal parts of the book. Bishop Andrew Honyman of Orkney (1619-1676) having published a rebuttal, 'A Survey of... Naphtali' (1668), Stewart replied anonymously with his most important political treatise, 'Jus populi vindicatum, or, The people's right to defend themselves and their covenanted religion, vindicated' (1669), in which, building on Samuel Rutherford's (1600-1661) 'Lex, rex' (1644), John Brown of Wamphray's ('c'.1610-1679) 'Apologetical Relation' (1665), Johannes Althusius's (1557-1638) 'Politica methodice digesta' (1603), and George Buchanan's (1506-1582) 'De jure regni apud Scotos' (1579), he combined biblical, natural law, and contractual arguments in support of a private right to violent resistance to tyrannous rulers. His part in these writings was soon suspected by the government, and in 1671 Stewart went into exile in Rouen as a merchant under the alias Graham. He returned to Scotland after about two years, where, in response to corruptions in government, he anonymously published an 'Accompt of Scotland's Grievances by Reason of the d. of Lauderdale's Ministrie' (1674). Thirteen months later Charles II ordered the privy council to apprehend him on charges of treason and seditious libel. He escaped arrest and became an exile under the alias Lawson in England, where for the next several years he wrote religious homilies and discourses on political theory, none apparently now extant. He practised law anonymously, preparing legal briefs for clients who met only his clerk. He became increasingly involved with English and Scottish radicals in both Britain and the Netherlands. About 1677 or 1678 he married Agnes Trail, daughter of the covenanting minister Robert Trail, whose son Robert Trail preached at conventicles. In 1679 the king withdrew his order for Stewart's arrest, and he returned to Scotland. 
Late in 1681 a memorandum by Stewart critical of the government was found among the papers of Archibald Campbell, ninth earl of Argyll, who had been charged with treason for taking the oath required by the 'Test Act' of 1681 with reservations in favour of protestantism, apparently on Stewart's advice. (It was for this that Argyll was executed after his rebellion in 1685, no new indictment for the rebellion being made.) Indicted for treason in January 1682, Stewart fled to Utrecht, in the Netherlands, where he joined Scottish and English exiles in plotting to overthrow the Stuart monarchy. There, over the next few years, he had a minor hand in the larger insurrection plot associated with the Rye House plot and the English 'council of six' (1682-3), led by Anthony Ashley Cooper, first earl of Shaftesbury, although probably not in the narrower assassination plot. After these plots failed, Stewart joined surviving radicals in the Netherlands plotting and raising funds for the rebellions to be led by Charles II's illegitimate son James Scott, duke of Monmouth (1649-1685), whom Stewart advised to style himself king in direct challenge to James's succession because of the latter's Catholicism, and Argyll, writing the 'Declaration and Apology' justifying the latter's invasion, although when the time came Stewart rightly advised that the movement lacked adequate support in Scotland and declined to join in the invasion (May 1685). He was indicted and condemned 'in absentia' for treason. 
Stewart remained in the Netherlands, working closely with William Carstares, chaplain to Prince William of Orange, and other English and Scottish radicals (including John Locke) in escalating the conflict between William and his father-in-law, James VII and II. Late in 1686 William Penn, sent by James to try to persuade exiles to accept pardons and return to Britain, told James he thought he had persuaded Stewart of the rightness of the king's toleration policies and that Stewart could build support for them among Scottish Presbyterians if given a pardon. James offered one, and Stewart accepted it in May 1687, going to London in July to join the government under John Drummond, earl of Melfort, then secretary of state for Scotland. In that capacity, he wrote letters to Carstares setting forth and offering defences for James's policies -- repeal of the penal laws for nonconformity and of the 'Test Act' (which excluded Catholics from office). Carstares showed his letters to William of Orange and Gaspar Fagel, the grand pensionary, who in a widely published 'Letter... to Mr. James Stewart, advocate: giving an account of the prince and princess of Orange's thoughts concerning the repeal of the test, and the penal laws' (1687) used them as a foil opposite which to cast William and Mary's policy for removal of the penal laws but maintenance of the test -- and, crucially, for calling a freely elected parliament. Stewart wrote a reply on James's behalf, 'James Steuarts Answer to a Letter Write by Mijn Heer Fagel', published in May 1688. Although some writers (including Macaulay in his 'History of England') have interpreted Stewart's actions as betraying his principles, there is good evidence from which to infer that in serving in James's government Stewart was neither a convert to James's policies nor a trimmer, but a double agent. In January 1687 -- after Penn thought him converted to James's policies -- he wrote a 'Memorial for the Prince of Orange', in which he argued strongly that James's policies of toleration were only a temporary means to the end of re-establishing Catholicism. On 3 July 1687, the night before leaving the Netherlands, he met with and promised inviolable fidelity to the prince of Orange. After the Revolution, he 'bragged to hundreds, that he gave several advices, designedly to ruin' James's government (Lindsay, 3.214n.). Once king, William soon tapped him for high office, appointing him first prosecutor and then, in 1692, lord advocate of Scotland. His continued good relations with Scottish Presbyterians, capped by his authorship of most of the religious settlement after the revolution, would be inexplicable if his contemporaries had believed that he had betrayed his principles to accept the pardon and serve under Melfort. It is impossible to reconcile James's doctrine of royal supremacy -- both civil and religious -- with Stewart's adamant support for constitutional, parliamentarily limited monarchy and rejection of Erastianism. Whatever the case, King James appears to have trusted Stewart, for in January 1688 he appointed him to assist Sir George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh in prosecutions in Scotland, and in May he assigned him to answer Fagel. 
Following the revolution, Stewart became one of the chief advisers of the whig party in Scotland and wrote the act -- introduced into parliament by his brother Sir Thomas Stewart of Coltness (1631-1698) in June 1690 -- ratifying the Westminster confession, establishing Presbyterianism, and abolishing patronage in Scotland. As lord advocate (1692-1709, 1711-1713; appointed 28 November 1692; commissioned 10 December and admitted 26 December 1692), he wrote much of the government's report (April 1695) on the Glencoe massacre (February 1692); procured passage of an act establishing the Scottish East India Company (June 1695); prosecuted Melfort, the earl of Middleton, and others for treason for assisting James VII and II in attempting to regain the throne (July 1695), and Thomas Aikenhead for blasphemy (December 1696); and drafted Scotland's habeas corpus act (1701). Although he opposed the union of the parliaments (1707), as lord advocate he was able to do little to hinder it. He also drafted many of the public papers of the Church of Scotland between 1690 and his death. 
Stewart was widely respected not only for legal and political prowess but also for religious devotion and theological and ecclesiastical acumen, and when he died on 1 May 1713, at Advocates' Close, Edinburgh, of complications stemming from crippling gout, the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, then in session, recessed to attend his funeral and burial in Greyfriars churchyard, Edinburgh. George Lockhart of Carnwath described him as a great man, a profound lawyer, the chief support of presbytery, and a virulent enemy of the royal house of Stuart (Burnet, 3.214n.). The Scottish minister and church historian Robert Wodrow, who knew him personally, called him 'a person every way eminent for religion, learning, and law, and far above any character in my power to give' (Wodrow, 'Analecta', 2.202-8). A tall man, Stewart was crippled by gout, leading to debilitating obesity, during the last seven years of his life. An oil portrait (1712) of him by Sir John Medina hangs in the library of the writers to the signet in Parliament House, Edinburgh. 
Stewart's other significant writings include 'The Index or Abridgement of the Acts of Parliament... 1424 [to] 1707' (1st edn, 1685; rev. edn, 1707; reprinted 1715), 'The Oath of Abjuration Set in its True Light' (1712), and 'Dirleton's Doubts and Questions in the Law of Scotland, Resolved and Answered' (2nd edn, 1762). Stewart had three children with his first wife, Agnes (or Anna) Trail: two daughters, Marion (1679-1727) and Anna ('b'. 1680), and a son, James (1681-1727), who became Sir James Steuart of Goodtrees and Coltness, baronet, solicitor-general, whose son Sir James Steuart of Goodtrees and Coltness, baronet (1713-1780), wrote 'An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Economy' (1770; to which, in many respects, Adam Smith's 'An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations', 1776, was a response), and who ironically (granted his grandfather's opposition to the Stuart regime) sided with Charles Edward Stuart, the Young Pretender, in 1745. With his second wife, Margaret Air (died 1743), Stewart had four children: two sons, Henry Steuart Barclay of Collernie and Robert Steuart of Newmains, and two daughters, Susan (1699-1723) and Margaret. 


@@@@@


doc= 26419


Sir Reginald Macdonald Steuart-Seton, second baronet (1778-1838), assumed the name of Steuart, and subsequently that of Steuart-Seton, when he succeeded to the baronetcy. He was a friend of Scott, was sheriff of Stirlingshire for twenty-six years, and for thirty-nine acted as ruling elder of the presbytery of Moll in the general assembly. He was also for many years secretary of the Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland. He died in Edinburgh, aged sixty, on 15 April 1838, leaving three sons and two daughters. The eldest son, Sir Henry James Macdonald Steuart-Seton (1812-1884), succeeded to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 26420


Stevens, Alfred George (1817-1875), sculptor and designer, was born on 31 December 1817 at Blandford Forum, Dorset, where he was baptized on 28 January 1818, the second son of George Stevens, heraldic painter and house decorator, and his wife, Susan (died 1869). He was educated in the local village school and showed precocious talent as a painter. In 1833 he went to Italy, where he received some training at the Accademia di Belle Arti in Florence and in 1841 worked in Rome as an assistant to the major neo-classical sculptor Bertel Thorvaldsen. On his return to England in 1842, he unsuccessfully entered the Palace of Westminster fresco competition and drew illustrations to Homer. In 1845 he was appointed as an instructor in painting and ornament at the Government School of Design at Somerset House, London. His experiences in Italy convinced him that industrial design could not be taught separately from fine art. Following his resignation in 1847, he was commissioned to design bronze doors (1848) for the Geological Museum, London, which for economic reasons were unexecuted. From this period date his first major decorative painting scheme (1846, Deysbrook House, Liverpool), unexecuted designs for the base of Nelson's Column, London, and 'Bible' and history illustrations and paintings which reflected his lifelong admiration for Michelangelo. 
In 1850 Stevens was appointed chief designer to Hoole & Co. of Sheffield, who won a council medal at the Great Exhibition of 1851. Stevens's hot-air stove and 'boy' stove received wide praise. At the 1855 Paris Universal Exhibition Hoole & Co. was awarded a medal of honour and Stevens a silver medal. Until the early 1860s Stevens produced designs in many fields, including those for bowie knives, table-centres, chimney-pieces, street lamps, medals, and majolica. He repeatedly refused to enter into business dealings with manufacturers, probably because of his awkward, undisciplined, and Romantic temperament. The last was reflected in a series of remarkably ambitious but unrealistically expensive interior decoration schemes, including a waiting-room for Queen Victoria at Paddington Station and the dome of the British Museum reading-room (both 1855). Stevens's best-known surviving work of this period is humbler: the twenty-five cast-iron lions (1852) for the railings of the British Museum, later copied in large numbers. 
1856 marked a turning point in Stevens's career: he received the two major commissions which occupied the rest of his life -- the dining-room decorations for Dorchester House, London (dem. 1929), and the monument to the duke of Wellington (1856-1912) for St Paul's Cathedral, London. The Dorchester House decorations were designed as an ensemble, linking painting, sculpture, furniture, and furnishings alike. While his numerous chalk studies for the ceiling decorations identify him as one of the finest British draughtsmen of the nineteenth century, the actual paintings were never executed. The marble chimney-piece (Victoria and Albert Museum, London), with its Michelangelesque caryatids, was only completed after his death and its cost ($1778) shocked Robert Holford, the patron. Holford's summary of Stevens surely echoed that of other patrons: 'I had... the greatest admiration of his genius as an artist and what he did finish for me is admirable'. He was, Holford believed: 'a thoroughly honest man and an industrious and hard worker... but he was so absolutely incompetent to take in the slightest notion of business, and so... unconscious of the moral duty of not undertaking more than he could perform in some reasonable time, that it really was impossible to deal with him. (Beattie, 'Catalogue', 43)' The Wellington monument was Stevens's one major public commission. Its 56-year history makes tragic reading, especially in regard to Stevens himself. It is wrong, though, to portray him as a victim of bureaucratic hounding, as admiring biographers, from Walter Armstrong (1881) to Susan Beattie (1975), have consistently done. Rather, he was the victim of his own chronic procrastination and perfectionism, as well as his inability to deal with government patrons. 
In the 1856 competition for the monument the Royal Academician William Calder Marshall was declared the winner while Stevens, then virtually unknown as a sculptor, was placed sixth. Stevens owed his promotion to the jury's consideration of how effective the shortlisted designs would look when placed within the context of St Paul's. Further support for his design from two successive surveyors to the fabric, C. R. Cockerell and F. C. Penrose, was crucial. Stevens unwisely agreed to work on a reduced budget and to produce a full-scale model which would be erected 'in situ'. What followed was a long chapter of studies, maquettes, models, mishaps, reassurances about the rate of progress, unanswered letters, and mounting costs. As late as 1870 there was little to show for the monument apart from the full-sized plaster model. The cost overrun was estimated at over $13,000, which was almost as much as Stevens's original budget. The first commissioner of works, A. S. Ayrton -- described by Walter Armstrong as someone who 'despised art and all its manifestations' (Armstrong, 36) -- terminated Stevens's contract and had his work impounded in November 1870. No other eminent sculptor could be found to inherit the project, which was halted until the architect and writer James Fergusson arranged for Leonard Collmann, the interior decorator, to supervise Stevens. Suffering from poverty, anxiety, and heart disease, Stevens made little further progress. His sudden death in his studio at 9 Eton Villas, Haverstock Hill, Hampstead, London, on 1 May 1875 may have been suicide. He was unmarried. He was buried in Highgate cemetery on 5 May 1875. 
The main part of the Wellington monument was completed by Hugh Stannus, Stevens's pupil and biographer. It was unveiled in 1878 without its crowning equestrian figure. Following a campaign headed by Frederic Leighton in 1894 and sustained by Stevens's admirer, D. S. MacColl, the monument was completed by John Tweed in 1912. Its grand scale and its dimly lit surroundings, however, render the totality less impressive than its constituent parts. Yet from Stevens's models in the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Tate collection, the inventiveness and grandeur of the two groups of Virtues, 'Truth and Falsehood' and 'Valour and Cowardice', are evident. The former, with its figure of Truth extracting the tongue of Falsehood, mixes Michelangelo with medievalism, while the latter pays intelligent tribute to Michelangelo's 'Victory' of 1527. 
Both works were shown at the Royal Academy in 1876, the year after Stevens's death, and were his sole exhibits there. This at last enabled his significance to receive wider appreciation. The question of his influence on the major movement of the late nineteenth century, the New Sculpture, while admittedly less direct than that of Leighton, Jules Dalou, and Joseph Edgar Boehm, remains problematic. However, Stevens's modest 'oeuvre', as it became more widely known, was repeatedly quoted by such leading sculptors as Thomas Brock, Alfred Drury, and George Frampton. With his passionate belief in the integration of art and design -- his motto was 'I know of but one Art' -- he could also be seen to foreshadow the ideals of the arts and crafts movement. 
Alfred Stevens is one of the cult figures of British art. Solitary, shy, and swarthy, he was often mistaken for a Roman Catholic priest. His obituary in 'The Times' observed how he was 'insanely devoted to his art' and how 'he would destroy model after model and sketch after sketch while he was eating only a crust of bread' (4 May 1875). Isolated from the mainstream of British sculpture in training, style, and temperament, he was untypical of his age. Yet this tragic isolation contributed to his status. Hugh Stannus described him as 'the Master', while Kenneth Towndrow, writing in 1950, saw his drawings as worthy of hanging beside those of Edgar Degas. Only in recent years, when Victorian sculpture as a whole has been given overdue scholarly assessment, has Stevens lost his reputation as 'undoubtedly the finest of Victorian sculptors' (R. Middleton and D. Watkin, 'Neoclassical and 19th Century Architecture', 1980, 262). 


@@@@@


doc= 26421


Stevens, Francis (1781-1823), landscape painter, was born, probably at Exeter, on 21 November 1781. He was a pupil of Paul Sandby Munn, and became a skilful painter of landscape and cottage architecture, working chiefly in watercolours. He exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1804 and 1805, and in the latter year was elected an associate of the newly founded Society of Painters in Water Colours; he was promoted to full membership in 1809. Stevens was one of the originators of the Chalon Sketching Society in 1808. He was a member of the Norwich Society of Artists from 1810. In 1815 he published 'Views of Cottages and Farmhouses in England and Wales', which included his etchings after drawings by Munn, John Varley, Samuel Prout, and others. In the following year he became a drawing-master at Sandhurst. He painted in Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire as well as his native county of Devon. Later he settled at Exeter, whence he sent works to the Royal Academy in 1819 and 1822. He died of apoplexy at Exeter in 1823. His 'Lustleigh Cleeve' is in the Devon and Exeter Institution, Exeter. Other examples of his work are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 26422


Stevens, George Alexander (1710?-1784), actor and writer, was born in Holborn, London. He was apprenticed to a trade by his father, a London tradesman, but ran away before his time was out and joined a troupe of strolling players. By 1741 he was acting at Norwich; he was playing lead parts by 1744; poems by him were published in the 'Norwich Mercury' in 1743. By 1750 he was acting in Lincoln, about which time he married a fellow player, Elizabeth Herbert ('bap'. 1728, died 1813), only daughter of the company manager. No children of the marriage have been traced. Stevens's 'Religion, or, The Libertine Repentant: a Rhapsody', is dated from Bath, 22 February 1751: it is not known whether he was in Bath to act or to cure the illness that had brought on this sadly confessional poem. 
Between September 1751 and May 1753 Stevens acted at the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin, where he performed small parts in the talented company gathered by Thomas Sheridan. Now a less repentant libertine, he co-founded the Nassau Court, a jovial club devoted to drinking, repartee, and mock trials. His mock-heroic poem 'The Poet's Fall', an epistle 'A Week's Adventures', an unacted burlesque 'Distress upon Distress', and 'The Tombs, a Rhapsody' (product of another fit of religious seriousness), were all published in Dublin in 1752. His less ephemeral collection of 120 lyrics, 'New Comic Songs', appeared in 1753. 
Stevens went to London, playing small parts at Covent Garden between November 1753 and May 1755, and writing songs and benefit speeches for the leading comedian Edward Shuter (1728?-1776) and other performers. He joined several London drinking clubs and wrote convivial songs for them. It is said that he was a reckless practical joker and once threw a waiter out of a window and told the landlord to put him down on the bill. His heroi-comical poem, 'The Birth-Day of Folly', was published in 1754. In December of that year, following the lead of Samuel Foote and Christopher Smart, he began to give theatrical entertainments satirizing the famous orations of John Henley (1692-1756), which vexed their target sufficiently for Henley to prosecute Stevens. It is not certain where Stevens spent the next six years, but it is likely that he was touring with his father-in-law's company and was frequently in debt. Three almost identical versions are recorded of an elaborate letter, one from Nottingham gaol, the others from Yarmouth gaol in which he was confined 'for a London debt'; they are addressed to persons from whom Stevens had recently parted in, variously, Norwich, Lincoln, or Doncaster ('European Magazine', 10, 1786, 274-5; Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 271; Baker and Reed, 690-91). 
Between October 1761 and February 1764 Stevens was with the Drury Lane company under David Garrick; he played Falstaff in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', but his other parts were fairly small. He was busier as an author than a player. In 1759 he published another 'Collection of New Comic Songs'. His unsuccessful farce 'The English Sailors in America' was performed four times between 1759 and 1761 in different versions under different titles and printed in 1767. He wrote a picaresque novel, 'The History of Tom Fool' (1760), and an even looser, baggier prose work, 'The Dramatic History of Master Edward, Miss Ann, and Others' (1763), which satirized Shuter with whom he had quarrelled. (Ann is Shuter's mistress, the actress and dancer Nancy Dawson, who was already celebrated in a well-known ballad by Stevens). In 1762 Stevens was attacked in an anonymous prose satire, 'The Battle of the Players' (pp. 31-2), as the 'Author of a thousand bawdy Songs and obscene Treatises'. Between 1762 and 1764 he edited and partly wrote a periodical, 'The Beauties of All the Magazines Selected'. The afterpiece 'Hearts of Oak' (1762), sometimes attributed to Stevens, is probably not by him: its title-song is certainly by Garrick. 
As an actor Stevens 'was below mediocrity' ('GM', 54, 1784, 717) but his comic lecture as an entr'acte in Dublin in 1752 and his mock orations at the Haymarket Theatre in 1754-5 were well received. Building on their success he devised his 'Lecture upon Heads', first delivered on 30 April 1764 at the Haymarket. Standing beside a table covered with dozens of papier-mache busts and wig blocks, together with a few props, he gave a two-hour satirical monologue on such varied characters as a Cherokee chief, Alexander the Great, a London blood, a Billingsgate fishwife, a jockey, a conjuror, a Frenchman, a Spaniard, a Dutchman, and a Methodist parson. This one-man show was an immediate success. Stevens took it to Dublin, Manchester, Bath, and Bristol in 1764 and repeated it in several London theatres in 1765. In following years he performed many times in London and all over the provinces, making changes to keep the entertainment topical and in a vain attempt to outwit imitators. It is said that he crossed the Atlantic with the 'Lecture', but performances in America were almost certainly by an imitator, of which there were many throughout the English-speaking world. The 'Lecture' was first published in 1765 and there were many more editions, authorized or not; so, to Stevens's vexation, other performers freely capitalized on his successful formula. 
Stevens visited Stratford at the end of 1767; it was he, rather than, as is sometimes claimed, George Steevens (1736-1800), who conducted negotiations which resulted in Garrick presenting a statue of Shakespeare to the town. Stevens toured with the 'Lecture' in 1768-9 and returned to the Haymarket on 28 March 1769 for a two-month run in which he presented the 'Lecture' sixteen times. His comic opera 'The Court of Alexander' was performed eight times at Covent Garden in January 1770 and published. He was perhaps the author of another comic opera, 'The Fair Orphan', acted and printed at [King's] Lynn, 1771. He made two appearances on the conventional London stage in benefits for actor friends: as Touchstone in 'As You Like It' at Covent Garden on 5 April 1771, and as Stephano in 'The Tempest' at Drury Lane on 12 May 1773. With Thomas Snagg the actor (stage name Wilks) he set up a burletta company which played for a few weeks in summer 1771 at Yarmouth and Harleston, but was disbanded on account of 'the improbability of profit or reputation ensuing' (Snagg, 80). Despite this experience Stevens was managing a small company which performed in a booth at the Cambridge cheese fair in September 1772. 
At the beginning of 1773 Stevens was making life-sized puppets for Samuel Foote (died 1777) and probably manipulating them and providing voice-overs at performances. His most successful comic opera, 'The Trip to Portsmouth', opened on 11 August 1773 at the Haymarket for twelve nights, was revived there for six performances in 1774-5, and played in Belfast, Dublin, and Newcastle. His staples, though, remained his songs and the 'Lecture upon Heads'. To counter pirates he published an authorized edition of 'Songs, Comical and Satyrical' (1772), containing 134 songs. That year he gave the 'Lecture' sixteen times between 26 March and 11 May at the Haymarket and added an 'Essay on Satirical Entertainments' to a printed edition of the 'Lecture'. Over the next seven years he took the 'Lecture' on tour as far afield as Manchester, Dublin, and Belfast, as well as performing in London; his last recorded performance was on 10 December 1779 in the Town Hall, Wrexham. He sold his lecture to the actor Charles Lee Lewes, who delivered it from 1780 but never matched his success. Other prose sketches by Stevens were gathered posthumously in 'The Adventures of a Speculist, or, A Journey through London' (2 vols., 1788). 
The 'Gentleman's Magazine' claimed in 1784 that Stevens made $10,000 from his 'Lecture upon Heads', adding inconsistently 'the greatest part of which melted from his hands before his death' ('GM', 54, 717) and 'he secured himself in affluence during the rest of his life' (ibid., 795). Stevens's intellect was decaying by 1780 and he had retired to Hampstead. He died on 6 September 1784 and was buried two days later at Biggleswade, Bedfordshire. His wife outlived him; she died on 2 September 1813. 


@@@@@


doc= 26423


Stevens, John (c.1662-1726), translator and antiquary, was born in London, the son of Richard Stevens, page of the backstairs to Queen Catherine of Braganza. In view of his later statement that he was brought up to speak Spanish from infancy, and given that his father had earlier served the first earl of Clarendon in Madrid, it is likely that his mother was of Spanish origin. Queen Catherine's chapel in London was served by English Benedictines from St Gregory's, Douai, and Stevens is recorded as having attended their school at Douai 'c'.1675. Though his Benedictine education inspired him with a lifelong interest in monastic history, he aspired at first to a military career, and appears to have served in the force sent to quell Monmouth's rebellion (Murphy, 452). When the second earl of Clarendon was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland in 1685 Stevens accompanied him to Dublin as one of his gentlemen-at-large. When Clarendon left office in 1686 he recommended Stevens to his brother, Lord Rochester, as 'an honest and sober young fellow, and a pretty scholar' ('Correspondence of... Clarendon', 1.653). On Rochester's nomination Stevens was appointed in January 1687 to be collector of taxes at Welshpool, with a brief covering mid-Wales and the borders. His staunch loyalty to James II made his position there untenable after the revolution of 1688: escaping to France he volunteered enthusiastically for the Jacobite force which landed at Bantry in May 1689. In Dublin, though penniless and abandoned by his former patrons, he eventually obtained a commission in Fitzjames's regiment and served throughout the ensuing war. His journal, not published until 1912, is all the more valuable an eyewitness account for having been written by a Jacobite who was not an Irishman. While admiring the endurance and courage of the Irish rank and file, he was shocked by the irresponsibility of many of the younger officers, Jacobites by convenience, not conviction. His regiment redeemed its flight at the Boyne by a heroic defence of Limerick. 
Following the evacuation of the Jacobite forces by the terms of the treaty of Limerick, Stevens found temporary refuge and employment in Lisbon, joining his brother Richard, who accompanied Queen Catherine on her return to Portugal in 1692. By 1695, however, he was back in London, where he settled down to make a living as a professional writer, putting his command of Spanish and Portuguese to practical, though not lucrative, use. His first two publications, translations of works by Manuel de Faria y Sousa and Francisco Manuel de Mello, introduced English readers to Portuguese writing of their own time. The version of de Mello's 'Carta de guia de casados' ('The government of a wife', 1697) was dedicated to Queen Catherine. Over the next thirty years he published over twenty translations, mainly from the Spanish, in addition to histories of Spain and Portugal and a painstakingly researched Spanish dictionary. He satisfied the contemporary taste for books of travel by making available some of the classics of the 'conquista': accounts written from an Iberian, rather than an English point of view. Though self-deprecating about his literary style, he produced a lively and successful translation of Quevedo's comic satires. His revision of Shelton's version of 'Don Quixote' gained in accuracy what it lost in artistic unity. He preferred fact to fiction, and required a tale to carry a moral. The austere and devout Quevedo, champion of absolute monarchy, was his favourite writer, and in 1709 he recruited him to the tory cause by translating two of his political works in defence of Dr Henry Sacheverell. 
Stevens's only regular paid employment was as editor from 1712 to 1715 of the 'British Mercury', a four-page weekly gazette published by the Sun Fire Office as a means of attracting policy holders. His meagre earnings in Grub Street were spent in pursuit of his consuming interest in monastic history. His abridgement in English of Dugdale's 'Monasticon Anglicanum' (1718) was followed by a two-volume supplement (1722-3), containing some 500 additional monastic charters in English translation. It improved on Dugdale by covering the mendicant orders and including biographical accounts of monastic writers, and for the first time it treated pre- and post-Reformation monastic history as a continuum. Stevens did not attempt the task of historical interpretation (partly to avoid the charge of Catholic bias), and his presentation of the documents in English translation rather than in the original Latin did not please the academic purists (such as Thomas Hearne), but these criticisms are outweighed by the scale of his single-handed achievement as a collector of scattered material who opened up the monastic past to a non-professional readership. He also published translations of Bede's 'Ecclesiastical History' (1723), and of Louis Alemand's 'Histoire monastique d'Irlande' (1722). 
This dedication to scholarship cost Stevens's dependants dear. When he died in London on 27 October 1726 he left his wife and his sister, Catharine Sabina Stevens, with almost no means of support. In February 1729 the 'Flying Post' reported his widow as being 'in the utmost distress', having been left a legacy of under $20. His surviving manuscripts were purchased from her by his friend John Warburton, the antiquary. Catalogued for the Warburton sale of November 1759, they bear witness to the catholicity of Stevens's antiquarian interests. 


@@@@@


doc= 26424


Stevens, Richard John Samuel (1757-1837), composer and diarist, was born on 27 March 1757 at the Garden House, Bell Alley, Coleman Street, London, the first of four children of John Stevens (died 1778), a cloth drawer and member of the Haberdashers' Company, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Chippendale. Stevens was noted by his contemporaries as an organist and composer of glees (vocal compositions for three or more singers with or without accompaniment). His main historical significance lies in his diaries, commonplace books, 'Recollections', and incomplete account books, which give a vivid picture of the life of a financially successful professional musician in late Georgian London. The 'Recollections' are also the only source to identify John Stafford Smith as the composer of the 'Anacreontic Song', whose tune is now familiar as 'The Star-Spangled Banner', the national anthem of the United States of America, and which was originally the club song of the Anacreontic Society. 
Stevens was a chorister at St Paul's Cathedral, and in 1768 was apprenticed to William Savage, vicar-choral and master of the choristers. In 1778 he began to teach music to the daughters of Lord Thurlow (lord chancellor in 1778-83 and 1783-92), and Thurlow became an important patron for Stevens, whose career was also much helped by his friendship with Samuel Birch. Stevens's major appointments were as organist to St Michael Cornhill (1781-1810), the Inner Temple (1786-1810), the Charterhouse (1796-1837), and Christ's Hospital (1808-10), and as Gresham professor of music (1801-37). His 'Recollections' include descriptions of many of the glee-singing clubs of London, including the Noblemen and Gentlemen's Catch Club (where he was a professional member), the Anacreontic Society, and many smaller organizations. 
On 7 June 1810 Stevens married Anna Maria Jeffery (1768-1847), daughter of George Jeffery of London and Peckham, and they had one child, Richard, born in 1811. Anna Maria had become one of Stevens's pupils in 1788, and he first proposed to her (unsuccessfully) in 1799. Allusions in the diaries and 'Recollections' suggest that this long delay was because members of the Jeffery family objected to the elder daughter's marrying beneath herself. By the time of the wedding Stevens had already relinquished most of his teaching and the Jeffery family also required him to resign most of his other musical appointments. He was saved from possible financial embarrassment by a substantial bequest from Thomas Rivers, one of his father's friends, in 1817. His closest friends were successful members of his own class, Joseph Kirckman the piano maker, and tea merchant Richard Twining the younger (1772-1857). 
Stevens's most important musical compositions were his glees, of which 'See what horrid tempests rise' and 'It was a lover and his lass' won prizes from the Catch Club in 1782 and 1786 respectively, while a further five glees and one catch appeared in the Catch Club's annual collections. Some of his glees, such as these prize-winning compositions, are fine examples of the rather conservative style associated with the glee-singing clubs. Stevens also had a lively interest in new musical developments. He orchestrated some of his glees for use in the theatre, and his more innovative pieces include 'Pray pull the bell sir', which is a miniature piece of music theatre, glees with piano duet accompaniment, such as 'O strike the harp', and more clearly homophonic pieces which embrace sonata form, such as 'Ye spotted snakes'. 
Stevens declined an invitation to join the teaching staff of the Royal Academy of Music when it was founded in 1814, but he left most of his sheet music to them after his death in Peckham on 23 September 1837. His manuscripts remained in the family until 1957, when the music was left to the Fitzwilliam Museum and other papers to the Pendlebury Library (both in Cambridge). 


@@@@@


doc= 26425


Stevens, William (1732-1807), hosier and religious writer, was born on 2 March 1732 in the parish of St Saviour's, Southwark, son of a tradesman of Southwark named Stevens (died 'c'.1733), and his wife, who was a sister of the Revd Samuel Horne, rector of Otham, Kent, and aunt of Dr George Horne, the future bishop of Norwich. After the early death of her husband about 1733 Mrs Stevens moved her only son and daughter, both then in infancy, to Maidstone to be near her brother's family. This formed the basis of a lifelong intimacy between William Stevens and his cousin, George Horne. They were educated together at the same commercial school at Maidstone under the Revd Deodatus Bye, a teacher learned in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. When Horne at the age of fifteen was sent to University College, Oxford, to prepare for holy orders, Stevens, at the age of fourteen, in August 1746, was placed as an apprentice with an eminent wholesale hosier, Mr Hookham, at 68 Old Broad Street, in the City of London. After his apprenticeship expired in 1753 Hookham employed him for a further twelve months as an assistant. In 1754, at the early age of twenty-two, Stevens's diligence was rewarded by his being given a share of the business and being made Hookham's partner. After Hookham's death he became the chief partner, but in 1801 he relinquished a great part of the business in order to devote more time to his studies and charities. 
From his earliest years in business Stevens devoted his leisure to literary, theological, and historical studies. He soon acquired an intimate knowledge of the French language and Latin, Greek, and Hebrew literature. His linguistic proficiency as a translator was well displayed in his first publication, a translation of letters in French addressed to Benjamin Kennicott, the whig Hebraist, on the Hebrew text of the 'Old Testament'. In this anonymous work of 1772 he supported George Horne's attack upon Kennicott's project of a revised Hebrew text of the 'Old Testament'; a translation of letters by Joseph Adolphe to Kennicott on the same subject was published in 1773. He became well read in the writings of the fathers of the early church, and an authority on the writings of notable seventeenth-century Anglican divines such as Thomas Jackson, Lancelot Andrewes, Jeremy Taylor, and George Hickes. He was, for a time, a great admirer of the writings of the biblical critic John Hutchinson. Stevens -- along with his like-minded friends Horne, William Jones of Nayland, Nathan Wetherall, Thomas Calverley, George Gaskin, Samuel Glasse, John Parkhurst (who dedicated the fourth edition of his Hebrew and English lexicon to Stevens), John Prince, and Jonathan Boucher -- formed the nucleus of a circle of high-church Anglicans, sometimes known as the Hutchinsonians. In their sacramental and mystical interpretation of orthodox Christianity these high-churchmen are often seen as precursors of the Oxford Movement as well as heirs of the Caroline divines and nonjurors. 
Stevens's orthodox theological concerns, in which he sought to stem the tide of infidelity and latitudinarianism, found lucid expression in several controversial works. One of the most notable, published anonymously to counteract the Feathers tavern petition of 1772 which called for abolition of subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', was entitled 'An essay on the nature and constitution of the Christian church, wherein are set forth the form of its government, the extent of its powers, and the limits of our obedience, by a layman' (1773). In another anonymous work of 1773 Stevens took up a similar anti-latitudinarian and anti-rationalist theme, albeit in a more humorous tone, and asserted the apostolical form of ministry and necessity of episcopal ordination against the 'vague and indefinite' arguments of Francis Wollaston, rector of Chislehurst ('Cursory Observations on a Pamphlet Entitled, An Address to the Clergy of the Church of England', 1773, 9-10). It was one of Stevens's most deeply held convictions that 'making establishment necessary to the existence of a church, as many are apt to do, is a grievous mistake' (Park, 'Memoirs', 1814, 138). This concern for the independence of the church was in the tradition of the nonjurors and prefigured the teaching of the Oxford Movement. 
Stevens was an exponent of a high-church political as well as sacramental theology, emphasizing subordination, attachment to the constitution in church and state, and, in the tradition of the nonjurors, even upholding doctrines of passive obedience and non-resistance to constituted authority. To counter extreme whiggish and 'rational' notions concerning the nature of civil power which were being propagated in support of the American colonists, he published 'A discourse on the English constitution, extracted from a late eminent writer, and applicable to the present times' (1776). With the same end in view, he assailed a sermon of Richard Watson, then regius professor of divinity at Cambridge, for grounding all authority in the power of the people, in two works both published in 1777: 'Strictures on a Sermon Entitled 'The Principles of the Revolution Vindicated'', and 'The Revolution Vindicated, and Constitutional Liberty Asserted'. Although these works represented a conservative defence of the 1688 constitution, he was accused by Kennicott of not only denigrating reason but of Jacobite sympathies. In fact, privately, as expressed in correspondence with his close friend the Anglo-American loyalist Jonathan Boucher, Stevens's 'tory' and 'throne and altar' historical sympathies were marked, extending not only to an intense personal devotion to the memory of the 'royal martyr' Charles I, but even to a sentimental neo-Jacobitism. Thus he criticized the pro-whig, French Huguenot historian Rapin for blackening the character of the excluded Stuart family, commended the Jacobite Thomas Carte's 'General History of England' (1747-52), and always remained uneasy at the part of the 5 November state thanksgiving service commemorating the 'deliverance' wrought by William of Orange in 1688. 
Stevens responded vigorously to the challenge posed by the influence of the French Revolution and was prominent in the propaganda war against Jacobinism in the 1790s. While retaining a high-church awareness of the danger of Erastianism, in the context of the 1790s Stevens repeatedly defended the link between national church and national government against 'French' contractarian notions. He joined with Jones of Nayland and others in forming a Society for the Reformation of Principles. The society published a collection of tracts for the younger clergy, with a preface by Jones, entitled 'The Scholar Armed Against the Errors of the Times' (1795), and in 1793, inspired by Stevens and Jones, founded a high-church review, the 'British Critic'. He contributed to the 'Anti-Jacobin Review' and his name has also been linked to the foundation of the 'Orthodox Churchman's Magazine' in 1801. 
Stevens kept up a lifelong collaboration on theological questions with George Horne, to whom he suggested the plan and satirical character of his 'Letters on Infidelity' which, when published, were dedicated to him. On Horne's death Stevens published three volumes of his sermons, and supplied Jones of Nayland with materials for his biography of Horne. It was fitting that in 1795 Jones should dedicate to Stevens his 'Life of Bishop Horne', and in 1800 Stevens defended his late cousin from an attack in the 'British Critic'. Stevens's innate humility was reflected in his signing his defence of Horne with the 'nom de plume' Ain (Hebrew for 'nobody'), which in turn suggested the title of a collection of his pamphlets published in 1805 as 'Nobody's Works'. He was ever afterwards known by this appellation, and in 1800 a dining club was instituted by fifteen of his friends in his honour, denominated Nobody's Club. Three meetings of the club, which included well-known clergymen, peers, lawyers, and doctors, were held every year at the Crown and Anchor inn in London. The club, under the name of Nobody's Friends, became a forum for meetings of eminent high-churchmen throughout the nineteenth century and may be regarded, 'in a certain sense, as his posterity' (Park, 'Preface' to 'Memoirs', new edn, 1859, iv). It was appropriate that Stevens's last published work should be his edition of Jones's works published in twelve volumes in 1801, prefixed to which was a life of Jones, part of which had already appeared in the 'Orthodox Churchman's Magazine' after an unsuccessful attempt to place it in the 'Anti-Jacobin Review'. 
Stevens was of a playful, often whimsical disposition, but a man of holy life. He was assiduous in private devotion and public worship from an early age. He regularly attended weekday matins and evensong at a time when the custom was relatively neglected, and was a constant communicant with a high view of the real presence. His habits of fasting and regard for clerical celibacy owed much to the influence of the nonjuror William Law's spiritual classic 'A Serious Call to a Devout and Holy Life' (1728). He also believed in and practised prayers for the dead. 
Stevens can be placed within that tradition of high-church Anglican lay piety associated with Isaak Walton, Matthew Hale, John Evelyn, and Robert Nelson, that was continued by his friend Joshua Watson and the generation of high-churchmen known as the Hackney Phalanx or Clapton Sect. Like Walton before him and Watson after him Stevens was the lay companion and friend of the most eminent Anglican prelates and divines of the day, and 'a profound master in the art of holy living'. He shared lifelong spiritual counsel with his closest friend, Thomas Calverley of Ewell, Surrey, on whose death in 1797 Stevens wrote a moving memoir in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. For some years he acted as a spiritual guide and theological mentor to Jane Hookham, only child of his business partner John Hookham, who in 1768 married John Frere, antiquary and high-churchman. Although Stevens detested what he regarded as Methodist irregularity and 'enthusiastical fanaticism', in later years his attitude to Anglican evangelicals and moderate dissenters became more measured, and his outlook was somewhat broader than that of his friend Charles Daubeny and other high-churchmen associated with the Hackney Phalanx. 
Stevens was prodigal in his generosity to the poor. His charitable endeavours were reflected in his benefactions to the Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy, Corporation of the Widows of the Clergy, and Clergy Orphan School. He was governor of several hospitals and worked for many years as printer and treasurer of Queen Anne's Bounty (1782-1807), and auditor of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. He also sought to fund the expense of university education for those in financial need. He actively supported the exiled French Catholic clergy in the 1790s, and retained a respectful attitude towards the Roman Catholic church, which contrasted with a more critical treatment of protestant dissenting and presbyterian churches. His greatest labour of love, however, reflecting his sympathy for the nonjuring tradition, was reserved for the depressed episcopal church in Scotland. In 1789 Stevens and two associates, the young lawyer (and later his biographer) James Allan Park and the clergyman George Gaskin, formed a 'voluntary committee for managing in England the affairs of the Scotch episcopal church'. He became a friend and correspondent of Bishop John Skinner of Aberdeen, primus of the Scottish episcopal church, and helped pave the way for Bishop Samuel Horsley's successful championship of a bill of 1792 which removed the prohibition of episcopalian clergy ministering in Scotland. At a later date, he served on the English committee of the duke and duchess of Buccleuch's fund for augmenting the incomes of episcopalian bishops and clergy. 
Stevens remained a bachelor. His closest friends in his last years included James Allen Park, John Richardson, barrister, and John Bowdler of Hayes, near Bromley, with whom he spent the day preceding his own death. He died on 7 February 1807 at his house in Old Broad Street, London, and was buried on 14 February in Otham churchyard, Kent. He left the bulk of his property to his cousin, William Horne, rector of Otham, having during his life been a great benefactor of Otham church, spending about $600 in repairing and adorning it. 


@@@@@


doc= 26426


Stevens, William Bagshaw (1756-1800), poet and diarist, was born on 15 March 1756 at Abingdon, Berkshire, the elder child and only son of William Stevens (1726-1788), apothecary and surgeon, and his wife, Susanna Bagshaw (1726-1783); through his mother Stevens claimed kinship with the Harington family. He was educated at Roysse's Grammar School, Abingdon, until 1772, when he was admitted to Magdalen College, Oxford, as a Berkshire demy. He had early shown ability: when he was a small boy his father promised him 1died for every hundred lines of Virgil that he learned by heart. At Magdalen, during what were probably the happiest years of his life, his talent blossomed. In 1775 he published a volume of verse, 'Poems, Consisting of Indian Odes and Miscellaneous Pieces', dedicated to Lord North, who gave him an interview and 3 guineas in recognition of the compliment. The poems were generally well received and were apparently thought to prove Stevens's qualification for the post of assistant master to Dr William Prior, the head of Repton School, Derbyshire, after he graduated BA in 1776. Throughout his life Stevens had a gift for friendship; he and Dr Prior were soon on excellent terms, and the local grandee, Sir Robert Burdett of Foremark Hall, appointed him his domestic chaplain in 1779, after he had taken deacon's orders (he did not take priest's orders until 1798). In the same year Prior died and Stevens was appointed to succeed him as headmaster of Repton. 
It was a promising launch in life but thereafter Stevens's career stagnated. He never married, professedly because he thought himself too poor to support a wife but really because he suffered bitter disappointment in the two great loves of his life. Sir Robert's promise to bestow a good living on his chaplain came to nothing and Stevens increasingly found his patron tiresome and tyrannical (he himself was probably too inclined to feel slighted). He hated schoolmastering, although, contrary to legend, there is no evidence that he neglected his duties and he was in constant demand as a preacher at the various churches near Repton. But the school sagged under his despondent leadership to the lowest point in its history, not entirely through his fault. He kept up his Magdalen connection, remaining a demy until 1794, when he was elected a fellow, but he rejected President Routh's offer of a tutorship, no doubt because anything to do with education had become horrible to him. He did undertake one or two minor college jobs, however, and in January 1800 he was appointed dean of divinity. 
In 1782 Stevens published a second volume of poems but it was not a success and, except for occasional verses written for such friends as Erasmus Darwin and Anna Seward and a few contributions to periodicals (the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and the 'Topographer', edited by his former pupil Stebbing Shaw), he never ventured into print again. His ambitions narrowed to securing church preferment but it was not until the last year of his life that, through the good offices of his devoted friend Sir Francis Burdett, Sir Robert's grandson and heir, and of Thomas Coutts, Burdett's father-in-law, he attained a rectory (Seckington) and a nearby vicarage (Kingsbury) in Warwickshire. His health had been failing for some years -- he complained much of gout -- and on 28 May 1800 he died at Repton from an apoplexy brought on, says tradition, from immoderate laughter at the antics of an Italian and his monkey in the village high street. On hearing the news Francis Burdett wrote to Stevens's sister that it was an irreparable loss, leaving a void in his mind that could never be filled. Stevens was buried in Repton churchyard. 
Stevens was a better poet than his contemporaries knew. Some of his verse was still unpublished 200 years after his death, but, if the whole of it is read, he emerges as a man of real talent, humour, wit, and feeling, though trapped in the limbo of poetic diction that the great Romantics would soon blow apart. He was especially devoted to the work of that earlier Magdalen poet William Collins. But his fame now rests on the journal that he kept from 1791; its publication by Georgina Galbraith in 1965 permanently altered Stevens's position in the history of English literature. It is as valuable to historians as the contemporary diary of James Woodforde and, like Woodforde, presents a vivid picture of a corner of rural England in the late eighteenth century; unlike Woodforde it also records a man's inner life, above all in its account of Stevens's hopeless love for the young, rich, highly-strung, and beautiful Fanny, Thomas Coutts's second daughter, who married the marquess of Bute four months after Stevens's death. In his minute depiction and analysis of situations and emotions Stevens shows the talent of a novelist -- a Richardson rather than a Jane Austen; the secret drama of a quiet life has seldom been more painfully displayed. The journal is also an essential source for the early life of Francis Burdett. 


@@@@@


doc= 26427


Stevenson, Alan (1807-1865), civil engineer, was born on 28 April 1807 in Edinburgh, the eldest surviving son of Robert Stevenson (1772-1850) and his wife, Jane ('c'.1779-1846), daughter of Thomas Smith (bap. 1752, d. 1815), engineer to the Northern Lighthouse Board. He was the brother of David Stevenson and Thomas Stevenson and the uncle of Robert Louis Stevenson. He was educated at the high school and university of Edinburgh, where from 1821 he read Latin, Greek, and mathematics with a view to entering the church. In 1823 Stevenson decided to follow an engineering career and, after six months at the Revd Pettingal's Twickenham Finishing School, he commenced a four-year apprenticeship to his father, a civil engineer. During each winter he attended classes at Edinburgh University appropriate to his career and in 1826 he graduated MA, gaining under Sir John Leslie (1766-1832), professor of natural philosophy, the Fellowes prize for excellency as an advanced student of natural philosophy. In the same year he read his first paper to the Royal Physical Society of Edinburgh, on the 'causes of obscurity in style', urging greater clarity in writing. 
Stevenson's thorough training from 1823-7 included railway surveying under William Blackadder of Glamis; bridge building, river improvements, harbour and lighthouse engineering under his father's direction; and a study tour of works in Sweden and Russia with the engineer Robert Bald. In 1828-9 he gained experience on works conducted by Thomas Telford and James Walker at Hull docks, on the Birmingham Canal under its resident engineer, William Mackenzie, and on a new dock at Liverpool. Encouraged by his father, and with access to his notes, Stevenson compiled a list of British lighthouses, describing their appearance at night. This pocket-book list, the first of its kind, published in 1828 as 'The British Pharos' (2nd edn, 1831), was very useful to mariners. 
In 1830 Stevenson, in addition to being an assistant in his father's firm, was appointed clerk of works to the Northern Lighthouse Board, to which his father was engineer. During the following three years he worked on new lighthouses at the Mull of Galloway, Dunnet Head, Douglas Head, Barra Head, Girdleness, and Lismore. For some years Stevenson had been interested in improving lighthouse illumination and in the summer of 1834 he visited lighthouses and workshops in France. There he gained knowledge of the work of the Fresnel brothers, Augustin (1788-1827) and Leonor, Jean Baptiste Francois Soleil (1798-1878), Isaac-Ami (1798-1878), and Bordier-Marcet (1768-1835), and, in particular, of Fresnel's dioptric apparatus which used lenses instead of mirror reflectors to enhance light intensity. In the following year Stevenson's influential 'Report... on Illumination of Lighthouse by Means of Lenses' which included a valuable account of French practice was published. In 1835 under his direction the revolving light at Inchkeith and in 1836 the fixed light of the Isle of May were made dioptric instead of catoptric, with a resulting threefold order of increase in brightness. For Trinity House in 1836 Stevenson designed and superintended the installation of the first dioptric light in England at Start Point, Devon. 
Stevenson was taken into partnership in the firm by his father about 1832. Work upon which he was engaged with his father from 1832 to 1837 included preparation of 'A chart of the coast of Scotland', Ballyshannon harbour improvement, Granton harbour, plans for Edinburgh and Glasgow, Edinburgh and Dundee, and Perth and Dunkeld railways, Perth harbour, and Tay and Ribble navigation improvements. Soon afterwards he wrote an authoritative account of the development of 'sea lights' from the earliest times to about 1838 which was published in the seventh and eighth editions of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' in 1840 and 1857 respectively. From December 1837 until August 1843, Stevenson was almost exclusively employed by the Northern Lighthouse Board on the design and construction of Skerryvore lighthouse, this being mutually agreed as too arduous a task for his father who was by then sixty-five. In January 1843 Stevenson succeeded his father as the board's engineer and from then until paralysis dictated his retirement in 1853 he was responsible for the design and construction of new lighthouses, in addition to Skerryvore, at Little Ross, Covesea Skerries, Chanonry Point, Cromarty, Cairn Point (Loch Ryan), Noss Head, Ardnamurchan, Sanna, Heston Island, Hoy, and Stornoway. On 11 September 1844 he married Margaret Scott (1813-1895), daughter of Humphrey H. Jones of Llynon, Anglesey and his wife, Jean, 'nee' Scott; they had one son, the art critic Robert Alan Mowbray Stevenson, and three daughters including the author Katharine de Mattos. 
Stevenson's national reputation was mainly based on his design and execution of Skerryvore lighthouse, his classic account of which, together with his notes on lighthouse illumination, were published in 1848 as 'Account of the Skerryvore Lighthouse'. These notes were extended and more widely propagated through 'A Rudimentary Treatise on the History, Construction and Illumination of Lighthouses', published in 1850. Both works were of outstanding technical value well into the twentieth century. Skerryvore lighthouse was a great engineering achievement and is still in service. It is 155 ft high, located on an isolated reef 12 miles west-south-west of Tiree and exposed to the full fetch of the Atlantic. The first season's work, the beacon-barrack erected in 1838, was totally destroyed by a November storm. The eventual creation of the lighthouse by 1843 severely tried Stevenson's courage, patience, and health and fully exercised his undoubted ability. The lighthouse has been widely acknowledged to be the finest example for mass combined with elegance of outline of any rock tower. Stevenson adopted for its shape the hyperbolic curve which was the form with the least mass and lowest centre of gravity of the various options examined. It strongly influenced the design of the Alguada lighthouse built for the Indian government in 1862-5. Skerryvore's revolving dioptric apparatus was the most advanced in the world at that time, with prismatic rings instead of mirrors below the central belt, thus greatly extending the improved dioptric effect. Stevenson further improved its efficiency by introducing inclined astragals into the lantern. His improvements to the dioptric system, which included the conversion of Fresnel's narrow lenses in fixed systems into a truly cylindrical drum, led to its wider adoption. He introduced prismatic rings above and below the central belt, thus securing equal distribution of light all round and extending dioptric action through the whole height of the apparatus. 
In 1830 Stevenson, sponsored by Telford, became a corresponding member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, and in 1838 a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, acting as a member of its council in 1843-5. In 1840 the University of Glasgow conferred on him the honorary degree of LLB. The emperor of Russia and the kings of Prussia and the Netherlands presented him with medals in acknowledgement of his merit as a lighthouse engineer. Dr John Brown wrote that Stevenson had genuine literary genius, that he was able to read Italian and Spanish critically and with ease, and that he knew Homer by heart and read Aristophanes in Greek. Clarity and style characterize his writings. In addition to the publications already mentioned Stevenson contributed papers to the 'Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal' and in 1851 his biographical sketch of his father was published (illustrated edn, 1861). 
In 1852 Stevenson was seized with paralysis, and in the following year he resigned as engineer to the Northern Lighthouse Board. He beguiled his suffering in retirement by translating the ten hymns of Synesius, bishop of Cyrene AD 410. These translations, along with other poems, were printed for private circulation in 1865. Stevenson died of general paralysis at his home, 6 Pitt Street, Portobello, on 23 December 1865 and was buried in the new Calton cemetery, Edinburgh. He was survived by his wife and their four children. On 3 January 1866 the Northern Lighthouse Board recorded their deep and abiding regrets for the loss of a man whose services had been to them invaluable and whose works combined profound science and practical skill. 


@@@@@


doc= 26428


Stevenson, David (1815-1886), civil engineer, was born in Edinburgh on 11 January 1815, the third surviving son of Robert Stevenson (1772-1850), a civil engineer, and his wife, Jane ('c'.1779-1846), daughter of Thomas Smith (bap. 1752, d. 1815), engineer to the Northern Lighthouse Board. He was the brother of Alan Stevenson and Thomas Stevenson. He was educated in Edinburgh at the high school in 1824-30 and attended classes at the university in 1831-5 under professors Wallace, Forbes, Hope, and Jameson while undergoing an exemplary engineering training in his father's office. Before commencing his apprenticeship Stevenson gained experience in working with iron and wood with a leading Scottish millwright, James Scott of Cupar, Fife, and was taught mechanical drawing by his son David Scott. In 1832 he gained experience on bridge works being conducted by his father over the Clyde at Glasgow, and the Forth at Stirling, where he dressed at least one arch stone, and also at the cotton works of James Smith of Deanston, agricultural engineer. In 1833-4 Stevenson's training included surveying for the Tay navigation improvement and with William Mackenzie (1794-1851), contractor, setting out and starting work on a 22-mile section of the London and Birmingham Railway in Warwickshire and on the construction of Edgehill Tunnel, Liverpool. 
In 1835 Stevenson studied road making in Ireland and diving bell work at Kingstown harbour and made a survey of and supervised road construction on the Calf of Man. His earliest papers were read to the Royal Scottish Society of Arts on the subjects of the Liverpool and Manchester and Dublin and Kingstown railways, in 1835 and 1836 respectively, the former earning him a medal from the society. Late in 1835, aged twenty, Stevenson declined an invitation from Marc Isambard Brunel to work as a resident engineer on the Thames Tunnel, preferring the post of resident engineer at Granton harbour, where he worked under his father on quarry opening, pier construction, and road building. In 1837 he resigned this post and gained wider experience in North America, France, Switzerland, Germany, and the Netherlands. This tour led to the publication of his influential and now historically valuable 'Sketch of the Civil Engineering of North America' (1838, 2nd edn, 1859), which influenced the introduction into Britain of faster steam vessels, with fine lines and long-stroke pillar engines and cost-effective timber construction. 
In May 1838 Stevenson entered into partnership with his father and brother Alan and the firm became known as Robert Stevenson & Sons. As 'managing partner' he immediately became responsible for the entire management of the firm's general business. Work in Scotland included navigational improvement on the Forth, Tay, Clyde, and Nith, and harbour construction. English projects included improvements to the Dee, Lune, Ribble, Wear, and Fossdyke, and in Ireland, the Erne and Foyle. Other work included Mullagmore and Morcambe harbours, Allanton Bridge, Newfoundland lighthouses, Peebles railway, Birkenhead docks, and opposing railway crossings of the Tay and Dee. On 3 June 1840 Stevenson married Elizabeth (1816-1871), daughter of James Mackay, a goldsmith from Edinburgh. They had four sons and four daughters. Only two sons survived childhood; they were David Alan Stevenson (1854-1938) and Charles Alexander Stevenson (1855-1950) ['see under 'Stevenson, David Alan], who continued the family engineering tradition. 
Stevenson also advised on salmon fishing disputes and in 1842, in connection with the Dornoch fishings, first categorized the different physical characteristics of a river in to the well-known terms 'sea proper', 'tidal', or 'river proper'. This work led to his paper 'Remarks on the improvement of tidal rivers' read to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1845, which was also separately published, under the same title, that year (2nd edn, 1849); in it he argued conclusively that if the duration of tidal influence was extended, the hydraulic head would be lessened and the velocity of tidal currents decreased. Stevenson also correctly propounded the theory of the origin of bars at the mouths of rivers and defined effective measures for their removal. He emphasized the necessity for accurate data upon which to base improvements and wrote 'A treatise on the application of marine surveying and hydrometry to the practice of civil engineering', which was published in 1842. Stevenson's practice of marine engineering was extensively promoted through his article 'Inland navigation' in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (8th edn, 1857), enlarged into 'Canal and River Engineering' (1858). This became a definitive work which continued to be used well into the twentieth century and established his national reputation. 
In 1846, when railway projects, and to a lesser extent public health bills, were overwhelming the Admiralty and Woods and Forests departments, Stevenson held courts of inquiry under the 'Preliminary Inquiries Act' for at least twenty proposed bills. His findings were accepted in every case, except for the Caledonian Railway's proposed crossing of the Clyde at Glasgow, which was at first opposed by the Admiralty but later approved. In 1849-50 he reported on fishery board proposals at Lybster and Scallisaig harbours which led in 1851 to his becoming at his own request joint engineer to the board with his brother Thomas for more than thirty years. In 1853 Stevenson succeeded his brother Alan as engineer to the Northern Lighthouse Board and the following year achieved construction of Britain's most northerly lighthouse at North Unst (Muckle Flugga) under difficult circumstances. In 1855, again at his own instigation, he became joint engineer to the board with Thomas. In 1855-80 they designed and executed some twenty-eight beacons and thirty lighthouses, two of which, Dhu Heartach in 1872 and Chicken Rock (Isle of Man) in 1875 were works of particular difficulty on isolated rocks. 
The general business of what had become the firm of D. and T. Stevenson continued to flourish under Stevenson's management until his retirement because of ill health in 1884. In addition to marine work the firm was also engaged on public health improvements, including Edinburgh and Leith sewerage in 1863, the city's first such major scheme, which involved the construction of the Water of Leith sewer to an outfall in the Forth. Abroad, the firm's lighthouse practice extended to India, New Zealand, and Japan, including the organization of complete systems for the two latter countries. For Japanese lighthouses in earthquake zones Stevenson devised an 'aseismatic' joint to mitigate the effect of shocks on lighting apparatus, but according to Richard Henry Brunton (1841-1901), the site engineer the firm had recruited, it did not prove effective in practice. Stevenson played a leading part in developing and promoting the use of paraffin in place of the more expensive colza oil in lighthouse illumination from about 1870, which resulted in enhanced light intensity at a lower cost and considerable savings worldwide. 
In 1844 Stevenson was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (vice-president in 1873-7), and also a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers; he contributed papers to both bodies. Stevenson was also a member of the Societe des Ingenieurs Civils, Paris, and other learned societies. He was twice president of the Royal Scottish Society of Arts, in 1854 and 1869, his latter presidential address being entitled 'Altered relations of British and foreign industries and manufactures'. He was also engineer to the convention of royal burghs of Scotland and to the Highland and Agricultural Society. Other writings by Stevenson included 'Our lighthouses' in 'Good Words' (1864), which was also separately published in book form in the same year, 'Reclamation and Protection of Agricultural Land' (1874), and the definitive life of his father published in 1878. His many interests included the improvement of agricultural implements, better endowment of professorial chairs of the University of Edinburgh, art and art criticism, and the formation of a valuable collection of etchings and engravings. 
Stevenson was a man of sound judgement, upright, kind, open, and easily accessible. He died at Anchor Villa, West Links, North Berwick, of apoplexy on 17 July 1886 and was buried at Dean cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 26429


Stevenson, George (1799-1856), newspaper editor and proprietor and horticulturalist in Australia, was born at Berwick upon Tweed, Northumberland, on 13 April 1799. After the death of his father, a gentleman farmer, in 1811, he went to sea with an uncle who traded in the East Indies, but dissatisfied with this life he began the study of medicine in Scotland. However, in 1820 he left Scotland for Canada, where he worked for some years on his brother's ranch. On the death of his brother he travelled in Central America and the West Indies and contributed travel articles to the London whig newspaper the 'Globe and Traveller'. 
Stevenson returned to England in 1830 and collaborated with Sir William Lytton Earle Bulwer (Lord Dalling) on his book 'France, Social, Literary, Political' (1834). He obtained employment on the 'Globe and Traveller' and became joint editor in 1835. 
In 1836 Stevenson accepted the position of private secretary to Captain John Hindmarsh, the first governor of South Australia. On 13 May of that year, at St George's, Hanover Square, London, he married Margaret Hutton, 'nee' Gorton, the daughter of John Gorton of Chester, former assistant editor of the 'Globe'. Before leaving London he entered into partnership with a master printer, Robert Thomas, to produce the first South Australian newspaper, the 'South Australian Gazette and Colonial Register'. A preliminary issue was published in London on 18 June 1836, and the South Australian publication began on 3 June 1837. 
Stevenson travelled to the new colony with Hindmarsh on the 'Buffalo'. He was responsible for the drafting and reading of the proclamation of the colony on 28 December 1836. He was appointed private secretary, clerk of the court, justice of the peace, registrar of shipping, agent for Lloyds, postmaster and customs officer, and interim protector of Aborigines, but continued to edit his newspaper, his outspoken articles often attracting much criticism. In July 1839, following differences with Governor Gawler, he resigned all offices under the crown and was deprived of government printing, but he continued to publish the paper as the 'South Australian Register' until 1842. Financial difficulties then resulted in bankruptcy proceedings. 
For the next three years Stevenson concentrated on horticulture and viticulture, playing a leading part in their development in South Australia. He was most successful at shows and exhibitions. He propagated and sold large numbers of rooted vines and fruit trees, and his North Adelaide garden and orchard were regarded among the best in the colony. 
Stevenson returned to journalism in 1845 with a new 'South Australian Gazette and Colonial Register', but changed its name in 1847 to the 'South Australian Gazette and Mining Journal'. In 1852 the paper ceased publication when most of his skilled staff left for the Victorian goldfields. In the same year he was appointed special coroner. He was one of a syndicate of six who were owners of the 'Adelaide Times' for seven months from November 1853, and was the chief leader writer. 
Stevenson was described by his granddaughter Violet de Mole as 'a tall powerfully-built Scot, six feet three in height, with keen brown eyes in a leonine head, athletic, a great shot and an excellent fisherman... He possessed a powerful and ruthless weapon in his pen which was unrivalled for its brilliant ease and satire. (Adelaide 'Advertiser', 12 Nov 1936)' Stevenson died on 19 October 1856 at Finnis Street, North Adelaide, and was buried at the Adelaide suburb of Kensington on 20 October. He was survived by his wife and three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 26430


Stevenson, George John (1818-1888), hymnologist and historian, was born at Prince's Yard, Chesterfield, on 7 July 1818, the son of John George Stevenson (1792-1866) and his wife, Jane Aldred, both Methodists. Educated at Duttoris grammar school, Chesterfield, he became an active Methodist in 1831, while an apprentice printer. Over the next dozen years, he practised his trade in Sheffield, London, and, from 1841, in Great Yarmouth, where he managed a printing business, established a lending library in connection with the local Methodist Sunday school, and occasionally preached. 
In 1844 Stevenson entered Kay Shuttleworth's Battersea Training College (recently taken over by the National Society), and qualified as a teacher. His first post was as general superintendent of the Philanthropic Institute's reformatory school in St George's Fields, Southwark. In 1848 the society reconstituted its school as a Farm School for the Reformation of Criminal Boys in Redhill, and Stevenson became headmaster of the endowed parochial school at Lambeth Green. On 17 July 1850 he married Sarah ('b'. 1822/3), the daughter of the Revd Thomas Thompson, whom he had met in Great Yarmouth; they had at least nine children. During this period he lectured to the Church Schoolmasters' Association and argued in a publication of 1853 that the origin of alphabetical characters was divine not human. In 1854 he helped to launch 'The School and the Teacher', a periodical for elementary schoolteachers, which advertised that it was conducted by church schoolmasters. A year later he gave up teaching for bookselling and publishing in Paternoster Row, where he published periodicals, including the 'Pupil Teacher' (begun 1857), and a new series of the 'English Journal of Education' (begun 1861), as well as cheap school books, sermons, pamphlets, and suitable Sunday reading. 
From 1861 to 1867 Stevenson was editor and proprietor of 'Wesleyan Times', in which appeared his series of articles on hymnbooks and hymn writers. These articles were heavily used by other hymnologists such as Josiah Miller, and were the basis of Stevenson's 'The Methodist Hymnbook and its Associations' (1870) and 'The Methodist Hymn Book, Illustrated with Biography, History, Incident, and Anecdote' (1883). John Julian judged the latter an 'indispensable' resource (Julian, 1093-4). 
In addition to hymnology, Stevenson chronicled for nearly thirty years the career of the preacher Charles Spurgeon, beginning with 'A Sketch of the Life of C. H. Spurgeon' (1857), and culminating in 'Pastor C. H. Spurgeon: his Life and Work to his Fiftieth Birthday' (1885). His concern for Methodist history led him to write -- among other books -- 'City Road Chapel, London, and its Associations' (1872), 'Memorials of the Wesley Family' (1876), and 'Methodist Worthies' (1884) and to accumulate a considerable collection of Wesley memorabilia. Before 1873, when he gave up publishing to concentrate on his literary pursuits, he wrote before eight in the morning and after seven at night, on top of his family and business responsibilities. In this work he relied heavily, however, on the day-labour in the British Museum of his daughter May (Mary Anne), prompting one observer to draw a parallel with Milton and his daughters. By 1886, moreover, he had lost one eye, and appeared a 'doubtful character' (McKenny, 25), at least to the maidservant who left him standing in the hall when he came to call on the then-minister at City Road Chapel a few months after May's death. Three of his children died in young adulthood and were commemorated in his 'Memorial Sketch of May Stevenson' (1886). This book gives a clear picture of the importance of the Methodist connection in east London where the family lived. Stevenson continued his active involvement in Methodist circles, editing, for example, a short-lived 'Union Review and Chronicle of Wesleyan Methodist Literary and Mutual Improvement Associations' (1882), and reading papers at one of the nearly fifty such associations in London. Despite failing health, he met his society class only three weeks before his death at his home, 12 Gore Road, South Hackney, on 16 August 1888. He was buried on the 21st in Abney Park cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26431


Stevenson, John (b. 1778, d. in or after 1844), surgeon, son of Joseph and Deborah Stevenson, was baptized at Kegworth, Leicestershire, on 13 March 1778. He was educated privately, and was apprenticed to his father, a surgeon, at the age of sixteen. Three years later he was sent to the united hospitals of St Thomas's and Guy's, London, where he stayed until 1800. It is probable that his medical studies were much interrupted by ill health, for he was not admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons until 20 November 1807. On account of his health he determined to devote himself to ophthalmic surgery. After studying for some time under John Cunningham Saunders, the oculist, he settled in or near Nottingham. The death of Saunders in 1810 led Stevenson to return to London, where he commenced to practise. 
In 1813 Stevenson was oculist and aurist to the princess of Wales, and to Leopold, duke of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld; he was then living in Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury. He delivered the anniversary oration at the Medical Society of London in March 1817, taking as his subject the treatment of gutta serena. He founded in 1830, at 13 Little Portland Street, Cavendish Square, the Royal Infirmary for Cataract, and he was soon afterwards appointed oculist and aurist to William IV. Stevenson operated on cases of cataract at an earlier period than was thought advisable by other surgeons, and his infirmary was founded with the express design of carrying out his mode of treatment. He published several books on this subject: the first, 'On the Morbid Sensibility of the Eye, Commonly Called Weakness of Sight' (1810), was criticized for plagiarism ('Medical and Physical Journal', 77-80), but went through several editions up to 1841. Likewise, his 'Deafness, its Causes, Prevention and Cure' (1828) 'offered nothing new' (Politzer, 277). Stevenson's 'Practical Treatise on Cataract' (1813), however, had reached its seventh edition by 1843. 
In 1841 Stevenson became oculist and aurist to Leopold I, king of the Belgians. Until mid-1844 he was living at 38 Conduit Street, London, and at Norwood Park, Middlesex. All trace of him is lost after this year. 


@@@@@


doc= 26432


Stevenson, Sir John Andrew (1761-1833), composer, was born at Dublin in November 1761, the second of the two sons of John Stevenson, of Glasgow, a violinist in the state band in Dublin. He was a chorister of Christ Church, Dublin, under Dr Richard Woodward, from 1771 to 1775, and a member of St Patrick's Cathedral choir from 1775 to 1780. He became a vicar-choral in St Patrick's in 1783, and in Christ Church in 1800. He was created MusD of Trinity College, Dublin, in 1791, and was knighted in 1803. In 1814 he was appointed the first organist and music director at the castle chapel. 
As a composer, Stevenson was influenced by Haydn. He is remembered mainly for 'A Selection of Irish Melodies', first published in 1808, arrangements of Irish airs with words by Thomas Moore, which was reprinted many times during the nineteenth century. He composed several operas, including 'The Contract', a comic opera written with Philip Cogan and first performed in 1782, 'Love in a Blaze' (1799), and 'The Bedouins' (1801). His only important church music was a selection of services and anthems published in two volumes in 1825. An oratorio, 'The Thanksgiving', was performed in 1831 at the Dublin festival, and twenty-six 'Sacred Melodies' for the psalms were issued in 1822. He also wrote 173 glees and catches for the Hibernian Catch Club. 
Affable and sociable, Stevenson dressed in the height of fashion and moved in the best circles. He married Anne, the widow of William Singleton and the daughter of a Mr Morton of Rahoboth, near Dublin, who worked in the custom house. She died in 1802. The couple had two sons and two daughters. Stevenson died on 14 September 1833 at Headfort House, Kells, co. Meath, the seat of Thomas Taylour, second marquess of Headfort, whose first wife was Olivia (died 1834), Stevenson's elder daughter. He was buried on 17 September in the Lambart vault of St Mary's Church, Painstown, near Beau Park, co. Meath. 


@@@@@


doc= 26433


Stevenson, John Hall- (1718-1785), poet and satirist, probably born at Skelton Castle, Yorkshire, the eldest of three surviving sons and one daughter born to Joseph Hall ('bap'. 1693, died 1731), a Durham lawyer, and his wife, Catherine Trotter (1694?-1740), sister of Lawson Trotter of Skelton Castle. On 16 June 1735 he enrolled as a fellow-commoner of Jesus College, Cambridge (where he met Laurence Sterne), and on 21 November was admitted to the Inner Temple. Originating in shared literary enthusiasms, notably for Rabelais, his friendship with Sterne, for which he is principally known, lasted until the latter's death. About 1738 Hall left university without taking a degree and made the grand tour. On 7 February 1740 he married an heiress, 'Miss Stevenson, a young Lady of 25,000 l. fortune' ('York Courant', 12 February 1740); 'The Ceremony was perform'd by the Rev. Mr. Sterne of Sutton-Forest' (Cash, 'Early and Middle Years', 79). Anne Stevenson (buried at Skelton, 1 August 1790) was the daughter of Ambrose Stevenson, of Manor House, Lanchester, near Durham, and his wife, Ann Wharton, daughter of Anthony Wharton of Gillingwood, near Richmond, Yorkshire; her father later lost the fortune for which Hall had married. 
Joseph Hall bought Skelton Castle from Lawson Trotter, and his son, who assumed his wife's surname in addition to his own, devoted the partly ruined castle in the north-east corner of Yorkshire's North Riding to baronial hospitality and fashionably Gothic defiance of propriety. An engraving of Crazy Castle, as Hall-Stevenson called it, forms the frontispiece to his 'Works' (1795); to the indignation of a local clergyman who drew and described the old castle (Ord, 253), Hall-Stevenson's grandson, who took the surname Wharton, built the existing neo-Gothic building. During the 1745 Jacobite rising Hall-Stevenson and other local hunters formed the royal hunters, a volunteer troop who successfully engaged the Jacobites, earning thanks from the duke of Cumberland. Hall-Stevenson served on the grand jury for the Lent assizes of 1746 but otherwise took little part in public affairs. He collected an extensive library in which Sterne read freely. Contemporaries praised his good breeding and conversation, but he was also a hypochondriac who apparently once took to his bed during an east wind, rising only after Sterne paid a boy to tie the weathercock in a more favourable position. Freethinking and anti-clerical, he supported Sterne in his last days but avoided his funeral. 
A lurid reputation for licentiousness and blasphemy attends both Hall-Stevenson's verse and the loosely structured club of 'demoniacs' he modelled on Francis Dashwood's Franciscans. This circle of avid hunters and shooters delighted in bawdy wit. Yet it included some remarkably capable eccentrics, and as A. H. Cash shrewdly observes, 'The most rakish of them, Zachary Moore, founded a Sunday school at Loftus' (Cash, 'Early and Middle Years', 193). Nicknamed Panty, after Rabelais's Pantagruel, the unconventional clergyman Robert Lascelles was a fellow soldier who became Hall-Stevenson's gamekeeper in 1755 and accepted the living of Gilling West from him in 1777, writing a book, published posthumously, on angling, shooting, and coursing. Skelton Castle attracted Sterne, another unconventional clergyman, and Andrew Irvine, schoolmaster of Kirkleatham School. Hall-Stevenson celebrated William Chambers, not yet famous, as 'Don Pringello', the architect so impressed by Crazy Castle that he added only a few ornaments (Hartley, 'Don Pringello'). Tobias Smollett praised William Hewett as an original in 'Humphry Clinker'. Active soldiers included Colonel John Hale, Hall-Stevenson's brothers Thomas and George Lawson Hall ('Letters of Laurence Sterne', 141, n. 6; Cash, 'Early and Middle Years', 190, n. 1), and perhaps Charles 'Savage' Lee, later George Washington's second in command. 
Hall-Stevenson adopted fashionable verse forms as early as 'Hymn to Miss Lawrence in the Pump-Room at Bath' (1755) but caught the public eye by exploiting the notoriety of Sterne, John Wilkes (with whom he was also acquainted), and Charles Churchill. Typically grouping fables or tales in a loose frame, he imitated not only La Fontaine, whose example justified his irregular verse, but also Rabelais, Boccaccio, and Chaucer. Following 'Tristram Shandy''s immediate success, 'Antony Shandy' welcomed Cousin Tristram (Sterne) to London in 'Two lyric epistles: one to my cousin Shandy on his coming to town; and the other to the grown gentlewomen, the misses of ****' (1760). (Hereafter, Sterne frequently addressed his 'cousin' Antony, and Hall-Stevenson wrote 'Crazy Tales' as 'A. S.'.) More carnal than sentimental, 'A sentimental dialogue between two souls in the palpable bodies of an English lady of quality and an Irish gentleman' (1768) followed Sterne's 'Sentimental Journey', but Hall-Stevenson did not write the 1769 sequel sometimes attributed to him (see Hartley, 'Yorick's sentimental journey'). 'Crazy Tales' (1762) assigns Chaucerian tales to fictionalized members of Hall-Stevenson's circle, although many of them cannot be attributed accurately; editions appeared in 1764, 1769, 1825 (attributed to 'the late Richard Brinsley Sheridan'), and 1894 (for private subscribers). The prologue evokes Crazy Castle itself, while the opening of 'My cousin's tale of a cock and a bull' commemorates Sterne and Hall-Stevenson's days learning to 'wrangle' beneath the ancient walnut tree in the quadrangle of Jesus College. Hall-Stevenson compares the tree's windings with both a corkscrew and 'Tristram Shandy''s narrative obliquity, characteristically blending conviviality with wit. Even in a satiric collection, 'Makarony Fables: with the New Fable of the Bees: in Two Cantos', Hall-Stevenson includes 'The Black-Bird', a poem appropriating Sterne for his own anti-clerical position. 
Although some reviewers found them obscure, Hall-Stevenson's eight verse tales in 'Fables for Grown Gentlemen, or, A Fable for Every Day in the Week' (1761; 2nd edn, 1762; part 2, 1770) were well received. 'The River with a Petition' expresses the virulent anti-Scottish feeling that Lord Bute's ministry provoked in England. Having defended himself in 'A Nosegay and a Simile for the Reviewers, a Lyric Epistle' (1760), Hall-Stevenson defied offended reviewers of 'Fables' in 'Two Lyric Epistles, or, Margery the Cook-Maid to the Critical Reviewers' (1762). In an appendix to 'A pastoral cordial, or, An anodyne sermon, preached before their graces N[ewcastle] and D[evonshire] by an independent teacher of truth' (1763), he attacked 'judging Caledonian Pedlars' generally and Smollett particularly (Hall-Stevenson, 1.134-7). This overt political satire was followed by 'A Pastoral Puke: a Second Sermon Preached Before the People Called Whigs' (1764). 'Lyric consolations, with the speech of Alderman W[ilkes] and delivered in a dream at king's bench prison the evening of his inauguration' (1769) imitated Horace's odes to satirize contemporary politics. A prose work, 'An essay upon the king's friends, with an account of some discoveries made in Italy... to Dr. S[amuel] J[ohnson]' (1776), comments on fictitious Virgilian variants to satirize Johnson's 'Taxation No Tyranny'. 'Fables for Grown Gentlemen', the most popular of this group, was reprinted with 'Makarony Fables' and other works (1772), with 'Crazy Tales' (1780), and in two miscellanies, 'The Poetical Calendar' (12 vols., 1763) and 'The New Foundling Hospital for Wit' (4 vols., 1786). 
Hall-Stevenson died on 25 March 1785 and was buried at Skelton. More sophomoric than salacious, his irreverent and often sexual verse sometimes captures the ribald masculine wit of Crazy Castle, intermittently suggesting the marital unhappiness he and Sterne had in common. Despite a carefully prepared posthumous collection of his works (3 vols., 1795), he is best remembered as the hospitable friend on whom Sterne modelled his Eugenius. 


@@@@@


doc= 26434


Stevenson, Joseph (1806-1895), historian, archivist, and Church of England clergyman, was born on 27 November 1806 at Berwick upon Tweed, the eldest son of Robert Stevenson, surgeon, and his wife, Elizabeth Wilson. He had two sisters. After his first schooling at Witton-le-Wear he entered the grammar school attached to Durham Cathedral. The life of a scholar was not inevitable: he had occasionally accompanied an uncle on smuggling expeditions across the border. At Durham he was usually near the bottom of his class and at one time kept a loaded pistol among his effects which went off in the hands of a servant with dramatic although not grave consequences. At all events, Stevenson proceeded to Glasgow University although apparently without taking a degree. His studies were mainly in Latin and Greek, but on his own admission he made little progress. In 1829 he returned to Berwick to pursue a vocation with the Church of Scotland. He also began his literary and antiquarian pursuits in earnest and from 1831 'his pen was never idle' ('DNB'). His first work was in connection with a new edition of Chaucer; it did not proceed far but in 1832 he published a glossary of Old English. Thanks to another uncle he made a first visit to London about 1821, returning there permanently about 1831 on a coal smack. By midsummer he obtained a good post in the British Museum, which had just acquired the Arundel collection and needed competent assistants to sort and classify. His work having been accepted, he returned to Glasgow to claim a bride, Mary Ann, daughter of John Craig of Mount Florida, whom he married on 19 September 1831. A son, Robert, was born in August 1832; two daughters came later. From this time Stevenson established contact with many notable British historians including Patrick Fraser Tytler, and joined various learned societies. In 1834 he was appointed a subcommissioner of the public records and began work on a proposed new edition of Thomas Rymer's 'Foedera'. He might have risen notably higher and quickly in his chosen profession had not another vocation drawn him even more strongly. While in London, although with no dramatic suddenness, he transferred his allegiance from the kirk to the Church of England, in which Robert and the two daughters were baptized. 
The death of Robert on 5 November 1839 proved traumatic. Stevenson resigned from the record commission and returned to Durham to enter the university and study theology. After receiving the licentiate in 1841, he was ordained for the Anglican ministry, and was also appointed librarian and keeper of records to the dean and chapter. He spent the next seven years cataloguing the charters and deeds in the treasury. In consequence, the university gave him an honorary MA and the church an appointment in 1847 to St Giles, Durham, as a curate. During this period he developed his early interests in St Cuthbert and other early saints. But he was subjected to more influences than one, including George Townsend, a redoubtable protestant, his vicar, who went to Rome to convert the pope, although with no notable success. Meanwhile, Stevenson needed to increase his income to maintain a growing family. He was urged to go no further than Durham, but 'dearly as he loved Durham, he was repelled by the rich pluralists who then occupied the posts of dignity in the cathedral' (Pollen, 339). His idealism was satisfied by the parish of Leighton Buzzard, to which he was inducted in January 1849. By contrast with his comfortable Durham living, here he had to manage on $120 per annum, and to live in a vicarage so decayed as to be uninhabitable. He stayed until 1862, somehow finding the money to fund a curate, rebuild the vicarage, and restore the church after it was struck by lightning. 
Stevenson retained throughout his life a reputation as a warm and welcoming individual with none of the dryness or coldness of some scholars. This was sufficiently proved when after the lightning disaster more than one dissenting minister offered him the use of his chapel until the church was repaired. Their kind offers were accepted with alacrity. He took a great interest in his parish, opening a night school, in which he himself taught. All his life he had a special affection for children. He also helped the poor, in spite of his meagre resources. These were augmented by Stevenson's continuing contact with the world of scholarship. Even after his resignation as subcommissioner for the records, he went on to edit some twenty volumes for the Bannatyne, Roxburghe, Maitland, Surtees, and other learned societies. Earlier plans for publishing or calendaring the national records did not come to much, but in 1856 his representations to government induced them to begin the celebrated 'Rolls Series'. Appointed one of the editors, he visited Paris, Rheims, Chartres, Rouen, and Lille to further his researches. 
In 1862 Stevenson resigned his living, but this was not simply to devote himself more completely to scholarship. His progress over many years through the minefield of Reformation history led him to conclude that the Roman Catholic church was where he belonged. On 24 June 1863 he was received at Farm Street Church, London, by Father Peter Gallwey SJ. His wife was received in 1865 by the Dominican Fathers at Haverstock Hill. So dim was the view taken of this step by his peers in the Public Record Office that even Sir Thomas Duffus Hardy, a friend of many years, was alienated for a time, and Stevenson felt obliged to resign as a calendarer although he continued as an editor of the 'Rolls Series'. He continued also to be frequently employed by the Historical Manuscripts Commission. He moved to Selly Park, Birmingham, where he took up residence with the priest, while his wife boarded with the Sisters of Charity. When she died on 11 July 1869, Stevenson moved to neighbouring Oscott to study for the priesthood, which he entered in 1872. 
In this year, W. E. Gladstone awarded Stevenson a pension for services rendered to scholarship while he received a commission from the government to search in the Vatican archives for material of interest to English-speaking historians; the task occupied him some four years, and involved scenes reminiscent of Italian opera set in Piedmont as well as Rome before it could be taken up. 
Stevenson returned in 1877, with a further desire to join a religious order. His first idea was to join the Franciscans but, not unreasonably, they baulked at admitting a man over seventy to the severe life of a novice. He then approached the Jesuits but had to endure a double rebuff before -- thanks to the influence of a fellow scholar, John Morris SJ -- he was admitted to the noviciate at Manresa House, Roehampton, on 14 September 1877. Although he was obliged at first to follow the physically demanding routine of his young companions, the novice-master, George Porter, an understanding man, soon put Stevenson on to tasks better suited to his age and experience. When asked why so old a man was allowed to join the society at all, Porter 'chuckled in his characteristic way and answered, 'Why? Because we hope to get fifteen years' work out of him!' In fact the Society got seventeen' (Pollen, 506). 
After a brief stay at Oxford in 1878, Stevenson spent the rest of his life mainly at 31 Farm Street, Mayfair, the 'House of Writers'. On 25 March 1882, by dispensation, he was professed of three vows. Nor were his Scottish connections severed. 'His lithe, spare, alert, and slightly stooping figure, his thin and sharp but genial face, and his keen, bright eye, were as well known in the Edinburgh Register House as in Fetter Lane' ('Letters and Notices', 23, 1895, 120). On 22 November 1893 he was granted the honorary degree of doctor of laws by the University of St Andrews. Active almost to the last, in 1892 he joined, if he did not lead, a demanding pilgrimage to Lindisfarne for 7 September, the day of St Cuthbert's translation. He underwent a very severe illness in the summer of 1893, but in 1894 prepared for publication French ambassadorial dispatches of Queen Elizabeth's time, held in the Bodleian Library. Stevenson was still engaged on this when he died at Farm Street on 8 February 1895 after complications following a paralytic stroke. The date was most significant for one with his interest in the life and cause of Mary Stuart. He was buried in the cemetery of St Thomas's Church, Fulham. His main contribution to British scholarship lay in the transcription of documents dealing with medieval and early modern English and Scottish history, but he also published some forty articles in 'The Month' and a number of popular lectures delivered north and south of the border. 


@@@@@


doc= 26435


Stevenson, Matthew (d. 1684), poet, was probably of Yorkshire origin, but for most of his life he lived in Norfolk. He was occasionally seen in London, a member of a circle of cavalier wits who haunted the lawcourts in the years following the Restoration. The coterie was dominated by such faint luminaries as Henry Bold, Valentine Oldys, Alexander Brome, and Edward Baynard. Stevenson's first publication was 'Occasion's Offspring, or, Poems upon Severall Occasions' (1654), dedicated to his friend and cousin Benjamin Cook. The work is preceded by a portrait of the author by R. Gaywood. His next work was a compendium of oral tradition and folklore entitled 'The twelve moneths, or, A pleasant and profitable discourse of every action, whether of labour or recreation, proper to each particular moneth' (1661). The occupations of each month are illustrated by a woodcut. Also in 1661 he published 'Bellum presbyteriale, or, As much said for the presbyter as may be, together with their covenants catastrophe, held forth in an heroick poem'. The catastrophe in question is the burning of the covenant by the common hangman on 22 May 1661 and the consequent confusion of the Presbyterians, at which the author rejoices. A year later he published 'Florus Britannicus, or, An exact epitome of the history of England from William the Conqueror to the twelfth year of the reign of his sacred majesty Charls the Second now flourishing' (1662), which is very rare in a perfect condition. The dedicatory epistle to his cousin Mrs Grace Killingbeck of Baroughby Grange, near Wetherby in Yorkshire, was written from his study in Fleet Street on 12 March 1661. He 'had the happinesse for some years, not long since, (through your more than generous goodnesse) to call your house, My Home' (sig. A2). The letterpress, amounting to a page and a half for each monarch, was evidently written to accompany the plates, which are by Renold Elstracke. In 1665 he published his 'Poems', inscribed to Edward Somerset, marquess of Worcester, on whose 'Inimitable, Water-Commanding Engine' there is an elaborate panegyric (1-3). Stevenson's last volume of verse was 'Norfolk drollery, or, A compleat collection of the newest songs, jovial poems, and catches, &c.' (1673), reissued as 'Poems' in 1673 and 'The Wits' in 1685. Many of these poems had been composed under the roof of Mary Hunt, of Sharington Hall to whom the book is jointly dedicated with Thomas Brown of Elsing Hall. A number of the verses had appeared before and, although the author celebrates the East Anglian labourer's practice of demanding largess from field-farers, there is little in the volume that is distinctive of Norfolk. Stevenson was buried at St Mary-in-the-Marsh, Norwich, on 20 March 1684. 


@@@@@


doc= 26436


Stevenson, Robert (1772-1850), civil engineer, was born in Glasgow on 8 June 1772, the only child of Alan Stevenson (1752-1774), a West India merchant, and his wife, Jean Lillie (1751-1820). Two years later his father died of fever in St Kitts, leaving his family in straitened circumstances, and Stevenson was educated at a charity school in Edinburgh. In 1786 he was apprenticed to an Edinburgh gunsmith and was himself described as a gunsmith about 1791. At about that time he began work for Thomas Smith (bap. 1752, d. 1815), an Edinburgh tinsmith, lampmaker, and merchant who, following his invention of a light reflector, had been appointed engineer to the newly formed Northern Lighthouse Board in 1787. Smith married Stevenson's mother in 1792 and became his father-in-law when Stevenson married his daughter Jane ('c'.1779-1846) on 3 June 1799. 
During the winters of 1792-4 Stevenson attended Professor John Anderson's classes in natural philosophy at Glasgow University and was directed by him towards an engineering career. From 1796 until 1802 he was apprenticed to Smith, specializing in lighthouse work, and gained experience on reflector installation, building maintenance, and construction of the Pentland Skerries and Little Cumbrae lighthouses. From 1797 Stevenson exercised considerable autonomy in the firm's lighthouse work including the construction of Inchkeith and Start Point lighthouses. By 1802 he had been taken into partnership by Smith, whom he succeeded as engineer to the board in 1808. During the winters of 1800-04 Stevenson continued to develop an engineering career by attending classes at Edinburgh University in mathematics, natural philosophy, chemistry, and natural history. During this period he was also trying to gain approval for the Bell Rock lighthouse project 11 miles off Arbroath, which was to prove his most important engineering achievement. 
In 1799, following a storm in which many ships were wrecked, Stevenson had proposed erecting on the Bell Rock a beacon-style lighthouse on cast-iron pillars but in 1800, after seeing that the rock was submerged by about 12 feet at each high tide, and considering the possibility of damage by ships, he abandoned this idea in favour of a more substantial lighthouse to be made of stone. As part of the design and promotional process for the project both designs were accurately modelled, a practice which Stevenson often employed subsequently on important work. Because of the hazardous and expensive nature of the project it was only after the board had obtained the support of the eminent engineer John Rennie in 1805 that the necessary act of parliament was passed in 1806. Rennie was appointed chief engineer and with Stevenson acting in effect as resident engineer the lighthouse was constructed in 1807-11. The great achievement of the work was in the exceptional difficulty of its execution, which was carried out by Stevenson and his dedicated workmen, rather than in its design which at Rennie's insistence was more closely modelled on Smeaton's Eddystone lighthouse than Stevenson's proposal, particularly in respect of its external shape. Stevenson also had been strongly influenced by the Eddystone design and improved on it in detail with cantilevered and bonded instead of flat-arched floors to compartments, an innovation widely adopted in subsequent rock lighthouses. Rennie recognized the importance of Stevenson's role when writing to him in 1807 that the work 'will if successful, immortalise you in the annals of fame' (Stevenson, 'Biographical Sketch', 10). Innovations introduced under Stevenson's direction included the temporary beacon barrack, elevated cast-iron railways across the rock, and the ingenious movable jib and iron balance cranes, which records indicate were invented by foreman millwright Francis Watt who also designed the barrack as built. The success of the work enabled Stevenson, from 1811, to establish within a decade one of Scotland's leading indigenous civil engineering practices, which, with his descendants, practised engineering continuously until 1952. His classic 'Account of the Bell Rock Light-House' was published in an edition of 300 copies in 1824 and he can be considered to have attained the first rank of his profession shortly thereafter. The lighthouse was still in service in 2003, but unmanned. 
As engineer and chief executive to the Northern Lighthouse Board in 1808-43 Stevenson can be said to have inaugurated the modern lighthouse service in Scotland. He designed and constructed at least eighteen lighthouses including Toward Point (1812), Isle of May (1816), Corsewall (1817), Point of Ayre and Calf of Man (1818), Sumburgh Head (1821), Rhinns of Islay (1825), Buchan Ness (1827), Cape Wrath (1828), Tarbat Ness and Mull of Galloway (1830), Dunnet Head (1831), Douglas Head (1832), and Girdle Ness, Barra Head, and Lismore in 1833. On lighthouse illumination Stevenson developed Smith's work and brought the catoptric system, using silvered copper parabolic reflectors and Argand lamps, to a high degree of perfection. With the increasing number of lights it became necessary to distinguish between them, and to this end he devised intermittent and flashing lights. 
Marine engineering represented the largest element of Stevenson's general practice. He proposed improvements at numerous harbours including Dundee, Peterhead, Stonehaven, Sunderland, Fraserburgh, and Granton, and navigation schemes for the Forth, Tay, Severn, Mersey, Dee, Ribble, Wear, Tees, and Erne. Many of these proposals were implemented. He also reported on ferry crossings of the Forth, Tay, Dornoch and Pentland firths, and the Severn, and on fisheries. Stevenson's innovative marine work included the design and construction in 1821 of a sea wall with a cycloidal-curve vertical profile which dissipated wave energy more effectively than common walls, and experiments on the destruction of timber by the 'Limnoria terebrans' which influenced the universal adoption of greenheart for marine timberwork. His discovery at Aberdeen in 1812 that salt water from the ocean flowed up river in a distinct layer from the fresh water which overflowed it, led to his invention of the 'hydrophore' or water sampler for procuring samples, to further experiments, and to his Royal Society of Edinburgh paper on vertical differences of salinity in water in 1817. His observations upon the floor of the North Sea, delivered to the Wernerian Society, were published in 1817 and 1820. Stevenson was joined in partnership of the firm by his sons Alan Stevenson, about 1832, and David Stevenson, in 1838. Thomas Stevenson became a partner in 1846 on his father's retirement. 
From 1811 to 1827 Stevenson was extensively engaged on canal, road, and railway projects, often adopting a promotional role. Before 1818 he made proposals for canals on one level between Edinburgh and Glasgow and also in the Vale of Strathmore. In 1828 he worked with Telford and Nimmo on a proposal for a new harbour at Wallasey and a ship canal across the Wirral to the Mersey. None of these schemes was executed but he was more successful with road making and in his advocacy of stone tracks in city roads. By 1818 Stevenson was convinced of the superiority of railways over small canals for inland communication and proposed the Edinburgh Railway to connect with the Midlothian coalfield. In 1819 he advised on the line for the Stockton and Darlington Railway. By 1820 he was the leading authority on horse-traction railways in Scotland and he edited with notes the numerous 'Essays on rail-roads' submitted to the Highland Society, which were published in 1824. By 1836 he had worked out various railway schemes to traverse eastern Scotland from the Tweed to Perth and Aberdeen, and from Edinburgh to Glasgow via Bathgate, more or less on the lines of the eventual railway network, but the financial climate was unfavourable and the necessary finance for their implementation was not forthcoming. The only scheme actually constructed was the short Newton colliery Railway to Little France near Edinburgh. Stevenson's design practice was basically the same as he had adopted for canals: to plan his railways as near level as practicable, using stationary steam-engine powered inclined planes to overcome differences in level. In 1818 he advocated the use of 12 feet long malleable iron edge-rails in preference to the much shorter and weaker cast iron rails then prevalent. Three years later George Stephenson, in acknowledging Stevenson's influence on Birkinshaw's epoch-making development of the malleable iron forerunner of the modern steel rail, wrote to him 'you have been at more trouble than any man I know of in searching into the utility of railways' (Stevenson, 'Biographical Sketch', 27). 
Stevenson was also a notable bridge engineer and highway planner. He designed and constructed many bridges throughout Scotland including, over the Clyde at Glasgow, Hutcheson Bridge (1832-68) and a temporary but notably wide fourteen-span timber bridge (1832-46). The former, which had to be replaced because of Clyde navigation deepening, was considered one of the best specimens with segmental masonry arches. So was Stirling Bridge, which still stands, and for which Stevenson also planned its town approach. This approach is not as imposing as his earlier London and Regent Road approaches into Edinburgh skirting Calton Hill, which included the Regent's Bridge with its open parapets to enable users to enjoy the view. He was also responsible for making these roads which involved blasting, rock excavation, and a massive retaining wall. 
Segmental arches characterize Stevenson's masonry bridges, fine examples of which still exist at Marykirk, built in 1812, and Annan, 1824. He adopted segmental arches in major proposals for cast iron additions to Newcastle upon Tyne, Perth, and Edinburgh North bridges, but none was executed. Stevenson's innovative designs for other kinds of bridges included a laminated timber arch for Dornoch Firth in 1830 and, from 1821, a new type of medium-span suspension bridge without towers which he proposed for numerous locations. This design was novel in that the roadway superstructure rested on the catenarian chains rather than being suspended from them. It was widely publicized in Stevenson's authoritative 'Bridges of suspension' article published in the 'Edinburgh Philosophical Journal' in 1821, which was translated into French, German, and Polish. Numerous small-span bridges on this basic principle were subsequently executed in Britain and on the continent by 1850. Although not implemented as intended, Stevenson's proposals, together with details of his Glasgow and Stirling bridges, were widely disseminated through John Weale's 'The Theory, Practice and Architecture of Bridges' from 1839 and undoubtedly influenced subsequent bridge-building practice nationally. More unusual structures upon which Stevenson advised were the cracked steeple of Montrose church, Arbroath Abbey, and the Melville monument in Edinburgh. 
Stevenson had a lifelong interest in gaining and promoting knowledge and his writings appeared in more than sixty publications. Many were engineering reports, but about one-third achieved much wider circulation through leading periodicals and encyclopaedias. He contributed significant articles to the 'Edinburgh Encyclopaedia' between 1810 and 1824, entitled 'Bell Rock', 'Eddystone rocks', 'Inchkeith', 'Light house', 'Roads and highways', and 'Railway'. To the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' between 1816 and 1819 he contributed 'Bell Rock light house', 'Blasting', 'Caledonian Canal', and 'Dredging'. In 1817 he wrote a lively and informative series of letters to his sixteen-year-old daughter, Jane, while on a tour through the Netherlands; these were of sufficient interest to be published in the 'Scots Magazine' in 1818-21 and separately as 'Journal of a Trip to Holland' in 1848. Many of Stevenson's publications, because of their depth and authority, now represent a valuable historical resource. His membership of learned societies seems to have commenced with that of the Highland Society in 1807. By 1812 he was a member of the council of the Wernerian Natural History Society and in the following year a founder director of the Astronomical Institution of Edinburgh. In 1815 he was elected to fellowships of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the Geological Society, and the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. Six years later he became a founder member of the Scottish Society of Arts and in 1827-8 was elected respectively to membership of the Smeatonian Society of Civil Engineers and the Institution of Civil Engineers. 
Prominent points of Stevenson's character noted by his sons were sagacity, fortitude, perseverance, unselfishness, generosity, a high sense of duty, and extensive and unwearied exertions in forwarding the progress of young professional men. He was a member of the Church of Scotland and an elder, first at St Mary's, Edinburgh, from 1828-43 and afterwards at Greenside parish church. He died at his home, 1 Baxter's Place, Edinburgh, on 12 July 1850 and was buried in the new Calton cemetery. An affectionate portrait is given by his grandson (Stevenson, 'Records'). 


@@@@@


doc= 26437


Stevenson, Robert Alan Mowbray (1847-1900), painter and art critic, the only son of the Scottish engineer Alan Stevenson (1807-1865) and his wife, Margaret Scott Jones (1813-1895), was born at Edinburgh on 25 March 1847; his younger sister, Katharine ['see 'Mattos, Katharine Elizabeth Alan de], later achieved prominence as a writer. From boyhood he was a close friend of his first cousin Robert Louis Stevenson, his junior by three and a half years, who was to acknowledge his youthful debt to the stimulating company and influence of his cousin Bob. Robert Stevenson was educated at Windermere College and at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he took no honours, but graduated BA in 1871 and MA in 1882. He excelled as a gymnast and athlete; his favourite outdoor exercise was canoeing. His bohemian temperament made the family profession unattractive to him; his real interests lay in the fine arts, especially their theory and practice. 
For a year or two after taking his degree Stevenson continued to live with his widowed mother and sisters at Edinburgh, studying painting at the school of art in that city. In 1873 he went to Antwerp to continue his studies at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts before moving to Paris to study with Carolus Duran, and then spending several years at Barbizon and Grez. In 1876, with his cousin, he took the canoe trip on the Sambre, Meuse, and Somme which is the subject of R. L. Stevenson's book 'Inland Voyage' (1878). 
Stevenson's work in landscape painting, exhibited at the Royal Academy and elsewhere, was interesting and competent; but his unassertive personality and lack of commercial instinct would probably have hampered his career as an artist. Theory was his element, and about 1881 -- the year in which he married Harriett Louisa ('b'. 1855/6), daughter of Theodore Purland, on 27 August -- his friends, especially W. E. Henley, began to urge him to turn his critical faculties to practical account. In 1882 he taught a painting class of undergraduates at Cambridge, in connection with the work of Sidney Colvin as Slade professor. Having previously been an occasional contributor, from 1885 to 1889 he wrote regularly for the 'Saturday Review' as a critic of both painting and music. In 1889 he was appointed professor of fine arts at University College, Liverpool, and, after resigning that office in 1893, became for six years the regular art critic of the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. He was also a contributor to the 'Magazine of Art' and to the 'Portfolio Monographs'. 
Stevenson also published a translation of Henri Delaborde's 'La gravure' as 'Engraving' (1886), a short study of Peter Paul Rubens (1898), and his most important work, 'Velasquez' (1895, revised and expanded 1899; new edition by Denys Sutton, 1962). This volume was closely linked, both in Stevenson's terms and the values he stressed, to his long-standing championship of both Whistler and the impressionists: he sought legitimacy and acceptance for these contemporary artists by drawing attention to the parallels that could be made between their techniques and those of Velazquez, 'the great Spanish Impressionist' (R. A. M. Stevenson, 'Velasquez', 1895). An essay on Raeburn, accompanying a volume of reproductions from that master's works, was published posthumously (1900). 
Stevenson was the pioneer of a new school of art criticism in England. He attempted, above all, to introduce the British public to the aims and methods of impressionism, valuing these painters' capacity to reproduce 'the broad shimmer of light and the aerial suppleness of a natural envelopement' ('The Royal Academy: IV', 'Saturday Review', 63, 4 June 1887, 800). Although he was scrupulously fair towards other artistic tendencies with which he was less in sympathy, he was critical of the policies of the Royal Academy, believing them to be over-influenced by commercial considerations and to favour those artists who fed public taste with 'nice little fables with a very obvious moral' ('The Picture Galleries: III', 'Saturday Review', 55, 19 May 1883, 632). He attacked those artists who practised 'the realism of story telling and illustrative incident, instead of the realism of effect' ('Saturday Review', 65, 19 May 1888, 595). 
Stevenson's prose was lucid and vivid. Yet he had learned to write with difficulty, and his instinctive genius was for talk. In conversation his insight, imagination, humour, and gift of expression played freely, and not only on artistic topics. R. A. M. Stevenson aptly figures in the writings of his cousin R. L. S. as the Arethusa of the 'Inland Voyage', and Spring-heel'd Jack of the essay 'Talk and Talkers'. In the autumn of 1899 Stevenson's health broke down, and he died of heart disease in his house at 41 Oxford Road, Chiswick, on 18 April 1900. 


@@@@@


doc= 26438


Stevenson, Robert Louis (1850-1894), writer, was born at 8 Howard Place, Edinburgh, on 13 November 1850, the only son of Thomas Stevenson (1818-1887), civil engineer, and his wife, Margaret Isabella Balfour (1829-1897). He was given the names Robert Lewis Balfour but changed the spelling (although not the pronunciation) of the second to Louis when he was about eighteen, and dropped the third in 1873; to his family and close friends he was always known as Louis. Thomas Stevenson was the youngest surviving son of Robert Stevenson, builder of the Bell Rock lighthouse; his wife was the youngest daughter of the Revd Lewis Balfour (1777-1860), Church of Scotland minister at Colinton, on the outskirts of Edinburgh, grandson of James Balfour (1705-1795), professor of moral philosophy at Edinburgh University. In 1853 the family moved to 1 Inverleith Terrace, and in 1857 to 17 Heriot Row. 
Stevenson liked to recall his childhood as a golden age; in reality it was also, as he later admitted, 'full of fever, nightmare, insomnia, painful days and interminable nights' ('Letters', 5.97). Until he was about eleven the winter months were dominated by illness: bronchitis, pneumonia, and feverish colds. The devoted care of his nurse, Alison Cunningham (Cummy), during his sleepless nights is celebrated by the dedication to her of 'A Child's Garden of Verses' (1885). She was narrower in her religious views than his parents and it was to her bigotry that he owed the nightmares and 'high-strung religious ecstasies and terrors', including 'an extreme terror of Hell' (ibid., 1.84), that disfigured his early years. In his recollections of his childhood all these morbid fears disappeared in his memories of the delights of convalescence at his maternal grandfather's manse at Colinton. His later writings, particularly 'A Child's Garden of Verses' and his essay 'Child's play', show that he had a highly imaginative love of games. Because of his ill health many of these were solitary pleasures, but when he was well there was no shortage of young cousins as playmates. 
Though he delighted in having stories read to him Stevenson did not learn to read for himself until he was eight. In September 1857 he went to Mr Henderson's school in India Street, Edinburgh, but because of poor health stayed only a few weeks and did not return until October 1859. During his many absences he was taught by private tutors. In October 1861 he went to Edinburgh Academy and stayed there (with interruptions) for about fifteen months. In the autumn of 1863 he spent one term at an English boarding-school at Spring Grove, Isleworth, Middlesex. In October 1864, following considerable improvement in his health, he was sent to Robert Thomson's private school in Frederick Street, Edinburgh; he continued there until he went to university. 
Largely because of his mother's state of health (she had a weak chest) Stevenson's summers were spent at Scottish holiday places such as Bridge of Allan, North Berwick (commemorated in the essay 'The lantern bearers'), and Peebles, and there were two visits to Torquay. In 1862 the Stevensons were at Homburg. The first five months of 1863 were passed in Nice and Menton, followed by an extensive tour of Italy and Germany; there was another visit to Menton in 1864. From 1867 to 1880 Thomas Stevenson leased Swanston Cottage, at the foot of the Pentland Hills, and this became a much-loved country home. The scenery and its associations figure in a number of Stevenson's essays, including 'Pastoral', and the cottage became the home of the heroine of 'St Ives'. 
Stevenson became a student at Edinburgh University from November 1867 and began half-heartedly to prepare himself for the engineering profession. He gained practical experience in 1868 by visiting the harbour works being undertaken by the family firm at Anstruther and Wick, and the following year he accompanied his father on his official tour of the lighthouses in the Orkney and Shetland islands. In 1870 he spent three weeks on the islet of Earraid, off the isle of Mull, the base for the building of the Dhu Heartach lighthouse. It later became the setting for 'The Merry Men' and for David Balfour's misadventures in 'Kidnapped'. He showed some aptitude for engineering in his paper 'On a new form of intermittent light for lighthouses', which was read before the Royal Scottish Society of Arts and awarded a silver medal. Stevenson loved the outdoor and seafaring aspects of the profession but hated the drudgery of office work. In April 1871 he finally told his father that he had no interest in engineering and cared for nothing but literature. Thomas Stevenson agreed that as a compromise his son should read law and be called to the bar. 
Even before he could write Stevenson was dictating stories to his mother and his nurse. When he was six he won a prize, given by an uncle, for his 'History of Moses' (dictated to his mother), and a number of manuscript magazines and other childish efforts survive. As a child he was introduced by his nurse to writings by and about the covenanters, and their influence remained with him all his life. His first published work was a historical essay (derived from a romance on the same subject), 'The Pentland Rising: a Page of History, 1666'. It was published anonymously in 1866, at his father's expense. 
All through his university years, when he was looked upon as an idler neglecting his formal education, Stevenson was in fact reading widely and conscientiously learning how to write by composing descriptions of what he saw and, above all, by setting himself, as he described in his essay 'A college magazine', to imitate the style of an author whom he admired. He thus 'played the sedulous ape', as he put it, to a wide range of authors. Only one of these efforts, a verse drama, 'Monmouth: a Tragedy' (1868), in the style of Swinburne, has survived (privately printed, 1928). Six essays appeared in the short-lived 'Edinburgh University Magazine' (1871), of which Stevenson was one of the editors. 
At university Stevenson made some special friends. Chief among them was Charles Baxter, who became a lawyer, Stevenson's financial agent, and his lifelong correspondent. In their letters they created the characters of Thomson and Johnstone, dissolute church elders who wrote to each other in broad Scots. The other friends were James Walter Ferrier and Sir Walter Simpson; all were members of the Speculative Society, the famous university literary and debating society that Stevenson joined in March 1869. Valuable older friends were Fleeming Jenkin, the professor of engineering, and his wife, Anne; Stevenson enjoyed taking part in their annual amateur theatrical productions. His closest friend and confidant from boyhood was his cousin Robert Alan Mowbray (Bob) Stevenson, who returned to Edinburgh from Cambridge in 1871. Together they indulged in elaborate practical jokes and other fooleries, but more importantly Bob played a major part in helping Stevenson to break away from the conventions of polite Edinburgh society. He affected a bohemian exhibitionism of long hair and velvet jacket. Because he was kept short of money by his parents he had his dissipation in the lowest possible surroundings -- in cheap public houses (where Baxter was a regular drinking crony) and brothels, 'the companion of seamen, chimney sweeps and thieves' ('Letters', 1.210). The extent of this was exaggerated by biographers in the 1920s and there is no foundation for the story that he was in love with a prostitute called Claire whom his father forbade him to marry. 
Stevenson's major conflict with his father was over religion. Under the influence of his reading he rejected the harsh doctrines of the Calvinistic Christianity that his father passionately espoused. Stevenson's letters show the bitterness of the arguments between father and son, and his own unhappiness at the distress that he was causing his parents. Although he rejected its dogmas (including a belief in personal immortality) his Presbyterian upbringing deeply influenced him and he was always concerned about the moral principles upon which man should conduct his life. 
A turning point in Stevenson's life came in the summer of 1873 at Cockfield rectory, in Suffolk, the home of Professor Churchill Babington, whose wife was Stevenson's cousin Maud. There he met Professor Sidney Colvin and his friend Mrs Frances Sitwell, a beautiful woman of thirty-four (living apart from her clergyman husband), whom Colvin would much later marry. They recognized his potential and did all they could to help him. Colvin became Stevenson's literary mentor and closest friend. Stevenson fell in love with Mrs Sitwell, and for the next two years poured out long diary-letters to her; they constitute a touching record of his emotional dependence on her and of his slow growth to maturity. Mrs Sitwell began as 'Claire' (the name wrongly applied to the imaginary Edinburgh prostitute) and progressed to being his 'Madonna' -- a goddess and mother figure. 
Suffering from nervous exhaustion and threatened by lung trouble, on medical advice Stevenson spent the winter of 1873-4 at Menton, where Colvin joined him for part of the time and where he had his first meeting with Andrew Lang. Having returned home in April 1874 Stevenson established a 'modus vivendi' with his father over religion and resumed his law studies. On 14 July 1875 he passed his final examination and two days later was called to the Scottish bar. He made a few perfunctory efforts to practise as an advocate but soon gave up the pretence and devoted himself to literary work. While still a student he had made brief visits to London to see Colvin and Mrs Sitwell, and in June 1874 was elected to the Savile Club (a favourite haunt). There he made friends with Edmund Gosse and met leading editors. 
In February 1875 Stevenson was taken by Leslie Stephen to visit W. E. Henley, then a patient in the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary. For the next twelve years, until their quarrel, the two enjoyed a warm, emotional friendship and helped each other in their literary work. 
During this period Stevenson enjoyed life out of doors. In August 1874 he was yachting with Simpson off the west coast of Scotland, and he went on a number of walking tours in England, Scotland, and France. In 1875 he paid his first visit to the artists' colonies in the forest of Fontainebleau frequented by Bob Stevenson, and for the next three years spent much time first at Barbizon and then at Grez. He wrote of his impressions in 'Forest notes' (1876) and 'Fontainebleau' (1884). He was always at ease in France; he spoke the language fluently and loved French literature. 
Through Colvin's influence Stevenson's work had begun to appear in periodicals. His first paid contribution was the essay 'Roads', published in November 1873 under the pseudonym L. S. Stoneven in 'The Portfolio'. It was followed by 'Ordered south', reflecting his experiences in Menton ('Macmillan's Magazine', May 1874), and by his first contribution to the 'Cornhill Magazine', 'Victor Hugo's romances', in August 1874. It was in 'Cornhill', under the initials R. L. S., that he began to write from 1876 the series of essays later collected (with others published elsewhere) in 'Virginibus puerisque' (1881). These early essays, containing light-hearted and slightly cynical observations on life, in which the style is sometimes more important than the matter, became very popular. Alongside them Stevenson was writing more solid and less mannered essays -- the fruit of his wide reading -- on John Knox, Charles d'Orleans, Francois Villon, Walt Whitman (an important early influence), and others, later collected in 'Familiar Studies of Men and Books' (1882). The volume also included an essay on Robert Burns (1879) containing the substance of an earlier article rejected by the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' in 1876 as too critical. 
During these years Stevenson did some book reviews for 'The Academy' and 'Vanity Fair' but the greatest outlet for his journalism came with the founding in 1877 by an Edinburgh friend, Robert Glasgow Brown, of the short-lived magazine 'London'. Stevenson and Henley were closely involved and Henley soon took over as editor. As well as reviews and essays Stevenson contributed to it, anonymously and unacknowledged, his first published short story, 'An Old Song', as a serial in February-March 1877; it was first identified and reprinted in 1982. The first story that he acknowledged was 'A Lodging for the Night', a by-product of his essay on Villon, in 'Temple Bar' (October 1877), and this was followed by 'The Sire de Maletroit's Door' in the same journal and by 'Will o' the Mill' in 'Cornhill', both in January 1878. In 'London' in 1878 he published the series of fantasies of modern life that was later collected (with other stories) as 'New Arabian Nights' (1882), as well as the story 'Providence and the Guitar'. In May 1878 he published his first book, 'An Inland Voyage', describing a canoe journey in Belgium and France made with Simpson in 1876. Its combination of descriptive writing and slightly self-conscious personal observations won favourable reviews. 
At Grez in September 1876, at the end of the canoe journey, Stevenson met and fell in love with the American Frances Matilda (Fanny) Van de Grift Osbourne (1840-1914). She had left her unsatisfactory husband, Samuel Osbourne, and come to Europe from San Francisco to study with her daughter, Isobel 
(Belle; 1858-1953)
, at art schools first in Antwerp and then in Paris. Her young son, (Samuel) Lloyd Osbourne (1868-1947), was also with her and she was recovering from the recent death of her five-year-old son, Hervey. After their brief meeting Stevenson spent the winter in Edinburgh, recording his feelings in the essay 'On falling in love' ('Cornhill Magazine', February 1877). He joined Fanny in Paris in January 1877 and they became lovers later that year; he spent much of the next eighteen months with her and her children in Paris and Grez. In August 1878 Fanny returned to America and Stevenson set off on his famous walking tour, with a donkey, across the Cevennes. From his journal he quarried what was to be his third book, 'Travels with a Donkey' (June 1879), one of the best known of his early works. His second book, 'Edinburgh: Picturesque Notes', appeared in December 1878. It is the classic account of the city whose climate he hated but that always haunted his imagination. In the spring of 1879 he drafted the first four chapters of 'Lay morals', a fragment on ethics (posthumously published), a subject that he referred to as his 'veiled mistress' ('Letters', 5.213). 
In August 1879, in response to a cable from Fanny, Stevenson -- without consulting his parents and in the face of opposition from his friends -- made a reckless journey to California to join her. For the sake of economy and to collect material for a book he sailed from Glasgow to New York by the emigrant ship 'Devonia', describing his experiences in 'The Amateur Emigrant', part 1 (abridged, 1895; unabridged, 1966). He made a nightmare journey by emigrant train across America to San Francisco and then down the coast to Monterey, where Fanny was living with her children; it is described in part 2 (published in 'Across the Plains', 1892). Thomas Stevenson reacted violently to what he called his son's sinful behaviour and tried in vain to get him to return; the two were estranged for several months. In late December, Stevenson moved from Monterey to a cheap lodging-house in San Francisco to be near Fanny, who had already returned to her home in Oakland. He was determined to live within his own resources and worked hard at his writing, half-starving himself to save money. On board ship he had completed his short story 'The Story of a Lie' and in Monterey he finished 'The Pavilion on the Links' -- a powerful, melodramatic tale published in the 'Cornhill Magazine' (September-October 1880). His other work included an abandoned novel, 'A Vendetta in the West', two essays for 'Cornhill' (on Thoreau and Yoshida-Torajiro, a Japanese hero), and a fragment of autobiography, 'Memoirs of Himself'. 
The hardships of the journey and the poverty that he endured wrecked Stevenson's health, and he was ill for much of the time. He broke down completely in March 1880 and came very near death, having the first of the haemorrhages from the lung that plagued the rest of his life. Fanny, who had obtained a divorce from Osbourne in December, took him into her home and nursed him devotedly. By this time his parents had accepted the situation and sent him a cable: 'Count on 250 pounds annually' ('Letters', 3.75). Stevenson and Fanny were married in San Francisco on 19 May 1880. They spent their honeymoon in an abandoned mining camp on the slopes of Mount St Helena, overlooking the Napa valley, experiences later described in 'The Silverado Squatters' (1883). 
Stevenson, accompanied by his wife and twelve-year-old stepson, Lloyd, returned to Scotland in August 1880 and went on holiday with his parents (with whom there was a full reconciliation) to Strathpeffer, in the highlands. Thenceforward Stevenson's life was that of an invalid suffering from chronic lung disease and at risk from haemorrhages and prostrating coughs and fevers. The disease was thought to be tuberculosis but some modern experts suggest it may have been bronchiectasis. His life was undoubtedly prolonged by the devoted care of his wife, who was herself much of an invalid. Small and dark-complexioned, she was a formidable personality, outspoken and passionate in her views and determined to safeguard her husband's health. Stevenson in his turn was fiercely protective of her and showed his love in the poems that he wrote, culminating in the dedication of his unfinished novel, 'Weir of Hermiston'. Fanny established warm and affectionate relations with Stevenson's parents but his friends were slower to accept her, and Henley never really got over his dislike. 
Two winters were spent, on medical advice, at Davos, a dismal health resort in the Swiss Alps, where the only high spot was friendship with John Addington Symonds. In the first winter, of 1880-81, Stevenson read widely for a projected history of the highlands that was never written, and saw the volume of collected essays 'Virginibus puerisque' through the press. Having returned to Scotland in late May 1881 he and Fanny spent the summer with his parents at rented cottages in the highlands, first at Pitlochry and then at Braemar. At Pitlochry, Stevenson wrote, in Scots, 'Thrawn Janet', a grim and widely praised tale of satanic possession, and most of 'The Merry Men', which he called 'a fantastic sonata about the sea and wrecks' ('Letters', 3.206); both were accepted for 'Cornhill'. While at Pitlochry, with the encouragement of his father and carefully worded testimonials from his friends, Stevenson applied without success for the vacant chair of history and constitutional law at Edinburgh University. At Braemar in August 1881 he began 'Treasure Island' (originally called 'The Sea Cook'), the book always associated with his name. The inspiration came from the drawing of the map of an island to amuse his stepson (to whom the book is dedicated), and his father gave enthusiastic support. He finished it during the second winter at Davos and it was serialized, under the pseudonym Captain George North, in 'Young Folks', a boys' magazine, between October 1881 and January 1882. It attracted little attention. It appeared, to a chorus of praise, in book form in November 1883 and has never since been out of print. It has been translated into many languages and there have been plays, films, television and radio adaptations, sequels, and even musicals, as well as notable illustrated editions. 
While at Davos, Stevenson also prepared for press 'Familiar Studies of Men and Books', wrote 'The Silverado Squatters', and projected but abandoned a biography of Hazlitt. Henley was made editor of the 'Magazine of Art' in October 1881 and Stevenson contributed a number of essays to it, beginning with 'Byways of book illustration: Bagster's 'Pilgrim's Progress'' in February 1882. Henley acted as unpaid agent for Stevenson in negotiating publishing deals, and the friendship was at its closest over the next few years. Other essays written at Davos included 'Talk and talkers' and its sequel for 'Cornhill', and 'A gossip on romance' for the first issue of 'Longman's Magazine' (November 1882). A major amusement was the writing of comic verses and the making of crude woodcuts for the small booklets produced by his stepson on his printing press, including 'Not I' and two collections of 'Moral Emblems'. 
Stevenson and his wife left Davos for good in April 1882. The following month there was a brief visit (with his parents) to Box Hill, where Stevenson renewed his friendship with George Meredith, whom he had first met in 1878. In June he made his last journey with his father to Lochearnhead, Ballachulish, and Oban, in search of local colour for a projected article on the Appin murder (1752), later to provide the background for 'Kidnapped'. The next two months were spent first at Stobo manse, near Peebles, and then at Kingussie, on Speyside. The weather was bad and Stevenson was frequently ill. At Kingussie he wrote most of 'The Treasure of Franchard'. In August 1882 his collection of short stories 'New Arabian Nights' was published in two volumes. 
The Stevensons next tried the south of France. In October 1882 they rented the Campagne Defli at St Marcel, near Marseilles. The place was unhealthy and Stevenson became seriously ill. In February 1883, after a brief stay in Nice, they moved to the health resort of Hyeres and the next month set up home in the Chalet la Solitude, a tiny Swiss chalet on a hillside described by Stevenson as 'the loveliest house you ever saw, with a garden like a fairy story and a view like a classical landscape' ('Letters', 4.102). Looking back in 1891 he declared, 'I was only happy once: that was at Hyeres' (ibid., 7.93). A French girl, Valentine Roch, joined them as maidservant and stayed for the next six years, accompanying them on their first Pacific cruise. During 1883 Stevenson wrote two very different novels. He lavished great care on 'Prince Otto' (published 1885), an artificial comedy set in an imaginary German principality and written in a mannered style reminiscent of Meredith. The book has never been popular but in Colvin's opinion ('DNB') is very characteristic of Stevenson's mind. 'The Black Arrow' is an adventure story for boys set at the time of the Wars of the Roses and founded on the style of the 'Paston Letters'. It was written hurriedly on commission for 'Young Folks', where it was serialized with great success, under the Captain George North pseudonym, from June to October 1883. Stevenson dismissed it as 'Tushery' ('Letters', 4.128) and it did not appear in book form until 1888. 
At Hyeres, Stevenson continued to write poems for children that he had begun at Braemar in 1881; they were privately printed in a trial version called 'Penny Whistles' (1883). After revision and the addition of further poems they were published in 1885 as 'A Child's Garden of Verses'. These vivid glimpses into his childhood, written from the standpoint of the child, are unique of their kind; in spite of their familiarity they continue to give pleasure and there have been many illustrated editions. Several essays by Stevenson were written for the 'Magazine of Art', among them 'A penny plain and twopence coloured', on the delights of the toy theatre of his childhood, and 'A note on realism' -- one of several on the art of writing. In July and August 1883 Stevenson and his wife spent a holiday with his parents at the spa town of Royat, Puy-de-Dome. On his return to Hyeres in September he was greatly distressed to learn of the death of his old friend Walter Ferrier and paid tribute to him in his essay 'Old mortality'. 
Stevenson's health took a dangerous turn for the worse in 1884. He was seriously ill at Nice in January with fever and congestion of the lungs. In the following months at Hyeres he was almost continuously ill with haemorrhages, suffering from sciatica, nearly blind because of eyestrain, and forbidden to speak. He came near to death in early May, when he suffered his worst ever haemorrhage. He recovered slowly and, after a brief convalescence in Royat, travelled to England at the end of June to consult doctors. 
In July 1884 Stevenson and his wife went to Bournemouth, where Lloyd Osbourne was at school, and finally decided to settle there. After staying in various lodgings and boarding-houses they rented a furnished house for the winter called Bonallie Tower, in Branksome Park. The following year Thomas Stevenson bought his daughter-in-law a house in nearby Alum Chine, which they renamed Skerryvore (in honour of the lighthouse built by Stevenson's uncle Alan), and they moved there in April. For most of his years in Bournemouth, Stevenson lived the life of an invalid plagued by colds and haemorrhages -- a life later remembered as that of 'the pallid brute that lived in Skerryvore like a weevil in a biscuit' ('Letters', 7.280). There were occasional visits to stay with Colvin in his official residence as keeper of the prints and drawings at the British Museum, a visit to Thomas Hardy in Dorchester, and one to Meredith, and a fortnight in Paris in August 1886, staying with his American artist friend Will H. Low, during which he met the sculptor Auguste Rodin. 
Stevenson and Henley had collaborated in 1879 on the play 'Deacon Brodie'. Convinced that the theatre would make their fortunes they spent most of August and September 1884 writing 'Beau Austin' and 'Admiral Guinea'; early in 1885, at the invitation of Herbert Beerbohm Tree, they wrote a new adaptation of the French farce 'Macaire'. Although all the plays were eventually performed they met with no success. While at Bournemouth, Stevenson wrote a play, 'The Hanging Judge', in collaboration with his wife; a version was privately printed in 1887 but never performed. Another collaboration with Fanny was 'More New Arabian Nights: the Dynamiter' (1885), inspired by the Fenian bomb outrages in London. Stevenson was responsible for only one of the stories but these witty fantasies all bear the mark of his revising pen. He wrote a number of short stories for the Christmas numbers of magazines: 'The Body Snatcher', originally drafted at Pitlochry in 1881, in the 'Pall Mall Gazette' (1884); 'Olalla' in the 'Court and Society Review' (1885); 'Markheim', a powerful story foreshadowing 'Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde', in 'Unwin's Annual, 1886'; and 'The Misadventures of John Nicholson' in 'Yule Tide' (1887). He began and abandoned in 1884-5 a romance about highwaymen called 'The Great North Road'. He wrote a memoir of his friend Fleeming Jenkin (published 1887) and projected, but did not write, a biography of the duke of Wellington. 
An essay by Henry James, 'The art of fiction', in 'Longman's Magazine' in September 1884 led to a reply by Stevenson, 'A humble remonstrance', in the same publication in December. A close friendship resulted; James became a welcome visitor at Skerryvore and the two corresponded on affectionate terms for the rest of Stevenson's life. 
In his fiction Stevenson is seen exploring moral ambiguity and duality in human nature; a recurring theme is the contrast and conflict between good and evil. He achieved world-wide success with his 'shilling shocker' 'Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde' (1886), a moral allegory about the divided self and the problem of evil, the main incidents of which came to him in a dream. The characters of Jekyll and Hyde have become proverbial and the story has been widely translated, reprinted in countless editions, and dramatized (if often distorted) in plays and films. Stevenson's reputation was further enhanced later in 1886 by the publication of 'Kidnapped', after serialization under his own name in 'Young Folks' Paper'. It is far more than the adventure story for boys that it purports to be. Making skilful use of Scots it brilliantly evokes the atmosphere of Scotland in the period following the 1745 Jacobite rising and explores the differences between lowland and highland mentality in the contrasting characters of David Balfour and Alan Breck. It remains one of Stevenson's most popular books, and there have been many film and television versions. A collection of short stories (previously appearing in periodicals) was published as 'The Merry Men' in 1887. 
For several years Thomas Stevenson's health had been failing, and he and his wife spent much time in Bournemouth to be near their son. Thomas died in Edinburgh on 8 May 1887. Stevenson's 'Memories and Portraits' (1887) collected a number of his mainly autobiographical essays, including one commemorating his father's life and character. Another essay, 'The character of dogs', celebrates the liking for dogs that he shared with his father and commemorates in particular the Skye terrier Woggs (later called Bogue). 
His father's death freed Stevenson to visit America. Accompanied by his mother, wife, stepson, and maidservant he sailed from London on board the cattle boat 'Ludgate Hill' and was given an enthusiastic reception as a famous author on arrival in New York on 7 September 1887. The winter (October-April) was spent at Saranac Lake in the Adirondacks, not far from the Canadian border. Here, in bitterly cold weather, his health improved. He established friendly relations with his American publisher, Charles Scribner, and E. L. Burlingame, editor of 'Scribner's Magazine'. For the magazine he wrote a series of twelve essays (published January-December 1888 and partly reprinted in 'Across the Plains', 1892). They include the biographical essays 'A chapter on dreams' (giving the genesis of 'Jekyll and Hyde'), 'The lantern bearers', and two 'Random memories': 'The coast of Fife' and 'The education of an engineer'. Two famous essays, 'A Christmas sermon' and 'Pulvis et umbra', give his views on religion and ethics. 
In December he began with enthusiasm his most complex and profound study of evil, the tragic story 'The Master of Ballantrae'. It relates with great power and subtlety the bitter antagonism between two brothers in the period after the 1745 rising and the destructive effects of their hatred. In spite of its flawed ending it is generally regarded as a masterpiece. Stevenson continued the novel in Tahiti and finished it after much effort in Hawaii in April 1889, after it had already begun serialization in 'Scribner's'. 
A very different side of Stevenson's genius is shown in 'The Wrong Box' -- the black comedy written in collaboration with his stepson. Some contemporary reviewers and later critics saw no merit in it but its admirers (including Kipling, Chesterton, Max Beerbohm, and V. S. Pritchett) regarded it as a comic masterpiece; E. F. Benson called it 'perhaps the most superb extravaganza in the language' ('London Mercury', August 1928, 378). Osbourne wrote the first version at Saranac in 1887; Stevenson took it over and rewrote it, completing it at Honolulu in 1889. The form and manner of the book are entirely Stevenson's. A more accurate version from the manuscript and corrected proofsheets appeared in 1989. Stevenson left Saranac in April 1888 and, after a brief stay in New York (where he met Mark Twain), went with his mother and stepson to Manasquan, on the New Jersey coast; Fanny had gone to San Francisco to visit relatives. 
During the last weeks at Saranac, and while he was at Manasquan, Stevenson was agonizing over a quarrel with Henley. Henley had accused Fanny of plagiarism in publishing under her own name a short story, 'The Nixie', based on one written earlier (and abandoned) by Stevenson's cousin Katharine de Mattos (to whom 'Jekyll and Hyde' was dedicated). Stevenson reacted furiously; the main issue for him was that Henley had been disloyal as a friend in making such an accusation, and he saw it as the latest example of Henley's penchant for stirring up trouble behind his back and speaking ill of him to his friends. Stevenson wrote long letters to their mutual friend Charles Baxter and made himself ill with distress and bitterness. Henley apologized but the old, cordial relations were never restored. The last straw for Stevenson came in December 1890, when he learned that Henley, living in Edinburgh, had failed to call on Stevenson's widowed mother; a few more letters were exchanged but the friendship was over. 
In another bid for improved health Stevenson decided on a cruise in the South Seas. The American editor and publisher S. S. McClure (the original of Pinkerton in 'The Wrecker') offered to sell through his newspaper syndicate a series of letters describing Stevenson's experiences. Stevenson chartered the schooner yacht 'Casco' (under Captain A. H. Otis) and the family party embarked in San Francisco on 28 June 1888. They spent six weeks in the Marquesas Islands and two weeks in the Paumotu (or Tuamotu) archipelago before reaching Tahiti at the end of September. Stevenson became seriously ill and convalesced in the village of Tautira as the guest of the local chief, Ori a Ori. There he wrote two ballads based on Polynesian legends, 'The Feast of Famine' and 'The Song of Rahero'; they were published, to no great success, with 'Ticonderoga' (printed in 'Scribner's', 1887) and others, in 'Ballads' (1890). The cruise ended with the Stevensons' arrival in Honolulu on 24 January 1889, and the 'Casco' was sent back to San Francisco. 
The family party was joined by Fanny's daughter, Belle, her ne'er-do-well, drunken husband, the painter Joseph (Joe) Dwight Strong, and their eight-year-old son, Austin, who had been living in Honolulu since 1882. Stevenson stayed in Honolulu for five months, becoming friendly with Kalakaua, the last of the Hawaiian kings. He visited the leper settlement on the island of Molokai, where Father Damien, the Roman Catholic missionary, had recently died. He was deeply moved by what he saw. In February 1890 in Sydney, in a white heat of indignation, he wrote his powerful piece of invective 'Father Damien: an Open Letter to the Reverend Dr Hyde' in defence of the priest's reputation against attack by an American protestant missionary in Honolulu. 
The climate of the South Seas and life on board ship suited Stevenson, and he delighted in his experiences. Though he was still subject to colds his health improved wonderfully. Accordingly in June 1889 he set off on another cruise with his wife, stepson, and Joe Strong (his mother having returned to Edinburgh) on the trading schooner 'Equator' (under Captain Dennis Reid). The next six months were spent voyaging through the Gilbert Islands southwards towards Samoa, which was reached in early December. 'En route' they stayed for two months at Apemama as guests of the formidable tyrant King Tembinoka, about whom Stevenson wrote a memorable account. In Samoa, on the island of Upolu, about 3 miles outside Apia, Stevenson bought (on the advice of the American trader H. J. Moors) an estate of 300 acres, which he called Vailima (Five Waters). After arranging for part of the area to be cleared he left for Sydney in February 1890. In Sydney he again became seriously ill, and abandoning plans for a visit to Britain, he went (with his wife and stepson) on a voyage, lasting from April to July, on a trading steamer, the 'Janet Nicoll'. This took him to many remote places, including Penrhyn, the Ellice Islands, the Marshall Islands, the Gilbert Islands (again), and New Caledonia. 
For the last four years of his life Stevenson made his home on his plantation of Vailima, beautifully situated 600 feet above sea-level, on the mountainside among thick woods, with fine views of the Pacific. His main absences were two brief visits to Sydney, in the spring of 1891 and again in 1893, and a visit to Honolulu in the autumn of 1893; he returned from all of these in worse health. On their arrival in Samoa from Sydney in September 1890 Stevenson and Fanny lived at Vailima in a rough cabin in the most primitive conditions while work proceeded on clearing the estate and building a suitable house. They moved into the new house in April 1891 (it was enlarged in 1893) and the family furniture was brought from Bournemouth and, later, from Edinburgh. Stevenson gathered his family around him and lived in patriarchal style, like a clan chieftain, with a number of Samoan servants in both house and plantation, in whose welfare he took the greatest interest. He dispensed hospitality (often on a grand scale) to a wide range of visitors, including missionaries, white officials, officers from British warships, traders, and Samoan chiefs and their retainers. The household comprised his wife, his mother (who went back to Scotland in 1893 but rejoined them in 1894), his stepson, Lloyd, his stepdaughter, Belle, and her husband (whom she divorced in 1892), and their son, Austin. Stevenson's cousin Graham Balfour (later his biographer) paid three visits and became a close friend. Though he was still at risk Stevenson's health improved and he delighted in being able to enjoy outdoor life again; his favourite exercise was riding. For a period he became obsessed with weeding and clearing the bush (celebrated in his poem 'The Woodman'). Fanny Stevenson worked indefatigably in the garden and much of the planning of the plantation (which never paid its way) fell on her. Stevenson's monthly journal-letters to Colvin (published as 'Vailima Letters', 1895) give a vivid picture of their life. 
Stevenson's sympathy with the Samoans (he studied their language) and his desire to defend their interests meant that he was drawn (to the dismay of Colvin and other friends) into Samoan politics. He wrote 'A Footnote to History' (1892), telling the story of German intervention in Samoan affairs, the involvement of Britain and America, and the rivalries over the kingship between rival chiefs. A notable chapter is his account of the hurricane of March 1889. Following a conference in Berlin (1889) the great powers established tripartite control of the government of Samoa; they recognized Malietoa Laupepa as king and rejected the equally valid claims of Mataafa Iosefu. Stevenson championed the cause of Mataafa, for whom he developed a great affection. Stevenson, whose object was to bring about reconciliation between the two rivals and thus prevent bloodshed, paid several visits to Mataafa's rebel camp, a few miles from Apia. He turned into a romantic adventure a visit to Mataafa with Lady Jersey (wife of the governor of New South Wales) in August 1892. Two European officials -- a Swedish chief justice, Conrad Cedercrantz, and Baron Senfft von Pilsach, German president of the municipal council of Apia -- appointed under the Berlin Act proved disastrously unfitted for their tasks. Stevenson wrote a series of letters to 'The Times' drawing attention to their incompetence and the impropriety of some of the administrative and legal decisions; they were both replaced in 1893. He believed himself threatened with deportation because of his activities. He was certainly at risk of fine or imprisonment under the terms of the sedition (Samoa) regulation of 1892 made by Sir John Thurston, British high commissioner for the Western Pacific; the Colonial Office promptly amended the regulation, taking Stevenson out of its purview. 
In July 1893 fighting finally broke out between Mataafa and Laupepa. Mataafa's resistance was quickly crushed with aid from the three powers, and he was deported with his leading chiefs to the Marshall Islands. Stevenson sent him gifts and tried in vain to secure a pardon. Stevenson and his family visited and helped a number of minor Mataafa chiefs imprisoned in gaol in Apia, following their uprising. He was deeply touched when, on their release, they built in October 1894 what they called the Road of Gratitude, joining Vailima to the main highway. 
In spite of his other interests Stevenson, who was given the Samoan name Tusitala (Writer of Tales), continued with a punishing schedule of writing, starting at 6 a.m. and usually working for many hours each day. Much effort was spent in preparing for McClure's syndicate -- from the journals he had kept at the time -- the series of letters called 'The South Seas', describing his voyages. They were serialized in 1891 in 'The Sun' (New York), partly in 'Black and White' (London), and in Australian and New Zealand papers. Stevenson's attempt at an objective anthropological and historical work displeased the newspaper editors as well as Colvin and Fanny, who wanted an entertaining personal narrative, and the series was abandoned, as was the idea of using them as raw material for a book. A selection was posthumously published as 'In the South Seas' (1896) and others appeared in later collected editions. In spite of its imperfections it is now seen as a valuable record of a vanished world. Stevenson next turned, in 1891, to the project of a history of the Stevenson family. He continued it at intervals, delighting in the details of the life of his grandfather Robert Stevenson. The first three chapters were posthumously published as 'Records of a Family of Engineers' (1896). 
The South Seas furnished Stevenson with fresh themes for his fiction. Two novels written in collaboration with his stepson are set there. 'The Wrecker' (1892) is a long, diffuse mystery story with fine descriptions of life at sea and recollections of Edinburgh, San Francisco, and artists' life in Paris and Barbizon; it is Stevenson in relaxed mood, providing entertainment rather than great literature. 'The Ebb-Tide' (1894) had its origins in a much longer novel, 'The Pearl Fisher', planned in 1889; it is a grim and powerful story of moral depravity and evil whose four main characters Stevenson himself called 'such a troop of swine' ('Letters', 8.107). There are parallels between 'The Ebb-Tide' and 'The Beach of Falesa', regarded as one of his finest short stories. He described it as 'the first realistic South Sea story; I mean with real South Sea character and details of life' (ibid., 7.161). It was collected in 'Island Nights' Entertainments' (1893) with two other tales, 'The Bottle Imp', a German folk story given a Hawaiian setting (which was published in translation in a Samoan missionary magazine), and 'The Isle of Voices', a Polynesian fable. The first full, unbowdlerized version of 'Falesa' did not appear until 1984. 
Scotland continued to haunt Stevenson's imagination. In 1892 he wrote 'Catriona', the sequel to 'Kidnapped' (published in America under Stevenson's original title, 'David Balfour'). Though it never achieved the popularity of 'Kidnapped' it was notable for his successful portrayal of women characters, long regarded one of his failings as a novelist. He called the interpolated 'Tale of Tod Lapraik' 'a piece of living Scots' ('Letters', 8.38). 
When he suffered from writer's cramp in June 1892 Stevenson's stepdaughter became his amanuensis, and many of his letters and his two last unfinished novels were dictated (in whole or part) to her. 'St Ives', a lightweight potboiler, begun in 1893, featuring the adventures of a French prisoner-of-war in Napoleonic times following his escape from Edinburgh Castle, was completed by Arthur Quiller-Couch (1897). In September 1894 he dropped 'St Ives' and took up 'Weir of Hermiston' (also called 'The Justice-Clerk'), first begun in 1892, and worked on it with enthusiasm until his death. This fragment (published 1896) is recognized as Stevenson's masterpiece for its evocation of the background of Edinburgh and the border country as the setting for the conflict between father and son and a tragic love story, and above all for its strong characterization (including the women characters) and its powerful use of Scots dialogue. Lord Hermiston is based on the notorious eighteenth-century Scottish judge Lord Braxfield, about whom Stevenson had written in his early essay 'Some portraits by Raeburn'. Fragments of three other novels with a Scottish theme survive: 'Heathercat', a story of the covenanters, 'The Young Chevalier' (from ideas suggested by Andrew Lang), and 'The Go-Between'. He also projected 'Sophia Scarlet', set in a plantation in the South Seas. A collection of 'Fables', some written in the 1870s, was posthumously published in 1896. In his fiction Stevenson's aim was 'to get out the facts of life as clean and naked and sharp as I could manage it' ('Letters', 7.344). He achieved a wonderfully lucid style, notable for its concision and felicitous use of words. As Chesterton wrote, he possessed 'a quite exceptional power of putting what he really means into the words that really convey it' (Chesterton, 150). 
Stevenson wrote poetry all his life (often when he was ill), experimenting with virtuosity in a wide range of forms and techniques, and some of his finest poems were written in Scots. His first collection -- apart from his poems for children -- was 'Underwoods' (1887). He continued to write poetry in the South Seas, including poems looking back nostalgically to Scotland and his youth, and these appeared as 'Songs of Travel' in 1896. Though he made no claim to be a great poet he achieved work of freshness and originality with memorable phrases. He had a lifelong interest in music, and a number of the poems have musical settings. As a young man he regularly went to concerts in Edinburgh. At Bournemouth he tried to write music and became obsessed with playing the piano. In Saranac he took up the penny whistle, and in the South Seas the flageolet. He enjoyed making music with amateur musicians drawn from his family and friends. 
Stevenson was about 5 feet 10 inches tall and abnormally thin. His head was small and he had a long, oval-shaped face with large, very wide-set, dark hazel eyes. His hair, lightish-brown in youth, grew darker with the years, and until he reached the tropics was usually worn long; he had a moustache and the merest hint of an imperial. His friends were bowled over by the power and charm of his personality and the brilliance of his conversation, his gaiety, eagerness, and vitality. They described him restlessly pacing to and fro as he talked, holding a lit cigarette (he smoked incessantly), as in John Singer Sargent's portrait. Colvin says that his sympathetic power of inspiring others was the special distinguishing note of his conversation and that in the best of his letters there is a far-away echo of his talk. 
In his last years at Vailima, Stevenson was under considerable strain. Fanny, who had a background of emotional instability, suffered a serious mental breakdown in April 1893, which was the culmination of eighteen months of trouble. All that is known of it lies in a few guarded references in Stevenson's letters, and Fanny appears to have made a good recovery. Stevenson had moods of depression over his writing, and overworked himself in order to earn the large sums necessary to maintain the estate and their style of life. It was to help ease the burden that Baxter, in co-operation with Colvin, put forward the plan for a limited, 'Edinburgh Edition' of his collected works. Stevenson welcomed the idea but did not live to see even the first volumes. 
Stevenson spent the morning of 3 December 1894 happily dictating 'Weir of Hermiston' to his stepdaughter. At sunset he joined his wife on the verandah and collapsed while helping her to prepare a mayonnaise for dinner: two hours later, without regaining consciousness, he died of a cerebral haemorrhage. The following day forty Samoans cut a steep path up the mountainside and he was buried (by his own wish) on the summit of Mount Vaea. By 1897 a tomb had been built from large blocks of cement bearing two bronze panels; one carries Stevenson's own 'Requiem' ('Under the wide and starry sky'), written when he was ill in San Francisco. In 1915, the year after her death, Fanny Stevenson's ashes were interred there. 
The romantic circumstances of Stevenson's exile in Samoa and the manner of his death helped to create a legendary figure. He was sentimentalized by extreme admirers as a near-saintly optimist and heroic invalid -- the 'Seraph in Chocolate' of Henley's famous phrase ('Pall Mall Magazine', December 1901, 508), although Henley's gibe was not really true of the portrait presented in the official biography by Graham Balfour (1901), despite the obvious reticences inevitable at the time that it was written. In reaction to this canonization the debunking biographers of the 1920s (led by G. S. Hellman and J. A. Steuart) created another unreal person: the sensualist and poseur dominated by his wife. The standard biography, 'Voyage to Windward' (1952) by J. C. Furnas, swept away the legends and provided a balanced picture of the man. The process was completed by the publication in 1994-5 of a major edition of Stevenson's 'Letters'. Even in the expurgated selections edited by Colvin (the latest in 1924) the quality of the letters had been apparent; Stevenson is now recognized as one of the great letter-writers of the nineteenth century. 
Stevenson is the most autobiographical of writers, and inevitably his personality is part of the pleasure that readers derive from his work, but in the years since his death interest in his life has obscured the literary artist. He was overpraised in his lifetime and immediately after his death, and has been considerably undervalued since. A series of collected editions bore witness to the popularity of his books with the general reader, but from the 1930s onwards he was ignored or patronized by academic critics as merely a writer for children. Slowly the tide has turned. He has been praised by modern writers -- among them Graham Greene, Jorge Luis Borges, and Vladimir Nabokov -- and the critics (following pioneer work by David Daiches and Janet Adam Smith) are beginning to take him seriously again. There have been a number of critical editions of individual works and a new collected edition is in progress. 


@@@@@


doc= 26439


Stevenson, Seth William (1784-1853), antiquary, was born at Norwich. His father, 
William Stevenson's wife was Catherine ('bap'. 1751), eldest daughter of William Chase of the 'Norwich Mercury' and widow of John Matchett. Their only son, Seth William Stevenson, was born in 1784, but only baptized, with a younger sister, on 30 October 1795 at St Peter Mancroft, where all Stevenson family baptisms and marriages were held. He became the third partner of Stevenson, Matchett, and Stevenson, succeeding his father as proprietor and virtual editor of the conservative 'Chronicle' on the latter's death. He continued in this position until his own death, when his youngest son, Henry, took it on until 1888. For over a century, therefore, the paper was in the successive hands of three generations of a family linked with the principal printing and publishing families of the city. Seth William was elected FSA in 1817, the year he published his 'Journal of a tour through part of France, Flanders and Holland, including a visit to Paris and a walk over the field of Waterloo in the summer of 1816'. This work, for private circulation, he dedicated to the Society of United Friars, a distinguished Norwich fraternity founded in 1785 by his father and Sir William Beechey for literary and philanthropic purposes. Seth William was initiated in 1813, becoming prior in 1815 and abbot in 1818; he was the most senior member when the society closed in 1828. 
In 1827 Stevenson published his two-volume 'Tour in France, Savoy, Northern Italy, Switzerland, Germany and the Netherlands'. The next year he was nominated sheriff of the city and elected alderman, serving as mayor in 1832. On 20 October 1817 he married Mary ('bap'. 5 March 1797), daughter of Francis Newton, silversmith, and his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Ashby). Together the Stevensons had two sons and two daughters, one of whom died in infancy. Henry, the younger son already mentioned, a fellow of the Linnean Society, was a founder of the Norfolk and Norwich Naturalists' Society and the author of 'The Birds of Norfolk' (3 vols., 1866-90). 
On its foundation in 1836 Seth William joined the Numismatic Society, and the British Archaeological Association in 1845. His chief leisure pursuit for many years was the compilation of a complete dictionary of Roman coins, explaining the different types of consular and imperial coins, and the symbols and devices depicted thereon. He included biographies of the emperors, and notes on the history, geography, and mythology associated with the rarest specimens. At his death about half the work was in print, but the remainder was revised by Charles Roach Smith and completed by F. W. Madden, illustrated by F. W. Fairholt, and published in 1889 as 'A Dictionary of Roman Coins, Republican and Imperial'. It was sufficiently useful to merit a reprint in 1964. After six months of illness, Stevenson died on 22 December 1853 at 2 Pembroke Place, Cambridge, where lived his daughter Adelaide, the wife of John Deighton, a surgeon. Stevenson was buried at St Stephen's, Norwich, on 3 January 1854, where there is an armorial tablet dedicated to him, his father, and his wife, Mary, who had been buried there on 17 August 1848. 


@@@@@


doc= 26440


Stevenson, Thomas (1818-1887), civil engineer and meteorologist, born in Edinburgh on 22 July 1818, was the youngest surviving son of Robert Stevenson (1772-1850), and his wife, Jane ('c'.1779-1846), daughter of Thomas Smith (bap. 1752, d. 1815), engineer to the Northern Lighthouse Board. He was the brother of Alan Stevenson and David Stevenson. He was educated in Edinburgh at Alexander Brown's Preparatory School and at the high school, where his performance was unremarkable, except for acquiring a grounding in Latin, which he cultivated and enjoyed in later years. Brown's contagious enthusiasm for English literature found in Stevenson a receptive mind, but the severe discipline which accompanied it initiated his lifelong contempt for formal education. On leaving school he provisionally entered the printing firm of his father's friend Patrick Neill, but he did not pursue a typographical career. Youthful interests included collecting books, writing, and printing some of his essays on his own working model of a 'Columbian' press. 
At the age of seventeen Stevenson entered the family engineering firm and during a rigorous apprenticeship to his father in 1836-9 he gained experience in harbour, river improvement, and lighthouse work and attended several classes at Edinburgh University. He still found time to write fiction, amounting to a 'drawer full', but when this was discovered by his father he was urged by letter to 'give up such nonsense and mind your business' (Mair, 143). By 1841 Stevenson's book collection is known to have embraced 'Aesop's Fables' with Bewick woodcuts, Boece's 'Croniclis of Scotland' (1527), and engineering-related works, including Sinclair's 'Hydrostaticks' (1672) with skilful pen and ink restoration of missing plates, presumably carried out by its young owner. 
From 1839 until 1841 Stevenson combined his talent for writing with engineering in the columns of 'The Civil Engineer and Architect's Journal'. His annotated copies attest to communications advocating the removal of ruinous buildings by blasting, and restoration rather than replacement of ruinous historic buildings; on the form of river bank profiles; the repair of breaches; and on an improved levelling staff and 'quick-set' level, made to his design. In 1845 he furnished the 'Journal' with an abstract of his paper to the Royal Society of Edinburgh on forces exerted by sea-waves, the first significant work on this subject. These contributions, together with the first of numerous articles in the 'Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal' in 1842-3 on defects in rain gauges and the geology of Little Ross Island, were the earliest of more than sixty publications during his lifetime. Many of these demonstrate Stevenson's innate faculty for the quantitative investigation of natural phenomena and artificial constructions which enabled him to advance contemporary knowledge and practice by means of observation and experiment. 
On his father's retirement in 1846 Stevenson became the junior partner in the firm, which after a short period as Messrs Stevenson soon became known as D. and T. Stevenson. In this capacity, he was able for many years to engage effectively in research and development and became a leading authority on lighthouse illumination and harbour engineering. Abroad, the firm's advice extended to lighthouses in India, China, and Newfoundland and to the lighting of the whole coasts of Japan and New Zealand. In Scotland in 1855-84 Stevenson acted jointly with his brother David as engineer to the Northern Lighthouse Board; they designed and executed some twenty-eight beacons and thirty lighthouses, including Dhu Heartach completed in 1872 and Chicken Rock (Isle of Man) completed in 1875, on isolated rocks, which were works of particular difficulty. He then acted as sole engineer to the board for nine months and as joint engineer with his nephew David Alan in 1885-7 until his death. 
From 1851 for several decades the firm acted as engineers to the British Fisheries Society and fishery board working at Lybster, Wick, Peterhead, and other harbours. Stevenson continued his practical investigations into the generation and force of waves. By 1852 he had formulated a tentative empirical relationship between their height and fetch which was commonly used by engineers for more than a century afterwards as a first approximation. Other experiments led to formulae which enabled the effect of harbours and breakwaters in reducing the height of waves to be calculated. Stevenson's valuable work became widely known through his 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' article 'Harbour' (1857) separately published as 'The Design and Construction of Harbours' (1864; 2nd edn, 1874; 3rd edn, 1886). The firm's harbour work was almost invariably successful, except for Wick breakwater which, as its construction progressed, proved unable to resist the effect of 40 feet waves in 1872-3 and was eventually abandoned as a costly, but nevertheless most instructive, failure. 
Stevenson's national reputation was based on his harbour work and more particularly on his devices, by which 'the great sea lights in every quarter of the world now shine more brightly' (R. L. Stevenson, 'Familiar Studies', v). These are fully described in his classic work 'Lighthouse Illumination' (1859; 2nd edn, 1871), expanded into 'Lighthouse Construction and Illumination' (1881). He developed the work of Augustin Fresnel and Alan Stevenson and installed at Peterhead North Harbour lighthouse in 1849 a catadioptric fixed holophote which was the first to combine the whole sphere of rays diverging from a light source into a single beam of parallel rays. Stevenson then further developed this system by introducing the first dioptric holophotal revolving light which was installed at Horsburgh Rock near Singapore in 1850. The holophotal system, which proved a great improvement in lighthouse illumination, was then adopted on a larger scale by the Northern Lighthouse Board at North Ronaldsay lighthouse in 1851 and afterwards came into universal use. Stevenson also developed the concept of creating an 'apparent' light on dangerous reefs by indirect illumination and reflection from a parent lighthouse and installed a 'beautiful and ingenious contrivance' ('Report... Stevenson's paper on dipping and apparent lights', 291) at Stornoway in 1851. Stevenson's crowning achievement was his 'azimuthal condensing system', which reduced the available light in some sectors of azimuth and optimized it in others. It was introduced at Isle Oronsay lighthouse, Skye, in 1857 to service Sleat Sound. He was assisted in some of the calculations required for his inventions by his cousin and lifelong friend Professor W. Swan and also by Professor P. G. Tait. 
Stevenson was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1848, becoming its president in 1884. He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1864, a fellow of the Geological Society in 1874, and was a founder member of the Scottish Meteorological Society in 1855, becoming its honorary secretary in 1871. Among the many and permanent contributions which he made to meteorology were the Stevenson screen for the protection of thermometers, designed in 1864 and now in universal use; the introduction in 1867 of the term 'barometric gradient'; and the means of ascertaining, by high and low level observations at Ben Nevis observatory and elsewhere, the vertical gradients for atmospheric pressure, temperature, and humidity. 
Stevenson married Margaret Isabella (1829-1897), daughter of the Revd Lewis Balfour, minister of Colinton, on 8 August 1848. In her early and middle life she suffered from chest problems. They had one child, the writer Robert Louis Stevenson. A devoted member of the Church of Scotland, Thomas Stevenson wrote several religious pamphlets including 'Christianity confirmed by Jewish and heathen testimony, and the deductions from physical science' (1877; 2nd edn, 1879). He became ill with an enlarged liver in 1885; eventually he developed jaundice and died at his house, 17 Heriot Row, Edinburgh, on 8 May 1887. He was buried in the new Calton cemetery, Edinburgh. He was survived by his wife who lived for a time in Samoa with her son. 


@@@@@


doc= 26441


Stevenson, William (c.1719-1783), physician, born in Ireland, was first cousin to Andrew Thomas Stewart, sixth Baron Stewart of Stewart Castle, co. Tyrone. The Stewarts moved to Scotland at the beginning of the eighteenth century, and it may be for this reason that Stevenson received his medical education at the University of Edinburgh. Here he studied under Alexander Monro (1697-1767) and his son, also called Alexander Monro (1733-1817), John Rutherford (1695-1779), Robert Whytt, and William Cullen. He graduated MD with the inaugural thesis 'De diabete', and remained in the city for two more years, partly to study medicine further and partly for instruction in divinity. He was one of the earliest members of the Edinburgh Medical Society, founded in 1737, and he appears to have served for a time in the army, for he says that he 'was formerly commander of one of his majesty's forts'. He practised for some time at Coleraine in Ireland, and then moved to Wells in Somerset, where he was practising as a physician in 1779. He lived for a short time at Bath, but moved to Newark, Northamptonshire, at the end of May 1781. 
A Presbyterian in religion and a Jacobite in politics, Stevenson in his later years was constantly at variance with his surroundings. He hated the apothecaries, he despised the Royal College of Physicians, and he abhorred the therapeutic measures adopted by his contemporaries. His pen was venomous, and he spent his life lampooning and being lampooned. He appears to have been a shrewd physician, magnifying his calling, disbelieving in the efficacy of drugs or of bleeding, but with an abiding faith in the curative value of blisters and issues. He took the opportunity to attack the views of his contemporaries, his reviewers, and the colleges of medicine in his works, which were: 'A successful method of treating the gout by blistering, with an introduction consisting of miscellaneous matter' (1779); 'Cases of medicine interspersed with strictures occasioned by some late medical transactions in the town of Newark' (1782); 'Dr Stevenson's reply to a letter addressed to Dr Stevenson of Newark by Ed. Harrison' (1782); 'Candid animadversions on... a singular gouty case, to which are prefixed strictures on royal medical colleges, likewise a summary opinion of the late disorder called the influenza' (1782); and 'Considerations on the dangerous effects of promiscuous blood-letting and the common preposterous administration of drugs, with other coincident subjects, medical and moral' (1783). The last work was left incomplete, and was published after Stevenson's death. 
Stevenson's contemporaries regarded him as a malignant quack, who endeavoured to destroy their lucrative practice by explaining away the remedial action of the Bath waters in gout. Stevenson died at Newark on 13 April 1783. 


@@@@@


doc= 26442


William Stevenson (c.1750-1821), publisher and author, was the eldest son of the Revd Seth Ellis Stevenson (died 1796), of East Retford, rector of Treswell, Nottinghamshire. William Stevenson went to Norwich as a miniature painter, having been a pupil of Reynolds, but from 1785 became proprietor of the 'Norfolk Chronicle', which he printed and published in partnership with John Crouse in Norwich market place. Stevenson was sheriff of the city in 1799. In 1812 he produced a new edition of James Bentham's 'History of the Cathedral Church of Ely' (1771), adding a substantial supplement in 1817. He also edited John Campbell's 'Lives of the British Admirals', to 1812. He contributed frequently to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and Nichols's 'Literary Anecdotes', and helped Elizabeth Bentley (1767-1839), the self-taught Norwich poet, to publish her first work. Elected FSA in 1801, he died after a long illness at Surrey House, Norwich, on 13 May 1821 and was buried at St Stephen's, Norwich, on 21 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 26443


Stevenson, William (bap. 1770, d. 1829), writer, was baptized in Berwick parish church on 26 November 1770, the eldest of five children of Lieutenant Joseph Stevenson RN ('bap'. 1719, died 1799), and his wife, Isabel Thomson ('bap'. 1741, died 1806). Educated at Berwick grammar school, he left in 1787 to study for the dissenting ministry under Thomas Belsham at Daventry Academy. In 1789 Stevenson moved with it to Northampton, but failed to complete his five-year course. After tutoring privately at Bruges, he joined Manchester Academy as classical tutor in 1793. The principal, Thomas Barnes, also minister of Cross Street Chapel, is said ('DNB') to have converted him to the Arian variant of Unitarianism. Stevenson served locally as minister of Dob Lane Chapel, but in 1796 abandoned chapel and college, publishing 'Remarks on the Very Inferior Utility of Classical Learning'. 
Stevenson then farmed unsuccessfully at Saughton Mills near Edinburgh, having married Elizabeth Holland (1771-1811) of Sandlebridge near Knutsford on 1 December 1797. Subsequently his face became disfigured by 'a severe leprous complaint' ('Annual Biography and Obituary', 211). From about 1801 he survived as a private tutor in Edinburgh until the Scottish whig James Maitland, eighth earl of Lauderdale, made him his secretary and found him an active post as keeper of the papers at the Treasury, starting at $200 a year on 5 July 1806. Stevenson went to live at 3 Beaufort Row, Chelsea, in 1811, where his first wife died in October. Of their two surviving children, John ('b'. 1798) became a merchant navy officer and Elizabeth ['see 'Gaskell, Elizabeth Cleghorn], whose birth on 29 September 1810 in Lindsey Row, Chelsea, was recorded in the register of nonconformists at Dr Williams's Library, was taken to Knutsford and brought up as a Unitarian. She married William Gaskell, junior minister at Cross Street Chapel, Manchester, in 1832, and became famous as a writer of fiction and the biographer of Charlotte Bronte. Stevenson next married, on 11 April 1814, Catherine Thomson of Edinburgh, who was born at Savannah, Georgia, in 1775. Of their two children, William was baptized in 1815 by a relation, the dissenting minister William Turner, but Catherine, born in 1816, was baptized in the established church. 
Stevenson wrote extensively, contributing about a dozen articles (1803-9, 1828) to the 'Edinburgh Magazine', over fifty entries ('c'.1816-20) to David Brewster's 'Edinburgh Encyclopaedia' (1830), and a few to the early numbers (1815-16) of a supplement to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. He also revised three 'General Views of Agriculture' (1809-15) and wrote a 'Life of William Caxton' (1833) for the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. According to an obituary, he was editor and a major contributor to the 'Scots Magazine'. His lengthy 'Historical Sketch of the Progress of Discovery, Navigation and Commerce', with a selective catalogue of texts, appeared in 1824. It has been long forgotten, though five articles attacking hard-edged political economy in 'Blackwood's Magazine' (1824-5) are more memorable. 
Stevenson died of a stroke at 3 Beaufort Row on 22 March 1829 and was buried with his first wife in the King's Road cemetery of Chelsea parish church on 27 March. Despite his literary earnings and salary, by then $350 a year, he was ever desperate for money. Elizabeth Gaskell later alluded to her acute unhappiness on occasional visits to Chelsea in her youth. An unsigned will of July 1827 shows that he had been forced to borrow part of his second wife's dowry, which amounted to $800 with interest (TNA: PRO, PROB 10/5099). In April 1829 Mrs Stevenson, apparently destitute, was allotted $40 by the Royal Literary Fund (BL, Case File 652), and afterwards went to live in Scotland with her children. 
Quiet, meticulous, and dry in manner, Stevenson became obsessed with intellectual method: his friend and patron William Blackwood once advised him 'to come directly to the Scratch as the Bruisers say, and not to talk about it' (W. Blackwood to W. Stevenson, 24 Nov 1824, NL Scot., Blackwood MSS). Stevenson's 'Westminster Review' articles (1825-6) show a more lively play of mind, but his early death unfortunately cut short the kind of canny critical remarks on the literary scene displayed in a single surviving letter (2 July 1827) to his teenage daughter Elizabeth: 'The 'Literary Gazette' also contains a review of Moore's Epicurean -- but I can hardly judge from what they say, what sort of work it is. I dare say, very gaudy' (Chapple, 'Elizabeth Gaskell', 287). 


@@@@@


doc= 26444


Stevenson, William Bennet (b. 1787?, d. after 1830), writer on South America, is thought to have been born in 1787 but nothing more is known of his early life or family. He landed on the coast of Chile in Araucania, which was still Indian territory, in early 1804, intending to travel through the country. At Arauco he was arrested on the pretext that war had broken out between Spain and England. He was transferred successively to Concepcion, Callao, and Lima, where he was confined in gaol for eight months among common criminals. His liberty was gradually increased and he was permitted to live in Lima and to travel to adjacent provinces. In 1808 he became private secretary to Count Ruiz de Castilla, president and captain-general of the audiencia of Quito. In 1809 he joined a brief revolt in Quito against Spain, and in December 1810 was appointed governor of Esmeraldas province. In 1811 he was again imprisoned by the Spaniards, in Guayaquil, and he subsequently moved to Lima. In 1818 he became secretary to Lord Cochrane and participated in many of his naval operations in the cause of the independence of Chile and Peru. After twenty years' residence in South America he visited England about 1824, but returned to Peru about the end of 1825. Late in 1827 he arrived in Greece, where he started a potato plantation employing up to 1500 workers, but ill health forced him to leave Greece in the summer of 1828. He is presumed to have been alive in 1830, but the date and place of his death are unknown. 
While in England, Stevenson published the results of his experiences in a three-volume work entitled 'A Historical and Descriptive Narrative of Twenty Years' Residence in South America' (1825). He later published a pamphlet 'On the Disturbances in South America' (1830). His book provided detailed descriptions of Lima and Valparaiso, and is of great value for the period of South American independence from Spain (1808-23), and as a source on Cochrane's activities. W. H. Prescott made considerable use of it in his 'History of the Conquest of Peru' (1847), and later Peruvian commentators have regarded the book as the most important socio-political document written by a traveller of the period. Translations into French and German were published in Paris and Weimar respectively in 1826 and in Spanish in Madrid in 1917. 


@@@@@


doc= 26445


Stevenson, William Fleming (1832-1886), minister of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, the youngest child of William Stevenson, a merchant in Strabane, co. Tyrone, and Margaret Anne, daughter of Samuel Morton, was born at Strabane on 20 September 1832. After being taught for some time by a private tutor he was sent in 1844 to the Royal Belfast Academical Institution, where he remained until he entered the University of Glasgow in 1848. He graduated MA in 1851, and commenced the study of theology at New College, Edinburgh. In 1854, his course completed, he went to Germany, where he studied for some time at the universities of Berlin and Heidelberg, and made his first acquaintance with those forms of home-mission work and Christian activity which he later described in 'Praying and Working' (1862). In 1856 he was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Strabane, and in the autumn of 1857 became a town missionary in Belfast, where a virulent attack of typhus, caught in the discharge of his duties, almost cost him his life. After holding two temporary appointments, one as locum tenens in Bonn for William Graham DD (1810-1883) in 1858, and the other as assistant to the Revd D. McKee in Belfast in 1859, he was ordained on 1 March 1860 as minister of a newly established Presbyterian congregation at Rathgar, a suburb of Dublin. Two years later a new church there, built largely through Stevenson's efforts, was opened. The services became so popular that the building was soon filled, and was twice enlarged. On 1 June 1865 he married Elizabeth Montgomery, eldest daughter of John Sinclair of Belfast. They had two sons, one of whom became a missionary to India, and three daughters. 
Stevenson's literary activity started in 1855 when he began writing in the 'Edinburgh Christian Instructor', then edited by Dr Norman Macleod. He contributed to 'Good Words' from its beginning. 'Praying and Working', which first appeared in its early numbers, was published separately in 1862 and became one of his most popular works. In 1873 he published a large selection of 'Hymns for the Church and Home', which had a wide circulation. 
Meanwhile, in 1871, Stevenson's deep interest in foreign missions caused him to be appointed colleague to the Revd James Morgan in the honorary convenership of the Irish general assembly's foreign mission. On Morgan's death in 1873 he became sole convener. Much of his time and thought was devoted to this enterprise. As an auxiliary to it he founded a zenana mission. In 1877, accompanied by his wife, and at the request of the general assembly, he made a journey round the world, visiting mission stations, especially in China and India. In 1879-80 he held the chair of evangelistic theology in New College, Edinburgh, and from 1882 until 1886 he was Duff lecturer on foreign missions. A series of lectures which he delivered in this last capacity was published posthumously in 1887, under the title 'The Dawn of the Modern Mission'. In 1881 he was elected to the lectureship founded in Londonderry in memory of Richard Smyth, and lectured on his favourite theme, 'The history and methods of Christian missions'. 
Many other public duties devolved upon Stevenson. In 1879 he was appointed by the crown one of the first senators of the newly established Royal University of Ireland. In 1881 he was elected moderator of the general assembly, and received the honorary degree of DD from the University of Edinburgh. And in 1886 he became the first Presbyterian clergyman to be appointed chaplain to the lord lieutenant of Ireland (the earl of Aberdeen). He died suddenly at his home at Orwell Bank, Rathgar, co. Dublin, on 16 September 1886. He was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin, on 27 September 1886. The Fleming Stevenson Missionary Training College was established in his memory at Ahmadabad, and his library of 6000 volumes, which became known as the Stevenson Memorial Library, was presented to the Assembly's College (now Union Theological College), Belfast. 


@@@@@


doc= 26446


Steward, Richard (bap. 1595, d. 1651), dean of Chichester, was baptized on 3 August 1595 at Pattishall, Northamptonshire, the third of four children of Nicholas Steward (1561-1628) of Pattishall, and his first wife, Anne (died 1615), whose maiden name was Madox. The Stewards were a family of long standing in Northamptonshire, possessing the advowson of the parish church at Pattishall and an estate at Loddington, near Kettering. Richard Steward matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 1 December 1609, graduated BA in 1612, and was elected a fellow of All Souls in 1613. He proceeded MA in 1615, BCL in 1617, and DCL on 3 July 1624, and served as proctor in 1622. 
In 1626 Steward resigned his fellowship when the college presented him to the rectory of Harrietsham, Kent. He quickly rose through the ranks, enjoying the patronage of William Laud, with whom he shared a distrust of puritanism and similar views on the proper place of ceremony in the church, and for whom he later acted as a literary executor. So it was that Steward was presented by the king to a prebend at Worcester on 17 July 1629. The following year he became vicar of Aldbourne, Wiltshire -- where he later repositioned the communion table altarwise, according to Laudian practice -- and rector of Mildenhall and Alton Barnes, in the same county. This last benefice brought with it collation to a canonry at Salisbury. In 1633 Steward married Jane ('b'. 1612/13), daughter of Sir William Button, first baronet (1585-1655), of Alton and Tokenham, Wiltshire, and Ruth, daughter of Walter Dunche of Avebury, Wiltshire. Installed as a canon of Chichester Cathedral in May 1634, for the next eight years he served as dean; presiding over the consistory court he issued on several occasions orders enjoining catechizing and the wearing of surplices. 
Steward was made a chaplain-in-ordinary to the king in 1633 and replaced Matthew Wren as clerk of the closet in 1636, appointments that marked the beginning of a more intimate association of Steward in the confessional and spiritual life of the monarch. Steward was presented by the king to a prebend at Westminster on 24 April 1638; having resigned his Worcester prebend, he was installed in December. He accompanied Charles to Berwick and witnessed the negotiations there with the Scots in June-July 1639, and then on 28 December 1639 was appointed by the king to replace Sir Henry Wotton as provost of Eton College. In 1640 he was mentioned as a potential lord keeper, but instead acquired a high public profile by reason of his appointment as prolocutor of convocation in April 1640, no doubt a reflection of his reputation as a reliable courtier and skilful negotiator. He played a key role in winning a vote for subsidies to be paid by the clergy to the king, and piloting through the controversial canons that upheld the discipline and ceremonies of the church. His reward came in the form of the nomination to the deanery of St Paul's, confirmed in March 1642, though he was never installed. He was admitted by royal grant to the prebend of St Pancras, also in March 1642, and in 1643 was made dean of the Chapel Royal. 
The outbreak of the civil war witnessed Steward's ejection from the provostship of Eton in January 1644 and subsequent deprivation of his other preferments, and it prevented him from taking possession of the deanery of Westminster, to which he was nominated in 1645. However, despite these set-backs he played perhaps his most public role as one of six ecclesiastical commissioners in January-February 1645 at the negotiations with parliament at Uxbridge, where he is reported to have 'spake very learnedly (though seeming frowardly) against presbyterial government' (Whitelocke, 1.379, 390), and where he argued for divine-right episcopacy and the 'Book of Common Prayer'. 
Steward probably remained in Oxford from 1643 until the fall of the city, when he fled abroad and into the service of the prince of Wales, who had been instructed by the king to heed 'his [Steward's] advice... in everything which concerns conscience or church affairs' (Ogle and Bliss, 1.205). He acted as a preacher to English exiles at St Germain during 1647-8, and was with the prince at The Hague in the autumn of 1648. Steward accompanied the new king to Jersey in June 1649, but remained behind when Charles returned to the Netherlands in December. 
Steward was held in high regard by Charles I, who described him as 'my honest and faithful servant', and 'a discreet, good man' ('Charles I in 1646', 63). He also maintained a good working relationship with Sir Edward Hyde, with whom he shared a commitment to defend the English liturgy and a fear that sacrilegious compromise with the royalists' enemies would attract divine retribution. This became the main theme of his writings (mainly published posthumously), which include six published sermons and two pamphlets in a typically 'smart fluent stile' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.296), of which 'A Discourse of Episcopacy and Sacrilege' (1683) is perhaps the most characteristic. Unsurprisingly, Steward was critical of a proposed treaty with Scottish presbyterianism during 1649-50, and he condemned proposals that would have allowed foreign divines a voice in deciding the future of the Church of England. In doing so, he affirmed his opposition to Queen Henrietta Maria's party based at the Louvre. In contrast, his friends were drawn mainly from the Laudian wing of the ecclesiastical party, and included John Cosin, Gilbert Sheldon, and Henry Hammond. However, while fellow exile John Evelyn called him an 'excellent and pious person' (Evelyn, 3.40), critics argued his conviction of moral certainty often resembled stubbornness or intolerance. 
Steward had acted as a tutor to James, duke of York, before his capture by parliament in 1646, and the two were reunited in Jersey. They remained there a year before returning to Paris in 1650 when Steward was formerly adopted as James's chaplain and served on his council. He was successful in discouraging the duke from adopting the Roman Catholic faith, a further reflection of his unswerving commitment to maintaining the integrity and independence of the Church of England. Steward probably followed his master to Brussels and The Hague in October 1650, before returning to Paris later in the year. Apart from a brief journey to Holland in the summer of 1651, he remained there to preach and officiate until a chronic consumptive illness claimed his life on 15 November 1651. He was buried on the 17th in the protestant cemetery near St Germain-des-Pres. By this time his wife seems to have died, but he was survived by their son Charles (1638?-1698), who, following a career at Oriel College, Oxford, retired to the life of a country gentleman. 


@@@@@


doc= 26447


Steward, Robert (d. 1557), prior and dean of Ely, was born at Wells next the Sea, Norfolk. His father was Nicholas Steward, a lawyer of the Middle Temple, from an established Norfolk family of minor gentry; his mother was Cicely, daughter of John Baskerville. The family was convinced that they descended from the Stewart royal house, via Sir John Steward, the so-called Scotangle, who moved to England in the service of Henry V. In 1511 the heralds prepared a full, if questionable, genealogy for them, and this became a document of obsessive importance for the family. Robert was clearly proud of this descent: he incorporated a copy with the continuation of the 'Historia Eliensis', the history of the see, abbey, and priory of Ely, which he undertook as prior and dean. One of Robert's brothers, Simeon, settled at Lakenheath; another, Nicholas, moved to Ely; both established dynasties which played major roles in the affairs of the see and cathedral. 
Robert Steward became a Benedictine monk at Ely, and took his birthplace as his surname in religion. He studied at Cambridge. It has been suggested that he was the pensioner of Gonville Hall who took his BA in 1517 and his MA in 1520. Surviving documentation, however, consistently refers to him simply as clerk without further title. He was elected prior of Ely in 1522, and in the 1520s served in predictable roles in convocation and as a clerical tax collector for the crown. The only evidence of his views on the crisis of the 1530s is his affirmation of the validity of Henry's marriage to Katherine of Aragon in the convocation of 1533. Thereafter he must have accepted the change of religion (as he did all the subsequent changes from then until his death), since Thomas Goodrich, who succeeded the conservative Nicholas West as bishop of Ely in 1534, thought sufficiently highly of him to recommend him to the crown as a possible suffragan bishop of Colchester in 1536. However, the other nominee, William More, was promoted, probably because he was steward to Lord Chancellor Audley. Ely Priory was surrendered to the crown on 18 November 1539, and was refounded as a cathedral with dean and chapter on 10 September 1541. Wells became the first dean, converting his monastic pension of $120 into stipend, and resuming his family surname. Evidence for his management of the priory estate is fragmentary, but he does not seem to have been as ruthless in dispensing long leases and dispersing property as some former monastic heads of house. However, as dean he ensured that his family prospered: there were leases of Lakenheath Manor to Simeon and of the rectory of Ely to Nicholas and his son William. William's relationship by marriage with Bishop Goodrich also helped to secure advantageous episcopal leases. But most of the profit of the Stewards seems to have derived from office holding: they were auditors, coroners, and stewards to both chapter and bishop. 
Robert Steward died in Ely on 22 September 1557 and was buried in Ely Cathedral. He had taken a number of the priory's manuscripts into his safe keeping at the dissolution and retained them under the provisions of the Henrician charter. These Ely manuscripts now survive in the British Library, Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and Lambeth Palace Library, and include several copies of the 'Liber Eliensis', the chronicle of the priory and see. The dean's close personal interest in these records is suggested by his rebinding of the texts, as well as by his own work on the continuation of the chronicle. His judgements on the sixteenth-century bishops whom he had known are sympathetic, but not uncritical. Steward's own best memorial is the comment of Henry Wharton who prints his chronicle and genealogy: without his labours the unique 'Historia' might have been lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 26448


Steward, Sir Simeon (1579/80?-1629?), poet, was the surviving son of Mark Steward ('c'.1525-1604) of Stuntney, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Anne, daughter of the royal physician Robert Huicke. His father married late in life, in or after 1575, and was knighted at Whitehall, with his son, by King James on 23 July 1603. Sir Simeon proved his father's will and erected an elaborate monument to him in Ely Cathedral, whose inscription fancifully traces the family's Scottish origins. 
Steward was probably admitted to Gray's Inn on 29 January 1593, and on 13 April 1597 he married Grace ('b'. 'c'.1579), daughter of Edward St Barbe of Ashington, Somerset, at St Olave, Hart Street, London, 'in the la: walsinghames house'. Their son Robert was born 'c'.1599. According to Fuller, Steward lived at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, as a fellow-commoner following his knighthood, but the coat of arms displayed in his chamber, recorded as extant in 1730, had been lost without trace by 1886. 
Steward's political career was controversial. Elected MP for Shaftesbury, Dorset, in 1614, he was the subject (with his second cousin Sir Thomas) of a quarrelsome petition in November 1619. With Edward Peyton he was returned for Cambridgeshire in January 1624, but the election was declared void upon petition, Steward having persuaded the under sheriff to ignore the vociferous support for their rival, John Cuts, who then replaced Steward as MP. 
Steward had meanwhile befriended at Cambridge the poets Robert Herrick and Mildmay Fane, the former addressing from London, in January 1624, ''A new-yeares gift sent to Sir' Simeon Steward', published in 'Hesperides' (1648), which playfully contrasts rural 'Christmas sports' with city gossip. Inspired by Shakespeare's 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', Herrick and Steward helped initiate a brief vogue for miniaturist fairy poetry to which belong -- though precise chronology is vexed -- Michael Drayton's 'Nymphidia' (1627) and parts of William Browne's 'Britannia's Pastorals'. Steward's contribution, 'A description of the king of fayries clothes, brought to him on new-yeares day in the morning, 1626', was subsequently published in 'A Description of the King and Queene of Fayries, their Habit, Fare, their Abode, Pompe, and State', a small collection compiled by 'R. S.' (1634; 2nd edn 1635). Steward's poem (variously titled in its many fuller manuscript texts) wittily evokes cavalier fashion; was anthologized in 'Musarum deliciae' (1655) and 'The English Parnassus' (1657); and appears, truncated, alongside a Latin translation in Archibald Pitcairne's pseudonymous ''Mormonostolismos', sive, Lamiarum vestitus: a Poem on the King and Queen of Fairy' (1691). The 1634-5 volumes include the anonymous 'Melancholly Lovers Song' (which influenced Milton's 'Il Penseroso'); and a version of Herrick's 'Oberon's Feast', leading some to reassign Steward's poem to Herrick himself, indeed to question whether Steward 'actually wrote poetry' (Farmer, 76). The discovery of Fane's manuscript epitaph on Steward ('He who such strong lines wont compose') effectively countered this claim (Cain, 316). 
Steward was returned as MP for Aldeburgh, Suffolk, in 1627, and died 'c'.1631 (according to the 1684 Cambridgeshire visitation), probably (if a note in Fane's manuscript applies to him) in 1629, aged forty-nine. 


@@@@@


doc= 26449


Steward, Thomas (1668/9-1753), Presbyterian minister, was probably born at Norwich. His family was originally of Lackford, Suffolk. He was educated for the ministry by John Collinges, and in 1689, on the recommendation of the ejected minister John Fairfax (1623-1700), was settled in a congregation at Debenham, Suffolk. He was described in the Common Fund survey (1690-92) as having $30 a year and as 'a single man very young' (Gordon, 103). 
In 1706 Steward succeeded Elias Travers as minister of Cook Street Presbyterian congregation, Dublin. A colleague of the Revd Ralph Norris, he lived on a stipend of $80. His house rent cost him $20, and he complained that, funeral sermons being 'quite out of fashion', he got 'nothing in that way'. He was an English Presbyterian, and sympathetic to the non-subscribers. In 1722 he, along with Joseph Boyse, Nathaniel Weld, and Richard Choppin, attended the General Synod of Ulster at Londonderry as corresponding ministers from the 'Southern Association'. They witnessed an unsuccessful attempt at compromise between the subscribing and non-subscribing factions. 
In 1724 Steward left Dublin and became minister of the Presbyterian congregation at Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk. He received the diploma of DD from Aberdeen in 1733. He was a correspondent of Francis Hutcheson, Philip Doddridge, John Leland, and Cromwell Mortimer. Theologically orthodox, he preached against deism and atheism. Besides one or two single sermons he published a collection, 'Fifteen Sermons', in 1734. In the 'Philosophical Transactions Abridged' (1738) is his paper on a remedy for the bite of a mad dog. A folio volume of manuscript letters in Latin and English, containing about eighty originals addressed to Steward, and twenty copies of his replies, was in 1998 held in Magee College Library, University of Ulster, Londonderry. 
Steward died at Bury St Edmunds on 10 September 1753, aged eighty-four, his wife having predeceased him in 1749. 


@@@@@


doc= 26450


Stewardson, Thomas (1781-1859), portrait painter, was born at Kendal, Westmorland, in August 1781, the son of John and Anne Stewardson of Kendal, who belonged to a Quaker family at Ullsmoor, near Shap in Westmorland. After a short apprenticeship with John Fothergill, a painter at Kendal, Stewardson studied there for some years under George Romney, and was one of his last pupils, along with Isaac Pocock and James Lonsdale. After this he went to London, and exhibited for the first time at the Royal Academy in 1803. He is also said to have received some instruction from John Opie. The list of Stewardson's exhibited works indicates that from his earliest days in London he was well employed. His paintings fall into three categories: portraits, exotic subjects such as 'The Indian Serpent Charmer' (exh. RA, 1818), and fancy works, often featuring children, whose titles indicate the influence of the cult of sensibility. For instance, he exhibited a picture entitled 'The Mother' (exh. RA, 1811) accompanied by a quotation from Tobias Smollett: '
The pious mother doom'd to death, 

Forsaken wanders o'er the heath 

Her wretched orphan cries for bread 

' Portraits, however, predominated, one of the earliest being 'Mrs Catherine Byron' (priv. coll.), mother of the poet George Gordon Byron, sixth Lord Byron. In his edition of Byron's letters and journals, R. E. Prothero noted that 'she exhausted the patience of Stewardson the artist, who in 1806, after forty sittings, painted her portrait, by her anxiety to have a particular turn in her elbow exhibited in the most pleasing light' ('Works', 1.2; portrait of Mrs Byron repro. facing p. 194). 
In 1807 Stewardson exhibited at the Royal Academy portraits of Lord Sunderland and Lord Charles Spencer, indicating his rapid acceptance by aristocratic sitters. In the Royal Academy catalogue for 1811 he was described as 'Portrait Painter to HRH the Princess of Wales'. Redgrave noted also that Stewardson 'painted George III and his Queen' (Redgrave, 'Artists', 413). His portrait of George Canning (1770-1827) (exh. RA, 1813; formerly collection of George Drinkwater, Isle of Man) was engraved more often than any other portrait of that sitter. Many other portraits by Stewardson were also engraved. His portrait of the historian George Grote is in the National Portrait Gallery, London. Stewardson exhibited a total of eighty-three works at the Royal Academy between 1803 and 1825, with gaps in 1814, 1823, and 1824. This faltering in the early 1820s suggests that the illness which prevented him practising his art during the remaining decades of his life struck at about that time. 
The influence on Stewardson's style of Romney and portraits by Sir Thomas Lawrence resulted in a blending in his work of neo-classical and Romantic styles. At Romney's studio sale Stewardson purchased the unfinished 'Lady Hamilton as the Character of the Maid of Orleans', which had been intended by Romney as a companion to his 'Cassandra'. Stewardson is said to have been unmarried but Rogers lists a portrait by Opie of a Mrs Stewardson which had been in Stewardson's own collection (Rogers, 165). He died at his lodgings at 69 Pall Mall on 28 August 1859 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. Examples of Stewardson's work are in the collections of the National Trust, Tatton Park; the Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight, Cheshire; and the Abbot Hall Art Gallery, Cumbria. 


@@@@@


doc= 26451


Stewart, Alexander, first earl of Buchan (c.1345-1405), magnate, was the fourth son of Robert Stewart, subsequently King Robert II (1316-1390), and the youngest of his first marriage, to Elizabeth Mure. As his nickname indicates, Alexander's power base was the lordship of Badenoch, in the western Grampians just north of Drumochter Pass. It had been in his father's hands for part of the 1360s, and by the end of the decade Alexander was exercising unofficial lordship (or perhaps just protection rackets) there; his activities may explain why he was imprisoned by David II during early 1369, apparently as part of a royal effort to impose order on the highlands. 
Once his father became king, Alexander's position was formalized on 30 March 1371 by the grant of Badenoch together with the castle and forest of Lochindorb in Strathspey, to be held in regality (like an English palatinate). Robert's policy was no doubt to have a loyal magnate in charge of the north-central highlands, the region which for the past two centuries had been the key to royal control of northern Scotland; Alexander was to be the successor of the Comyns of Badenoch and of Thomas Randolph, Robert I's earl of Moray. But although Badenoch and Lochindorb had formed part of the Randolph earldom of Moray, Alexander was not given the earldom itself, as he perhaps hoped: part of it, the barony of Urquhart, west of Loch Ness, went to his half-brother David, while one of Robert II's political deals meant that the rest, mostly along the shore of the Moray Firth, had to go to a Randolph descendant, John Dunbar, along with the title earl of Moray. Compensation came for Alexander, however, in his appointment on 8 October 1372 as royal lieutenant north of the Moray Firth and in Inverness-shire outside the rump of Moray. During the 1370s he also leased Urquhart from his half-brother David Stewart, acquired other land in the Grampians and north Perthshire, and was made sheriff of Inverness. His estates commanded most of the routes through the central highlands; and his officers put him in charge of the entire north. 
In June 1382 Alexander Stewart gained the earldom of Ross, which straddled Scotland north of the Moray Firth. This had belonged to Euphemia Ross ['see under 'Ross family], the daughter of the last earl, and her husband, Sir Walter Leslie, one of David II's favourites. Robert II denied the couple the status of countess and earl, and when Walter died in April 1382, Alexander's marriage to Euphemia was rapidly arranged, with his father's backing. By the marriage settlement, Euphemia gave him the lands of Ross for life, while the rest of her property, including Lewis, Skye, and Dingwall (then separate from the earldom) became a jointure for the two of them and the heirs of their bodies; as a result Euphemia's son from her marriage to Walter Leslie could not inherit Ross until Alexander's death, and also faced disinheritance from the rest of his mother's land. Alexander did not, however, become earl of Ross; instead, since Euphemia's inheritance included Kingedward in Aberdeenshire, part of the old earldom of Buchan, King Robert created him earl of Buchan. 
Following his marriage -- which made him one of the greatest landowners in the history of the Scottish highlands -- Alexander Stewart appears to have been at the height of his power. His only obvious problem was a long-running dispute with Alexander Bur, bishop of Moray, which had come to a head in a dramatic confrontation at Kingussie in Badenoch in 1380, but seemed to have been settled by the end of 1383; technically, it was over Bur's efforts to keep his episcopal lands in Badenoch and Strathspey independent from Stewart's all-embracing regality powers, but the real reason was probably Alexander's exercise of Gaelic military lordship through gangs of 'caterans' -- Gaelic warriors who were used in Ireland and parts of highland Scotland to assert local lordship by brute force; known in Ireland as 'coyne', such demonstrations of power could constitute a very effective way of exercising local rule, but inevitably provoked bitter hostility. There are indications that these activities also antagonized the earl of Moray, the bishop of Aberdeen, and the kinsmen of Walter Leslie, including Sir David Lindsay of Glen Esk, some of whose land, bordering Badenoch, had had to be leased to Alexander. So long as Robert II ruled in person, however, opposition to Alaisdair Mor Mac an Righ ('big Alexander, son of the king'), as he was known in Gaelic, was muted. But in November 1384 the crown's executive authority was taken over by the king's eldest son, John, earl of Carrick (the future Robert III). Although the main issue was a demand for more active warfare against England, Robert II was strongly criticized over law and order, probably in relation to Alexander -- who was himself attacked in the April 1385 council-general by his half-brother David (over non-payment of the lease of Urquhart), Sir James Lindsay of Crawford (who claimed the earldom of Buchan), and the earl of Moray (over killings by highlanders from Alexander's lands). Carrick was ordered to take a force north to restore order; but his faction's chief priority was the English war, and so nothing was done. Alexander kept his land and offices, and by late 1386, his father (perhaps challenging Carrick) had appointed him justiciar, or chief justice, for the whole of Scotland north of Forth. 
In November 1388, however, there was a further coup, which brought the king's second, and ablest, son, Robert Stewart, earl of Fife (later duke of Albany), to power. Again border affairs are the main explanation, but again there was an outcry against Alexander Stewart, whom the council-general described as 'useless to the community' ('APS', '1124-1423', 556); he was dismissed from the post of justiciar, and also presumably lost his northern lieutenancy and the sheriffship of Inverness. And this time -- once the English war ended in 1389 -- the Wolf of Badenoch headed the government's priorities. Fife took several steps against his brother's position. Through various property transactions, he and his son Murdoch became the main landowners in northern Perthshire, which had been in Alexander's area of operations. He had Murdoch appointed northern justiciar, and supported him by taking a large retinue, including David Lindsay, north to Inverness. There, he brokered an agreement between Bishop Bur and the earl of Moray (with whom Bur had also been quarrelling); and he encouraged Euphemia Ross to sue her husband before Bishop Bur and the bishop of Moray. Alexander's marriage had been an utter failure: he had almost certainly been strongly opposed within Ross by Euphemia's male relatives, representatives of the original Ross kindred; and he had continued an apparently permanent relationship with a certain Mairead, daughter of Eachann (or Eachainn), with whom he had several children including Alexander Stewart, later earl of Mar. Now, on 2 November 1389, the bishops ordered him to return to Euphemia. The implied threat of the annulment of his marriage -- and its territorial settlement -- presumably made Alexander capitulate, for he promised to do as ordered, restore Euphemia's property, and no longer use his men against her. 
His surrender must have left Alexander Stewart looking effectively curbed, as well as humiliated. Fife returned south; the earl of Moray and David Lindsay travelled to England; and Bishop Bur retained Thomas Dunbar, Moray's son and the new sheriff of Inverness, to protect the episcopal possessions and men. That may have meant that Bur stopped paying protection money to Alexander; certainly it challenged him. But in April 1390 Robert II died, and with a Carrick-Fife power struggle in prospect, Alexander saw an opportunity to reassert himself against both Bur and Fife. He did so spectacularly, first by attacking Forres, and then, with a band of 'wyld wykkyd Heland-men' (Wyntoun, 3.55), by burning Elgin, including the cathedral of Moray, on 17 June 1390. The atrocity was a complete miscalculation. In the long run it brought him everlasting notoriety; more immediately, it made his power collapse. Church and state were united against him; excommunicated, he was made to submit before the king, Fife, and the royal council, to beg for absolution, and to 'make satisfaction to the church of Moray' (Innes, 2.382-3). Thereafter he was never so prominent in the north; and although he kept Badenoch and the title of earl of Buchan, he lost Urquhart and in particular the earldom of Ross. In 1392 Euphemia (backed by Fife) successfully petitioned the Avignon curia against him, and his marriage, which was stated to have caused 'wars, plundering, arson, murders and many other damages and scandals', was annulled (Burns, 174); Ross reverted to Euphemia herself, and on her death went to her son Alexander Leslie. 
Alexander Stewart seems to have looked more to the southern highlands in the last fifteen years of his life. He was acting as baillie of Atholl in 1402, he was active in Perth in 1404, and when he died about 20 June 1405, he was buried in Dunkeld Cathedral, where he is still commemorated by a battered stone effigy representing him in full armour. But although the Wolf of Badenoch may have been more peaceful in his later years, the same cannot be said of the central highlands in the same period. Alexander's sons were among the leaders of a large-scale raid into Angus in 1392, culminating in a pitched battle against forces led by Sir David Lindsay, in which the sheriff of Angus was killed. Clan warfare intensified in the Inverness-Badenoch region, until it was settled in the famous thirty-a-side fight at Perth in 1396; significantly this was arranged not by the Wolf but by Lindsay and the earl of Moray. Most seriously of all, Alaisdair MacDonald of Lochaber, son of the lord of the Isles, repeatedly led his caterans up the Great Glen and into Moray, where the bishop and earl were pressurized by him just as much as they had been by Alexander Stewart. These troubles may indicate that Robert II had been right to see his son as the best means of keeping the highlands under control, and that Fife should have supported Alexander, not undermined him. If so, the lesson was learned, because after 1405 the Wolf's eldest son, by then earl of Mar, stepped into his father's footsteps, and became the crown's main, and extremely effective, agent in the north. On the other hand Mar, unlike his father, worked with the local landowning elites to maintain law and order. 
His son's success highlights what may be the most important points about the Wolf of Badenoch: first, that the complaints against him before 1390 were not about what he did but about what he did 'not' do, namely arrest and punish criminals; and second, that he did not bother to maintain relations with his wife and her kindred which were good enough to enable him to keep possession of the earldom of Ross. These failures suggest he was not so much an overmighty as an undermighty presence in northern Scotland. But whatever the case, the principal effect of Alexander's career was to accentuate the growing belief in lowland Scotland that the highlands were lawless and dangerous -- a belief which from the later fourteenth century onwards would constitute one of the major themes of Scotland's history. 


@@@@@


doc= 26452


Stewart, Alexander, earl of Mar (c.1380-1435), magnate, was the illegitimate son of Alexander Stewart, first earl of Buchan (c.1345-1405); his mother was probably Buchan's long-standing mistress, Mairead inghean Eachainn (or Eachann). There is considerable uncertainty about the date of the younger Alexander's birth. He must have been at least fourteen by 1404, when he married the widowed Isabella Douglas, countess of Mar (died 'c'.1408), but was probably older. Indeed, he may have participated in raids on lowland areas, instigated by his father and his brothers Duncan and James in the 1380s and 1390s. However, neither Alexander nor another brother, Andrew, were specifically implicated in these attacks, and although it is often assumed that Alexander was his father's eldest child, it remains possible that he was not born until as late as 1390, when Mairead was already established as Buchan's mistress. Be that as it may, the young Alexander was described by one contemporary as 'headstrong and wild and the leader of a band of caterans' (Bower, 8.293). 
Alexander Stewart's marriage has been the cause of much controversy. Traditionally it has been assumed that in 1402, together with Robert, duke of Albany, Stewart instigated the murder of the countess's husband, Sir Malcolm Drummond, and that Stewart then forced Isabella to marry him. This seems unlikely. There is no evidence of collusion between Albany and Stewart at this stage, nor of enmity between Drummond and Stewart. Rather, Stewart's marriage coincided with a revival in his father's political fortunes from 1402 and appears to have been opposed by Albany, who was Buchan's rival. It was presumably at the instigation of Albany, then lieutenant of the kingdom, that the marriage settlement agreed by a charter of 12 August 1404 was denied royal ratification. The agreement stipulated that descent of the earldom would pass to heirs of Stewart and the countess, failing which (a likely event given the countess's advancing years) descent would pass to Stewart's heirs. This arrangement excluded the claims of the Erskine family, which were supported by Albany and his allies. A compromise between Stewart and Albany was reached in December 1404, whereby Stewart was granted a liferent on the earldom, but the subsequent inheritance was to pass to the countess's heirs. A public marriage ceremony between Isabella and Stewart took place outside Kildrummy Castle, the caput of the earldom, on 14 December. From then until his death Stewart was styled earl of Mar, a title indicative of his lordship in central Aberdeenshire and the Garioch. 
In the aftermath of his marriage Mar began to play a more prominent role in national affairs. In 1405 he commanded a fleet attempting to blockade Newcastle and Berwick, a prelude to his appointment as admiral of Scotland, perhaps as early as 1407, but certainly by 1414. In 1406 he was chosen to treat with England over breaches of truce, and also for the release of the recently captured James I. Although Mar engaged in other diplomatic activities and foreign visits -- he tourneyed in London in 1406, visited Paris and the Low Countries in 1407-8 (where he not only scored a spectacular social success, but also, according to Wyntoun, played a leading part in the campaign by which the dukes of Burgundy and Holland established the latter's brother in the see of Liege), and received another ambassadorial appointment to England in 1416 -- his principal public activities were closer to home. On 24 July 1411, at the battle of Harlaw, he commanded the government forces that confronted the army which Donald of the Isles, who claimed the earldom of Ross and may also have had an eye to the plunder of Aberdeen, had led into Mar. The hard-fought battle brought Donald's submission only in the short term and prevented his pressing his claim to Ross for barely a decade, but it confirmed Mar's political leadership of the north. The death of David Lindsay, earl of Crawford, in 1407 and the lengthy absences abroad of John Stewart, earl of Buchan, meant that Mar was the only magnate capable of defending the region against highland incursions. His pre-eminence there was remarked upon by Walter Bower, who notes that Mar 'ruled with acceptance nearly all the north of the country beyond the Mounth' (Bower, 8.293). This was a role which he continued to perform, notably by supervising the construction of fortifications at Inverness from 1412, by organizing a maritime expedition against the Islesmen in 1415-16, and by leading the government forces at the battle of Inverlochy in 1431, albeit these were surprised and defeated. 
Mar's ability to lead the north stemmed from his careful cultivation of a broadly based affinity. In addition to his brothers and erstwhile Drummond adherents in Mar, the earl courted Angus families, such as the Ogilvys of Auchterhouse and the Scrymgeours, and provided them with lands in the north-east, even though the former, at least, had been bitter opponents of the earl's renegade brothers. Mar also attempted to install friendly clerics in the dioceses of Aberdeen, Moray, Ross, and Dunkeld. These included his secretary, John Inchmartin, whom he sponsored from at least 1409 until 1415 as archdeacon of Ross, and possibly Henry Lichton, who was elected bishop of Moray in 1414. It was Lichton who, while visiting the court of the Avignon pope Benedict XIII at Valencia in 1415, obtained an annulment of Stewart's second marriage. 
With burgesses too, especially those from Aberdeen, Mar maintained close relations. Several, among them Provost Robert Davidson, died while serving with the earl's army at Harlaw. After the battle Mar sat briefly on the burgh council of Aberdeen, an extraordinary appointment for an early fifteenth-century magnate. Although his respectability grew at home, however, the earl's collaboration with Davidson in a campaign of piracy waged on Netherlandish, English, and Hanseatic shipping between 'c'.1408 and 1412 won him international notoriety. In response the Hanse imposed an embargo on Scottish trade which was not lifted until 1436. The reasons behind the piracy, initially directed against Dutch shipping, may be connected with the earl's second marriage. Stewart probably met Marie van Hoorn (died 'c'.1436), heir of Duffel in Brabant, while he was serving with the Burgundian army which defeated the Liegeois at Othee in 1408 and may have married her that year. She was allegedly still married to Thiery de Lienden, and Mar perhaps blamed his Netherlandish companions for the unfortunate liaison. Permission to annul the marriage was granted in 1415, and again after the end of the schism in 1424, but although Mar obtained a dispensation in 1432 to marry Margaret Seton, widow of James Dunbar, earl of Moray, Marie continued to be styled countess of Mar as late as 1434. 
That Mar was not forced by the Scottish government to make amends for his piracy bears witness to his considerable political influence. After 1405 he had achieved a rapprochement with Albany, and in 1420 he made a bond of loyalty with Albany's son Murdoch Stewart, who became governor of the realm in the same year. Mar also survived the restoration of James I in 1424. In part this was due to his continued usefulness to the government in the north, but it may also be connected to his early collaboration with crown loyalists such as Henry Sinclair, earl of Orkney, in the military activity of 1405, and to the visits made by Sir Alexander Forbes, a prominent member of Mar's affinity, to James I during the king's captivity in England. Influence and service brought the substantial rewards which were necessary to bestow patronage on his followers. Between 1412 and 1422 Mar received $4238 in the form of annuities from the customs accounts and in 1420 half the crown's judicial profits from the north, including those from his father's lordship of Badenoch. The size and frequency of such grants declined after 1424, but the grant of a liferent on Badenoch on 9 January 1427 indicates that by this time he had effectively brought that lordship under his own control. 
Mar had no legitimate heirs. Of his illegitimate children, Thomas married Elizabeth Douglas, the widow of John Stewart, earl of Buchan, Janet married Lachlan Maclean of Duart, while Walter and David were earmarked for ecclesiastical careers. Mar's attempts to arrange for the succession of Thomas to his earldom were approved by the crown in 1427, but in 1430 Thomas predeceased his father. Following the earl's death on 26 July 1435 and burial in the Dominican friary at Inverness his estates reverted to the crown, though they continued to be the subject of dispute for over twenty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 26453


Stewart, Alexander, duke of Albany (1454?-1485), magnate and rebel, was the second son of James II, king of Scots (1430-1460), and Mary of Gueldres (d. 1463). The exact date of his birth is unknown, but 1454 seems likely. Between 18 July 1455 and 3 July 1458 James II bestowed on him the earldom of March, the lordships of Annandale and Man, the wardenship of the marches, and the dukedom of Albany, giving him an impressive power base in the east and west borders, centred on Dunbar Castle. In June 1460 he travelled to the continent, to further his princely education, and he seems to have spent most of his time with his mother's family in Gueldres. On his return, before 8 July 1464, he was captured in the North Sea by English pirates in a violent skirmish, and was detained by Edward IV for a further year. Aged just fourteen, Albany may have been involved in an attempt to overthrow the Boyd faction, with his half-uncle the earl of Atholl and the lord of Auchterhouse (later earl of Buchan), in late 1468 or early 1469. 
In April 1474 Albany was sent to Lauder to lead the Scottish host against a feared invasion by Richard, duke of Gloucester. His previously good relations with James III, his elder brother, ended after 26 October 1474, when the king agreed a permanent alliance with England. As a border magnate, much of Albany's ability to provide patronage involved his willingness to allow his followers to raid into England. The alliance technically put an end to this, upsetting a long-standing border way of life. However, there is evidence that Albany continued to be involved in border raiding: Edward IV would complain in 1480 about Scottish truce breaking and murders, specifically implying the participation of the march wardens, and Albany's indictment for treason in October 1479 claimed he had taken part in the 'treasonable hurting, violacioune and breking of the trewis and pece' ('APS', 126). Blind Hary's strongly anti-English poem 'The Wallace' ('c'.1478), written with the involvement of Albany's closest ally, his steward Sir James Liddale of Halkerston, is critical of the 1474 marriage alliance and implies that Albany would make a more able king than his brother. Other actions would have made the duke popular with his own affinity but not with the king. He twice deprived rivals of land on behalf of members of his own affinity, and then demanded non-entry fines in fact due to the crown; he allowed two of his tenants to hold an illegal court on their lands to decide a dispute in their own favour; while his parliamentary indictment in 1479 accused him of 'art and part in the Cruell slauchter of Johne of Skougale' (ibid.), a royal official in Haddingtonshire. The upshot was that James III tried to push Albany into collaborating with his foreign diplomacy. In 1477 he included Albany in proposals designed to strengthen the English marriage alliance, and on 9 March 1478 Albany was forced to divorce his first wife, Katherine Sinclair, daughter of the earl of Orkney, for similar reasons. They had married about 1470 and had four children. Thereafter Albany refused to co-operate with the king's plans, and this defiance may have finally provoked the king into retaliation by besieging Dunbar Castle in April 1479. Albany fled to France, a disastrous outcome for James III, made worse when successive assizes of parliament between 3 October 1479 and 4 February 1482 repeatedly refused to forfeit the duke for treason. 
In France, Albany received many favours from Louis XI, most notably marriage to Anne de la Tour (died 1512), the daughter of the count of Auvergne, in 1480. Their son John was Albany's heir and future governor for James V. Albany's position in France was a considerable threat to James III, as he saw the Anglo-Scottish alliance collapse into war, and growing domestic antipathy to his kingship. In March 1482 parliament sent an embassy to France, ostensibly to ask for help against England. In reality it is likely that the embassy hatched a conspiracy with Albany, as it included the earls of Buchan and Angus and the bishop of Dunkeld, who would form the core of Albany's administration in late 1482. Albany thereafter travelled from France to England, and on 10 June described himself as 'Allexander, king of Scotlande' (Rymer, 'Foedera', 12.156) for the first time -- probably the price of Edward IV's support, rather than a serious ambition to usurp the Scottish throne. The next day he signed the treaty of Fotheringhay with the English king, which promised him the crown of Scotland in return for homage and handing over Berwick and extensive parts of the Scottish marches. With Richard of Gloucester and a 20,000 strong army Albany entered Scotland in July 1482, taking Berwick, probably by arrangement with Lord Gray, one of his supporters. James III, meanwhile, led his army to Lauder, where on 22 July he was seized and incarcerated in Edinburgh Castle (in the custody of Lord Darnley) by his nobility, some of whom were undoubtedly allies of Albany, while others wanted to avoid a disastrous military confrontation with the English. 
Albany and Gloucester reached Edinburgh soon afterwards, but the king was held in the castle by Albany's allies -- Buchan, Atholl, and Darnley -- and while the English army remained, the king was not released. Thus when Gloucester and his army went south on 11 August, Albany was able to claim, as Edward IV admitted, that he had prevented widespread English devastation, and also that he and his fellow conspirators had prevented the military defeat and capture of the king which James's own policies had provoked. 
Albany's duplicity had left him in a strong position. Between August and September 1482 he seems to have gained the support of Queen Margaret at Stirling, returning to Edinburgh and securing the release of James III from the castle through a nominal siege on 29 September. By 10 October Albany had formed a new regime, based on the support of the earls of Buchan and Atholl, the bishops of Dunkeld and Glasgow, and the bishop-elect of Moray, and had made himself lieutenant-general. King in all but name, Albany until this point had acted with considerable ability and had achieved notable success. His greatest error came when he styled himself earl of Mar (before 10 October). George Gordon, second earl of Huntly, had long-standing ambitions in Mar, and by taking the earldom Albany brought Huntly back to the side of the king. 
At the parliament of 2 December 1482 Albany could not obtain confirmation of his lieutenant-generalship. It is likely that Huntly led the opposition on behalf of the king. Moreover, between 19 October 1482 and 10 January 1483 James III managed to recover the support of Darnley, Atholl, and the bishop of Dunkeld. By 30 December Albany had fled to Dunbar, his ambitions temporarily defeated, yet he continued to have the support of a significant number of important figures. On 2 January 1483 he made another attempt to seize the king, and again it was probably Huntly, still in Edinburgh, who provided the strength to resist Albany. James was too weak to deal effectively with his brother, who on 12 January sent Angus, Gray, and Liddale to treat with Edward IV to gain new military aid. On 11 February, Edward IV promised further assistance, once more greatly endangering James III. By 21 February, Albany had developed an impressive court at Dunbar, with Buchan, Lord Boyd, Lord Crichton, the master of Morton, Sir John Maxwell of Calderwood, John Liddale, David Lindsay, and many lesser men from the south-east border region. On 19 March, James III had to make a humiliating indenture with Albany in an attempt to safeguard his position, promising full remission for Albany and his accomplices in return for Albany's renouncing allegiance to Edward IV and any claim to be lieutenant-general. Albany's treasons continued, though, and it was only the death of Edward IV on 9 April 1483, throwing England into the confusion of a minority government, that left Albany open to attack. By early May he had let an English garrison into Dunbar and fled to England. He was finally forfeited on 8 July. 
Albany's career was far from over. In July 1484 he went back to Scotland once again, with the long exiled earl of Douglas, and was still able to muster a number of his allies from 1482-3, most notably the bishop-elect of Moray. However, he almost certainly had no aid from Richard III. The English king was seeking agreement with James III for a truce and marriage alliance before the invasion, and seems to have prevented Albany and Douglas from returning to the obvious starting point of Dunbar. Thus the invasion was forced onto the west march, where Albany's support had always been weakest and Douglas's affinity was long superseded. They were defeated in battle at Lochmaben on 22 July. Douglas was captured, but Albany escaped again into England. 
Although it used to be thought that this was Albany's last incursion into Scotland, it now appears he made a final return in the summer of 1485, in the company of Sir James Liddale of Halkerston and with the help of Liddale's son, John. This return, however, seems to have been low-key, perhaps in the hope of a peaceful compromise with the king. A superficially unlikely account by Adam Abell, a Jedburgh friar, in his 'Roit and Quheill of Tyme' of 1533 (NL Scot., MS 1746) can be corroborated by contemporary evidence. According to Abell, Albany 'quietly... staw out of ingland' (fol. 111'r'), was captured, placed in Edinburgh Castle, and escaped by killing his keeper, Henry Livingston of Manerston (an event dated wrongly by later chroniclers to 1479). Livingston, a minor royal official known to have bought gunpowder for the king, was certainly dead by 14 October 1485, and it is known that Sir James Liddale was captured and executed soon after 7 September. Following this final escape Albany fled back to France, where he was killed a few months later in a joust in Paris; he was buried in the city's Celestine church. 
The notion that after 1483 Albany was discredited in Scotland has little basis in evidence; instead it is likely that the rebels of 1488 used Albany's popularity as part of the justification for their actions. Sympathetic accounts of his behaviour were certainly being written long before the return of his son in 1515. Albany had been a focus of opposition to an unpopular king and had exploited his standing with skill, creating an instability at the heart of James III's government that extended beyond the grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 26454


Stewart, Alexander (c.1493-1513), administrator and archbishop-designate of St Andrews, was the illegitimate son of James IV, king of Scots (1473-1513), and Marion Boyd. His mother, with whom James IV had a liaison between 1492 and 1494, was the daughter of Archibald Boyd of Naristoun and a niece of Archibald Douglas, fifth earl of Angus. James intended his son for high office in the church: accordingly in 1497 he obtained for Alexander a dispensation from illegitimacy, and subsequently he saw that the boy received an education suitable for a prelate and a prince. In January 1501 Alexander was dispatched to Stirling, where he (along with others of James's illegitimate offspring) was placed in the charge of James Watson, graduate of Louvain and a future dean of the faculty of arts at St Andrews. In early 1503 he made a brief visit to France in the company of John Hervey, then of the University of Paris, and in 1506 he was received at St Andrews into the faculty of arts. James subsequently entrusted his son's education to the classical stylist Patrick Panter, royal secretary from 1505, with whom the youth developed a close and lasting friendship. 
Alexander Stewart was appointed archdeacon of St Andrews in or before September 1502. The archbishop of St Andrews -- Alexander's uncle James Stewart, duke of Ross -- was then below the canonical age for consecration, and consequently the crown was receiving the temporal revenues of the archdiocese and of the monastic headships which Ross also held 'in commendam'. Ross died in January 1504, and partly to maintain the existing financial situation, and partly to avoid the appointment of a primate who might oppose the royal policy of nominating crown servants to consistorial benefices, the king decided to nominate Alexander as archbishop. Accordingly he made rapid representations to Pope Julius II, and Alexander was provided to the archbishopric (to which, like his uncle, he was never consecrated) on 10 May 1504. In 1509 he was additionally granted the commends of Dunfermline Abbey and Coldingham Priory. 
In September 1507 Alexander was sent abroad again to continue his education, this time to Italy, under the governorship of Thomas Halkerston, provost of Crichton. He was a pupil of Raphael Regius at Padua until about December 1508, when Erasmus was engaged as his tutor; a month or so later Alexander accompanied his new teacher to Siena and, eventually, Rome. In his 'Adagia', written after his pupil's untimely death, Erasmus eulogizes the fifteen-year-old student he knew: tall, graceful, and dignified of bearing, albeit short-sighted; introspective, devout, quiet (Panter, too, refers to Alexander's 'profound silence'), modest, level-headed, yet of a lively intellect, hungry to learn, with a rare ability to tackle diverse tasks simultaneously, and with an innate love of music and aptitude for music-making. Erasmus also records Alexander's keen interest in history, and his pride in and devotion to his father. 
While still abroad Alexander Stewart had cause to exert his primatial authority. Before his departure he had asked the king to nominate Halkerston for the vacant archdeaconry of Aberdeen; however that appointment was contested at Rome by the bishop, William Elphinstone, whose reforming plans precluded the acceptance of an absentee archdeacon. In March 1508 Alexander wrote to James and to Panter urging them, with rhetorical asperity, to defend the original nomination; however, by October 1508 he was more diplomatically asking James to find an equivalent benefice for Halkerston, preferably within the diocese of St Andrews. In the same year, having learnt of his father's attempt to detach the Chapel Royal from his archiepiscopal jurisdiction, he dispatched a shrewd (though unsuccessful) appeal to the curia which had appointed him -- a minor -- to his position of responsibility, and which by implication owed him support. 
The chancellorship of Scotland had evidently been kept vacant since Ross's death in the expectation that Alexander would succeed to the post after he completed his education abroad. After returning to Scotland in spring 1510 he took custody of the great seal on or before 14 June and was thereafter increasingly involved in the business of government. From late August 1510 onwards he was a regular member of the king's inner council, from March 1511 he began also to sit regularly as a councillor hearing civil causes, and he served as an auditor of the exchequer in August 1510 and July 1512. Meanwhile he also took a considerable interest in the affairs of St Andrews University. In 1512 he undertook a major re-endowment of the pedagogy, and he gave his full support to Prior John Hepburn's foundation of St Leonard's, a college for poor students. 
The sources agree that Alexander Stewart was an exceedingly able and well-respected young man, with a distinguished career in church and state ahead of him. This was cut short, however, when on 9 September 1513 he was killed fighting beside his father at Flodden, Northumberland; his place of burial is not recorded. Erasmus lamented the waste of such great promise: 'What hadst thou to do with the war-god... thou who wast consecrated to the Muses, nay, to Christ himself?' (Herkless and Hannay, 264). 


@@@@@


doc= 26455


Stewart, Alexander, fifth earl of Moray (bap. 1634, d. 1701), politician, baptized on 8 May 1634, was the second son of James Stewart, fourth earl of Moray ('c'.1608-1653), and Lady Margaret (died 1683), elder daughter of Alexander Home, first earl of Home, and coheir with her sister Anne, first duchess of Lauderdale, of her brother James, second earl of Home. Alexander Stewart (sometimes described as fourth earl) was served heir to his father on 23 June 1653, his older brother James, Lord Doune, having died without children. Alexander's youth was blighted by the Cromwellian occupation and the following year he was fined $3500 under Cromwell's 'Act of Grace'. Although this was reduced to less than $1200, he appealed in early 1656, claiming callow youth and the 'small and much charged' condition of his estate ('CSP dom.', '1655-6', 152). Eventually a mere $500 was demanded. 
Following the Restoration, Moray took his place in parliament and the privy council, although his role was minor before the mid-1670s when he was courted by John Maitland, duke of Lauderdale, secretary of state, his uncle by the duke's first marriage. Lauderdale's administration was becoming hard-pressed by both covenanting and noble opposition. Moray proved an enthusiastic suppressor of conventicles and supported Lauderdale's more ruthless initiatives. He became justice-general in June 1675, in place of the marquess of Atholl, and that August was commissioned by the privy council to suppress seditious meetings in the northern shires. 
Further preferment was forthcoming as Moray became more closely linked to Lauderdale. In 1677 his son James, Lord Doune, married Catherine Tollemache, eldest daughter by the first marriage of Elizabeth, second duchess of Lauderdale. Moray himself was appointed a commissioner of the Treasury on 27 September 1678 and was nominated an extraordinary lord of session on 17 July 1680. This was the year of Lauderdale's fall from office, yet Moray was not tarnished by association and was himself appointed secretary of state that October. No doubt with continuity in mind, Lauderdale was allowed to nominate his successor, but Charles II, who had a low opinion of many of Lauderdale's opponents, had also been impressed by Moray's loyalty to the Lauderdale administration. 
Moray succeeded to Lauderdale's office but not to his power, as the king's brother James, duke of York, became the leading force in Scottish politics. Moray was, however, a favourite of York, just as the earl was an admirer of the duke. When York succeeded as James VII, Moray supported the new king's religious policies and attempts to deliver legal toleration for Catholics. With a view to achieving this Moray was nominated commissioner to parliament in 1686. Indeed, the following year he confirmed his conversion to Catholicism. Also that year he became one of the first knights of the Order of the Thistle. However, with the revolution of 1688 he was deprived of office and retired from public life. 
Moray's character impresses itself as that of a loyal servant of government and crown. Although presbyterian historians like Wodrow attacked his suppression of conventicles and his conversion to Rome, his conversion may not have been a matter of political expediency. His trials and tribulations under the Cromwellian regime helped shape his character and responses to sedition. About 1658 he had married Emilia (died 1702), daughter of Sir William Balfour of Pitcullo, lieutenant of the Tower of London, and they had a daughter and four sons, the eldest, James, predeceasing his father in 1685. Charles (died 1735) became the sixth earl, and his brother Francis (died 1739) the seventh. Moray's territorial possessions were extensive, and in 1661 he received parliamentary ratification of his earldom of Moray and its lands including the burghs of Darnaway, Doune, and Fisherton of Pettie. He died at Donibristle on 1 November 1701 and was buried on 24 January 1702 at the church of Dyke at Darnaway, seat of the earls of Moray. 


@@@@@


doc= 26456


Stewart, Alexander, fifth Lord Blantyre (d. 1704), politician, was the son of Alexander Stewart, fourth Lord Blantyre, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of John Shaw of Greenock; his parents married about 1649. Nothing is known of his education or early life. He married first Margaret, eldest daughter of Sir John Henderson of Fordell, Fife, who died childless, and second, some time before 1683, Anne ('bap'. 1658, died 1722), daughter of Sir Robert Hamilton, Lord Pressmennan, and sister of John Hamilton, second Lord Belhaven; they had five sons -- Walter, Robert, John, James, and Hugh -- and four daughters, Marion, Frances, Helen, and Anne. 
The exact date of Stewart's succession to the barony cannot be accurately established, so it is unclear when he first entered public life. As he succeeded some time before 1689, it is possible that he was the Lord Blantyre who sat in the parliaments of 1678, 1681, and 1685. Nevertheless, it is equally feasible that this was his father, the fourth lord. 
What is clear is that following the revolution of 1688-9 Blantyre was active in national affairs. On 14 March he took his seat in Parliament House, where he signed both the act declaring the convention a lawful meeting of the estates and the letter of congratulation addressed to the prince of Orange. On 30 March he was nominated one of the militia officers for Renfrewshire, and the following month commissioned to levy a regiment of 600 foot. This was successfully raised by July, when he wrote to the secretary of state, George Melville, Lord Melville: 'I have levied ane regiment for his Majesties service, and I hope it shall be found inferior to non of the other regiments; and this week I have advanced near eight hundred lib. [pounds] sterline for cloathing to them, and shall have them readie at a call wher ever the King shall command them; and if his Majestie think fit to honour me with his commands... I shall desire to posses life and fortune no longer than my willingnes continues to venture them for my religion and King. ('Letters... Addressed to George, Earl of Melville, 1689-91', 146-7)' During the battle of Killiecrankie, Blantyre's regiment was stationed at Stirling. In April 1689 he was named as a commissioner of supply for the shires of Lanark and Renfrew. Regularly present in parliament, on 31 July 1689 he swore and subscribed the oath of allegiance and took the oath of parliament. He was appointed a member of the committee for considering fines and forfeitures in May 1690. The following month he was again named as a commissioner of supply for Lanarkshire. On 10 September 1696 he endorsed the association. Almost certainly in return for this loyalty, Blantyre was awarded with a pension from King William. 
However, despite previous conformity, in January 1701 Lord Blantyre opposed government policy concerning the territory of Caledonia. This was almost certainly due to the fact that no effort had been made to pay him his promised pension and other arrears. Consequently he was one of those who voted for an act rather than address concerning the colony. Next, on 31 January, he dissented from continuing the additional armed forces for a further four months. Consequently he adhered to the duke of Hamilton's protest against the legality of continuing the Convention Parliament after King William's death. He was one of the members who withdrew from parliament in June 1702, and was chosen by them to deliver an address to Queen Anne containing the reasons for their actions. Although the queen declined to accept the protest, she permitted Blantyre to wait upon her. He sat in parliament in May 1703, taking the oath of parliament, and subscribing the allegiance and assurance. On 11 August, in the presence of the advocate, Blantyre disputed the duke of Queensberry's instructions concerning the allocation of 'commissions to inferiour officers', calling him 'a base and impudent liar' (Hume, 125). It was alleged that as Queensberry was lord high commissioner Blantyre's words reflected on the queen. He offered to place himself in the lord constable's hands, and was placed under arrest in his own chamber. On 13 August, Blantyre gave in a petition 'acknowledging his undecent and unbecoming expressions' (ibid.), craving pardon of the commissioner and the house. It was ordered that on his knee he should crave pardon of Queensberry and the estates, and submit to a fine of $5000 Scots. However, on his being called the commissioner dispensed with the former of these stipulations. 
Blantyre was described by a contemporary -- perhaps somewhat unfairly -- as: 'a very busy man for the liberty and religion of his country, yet whatever party gets the better, he can never get in to the administration... very zealous for the Revolution... A little, active man, but thinks very seldom right, and can neither speak nor act, but by overdoing spoils all. He loves to be employed, and therefore is often made the finder of a party; can start the hare, but hath no other part in the chase; makes but a mean figure in his person, very short of stature, short-sighted, fair complexioned. ('Scots peerage')' Blantyre died on 20 June 1704, and was succeeded to the barony by his eldest son, Walter (1683-1713). Lady Blantyre died in 1722 and was buried about 31 December that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 26457


Stewart, Alexander, of Invernahyle (1707/8-1795), Jacobite army officer, was the eighth son of Duncan Stewart, laird of Invernahyle; his mother was a daughter of Campbell of Barcaldine. During the rising of 1745 Stewart was out with his clan, the Stewarts of Appin, having previously kissed hands with Charles Edward Stuart at Glenfinnan. He distinguished himself at the battle of Prestonpans and was wounded at the battle of Culloden, from which he succeeded in making his escape; he then skulked in his native Appin. At Prestonpans Stewart was in combat with Colonel Charles Whitefoord of Ballochmyle, whose life he saved when the colonel was in imminent danger of having his head cleft by an over-zealous clansman. Stewart then secured his prisoner's parole and visited him in Ayrshire while the rising was still at its height. After Culloden Whitefoord endeavoured to obtain for Stewart a pardon from the duke of Cumberland. When that was refused, Whitefoord asked that protection at least be granted for Stewart's house, wife, children, and property. This also was refused; but Whitefoord having thereupon requested to lay down his commission, it was finally conceded. Nevertheless the search for Stewart went ahead, but he could not be found, and he was afterwards pardoned under the 'Act of Indemnity'. 
Stewart, in later years, was a client of Sir Walter Scott's lawyer father and was his frequent guest at Edinburgh when Scott was a boy. Sir Walter later related that: 'His tales were the absolute delight of my childhood. I believe there never was a man who united the ardour of a soldier and tale-teller -- a man of 'talk' as they call it in Gaelic -- in such an excellent degree, and he was as fond of telling as I was of learning; I became a valiant Jacobite at the age of ten years. ('Familiar Letters', 1.67)' At Stewart's request Scott visited him in Appin in 1786 or 1787, when he made his first enthralled acquaintance with the highlands. It was Stewart's engaging story of his exploits during the 1745 rising on which Scott claimed to have drawn for 'Waverley' (1823), wishing to make a reconciliation theme out of the Forty-Five and substituting the fictional Captain Edward Waverley and Colonel Talbot for the real-life protagonists. According to John Gibson Lockhart, Stewart also told the young Scott of his involvement in the rising of 1715. This, however, could not have been so, since Stewart was born in either 1707 or 1708, giving his age as forty-four at the trial of James Stewart of the Glen in 1752. Stewart was married to Katherine, daughter of Robert Stewart, laird of Appin; the couple had fifteen children, of whom Dugald succeeded Stewart on his death in 1795. Before his death he had sold the estate of Invernahyle. 


@@@@@


doc= 26458


Stewart, Alexander Patrick (1813-1883), physician, second son of the Revd Andrew Stewart (died 1838), minister of Bolton in East Lothian, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Alexander Stewart, tenth Lord Blantyre, was born at Bolton manse on 28 August 1813. His father had graduated MD and practised as a physician before his ordination. Stewart was educated between 1826 and 1828 in the faculty of arts of the University of Glasgow and became a good Greek scholar. He travelled with his family in the Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland, and France from 1828 to 1830, and learned French thoroughly when he stayed in Geneva. This helped him greatly in his later research, and he wrote for the learned journal, 'Archives Generales de Medecine'. On his return he entered the medical faculty and graduated MD at Glasgow in 1838, afterwards making further studies at Paris and Berlin. In 1839 he settled in Mount Street, then Maddox Street, and finally in Grosvenor Street, London, and practised there until his death. 
In January 1850 Stewart was elected assistant physician to the Middlesex Hospital, and he became physician there in February 1855, in which year he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. His first lectures in the Middlesex Hospital were on materia medica, his later ones on medicine. Stewart was also physician to the St Pancras Royal General Dispensary. From 1853 he was an active member of the British Medical Association, and was presented for his services a sum of money in 1875, but he gave back $400 to fund the Stewart prize for research on epidemic diseases. Stewart was a promoter of sanitary reform and in 1849 wrote an essay, 'Sanitary Economics', and in 1854 he submitted a paper on cholera cases in the Middlesex Hospital to the 'Medical Times and Gazette', but his title to greatness rests upon 'Some considerations on the nature and pathology of typhus and typhoid fever applied to the solution of the question of the identity or non-identity of the two diseases', read before the Parisian Medical Society on 16 and 23 April 1840. In Paris, Stewart came across M. Chomel, who had come to the same conclusion, that there was a clear distinction between typhus and typhoid fever. His lecture was published in the 'Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal', October 1840. Stewart's experience in the post-mortem room at Glasgow Fever Hospital from the summer of 1836 to June 1838 had led him to believe firmly in the distinction between the two fevers, and in this essay he stated clearly, from his own observation of cases, their differences in origin, cause, course, symptoms, and anatomical lesions, while his remarks against the use of purgatives in typhoid fever entitle him to further distinction as one who contributed to the saving of many lives by pointing out the danger of what had been a prevalent method of treatment. Sir William Jenner's celebrated papers in 1849, 1850, and 1853 were written on the same lines as Stewart's (and it was he who received the credit), but as they were based on a far more extended field of personal observation they had more public effect, and are justly regarded as having finally settled the question. 
Stewart was an elder in Regent Square Presbyterian Church of Scotland, where he had a successful Sunday school for young men, and afterwards in the Belgravian Presbyterian Church under the ministries of the Revd Thomas Alexander and Dr Sinclair Patterson. Stewart wrote, in 1843, 'Divide and Conquer', and numerous other pamphlets relating to the Church of Scotland. He died as a bachelor at his house, 75 Grosvenor Street, Westminster, on 17 July 1883 from cardiac dyspnoea, but he was well looked after by Dr Wilson Fox. He was buried at Highgate cemetery on 23 July. He did not attain to large practice, because of his tendency to be unpunctual. Often he would work all night and sleep in the morning, annoying those who had to wait for him. But he had so many commitments, as, for example, honorary librarian (1863 to 1868) for the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society of London, which he served as fellow for forty-one years and as its vice-president, 1871-2, and also for years his mission outreach among the non-churchgoing poor of the Chelsea area. 


@@@@@


doc= 26459


Stewart, Andrew, Lord Avondale (c.1420-1488), courtier, appears to have been the eldest son of Walter Stewart ('c'.1392-1425), second son of Murdoch Stewart, second duke of Albany (c.1362-1425), and Isabella, countess of Lennox (died 1458/9). His mother's name is uncertain. She may have been a daughter of Sir Duncan Campbell of Loch Awe, but it seems that if the couple were married then their union was not completed according to law. Andrew, together with brothers Arthur and Walter, obtained letters of legitimation from James III in 1472, repeated in 1479. He and his brothers may have fled to Ireland with their mother or stepmother after his father's execution in 1425 -- as the senior surviving member of the Albany Stewart line, he was not likely to be 'persona grata' with James I. Stewart is first encountered in England in July 1437 with his brother Murdoch, by which time both had been knighted, and he had returned to Scotland by August 1440. In the 1440s, evidently, he was resident with his grandmother, the countess of Lennox, on her estates at or near Inchmurrin, Dunbartonshire. 
Stewart chose to make a career at court, however, witnessing there for the first time in 1450. One of the members of the royal entourage who struck down William Douglas, eighth earl of Douglas, on 22 February 1452, he witnessed a number of crown charters in the following months. His absence from charters after the middle of 1452 may indicate that he was keeping a low profile during the period of apparent reconciliation between James II and the ninth earl of Douglas, which lasted until the spring of 1455, though it is also possible that the impression of absence is simply a result of the paucity of royal charters from those years. Shortly after the final defeat of the Black Douglases at Arkinholm on 1 May 1455 Stewart was certainly once more at court. By no later than October 1455 he was created Lord Avondale and thereafter appeared regularly as witness to crown charters. He was keeper of Lochmaben Castle, Dumfriesshire, from about mid-1455 to mid-1460 and warden of the west march from at latest mid-1456. By May 1458 he had become justiciar, a post he held until 'c'.1461. His consolidation of authority culminated in his appointment as chancellor by 4 July 1460. Subsequently his daily activities were those of the king's court, where he was constantly present. 
Avondale's role was substantially changed by the death of James II in August 1460, leaving the eight-year-old James III to succeed him. As head of the king's council Avondale inevitably had a senior position during the minority. The Boyd coup and abduction of the king in July 1466 caused particular difficulties. Although Avondale then became keeper of Stirling Castle (and continued to be so until early 1480), he remained loyal to the king and in due course the Boyds were ousted. He was one of the embassy which in 1468 negotiated James's marriage with Margaret, daughter of Christian I of Denmark-Norway. An important part of the settlement was the pledge to Scotland of all Norwegian rights, lands, and revenues in Orkney. 
Avondale's loss of office resulted from the crisis of July 1482, when, against the background of a massive English invasion of Scotland, James III was seized at Lauder by a small group of Scottish nobles, fearful of the consequences if the Scottish army met the English forces in battle. Avondale was one of the Scottish leaders who on 2 August negotiated a settlement with the invaders, but following the English withdrawal he was unable to maintain his position in the face of the ambitions of the king's captors, among whom James's half-uncles were prominent, and he was replaced as chancellor that summer. He failed to regain office either after the king was freed in September or when James III re-established control of government the next spring. 
Avondale profited surprisingly little, so far as is recorded, from his close proximity to the crown. Apart from the barony of Avondale in Lanarkshire, he was given some lands in Stirlingshire and Perthshire in 1472. But his major benefit was a life-rent gift of the property of the earldom of Lennox, made to him by James III on 4 May 1471. The grant was controversial: the status in law of the earldom after the execution of Earl Duncan in 1425 had never been clearly defined; and in any case there were other claimants, most notably John Stewart, Lord Darnley, who asserted a better right to succeed to the title and most of the lands, and was indeed possessed of the title of earl of Lennox between 1473 and 1476. Avondale may have abused his position to forestall Darnley's claim, though it is worth noting that Avondale was himself a great-grandson of Earl Duncan. He was dead by July 1488, having apparently had no part in the battle of Sauchieburn on 11 June, the set-to between the king and his eldest son which resulted in the king's death. It seems that Avondale was unmarried, and his title became extinct. His nephew Alexander Stewart (died 1489), son of his brother Walter Stewart of Morphie, inherited the lands of Avondale, and his son Andrew was created Lord Avondale 'c'.1500. 


@@@@@


doc= 26460


Stewart, Andrew, second Lord Ochiltree (1521?-1594?), nobleman, was the second son of Andrew Stewart, third Lord Avondale, afterwards first Lord Ochiltree (died 1548), and Margaret Hamilton, an illegitimate daughter of James Hamilton, first earl of Arran. A family pedigree of 1618 (BL, Harley MS 245) gives the date of his birth as 1521, but this account may not be entirely accurate. The family was descended from Murdoch Stewart, duke of Albany, grandson of King Robert II. By the time Andrew Stewart succeeded his father in 1548, his elder brother having already died, the family had moved its base from Lanarkshire into Ayrshire. His father exchanged the barony of Avondale with Sir James Hamilton of Finnart for that of Ochiltree in Ayrshire, the transaction being confirmed by the crown on 2 September 1534, and on 15 March 1543 was recognized as a lord of parliament with the title, Lord Stewart of Ochiltree. 
The second Lord Ochiltree came to political prominence in the 1550s as one of the lords of the congregation, the political leaders of the movement for religious reform who also favoured alliance between Scotland and England. His family had been associated with religious protest since the 1530s; in 1533 his elder brother, Walter, was tried at Glasgow for heresy, and was accidentally drowned when crossing the River Calder on his way home -- presumably to Avondale Castle -- after his public recantation; and his cousin John Stewart, son of Henry, first Lord Methven, was also accused of holding heretical opinions. In 1556 Ochiltree invited John Knox to preach at his house during the reformer's visit to Ayrshire that year. The two men remained close friends. Ochiltree accompanied Knox to the palace of Holyroodhouse on the famous occasion in 1563 when her altercation with Knox so upset Queen Mary, while in 1564 Knox married Ochiltree's daughter Margaret as his second wife. 
Ochiltree had earlier taken a prominent part in the events that led to confrontation between the queen regent, Mary of Guise, and the lords of the congregation. He joined the Ayrshire contingent under the earl of Glencairn that marched to Perth in May 1559 in support of the other leaders of the congregation and their preachers, and he subscribed the band of Perth (31 May 1559) for the mutual support of the congregation and the advancement of the reformed religion. He was a delegate to the queen regent on behalf of his party that summer, and he subscribed both the congregation's first letter to William Cecil (19 July) asking for English military help, and the letter to the regent of 19 September protesting against the fortification of Leith by French troops. On 10 February 1560 he endorsed the instructions to the congregation's commissioners who met the duke of Norfolk at Berwick to discuss English military assistance, and he subscribed the ratification of the subsequent contract drawn up at Berwick on 27 February. He was among those leaders who met the English army when it entered Scotland in April 1560 and he was a signatory to the so-called 'last band of Leith' on 27 April, which promised to defend the reformed faith and, with English military help, expel the French from Scotland. 
During Queen Mary's personal reign (1561-7) Ochiltree was a staunch supporter of the reformed religious establishment. In January 1561 he voted for the adoption of the 'Book of Discipline', the blueprint for the structure and provision of the new church. He sat on the privy council in December 1561. On 4 September 1562 he was one of seventy-seven individuals who subscribed the band of Ayr in defence of the reformed faith, at a time when it was feared that Archbishop John Hamilton of St Andrews and others were organizing a Catholic backlash in the west. In 1565 he joined those, led by the earl of Moray, who rebelled briefly against the queen's marriage to Lord Darnley and with them was outlawed for some time, taking refuge in England. He returned to Scotland after the murder of the queen's Italian secretary David Riccio (9 March 1566) and with other pardoned noblemen attended the council at which the queen was advised to accept the fact of her secretary's death and make the most of the support of so many nobles. He attended the meetings of the council in June and July 1567, and was among those summoned to the general assembly of June 1567 to discuss the settlement of reformed worship and church order and provision for the ministers, subscribing the subsequent articles agreed. 
Ochiltree attended James VI's coronation on 29 July 1567, and fought in the army of the king's party at Langside on 13 May 1568, when he was wounded by Lord Herries. He attended the convention of the estates held by Moray, now regent, at Perth in July 1569, and voted against the proposal of a divorce for Mary and Bothwell. He was a consistent supporter of Moray's regency, and in February 1570 attended the latter's burial in St Giles's, Edinburgh, after his assassination in January. Ochiltree continued to attend the privy council, but his involvement in public affairs in his later years was largely associated with the somewhat erratic careers of his sons, James Stewart, made earl of Arran in 1581, and Sir William Stewart of Monkton (c.1550-1588), who was killed by Francis Stewart, earl of Bothwell, James VI's cousin, in 1588. Lord Ochiltree persistently tried to bring Bothwell to justice, but without success. In 1592 he is said to have mediated in the feud between the earl of Huntly and the second earl of Moray at the request of the king, and to have made efforts to bring Huntly to justice for his murder of Moray at Donibristle that year. 
Since the precise date of Ochiltree's death has not been verified, confusion has arisen as to whether it was he or his grandson and successor James, third Lord Ochiltree, who was involved in the subsequent vendetta against Huntly; it was probably the latter. Ochiltree was twice married. His first wife, whom he married before 27 March 1549, was Agnes, daughter of Sir John Cunningham of Caprington; they had five sons and three daughters: Andrew, master of Ochiltree (died before 10 Sept 1578), James, earl of Arran, Sir William of Monkton, Henry of Barskimming, and Robert of Pittheveles, who obtained land in Ulster in 1609, Isabel, who married (as his second wife) Thomas Kennedy of Bargany, Margaret, who first, in 1564, married (as his second wife) John Knox, and second, in 1574, Sir Andrew Ker of Faldonside and Bethia. Ochiltree's second wife was Margaret Cunningham (died 1574), widow of John Wallace of Craigie. He had a natural daughter Margaret who was legitimated on 31 March 1585. He was alive on 26 December 1593, and probably died at some time in the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 26461


Stewart, Andrew (1614/15?-1671), clergyman and ejected minister, was one of the four children of the Revd Andrew Stewart (died 1634) of Donegore, co. Antrim, 'a well studied gentleman and fervent in spirit' (Adair, 26). His date of birth is uncertain: according to his tombstone, he was aged forty-six at his death in 1671, but it has been plausibly suggested that this was a mistake for fifty-six, as he was old enough to recall witnessing in 1625 the effects of the ministry of one Glendinning at Oldstone, co. Antrim, who preached 'nothing but law, wrath, and the terrors of God for sin', so that his hearers, as 'I have seen them myself, were stricken, and swoon with the word -- yea a dozen in one day carried out of doors as dead' (ibid., 316-17). 
In 1645 or 1646 Stewart was appointed minister of Donaghadee, co. Down, but after the invasion of the English army under Cromwell he and many other presbyterian ministers fled to Scotland. In 1652, however, the attitude of the authorities relaxed somewhat, and in summer 'Mr Andrew Stewart, minister of Donaghedee, being then in Galloway' felt able to 'hazard a visit to his congregation, though without licence, and upon that account was not checked by the commissioners' (Adair, 191, 207). Soon he and other ministers received letters from the commissioners of the revenue, who were prepared to license them on condition that they signed the engagement to the Commonwealth. At a conference in Belfast on 21 October 1652 the ministers promised not to agitate against the present powers, but they refused the engagement. The commissioners adjourned the conference until early December, urging the delegates to accept a specially amended text. On 25 October the ministers 'appointed a private meeting in a barn, and there Mr Andrew Stewart was appointed by the brethren to return to Scotland' in order to brief and consult with senior presbyterian ministers there. On arrival, Stewart held discussions with Robert Blair, David Dickson, James Wood, and others, but contrary winds delayed his return to Ireland beyond the time set for the resumption of the conference. The engagement issue remained unresolved and the authorities very hostile, but it seems that Stewart returned to Donaghadee in 1653. 
Meanwhile, in the bitter division among the Scottish presbyterians, Stewart stood with the moderate resolutioners against the protesters, although he did recommend the readmission of the protester James Ker, who had deserted to the Independents but repented of it, to the presbytery in Northern Ireland. In 1654 Stewart was one of the presbyterian committee who met at Bangor and there framed an agreement which successfully prevented the Scottish controversy from leading to a fratricidal split in Ireland. The same year he was one of the ministers who sought from the commander-in-chief in Ireland, Charles Fleetwood, and the council at Dublin the right to the tithes of their respective parishes. The government, however, was set against this, and eventually Stewart and his colleagues in Antrim and Down found it expedient to accept a decision of 20 November 1655, by which salaries of $100 p.a. were to be paid them by the Treasury. Stewart remained at his parish of Donaghadee until ejected in 1661 by Bishop Jeremy Taylor. 
In 1662 the northern ministers found themselves the victim of a propaganda campaign which sought to paint them as rebels, complicit with the Cromwellian authorities. Three delegates, Patrick Adair, Andrew Stewart, and William Semple, were sent to Dublin with instructions to consult a friend of the presbyterians, Lord Massarene. In the capital from August to October 1662, they presented to Ormond a petition protesting their record of loyalty to the king and 'begging immunity from bishops and ceremonies' (Adair, 265). Earlier that year, however, Stewart and another Down minister, John Greg, had been visited in the north by Thomas Blood and William Lecky, who urged violent action to overthrow the bishops and the state. It is clear that Stewart and Greg had rejected these overtures, though other ministers were compromised. Despite the intervention of lords Mount-Alexander and Massarene, Stewart and six other ministers of Down were arrested in mid-June and imprisoned at Carlingford Castle, being brought to Dublin in July. Under questioning Greg denied meeting Blood, but, on the advice of Massarene, Stewart admitted it. His story was regarded as credible and he was soon given the liberty of the city on a bond of $1000, whereas Greg was kept close prisoner (ibid., 279). Despite these privileges he fell ill; eventually, in November, Stewart 'having some special friend, got liberty to returne to his house upon bonds given to live amenably to the law' (ibid., 283). 
In 1670 Stewart was sentenced to be excommunicated by Bishop Roger Boyle but, following the intervention of the duke of Ormond and Archbishop Margettson, this was not carried out. After the death of John Greg in July 1670 Stewart undertook the continuation of his history of the Church of Ireland. Its third chapter, 'After the entry of the Scots', was published in 1866 as an appendix to Patrick Adair's 'True Narrative of the Rise of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland', and takes its story up to 1626. But already at the time he took up this burden Stewart was ill and unable to travel; he died, unmarried, on 2 January 1671 at Donaghadee, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 26462


Stewart, Anthony (1773-1846), miniature painter, was born at Crieff, Perthshire. Nothing is known of his parents, but he received a good education, and was 'bred to Landscape under' Alexander Nasmyth of Edinburgh (Farington, 'Diary', 201). His portrait of Nasmyth's wife, Barbara Foulis, is at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. He produced many landscapes, sketches, and drawings of Scottish scenery but soon gave up painting landscapes in favour of miniatures. 
On 5 July 1793, in St Andrew's parish, Edinburgh, Stewart married Janet Weir of Tron parish, the daughter of Alexander Weir, painter. He practised for a time in Edinburgh, then successfully established himself in London. On 17 June 1794 he was introduced to the landscape painter Joseph Farington by Caleb Whitefoord at the Shakspeare Gallery, London. In 1803 he was again in Edinburgh, living at 1 George Street, North Side, but when he exhibited works at the Royal Academy between 1807 and 1820 he gave his address as '26, Prince's Square, St George's East', London (Graves, 'RA exhibitors', 260). 
Stewart was introduced to the royal family, and painted Princess Charlotte. He also painted miniatures of Queen Victoria as a child ('c'.1822 and 'c'.1826; Royal Collection, Windsor; numerous copies, variously dated). An engraving by Thomas Woolnoth, after a miniature by Stewart of Princess Victoria 'in her ninth year', was published in 1832. Stewart often used light, clear colours with stippled backgrounds, and his sitters are shown full-face with distinctive bright eyes. He excelled in painting children, and for the last fifteen years of his life devoted himself almost exclusively to them; his portraits of adults were less effective. Among his miniatures still in family collections are four of the Methuen children, including Frederick Henry Paul, later second Baron Methuen of Corsham, and three of the children of Thomas Howard, thirteenth duke of Norfolk, including Henry Granville Fitzalan-Howard, later the fourteenth duke (1827). His watercolour-on-ivory portraits of members of the Dalrymple and Fanshawe families are in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh. In addition to several miniatures of unknown sitters, mostly children, and the portrait of Nasmyth's wife already mentioned, the Victoria and Albert Museum has a self-portrait miniature of Stewart. His portrait of Euphemia Murray (later Smith) was engraved by Henry Robinson for 'The Works of Robert Burns' (1843; 2.22). 
Stewart died at Crown Hill, Norwood, Surrey, on 20 November 1846, and was buried in Norwood cemetery. He taught his daughters Margaret and Grace to paint miniatures, and their work was considered good. 


@@@@@


doc= 26463


Stewart, Balfour (1828-1887), physicist and meteorologist, was born at Edinburgh on 1 November 1828, the son of William Stewart, a tea merchant of Leith, and his wife, Jane, daughter of William Clouston, for sixty years minister of Stromness, Orkney. William Stewart belonged to the Stewarts of Brough, Orkney, who at one time owned the Fair Isle and other land. Balfour Stewart took his name from a grandmother who belonged to the family of Balfours of Balfour. His uncle, the Revd Charles Clouston of Sandwick, Orkney, was a well-known meteorologist and naturalist. 
Balfour Stewart went to school in Dundee, then for a short time, at the age of thirteen, to the University of St Andrews. At the University of Edinburgh in 1845-6 he attended the class of James David Forbes, the professor of natural philosophy. On leaving the university at the age of eighteen he began an apprenticeship in the office of a cousin, James Balfour, a Leith merchant. Stewart travelled to Australia on business in 1855, where his taste for physical science developed. His first two papers -- 'On the influence of gravity on the physical condition of the moon's surface' and 'On the adaptation of the eye to the rays which emanate from bodies' -- were contributed in 1855 to the Philosophical Society of Victoria. 
On his return Stewart gave up business, and in February 1856 he joined the staff of Kew observatory as assistant observer to John Welsh. In October 1856 he became assistant to his former teacher, Forbes, at the University of Edinburgh, Stewart lecturing on mechanics and mathematical subjects. At that time he also worked at pure mathematics with Professor Philip Kelland, and in 1856 wrote a paper on a theorem in the theory of numbers, his only published contribution to mathematics for which he showed distinct aptitude. In 1857 he published on the relation between the density and composition of sulphuric acid solutions, deducing the existence of definite compounds of the acid and water. Spencer Umfreville Pickering and others subsequently employed Stewart's method of research. 
It was under Forbes's influence, and with free access to Forbes's unique collection of thermal apparatus, that Stewart undertook the researches on radiant heat which form his most important contribution to physical science, and for which in 1868 he was awarded the Rumford medal by the Royal Society. Stewart extended the theory of exchanges due to Pierre Prevost of Geneva, and in 1858 proved, in opposition to Fourier, that radiation is not a surface phenomenon, that it depends on the thickness of the radiating body, and in general that at any given temperature and for any kind of radiation the absorption of a plate equals its radiation. Meanwhile Gustav Robert Kirchhoff arrived independently at results which included those of Stewart, and led to the explanation of the dark lines in the solar spectrum as due to the absorption of radiation by layers of the vapours of various elements, and to the foundation by himself and Robert Wilhelm Bunsen of spectrum analysis. 
Stewart continued his researches on this subject after his appointment in 1859 as director of the Kew observatory, in succession to the late John Welsh. In 1860 he undertook experiments on tourmaline, following an experimental arrangement suggested by G. G. Stokes that his law held good for polarized rays of light. In the same year Stewart also showed that red glass, when raised to a sufficiently high temperature, would emit a greenish light, and similarly that a piece of blackened platinum foil appears, when heated, brighter in the blackened part than elsewhere. In May 1861 he wrote a paper on the theory of internal radiation in uniaxal crystals, which was developed in the same year by Stokes. By this time, however, Kirchhoff had practically exhausted the subject for the time being. 
In his eleven-year term as director of the Kew observatory (1859-71) Stewart devoted himself mainly to meteorology, and especially to the phenomena of terrestrial magnetism. Under his guidance Kew became a national centre for the standardization and testing of thermometers, sextants, dipping needles, and other instruments required for meteorological or magnetic work. In August and September 1859 there had been a great magnetic disturbance, accompanied by auroral displays and by marked changes in sunspots; the analysis of the photographic records of the magnetic storm at Kew directed Stewart's attention to the connections between solar behaviour and terrestrial phenomena. General Edward Sabine had previously shown a connection between the occurrence of sunspots and magnetic disturbances. In 1861 Stewart put forward the view that aurorae, magnetic storms, and earth currents were due to variations in a primary electric current in the sun. These themes became leitmotifs throughout the rest of Stewart's career in physical research. In 1862 he was elected FRS, and in the same year he suggested that the red prominences on the sun were solar aurorae. 
In 1863 Stewart made a careful investigation of the increase of pressure of a given volume of air between 32 degree F and 212 degree F, and his result for this important constant agreed closely with that of Victor Regnault. On 8 September that year Stewart married Katharine Stevens, only daughter of Charles Stevens, a lawyer in London; they had two sons and a daughter. In 1866 Stewart redetermined the density of mercury at 32 degree F with great accuracy and published his widely read 'Treatise on Heat'. By then it was known that the law of radiation of Stewart and Kirchhoff did not hold for a moving body in an enclosure of constant temperature. In conjunction with Professor P. G. Tait, whom he had known since becoming an examiner of the University of Edinburgh in 1861, Stewart carried out a number of experiments on the heating of a disc by rapid rotation 'in vacuo'. The apparatus for the trials undertaken between 1865 and 1873 was designed by R. Beckley, engineer to the Kew observatory. These experiments were discussed and analysed by James Clerk Maxwell, Professor Ludwig Boltzmann, and others, but without reaching agreement on the correct explanation of the heating effect elicited. 
In 1865-8 Stewart published, in conjunction with Warren De La Rue and Benjamin Loewy, a long series of investigations on sunspots, the variation of which they attempted, albeit not without controversy, to trace to changes in planetary configuration. Nevertheless, Stewart showed that the daily range of magnetic variation appeared to be connected with these changes. He spent much effort from this time until his death on the discovery of certain periodic inequalities in terrestrial and solar phenomena. Stewart attempted to deduce causes for these inequalities in a project he called cosmical meteorology, and he collaborated with many individuals on researches to this end. Since Stewart knew that such deductions could be regarded as valid only when based on an extremely large number of observations, with the assistance of William Dodgson, William Lant Carpenter, and others, he spent a large amount of labour on the necessary calculations. 
On 1 January 1867 Stewart was appointed secretary to the government meteorological committee, and in this and the following year he supervised the installation of meteorological stations all over the kingdom. He resigned the post in 1869 following a major disagreement with Sabine about the collection and analysis of meteorological data. He continued, however, to act as superintendent of Kew observatory until 1871. 
On 7 July 1870 Stewart was appointed professor of natural philosophy in the Owens College, Manchester, his reputation for educational writing having been secured by his book of that year 'Lessons in Elementary Physics'. In one of his journeys from London, in November 1870, he met with a railway accident in which his thigh was crushed, and for nine months he lay ill at Harrow, in the course of which he passed from 'vigorous activity... to a grey-headed old age' (Tait, 'Nature', 202), although his mental powers remained unimpaired. 
Returning to duties at Owens in 1871, Stewart established a new physics laboratory for students in which he taught J. J. Thomson, Arthur Schuster, and J. H. Poynting. He was not a forceful lecturer, but introduced his disorderly students to the joys of research in the laboratory. Despite his injury, Stewart published two major textbooks in 1872, his 'Conservation of Energy' (many editions and translations) and his 'Primer in Physics'. Between 1875 and 1885 he worked with his assistant W. H. H. Gee on a series of textbooks on practical physics, and composed the entry on terrestrial magnetism for the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. 
In April 1875 Stewart and Tait published anonymously a book called 'The Unseen Universe'. They aimed at deducing from theological postulates and scientific evidence the existence of the soul and of a transcendental universe, and thus that the doctrines of science and religion were by no means in conflict, as contemporary materialists had claimed. Written in a popular and picturesque style the book excited much attention, running through fourteen editions in thirteen years, the authors only avowing their identity in the fourth edition (April 1876). Professor William Kingdon Clifford had made an attack on the book from the heterodox point of view in the 'Fortnightly Review' (June 1875), to which a reply was offered in the preface to the second edition. A sequel published in 1878 by Stewart and Tait, dedicated to the members of the Paradoxical Society, and entitled 'Paradoxical Philosophy', portrayed in dialogue form the conversion of a cynical and heterodox German mathematician to religious and social orthodoxy, but proved less successful. 
Stewart, who was a devoted and fervent churchman, was elected by a conference held at Lambeth Palace on 7 January 1881 as member of a committee for promoting interchange of views between scientific men of orthodox views in religious matters. He was also one of the founders of the Society for Psychical Research, in whose investigations he took a deep interest. He made several short contributions to its proceedings, and was president from 1885 until his death. In February 1887 he was elected president of the Physical Society, and also of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. He died suddenly on 19 December 1887 of apoplexy at Ballymagarvey, a small estate near Drogheda which he had inherited, where he was spending Christmas. He was survived by his wife. Stewart was known to his friends and family as a man of exceptionally modest, gentle, and kindly nature. His collaborator, Tait, added that Stewart was 'full of the most weird and grotesque ideas which made him a most stimulating conversationalist and co-worker' (Tait, 'PRS', xi). 
At the time of his death Stewart's speculations on cosmical meteorology had become less reputable as critics had pointed out the discrepancies in different experimental reports of solar-terrestrial correlations. Although his junior colleague Arthur Schuster pursued Stewart's project after 1887, it was only in the latter decades of the twentieth century that Stewart's conviction of a correlation between sunspots and weather was borne out by weather forecasters. 


@@@@@


doc= 26464


Stewart, Charles (1775-1812), army officer, was the eldest son of Thomas Stewart of Drumin, Banffshire, a lieutenant in the 56th foot, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Gordon. After serving for a short time in the duke of Gordon's fencibles, he was commissioned lieutenant in the 71st (Highland) regiment on 25 January 1791. He joined it in India, and was wounded in the attack on Tippu Sahib's camp at Seringapatam on 6-7 February 1792. He was with the light company, and was noticed by Lord Cornwallis. On 3 April 1794 he obtained a company in the 109th, and, when it was reduced in 1795, he was transferred with the men to the 53rd on 2 September. 
Stewart served for several years in the West Indies, and was wounded in storming the Morne Fortune at St Lucia in May 1796. He was promoted major in the 53rd on 4 April 1800, and came home in command of it about 1804. On 17 February 1805 he was made lieutenant-colonel of the newly raised 2nd battalion of the 50th. Sir Charles James Napier, who was major under him, wrote of him at the time as very pleasant in command and very decided, and afterwards spoke of him as one of the best officers of his rank. 
Having been transferred to the 1st battalion, Stewart served with it in the Walcheren expedition, was left in command of the rearguard when the army withdrew, and was mentioned in dispatches. In September 1810 he went to the Peninsula with the 1st battalion, and commanded it throughout the campaigns of 1811-12. It was engaged at Fuentes de Onoro, and was soon afterwards attached to Hill's corps and took part in the actions at Arroyo de Molinos, Almaraz, and Alba de Tormes. In the storming of Fort Napoleon, at Almaraz, Stewart led the right wing of his regiment 'in a most gallant and spirited manner'. The hardships of the retreat to Portugal in the autumn of 1812 broke down his health, and he died at Coria on 11 December; he was buried with military honours in the Campo Santo at Coria. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 26465


Stewart, Charles (1764-1837), orientalist, was the eldest son of Poyntz Stewart, army officer, of Lisburn, co. Antrim, where Charles was born. In 1781 he entered the East India Company's Bengal army as cadet; he left it with the rank of major in 1808. When the Fort William College was founded at Calcutta in 1800 Stewart was appointed assistant professor of Persian, but in 1806 he returned to England. The following year he was appointed to the professorship of Arabic, Persian, and Hindustani, in the East India College, Haileybury, a post he retained until 1827. His publications were numerous. He wrote on historical and literary subjects, as well as compiling bibliographical and biographical works such as 'A descriptive catalogue of the oriental library of the late Tippoo Sultan of Mysore, to which are prefixed memoirs of Hyder Aly and his son, Tippoo Sultan' (1809). He also translated several books from Persian and Arabic, notably 'The seventh chapter of 'Anvari Soohyly', with an English translation and analysis of all the Arabic words' (1821) and 'The Mulfuzat Timury, or, Autobiographical memoirs of the Moghul Emperor Timur, translated' (1830). He was a member of the Konigliche Akademie der Wissenschaften of Munich and other learned bodies, and in 1831 received the gold medal of the Oriental Translation Fund. 
Stewart married, first, Amelia, daughter of Sir W. Gordon, baronet, of Embo, and, secondly, in 1828, Anne, daughter of Nicholas Holland, rector of Stifford, and widow of J. Reid, of Calcutta. There were no children from either marriage. Stewart died at Bath, where he had lived for the last decade of his life, on 19 April 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 26466


Stewart, Charles James (1775-1837), bishop of Quebec, was born on either 13 or 16 April 1775 at London, the third surviving son of John Stewart, seventh earl of Galloway (1736-1806), and his second wife, Anne (1742/3-1830), second daughter of Sir James Dashwood of Kirtlington, baronet. General Sir William Stewart (1774-1827) was an elder brother. Stewart was educated at home, at Galloway House, Wigtownshire, by private tutors, notably the Revd Eliezer Williams, an evangelical clergyman who was to have a profound influence on his vocation. He matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 22 May 1792, graduating BA in 1795, proceeding MA in 1799, and BD and DD in 1816. In 1795 he was elected a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford. He was ordained deacon on 23 December 1798 and priest on 19 May 1799 in Christ Church, Oxford, after which he was presented to the rectories of Orton-Longueville and Botolph Bridge in Huntingdonshire. 
During a visit to England in 1806 by Jacob Mountain, bishop of Quebec, Stewart was recommended to him for missionary work in Canada. He arrived in Quebec on 27 September 1807 and was appointed to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel's mission of St Armand in Misisquoi Bay, on the border with Vermont, which covered a number of townships. From this time he devoted both time and money to the work of the church in North America. As a result of his efforts, and partly of his private generosity, twenty-four churches, some very simple, were built. His first service at Trinity Church, Frelighsburg, in 1809 attracted some 1000 worshippers. This success was repeated at Philipsburg in 1811, and his new churches attracted large, regular congregations. Stewart's ministry was characterized by constant travel; to Montreal at least once a year, and frequently south into Vermont. During this time many of his sermons were printed and distributed without charge, to provide spiritual reading for his congregations until his next visit. He gave considerable encouragement and financial support to schools in St Armand. He was also instrumental in organizing relief work among the sick, refugees, and prisoners during the Anglo-American War of 1812-14. In 1817, after a visit to England to raise funds for church building, Stewart moved to Hatley, east of St Armand, where he continued the same pattern of ministry. In 1819, to meet the needs of the growing number of immigrants, he became a visiting missionary, with responsibility for travelling to the remoter parts of the diocese of Quebec. On his first tour of Upper Canada he travelled nearly 2000 miles in six months, and this became a regular routine. 
In 1825 Stewart was selected to succeed Jacob Mountain as bishop of Quebec, and returned to England, where he was consecrated on 1 January 1826 at Lambeth Palace. As bishop he did not slacken his pace, but continued to tour Upper and Lower Canada, hoping to provide effective ministry for areas which were short-staffed and to increase the number of clergy. By 1832 he had ordained thirty priests and confirmed about 3800 people. In 1833, when the first steps were taken in England to cut government funding for the church in North America, Stewart was faced with fresh difficulties. There was an increasing call for the secularization of the clergy reserves in order to channel the revenue into public education, rather than support for the established church. Stewart, though a supporter of educational expansion and not by nature a controversialist, was forced rather unwillingly to champion the Anglican cause. At the same time the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel was threatened with a withdrawal of grants from the British government for the payment of missionaries' stipends. Here Stewart had better success, as the grants were reduced rather than cut off, but this external pressure forced him to urge the Canadian church to become self-supporting. This, in turn, began a movement for self-government and an increasing lay participation in church ministry. 
Stewart's health began to deteriorate, partly owing to the strain of his work, and an assistant, George Jehoshaphat Mountain, was consecrated coadjutor-bishop of Montreal on 14 February 1836. In September of the same year Stewart returned on a visit to England. He died unmarried at his brother's house in Grosvenor Square in London on 13 July 1837, and was buried in the Stewart family vault at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26467


Vane, Charles William, third marquess of Londonderry (1778-1854), army officer and diplomatist, was the only son of Robert Stewart, first marquess of Londonderry (1739-1821), and his second wife, Frances (died 18 January 1833, aged eighty-two), eldest daughter of Charles Pratt, first Earl Camden. He was born in Mary Street, Dublin, on 18 May 1778, and was thus nine years younger than his half-brother, Robert Stewart, second marquess, better known as Lord Castlereagh. Charles was raised as an Anglican, in contrast to the family's Presbyterian tradition, and was educated at Eton College (1790-94), where at the age of thirteen he narrowly escaped drowning in a vain attempt to save the life of his schoolfellow Lord Waldegrave. 
At the age of sixteen, on 11 October 1794, he was commissioned an ensign in a newly raised regiment of foot (Macnamara's), in which he became lieutenant on 30 October and captain on 12 November. He obtained a majority in the 106th foot on 31 July 1795, but both this and his former regiment were disbanded in that year. He was employed on the staff of Lord Moira's corps in the campaign of 1794-5 in the Netherlands. He then accompanied Colonel Craufurd to the headquarters of the Austrian army, and served with it in the campaigns of 1795-6 on the Rhine and upper Danube. At Donauworth he was struck by a bullet, the ball entering the right side of his face, passing under his nose, and lodging in his left cheek, subsequently leaving his sight impaired. 
Having briefly served as aide-de-camp to his uncle, Lord Camden, the lord lieutenant of Ireland, on 4 August 1796 Stewart obtained a majority in the 5th dragoons (Royal Irish); he became lieutenant-colonel of the regiment on 1 January 1797. The 5th dragoons served in Ireland during the uprising of 1798, but were disbanded as potentially disloyal on 8 April 1799. Lord Cornwallis, however, expressed the hope that since Stewart's individual exertions had been 'as meritorious as possible' his worth should not be 'suffered to pass unnoticed', and with the concurrence of the duke of York he was within four days made lieutenant-colonel of the 18th light dragoons (Charles, marquess of Londonderry, 'Memoirs', 1st ser., 2.105-6, 112). Stewart served in the short campaign of 1799 in the Netherlands. He was attached to Abercromby's division on 19 September, and to Pulteney's on 2 October, and was again slightly wounded on outpost duty at Schagenburg on 10 October. On 25 September 1803 he was made aide-de-camp to the king and colonel in the army. Shortly afterwards he was appointed under-secretary in Ireland. He had been elected member for Thomastown in the Irish parliament in March 1800, and for County Londonderry (where his family owned estates) in May; after the union he was member for County Londonderry in the imperial parliament from 1801 until 1814, serving as under-secretary to his half-brother at the war department in 1807. 
In August 1808 Stewart left his office for a time to command the hussar brigade in the corps sent out to Portugal under Sir John Moore. The brigade, composed of the 18th and the King's German hussars, to which the 10th hussars were later added, covered Hope's advance on Madrid and Salamanca in November, and afterwards the retreat of the whole army on Corunna. Stewart was critical of Moore, who in turn thought Stewart a 'very silly fellow' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 6.319), though publicly he praised Stewart and Paget for the spirit they had inspired in the cavalry. Stewart returned to England and to his office in January 1809, but in April 1809, on the recommendation of Castlereagh, he went back to Portugal as adjutant-general under Sir Arthur Wellesley (later Viscount Wellington), with the rank of brigadier-general. He was promoted major-general on 25 July, and served as adjutant-general throughout the campaigns of 1810 and 1811. Stewart was full of praise for Wellington, but the latter shared Moore's reservations, especially as regards the pretensions Stewart brought to his position as adjutant-general. 'The Times' commented that 'it was never pretended that the Marquis of Londonderry possessed the qualities of a great military commander', but added that 'there never was a braver soldier in the British army' ('The Times', 7 March 1854, 9). At Rueda his dashing attack unfortunately gave away the British positions; at Porto his charge with a squadron of the 14th dragoons resulted in severe casualties. No one doubted his gallantry; Wellington mentioned him in his dispatches following Busaco and Fuentes de Onoro; he singled him out for repeated praise for his actions at Porto, while the French commander, Foy, described his action as 'un charge incroyable'. The thanks of the House of Commons were voted to him after Talavera, and Wellington told Liverpool that Stewart behaved with 'his usual gallantry' at Cuidad Rodrigo (Oman, 341; 'Despatches, Correspondence', 2nd ser., 4.321-4, 5.309). Wellington, however, refused to trust him with a substantial cavalry command, telling the duke of York that, with his defective sight and hearing, his gallantry would be apt to lead him into difficulties 'from which even the superiority of our men and horses would not be able to extricate our cavalry'. Years later, Wellington told Croker that Stewart used to harass the cavalry to death by constant patrols and reconnaissances. This, he added, 'I was obliged to forbid, but he refused to obey me' ('Supplementary Despatches', 7.165-6; 'Croker', 1.346). Moore, with some justification, and Wellington with less, believed Stewart intrigued in London behind their backs. His direct line to the war department was unsettling to his commanders, for, as Wellington told Croker in 1826, 'Castlereagh had a real respect for Charles's understanding, and a high opinion of his good sense and discretion. This seems incomprehensible to us who knew the two men' ('Croker', 1.346). 
With the rejection of his repeated requests for a new cavalry command, on the return of his half-brother to office as foreign secretary, Stewart embarked on a diplomatic career. As he later confessed to Lord Clarendon, though he had 'no trade but the sword', a 'smatter' of diplomacy had come his way (Londonderry to Clarendon, 19 Nov 1851). Having been made KB on 1 February 1813, and having received the Portuguese order of the Tower and Sword on 27 March (he was to receive the gold medal with one clasp in the following year for his services in the Peninsula), Stewart was appointed on 9 April 1813 British minister to the court of Berlin; he was 'specially charged with the military superintendent, so far as Great Britain is concerned, of the Prussian and Swedish armies'. He reached the headquarters of the allies at Dresden on 26 April, and signed the formal treaty of alliance between Great Britain, Russia, and Prussia. To his chagrin he missed the battle at Lutzen; but he was actively engaged at Bautzen, and he took part in Blucher's cavalry stroke at Haynau on 26 May. He helped to storm one of the redoubts at Dresden, and was severely wounded at Kulm. At Leipzig (16 October) Blucher gave him the command of his reserve cavalry, and he captured a battery at the head of the Brandenburg hussars. He was said, as ambassador, to be 'always at the post of danger', and 'to have no other object in view than to go in quest of death wherever it is most likely to be found' ('Supplementary Despatches', 8.353). 
But it was in bringing pressure upon Bernadotte that Stewart was of most service to the cause of the allies. Recognizing Bernadotte's reluctance to attack his countrymen, Stewart, using 'outrageous' plain speaking, brought him to undertake a limited advance at Leipzig (Brett-James, 204-5), and he prevented the completion of a convention under which Davout would have been allowed to return to France with 30,000 troops. During the campaign of 1814 Stewart, who had been made colonel of the 25th light dragoons on 20 November 1813, was present at the actions of La Rothiere, Fere-Champenoise, and Montmartre, and at the entry into Paris on 31 March. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 4 June. 
Bernadotte 'a prefere ses interets a ses passions' (ibid., 212), in creating Stewart knight grand cross of the sword of Sweden (25 October 1813), but his elevation to the peerage as Baron Stewart of Stewart's Court and Ballylawn, co. Donegal, rumours of which were abroad in 1813, but which was finally gazetted on 1 July 1814, marked genuine regard for his services, as well as Castlereagh's favour. He also received the order of the Black Eagle (30 September 1813), and of the Red Eagle (12 March 1814) of Prussia, and the Russian order of St George (fourth class) (30 September 1813). He received an honorary DCL from Oxford (16 June 1814) and an honorary LLD from Cambridge (July 1814), and was sworn of the privy council on 22 July 1814. On the enlargement of the Bath he received the GCB (January 1815), and in March 1816 the GCH. 
On 27 August 1814 Stewart was appointed ambassador at Vienna. He assisted Castlereagh, and afterwards Wellington, in the negotiations of the congress there, being especially concerned with the affairs of Switzerland. His chief function, and one in which his skill was acknowledged, was as a verbatim note-taker, but Castlereagh also used him as a trusted messenger to England. At Vienna his love of finery in dress earned him the name 'the golden peacock' and made him ridiculous; his drinking attracted unfavourable comment; and his womanizing shocked the diarist Charles Greville, as well as attracting the attention of the Austrian secret police. As well as patronizing the brothels of Vienna, as a handsome widower, Stewart's name had been linked with Lady Priscilla Burghersh and the Princess Bagration, before he resumed an affair, begun while recuperating from his wound at Kulm, with the duchess of Sagan. Nevertheless Castlereagh confirmed him as British representative at the congresses of Troppau in 1820, and Laybach in 1821, and he was at Verona with Wellington in 1822. More sceptical of Metternich that the gullible Aberdeen, Stewart played the difficult role assigned to him, of participating without committing his government, with some skill. 
By his brother's death on 12 August 1822 Stewart became marquess of Londonderry, and when he found that Canning was to take the Foreign Office he tendered his resignation; but at Canning's request he remained until the end of the year to assist Wellington at Verona. Nevertheless he sought to persuade fellow ambassadors, such as Cathcart, to help in resisting the new foreign secretary. His devotion to his brother, which was to persist throughout his life, was largely responsible for his hatred of Canning, and also made him suspicious of Wellington, leading to hostility between the two men at Verona, and setting a pattern of alternating distrust of, and regard for, the duke that was also to remain a feature of Stewart's career. In 1823, on his return from Verona, he demanded of Liverpool a diplomatic pension, causing the prime minister (who had already experienced great difficulties with Stewart's demands for the reversion of his brother's command of the County Londonderry militia, and the granting of the British peerage promised to his late brother) to write on the offending letter 'This is too bad', a phrase that was to be thrown at Stewart, now Londonderry, by his enemies for the rest of his life. The prime minister and others saw him as greedy and grasping; for his part Stewart pointed out that he had resigned the lordship of the bedchamber he had held since 1814, as well as resigning the governorship of Fort Charles in Jamaica (to which he had been appointed in 1809) to facilitate the government's arrangements with Bloomfield. 
On 8 August 1804 Stewart had married Lady Catherine Bligh ('b'. 1774), daughter of the third earl of Darnley. She died on 11 February 1812, while he was on his way home from Spain, leaving one son. On 3 April 1819 he married, against the protests of her family, Frances Anne Emily Vane-Tempest (died 1865) ['see 'Vane, Frances Anne], only daughter of Sir Harry Vane-Tempest, and of Anne, 'suo jure' countess of Antrim, and heir to very large estates in co. Durham and the north of Ireland. On his marriage he took the surname Vane, and on 28 March 1823 he was created Earl Vane and Viscount Seaham in the peerage of the United Kingdom, with remainder to the eldest son by his second marriage. 
Having failed in an attempt, prompted by his own and his sister-in-law's antipathy to Canning, to establish an independent political connection with Camden and other associates of his late brother, the new Lord Londonderry devoted himself to establishing a political power base in Ireland and co. Durham. In co. Down he renewed his family's alliance with the Hills; in Durham he achieved, until 1831, a similar understanding with the Lambtons. This latter, though surviving the accession to office of Lord Grey, with whom Londonderry, once again estranged from Wellington, expressed sympathy, failed to survive the 'Reform Bill', of which Londonderry became one of the most bitter opponents, being at one point almost dragged from his horse by a pro-reform mob, and having to be forcibly restrained in his place in the Lords from interrupting William IV's dissolution in 1831. 
As a reward for his considerable expenditure in the Conservative cause, amounting in his own estimation to $30,000, in 1835, during Peel's short administration, he was offered and accepted the embassy at St Petersburg; the appointment was, however, bitterly attacked in the House of Commons on 13 March, on the grounds of Londonderry's unsuitability as an ambassador, and his pro-Russian stance on the Polish revolt. Wellington, as foreign secretary, had told Greville: 'that he was not particularly partial to the man, nor ever had been; but that he was very fit for that post, was an excellent ambassador, procured more information and obtained more insight into the affairs of a foreign court than anybody, and that he was the best relater of what passed at a conference, and wrote the best account of a conversation, of any man he knew. ('Greville Memoirs', 15 March 1835)' But in the face of the Commons' attack Londonderry, to save the government embarrassment, withdrew. Partly in compensation Peel offered Londonderry his old job at Vienna in 1841 (in spite of Queen Victoria's request that Londonderry should not be offered employment), but Londonderry's sense of self-importance and pretensions to other office (he wanted the Paris embassy, or the lord lieutenant of Ireland) made him decline. He nevertheless remained a supporter of Peel until 1850, though the latter failed to appreciate the complex local factors which induced Londonderry to support John Bright at the Durham City by-election of July 1843, in preference to a Conservative. Similar local considerations also induced him to oppose his own son at County Down in 1852. 
In co. Durham he threw himself enthusiastically into his second wife's coal concerns, investing heavily in property, and recruiting the foremost mining viewer of his day, John Buddle, as his agent. Seaham harbour was commissioned and built by him, exporting its first coal in 1831. That year also saw Londonderry settle a coal strike, following a face-to-face meeting with the union leader, Thomas Hepburn, to the disgust of his fellow owners. High expectations were held out that he would perform a similar function in the 1844 coal strike, and miners' delegates appealed to him to arbitrate the dispute. When, however, Londonderry refused to do so, the miners turned against him; his habit of issuing paternalistic ukases played into the hands of his critics, and popular mythology from then on unjustly cast him as the arch villain of the north-east coal trade, citing his opposition to the 'Coal Mines Act' of 1842 as evidence for their view. Though Londonderry was in theory a wealthy man, the fluctuations of the coal trade, his electioneering expenditure, and his personal extravagance meant that he was always in financial difficulties -- so much so that in 1834 it was feared he would follow his half-brother's example of suicide. 
Londonderry fought two duels, the first against Cornet Battier, of the 10th hussars, of which he had become colonel on 3 February 1820, for which he was soundly reprimanded by the Horse Guards; and the second against Henry Grattan the younger in 1839 for an alleged slight over the so-called 'bedchamber' crisis. In each case Londonderry received his adversary's fire, and then discharged his own pistol in the air. 
On 10 January 1837 Londonderry became general, and on 21 June 1843 he was transferred from the 10th hussars to the 2nd Life Guards. He had been appointed governor of co. Londonderry in 1823, and one of the joint-governors of co. Down in 1824; and he was made lord lieutenant of Durham on 27 April 1842. His lingering military ambitions were rebuffed by Derby, to whom he had transferred his political allegiance, when the latter declined to appoint him MGO in 1852. Derby, however, sought to compensate him on 19 January 1853 by awarding him the Garter made vacant by Wellington's death. 
Londonderry was one of the pallbearers at Wellington's funeral, but he did not long survive his old chief. He died at his home, Holdernesse House, Park Lane, London, on 6 March 1854, from influenza, and was buried on 16 March at Long Newton, near Wynyard Park, co. Durham, where his widow (who died on 20 January 1865, after continuing, to the admiration of Londonderry's friend, Disraeli, to manage the colliery enterprises following his death) built a 'memorial-room' for the insignia of his orders and other relics of him. An equestrian statue of him by Gaetano Monti was unveiled in the market place at Durham by Disraeli on 2 December 1861. 
Londonderry's only son from his first marriage, Frederick William Robert Stewart (1805-1872), succeeded as fourth marquess of Londonderry. Londonderry had three sons and four daughters from his second marriage. The eldest of these sons, George Henry Robert Charles William Vane-Tempest (1821-1884), succeeded him as Earl Vane, and (by the death of his half-brother) became fifth marquess of Londonderry on 25 November 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 26468


Stewart, David, duke of Rothesay (1378-1402), prince, was the eldest son of Robert III (d. 1406), and Annabella (Drummond) (d. 1401). He is reputed to have been born on 24 October 1378, when his father was still known as John, earl of Carrick -- when the latter became king as Robert III in 1390, his earldom passed to David. From an early stage in his life David was forced to play an important part in royal government because of the physical and political incapacity of his father, who in 1388 had been declared incapable of running the kingdom as guardian on behalf of his aged father Robert II (1316-1390), and replaced by his brother Robert Stewart, earl of Fife and Menteith. Even after Earl John succeeded to the throne Fife remained guardian. By February 1393 Fife's guardianship had been annulled, and the growing influence and activity of Carrick and his adherents possibly underlay this decision. In the years after 1390 Carrick's household was dominated by Sir James Lindsay of Crawford, his cousin David Lindsay of Glen Esk, and their kinsmen. His attachment to the Lindsays was romantic as well as political, for he had become involved in an affair with David Lindsay's sister Euphemia. 
In the summer of 1395, however, Carrick set aside Euphemia Lindsay and married Elizabeth Dunbar, the daughter of George, earl of March. The marriage provoked political opposition inside Scotland, led by Robert III himself. The marriage was annulled in 1397, but under terms which would allow the couple to marry after a suitable period of separation. When Carrick chose another bride in 1400, the result was a major dispute with the earl of March. 
Regardless of his marital problems Carrick assumed a more prominent role in royal government and diplomacy as the 1390s progressed. By 1397 he was established as a member of his father's council, and he acted as the king's chief representative at Anglo-Scottish march days and truce negotiations. Between 1395 and 1397, moreover, he headed a number of judicial and military expeditions into the north of the kingdom. On 28 April 1398 his growing status in the realm was reflected in his being created duke of Rothesay in a ceremony which was conducted at Scone while a general council met at nearby Perth. On the same day his uncle the earl of Fife was made duke of Albany. The two new royal dukes were immediately assigned the task of leading royal forces against Donald, lord of the Isles, that summer. During the course of the campaign, on 6 September, Rothesay received a grant of the earldom of Atholl from his father. 
Rothesay's and Albany's leadership of the royal host in 1398 resulted from the personal incapacity of Robert III as war leader, and the Perth general council had implicitly criticized the king's failings in a number of other areas. Rothesay, on the other hand, was young, vigorous, and capable. The duke was also fast approaching the age of full legal adulthood, reaching twenty (and entering his twenty-first year) in October 1398. Continued dissatisfaction with the king's governance of the realm contributed to the growth of a political consensus which supported the creation of a royal lieutenancy for the heir to the throne. In November 1398 a meeting at Falkland, involving Rothesay, Albany, and Archibald, third earl of Douglas, seems to have cleared the way for Rothesay's appointment as royal lieutenant. A general council meeting at Perth in January 1399 removed Robert III from active power and created a three-year lieutenancy for Rothesay. His tenure of this office was hedged with qualifications which meant that he would be answerable to the three estates for his behaviour and actions as lieutenant. Furthermore, the duke was enjoined to govern with the advice of a large council of twenty-one named men, a group which included Albany and Douglas. Whether the subjection of Rothesay's office to conciliar supervision was the product of a general concern over the delegation of critical royal powers to a relatively youthful lord or a more specific response to worrying aspects of the duke's character is unclear. 
As lieutenant Rothesay seems to have been energetic and reasonably effective. In February-March 1401, for example, he held a parliament in Perth which passed a number of statutes designed to improve the exercise of criminal and civil law. But he also made a number of political mistakes. Most notably, his decision early in 1400 to marry Mary Douglas (died in or before 1421), daughter of the earl of Douglas, provoked a furious response from the earl of March, father of the jilted Elizabeth Dunbar. In February 1400 March opened treasonable negotiations with the English king, Henry IV, and his disaffection was one of the factors which induced Henry to launch an invasion of southern Scotland in the summer of 1400. In late June March crossed the border to meet Henry, who was mustering his forces at York, and during his absence Archibald Douglas, son of the earl of Douglas, seized March's chief castle of Dunbar, forcing him into English service. Henry's army advanced into Scotland on 14 August, but the expedition soon ran into logistical problems and found no Scottish forces willing to take the field against it. Rothesay sat out the invasion in the safety of Edinburgh Castle, and replied to Henry's demands for homage with the offer of a combat between the noblemen of the kingdoms, to the number of 100, 200, or 300 a side, in order to limit the shedding of Christian blood. By 29 August the English army had left Scotland, having achieved nothing. One important result of the events of 1400, however, was the Douglas seizure of Dunbar and the exile of the earl of March. The cross-border Douglas-March feud was to play a critical role in Rothesay's downfall in 1401. Moreover, many in Scotland, perhaps including Albany, seem to have sympathized with March's predicament. 
The real crisis of Rothesay's lieutenancy was sparked by the young duke's behaviour during 1401. The chronicler Walter Bower saw the catalyst as the death of Rothesay's mother, Queen Annabella, in the autumn of 1401; after that, he wrote, 'it was as if a noose had become worn: he hoped to free himself and, spurning his council of honourable men, gave himself up to his previous frivolity'. Bower reports that, unable to control Rothesay, 'the council of magnates assigned to him resigned to the king, observing that even if they wished, they could not divert him to a serious way of life' (Bower, 8.39). In response, Bower claims, the king wrote to Albany requiring him to arrest Rothesay and place him in custody, until 'after punishment by the rod of discipline, he should know himself better'. Bower's account is generally sympathetic to Albany, and his presentation of Rothesay as a dissolute and indolent character seems to reflect the political viewpoint of Albany and his allies in 1401-2 and was intended to justify their action against Rothesay. Bower is probably correct, however, in suggesting that the crisis was precipitated by Rothesay's rejection of the constraints of conciliar supervision and his adoption of a more aggressive and independent approach to the administration of the realm during 1401. In the exploitation of royal revenues, in particular, Rothesay appears increasingly to have bypassed established conventions and officials, arbitrarily seizing money directly from the custumars of the east coast burghs even when these men had already paid their dues to Albany as royal chamberlain. Similarly, his occupation of the temporalities of the bishopric of St Andrews, following the death of bishop Walter Trail shortly before 1 July 1401, aroused resentment. 
Alarmed by his diminishing ability to control the activities of his nephew, Albany arranged for Rothesay's 'arrest' on the outskirts of St Andrews by members of Rothesay's own household, Sir John Ramornie and Sir William Lindsay of Rossie, on a date late in 1401 or early in 1402. Bower's account suggests that Albany justified the arrest on two grounds, namely Rothesay's breaking of the terms of his commission of lieutenancy and the express approval and instruction of the king, although whether the action against Rothesay was sanctioned by Robert III, as Bower claims, is unclear. After Rothesay's arrest, and while the young duke was held in the episcopal castle of St Andrews, Albany met with Rothesay's brother-in-law Archibald Douglas, now fourth earl of Douglas, and secured Douglas's approval of his actions by sanctioning the breakup of the earldom of March among Douglas and his supporters and by committing himself to a more aggressive foreign policy aimed against Douglas's exiled rival March and his English backers. Following Albany's agreement with Douglas, Rothesay was transferred to Albany's own castle of Falkland. 
After a prolonged spell as a prisoner Rothesay died in the dungeons of Falkland between 25 and 27 March 1402; he was buried in the nearby abbey of Lindores. Although it was claimed that he had died of dysentery, others suspected, perhaps correctly, that he had been starved to death. One of his most prominent supporters, his maternal uncle Sir Malcolm Drummond, lord of Mar ['see under 'Drummond family], also died in custody under suspicious circumstances during 1402. In a general council of May 1402 Albany and Douglas received a royal indemnity for themselves and any of their men and adherents who had been involved in Rothesay's capture and imprisonment. The terms of the pardon suggest that many were directly accusing the two men of Rothesay's murder: it declared that the heir to the throne had died 'by divine providence and not otherwise' and commanded that no one should 'murmur against' Albany and Douglas. By the 1470s a popular cult had developed which regarded Rothesay as a saint and martyr, put to death in horrific circumstances, and his tomb at Lindores was a pilgrimage centre and the scene of miracles. 
Rothesay's marriage to Mary Douglas produced no children. After his death Mary married Sir Walter Haliburton of Dirleton. Rothesay's younger brother, the future James I, succeeded to the earldom of Carrick. 


@@@@@


doc= 26469


Stewart, David, of Garth (1772-1829), army officer and writer on the Scottish highlanders, was the second son of Robert Stewart of Garth, Perthshire, and was descended from James Stewart (son of the Wolf of Badenoch, one of the many bastard children of Robert II) who built the castle of Garth at the end of the fourteenth century. His family had been Jacobite, and his maternal grandfather was killed at Culloden. Stewart was given a commission as ensign in the 77th (Atholl highlanders) on 21 April 1783, but they were disbanded soon afterwards. He joined the 42nd highlanders (the Black Watch) on 10 August 1787, became lieutenant on 8 August 1792, and captain-lieutenant on 24 June 1796. After serving with the 42nd in Flanders in 1794 he went with it to the West Indies in October 1795. He took part in the capture of St Lucia and St Vincent, and in the prolonged bush-fighting with the Caribs. He was also in the unsuccessful expedition against Puerto Rico in 1797. 
Stewart returned to Europe with the 42nd, was in garrison at Gibraltar, and embarked there with the expedition for the recovery of Minorca in November 1798. He was taken prisoner at sea, and was detained for five months in Spain before he was exchanged. He went to Egypt with Abercromby's expedition, and was severely wounded at the battle of Alexandria on 21 March 1801. On 15 December 1800 he had obtained a company in the 90th (Perthshire volunteers), but he returned to the 42nd on 23 July 1802. Stewart obtained a majority in the 78th highlanders (later the Seaforth Highlanders) on 17 April 1804 by raising recruits for the 2nd battalion then being formed, a feat made easy by his popularity in the highlands. His men were so attached to him that when he was at Shorncliffe in the following year Sir John Moore intervened to prevent his being sent to India to join the 1st battalion. He went with the 2nd battalion to the Mediterranean in September 1805, and took part in the descent on Calabria. At Maida, on 4 July 1806, he commanded a battalion of light companies, and was again severely wounded. He was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the West India rangers on 21 April 1808, and took part in the capture of Guadeloupe in 1810. He received a medal with one clasp for this and Maida, and in 1815 he was made CB. He was promoted colonel in the army on 4 June 1814, and in 1815 was placed on half pay. 
A traditionalist, praised by his friend Sir Walter Scott as 'honest Garth... a highlander of the old stamp' ('Letters', 10.468), Stewart was of 'gentle compassion and integrity of opinion, a small, weak-sighted man' (Prebble, 33). He was committed to the highlanders, and opposed to 'the cruel and oppressive system of landlords' (ibid., 34) and their clearances. 
In 1817 the officer commanding the Black Watch asked him for information on its history, as its records had been lost. The reminiscences and enquiries started by this request developed into Stewart's 'Sketches of the character, manners, and present state of the highlanders of Scotland: with details of the military service of the highland regiments' (2 vols., 1822; facsimile reprint 1977 with a coloured map of the clans). This book, 'whose excellence shines forth on every page', was the foundation of later works on the clans. The first two parts, on the country and people, occupy about half the first volume; the remainder provides annals of Scottish regiments, including fencible regiments. Among its subjects were highland dress and bagpipes. Against the opinion that trews were the ancient highland garb, and plaid and kilt modern innovations, he insisted that 'the truis, 'breachan-na-feal' (the kilted plaid), and philibeg, have ever been the dress of the Highlanders' (Stewart, 2.xxii). He also stated that bagpipes should be played in the open air: 'Playing the bagpipes within doors is a Lowland and English custom' (ibid., xxiii). The book sold well, was reprinted, and brought Stewart modest fame and a reputation as the authority on the highlanders. Although, on advice, he had not fully expressed his abhorrence of the treatment of the highlanders, parts were controversial. 'Remarks on Colonel Stewart's Sketches of the Highlanders' (1823) admitted the book's general merits, but alleged it was in parts inaccurate, and objected to its Jacobite sympathies. Stewart had thoughts of writing a history of the 1745 rising but gave it up. In 1820 he founded the Celtic Society of Edinburgh, whose first object was to promote the wearing of the ancient highland dress in the highlands; they wore highland dress in Edinburgh. He contributed, with Sir Walter Scott and others, to changing attitudes to the highlanders and Scottish history and tradition, and to the growing 'highlandism'. Some late-twentieth-century historians have seen them as 'inventing tradition', an allegation Stewart would surely have rejected as indignantly as he did the claim that the kilt had been invented by an Englishman. 
Soon after publishing his book, on the death of his simple elder brother, Stewart succeeded to the estate of Garth, impoverished by the incapacity of his father and of his elder brother. Before and during George IV's visit to Edinburgh in August 1822, Stewart helped Sir Walter Scott with the arrangements, headed the Celtic Society in the procession -- Lockhart wrote of his 'Toy-Captainship' -- adjusted the royal plaid for the levee, and pronounced the king 'a vera pretty man'. He was promoted major-general on 27 May 1825, and in 1829 he went out to St Lucia in the Windward Islands, as governor. St Lucia was very unhealthy; in little over four years, from 1829 to 1834, four governors died at Government House (known as the Pavilion), Morne Fortune near Castries. On 18 December Stewart died there, probably of malaria; he was buried in Castries. Stewart was widely regretted; he was unmarried, and had illegitimate children. 


@@@@@


doc= 26470


Stewart, Sir Donald Martin, first baronet (1824-1900), army officer, was born at Mount Pleasant, near Forres, Moray, on 1 March 1824, the son of Robert Stewart of Forres and his wife, a daughter of the Revd Donald Martin, minister of Abernethy, Strathspey, Scotland. Educated at schools at Findhorn, Dufftown, and Elgin, and at Aberdeen University, where he distinguished himself in classics, he entered the East India Company's service as ensign in the 9th Bengal native infantry on 12 October 1840. He was promoted lieutenant on 3 January 1844 and captain on 1 June 1854. He married, in 1847, Marina, daughter of Commander Thomas Dymock Dabine RN, who survived him with their two sons and four daughters. The eldest son, Norman Robert, the second baronet (1851-1926), colonel in the Indian staff corps, served with distinction under his father; the second son, Captain Sir Donald William (1860-1905), was British resident at Kumasi. 
Stewart served in the expeditions on the Afghan frontier -- the Mohmand expedition in 1854 and the Aka Khel and Basi Khel in 1855 -- and was mentioned in dispatches. In 1857 he was at Aligarh, where his regiment, the 9th Bengal native infantry, mutinied on 20 May. He then took command of a small body of volunteers and went to Agra, whence he voluntarily carried dispatches through rebel territory, arriving at Delhi on 29 June. Lord Roberts commented: 'It was a marvel that he ever reached Delhi' (Roberts, vol. 1, appendix I). On reaching Delhi he was appointed deputy assistant adjutant-general to the Delhi field force, and served with distinction to the end of the siege and in the capture of the city. He was then appointed assistant adjutant-general to the Bengal army and took part in the siege and capture of Lucknow and in the campaign in Rohilkhand. He was mentioned in dispatches and received a brevet majority on 20 July 1858. 
Stewart continued assistant adjutant-general of the Bengal army until 1862, when he was made deputy adjutant-general and took a prominent part in the reorganization of the Indian army. He was promoted brevet colonel on 20 July 1863, and lieutenant-colonel on 12 October 1866. In 1867 and 1868 he commanded with the rank of brigadier-general the Bengal brigade in the Abyssinian expedition. He showed considerable ability in organization and transport. He commanded at Senafe throughout the campaign, was mentioned in dispatches, and was made a companion of the Bath. On his return to India he was appointed to the frontier divisional command of Peshawar with the rank of brigadier-general. He was promoted major-general on 24 December 1868. In July 1869 he was sent by Lord Mayo to the Andaman Islands to reorganize the convict settlement there, which Mayo hoped would make the islands self-supporting. He was made sole commandant with autocratic powers. The results were so encouraging that Mayo visited the settlements in 1872, when he was assassinated by a convict. The subsequent investigation exonerated Stewart; nevertheless, the tragedy so shocked him that he was obliged to go to Europe on sick leave. 
Stewart returned to India in 1875, and in April 1876 was appointed to command the Lahore division. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 1 October 1877. In the Second Anglo-Afghan War he commanded the Quetta army in October 1878, marched through the Bolan and Khojak passes, dispersed the enemy in a cavalry action at Saif-ud-din, with only one squadron of the 15th hussars and part of the 1st Punjab cavalry, entered Kandahar, and also occupied Kalat-i-Ghilzai and Girishk in January 1879. He received the thanks of parliament and was made a KCB. On 30 March 1880 he set out to march to Kabul through a country deserted and without resources, defeated the Afghans at Ahmed Khel on 19 April and at Arzu on 23 April, and reached Kabul on 1 May, taking over the command from Sir Frederick Roberts on the following day. His combined force was now styled the northern Afghanistan field force. Having seen the new amir, Abdur Rahman, formally recognized, Stewart was preparing to leave the country when at the end of July he learned of the Maiwand disaster, and he ordered Roberts with 10,000 men to Kandahar. He himself returned to India in August with the rest of the troops by the Khyber route. For his services he was awarded the thanks of parliament and the grand cross of the Bath, and was created a baronet. He was appointed military member of the viceroy's council on 18 October 1880, but, on 7 April in the following year, succeeded Sir Frederick Haines as commander-in-chief in India, and occupied the post until the end of 1885, when he returned home. 
Stewart accepted a seat on the Council of India on 16 December 1885, which he held until his death. He was made a companion of the Indian Empire on 24 May 1881, promoted general on 1 July 1881, decorated with the grand cross of the Star of India on 7 December 1885, and appointed governor of Chelsea Hospital on 9 March 1895. In 1889 he received honorary degrees from Oxford and Aberdeen. He was a member of the royal commission on Indian civil and military expenditure. He was promoted field marshal in May 1894. He died at Algiers on 26 March 1900. He was modest and able to speak plainly without offending. He was a keen genealogist and fisherman, and visited Canada frequently for salmon fishing in the waters of his old schoolfellow, Lord Mount Stephen. 


@@@@@


doc= 26471


Stewart, Dugald (1753-1828), philosopher, was born in Edinburgh on 22 November 1753, the son of Matthew Stewart (1717-1785), one-time minister at Rosneath and professor of mathematics at the University of Edinburgh, and Marjory (died 1771), only child of Archibald Stewart of Catrine, Edinburgh, writer to the signet. Between 1761 and 1765 Stewart was educated at the Edinburgh high school, where he was taught for a few months by Alexander Adam, from whom he gained a love of classical poetry. He proceeded to take his BA degree at Edinburgh, following the traditional curriculum for an arts student -- Greek, logic, and moral philosophy -- though he also enrolled for a course in natural philosophy, and attended Hugh Blair's lectures on rhetoric and 'belles lettres' for two years. Adam Ferguson, author of the 'Essay on the History of Civil Society' (1767), was his moral philosophy tutor. It was Ferguson who suggested that Stewart, a talented student, attend the lectures of the celebrated Glasgow philosopher Thomas Reid, which he did during the academic session for 1771-2. He may also have held out hopes of becoming a Snell exhibitioner, but in this he was disappointed. While in Glasgow, Stewart shared lodgings with Archibald Alison, with whom he formed a lifelong friendship; he was the dedicatee of Alison's best-known work, 'Essays on the Nature and Principles of Taste' (1790). At this time Stewart was also active in a literary society to which he delivered a paper on dreaming, later published in the first volume of his 'Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind' (1792; Stewart, 2.289-305). 
On his return to Edinburgh in autumn 1772 Stewart replaced his ailing father in the mathematics classroom, where he showed sufficient aptitude to receive the chair three years later. In the academic session of 1778-9 he was also engaged in the teaching of moral philosophy at Adam Ferguson's departure for America as part of a delegation following the British defeat at Saratoga in the previous October. Stewart was transferred to the moral philosophy chair with Ferguson's formal resignation in 1785. He proved a successful and highly respected teacher, and his classes grew steadily during his tenure: this was due largely to his eloquence and innovation, but also to events in France during the early 1790s, and to the subsequent French Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars which restricted opportunities for continental education. Noteworthy students during his thirty-five-year classroom career include Henry, Lord Brougham, Henry John Temple, third Viscount Palmerston, Lord John Russell, Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, third marquess of Lansdowne, and the novelist Sir Walter Scott, who, in the 1790-91 session, wrote for Stewart a paper, 'On the manners and customs of the northern nations'. 
The content of Stewart's teaching was summarized in his 'Outlines of a Course in Moral Philosophy' (1793), in which he introduced students to the foundations of duty towards themselves, God, and society at large. He followed in an established tradition of Scottish moral education by also including lectures on epistemology which underpinned his moral scheme and supplemented the instruction offered to students in the previous year's logic class. He used the 'Outlines' as a framework on which his lectures built by illustrating his argument with recourse to the wide academic literature. Student lecture notes show that Stewart used philosophical texts, fiction, and travel literature to illustrate and defend his assessments, and that he spoke on a series of current academic debates ranging between the rights of women, racial difference, and the moral qualities of imaginative literature. During the academic session of 1800-01 Stewart took the radical step of separating his teaching on political economy from the moral philosophy course. His political economy lectures, given as a private series, proved immensely popular and influential, attracting an average enrolment of forty-two, among them the founders of the 'Edinburgh Review', Francis Jeffrey, Henry Brougham, Francis Horner, Sidney Smyth, and Macvey Napier, and the utilitarian philosopher James Mill. 
Stewart was an active participant in the life of his university. In 1805 he engaged in a dispute surrounding the appointment of John Leslie to the mathematics chair. Leslie's 'An Experimental Enquiry into the Nature and Propagation of Heat' (1804) had been publicly attacked by the 'moderate' party of the Church of Scotland for its support of the causation theories of David Hume, and Leslie deemed an unsuitable appointment. The debate was complicated by divisions over whether academic postings should preclude ministerial duties in the church. It was Stewart's view that they should. This placed him at odds with his 'moderate' friends who held that Leslie's opponent, Thomas Macknight, be allowed to keep his parish living while taking up the post at the university. For Stewart, notwithstanding his personal objections to Humean scepticism, the debate was a matter of professional duty and intellectual freedom for which he argued in 'A Short Statement of some Important Facts' (1805). Stewart subsequently appeared at the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in his role as an elder, and spoke in favour of Leslie, who had been accused of atheism, a charge the assembly rejected by ninety-six to eighty-four votes. It may have been for his stand that in 1806 Stewart received from the whig party the office of writer to the 'Edinburgh Gazette', which brought with it a lifelong sinecure of $300. 
In 1809 Stewart was greatly distressed by the death of his son, George, the child of his second marriage. His first wife had been Helen, daughter of Neil Bannatyne of Glasgow, whom he had married in 1783, and with whom he had one son, Matthew, later an army colonel, before her death in 1787; his second wife was Helen D'Arcy (1765-1838) ['see 'Stewart, Helen D'Arcy], third daughter of George Cranstoun and Maria, daughter of Thomas Brisbane, whom he had married on 29 July 1790. In the wake of his bereavement, and himself in failing health, Stewart retired from lecturing in 1810. He campaigned for his student Thomas Brown to succeed as co-holder of the moral philosophy chair, though he was disappointed with his replacement's abilities on taking up the appointment. Outside of the classroom Stewart was also active in public education. An energetic participant in a number of Edinburgh's literary societies, between 1772 and 1775 he read a series of papers to the Speculative Society on such subjects as taste, cause and effect, and scepticism. In February 1812 he offered the Royal Society of Edinburgh a paper -- later published in its 'Transactions' -- on a boy, James Mitchell, who, 'born deaf and blind', had gained the sight in one eye after surgery ('Collected Works', 4.300). Stewart also wrote a sequence of biographical accounts which he presented to the society in 1793, 1796, and 1802. These studies -- of the moral philosopher Adam Smith, the historian and Edinburgh University principal William Robertson, and Stewart's old mentor the common-sense philosopher Thomas Reid -- helped to configure the Scottish school of metaphysical philosophy, and articulate Stewart's perception of his intellectual heritage as a critic of Humean scepticism in favour of common-sense philosophy. 
In addition to being a lecturer of European reputation, Stewart was an active writer during and after his formal university career. His principal work, 'Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind', appeared in three parts (1792, 1814, and 1827), and was supplemented by 'Philosophical Essays' (1810) and the 'Philosophy of the Active and Moral Powers of Man' (1828). His lecture notes on his famous political economy series of 1800 and after were published posthumously in 1856. For Stewart the role of the philosopher was to elucidate the laws by which human understanding occurred. He gave as examples of such laws the belief in personal existence, the continuation of the personality, and the independent existence of the material world. As a consequence of his concept of the philosopher's responsibility, Stewart conceived of epistemology as an overarching discipline under which could be comprehended all other forms of more specifically directed thinking on individual pragmatic topics. His favoured empirical and inductive theory of knowledge had as its corollary a form of natural science in the tradition of Francis Bacon and Isaac Newton, whose works he admired. Bacon was especially influential, and Stewart saw himself extending the remit of Baconian science into the study of human activity. He argued that contrary to traditional readings of Baconian methodology, induction did not preclude any role for hypothesis. Instead of merely gathering unadorned facts, the philosopher's purpose was to place disparate experiences into a conjectural system so as to produce a testable prescriptive scheme: 'Without theory, or in other words, without general principles, inferred from a sagacious comparison of a variety of phenomena, experience is a blind and useless guide; while on the other hand a legitimate theory -- or hypothetical theories supported by numerous analogies -- necessarily presupposes a knowledge of connected and well-ascertained facts, more comprehensive by far than any mere empiric is likely to possess. ('Collected Works', 3.329)' The theories of Newton were his choice of model for this methodology, which he employed across a wide range of fields within the discipline of philosophy, though it is as an epistemologist that he is now principally regarded. 
In his epistemology Stewart was the most creative and able disciple of his former teacher Thomas Reid. Like Reid, Stewart advocated a 'common-sense' philosophy; he noted that this term 'seems nearly equivalent to what we in Scotland call 'motherwit', that degree of sagacity derived partly from natural constitution, but chiefly from personal experience, by which one is able to conduct one's self with propriety in the affairs of common life' (Bridges, 70). Stewart saw his thought as an antidote to the mitigated scepticism of David Hume. Although appreciative of Hume's intellectual calibre, and his positive contributions in the fields of political economy and history, Stewart worried about the consequences of Hume's epistemological scepticism and particularly his separation of fact and value, an understandable view given Stewart's employment as a professor of moral philosophy. However, rather than reject Hume's insight outright, Stewart followed Reid in overcoming the problem by concentrating on the intuition of everyday individuals. 
'Common sense', or the ordinary responses of humans to social circumstances, provided people with the knowledge they needed to live successfully and virtuously. These responses also gave philosophers the empirical evidence required to reveal the workings of the mind, thereby revealing the 'science of man'. Stewart argued that through a process of intensive introspection, the philosopher was able to determine the essential truths necessary for men's minds to operate successfully. Philosophy failed in its duty only when the philosophical urge to understand exceeded the boundaries imposed by empirical observation. Crucially, Stewart saw the world as being made up of more than the sum of individual experiences, leaving mysterious aspects of the workings of the universe which could be taken only on faith. In a stance superficially similar to that of Immanuel Kant, whose philosophy Stewart misread and disliked, the work of the philosopher was redefined as the study of the knowable, and the knowable defined as the realm of experience. 
In moral philosophy Stewart also continued the tradition bestowed upon him by Reid. He maintained that the mind held what he termed 'active powers' able to impose patterns upon the chaos of empirical data. This prioritized the power of the agent's understanding and his will over the influence of the social environment. In arguing this case, Stewart made a distinctive contribution to the theory of free will, proposing that humans were self-aware and intellectually creative, and therefore were not subject to causes in the same sense as the material, non-thinking world. The implication was that agents could choose between contending motives, thereby installing a theory of free will, and placing Stewart among the theological liberals within the Church of Scotland. As a consequence he contended that humans were capable of intellectual improvement, brought about by education and training, by which a whig politics of optimism was translated into a moral vocabulary: people, he suggested, could strive for, and attain, moral progress. Unlike the material, unthinking world of nature, it was the purpose of the conscious world to endeavour to comprehend the deity's purpose in creating the universe, and to co-operate with the intended ends of that power. It was this conception of the moral capacity of the individual that gave to Stewart's scheme a distinctly prescriptive element. In this he was anti-utilitarian; virtue was definable as the performance of social duties, and while Stewart was influential in developing the thought of his student James Mill, he did not follow Mill's reduction of virtue into utility. 
Significant, given Stewart's position as a university teacher, was the central role he perceived for education in the shaping of human morals. In 'Philosophical Essays' he proposed a scheme for aesthetic education aimed at inculcating and directing good taste. Moreover, education, rather than political revolution, was forwarded in his political economy lectures as a viable means of overcoming the moral deficit that he perceived within modern commercial societies. 
Stewart left Scotland four times, in 1783 and in the summers of 1788, 1789, and 1806, on all occasions travelling to France. In 1806 he was accompanying the earl of Lauderdale, who was on a political mission to negotiate peace with Napoleon. On these visits he informed himself of French thinking concerning political economy. He also witnessed the outbreak of the French Revolution, and wrote to Archibald Alison of his disquiet over the tactics of the estates-general, despite his support of certain reforms of government. He fully rejected the revolution with the regicide of January 1793, denouncing the 'shocking barbarities at Paris', but he was equally perturbed by the British desire to engage the French in battle, telling Alison of how 'all freedom... is for a time suspended' ('Collected Works', 10.cxxxvi). Stewart was also a friend of the poet Robert Burns, his acquaintance with whom he described in a long letter to the physician James Currie, author of 'The Life of Robert Burns' (1800). Therein, he claimed Burns to have been a Jacobite rather than a Jacobin, though Stewart professed he did not think Burns had 'thought much on such subjects, nor very consistently' (ibid., 10.cxliii). These associations led to Stewart's being linked in the public mind with the French Revolution, a cause for which his initial sympathy was fundamentally limited by his abhorrence of violence. Although he unadvisedly noted with admiration the work of the French deputy and sensationalist philosopher Condorcet in volume 1 of the 'Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind', Stewart was anxious to distance himself publicly from political radicalism (ibid., 2.473), and he consciously lectured in his moral philosophy course on the nature of political authority, a task he deemed 'the circumstances of the times seem to render more necessary' (Bridges, 381). Privately, his sympathies remained vexed, as his correspondence with the United Irish leader William Drennan makes plain. 
The political radicalism that tinged Stewart's thought may have extended into his reading of Adam Smith. Smith provided for Stewart a means of continuing radicalism in the wake of the French Revolution, allowing him to argue for economic and social reform while skirting the issue of political upheaval. His lectures on political economy proposed a theory of historical progress based upon the diffusion of knowledge through the printing press, and argued for the extension of education to the lower orders of society. Stewart further suggested that wealth creation could be compatible with the pursuit of moral means -- the merchant did his social duty by making profits -- thereby rendering void the Scottish moral paradox between the desire for wealth and the demands of virtue. Stewart had used aspects of Smith's 'Wealth of Nations' (1776) in his classes as early as the academic session of 1778-9 (Walker, 2.391), and his understanding of Smith was amended and extended through his reading of the French physiocratic political economists, notably Quesnay and Turgot. He was particularly approving of their use of empirical data in the search for an overarching science of human economic behaviour, rather than the treatment of political economy simply as a product of tradition or as a deductive science grounded on a priori principles of behaviour. The physiocratic contribution was, he believed, 'a reformation in politics similar to what Kepler and Newton accomplished in astronomy' ('Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind' quoted in Fontana, 100). 
Stewart's study of political economy was further influenced by Thomas Malthus's 'Essay on the Principle of Population' (1798). Although he was sympathetic towards Malthus in his critique of the philosophical utopianism found in William Godwin's 'Enquiry Concerning Political Justice' (1793), Stewart rejected the moral pessimism of the 'Essay'. Rather his vision of human history as progressive enabled him to overcome the tension between the 'science of man' and the need to prescribe a moral vision for which to strive. Progress allowed man to realize the potential implicit in society, thereby assisting the scheme of the deity. In the desire to argue an optimistic case, Stewart's theory of wealth creation all but occluded Smith's concerns over luxury and alienation, in favour of a whiggish optimism that infused his students. 
Stewart's principal contribution to the subject was to conceive of political economy as a distinct discipline, deserving of institutional autonomy within the academy. Perhaps driven to introduce the course for personal reasons -- wartime inflation had undermined his university salary -- Stewart made the decision to offer private tuition in the field separate from his remarks on the subject in his public moral philosophy class, which suggests a more general separation of personal morality from matters of political economy. None the less, within the political economy course Stewart upheld the Ciceronian notion of moral citizenship, teaching the sons of the Scottish economic elite that success in political economy depended on their moral probity, and vice versa. In this he remained securely within a Scottish tradition of moral thinking, a tradition he did much to identify, study, and promote. 
On the history of philosophy Stewart provided his series of biographies of Scottish literati and a lengthy essay on the recent history of philosophy in Europe. In the memoirs he contributed to the development of a distinctly Scottish variant of Enlightenment thought. This 'metaphysical philosophy of Scotland' was informed by the scientific observation of man and society, a trait that he thought best exemplified by the work of Adam Smith ('Collected Works', 1.427). This was combined with a historical awareness, personified by William Robertson, to produce an epistemology which was informed by empirical observation, but did not eschew the development of general theories of human awareness. It was, he argued, the achievement of Thomas Reid to have produced the groundwork necessary for a successful synthesis of this kind. 
In his historical essay 'Dissertation Exhibiting the Progress of Metaphysical, Ethical and Political Philosophy', Stewart situated Scottish metaphysics in the context of European thought since Francis Bacon. As a self-conscious alternative to d'Alembert's preliminary discourse to Diderot's 'Encyclopedie', the 'Dissertation' characterized the history of European philosophy as the emergence and progression of the experimental study of human nature. This progression, Stewart argued, had culminated in the Scottish school which for the first time was putting down secure foundations for an empirical science of man in the fields of epistemology, political governance, political economy, and moral philosophy. Stewart had originally intended his essay for the supplemental volumes to be added to the fifth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. The idea for the supplement had come from Stewart, who also advised Archibald Constable, publisher of the 'Edinburgh Review', who had acquired the rights to the 'Encyclopaedia''s imprint in 1812. The supplements, including Stewart's 'Dissertation', were finally published in 1824 in six volumes (699 articles) alongside the sixth edition. 
In 1820, following Thomas Brown's death, the Edinburgh moral philosophy chair reverted to Stewart, who now refused the requests of friends to take up teaching again and formally resigned in July of that year. He was to be disappointed in his preferred choice of successor. When the candidature of Sir James Mackintosh failed to materialize, he favoured his student and friend Macvey Napier, a prominent contributor to the 'Edinburgh Review' and editor of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. However, Napier withdrew from the competition, and Stewart transferred his support to the Oxford scholar and whig Sir William Hamilton, who subsequently edited Stewart's collected works. Contrary to his wishes the council elected the tory candidate, John Wilson (Christopher North). 
Stewart spent much of his retirement at Kinneil House, Linlithgowshire, which was owned by the duke of Hamilton. Despite suffering a stroke in January 1821 he continued to publish, and saw the third and final instalment of his 'Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind' to the press in 1827, and the 'Philosophy of the Active and Moral Powers of Man' in the following year. Throughout his later writing career he was assisted by his second wife, Helen, who was his reader and the hostess of a renowned Edinburgh salon; towards the end of his life he was also helped by their daughter, Maria (died 1846), who served as his amanuensis. Stewart died, probably of a stroke, at Edinburgh on 11 June 1828 while visiting friends, and was buried in the family vault in the city's Canongate cemetery. He was survived by Helen, who died in Edinburgh on 28 July 1838. 
Stewart's contribution to Scottish thought and letters is measurable in several ways. He had long supplemented his income by taking in students as boarders, and his university classes were filled with many of the great and the good of Scottish society. His nineteenth-century biographer John Veitch named some twenty-five notables who attended his classes in political economy, while few undergraduates escaped the influence of his lectures on moral philosophy (Veitch, liv-lv). He was considered by his students to be a superlative teacher; Lord Cockburn recalled there was 'eloquence in his very spitting' (Cockburn, 23). 
Stewart passed on the common-sense philosophy from Thomas Reid to a final generation of thinkers, headed by Sir William Hamilton. Although the early nineteenth century saw the Scottish school confronted by derivations from Kantian idealism and an emergent utilitarian pragmatism, Stewart's thought and the common-sense school remained an influential strand of British philosophical debate. However, external challenges by followers of Jeremy Bentham and Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and by the evangelical wing of the Church of Scotland headed by Thomas Chalmers, coupled with internal criticisms by radical reformers such as James Frederick Ferrier, saw Stewart's attempts to traverse a path between the extremes of rationalism and scepticism become slowly outmoded as the century progressed. Some of his students, among them the physician William Pulteney Alison, son of his friend Archibald, further critiqued Stewart's work from the stance of physiology, in which school Stewart became something of a straw man from whose work they could define their own position. 
In respect of political economy, Stewart was an inspiration to the 'Edinburgh Review'. It took from Stewart both his advocacy of free trade and his conception of political economy as a broad discipline concerned with investigating human behaviour and motivation. Paradoxically, given the 'Review's' whiggish political attitude, Stewart also influenced a tory school of political economists at Oxford. This group of high-churchmen, which included Edward Copleston, John William Ward, and Richard Whatley, was impressed by Stewart's 'Philosophical Essays'. In particular they drew on his arguments against philosophical materialism and the French school of 'ideologues'. They did, however, dissent publicly from his rejection of scholastic syllogistic logic in favour of Baconian induction, prompting Stewart into a defence of his stance in the second volume of the 'Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind'. 
In his work on the history of philosophy, Stewart proved to be both a late product, and an early theorist, of the Scottish Enlightenment. He identified two characteristics which have subsequently concerned its study: first, the issue of the Scottish character of the school. He was a strong patriot in matters of philosophical origins -- along with matters of chronological duration -- and gave the Irishman Francis Hutcheson a pivotal role, though he claimed Hutcheson as a fellow Scot. Second was the remit and scope of their concerns -- 'conjectural history', which he first defined in his essay on Smith; the 'science of man', which he centred on Robertson; and the defence against Humean scepticism, for which he celebrated Thomas Reid. He also highlighted the sociology of knowledge, giving pre-eminence to the universities and emphasizing the role of print culture in the development of the school's ideas. Moreover, his failure to consider the ramifications of mathematics and scientific exploration still finds an echo in studies of the field. Stewart also patronized a number of female novelists, notably Elizabeth Hamilton and the Irish writer Maria Edgeworth, whose brothers Lowell and Henry boarded in the Stewart household while at university. Stewart appeared as the Scottish philosopher in the introduction to Edgeworth's 'Essay on Irish Bulls' (3rd edn, 1808). 
Beyond Britain, Stewart was influential in both the United States and France. In the USA Stewart's abstract work on the mind played an important part in the development of philosophy curricula in many colleges. His 'Outlines' sold over 7500 copies, and by 1824 was in its eighth American edition. In France his thought was first used by P.-P. Royer-Collard, professor of the history of philosophy at the Sorbonne (1811-14). Victor Cousin introduced Stewart's ideas into the educational system following Theodore Jouffroy's translation of the major works in the 1820s and 1830s. Stewart's popularity in France was due, in part, to the perceived political quietism within his definition of the professional philosopher. This was a boon to defenders of the restored monarchy wary of any form of political engagement or ideological commitment which recalled the revolution, and no small irony given Stewart's own travails over the matter of political activism in the early 1790s. 


@@@@@


doc= 26472


Stewart, Henry, first Lord Methven (c.1495-1553/4), courtier and administrator, was the second of four sons of Andrew Stewart, second Lord Avondale (died 1513), and Margaret, daughter of John Kennedy, second Lord Kennedy. Nothing is known of his early years, but in 1524 he and his brothers supported the coup by which, in the absence of the duke of Albany in France, Queen Margaret (1489-1541) took control of the young King James V, who nominally assumed the government. Margaret had married Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus, in 1514, but by this time she was estranged from him. While she was in power Henry Stewart -- who on 3 November 1524 was described by English ambassadors in Scotland as 'a young man about her, who keeps all the seals, and orders everything' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 4, pt. 1, no. 800) -- acted as her treasurer and chancellor, held custody of the privy seal, and was appointed principal carver to the king; his brothers also obtained posts in the royal household. Henry VIII considered Angus a more reliable English agent in Scotland than his own sister; he was scandalized by her infatuation with Stewart and objected to her plans to divorce her husband. 
With English support Angus removed Margaret from power in 1525 and secured control of the king. As a result Henry Stewart and his brothers lost the offices and influence they had acquired, but Stewart's relationship with the queen dowager endured. In December 1527 word reached Margaret that the annulment had been granted, and in the following April Stewart became her third husband. Not long afterwards Angus compelled her to give him up, and he was placed in temporary imprisonment; but after James V made his escape from the tutelage of Angus in the summer of 1528, the queen and Henry Stewart became two of the king's chief advisers. On 17 July he bestowed on them jointly the lands of Methven, Perthshire, and Stewart was raised to the peerage with the title of Lord Methven; this was the only baronial creation of the reign. He was also made master of the artillery. Subsequently he received other grants of lands, including Cockburnspath, Berwickshire, in September 1528, Ardety, Perthshire, in January 1531, and Galashiels and Mossilie, Selkirkshire, in January 1536. 
In 1537 the queen attempted to divorce Methven, complaining that he had squandered her revenues. It is also possible that she had discovered his affair with Lady Janet Stewart, whom he later married, but Methven persuaded the king that her real reason was a desire to remarry Angus, who had been convicted of treason in 1528 and was in exile in England. James V therefore refused to grant consent and even restrained his mother from flight into England. By 1539 Margaret and Methven were reconciled, and the latter also retained the favour of the king, from whom he obtained the lands of Gilgerston in Methven in July 1541. On 16 August 1540 Methven was one of the lords who sat on the assize which convicted Sir James Hamilton of Finnart of treason, and in May 1541 he was appointed to replace Finnart as sheriff of Linlithgow. Queen Margaret died on 18 October 1541, and before 5 June 1545 Methven had a new wife, his mistress of some years, Lady Janet Stewart. She was the daughter of John Stewart, second earl of Atholl, and successively the widow of Alexander Gordon, master of Sutherland, and of Sir Hugh Kennedy of Girvanmains. They had four children, all of whom were born before the marriage and were legitimated in 1551: Henry, second Lord Methven (died 1572), Johanna or Janet, Margaret (died 1627?), and Dorothea. Methven also had another son, John, whose mother is not recorded in the contemporary accounts but is said to have been a certain Lady Leslie, married to Stewart before his liaison with Queen Margaret. In July 1537 John Stewart, son of Lord Methven, was gifted an escheat, and in February 1540 he was granted a letter of rehabilitation following his conviction for heresy. Possibly he died at the battle of Pinkie on 10 September 1547. 
Methven served on the privy council during the minority of Mary, queen of Scots, and was associated with the attempted coup by Mary of Guise against Governor Arran in June 1544. Both Mary of Guise and Arran used Methven as an ambassador attempting to arrange peace with England in 1544 and 1545, and as master of the artillery he took a major role in the siege of Haddington in 1548. One English report even claimed that he had been captured, but if this were so, he was probably not held for long. In February 1548 and October 1551 he and his wife received confirmations of the lands of Methven under the great seal. He died some time between June 1553, when he is recorded making a payment to the crown, and 3 April 1554, when the wardship of his heir was assigned to John Hamilton, archbishop of St Andrews. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26473


Stewart, Henry, duke of Albany (1545/6-1567), second consort of Mary, queen of Scots, was born at Temple Newsam, Yorkshire, the second but elder surviving son of Matthew Stewart, thirteenth or fourth earl of Lennox (1516-1571), and his wife, Lady Margaret Douglas (1515-1578), daughter of Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus, and his wife, Margaret Tudor, widow of James IV, king of Scots. He is traditionally said to have been born on 7 December 1545, shortly after the death of his infant older brother, also Henry, but it is possible that he was born a little later. He was known lifelong and continues commonly to be referred to by his father's subsidiary title Lord Darnley. 
Darnley's early life was spent at Temple Newsam and Settrington, both in Yorkshire. His title came from the barony of Darnley in Renfrewshire, an early possession of the Lennox Stewart family. Through his parents he had claims to both the Scottish and English thrones, being descended from both James II of Scotland and Henry VII of England, and parental ambition ensured that he was brought up conscious of his status and his inheritance. He was educated at home, 'well instructed from his youth in all honest and comely exercises' ('Memoirs of His Own Life', 134). He was an elegant dancer, and accomplished in singing and in playing the lute; physically he was strong and athletic, a good horseman with a knowledge of weapons and a passion for hunting and hawking; academically he appears to have been an average student for the time, learning Latin and growing up familiar with the Scots, English, and French languages, under the instruction of his tutors John Elder and Arthur Lallart. 
Darnley's father had been declared guilty of treason for his part in the 'rough wooing', and his Scottish estates were forfeited in 1545. Lennox was keen to recover his estates, and in the process to bring his son to the attention of Mary, queen of Scots (1542-1587). On the death of King Henri II of France in 1559, Darnley was sent by his parents to congratulate Mary and her husband, Francois II, on their accession, travelling incognito with John Elder, as a safe passage would not have been granted by Queen Elizabeth. The English ambassador, Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, reported that 'a young gentleman, an Englishman or a Scottishman, who has no beard' was received with great distinction (W. Fraser, 'The Lennox', 1.469). It is possible -- the sources conflict -- that Darnley crossed the channel again after the death of Francois in December 1560 to offer condolences. He had another motive for making such journeys: to obtain the restoration of the Lennox estates. This was refused while Mary remained in France, and after her return to Scotland Arthur Lallart was sent to speak to her on the same subject. 
All this intrigue did not go unnoticed at the English court and the family were arrested at Settrington in December 1561 and taken to London, but Darnley managed to escape 'en route', the rumour, though not confirmed, being that he had been 'conveyed to France' ('CSP Scot.', '1547-63', 616). Pardoned in early 1563, the family's fortunes soon improved. Elizabeth, under pressure to name a successor and preferring to keep everyone guessing, now showed favour to Darnley and his mother, inviting them to stay at court. She also wrote to Mary on 16 June 1563, asking her to consider the matter of the forfeited Lennox estates. In July 1564 Darnley was sent to welcome Diego Guzman de Silva, the new Spanish ambassador, and to conduct him to his first audience with Elizabeth. By the autumn of 1564 Mary had agreed to Elizabeth's request to permit Lennox to return to Scotland, and on 9 October 1564 he was 'restored to his lands, heritage and good name, by open proclamation made at the Mercat Cross of the burgh of Edinburgh' (Thomson, 78). 
In January 1565 Elizabeth finally permitted Darnley to go to Scotland, to be infefted with his father in their Scottish estates. Many theories have been offered concerning the reasoning, if any, behind this action. Was this a myopic decision, the result of a complete failure to predict the likely outcome, or was it, as some contemporaries suggested, a calculated move? Elizabeth's timing has been called an 'interesting enigma' (A. Fraser, 'Mary Queen of Scots', 1970, 265), but as the relevant papers for these events are conveniently missing it seems unlikely that the question will ever be solved. It certainly seems strange that Elizabeth and her advisers overlooked the potential consequences, especially as rumours had been rife since as early as February 1562, when there had been speculation about a possible marriage between Mary and Darnley. On 29 September 1564 Elizabeth herself had drawn the attention of Sir James Melville, the Scottish ambassador, to 'yonder long lad', as she described Darnley, at a time when the protracted negotiations between the two countries over proposals for the marriage of Mary to the earl of Leicester were foundering. 
On 3 February 1565 Darnley left London. By 12 February he was in Edinburgh, and on 17 February he presented himself to Mary at Wemyss Castle, Fife. Melville reported that 'Her Majesty took well with him, and said that he was the lustiest and best proportioned long man that she had seen' ('Memoirs of His Own Life', 134). After a brief visit to his father at Dunkeld, Darnley returned with Mary and the court to Holyrood on 24 February. The next day he heard John Knox preach, and he danced a galliard with Mary at night. From then on he was constantly in Mary's company. 
Marriage to Darnley made perfect dynastic sense: it avoided the uncertainty of a foreign match and promised a monarchy free of England and France, while strengthening the Scottish claim to the English throne. Darnley was also considered indifferent in matters of religion, having been brought up a Catholic but professing the reformed religion when in England. His rise, however, caused a split among the nobility, since by favouring the Lennox-Douglas faction it alienated Moray, Maitland, and the Hamiltons, as well as Mary's Guise relations and Elizabeth. Yet it must be acknowledged that whoever Mary chose would not have met with universal approval; in her relations with Darnley, opposition only strengthened her resolve. 
Early in April, Darnley took ill with a cold and soon 'mesels came out on him marvellous thick' ('CSP Scot.', '1563-9', 141). Mary spent much of her time with him, and on 15 May 1565 he was created knight of Tarbolton, Lord Ardmannoch, and earl of Ross, swearing allegiance to Mary. This was tantamount to announcing their engagement. Elizabeth was furious; she sent Darnley's mother to the Tower and confiscated Lennox's English estates. Nevertheless, on 22 July Darnley was created duke of Albany in the abbey of Holyroodhouse and the banns of marriage were called in the parish of Canongate. A proclamation was made at the Mercat Cross on 28 July that government would be in the joint names of the king and queen of Scots, thus giving Darnley equality with, and precedence over, Mary. This was confirmed in the circulation of a silver ryal in the names of Henry and Mary. 
On 29 July 1565 the marriage took place by Roman Catholic rites in Mary's private chapel at Holyrood, after which Darnley left Mary to hear the nuptial mass alone. The following day Darnley was proclaimed King Henry at the Mercat Cross. Only his father shouted out, 'God save His Grace'. For Lennox this was the fulfilment of his aspirations. Yet he was Darnley's only real supporter in Scotland; to nearly everyone else the queen's consort was unbearable and had 'an insolent, imperious temper' (W. Fraser, 'The Lennox' 1.480). 
Within a few weeks of the marriage it was becoming clear to Mary that Darnley was arrogant, vain, and unreliable, preferring pleasure to the affairs of state. On 13 October the English ambassador, Thomas Randolph, reported to Cecil that 'Jarres' were already evident between them. The central issue was Mary's refusal to grant Darnley the crown matrimonial: 'He claims the crown matrimonial, and will have it immediately. The Queen tells him that that must be delayed till he be of age, and done by consent of Parliament, which does not satisfy him' (W. Fraser, 'The Lennox', 1.481). Darnley became increasingly impatient, arguing that Francois II had received it and therefore so should he. But granting the crown matrimonial could bring about a change of dynasty -- in the event of Mary's death, Darnley would reign in his own right and any children of a second marriage would inherit the crown. 
In many ways Darnley was too immature to cope with the demands of his position. A product of his parents' ambition, his faults of character had gone unchecked. In his selfish expectation of Mary's attention at all times, he failed to see the importance of her duty to the country, and acted like a spoilt brat. The more he demanded the crown matrimonial, the less likely he was to be granted it. By December Mary's growing disillusionment with him had resulted in the silver ryal being withdrawn from circulation and another issued in the names of Mary and Henry, with the latter now referred to as only the 'queen's husband' ('CSP Scot.', '1563-9', 247-8). In February 1566 the French ambassador arrived and Darnley was invested with the order of St Michel, the greatest French order of chivalry, but concerning the celebrations which took place after the ceremony, Sir William Drury reported that 'All people say that Darnley is too much addicted to drinking... and gave her such words that she left the place in tears' (Keith, 2.403). 
Darnley's resentment was further fuelled by Mary's increasing reliance on other members of her household. By early 1566 his jealousy had focused on Mary's secretary, David Riccio, who was responsible for her French correspondence. As a foreigner and a Catholic Riccio was suspected of being a papal agent; his mistake of basking in his position and his familiarity with Mary also made him the scapegoat for the jealousy of Darnley and other disaffected nobles, such as Morton, Lindsay, and Ruthven. Consequently bonds were signed to support Darnley in his quest for the crown matrimonial and to maintain the protestant religion, while Darnley accepted responsibility for their plans and undertook to protect those involved. His own religious position was apt to fluctuate, and certainly changed several times, perhaps being dictated by a desire to oppose whatever Mary's prevailing policy happened to be. He was Catholic at Christmas 1565, but protestant at the time of the plot against Riccio, as he still was at the end of 1566. Shortly afterwards he was Catholic again, but he was once more apparently aligned with the reformers at the time of his death -- he was reported to have sung a metrical psalm on the night of his murder. 
On 6 March Randolph wrote to Cecil giving details of an imminent coup, ascribing it to Mary's refusal to grant the crown matrimonial and also to Riccio's having supposedly done Darnley 'the most dishonour that can be to any man' ('CSP Scot.', '1563-9', 260). Three days later, on the evening of Saturday 9 March, Riccio was brutally murdered in the presence of the pregnant queen. It may have been hoped that she would miscarry, so killing both the child and Mary herself: 'the King would have him taken in her Majesty's presence, and devised the manner himself' (Triphook, 16-18). The conspirators fled to England, sending to Mary as their parting shot the bond of indemnity which fully implicated her husband in Riccio's murder. 
Darnley's conduct was unforgivable and there were rumours at the end of April that a mission had been sent to Rome to seek a divorce. A series of remissions, culminating in the pardon of the Riccio murderers, were seen by Darnley as a threat to himself. Fearing for his own safety, Darnley kept in Mary's favour, joining her at the Easter celebrations and hearing mass every day. He acted like someone who recognized his own limitations and weakness, realizing that he had no support without Mary and would have even less after the birth of their child. Prince James (1566-1625) was born on 19 June 1566. Had Darnley been able to accept his role as the father of the future king he would have been better off. Instead he became increasingly unpredictable and potentially dangerous. He resolved to 'retire out of the Kingdom beyond the sea' (Keith, 2.455), complained about his loss of status, and wrote to the king of Spain, the pope, the king of France, and the cardinal of Lorraine, trying to undermine Mary's political and religious position. 
Towards the end of 1566 Mary met with her lords of council at Craigmillar near Edinburgh to discuss the 'Darnley problem', which showed no signs of resolving itself, forcing those present to seek 'the means that your majesty shall be quit of him without prejudice to your son' (Keith, 3.293). The lords then signed a bond committing themselves to the murder of Darnley. This has not survived but, according to the laird of Ormiston, 'it was thought expedient and most profitable for the commonwealth... that such a young fool and proud tyrant should not reign or bear rule over them... and... that he should be put off, by one way or other' (Pitcairn, 1.512). 
Meanwhile the baptism of Prince James took place in the Chapel Royal at Stirling Castle on 17 December 1566 with full Roman Catholic rites. Darnley, however, refused to attend and, shortly after, left Stirling to join his father in Glasgow. On the way he fell ill and 'blisters broke out, of a bluish colour' ('Knox's History', 2.193). On 9 January 1567 Mary sent her own physician, and the same day the earl of Bedford wrote that Darnley was 'full of the smallpox' ('CSP for.', '1566-8', 103-4), though the disease is more likely to have been syphilis. In spite of his illness rumours were rife, and Mary was told that 'The King, by the assistance of some of our nobility, should take the prince our son and crown him; and being crowned, as his father should take upon him the government' (Keith, 3.293). 
Mary herself travelled to Glasgow on 20 January 1567, taking an empty horselitter on which to bring Darnley back to Edinburgh -- not to Holyrood, as the prince was there, but to the Old Provost's Lodging at Kirk o'Field, 'a place of good air, where he might best recover his health' ('Memoirs of His Own Life', 173). Darnley wrote to his father that his speedy recovery was due to the kindness of Mary: 'I assure you [she] hath all this while and yet doth use herself like a natural and loving wife' (Mahon, 127). 
On the night before Darnley was due to return to Holyrood, however, the house at Kirk o'Field was completely destroyed by an explosion. Accounts of what happened on the night of 9-10 February vary, but Darnley had become the victim of one of the greatest unsolved murders in history. The bodies of Darnley and his servant were found under a tree in the garden, with a chair, a dagger, a coat, and a cloak beside them. There was no sign of explosion on the bodies, nor had they been stabbed, shot, strangled, or beaten. They had probably been suffocated, but the full story of events remains a mystery. Neighbours to the house later stated that Darnley had cried out 'O my brothers, have pity on me for the love of him who had mercy on all the world', possibly a vain appeal to his Douglas kinsmen who formed part of the conspiracy against his life (Mumby, 194). On 12 February spices costing $40 were bought for the 'oppinyng and perfuming of the Kingis grace majesteis umquhile bodie' ('Compota', 1566-74, 41). Darnley's body was buried in the royal vault of James V in the abbey of Holyrood. 
Darnley was unlamented. For political reasons he was not popular, and his unstable temperament alienated all but his own father, who, overlooking his obvious shortcomings, called him an 'innocent lamb' (Mahon, 127). In recent biographies he has tended to be judged in relation to Mary, always a more alluring figure. He has been called 'quixotic' (Lynch, 14), with a 'charming exterior, which... gave no hint of the maggots which lay inside' (A. Fraser, 'Mary Queen of Scots', 1970, 270). He was 'morally and intellectually worthless' (Donaldson, 'Scotland', 120), a man who 'might have been the ideal husband if only he had had the brain to match his birth' (Donaldson, 'Mary, Queen of Scots', 80). Even his own biographer calls him 'a figure of unfulfilled promise' (Bingham, 201). Unfulfilled in his own lifetime, certainly, yet it should be recognized that his son became King James VI, and on the death of Elizabeth united the kingdoms of Scotland and England under one crown; from him, all subsequent British monarchs have descended. Darnley's legacy has far outlived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26474


Stewart, Sir Herbert (1843-1885), army officer, was born on 30 January 1843 in Sparsholt, Hampshire, the eldest son of the Revd Edward Stewart, rector of Sparsholt, and a grandson of the seventh earl of Galloway, and Louisa Herbert of Muckross, co. Kerry. Educated at Brighton College in 1854, and then at Winchester College from 1854 to 1862, where he was captain of the eleven, Stewart was commissioned as an ensign by purchase in the 37th foot on 24 November 1863. He purchased his lieutenancy on 18 July 1865 and was adjutant from 17 July 1866 to 11 April 1868, when he purchased his captaincy. The regiment was then serving in Bengal and Stewart acted as aide-de-camp to Major-General Beatson, commanding the Allahabad division, from 15 August 1868 to 28 November 1870. Stewart also acted as deputy assistant quartermaster-general in Bengal from 27 January 1872 to 18 October 1873, having come to the attention of the commander-in-chief, Lord Napier, through his initiative, during Beatson's absence, in dispersing troops to camps during a cholera outbreak. 
Stewart returned to England in 1873, having exchanged into the 3rd dragoon guards on 18 October. He apparently became keener on his profession and entered the Staff College in 1877. His enrolment at the Inner Temple in April 1877 was also apparently intended to better qualify him for staff employment, but he was also interested in engineering and architecture. On 19 December 1877 he married Georgiana Janet Tombs, daughter of Admiral Sir James Stirling and widow of Major-General Sir H. Tombs. He did not complete the Staff College course as he secured appointment as a special service officer for the Zululand campaign in late 1878. The campaign was to launch him on a meteoric rise from captain to major-general in just six years, but initially he experienced considerable frustration. Appointed brigade major to the cavalry brigade on 26 February 1879, Stewart found himself restricted to patrolling lines of communication. He contemplated resignation, but his situation was transformed by the arrival of Sir Garnet Wolseley to supersede Lord Chelmsford. It has been suggested both that Wolseley learned of Stewart through his chief of staff, George Colley, who may have heard of Stewart in India, and also that Wolseley fortuitously met Stewart while the latter was on line of communications duty near Rorke's Drift. Either way, Wolseley immediately recognized Stewart's potential and added him to his staff, attaching him to the column under Lieutenant-Colonel C. M. Clarke. 
Wolseley was later to describe Stewart as 'one of the very best staff officers all round I have ever known in the Army', but it was also Stewart's personal qualities which Wolseley appreciated, for he 'never makes difficulties, is always ready for any undertaking, is a highly educated soldier and one of the pleasantest men to be associated with I have ever met' (Wolseley to prince of Wales, 28 Dec 1884, Royal Archives, T8/160). Wolseley remarked on Stewart's cheerfulness and willingness to take on any undertaking however unpleasant, and clearly his charm and tact also greatly appealed. None the less, Stewart was tempted to resign when he was not included in the gazette for Zululand, until persuaded by Wolseley's military secretary, Henry Brackenbury, to query its accuracy: Stewart had been granted a brevet majority on 28 October 1879. He then served as principal staff officer to Baker Russell during the operations against Sekukuni before preparing to go home. However, after Brackenbury was appointed private secretary to the viceroy, Stewart served as Wolseley's military secretary from 7 February to 25 May 1880. He was Wolseley's only remaining staff officer and, effectively, his chief of staff. For his services against Sekukuni he was made brevet lieutenant-colonel on 24 July 1880. 
Wolseley had resolved that he would employ Stewart again on campaign, but his next appointment was to go back to South Africa as assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general on 7 January 1881, where hostilities had broken out with the Boers. Colley's chief of staff had been killed at Laing's Nek on 28 January and Stewart was ordered up to replace him, arriving at Mount Prospect about 20 February. Stewart was party to Colley's decision to seize Majuba Hill on the night of 26-27 February, and was equally complacent in believing that the Boers could not successfully assault the position. He accompanied Colley on Majuba, and at the final Boer assault was knocked over in the rush and fell down the side of the hill; he then spent some thirty hours trying unsuccessfully to evade capture. He was released with the other prisoners at the end of March. He attributed the failure to entrench on Majuba to the tiredness of the men and, controversially, the British rout to panic by the troops. 
Promoted major in his regiment on 1 July 1881, Stewart was appointed aide-de-camp to Lord Spencer, lord lieutenant of Ireland, on 9 May 1882, but left Dublin in August to join Wolseley's expedition to Egypt. 'En route' for Egypt, an ailing Wolseley found Stewart an agreeable companion and used him as amanuensis in dictating his orders for the campaign. Initially Stewart was brigade major to the 1st cavalry brigade, then assistant adjutant-general of the cavalry division. He played a key role in pushing the cavalry on to Cairo after Wolseley's victory at Tell al-Kebir on 13 September and, backed by only fifty men, personally demanded and received the surrender of the city. For his services Stewart was made a brevet colonel, a CB, and aide-de-camp to the queen on 18 November 1882. He resumed his appointment in Ireland and remained there until 17 January 1884, when selected to command the cavalry brigade in the force being sent to Suakin under Sir Gerald Graham, which appointment he held from 12 February to 17 April. If the bluff to seize Cairo indicated Stewart's courage and enterprise, he was apparently rash at al-Teb on 29 February 1884, when he misread the situation and ordered his brigade to charge large bodies of fresh enemy he assumed were defeated and retreating. His brigade suffered heavy casualties. Later he urged Graham to push forward to Berber, but the government thought the risk too great and the Suakin force was withdrawn. He was created KCB on 21 May 1884. 
Stewart became assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general in south-east district on 18 April 1884 but on 1 September returned to Egypt for the Gordon relief expedition. Stewart went to Dongola to organize the camel corps and was appointed brigadier in command of the column intended to push across the desert to Methemmeh on 24 November, Wolseley having refused to accept anyone senior to Stewart for the task. With Colley's death, Stewart had become Wolseley's firm favourite, and jealousies were evident among other members of the Wolseley ring, Redvers Buller in particular resenting Stewart's appointment as brigadier and constantly 'crabbing' Stewart's reputation. 
The number of transport camels was insufficient for the stores thought necessary to take the desert column to Methemmeh, and Stewart set out from Korti on 29 December 1884 to establish an intermediate depot at Gakdul Wells. Gakdul was reached on 2 January and the process was then repeated at the cost of exhausting many of the camels. On 14 January Stewart finally advanced on Methemmeh from Gakdul with some 1800 men and 2888 camels, intending to establish a garrison at Methemmeh, from which a small detachment would be embarked on steamers for Khartoum. On 16 January the Mahdists were found to be in force near Abu Klea. On the following day, Stewart advanced on them in square. It was due to the undulating ground that the enemy was able to make a sudden charge on the left and rear faces of the square, which had become disrupted through camels lagging. The square was briefly broken and heavy casualties were suffered before the Mahdists were driven out, the dead including Stewart's designated second in command, Fred Burnaby. Stewart himself had had his horse killed under him. 
The march to Methemmeh was resumed late on 18 January and Stewart hoped to reach the Nile before daybreak. However, difficult terrain, the darkness of the night, and the exhaustion of men and camels left the column still some miles from the river. Stewart formed a defensive zereba for the baggage since it was clear that the Mahdists would strongly oppose any further advance, and they had already opened fire on the column. Some time between 9 a.m. and 10.15 a.m. on 19 January, Stewart was hit in the groin and compelled to hand over command to the expedition's intelligence officer, Sir Charles Wilson. Irrespective of whether the appearance of a few British troops on the river could have saved Gordon, all impetus was lost without Stewart's drive, and it was only on 24 January that Wilson finally embarked for Khartoum. The city fell on 26 January, two days before Wilson's steamers came in sight of it. 
Meanwhile, there were some hopes that Stewart might recover as he was taken painfully back towards Korti. However, he himself recognized from the beginning that the wound was mortal, penning a last touching letter to Wolseley asking him to care for his wife and son and referring to his own fate as 'Bad luck but glorious' (Stewart to Wolseley, 19 Jan 1885, Wolseley MSS). News of his promotion to major-general, for which Wolseley had pressed, had been received on 29 January and Stewart knew of this before he died near Gakdul Wells -- where he was also buried -- on 16 February 1885. Stewart was not quite as brilliant a field commander as Wolseley supposed, but his loss finally doomed the expedition to failure. Wolseley was concerned greatly that Stewart, like Colley, had not been a believer in 'revealed religion' and that Stewart's wife, whose pension he made strenuous efforts to arrange, had been twice widowed. It was also his belief, as he later remarked, that 'the sun of my luck set when Stewart was wounded' ('Journal of the Royal United Service Institution', April 1913, 446), and Wolseley bitterly described Stewart's death as 'another holocaust on the altar of Mr. Gladstone's self-opinionated ignorance' (entry for 19 Feb 1885, TNA: PRO, WO 147/8). 


@@@@@


doc= 26475


Stewart, Sir Houston (1791-1875), naval officer, third son of Sir Michael Shaw Stewart, fifth baronet (1766-1825), and his cousin Catharine (died 1849), youngest daughter of Sir William Maxwell, baronet, was born on 2 August 1791 at Springkell, near Kirtlebridge, Dumfriesshire. He was educated at Dr Horne's school in Chiswick, Middlesex. He entered the navy in February 1805 on the 'Medusa' with Sir John Gore, and in her went to Calcutta. On his return he followed Gore to the 'Revenge', and in October 1806 was moved to the 'Imperieuse', then commanded by Lord Cochrane, and shared in the many incidents of that remarkable commission, including the defence of Rosas. In December 1808 he was put in command of an armed xebec, which he had assisted in cutting out from under the batteries of Port Vendres, and was sent on an independent cruise in the Mediterranean. He did not return to Gibraltar until the 'Imperieuse' had sailed for England, and was unable to join her until after the battle of Aix Roads. He was, however, in her in the expedition to Walcheren, after which he was, during the winter, on the books of the flagship at Leith. Through the summer of 1810 he was in the 'Hussar' in the Baltic, and in 1811 was again in the Leith flagship until he was promoted lieutenant on 1 August. 
On 16 August 1811 Stewart was appointed to the 'Tigre' (74 guns, Captain John Halliday) and served off Rochefort; in the two following years he was Admiral Lord Keith's signal lieutenant in the channel, at first in the 'San Josef' and then in the 'Queen Charlotte'. On 3 March 1814 he was appointed acting captain of the 'Clarence' (74 guns) off Brest, but returned to the 'Queen Charlotte' at the end of April. On 9 June he was appointed commander of the 'Podargus' (14 guns), and was confirmed in that rank on 13 August 1814. During the next three years he commanded various sloops on the Jamaica station; in March 1817 he was acting captain of the 'Pique' and in May of the 'Salisbury', to which he was confirmed on 10 June 1817. He remained in the 'Salisbury' as flag captain to Rear-Admiral John Erskine Douglas until April 1818. He married, on 10 February 1819, Martha, youngest daughter of Sir William Miller, Lord Glenlee; they had three sons, the eldest of whom was Admiral Sir William Houston Stewart. Around the time of this marriage, his father settled the Roxburgh estate in Tobago upon him; Stewart was still owner of the estate in 1836 when he was awarded compensation for the emancipation of the 143 enslaved people on the estate. 
From October 1823 to December 1826 Stewart commanded the frigate 'Menai' on the North American station, and for two winters had charge of Halifax Dockyard. In August 1837 he was unsuccessful parliamentary candidate for Renfrewshire. In 1839 he went to the Mediterranean in the 'Benbow', which in the following year he commanded off the coast of Syria and at the capture of Acre under Admiral Sir Robert Stopford. For this campaign he was nominated CB on 18 December 1840. In 1846 he was for a few months superintendent of Woolwich Dockyard; in November 1846 he was appointed controller-general of the coastguard, a post he held until 1850, when he was appointed a lord of the Admiralty. On 16 June 1851 he was promoted rear-admiral. From February 1850 to March 1852 he was at the Admiralty, and during the latter part of that time was whig/liberal MP for Greenwich. 
In the spring of 1853 Stewart went to the Mediterranean as third in command and superintendent at Malta, where he remained until January 1855, when he served as second in command in the Black Sea under Sir Edmund Lyons, notably at the capture of Kinburn. He was nominated KCB on 5 July 1855, and received the grand cross of the Legion d'honneur and the Mejidiye (first class). For some months in 1856 he was superintendent of Devonport Dockyard, and from November 1856 to January 1860 was commander-in-chief on the North American station; he became a vice-admiral on 30 July 1857. From October 1860 to October 1863 he was commander-in-chief at Devonport. He became admiral on 10 November 1862, GCB on 28 March 1865, and admiral of the fleet on 20 October 1872. He died at his home, Dourie Bank, Port William, Wigtownshire, on 10 December 1875. 
Stewart was a very capable administrator, as he demonstrated at Woolwich, with the coastguard, on the Admiralty board, and at Malta. His handling of the supply side of the 1854 Black Sea campaign from Malta earned him the chance to fly his flag afloat, though Lyons rarely gave him an opportunity to act alone. His career after 1815 was dominated by the Scottish whig connection, especially Lord Panmure, his political leader in the period after 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 26476


James Stewart (c.1260-1309), the fifth stewart, was in the forefront of Scottish politics throughout his tenure of the stewardship, as councillor under Alexander III, as one of the six guardians elected by the magnates after the king's death in 1286, as a supporter of Robert (V) de Brus (known as the Competitor) when he made his claim to the Scottish throne in 1291, as sheriff of Ayr and intended sheriff of a wide area of south Argyll under King John's abortive scheme of 1293, as negotiator of peace terms with Edward I in 1296, as a principal leader in the independence struggle between 1297 and 1304, and finally as a supporter of Robert Bruce (the Competitor's grandson) when he was made king in 1306. He married Egidia (Gelis), a sister of Richard de Burgh, earl of Ulster, and with her he acquired a landed estate near Coleraine. His younger brother, Sir John Stewart of Jedburgh, married the heir to the barony of Bunkle in Berwickshire and was ancestor of the Stewarts of Bunkle. Sir John commanded the Scottish archers under Wallace at the battle of Falkirk (1298), and was killed there with all his men. 
James Stewart died on 16 July 1309, leaving as heir a younger son, 


@@@@@


doc= 26477


Stewart, James, duke of Ross (1476-1504), archbishop-designate of St Andrews, was the second son of James III, king of Scots, and his wife, Margaret of Denmark. Born early in 1476, James was immediately created marquess of Ormond, and along with his elder brother, the future James IV, he spent his early youth in Stirling Castle in the care of his mother until her death in 1486. His tuition was directed by George Shaw, abbot of Paisley. On 23 January 1481 he was granted the lands of the earldom of Ross and the castle of Dingwall, following the forfeiture of John Macdonald, fourth lord of the Isles; on 5 April following he received the lordships of Brechin and Navar, and about the same time was created earl of Ross. 
The Anglo-Scottish treaty of 1486 proposed the marriage of Ross to Katherine, sixth daughter of Edward IV; this was agreed in November 1487, and, to elevate the prince to an appropriate dignity, on 29 January 1488 he was created duke of Ross and earl of Edirdale, as well as being confirmed in his existing titles. However, the treaty negotiations foundered, lapsing altogether with the death of James III at Sauchieburn on 11 June 1488. Immediately afterwards Ross was moved to Edinburgh Castle, where he and his elder brother were placed in the keeping of Patrick Hepburn, Lord Hailes, an outstanding figure in the new regime, who in the parliament of 6 October 1488 was formally constituted the duke's governor. Ross remained in the royal household until about 1495, when he set up an establishment of his own, evidently on an ambitious scale, his agents in Flanders purchasing substantial quantities of furnishings, fabrics, and utensils, funded partly by the sale of salmon from their master's estates. 
In October 1493 and again in June-July 1494 Ross made occasional, brief attendances at council sessions, usually in the company of William Scheves, archbishop of St Andrews. It is possible that Ross was receiving some education in government and the law, and that Scheves -- out of favour but still involved in the royal administration -- was helping to provide it. On the eve of the Scottish incursion into England in September 1496, the spy John Ramsay reported to Henry VII that Ross might be recruited to the pro-English cause, but nothing came of this. As heir presumptive the duke did not attend with the host, however, but remained in Edinburgh with senior lords who included the justiciar, Lord Lyle, and George Brown, bishop of Dunkeld. 
After 1487 no provision was made in treaty negotiations for Ross's marriage, and it is likely that even before 1497 James IV, eager to fill the episcopate with compliant servants, intended his brother for high office in the church. After Archbishop Scheves died, on 28 January 1497, the king secured his brother's appointment to the see, initially as administrator until Ross had reached the age of thirty and could be consecrated. In the summer of 1497 Ross's trading activities substantially switched gear in order to fund foreign travel and the necessary expenses at Rome, as well as to purchase items necessary for a major prelate, such as a new seal and several signet rings -- and a tombstone. 
In or after December 1497 the new postulate travelled to Rome for papal confirmation of his appointment; he was back in Scotland by the following June. In January 1498 he was also made commendator of Holyrood Abbey; commends of the similarly wealthy Dunfermline and Arbroath abbeys followed, in June 1500 and July 1503 respectively. 
From 1493 until 1497 Ross occasionally sat with the lords hearing civil causes; after that date his attendances, while still sporadic and often brief, became more frequent, notably in the sessions of June-July 1498 and January 1499. On the death of the second earl of Huntly in June 1501, Ross was appointed chancellor, and from early July 1501 he was a member of the king's daily council. Also in July 1501 he served his first turn of intensive duty in a session on civil causes, a duty which he again performed in the sessions of February-March 1502 and of January-April and November-December 1503. However, throughout Ross's tenure of the chancellorship, the effective custody of the great seal probably lay with William Elphinstone, bishop of Aberdeen, at that time keeper also of the privy seal. 
Ross was never consecrated archbishop. On 4 January 1504 he witnessed a royal charter at Edinburgh, but died there, presumably suddenly, on the 12th or 13th following. On or shortly before 29 January he was buried in the chancel of St Andrews Cathedral, commemorated by the tombstone he himself had purchased at Bruges in 1498. His early death has left him an enigmatic figure. The scandalous circumstances of his appointment to the primacy, together with the very slight impression left by him in the records, caused Herkless and Hannay to present him as a rather lumpen, passive opportunist, without discernible virtues or vices. A eulogistic reference to a 'Roscia duca' in 'Orlando Furioso' has been ascribed to an encounter with Ariosto while Ross was visiting Rome; however, this refers to the son of a reigning Scottish king, by custom the duke of Rothesay, and seems likely to have been purely literary in derivation. The fulsome tribute in Henry VII's safe conduct of December 1497 is equally a matter of form, and sheds no true light on the young duke's character. 


@@@@@


doc= 26478


Stewart, James, earl of Moray (1500-1544/5), nobleman, was probably born on 21 February 1500, the illegitimate son of James IV of Scotland (1473-1513) and his mistress, Janet ('c'.1480- 'c'.1544), daughter of John Kennedy, second Lord Kennedy. On 1 June 1501 Janet Kennedy was granted Darnaway Castle and on 12 June her son was created earl of Moray, Lord Abernethy, and sheriff of Elgin and Forres. His parents seem to have had two further children, who probably died young. As a child Moray was tutored by James Watson and by the king's secretary, Patrick Paniter. In August 1508 he was sent to join his half-brother Alexander Stewart, archbishop of St Andrews, studying first under Raphael Regius and later Erasmus at Padua. Erasmus later remembered Moray as a boy of 'great promise' ('Letters of James V', 252). Alexander Stewart returned to Scotland in 1510, and presumably Moray came with him. He was probably not at the battle of Flodden, fought on 9 September 1513, where his father and the young archbishop perished. 
Moray became significant during the minority of his half-brother James V, was favoured by the lord governor, the duke of Albany, and consistently supported the latter's Francophile party in Scotland. When the duke left Scotland for France in May 1517 Moray may have travelled with him, and in October 1519 Lord Dacre, who was warden of all the English marches and well informed about Scottish affairs, noted his return when he joined the council. In December 1521 Moray was granted a nineteen-year lease of Ross and Ardmanach, and he served in Albany's army and council during 1522-4. He was a 'keeper' of the young king in Stirling Castle between December 1523 and May 1524, and Albany also made him lieutenant of the north in January 1524, in place of the deceased third earl of Huntly. Albany then proposed his marriage to a daughter of Frederick of Denmark, describing him as 'an attractive young man of administrative ability and exceptional gifts' ('Letters of James V', 98-9). 
In the summer of 1524 it became clear that Albany would not return to Scotland, and Queen Margaret set up a new government in which James V was supposedly ruling in his own right. Margaret was now estranged from Henry VIII's agent, the sixth earl of Angus (who was also her own second husband), and was keen to recruit Moray to her side. Therefore he was admitted to the new council and his lease of Ross and Ardmanach was confirmed. In addition, Margaret seems to have assigned Moray the wardship of the fourth earl of Huntly and offered him her daughter Lady Margaret Douglas in marriage. However, her schemes were confounded by Angus's return from exile; he joined the council in February 1525 and by August had secured custody of the king. Under Angus, Moray lost the Huntly wardship and his bride. In 1529 he married instead Lady Elizabeth Campbell (died in or before 1548), daughter of Colin Campbell, third earl of Argyll. They had a daughter, Mary (died 'c'.1547), who married John Stewart, master of Buchan. Between November 1525 and January 1526 Moray conspired with Queen Margaret and Arran to overthrow Angus, but came to terms after a show of force failed. Lacking an alternative, Angus confirmed Moray's appointment as lieutenant of the north in August 1526, but there was subsequently continual friction between them. 
Moray was one of the first lords to support James V against Angus in the summer of 1528, and he was a loyal servant of the adult king. In 1530 James considered using him as lieutenant of the borders, but instead Moray exercised his lieutenancy of the north in 1530-31, campaigning in Caithness and the isles. On 12 October 1532 he was appointed lieutenant-general of the Scottish realm during time of war, and lieutenant and warden-general of the east and middle marches in time of peace. He therefore acted as the commander-in-chief of the Scottish forces during the Anglo-Scottish war of 1532-3. As a reward for his services he received lands in Elgin and Forres in September 1528, the wardship of Duffus in April 1530, the wardship of the sheriff of Aberdeen in January 1532, and the feu of Strathearn in May 1532. 
In July 1535 Moray went to France as ambassador to assist Albany in arranging James V's marriage to a daughter of the duc de Vendome: the treaty was signed on 6 March 1536. Moray was made a knight of St Michael by Vendome, and instructed by Francois I to admit James V to the order. Between September 1536 and May 1537, with Moray as one of his party, James V visited the French court, jilted his fiancee, and married Princess Madeleine instead. While Moray was in France there was tension on the borders and his wardenship of the marches was revoked and assigned to Huntly. Moray was also discharged from his post as lieutenant of the north in August 1537, but does not appear to have been replaced. In 1540 Moray was feeling infirm and planned to recover his health in France. Before going he made a will (dated Edinburgh, 8 June) which reveals the existence of a mistress, Marion Stewart, and two illegitimate children, James and Elizabeth, about whom nothing further is known. He stayed in France until February 1541. 
Moray's health remained poor for some time. In August 1542, as hostilities with England reignited, Huntly was still lieutenant of the borders, and English spies reported that Moray was sick. Nevertheless, he replaced Huntly as lieutenant in early November, and the English thought that his pro-French, anti-protestant stance was influential with the king. In November 1542 the Scots planned a two-pronged assault on England: the king assembled a force at Lochmaben, and Moray was at Haddington with Cardinal Beaton, ready to dash across the border and pronounce a papal interdict on England before regrouping at Jedburgh. In the event Moray and Beaton never acted because the rout at Solway Moss on 24 November ruined their plan and the sudden death of the king on 14 December precipitated a political crisis. 
Moray was a key figure in the early minority of Mary, queen of Scots. Henry VIII was determined to make her Prince Edward's bride; Moray, Beaton, Argyll, Huntly, and the infant queen's mother, Mary of Guise, were equally determined that the French alliance should endure. However, during 1543 Moray and others of his party gave the impression of being open to persuasion. Sir Ralph Sadler reported that Moray was favourably inclined to Henry VIII while remaining 'a great beadsman and... good Papist, wholly given to the old ceremonies and traditions of Rome' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 18, pt. 1, no. 324). Moray facilitated the reconciliation of Governor Arran with Beaton in September, and the parliament of December dashed English hopes by annulling the treaties which had been concluded at Greenwich on 1 July. In May 1544 Henry's army sacked Edinburgh in retribution, and Moray was one of the defenders forced to retreat. Henry hoped that this 'rough wooing' would force the Scottish lords to accept the English marriage, and in December 1544 the English privy council was optimistically hoping that Moray would submit; yet five weeks earlier his countess had written to Mary of Guise, asserting his loyalty. Her letter reveals that Moray was now very ill and he died some time between December 1544 and 6 February 1545 (when a lease in Edinburgh was granted to his widow), having spent his life in the political, diplomatic, and military service of his country. 


@@@@@


doc= 26479


Stewart, James, first earl of Moray (1531/2-1570), regent of Scotland, was the second eldest (and after 1557 the eldest) among the seven illegitimate sons of James V (1512-1542), king of Scots, his mother being Margaret Erskine (d. 1572) ['see under 'James V, mistresses of, and their children], wife of Sir Robert Douglas of Lochleven and daughter of John Erskine, fifth Lord Erskine (died 1555). He was in his third year when in 1534 he and three of his half-brothers -- James, John Stewart (c.1531-1563), and Robert Stewart (1533-1593) -- were granted papal dispensation from their bastardy, which was regarded as a handicap to ecclesiastical preferment. 
Details of Moray's early life are obscure, but his father's affection for his mother and indeed for himself is clear from the generous provision that was made for him. In 1536 his father consulted the pope over a divorce for his mother; James V would then have been able to marry Margaret Erskine, and Lord James Stewart (as he was known) would have been legitimated as heir to the throne. The approach failed. In 1538 he was appointed commendator of the priory of St Andrews, one of the wealthiest monastic foundations in Scotland, a clear mark of his father's favour. His education, first under the supervision of George Buchanan from 1537 and then at St Andrews from 1545, was followed in 1548 by the first of many significant embassies abroad. Stewart had a licence to study in France, and on this short-term visit there he accompanied his half-sister the queen. Earlier in that same year he had given the first clear signs of his military skills, helping to repulse English raids in Fife in January and St Monans in June. From this point his movements are uncertain, with reports of him back in Scotland within the same year (Lee, 18) or not until 1549 (Herries, 23). Nevertheless, it is clear that he was not active in support of the pro-protestant and pro-English opponents of Cardinal David Beaton during the Castilian crisis in St Andrews. Equally significant as far as his future religious affiliation was concerned was his presence as prior of St Andrews at the first of the three reforming provincial councils held in Edinburgh in 1549. From this point he remained prominent in the service of the crown. 
On 16 January 1550 Stewart was betrothed in marriage to Christian, daughter of John Stewart, third earl of Buchan. This contract was not fulfilled, but it benefited Stewart enormously in gaining lands of the earldom. This episode later provided an insight into a material and acquisitive side to Stewart's character. In 1562, after his marriage to Annas Keith (8 February 1562), he protested to his mother his anger and dishonour at Christian's marriage to his half-brother Robert Douglas. Shamed he may have felt, but not enough to give up his Buchan lands. 
Far more significantly Stewart was present on the so-called 'brainwashing' expedition to France in 1550 with Mary of Guise and twenty-three other Scottish notables. There he viewed the extravagant Renaissance triumphs mounted in Rouen and elsewhere to mark the French victory over England, and witnessed the first expression of Mary's claim to the throne of England. Along with his colleagues he was alleged to have been bought completely by French pensions and in his own case with the promise of the French priory of Macon. He appeared to be a loyal follower of the policy of Mary of Guise at this point, but in common with many other Scots at this time was apparently not above receiving pay from two masters. In 1550 and 1552 the English privy council register records money paid to him on four separate occasions. 
Information about Stewart's movements from this point until 1555 is patchy, but his favour with Mary of Guise (formally regent from 1554) was still strong. Stewart was apparently influential in securing the assistant secretaryship to her for his future close associate and partner, William Maitland of Lethington, in 1554. The Moray-Maitland axis that grew from this appointment became one of the dynamic features of the politics of the succeeding decade, before its collapse into bitter enmity over the question of the restitution of the queen. 
The first clear sign of Stewart's protestantism was given in 1555 when he was among those who gathered to listen to John Knox at the house of John Erskine of Dun. After Knox's return to Geneva, in March 1557 Stewart signed a letter inviting him to return to Scotland, though this was later withdrawn, leaving the reformer stranded at Dieppe. Despite these reformist credentials and sympathies, Stewart was relatively late in joining the congregation, being a conspicuous absentee from the first band of 1557. Throughout 1557-8 he was still at the heart of the regime of Mary of Guise. In August 1557 he led a raid into England in support of the 'auld alliance' following Mary Tudor's entanglement in the latest round of the Habsburg-Valois struggle. In December 1557 he was chosen as one of the commissioners to attend Mary's wedding to the dauphin, Francois, and negotiate the marriage treaty. He set sail in February 1558, but the commissioners' ostensible success in securing recognition of the liberties of Scotland and the claims of the Hamiltons in the succession in return for the crown matrimonial proved a hollow triumph. The French promises were rendered worthless through the secret contract Mary had signed weeks before which essentially transferred Scottish sovereignty to the French. 
On his return from France, Stewart avoided the fate that befell four of his fellow commissioners, of death by poison, by apparently being held upside down by his boots to shake the poison out. He was present at the Scottish parliament on 29 November which agreed to honour Francois with the crown matrimonial and was deputed to take the sword, sceptre, and crown over to France. These ceremonial honours were never delivered, and Stewart made a number of excuses to avoid the mission. 
Stewart's experiences in France were vital in luring him away from his allegiance to Mary of Guise. Over the past decade he had enjoyed the rewards of French friendship, but the price that he and his fellow countrymen were being asked to pay was too much. With his access to the highest echelons of the French and Scottish courts, Stewart could not have been unaware that Scotland was becoming a French province, with all its attendant religious and political implications. He did not have long to wait to make his breach with Mary of Guise complete by finally declaring for the lords of the congregation. In May 1559, following the riot in Perth, the simmering religious and political crisis in Scotland came out in the open. Stewart was sent as one of the regent's commissioners to act as a mediator between herself and the rebels on 25 May. He even succeeded in effecting an agreement between the parties, allowing Mary of Guise to enter Perth on 29 May. At this point Stewart was under intense pressure from the congregation to commit openly to their side, suffering the taunts of Knox, who questioned his commitment to the religion. On 31 May, rightly suspecting the regent's intentions to hold true to the generous terms he had brokered for the rebels, he consented in writing to join the congregation. On the following day, when Mary of Guise broke the Perth agreement, Stewart, along with Archibald Campbell, fourth earl of Argyll, joined the congregation openly. Thenceforward he shared the congregation's fluctuating fortunes. From the despair of the evacuation of Edinburgh -- after the failed deposition of Mary of Guise in October 1559 -- to the relief of the eventual treaty of Edinburgh, Stewart's influence was pivotal. He was quickly established as one of the congregation's leaders and was crucial to the consolidation of the uneasy coalition that made up its membership. 
Stewart's political abilities were immediately apparent. In July 1559 he apologized to Sir William Cecil for the congregation's apparent lack of progress, stating: 'We are sorry to be judged cold slow and negligent in our proceedings.' In so doing, however, he offered a perceptive acknowledgement of the essential difficulty of the congregation's position, their lack of legitimacy: 'you know sir the difficulty of persuading the multitude to revolt against established authority'. He reminded Cecil that, unlike in England or Denmark, protestantism was not a state-sponsored activity. Not for the first or last time a lack of legitimacy hampered a cause identified with Stewart. It was a weakness that Mary of Guise was only too happy to exploit, denouncing the congregation as subversives who 'meantt not religion but a plane rebellion' ('Works of John Knox', 1.338). Stewart was particularly vulnerable to these accusations. It was the common talk of England, Scotland, and France that he had designs on the crown himself. Unsurprisingly he denied the charge when it was made personally by Sir James Melville, and in this case his actions provided a far more effective denial than a verbal rebuttal. His handling of the Hamiltons in the interests of the congregation suggests that he was already realistic about his chances of achieving the crown. He knew how vital the Hamiltons were to the congregation's cause and won them by securing the safe return of James Hamilton, third earl of Arran, to Scotland, and by allowing James Hamilton, duke of Chatelherault, titular leadership of the congregation. Stewart's critics may say that he did this with an eye to the long game, but his own regal ambitions -- if he had any at all -- were not allowed to stand in the way of the congregation's victory. 
There is no doubt that Stewart was a sincere and convinced protestant, and even allowing for his temporary shift from Knox between 1561 and 1565 he was one of the few acting in 1560 out of genuine religious motives. His enemies even attested to this. It has been argued that it was Stewart as much as the ministers and Knox who after 1567 helped to give the Reformation in Scotland a Calvinistic tone. His regency saw the fortunes of the kirk prosper in a way that it was soon to lament. It is not surprising then that Stewart was looked upon as a captain of Israel by contemporaries such as Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, and as the 'good regent' by George Buchanan and John Knox. His personal lifestyle seems to support these descriptions. Even when he was estranged from Knox for his defence of Mary's religious liberty, it was reported that 'thrice in the week an ordinary sermon [was heard] in the earl of Moray's lodgings in the Queen's house so near to the Mass' ('CSP for.', 4.605). Stewart was (unlike his father) by all accounts a loyal and faithful husband and the image of his house as 'a holy temple, free from impiety and improper conversation' seems correct ('History of Scotland', ed. Aikman, 2.573). 
Stewart, together with his close ally Maitland of Lethington, was given most credit for the congregation's success by Sir William Cecil and other English commentators. His wide-ranging contribution on the battlefield and at the negotiating table, and with the recruiting drum on behalf of the congregation inspired Sir William Cecil to think of Stewart in kingly terms. The Reformation Parliament, however, with Stewart's blessing advanced the Hamiltons' claim to pre-eminence rather than his own, through the Arran marriage proposal to Elizabeth I of England, and the formal declaration that Chatelherault and Arran were second and third persons of the realm. Once more this shows Stewart's political acumen. While no one has ever suggested seriously that he would in his heart have welcomed the sight of Arran as Elizabeth's consort, with all its attendant implications for the advancement of the Hamilton family, Stewart knew he was in no position to stop the proposal. He also recognized that it offered the best way of preserving the unity of the congregation and the continuance of the nascent Anglo-Scottish alliance. Most significantly he was also astute enough to realize that it stood little chance of success. Unsurprisingly Elizabeth rejected Arran as a husband, leaving the congregation in disarray. The fatal blow to the coalition came soon after the end of the Arran marriage project, in December 1560, when Mary's husband, Francois II of France, died, raising the almost certain prospect of Mary's return to Scotland as a widowed Roman Catholic monarch old enough to rule in person. Elizabeth, the Hamiltons, and Knox favoured a rapid solution by which Mary would marry the recently rejected Arran. This was dismissed out of hand by Stewart and Maitland, who had a far better grasp of the best way forward in dealing with their queen. A peaceful accommodation with the protestant lords ruling Scotland held great appeal for Mary and her Guise kindred, who sought Mary's smooth establishment in her realm. It was preferable to the Arran offer of marriage and the alternative of the Catholic crusade proposed by John Leslie and George Gordon, fourth earl of Huntly. Stewart's entire handling of the difficult period between the death of Francois and Mary's return confirms that he was politically astute. 
Following his selection in January 1561 by the convention of the nobility as ambassador to Mary 'to fully grope her mind' ('CSP Scot.', 1.510), Stewart was in a splendid position to promote his strategy. He left Scotland in March and met his sister in France on 15 April at St Dizier, where he stayed with her for five days before proceeding to Paris on 23 April and confiding in the English ambassador Throckmorton. He returned to Edinburgh on 29 May, seeing Elizabeth in London on the way. He had completed his mission well, with his credit in England, France, and Scotland enhanced. He had resisted French attempts to be won back to Roman Catholicism, and retained the high regard in which he was held by the English when he informed Elizabeth of Mary's intentions. He had not received the temporary regency he was looking for from Mary but had put forward the plan that provided the basis for Mary's successful return to Scotland. Mary would recognize the religious 'status quo' and accept Stewart and Maitland as her advisers; in return they would prosecute Mary's claim to the English succession energetically. The memorable advice Stewart offered Mary on his return to Scotland in a letter dated 10 June -- 'madame, for the luif of God presse na maters of religion, not for ony mans' advise on the earth' (Rose, 161) -- held the key to Stewart's strategy and the pre-eminence of the partnership with Maitland in the early years of Mary's personal reign. 
In August 1561 Mary returned to Scotland and issued a proclamation recognizing the religious 'status quo', in accordance with her half-brother's policy. Stewart was crucial in keeping the radical protestant opposition at bay. He physically defended Mary's right to hear mass in her own chapel and in the process earned the stinging rebuke of Knox, who was more fearful of one mass 'than ten thousand armed enemies' ('Knox's History', 2.12). In accordance with the Stewart-Maitland strategy, Mary dispatched Maitland as secretary of state to London to prosecute her claims to the English succession. 
Early signs of Mary's confidence in her half-brother were not in short supply. On 14 November 1561 Stewart was commissioned 'carte blanche' by the privy council to deal with the borders. The secret grant of his much-longed-for earldom of Moray on 30 January 1562 contrasted sharply with the public and spectacular lavishment of honours upon him and his followers on 8 February 1562 at St Giles's Cathedral, Edinburgh, on his marriage to Lady Annas Keith ('c'.1540-1588), daughter of William Keith, third Earl Marischal and near neighbour of his greatest enemy Huntly. Not content with the public creation of him as earl of Mar on 7 February, on his actual wedding night Moray was treated to the full Renaissance splendour of the Marian court. Knox, who had conducted the marriage service at St Giles's in due Calvinistic solemnity, denounced the vanity of the court. The anonymous author of the 'Diurnal of Remarkable Occurents' was, however, a more appreciative witness of what was perhaps the first of several major celebrations at the court which combined the elements of Renaissance magnificence -- acknowledged as an integral part of Mary's regime -- with an overtly political message. The marriage was celebrated with 'solemnitie as the lyk hes not bene sene before, the haill nobilitie of this realme being thair present' and with 'greit and divers baling and casting of fyre ballis fyrdsperis and running with horsis' (Thomson, 'Diurnal', 70). Mary created ten knights, the majority of whom can be clearly identified as members of Moray's party. John Wishart of Pitarrow, John Stewart of Minto, James Stewart of Traquair, Patrick Learmonth of Dairsie, and Andrew Murray of Balvaird were all members of Moray's household, while William Kirkcaldy of Grange was safely accounted one of his friends. 
Moray's marriage and the subsequent distribution of honours among his friends acknowledged the influence of his household and system of clientage. Not among those honoured, but a crucial figure, was Moray's loyal secretary John Wood who followed his master's fortunes faithfully from 1548, even sharing death at the hands of an assassin in the same year as Moray, 1570. Moray's marriage also broadened his power base, as the Earl Marischal was a vocal conservative protestant who supported traditional authority as well as the reformed religion. Moray did not forget his mother's family; he may have had the Erskine claim to the earldom of Mar in mind when he ceased to use the title in September 1562. He had a close relationship with his half-brother William Douglas, later sixth earl of Morton, a stalwart supporter of Scottish protestantism, and also the house of Douglas as a whole, including James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton. 
Domestically, the first year of Mary's rule was a year of triumph for Moray. His old enemy in the borders, James Hepburn, fourth earl of Bothwell, who had supported Mary of Guise against the congregation, was implicated by Arran in a scheme to kidnap Mary and murder Moray and Maitland. Despite Arran's insanity, the evidence was enough to have Bothwell imprisoned in March 1562, though in August he escaped to France. Moray could also rejoice at the dwindling fortunes of the Hamiltons, whose ambitions had been hit so hard by Elizabeth's and Mary's rejection of Arran and the lapse into madness of the unfortunate suitor. Most satisfying, though, for Moray was the demise of his greatest enemy, the Catholic earl of Huntly. Moray benefited enormously from the fall of the Cock of the North. His importance in Mary's strategy against Huntly was shown by her public proclamation of him as earl of Moray (the creation had remained secret until then) 'en route' for Corrichie at Darnaway Castle in Moray, probably on 10 September 1562. Moray's military prestige rose even higher after his humiliation of Huntly in the field at Corrichie, while materially he benefited from a generous share of the spoils from Huntly's palace of Strathbogie. His sphere of influence was further extended through his acquisition of the sheriffdoms of Elgin, Forres, and Inverness. 
Moray's rise in Mary's credit and his loyal support of Mary until 1565 put him on a constant collision course with his former godly allies. Despite remaining personally devout, Moray on a political level was a painful disappointment to the radical protestants. Arguably worse than his defence of Mary's mass was his close association with and benefit from the despised settlement regarding the thirds of benefices, where one third of the income of beneficed clergy was divided between protestant ministers and the government. The man responsible for this alleged division between God and the devil was Moray himself, and the 'collector general and universal intromitter' of all the revenues of the benefices was one of his clients, Wishart of Pitarrow. Alexander Clark, Stewart of Minto, and Andrew Wood of Largo, all clients of Moray, were also collectors of the hated thirds. Knox was not slow to denounce Moray, and in 1563 'the matter fell so hot betwixt the earl of Moray and John Knox that familiarly after that time they spoke not together more than a year and a half' (Lee, 117). 
Although the events of 1562 were probably the high point of Moray's alliance with Mary, between 1562 and 1565 strenuous efforts continued to ensure that the relationship was sustained. Also pursued was Mary's claim for the English parliament's recognition of her entitlement to the English succession -- the basis of the 'amity' with England. A sign of Moray's complete confidence in his and Maitland's control over Mary at this point was his support for the proposed match with Don Carlos of Spain, son of Philip II, for which Maitland negotiated seriously in 1563. He even supported the restitution of Matthew Stewart, fourth earl of Lennox, and was prepared to go along with the farce of the proposal, also in 1563, that Mary should marry Elizabeth's favourite, Robert Dudley, so long as it held the promise of the necessary guarantee. However, the collapse of Moray's personal relationship with Mary and the Moray-Maitland regime was signalled by Elizabeth's declaration of March 1565 that, regardless of whom Mary married, as far as her claim to the English succession was concerned 'nothing shall be done until her majesty shall be married or shall notify her determination to marry' ('State Papers... Burghley', 759) and by Mary's subsequent marriage to Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley. 
On receipt of Elizabeth's news Moray was described as 'the sorrowfullest man that can be' and it is not hard to see why (NL Scot., MS 3657, fol. 18). Elizabeth's frankness after four years of tortuous foreplay left the amity and Moray's policy in tatters. Darnley's presence in Scotland (he had arrived with his father, Lennox, in 1564) took on a whole new aspect, and everything that Moray had worked for, along with the political compromises he had made and his alienation of the godly, was coming home to roost. His despair led him back into friendship with Knox, as his displeasure at Mary's new independent policy beyond his personal control greatly reduced his previous toleration of Mary's Catholicism. His despair also led him into the biggest political mistake of his career. He refused repeatedly to give consent to the Darnley marriage, and on 3 April 1565 apparently left the court in disgust. In May he told Mary that marriage with Darnley would jeopardize protestantism and the alliance with England. He absented himself from the convention of the nobility at Perth in June, pleading that he was at risk of assassination by the Lennoxes, and in July he and his associates asked Elizabeth for support. Encouraged by a positive response from Elizabeth at this point, open rebellion began in August after Moray had been put to the horn for his repeated failure to attend summons. 
If Moray hoped to recreate the favourable circumstances of 1559-60 he was sadly mistaken. The rebellion was a farce, enjoying the ironic title of the chaseabout raid, where no pitched battle was truly sought or fought by either side. Mary was able to outmanoeuvre Moray completely, and he in turn was not supported by all the protestant lords, his former ally Maitland remaining with Mary. Moray gathered his forces in the west, and then moved east, entering Edinburgh on 31 August, but the attempted coup met no enthusiasm. Of his principal supporters, Argyll was kept in the north by Mary's supporter John Stewart, fourth earl of Atholl, and Chatelherault was deterred from pursuing the rebellion with the promise of a pardon and lenient terms of exile. Moray retreated from Edinburgh to Dumfries, while Mary placed Lennox in charge of the west and raised levies from the north. In two proclamations in September she depicted Moray as driven only by personal envy and desire for power, and promised a settlement of the religious question (implicitly in favour of protestantism) at the next parliament. This helped to secure Mary the support of many protestant lords, and isolated Moray. He now relied on English aid, but Elizabeth and her council, influenced by Mary's arguments against Moray, decided at the end of September that they could not help him beyond offering asylum. On 6 October Moray and his remaining supporters arrived in England. 
This low point of his career saw Moray experiencing an adroit performance of feigned public outrage from Elizabeth. Summoned to Elizabeth's court he received a public remonstrance in front of an international audience on 23 October. Private respite and asylum in Newcastle upon Tyne followed before his carefully rehearsed return to Scotland, in the company of a $1000 subsidy from Elizabeth, on 10 March 1566, the morning after the murder of David Riccio, Mary's Italian-born secretary. 
Events in Scotland during his absence had created the sort of alliance Moray had hoped to create in the summer. He was kept well informed by the conspirators, hence his perfectly timed arrival in Edinburgh. In the fallout from the Riccio affair, Moray was gradually able to return to Mary's favour as she exchanged one set of rebels for another. After the birth of Mary's son Charles James (later James VI) in June, Moray was to report to Cecil that he fully enjoyed her favour once more and was able to ensure the return of Maitland from his exile following the Riccio murder. Moray was present at Jedburgh in October 1566 for what threatened to be Mary's deathbed and witnessed her plea for national reconciliation in which he was personally beseeched not to persecute the Catholics after her death. After her recovery he followed Mary to the infamous conference at Craigmillar, which appears now to have been as much about the preparations for the spectacular baptismal celebrations for Charles James the following month at Stirling as about those for the Darnley murder. 
The debate as to the truth of the Darnley murder is endless, but it is extremely unlikely that Moray was not conversant with the plot to kill him. The description of Moray being fully apprised of the plot and promising to 'looke throw his fingeris thairto' (Keith, 3.293) is hard to resist. Yet another sign that Moray had learned from his mistakes of 1565 was his departure from Edinburgh across the River Forth on the morning of the murder, though his apologist Buchanan states this was because his wife had miscarried. After the murder Moray lay very low. Using his wife's illness as an excuse, he did not join the court at Seton but managed instead to meet Morton at Dunkeld at the end of February. In March he returned to court, but wrote to Cecil informing him of his desire to travel abroad. In April Moray took leave of Mary and Scotland, with Mary lamenting his departure and his precision in matters of religion. 
Moray's sudden wanderlust was the masterstroke of his career. His desire 'to see the pairtis of France, Flanderis or ony uther pairtis beyond sey' (Thomson, 'Diurnal', 107) was delightfully vague, but the provision in his will which left Mary as the guardian of his daughter was exceptionally astute. To describe Moray's leave of absence during the tempestuous months from April to August as conspicuous would be an understatement. What made such a move possible was the knowledge that his interests were in safe hands. Vincenzo Laureo, the papal nuncio to Scotland in 1566, offered a very tenable view of events as they unfolded. Writing in Italy in June 1567 and without prior knowledge of Mary's marriage to Bothwell, Laureo drew attention to the importance of the Moray-Maitland axis, arguing that, although Moray had left Scotland, Maitland, 'a great friend of Moray' (Pollen, 271), might either persuade Mary to marry Bothwell (who had returned from exile to a prominent place in Scottish affairs) or ensure Bothwell's exclusion from the queen's favour and recall Moray to power. Laureo's critique of Moray's tactics is strengthened by his later letter of 5 August 1567, written with knowledge of Mary's imprisonment in Lochleven but before Moray's acceptance of the regency. Laureo highlighted once more the importance of the Moray-Maitland axis and offered bitter admiration for Moray's outstanding political acumen: 'Moray absented himself partly from fear of the earl of Bothwell, partly in order to be able to maintain his favour with the queen and her party no matter what might happen. By this absence he has not only been able to play the part of an innocent man averse to the late tumults but he has also managed by his pretended services to win over both sides to mount the throne as he had planned. What has helped him most has been the crafty counsel of the laird of Lethington a man so astute and unprincipled that in all the late treasons he is thought to have throw the stone (as they say) without seeming to move his hand. (ibid., 401-2)' Moray read the political situation astutely, showing considerable finesse in his role as the 'innocent man'. On 10 April Moray was in Berwick and later that month he was in London. On 1 May he was in Dieppe and on 15 May he was with the Huguenots Gaspard de Coligny and Henri de Bourbon, prince of Conde. He was in Lyons when news reached France of the confrontation at Carberry on 15 June, between the confederate lords (including Moray's allies Morton and Argyll and his uncle John Erskine, earl of Mar) and Mary and her new husband, Bothwell, which had led to Mary's capitulation. His sightseeing was over. Resisting Catherine de' Medici's attempts to win him for France, Moray arrived in England on 25 July and rode into Edinburgh on 11 August. On 15 August he interviewed his half-sister, who had abdicated on 24 July, 'like a ghostly father' (Lee, 210) in Lochleven, listing the errors of the final two years of her reign. On 22 August Moray was proclaimed regent for James VI, with the support of the confederate lords and the protestants of Edinburgh, and with Mary's endorsement. 
The 29-month Moray regency was filled with desperate political struggles and decisions that were immensely significant for the Scottish polity. The kirk at last achieved the victory it had sought in 1560, winning if not the entire patrimony of the Roman Catholic church, then so much else. The second Reformation Parliament of 1567 was far more generous to the radical demands of the kirk than its counterpart of 1560. The general assembly's plaintive cry in the summer of 1567 that the foundation of the kirk had been laid in 1560 but that it still lacked its kaipstone was answered willingly by Moray. Fuelled perhaps by the desperate circumstances in which the party of revolution in 1567 found itself, there was a perceptible air of energy and momentum about its ecclesiastical legislation. Whereas in 1560 it had still claimed to be loyal to its sovereign majesties Mary and Francois, it had deposed and imprisoned in 1567 a divinely sanctioned monarch and crowned her son. The winter of 1567 brought a golden age for the kirk in its relations with the state, an ideal to which future Calvinistic dissidents looked back. Part of the reason for the almost classic Calvinistic model relationship between kirk and state at this time was its Calvinist personnel. As regent Moray played the role of the godly prince 'par excellence', acting in tandem with his client and former tutor George Buchanan, moderator of the Church of Scotland. As principal of St Leonard's College, St Andrews, Buchanan turned that institution into a major seminary of the kirk, following which it reaped a rich harvest of ministers in the 1570s and 1580s. 
It is hard to exaggerate the difficulty of the task that Moray had set himself. As regent he headed an illegitimate regime bereft of the appeal that a legitimate, adult sovereign could draw upon -- not to mention the uncomfortable presence of a captive Mary to contend with. His party also had to contend with a significant body of both international and domestic opposition, which questioned how James VI could 'evir be justlie king when his mother livis' (Bannatyne, 126-7). The situation was difficult enough even before Mary's escape from Lochleven on 2 May 1568 induced widespread panic among the king's party. Mary's support came from some of the Hamiltons and the earl of Argyll. Moray refused a settlement with Mary that would have restored her to the throne and provided independence from the Hamiltons, and instead he confronted Mary's army, under Argyll, at Langside near Glasgow on 13 May. Moray and his cavalry commander Sir William Kirkcaldy of Grange took maximum advantage of Argyll's sudden illness to overwhelm the superior forces of the queen's party. Moray carefully ordered his men to take prisoners rather than close the door on reconciliation by killing the queen's allies. 
It was at Langside that Throckmorton's description of Moray as a captain of Israel seemed most apposite, but in the face of the furore that Mary's flight into England caused the captain of Israel was to find the promised land elusive during the remaining months of his regency. Moray began negotiations with Elizabeth over Mary's fate, leading to the conferences at York and Westminster between October 1568 and January 1569 which he attended in person. Moray attempted to secure his position against Mary by revealing the casket letters to the English representatives, which appeared to prove that Mary had known of the plan to kill Darnley and had committed adultery with Bothwell. The conference ended any pretence that Moray and Maitland were still allies. Moray was already suspicious of Maitland's allegiance and referred to him openly as the necessary evil at this point. Moray included Maitland in the party for the conference only because he was worried about the damage his erstwhile partner would cause in Scotland in his absence. Given the amount of damage Maitland caused in London -- with his promotion of the idea that Mary, once divorced from Bothwell, should marry Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk -- Moray's suspicions were entirely justified. 
The uncertainty of Elizabeth's intentions towards Mary placed Moray in an invidious position. The skill with which he navigated the troubled waters that Mary's trial created was impressive. He responded to the threat of the Norfolk marriage proposal by seeming to give his approval, contingent upon Elizabeth's own support for the matter. He strengthened his own position during the first session held in Westminster in November, by openly accusing his sister of murdering Darnley and by delivering to the English privy council the contents of the casket letters and other doctored evidence designed to protect his own allies and maximize Mary's guilt. Moray succeeded in turning the conference into a trial in all but name, breaking his previous agreement with Mary and hoping to force Elizabeth into having Mary ratify her abdication and publicly recognize his government. The non-verdict of the trial on 10 January 1569 -- 'perhaps the most absurd judicial opinion ever left upon record' (Tytler, 7.317) -- was a personal triumph for Moray. Mary was still a captive in England, and Moray was able to return to Scotland with tacit recognition of his regency and a $5000 English subsidy. 
Moray's return to Scotland saw further success for both him and the king's party. Moray gained formal approval for all his actions in England from the Scottish privy council and in April 1569, at a supposed meeting to discuss the problem of Mary, Chatelherault (who had disputed Moray's claim to the regency) was imprisoned along with John Maxwell, fourth Lord Herries, who had been one of the principal representatives of Mary at the conference. Moray further reduced the queen's party in May by coming to terms with Huntly and Argyll. At a convention of the nobility in Perth in July, a motion to allow Mary's divorce from Bothwell was defeated by forty votes to nine, conclusive proof of the changed agenda from Carberry, when the professed intention of the confederates was to secure Mary's detachment from Bothwell; it was now more useful to the government to prevent Mary from marrying again. Maitland's support for Mary's divorce -- as a precursor to Mary's marriage to Norfolk -- signalled open hostilities between the former allies. The Norfolk marriage project provided the perfect solution to Scotland's ills for Maitland, promoting his dream of the union of the realms by marrying Mary to an English husband before her eventual succession. To Moray and the king's party, despite his earlier feigned support, it was to be avoided at all costs as Mary's restoration, combined with an English marriage, would have led to the king's party's eclipse. It was time for Moray to be rid of the menace of Maitland. On 2 September he tricked Maitland into attending a meeting at Stirling, where the latter was arrested, imprisoned, and charged with the murder of Darnley. His trial was set for 22 November. 
At this point things did not go according to plan for Moray, and his last months were among his most careworn. Maitland was spectacularly rescued from his imprisonment by Kirkcaldy of Grange (who had deserted Moray for the queen's party) and placed in the comfort of Edinburgh Castle to intrigue with the other key Marian supporters Chatelherault and Herries. Maitland's day of law resulted in a public humiliation for the regent. Maitland successfully mobilized his own supporters in Edinburgh, such a force of Hamiltons together with followers of Huntly, Argyll, and Alexander Home, fifth Lord Home (another defector from Moray), that Moray was forced to prorogue Maitland's trial. The outbreak of the northern uprising in England did nothing to ease Moray's burden. His unpopular arrest of the rebel Thomas Percy, seventh earl of Northumberland, on 24 December caused outrage even among his own party as transgressing the unwritten law of asylum to political refugees. Yet Moray really had little choice. He could not have afforded to offend Elizabeth, who as Moray knew held the key to the eventual solution of the civil war in Scotland so long as she held Mary. Moray's instructions to his envoy to England, Nicholas Elphinstone, on 2 January 1570 were understandably panic-ridden. He was fighting for his political life, and made Elizabeth aware in no uncertain terms of the basic difficulty of his position -- of what Maitland would later refer to as the problem of the regiment of the realm. His enemies would never submit to his authority, whether motivated by envy, ambition, or doubts over whether his regime could be legitimate while Mary lived; he was financially ruined; and he was unable to continue without significant English financial help, formal recognition by England of James VI as king, and a definite decision about Mary. 
Moray never received Elizabeth's reply, as he was assassinated in Linlithgow on 23 January 1570. He had been warned to avoid Linlithgow and had even been told of the house from which the fatal shot would come. He chose to ignore the advice. The assassination was perfectly planned by Moray's oldest rivals, the Hamiltons, and executed by their own hitman, James Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh, complete with camouflage and getaway horse. Within two weeks of Elphinstone's embassy Elizabeth recognized the magnitude of Moray's achievements over the previous three years. In characteristic fashion she seemed to realize just how great a servant Moray had been, and the means he provided to solve her Scottish problem, only at a time when his services were no longer available for hire. Moray's funeral and burial took place on 14 February in St Giles's Cathedral, Edinburgh, and were conducted appropriately enough by John Knox, whose sermon was based upon the text 'blessed are the dead, that die in the lord' ('CSP Scot.', 3.83-4). He was succeeded in the earldom of Moray by his daughter Elizabeth (1565-1591), who in 1580 married her kinsman James Stewart (1565/6-1592), from then on regarded as second earl of Moray. 
Moray's historical reputation has traditionally divided along the faultlines of allegiance to his half-sister Mary, queen of Scots. Favoured by her enemies, condemned by her supporters, Moray was seen most strongly as the 'good regent' in the 400-year-old portrait from the pen of his grateful tutor and client, George Buchanan. This picture is not too dissimilar from the one in John Knox's 'History of the Reformation in Scotland'; lovingly preserved in the twentieth century by Maurice Lee, it has remained the most familiar to students of the period. Alternatively, Moray has been presented as a proto-Shakespearean villain, a product of the loins of James V denied the destiny he felt to be his right by being born on the wrong side of the blanket. The unreliable memoirs of Sir James Melville describe him as an unskilled tennis player, unable to discern the flow of the game, and so 'running evir after the ball' (Melville, 222). This seems a most unfair and inaccurate description. Despite a later critically harsh verdict that Moray was lacking in political acumen and that his rare successes owed more to good luck than to his own unaided designs, it is difficult to square the evidence of his political career with the image of him as inept. During the personal reign of Mary he proved more than capable of learning from his mistakes and reading the game perfectly. 
Moray was unquestionably a man of great ability, driven by his protestant faith and capable of great courage and ruthlessness. But despite a contemporary view of him as the 'defender of the widow and fatherless' (Thomson, 'Diurnal', 156), it is hard not to think of him in cold, calculating terms. His personal character lacked warmth. The magnitude of his achievements as a regent should not be underestimated, however, and his death represented the nadir of the fortunes of the king's party. As Maitland rightly predicted, his death changed the issues in the civil war, which were now as much about the regiment of the realm as the succession. 


@@@@@


doc= 26480


Stewart, James, second earl of Moray (1565/6-1592), magnate and murder victim, was the eldest son of James Stewart, first Lord Doune ('c'.1529-1590), and his wife, Margaret Campbell ('b'. after 1541, died 1592), daughter of the fourth earl of Argyll. In 1580 the young James married his distant cousin Elizabeth Stewart, 'suo jure' countess of Moray (1565-1591), daughter of James Stewart, first earl of Moray and regent of Scotland, who had been assassinated in 1570. Along with Elizabeth's wealth, lands, and title, Moray acquired her family's long-running feud with the sixth earl of Huntly, and also its reputation as a bastion of protestantism. Huntly, the pre-eminent magnate of north-east Scotland (where the Moray earldom was also located), was Scotland's Catholic champion. In 1590 Moray, together with John Stewart, fifth earl of Atholl, tried to challenge Huntly's local power by supporting clans -- especially the Grants and the Macintoshes -- which had revolted against Huntly. A conflict ensued (a mixture of open warfare and court politics), and by the end of 1591 Huntly had emerged victorious. In the meantime Francis Stewart, earl of Bothwell, Moray's kinsman and ally, had begun a series of attempts to seize the person of King James that would transform Scottish politics. Afraid for his life, James became obsessed with Bothwell and all who supported him. Huntly, as possibly the most powerful man in Scotland, was commissioned to hunt down Bothwell and his supporters. 
Early in February 1592 the king used Andrew, Lord Ochiltree, yet another Stewart nobleman, to persuade Moray to go south to discuss issues concerning both Bothwell and his feud with Huntly. However, on 7 February, Huntly went with an armed company to Donibristle in Fife, near the northern shore of the Firth of Forth, where Moray was staying with his mother. Accounts of what happened next vary, but there is agreement that later the same day the castle was set on fire, the sheriff of Moray, who had accompanied the earl, was slain when he tried to flee, and Moray himself was hunted down and killed among the rocks by the sea. The story told by both Spottiswood and Calderwood is that Moray would have escaped had he not been spotted because the top of his hat had caught fire. 
Was this a prearranged plot to kill Moray and, if so, was the king party to it? Definite knowledge is impossible, but the facts do seem to point to some sort of plot, not least because James's reaction 'was one of official outrage and actual indifference' (Brown, 157). Calderwood's explanation is that Huntly 'hated the Erle of Murrey, partlie becaus he hated that hous for the Good Regent's sake; partlie becaus the erle was suspected to be a favourer of Bothwell' (Calderwood, 5.144). Huntly, on the other hand, was a great favourite with the king. Other contemporaries blamed the chancellor, John Maitland, Lord Thirlestane. The ballad known as 'The Bonny Earl of Moray' gives voice to the traditional grounds for suspecting James's connivance in Moray's death when it exclaims: '
And the bonny earl of Moray 

Oh he was the Queen's love! 
(Sargent and Kittredge, 444)' However, none of the major contemporary sources mention this, though they do comment on the earl's handsomeness. This is just one reason for doubting that the ballad is contemporary. Moray's family did commission ballads and other propaganda -- including a gruesome 'death portrait', now at Darnaway Castle -- but this was part of a campaign to seek royal justice, and would not have included material gratuitously offensive to the king. The present ballad can only be traced back to the second edition of William Thomson's 'Orpheus Caledonius' (1733). A completely different ballad with the same title appeared in John Finlay's 'Scottish Historical and Romantic Ballads, Chiefly Ancient', in 1808. 
Moray's murder caused a sensation in Scotland and tremendous popular outrage, so much so that the king felt obliged to leave Edinburgh for a time. This was partly because the ministers saw the dead man as a protestant champion killed by a Catholic. The earl's mother took his body back to Edinburgh, where it lay unburied for at least six years, a visible call for vengeance; she herself died within a few months, cursing the king's name. A raid to apprehend Huntly had been announced on 10 February, but it was cancelled when Huntly promised to enter in ward in Blackness Castle and to abide a trial for the crime. His defence was that Moray had been killed while resisting the execution of the king's commission to apprehend Bothwell's followers. Huntly was released within a few days and never stood trial. Four men were eventually executed for the murder: Captain John Gordon, a brother of Gordon of Gight, and another man were tried and executed within a few days of the deed at the insistence of Lord Ochiltree. Robert Innes of Innermarky was captured by Moray's brother Henry Stewart, later Lord St Colm, in 1595: he was subsequently tried and executed along with one of his servants. In 1603 a peace agreement was finally worked out between Huntly and the third earl of Moray -- it entailed the latter's marriage to Huntly's daughter, but other clauses were kept secret. 
The murder of Moray had a powerful long-term effect on Scottish politics. The desire for revenge, especially by the Stewart lords, merged with faction fights, Spanish plots, and Bothwellian raids to unsettle Scotland until 1595; and the murder remained a live issue long afterwards, becoming a permanent part of Scottish historical consciousness. Moray himself had arguably been a relatively unimportant, even incompetent, figure, but in his death he achieved fame and glory. His wife, who bore him two sons, the younger of whom was the courtier Sir Francis Stewart, and three daughters and who was more competent and energetic than her husband, predeceased him on 18 November 1591. Moray was eventually buried some time after 16 February 1598 in Regent Moray's aisle, St Giles's, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 26481


Stewart, James, earl of Arran (c.1545-1596), courtier and administrator, was the second son of the eight children of Andrew Stewart, second Lord Ochiltree (1521?-1594?), and his first wife, Agnes Cunningham (died in or after 1557), daughter of John Cunningham of Caprington. William Stewart of Monkton was a younger brother. The details of Stewart's early life are unknown, but he is said to have received an unusually good education. He may have been sent to study in France, where he subsequently became a mercenary; he fought in the army of the estates of Holland against the Spaniards and saw service in Sweden, Germany, and perhaps Russia, before returning home with the rank of captain in late 1577 or early 1578. 
A handsome man, eloquent, intelligent, and of great presence and considerable charm, Stewart impressed the young James VI and attached himself to the king's great-uncle, Robert, sixth earl of Lennox. However, Esme Stewart ('c'.1542-1583), seigneur d'Aubigny, James's fascinating cousin, arrived from France in September 1579 and rose rapidly in the royal favour. James Stewart, by now having an affair with Elizabeth Stewart (c.1554-1595?), the recently married countess of Lennox, deserted his patron in favour of Aubigny. The elderly Lennox was persuaded to resign his earldom to Aubigny, and Elizabeth left her husband for the dashing captain. Soon Stewart was sharing in the new earl of Lennox's rapid advancement, receiving with his father a grant of the lands of Bothwellmuir in Lanarkshire, which in August were transformed into a barony. He was also granted various escheats, along with revenues from the church lands of St Andrews and Leuchars. On 15 October 1580 he became one of the gentlemen of the king's chamber. 
James VI was still too young to rule for himself, and Scotland was being governed by the increasingly unpopular fourth earl of Morton, formerly regent and now head of the council. At Lennox's bidding, at a privy council meeting on 31 December 1580 Stewart accused Morton of murdering Lord Darnley, and the regent was imprisoned and later executed. For the next twenty months Lennox and Stewart virtually ruled Scotland, Lennox as the prime favourite but with Stewart retaining his influence over the young monarch and gathering honours and appointments as a result. In January 1581, to the fury of the Hamiltons, Stewart obtained the guardianship of his distant relative James Hamilton, third earl of Arran, who had been insane for nearly twenty years. In February he replaced his own father on the privy council and in March he was appointed captain of the king's guard. On 21 April 1581 the king created him earl of Arran and he took up residence in Arran's handsome tower house at Kinneil, in Linlithgowshire. By this time Elizabeth Stewart had managed to divorce her husband for impotence, and the new earl of Arran married her on 6 July 1581. She was already three months pregnant with their first child. 
Arran and Lennox (recently made a duke) were by now bitter rivals. Although Arran's resignation at the end of the year as captain of the king's guard eased the tension between them, their uneasy relationship continued until a group of nobles led by the earl of Gowrie decided to end their rule. In what became known as the Ruthven raid Gowrie and his ultra-protestant friends seized the king, on 22 August 1582, and held him at Gowrie's castle of Ruthven. Arran at once rode to the rescue but was taken prisoner, while Lennox was ordered to leave the country. For the next ten months the Ruthven lords ruled Scotland. Arran was released from Ruthven Castle in November 1582 after the king's intervention, and when James finally escaped from the Ruthven lords in June 1583 Arran joined him at Falkland, where, according to the French envoy Fontenay, he encouraged the young king to waste his time in amusement and idle recreation. Arran was soon attending privy council meetings again and further honours were showered upon him. He became keeper of the strategically important Stirling Castle when the second earl of Mar was forced to give it up, and in October he was elected provost of Stirling. By the end of that month, the Ruthven raiders, apart from Gowrie, had been either imprisoned or driven into exile. Arran was visited at Kinneil by his grateful monarch for two nights in November, and on 10 December he became an extraordinary lord of session. 
In spring 1584 the exiled Ruthven raiders attempted to recover power. They seized Stirling Castle on 18 April, and issued a proclamation declaring their loyalty to the king but denouncing 'that godlesse atheist, bloodie Haman and seditious Catiline, James Stuart, called Erle of Arran, the onlie disturber and unquietter of the whole countrie' (Calderwood, 4.28). However, the king marched against them; they fled, and Gowrie (arrested on 15 April, after dithering as to whether to join the other raiders) was executed on 4 May. His lands were then divided between the third earl of Montrose and Arran, who received Dirleton Castle and other properties in East Lothian. Arran was now acting as chancellor in place of the sixth earl of Argyll, who was sick, and under his conservative administration parliament on 19 May passed the 'Black Acts', asserting the king's authority over church as well as state. 
Arran pursued a policy of friendship with England and, though Elizabeth I did not trust him, in June 1584 she appointed the governor of Berwick, Baron Hunsdon, to meet him for a discussion about the possibility of an Anglo-Scottish league. In August Arran was made captain and keeper of Edinburgh Castle and on the 13th he met Hunsdon 5 miles outside Berwick, at Foulden church, deeply impressing the English contingent. Sir Edward Hoby told his uncle, Baron Burghley: '[Arran] not only comported himself with a noble dignity and grace but was in truth a king, binding and loosing at his pleasure... surely he carrieth a princely presence and gait, goodly of personage... very resolute, very wise and learned and one of the best spoken men that ever I heard: a man worthy of the Queen's favour, if it please her. (Tytler, 6.218-19)' None the less, their growing number of enemies hated Arran and his wife for their perceived arrogance and rapacity, deploring his violent temper and noting with horror that when Lady Gowrie knelt before the king, as he rode to parliament that August, Arran thrust her aside so brutally that she fainted and was left lying on the street until the royal procession had passed. 
Arran's ineluctable rise continued unabated. In September 1584 he became chancellor of Scotland on the death of Argyll, and in October he was elected provost of Edinburgh. By February 1585 he had been appointed lieutenant-general of the realm, and James VI and his court sought shelter at Dirleton when there was a serious outbreak of plague in Edinburgh. Arran made even more enemies, however, when he ordered the execution of John Cunningham of Drumquhassill and his son-in-law Malcolm Douglas of Mains, for having conspired in favour of the banished lords. Cunningham had been greatly respected as a leading supporter of the protestant church, and there was much indignation at his death. Arran also had a new rival: Patrick, master of Gray, who had returned to Scotland after some years in France and was high in the king's favour. Young, handsome, charming, and extraordinarily devious, Gray also ingratiated himself with Elizabeth I when James sent him south to discuss the proposed Anglo-Scottish league. 
Gray began to build up opposition to Arran and his machinations culminated that summer in Arran's arrest. When Arran attended a day of truce on the borders on 27 July 1585, Sir Francis Russell, son of the second earl of Bedford, was killed in a fracas. On Gray's prompting Edward Wotton, the English ambassador, deliberately put it about that Arran had arranged Russell's death so that the Anglo-Scottish league would be stalled. Wotton told James this version of events, but though the king imprisoned Arran in Edinburgh Castle he allowed him to return to Kinneil after a few days and let it be known that he would still like Arran to be one of the commissioners for the proposed league. Terrified that Arran would be restored to favour and would take revenge on him, Gray sent word to Elizabeth that she should delay the discussions of the league and allow the banished lords to return to Scotland. Elizabeth took this advice. The lords reached Stirling at the beginning of November, denounced Arran, knelt before the king, and begged for his forgiveness. Arran fled. Locking the Northbrig Port of Stirling behind him and throwing the keys into the River Forth, he made for the west, where a ship was waiting to carry him to France. The insane James Hamilton became earl of Arran once more, while the man who had supplanted him reverted to being Captain James Stewart, or Lord Quondam, as his enemies sardonically called him. 
Despite being stripped of his titles, lands, and offices, Stewart remained in Scotland. After several months spent in the west and possibly in Ireland, he eventually went north to join his wife on her Lovat jointure lands in Inverness-shire. There he did his best to construct a new power base by courting the friendship of the clan chiefs in the area. Determined to regain his former position of prominence, he rode to Edinburgh in the autumn of 1592 when he heard that his successor as chancellor, John Maitland, now Lord Thirlestane, had retired from court, apparently out of favour. The king received Stewart kindly but the church ministers preached against him, and his influential nephew the third Lord Ochiltree warned him that he would have to make his peace with the church if he hoped for reinstatement. Although Stewart agreed to appear before the presbytery, his lack of repentance for the death of Cunningham of Drumquhassill and other misdeeds was all too obvious and his appeals were rejected. 
For the next four years Stewart divided his time between his relatives in Ayrshire and his wife in Inverness-shire. She seems to have died in September 1595, and with the death of Lord Thirlestane a few weeks later Stewart decided to try once more to regain the king's favour. He travelled south with the young second duke of Lennox, who had for the past two years been the king's lieutenant in the north but had resigned his office. Lennox managed to arrange for Stewart to have some conversation with James and, apparently encouraged by his reception, Stewart decided to visit Ayrshire. A friend (or in one version of the story, a witch) warned him that he was risking his life by riding through Douglas territory to get there, for the earl of Morton's relatives had not forgotten that he had been directly responsible for the regent's fall from power. Stewart brushed the warning aside and continued his journey. On 1 December 1596 he was intercepted near Symington by James Douglas of Torthorwald, Morton's nephew, who with a small band of retainers attacked him and hacked him to death. Douglas triumphantly carried off Stewart's head on the tip of his lance. In 1608 Douglas was himself killed by William Stewart, one of Stewart's nephews. 
The historian of the Lovat family wrote of James Stewart of Bothwellmuir, 'He was a pretty man, a great spirit of bravery and courage: but he was a man full of violence and, when he was in place of rule, executed it with much cruelty' (Mackay, 221). Stewart's efforts as chancellor to create a league with England and subdue the church ministers did not in fact derive from personal ambition but were in keeping with James VI's own wishes. However, the Scottish nobility were consumed with envy when they saw the extent to which Stewart enjoyed James's favour. The ultra-protestants loathed him, and he made so many enemies in his ruthless rise to power that in the end even the king's protection could not save him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26482


Stewart, James (1791-1863), engraver, was born at Edinburgh in October or November 1791. He was articled in 1804 to the engraver Robert Scott, and had as his fellow pupil John Burnet, from whom he received much assistance; he also studied drawing in the Trustees' Academy and began to produce large steel historical and figure plates. Stewart's first independent plate was from Sir William Allan's 'Tartar Robbers Dividing the Spoil', which was followed by 'Circassian Captives' (1820), 'The Murder of Archbishop Sharpe' (1824), and 'Queen Mary Signing her Abdication', all from paintings by Allan. He then became associated with David Wilkie, for whom he executed a number of works, including an admirable plate of 'The Penny Wedding'. A founder member of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1826, he joined the Artist's Annuity Fund in 1812 and was still a member in 1843. In 1830 Stewart moved with his family to London, where he worked for various book publishers. He also engraved 'The Pedlar', after Wilkie, and 'Hide and Seek', from his own picture painted in the style of Wilkie, which was exhibited at the British Institution in 1829. His minor works, including book illustrations, date from 1830 to 1833, and are quite rare, an example being 'The Legacy', after James Inskipp, for 'The Amulet' (1831). 
In 1833 Stewart was induced by financial embarrassment to abandon his profession and emigrate to Cape Colony. There he settled as a farmer, but within a year he was ruined by the outbreak of war. He then moved to the town of Somerset, where, by teaching and portrait painting, he earned the means of purchasing another property. He later became a magistrate and a member of the colonial legislature. He died in the Cape in May 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 26483


Stewart, John, third earl of Buchan (c.1380-1424), magnate and soldier, was the second son of Robert Stewart, first duke of Albany (c.1340-1420), and the eldest son of Albany's second marriage, to Muriella, daughter of Sir William Keith (d. in or after 1407), the marischal ['see under 'Keith family (per. c.1300-c.1530)]. His initial role, in the north-east of Scotland, reflected the alliance between Albany and the Keiths, a major family in Aberdeenshire. He received the lands of Coull and O'Neill from his father in 1398 and those of Aboyne and Touchfraser from Keith in 1407. The title earl of Buchan was the product of Albany's ambitions in the north, though it took time for these to come to fruition. Following the death of the previous earl, Alexander Stewart, in summer 1405, his heir in the earldom was his brother Albany, who, however, at once granted it to his son John. But there were very few lands to support the title, and John was styled only lord of Buchan for several years. He was recorded thus on 26 June 1411, but by the following May he had begun to be referred to as earl, in charters and other documents. Even so it was only after 1415, when Euphemia Leslie, countess of Ross, who was in Albany's guardianship, was persuaded to resign her rights to John Stewart before retiring to a nunnery, that he came to have a substantial territorial base, made up of the earldom of Ross and the lordships of Nairn, Strathglass, and Kingedward. The last of these comprised about half the original earldom of Buchan. Buchan, however, never established himself as a great northern magnate. Although one later source says he was at the battle of Harlaw in 1411, regional power lay in the hands of the two main protagonists at that battle, Donald MacDonald, lord of the Isles, and Alexander, earl of Mar. The alliance of Albany with the latter probably led to a gradual handover of Buchan's interests to Mar after 1423 through grants to Mar's followers, a trend facilitated by Buchan's involvement elsewhere. 
From 1402 Albany had a more immediate need for Buchan. The capture of John's elder brother, Murdoch Stewart, at Homildon in 1402 left his 62-year-old father without an active political heir. The regular appearance of Buchan at court from 1406 and his appointment to the office of chamberlain, held by Albany for over twenty years, suggest that Buchan was being groomed as a stopgap successor. As Murdoch's own sons reached adulthood this role decreased in importance, but Buchan remained an element in his father's planning. About 1413, after the settlement of tensions between Albany and Archibald Douglas, fourth earl of Douglas (c.1369-1424), Buchan married the earl's daughter, Elizabeth (died 1451), to cement the deal. 
The match was to have major implications for Buchan's career. His connection with the Douglases was a crucial factor in his being chosen joint leader of an army raised in Scotland and sent to help the French against Henry V of England. Much of the army was raised from Douglas's following in Scotland and Buchan's joint commander was Archibald, earl of Wigtown, Douglas's son, though Buchan seems to have been the principal leader. Both men arrived in France in the autumn of 1419. The rest of Buchan's career was to be spent in French service and, while he returned to Scotland on diplomatic and recruiting missions, his interests increasingly centred on the Scots army in France. His breakthrough in this service came at the battle of Bauge in Anjou on Good Friday (22 March) 1421. In a confused running battle Buchan defeated an English force, killing its leader, Thomas, duke of Clarence, brother of Henry V. 
This morale-raising victory led to greater Scottish involvement in France. Buchan was given the lands of Chatillon-sur-Indre, the services of an astrologer, and the office of constable of France, and for him and his men alike the rewards to be won in France far outdid those to be had in Scotland. Pay of 30,000 ecus was distributed among the army of Scots for just two months in 1423, and individuals could make their fortunes. Buchan's secretary, Christian Chambers, was paid over 1000 livres tournois to join the dauphin's bodyguard. Buchan himself became a major commander. In 1421 and 1422 he won successes, but the collapse of a campaign which he led in the Ile-de-France in early 1423 was due to dissension between the French and their foreign constable. 
In 1423 Buchan returned to Scotland at the head of an embassy. His aim was to induce the earl of Douglas to enter French service. Although he had to contend with English attempts to block his efforts by negotiating the release of James I, who it was hoped would want peace with England, Buchan achieved his aim by treating with all Scottish parties. By October he had reached an agreement with his brother Murdoch, now duke of Albany, which probably involved the protection of Buchan's lands in his absence and the possibility of using the army in France as a weapon in Scottish politics. In March 1424, as James entered Scotland, Buchan returned to France with Douglas, now duke of Touraine, who led a huge Franco-Scottish force into Normandy. But on 17 August 1424 dissensions between Scots and French contributed to the defeat of their army by the English and the deaths of Douglas and Buchan at the battle of Verneuil. The earl of Buchan had become a figure of international stature and his death was perceived as an important event at the French court as well as in Scotland, where it seriously weakened the position of his Albany Stewart kinsmen. He was buried at St Gatiens's Cathedral in Tours. 


@@@@@


doc= 26484


Stewart, John, earl of Mar and Garioch (1457?-1479/80), prince, was the fourth, and third surviving, son of James II (1430-1460) and Mary of Gueldres (d. 1463). James III, king of Scots, and Alexander Stewart, duke of Albany, were his elder brothers. Born probably by July 1457, he was given the title earl of Mar and Garioch (the latter was hitherto a separate lordship) between 21 June 1458 and 23 June 1459. He started life in the royal nursery at Stirling Castle and was moved to Falkland in 1463 and subsequently to Doune Castle in 1468; he remained there for three years, during which time his academic tutor was Master Symon Dodds. In 1471 he emerged from pupillage and took control of the affairs -- or at least the rents -- of his northern earldom. 
Apart from his tutor's conventional praise of him as a noble and illustrious lord and Pitscottie's later statement that the earl 'knew nothing but nobility' ('Historie and Cronicles', 163), we know little of Mar's character or life. In the 1470s he appears to have lived mostly in the north, having a town house in Aberdeen and, it would seem, participating in Aberdonian feuds. James III wrote to the burgh of Aberdeen in 1476 saying that he had given Mar 'special charge and command to supply and defend... [the burgh] in our absence' (Stuart, 35). 
In March 1479 Mar attended the Edinburgh parliament which was swiftly followed by James III's attack on the castle of their brother, Albany, at Dunbar. Mar was alive and at liberty, though not in parliament, on 13 October 1479, but apparently under arrest, possibly dead, by 27 January 1480; he is described as dead and forfeited -- suggesting strongly that he had been executed -- by 14 July 1480. His crime is unknown. Later chroniclers' statements that he had conspired with witches against the king's life and was bled to death or drowned in a brewer's vat do not carry conviction. If he was first imprisoned at Craigmillar Castle, as Giovanni Ferrerio, writing in the following century, alleged, then James III's familiar Thomas Preston may have had a hand in his removal. King James himself, making a grant to St Salvator's College, St Andrews, in July 1480, required that masses should be said for the soul of the earl of Mar. 


@@@@@


doc= 26485


Stewart, John, tenth or first earl of Lennox (1424x9-1495), magnate, was the son of Sir Allan Stewart of Darnley (died 1438). His mother was probably Catherine Seton (died 1468x76), a daughter of the Sir William Seton killed at the battle of Verneuil in 1424. John was born some time between 1424 and 1429, given the terms of a marriage contract of 15 May 1438 describing him as under the lawful age for matrimony. The contract of 1438 suggests that he was then outside Scotland, probably in France, where his father, like numerous members of the Darnley Stewart family, spent many years in military service to the French crown. 
John Stewart is first recorded as active in politics on 22 February 1452, when he was one of the courtiers of James II involved in the killing of William, eighth earl of Douglas, in Stirling Castle. According to the Auchinleck chronicle, John was created a lord of parliament as Lord Darnley in June 1452, and he was using this title by 13 March 1453. His elevation to the parliamentary peerage was probably a reward for his role in the killing of Douglas and for his support of the king during the ensuing political crisis. 
Throughout his life Darnley's overriding ambition was to validate his claim to all or part of the earldom of Lennox. He was the grandson of John Stewart of Darnley and Elizabeth of Lennox, who were married shortly after 23 September 1406. Elizabeth was one of the three daughters of Duncan, earl of Lennox (executed in 1425). After 1437 Lennox had been held by Earl Duncan's eldest daughter, Isabella, duchess of Albany and countess of Lennox, the widow of Murdoch, duke of Albany. Isabella died without any legitimate heirs and in the years following her death Darnley pursued a claim to half of Lennox as the grandson of Countess Isabella's sister Elizabeth. The other half of the earldom was claimed by Sir John Haldane of Gleneagles and John Napier of Merchiston, husbands of the granddaughters of Earl Duncan's third daughter, Margaret of Lennox. Darnley's most serious rival, however, was Andrew Stewart, Lord Avondale, chancellor of the kingdom, who was the illegitimate son of Countess Isabella's son Walter. 
On 12 October 1463 Darnley petitioned parliament asking to be recognized as heir to the lands of half the earldom of Lennox and offering to supply the crown with a force of 100 spearmen and 50 bowmen for one year if his claims were allowed. James III's minority government did not respond to this petition, perhaps because of Avondale's influence, though on 4 February 1465 Darnley was given custody of the royal fortress of Rothesay on Bute. He continued to pursue his claims in the Lennox, but on 4 April 1471 his ambitions received a setback when James III granted the liferent, or life ownership, of Lennox to Avondale. Darnley's heritable right to half the lands of the earldom and the comital title was eventually acknowledged by James III when on 27 July 1473, after prolonged litigation, he granted Darnley an instrument of sasine. By 6 August 1473 Darnley had adopted the title of earl of Lennox; there was little material benefit for him since James III insisted that Avondale's liferent of the earldom should be honoured. 
Worse was to follow for Darnley on 12 January 1476: the king revoked the earlier grants in his favour and instead recognized Sir John Haldane of Gleneagles as the senior coheir to the earldom of Lennox on the basis that Margaret of Lennox, the grandmother of Haldane's wife, was senior to Elizabeth of Lennox, Darnley's grandmother. After the king's decision Darnley was forced to cede the comital title -- this despite his recent service to the crown in the suppression of the rebellion of John, lord of the Isles, for which on 4 December 1475, Darnley was given the powers of a royal lieutenant in Renfrew, Ayr, Wigtown, Kirkcudbright, Clydesdale, and the islands of Bute and Arran. 
On 8 May 1477 Darnley was shown some royal favour when he was reconfirmed as keeper of Rothesay Castle, while in March 1482 he received the wardenship of the west marches. He also played a significant, if rather enigmatic, role in the political crisis which followed the arrest of James III by his half-uncles John, earl of Atholl, and James, earl of Buchan, at Lauder on 22 July 1482. Custody of the captured king, who was held in Edinburgh Castle, was assigned to Darnley. On 19 October 1482, after he had been released, James III issued a letter of remission in Darnley's favour, saying that he had protected the king during his captivity from those who wished him harm. This suggests that Darnley, although involved in the king's incarceration, was not inclined to support any extreme action to remove James III from the political scene. 
In 1488, however, Darnley took an active part against the king in a rebellion under the nominal leadership of the king's son and heir, James (the future James IV). Darnley's son Matthew was associated with the rebel lords by May 1488, and he and his father were probably both members of the host which defeated the king's army at Sauchieburn on 11 June 1488. The death of James III at Sauchieburn and the accession of the young James IV allowed Darnley to renew his claims to the earldom of Lennox, while the death of Lord Avondale, who had the liferent of the earldom, during the summer of 1488 cleared another obstacle. 
Darnley had readopted the title of earl of Lennox before 6 October 1488, and on 20 October he and his son Matthew were given custody of Dumbarton Castle by James IV's minority government. Yet by April 1489 the new earl of Lennox was in rebellion against the regime he had helped install. He, Matthew, and Robert, Lord Lyle, were forfeited in parliament in June 1489, and by July the earl was besieged in Dumbarton Castle. In September Lennox was reinforced by another force from the north-east, led by Alexander Gordon, master of Huntly, but on 11 October the rebels were defeated by James IV's army at the battle of Gartloaning, near Aberfoyle. Lennox retreated to Dumbarton and his rebellion was eventually ended by negotiation in December 1489. On 5 February 1490 the forfeitures imposed on Lennox, Matthew Stewart, and Lord Lyle were annulled in parliament. Shortly after the battle of Gartloaning the rebels explained their action in a petition to the new king complaining about the way in which James IV's government was dominated by a number of named lords who had risen to power and authority as a result of James III's unavenged death, and who now shamelessly misused their influence in the minority regime to further their own ends. Lennox now occupied a position of political strength, and he exploited this to secure agreements (18 May 1490 and 11 July 1493 respectively) whereby the Napier and Haldane claims to the comital title were abandoned in return for uncontested possession of a quarter of the comital estates. He died in 1495, between 31 August and 11 September. 
Lennox is usually said to have been married to Margaret Montgomery, the eldest daughter of Alexander Montgomery, lord of Ardrossan, by the terms of a marriage contract of 15 May 1438. He was certainly married to a Margaret Montgomery by 20 July 1461. There is, however, no conclusive evidence that his wife in 1461 was the same as the Margaret mentioned in the 1438 contract, and an alternative identification of Margaret as a daughter of Alexander, master of Montgomery, and hence a niece of the Margaret of 1438, has recently been suggested. Lennox and Margaret had a number of children, including: Matthew Stewart, who succeeded his father as earl of Lennox and died at Flodden on 9 September 1513; William, lord of Oizon and de Grey in France, who spent most of his career as a soldier in France and died before 1503; Robert Stewart, lord of Aubigny, who served in the French army and attained the rank of mareschal, and died without heirs in 1543; John, lord of Oizon, another career soldier in French service, who died in 1512; Elizabeth, who married Archibald Campbell, second earl of Argyll; Marion, who married Robert Crichton, son of Lord Crichton of Sanquhar (contract dated 8 May 1472); Janet, who married Ninian, Lord Ross of Halkhead; and Elizabeth, who married Sir John Colquhoun of Luss. 


@@@@@


doc= 26486


Stewart, John, first earl of Atholl (1440?-1512), magnate, was the eldest son of Sir James Stewart of Lorne and Joan, nee Beaufort (d. 1445), widow of James I. His parents had married in July 1439, and John may well have been born in the following year. He is first recorded in an English safe conduct obtained by his father on 22 November 1445. John, his father, and his younger brother James Stewart (the future earl of Buchan) appeared on similar safe conducts issued in November 1447 and August 1451. His father having been killed at sea by Flemish pirates some time after August 1451, John evidently returned to Scotland, and by 20 June 1457 he had been created earl of Atholl by his royal half-brother, James II. 
On 25 March 1460 Atholl received a grant of the lordship and castle of Balvenie from James II. The occasion of the grant seems to have been John's marriage to Margaret Douglas, daughter of Archibald, fifth earl of Douglas. Balvenie had been forfeited to the crown in 1455 because of the rebellion of John Douglas, lord of Balvenie, the younger brother of Margaret's first and second husbands, the eighth and ninth earls of Douglas. Margaret had followed her second husband into political exile in England during 1455, but returned to Scotland 'c'.1459, after which their marriage was dissolved. 
Atholl continued to enjoy a good relationship with the royal house following the accession of his nephew James III to the throne in August 1460. Thus he played an active and important role in campaigns against John, earl of Ross and lord of the Isles, following Ross's forfeiture on 1 December 1475. On 4 December 1475 Atholl was made royal lieutenant in the bounds of Atholl itself, with the leading of the king's lieges in Appin of Dull, Strathbraan, Fortingall, Rannoch, Glenlyon, and Strathardle, as part of the general assault against John of the Isles. On 3 March 1481 Atholl was given a grant of the forest of Cluny and the park of Laighwood as a reward for his role in subduing the rebellion of John of the Isles. 
The relationship between Atholl and his nephew did not remain cordial, however. James III managed to alienate many of his subjects through the imprisonment of his own brothers Alexander Stewart, duke of Albany, and John Stewart, earl of Mar, in 1478-9, and his active promotion of an unpopular pro-English foreign policy. Political discontent was exacerbated by an economic crisis, and by 1482 the king met growing hostility. By the summer of that year the Scottish realm faced an English invasion nominally in support of the claims of James III's charismatic brother Albany (who had escaped from James's custody in 1479 and fled into exile) to replace James as king of Scots. On 22 July 1482, while the royal army was assembling at Lauder in order to resist the imminent English invasion, James III was arrested by Atholl and his brother James Stewart, now earl of Buchan, and they then imprisoned the king in Edinburgh Castle. The prominence of Atholl and Buchan almost certainly reflected their quasi-royal status as the closest male relatives of the king still resident in Scotland, which allowed them to act as a legitimizing focus for resistance to James. But the unity of the rebel lords seems to have broken down very swiftly after James's incarceration in Edinburgh, and over the winter of 1482-3 the king slowly recovered his hold on power. In January 1483 Buchan became involved in a new plot against the king in alliance with Albany and Edward IV of England, but Atholl did not participate in this second plot, and avoided the sentence of banishment imposed on his brother by James III in March 1483. 
In 1488 Atholl remained loyal to James III when the king faced a new rebellion, this time headed by the heir to the throne, Prince James (the future James IV). He was entrusted with part of the royal hoard during the campaigns of 1488 and was a member of the royal host defeated at the battle of Sauchieburn on 11 June 1488. 
During James IV's reign Atholl seems to have been uninvolved in high politics, concentrating instead on his interests in Perthshire. In 1502-4 he and his adherents, particularly his son-in-law Neil Stewart of Fortingall, clashed with the king's government over the policy of feu-ferming crown lands in highland Perthshire. In 1502 Neil Stewart attacked and destroyed the castle of Weem, the stronghold of Sir Robert Menzies, who had been the chief beneficiary and agent of James IV's feu-ferming of crown lands in the area, apparently with the active support or connivance of Atholl's son and heir, John, master of Atholl. In May 1504 Atholl's support for Stewart of Fortingall and his failure to help prosecute those who took part in the attack on Weem resulted in his being summoned for treason alongside Stewart. The two men appeared before parliament on 8 June 1504 and agreed to answer the (unspecified) charges against them. There is no further record of process against Atholl. It seems likely that he was swiftly reconciled to the king; there is certainly no indication that he was ever forfeited. 
Atholl is said to have died at the Laighwood, near Dunkeld, on 15 September 1512; he was buried in Dunkeld Cathedral. He was twice married. His first wife, Margaret Douglas, known as the Fair Maid of Galloway, had died before 8 December 1476, by which date Atholl had married Eleanor Sinclair, daughter of William, earl of Orkney and Caithness. John's marriages produced two sons. The elder son, John, succeeded his father as earl of Atholl and died in 1521, while the second son, Andrew, followed an ecclesiastical career. He was elected bishop of Dunkeld in 1515, but failed to obtain papal confirmation and was replaced by Gavin Douglas; in 1517 Andrew became bishop of Caithness. He died before 9 August 1541. John also had numerous daughters, including: Joan, who married Alexander Gordon (later third earl of Huntly) before 16 December 1482; Christian, who married Neil Stewart of Fortingall under the terms of a settlement between Atholl and Neil's father, also Neil, on 22 January 1478, died on 30 May 1538, and was buried in Dunkeld Cathedral; Marjory, who married Sir Colin Campbell of Glenorchy and died on 26 July 1524; Elspeth, who married Robert Innes of Innermarkie; Elizabeth, who married Andrew, second Lord Gray, before 1483; another Elizabeth, who married Alexander Robertson of Strowan before 24 January 1505; and another (or the same) Elizabeth, who was contracted in marriage to John Stewart, earl of Lennox, on 19 January 1512. 


@@@@@


doc= 26487


Stewart, John, twelfth or third earl of Lennox (d. 1526), magnate, was the eldest son of Matthew Stewart, eleventh or second earl of Lennox (d. 1513), and his second wife, Elizabeth (died after 1530), daughter of James, first Lord Hamilton, and granddaughter of James II of Scotland. His entry to public life coincided with his marriage on 19 January 1511 to Elizabeth Stewart, eighth daughter of John Stewart, first earl of Atholl; the couple were within prohibited degrees of consanguinity and received a grant of dispensation ten days later. As part of the marriage contract the eleventh earl settled Tarbolton, Galston, and Dreghorn in Ayrshire conjointly on the newly-weds. The couple had three sons and a daughter: Matthew Stewart, who succeeded as thirteenth or fourth earl; Robert Stewart, who was briefly earl of Lennox and then earl of March and also bishop of Caithness; John, Lord d'Aubigny; and Eleanor, mistress of James V. 
John Stewart succeeded to the title on his father's death at Flodden on 9 September 1513 and quickly established himself as a force in the political struggles that characterized the minority of James V. On the remarriage in 1514 of the king's mother, the queen regent Margaret Tudor, to Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus, Lennox aligned with his uncle James Hamilton, first earl of Arran, in an effort to frustrate this Douglas bid for control of government. He joined the appeals made by Arran to John Stewart, duke of Albany, that he should come to Scotland to assume the governorship, and took the field against Margaret's supporters, seizing Dumbarton Castle on 12 January 1515. After Albany's arrival in May 1515 Lennox took part in military action against Margaret and Angus, culminating in the blockade of Stirling Castle, where Margaret was based, and the temporary expulsion of the queen and her husband from Scotland. Lennox's support was rewarded by Albany: in October 1515 he received the tack of the crown lands of Dundonald in Ayrshire, and also a series of respites for himself and his kinsmen and servants for their actions from January to May 1515. 
The relationship of Lennox and Arran with Albany quickly soured, the breach fuelled by accusations that the governor -- who was next in line for the throne after the king and his brother -- had designs on the crown. In early 1516 Lennox signed a bond with Arran, the earls of Glencairn and Eglinton, and Lord Home, for the removal of the king from Albany's custody, and took up arms against the governor. Arran and Lennox seized the castle at Glasgow but were forced to submit by Albany. Lennox was warded briefly in Edinburgh Castle until he delivered Dumbarton into Albany's hands, but before the end of 1516 the two men had been reconciled and Lennox was restored to favour. In May 1517 Lennox accompanied Albany to France and returned in the autumn with news of the successful negotiation of the treaty of Rouen. 
From 1517 Lennox was associated with the administration headed by Arran that Albany had established before his departure for France. Following Albany's return in November 1521 Lennox again aligned closely with the governor and participated in his attack on Angus, who had been readmitted to a central role in government from 1517. In 1522 Lennox was present at the seizure of Tantallon Castle from Angus, but by 1523 his support for Albany had slackened and he took no part in the French-sponsored invasion of England in that year. Nevertheless, on Albany's final departure for France in May 1524, Lennox still adhered to the pro-French party. Although he formed part of the escort which accompanied Margaret Tudor and James V from Stirling to Edinburgh, there is no indication that he had joined with Arran or was associated with his uncle in the arrangement with the queen whereby the young king was declared of age, thereby technically ending Albany's governorship, nor that he supported Arran's proposal for a treaty with England. Instead he was associated with Angus in his opposition to Margaret's and Arran's exercise of government, and joined with Archbishop Beaton, Bishop Dunbar, and the earls of Argyll and Moray in urging loyalty to Albany and France. 
In November 1524 Lennox and Angus captured Edinburgh and besieged Margaret and Arran with the young king in the castle. The siege was maintained until February 1525, when a nominal reconciliation between the factions led to Angus's readmission to Margaret's council. From this time, while Margaret remained nominally in control of her son's affairs, Angus dominated the council, with Lennox and Argyll as his associates. A bond dated 18 June 1525 between Angus, Argyll, and Lennox for both the maintenance of James V and mutual support and advancement reinforced this association. Divisions among the nobility, based upon fears that rival factions would use control of James to entrench their power at the expense of their opponents, saw the devising of a scheme in July 1525 for the quarterly rotation of possession of the king between the principal groups. Angus's refusal to yield up James at the end of his term in November 1525 established him in control of government and, though Lennox remained a member of council, also broke the close association between the two men. 
Lennox was further alienated by Angus's advancement of his kinsmen, and, despite being appointed by parliament on 21 June 1526 as a member of a secret council to advise the king, by August he, Argyll, Cassillis, and Glencairn had ceased to attend council and had entered into a bond headed by the principal enemies of Angus. Lennox, however, harboured ambitions of his own, and had already on 30 June 1526 entered into a secret bond with the young king, who promised to take Lennox's advice before that of all others on important matters. It is uncertain if Lennox was involved in the attempt to seize James from Angus in July 1526, when Sir Walter Scott of Buccleuch attacked the king's escort near Melrose, but the association of Lennox and Buccleuch later in the year suggests complicity. On 4 September 1526 Lennox staged his own bid to secure the king, who was accompanied by Angus and Arran, at Manuel near Linlithgow. The attempt failed and Lennox, who was captured, was then killed by Sir James Hamilton of Finnart. His body was taken for burial at the Dominican convent in Glasgow, where Finnart subsequently made an endowment for the weal of his victim's soul. 


@@@@@


doc= 26488


Stewart, John, second duke of Albany (c.1482-1536), soldier and magnate, was born in Auvergne, France, the only son of Alexander Stewart, duke of Albany (1454?-1485), younger brother of James III, king of Scots, and his second wife, Anne de la Tour (died 1512), third daughter of Bertrand II, comte d'Auvergne, and his wife, Louise de la Tremoille. His father died in a jousting accident in 1485 when a splintered lance entered his eye, and on 15 February in either 1487 or 1488 his mother married Louis, 'comte de la chambre' and vicomte de Maurienne, of an illustrious Savoyard family; she lived until 13 October 1512. Albany seems to have been sent to the court of Charles VIII at a young age, probably about 1494, as he later remarked that he had served French monarchs since he was twelve years of age. 
In September 1499 Charles's successor, Louis XII, invaded Lombardy with 20,000 soldiers, and in three weeks he had conquered it along with the city of Genoa. The young duke of Albany was among the French nobles who soon afterwards accompanied their king when the latter triumphantly entered Milan. In 1501 he took part in an international crusade to the eastern Mediterranean and apparently distinguished himself in an attack on the Aegean island of Mytilene, where he was slightly injured. On the return voyage in December his ship was wrecked on an inhospitable coast, the survivors being left with little more than their cloaks for protection from the winter wet and cold. Fortunately Albany and his companions were rescued by a Venetian barque which transported them to Corfu, whence they were able to sail for home. In the following year, aged twenty, he was appointed captain of 100 lances 'des ordonnances du roi' garrisoned at Bordeaux, and in 1503 he returned to campaigning in Italy, where, however, the French were everywhere defeated and left without so much as an inch of ground. In 1505 King Louis arranged Albany's marriage to the latter's first cousin, Anne de la Tour, also known as Anne de Boulogne ('c'.1497-1524), who was then aged seven or eight and was the rich heir to the comte d'Auvergne. The marriage took place on 13 July in that year. Whether it was a reward for or an inducement to loyalty, it had the desired effect, and when Louis invaded Italy again, in 1507, Albany was present in the army, preceding the king when the latter entered Genoa on 28 April. 
It seems unlikely that the duke of Albany had forgotten that he was a Scottish peer, but for the first twenty years of his life his interests were predominantly French. On 5 December 1512 Louis XII requested James IV of Scotland to restore his father's dukedom to John Stuart (as his name is invariably spelt in French sources), but even this step was taken in a French context, being intended to place Albany on an equal footing with his wife and so enable him to assign dower to her in accordance with custom. James is not known to have responded. Within a year, however, everything had changed. On 9 September 1513 James was killed at Flodden along with many of his nobles, leaving an infant as his successor. In the aftermath of this disaster the first act of the lords of the council, on 19 September 1513, was to arrange the coronation of the seventeen-month-old James V at Stirling and to appoint his mother, Margaret, as guardian of the king and regent of the kingdom in accordance with James IV's will. Albany was the heir presumptive, and in November that year parliament not only sent ambassadors to Louis XII to remind him of the ancient alliance between France and Scotland but it also requested that 'it would pleise and lyke the said maist Cristin king to send the duke of Albany with his help and municounis with all maner of necesseries for weir in the realme of Scotland' ('APS', '1424-1567', 281). 
Responding to an earlier communique, Louis had already agreed that Albany should cross to his homeland, declaring on 4 October: 'As to the fourth article desiring the King to send the Duke of Albany to Scotland, as having right to the government and regency, he answers that he is willing because Albany is capable of it, although the Duke is much employed in his wars. Yet he will send him because he values the young king's affaires as his own. Before his departure it would be well to know the will of the Queen, Estates, and Council, and the Duke should go in such a way as to be able to render service. ('Flodden Papers', 84)' Albany himself wrote in similar terms to his agent Antoine de la Bastie, seigneur d'Arcy, echoing most of the French king's words and appealing to the Scots for support. He offered all possible service to the queen, her son, and the country, and begged them to employ him in France for such service. However, he never mentioned coming to Scotland himself, and at the beginning of 1514 he and Louis seem to have been thinking principally of helping Scotland by strengthening her alliance with Denmark, which had become increasingly important under James IV. 
All his engagements with Scottish affairs were coloured by the fact that Albany was perceived as essentially French, and by the effects of this perception on Anglo-French relations. In English eyes he was essentially a French agent in a position to make trouble on the Anglo-Scottish borders, and so to put serious constraints on England's freedom of manoeuvre. In French eyes he was apt to appear in much the same light, but as a liberating rather than a complicating factor and as a valuable card which could bring rich rewards if skilfully played. Henry VIII wanted to keep him away from Scotland, whereas Louis XII and then Francois I could hope for diplomatic advantage simply by threatening to send Albany there, and for military advantage if he actually went. 
On 3 June 1514, perhaps in an attempt to put pressure on England in the peace negotiations then in progress, French policy became one of positive action, with an 'Estimate for the Duke of Albany's Forces' being drawn up for Louis XII. A total expenditure of 438,950 livres tournois was envisaged to cover the wages of 8000 soldiers and sailors for four months and appropriate supplies of armaments and provisions. Although there were rumours that Albany would cross to Scotland with the Yorkist pretender Richard de la Pole, and though the two men did co-operate under French auspices later, Louis was clearly not banking on war, for on the same day he made an 'Offer to the King of Scots in the case of peace or truce' of 25,000 livres tournois to help with the finances of the kingdom. Of Albany he wrote that 'though the king needs his service in his wars and other affairs, still he is willing he should go so soon as possible' ('Flodden Papers', 100-01). In a separate dispatch Albany himself explained the significance of the current negotiations for a Europe-wide truce, but he also raised the possibility of further war between England and Scotland, and advised the Scots to prepare themselves for it by raising troops in Denmark and by maintaining domestic union. And he instructed the Scottish ambassador to convey the French king's anxiety 'for the good government of the kingdom and his pleasure with the Queen and Council, particularly the Queen's intention to keep on his side in spite of the offers made by England' (ibid., 108-9). 
Hopes of unity were dashed when on 6 August 1514 Queen Margaret married Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus, prompting an immediate decision by the lords of the council that she should relinquish the regency. On 18 September an invitation was sent: 'to my lord duk of Albany governor of Scotland to cum hame in this realme of Scotland in all possible haist for the defence of the samin and for gud reule to be put and kepit in the said realme in all partis. (Hannay, 20)' Albany was also requested to ask the French king for material help. Louis was probably too preoccupied to notice these developments, for three months later, on 9 October, he himself remarried, to the eighteen-year-old Mary Tudor. Albany was present at the wedding. Less than three months later Louis was dead, to be succeeded by the duc d'Angouleme as Francois I. If Louis had been reluctant to send Albany to Scotland, Francois showed no such inhibitions. He planned to invade Italy, and to have Albany in Scotland would help to keep the English occupied at home. So it was that on 3 July 1515 the lords of the council recorded 'that ane excellent and mychti prince Johnne duke of Albany, governour and protectour of Scotland and tutour to the kingis grace to his perfite age, arivit in the said realme the XVIII day of May' (ibid., 40). 
By the time Albany landed Margaret had been obliged to give up her children and forced to flee with Angus to England. On 28 September 1515, however, Albany offered 'to schew hir all the humanities that he can, sa that sche will return and cum in Scotland and be ane gud Scottis weman as accordis hir to doo' (Hannay, 57). But as well as trying to deprive Henry VIII of the diplomatic advantage which Queen Margaret's flight to England had given the English king, Albany also applied himself to strengthening Scottish links with France. Following a commission from Francois to open negotiations on 29 March 1515, a further confirmation of the 'auld alliance' was signed by Albany on 2 January 1516, and then taken to Paris by the bishop of Ross. 
It is generally agreed that Albany's first tour of duty in Scotland was successful. The council sat with increasing frequency and effectiveness, creating a clear perception 'that land disputes, claims against theft and kidnapping and feuds could be redressed satisfactorily', and that 'Albany could undoubtedly rely on the support of the majority of the ruling class' (Emond, 60). Nevertheless, Albany had to confront the spoiling tactics of Henry VIII, who exploited the grievances of James Hamilton, first earl of Arran, and Alexander, third Lord Home, probably offended by the duke's restoration to his father's earldom of March in a region where the Homes were now dominant. Home and Arran signed a bond for the removal of the king from the governor's custody and won the support of the earls of Lennox, Glencairn, and Eglinton, and even some highland chiefs. Nevertheless, Albany was able to maintain his position as governor. He showed himself unquestionably loyal to the young king, and soon after his arrival in Scotland he risked offending his principal ally by declining to send James V's brother Alexander to France as Francois wanted. On 13 November 1516 his position as second person of the realm was formally acknowledged by parliament. 
Yet again, however, the international situation complicated Albany's position. Preoccupied with his campaigns in Italy (his great victory at Marignano on 14 September 1515 was celebrated in Scotland with bonfires), Francois did not want to risk hostilities with England, and on 3 November 1516 he declared that a prior Anglo-French peace treaty meant that he could not ratify the treaty proposal of 2 January 1516. The Scots responded by making further efforts to secure the French alliance, and reminded Francois of its antecedents, but they also agreed to a truce with England and to Queen Margaret's coming back to Scotland. On 24 May 1517 the council formally agreed to her return and, on the next day, to Albany's leaving for France, 'for expeditioun of the materis concernyng the common wele of this realme' (Hannay, 91-3). On 2 June Albany appointed a council to govern in his absence and on the 8th he departed, intending, it was reported, to return in five months. 
Soon after his return to France, Albany, as governor of Scotland, and Charles, duc d'Alencon, on behalf of France, started negotiations for a treaty of friendship and alliance. This was signed at Rouen on 20 August 1517, and Albany undertook to have it ratified by the Scottish parliament within two months of his return. Alencon in turn promised confirmation by Francois when Scottish ratification was forthcoming. The treaty reconfirmed the 'auld alliance', defining in military terms the mutual responsibilities incumbent upon each kingdom should either be attacked by England. There was also agreement in principle for James V's marriage to a French princess. This treaty was one of the most important in sixteenth-century Scottish history. It was constantly referred to and updated during Albany's regency, and after 1528 it was the fundamental plank upon which James V rested his entire foreign policy. Albany's immediate reward was a gift of 10,000 livres tournois, ordered by Francois on 28 August 1517 for the duke's services to the French kingdom over the last two years. But Albany did not forget the Scottish kingdom, and in May 1518 he persuaded the French king to grant privileges to Scottish merchants under letters patent signed at Amboise. About this time he was again reported to be collaborating with Richard de la Pole in a planned invasion of England, but the rumours seem to have been baseless. 
Albany also had responsibilities in Auvergne and at the French court. On 28 February 1518 Queen Claude gave birth to a son; in April the dauphin, also named Francois, was baptized at Amboise, and the ceremony was attended by all the highest-ranking nobility of France, including the duke and duchess of Albany. The dauphin's godfather, Pope Leo X, was represented by his nephew Lorenzo di Medici, duke of Urbino, to whom Francois promised Albany's sister-in-law, Madeleine de La Tour d'Auvergne, in marriage. The duke and duchess had a daughter, Catherine, born at Urbino on 19 April 1519, but both died within a month of her birth, whereupon their child became the ward of her great-uncle, Leo X. In France she was a great heiress, for Francois declared that she could inherit the French lands of her mother. After the death of Leo X on 1 December 1521, Albany was appointed her tutor, as her closest male relative, and when he returned to Scotland shortly afterwards he appointed his wife to act as his proxy in administering Catherine's possessions. 
After he was appointed regent for James V, Albany exchanged a number of letters with the papal curia regarding Scottish ecclesiastical concerns; as his infant niece's closest male relative his standing at Rome, first under Leo X and then under another Medici pope, Clement VII, was greatly enhanced. He used this to promote Scottish interests, as when he approached Leo X on 5 January 1519 for confirmation of Innocent VIII's bull of 1487, 'granting delay of eight months in providing for prelatical vacancies in order that the king might forward his supplications' ('Letters of James V', 68), and again a few weeks later, when he requested that the pope take James V under his protection. In such moves he had the support of Francois, who hoped that Albany's family connections might prove useful to Franco-papal relations in the future. 
Meanwhile all was not well in Scotland. Before Albany returned to France in May 1517 he left French garrisons at Dunbar, Dumbarton, and Inchgarvie, and a commission of regency in which Antoine d'Arcy was appointed the king's lieutenant and president of the council. However, after d'Arcy's murder in September 1517 by members of the Home family, in retaliation for Albany's execution of Alexander, third Lord Home, in the previous year, the earl of Arran took charge of the commission of regency. Arran had the support of the earls of Argyll and Huntly and of James Beaton, archbishop of St Andrews, but Margaret Tudor's husband, the sixth earl of Angus (whose growing estrangement from his wife was itself a cause of turmoil), joined the Homes and other disorderly elements in the south-east, and he also exploited, to the discomfort of Arran's government, the popularity which he and his Douglas kinsmen enjoyed in Edinburgh. Friction between Hamiltons and Douglases worsened in the next two years, and culminated in the 'cleanse the causeway' fracas of April 1520 in which the Hamiltons were driven out of Edinburgh. 
Against this troubled background John, Lord Fleming, was sent to France in spring 1520 with a set of memoranda for consideration by Francois, and with instructions stating 'that unless Albany comes by midsummer he shall lose his right in the crown' and that the French king 'will lose Scotland unless he sends Albany within the appointed time, for in that case 'thai wil treyt with Ingland Sickyrly and withtout ony falte'' ('Letters of James V', 76). In the memoranda a long litany of complaints against England concludes with a reiterated warning: 'If the governor does not return at once, it will certainly be impossible to preserve the king and realm. It is the aim of the English to prevent the return [of Albany] and foster civil strife, undermining affection for France and Albany, and compelling a peace which will give England control. (ibid., 79)' Albany promptly set off for Rome, where he was able to obtain a bull, issued by Leo X on 19 June 1520, taking Scotland and James V under his protection and affirming Albany as governor and James's tutor: 'all persons of whatsoever ecclesiastical or worldly station however eminent are forbidden under pain of excommunication and disobedience in anywise to disturb the Duke's government' (ibid., 79-80). It is not known, however, whether Henry VIII or Wolsey were aware of this bull. While Albany was in Rome he also took the opportunity to attend to some private business and to gain permission for himself and his wife to construct a Sainte Chapelle in Auvergne at their Chateau de Vic-le-Comte (now in Puy-de-Dome). On 21 June 1520 Leo X issued a bull authorizing its construction. It was probably completed in 1524, not long before the death of Anne in that year. 
In October 1520 Francois responded to the civil strife and English threats, which alike endangered the peace of Scotland, by sending envoys and money. Albany ordered the Scots to obey the French king's instructions, even though Francois had decided that Scotland's interests would be better served if the duke remained in France, seeing his return as likely to cause both war with England and internal conflict. In this Francois showed himself concerned to maintain the treaty of universal peace of 2 October 1518, whereby Scotland was comprehended in an Anglo-French alliance. In November 1521, however, developments in international diplomacy yet again dictated the course of Scottish affairs and of Albany's involvement in them. The rupture of the 1518 treaty and the renewed outbreak of Hapsburg-Valois hostilities, along with a deterioration in Anglo-French relations, now made it expedient for the French king that Albany should return to Scotland. One of the duke's first actions, on 28 December at Edinburgh, was to ratify the treaty of friendship with Francois on behalf of James V, so renewing the 'auld alliance' against England. 
Inevitably Henry VIII and Wolsey raised objections to Albany's return. In a letter to the Scottish estates dated 14 January 1522, Henry complained that they had given 'the charge of James to a stranger of inferior repute, intending to sever the queen from her husband and marry her himself, to the great danger of the king, the ruin of the queen, and Henry's honour' ('Letters of James V', 86). The accusation that Albany wanted to marry Margaret Tudor (probably dreamt up by Wolsey), though it recurred frequently during the 1520s, was without the least foundation (in her early letters the queen showed herself consistently hostile to the governor, professing to believe that the latter's ambitions were a threat to her son's life). Similarly, English charges that Albany 'was unfit to be governor, because his rule was illegitimate; conducted in French interest; to the financial detriment to Scotland, and to the detriment of Scotland' (Emond, 296) were no more than propaganda and bore no relation to the actual situation. On 22 February 1522 the chancellor and estates of Scotland declared that 'Albany was the lawful tutor of their sovereign, repeatedly called by them to the government, and has always been anxious to preserve the peace, nor would he allow any restraint to be put upon the king' ('LP Henry VIII', 3/2, no. 2039). 
At this point Albany undoubtedly had the full support of the majority of the Scottish lords. In July and August 1522, however, English forces invaded northern France, and in September the duke responded to this attack on his ally by leading a Scottish army to the west march for an invasion of England. But the Scots, more cautious than they had been a few years earlier, and probably mindful of the debacle at Flodden, which had also been fought in the name of a Franco-Scottish alliance, refused to cross the border, the treaty of Rouen notwithstanding. Albany did not linger long after this failure but returned to France at the end of October, intending to raise French troops who would follow his orders and attack the English. Before leaving he again appointed a council of regents: the chancellor, James Beaton, the archbishop of Glasgow, the earls of Arran, Huntly, and Argyll, and Monsieur Antoine Gonzolles, whom Albany had appointed captain of St Andrews Castle after the death of Archbishop Forman in 1521. The regents were sworn to do nothing contrary to the duke's instructions and the latter promised to return before 15 August 1523 or forfeit his authority. His second visit to Scotland had enjoyed a significant domestic success, in that it had ended the paralysis brought to government by the conflict between the Douglases and Hamiltons, but his foreign policy had failed, for he left Scotland without having obtained an Anglo-Scottish truce that also comprehended France. 
Nevertheless, a series of purely Anglo-Scottish truces followed, though these did not prevent Henry VIII from engaging in his now familiar attempts at character assassination, traducing Albany as 'that person who had aspired to the crown [of Scotland] at the suggestion of the king of France' ('LP Henry VIII', 3/2, no. 2666). For his part Albany sent instructions by George Hay to Cardinal Wolsey in January 1523, referring to Clarenceux herald's recent meeting with the Scottish lords and his demands regarding 'certain conditions touching the marriage of the King [James V] with the princess Mary [Tudor], and a truce for sixteen years, on condition that Albany be not allowed to return to Scotland, and that no aid be rendered to France' (ibid., no. 2333). Albany rebuked Wolsey and upheld his own position, saying that 'if the Cardinal desires the peace of the two kingdoms he must address himself to the Duke, as the whole business has been remitted to him' by the Scottish lords (ibid., no. 2765). Meanwhile the Scots gave an equivocal reply to the English demands, whereupon Henry VIII began to prepare for war, and raiding began at the end of March. The French ambassador assured the Scots of Albany's imminent return, and in this he was supported by Francois, who at one point seems to have proposed that the duke should invade England from Brittany in the company of Richard de la Pole and who declared in a letter dated 30 May from Blois that the aid promised under the treaty of Rouen would sail no later than 24 June. Early in June 1523 the English march warden, Thomas, Baron Dacre, approached Chancellor Beaton to explore the possibilities for a renewed truce. But Albany remained a stumbling block, and one over which the Scots refused to budge. They had enjoyed good government when the duke was resident in Scotland, but faced the inescapable dilemma that it was impossible to have his rule without war with England as well. No compromise was possible, and English raids accordingly continued. Meanwhile Albany was doing his best to raise money and men, and when he had not returned by 15 August, as he had promised, the lords agreed to allow him until the end of September. In the event he returned on 20 September, along with a fleet of 87 small vessels, 4000 men-at-arms, 1000 harquebusiers, 600 horses, and a fine artillery park. Three days later an English army crossed the border and destroyed Jedburgh. 
The combined French and Scottish force, however, took a month to prepare its response, and the outcome of its eventual campaign dealt a fatal blow to Albany's prestige in Scotland. From the time of his return Albany had difficulties both in assembling Scottish troops and in raising supplies for them. As in the previous year there was little enthusiasm for a war which was perceived as dictated by French interests. It was late in the year, with inclement weather which created boggy conditions for carts and artillery and led to difficulties in fording swollen rivers and streams. The Scots also begrudged the need to provide food, fuel, and lodgings for the French soldiers who paid in French money. On 20 October 1523 an act of parliament ordered the acceptance of French coinage as legal tender in Scotland; refusal to accept it was punishable by death. Nevertheless a Franco-Scottish army was assembled on 19 October and the main force set off on the 27th and reached Melrose next day. On the 30th the earl of Surrey, commanding the English army in the north, learned that the assault would be directed against Wark, where the siege began on 1 November. But it lasted for only three days. Albany was unable to capture the castle, and when news of the approach of Surrey's relieving army reached him he crossed back over the Tweed, and on the 4th disbanded his army. 
His failure convinced Albany that he must return to France, but the Scots were anxious not to let him go, even for a short time. He regained some prestige when on 24 November he obtained a confirmation of the treaty of Rouen from the estates, thereby committing the Scots to the 'auld alliance' and so to continuing the war against England. Throughout the winter of 1523-4 the English expressed an interest in peace with Scotland, but Albany showed his continuing loyalty to the French crown and its policies by continuing to insist that any truce between the two countries must comprehend France as well. Increasingly anxious to leave, on 22 January 1524 he wrote from Dumbarton to Louise of Savoy, the French king's mother, informing her that he had been on the point of embarking for France when he received her request to stay in Scotland. He stated that he had: 'reduced the kingdom into excellent order, and could leave it without danger... [and] thinks it would be better in his present necessity to go to France to give the French king his advice' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/1, no. 52). The lords of council still would not let him go, making it clear that if he departed despite their opposition he would lose all his positions of authority in Scotland. But after many pleas for him to remain they finally relented and agreed to give the duke licence to depart for France for three months (until 31 August 1524), on condition that if he did not return by then his governorship would be at an end. On 31 May 1524 Albany sailed from Dumbarton, never to return to Scotland, though he continued to use the title of governor until 1528 and the end of James's minority. He was accompanied on the voyage by David Beaton (nephew of Chancellor James Beaton), who had been appointed Scottish ambassador to France, but left behind his only surviving child, a daughter named Eleanor, who had been born from a liaison with Jean Abernethy. She later came to France and in 1547 married Jean de l'Hopital, comte de Choisy. 
Albany's regency was terminated by a 'coup d'etat' in July 1524, when Queen Margaret and her supporters arranged for the twelve-year-old James V to be declared of age. On 11 December following, instructions were sent to Francois informing him in the young king's name that since the duke of Albany had not returned as promised, 'the three estates have accordingly committed the administration to the King and his mother, and removed Albany entirely' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/1, no. 917). Albany was also asked to surrender the castle at Dunbar, which he had left garrisoned by French troops, while the French king was notified that negotiations had begun for an Anglo-Scottish peace. James V himself wrote to Albany to the same effect, concluding with the pious hope that the duke 'will remain as good a friend as ever to the realm and its king' ('Letters of James V', 112). It is likely that by the time Albany returned to France he was a widower, his wife, Anne, having died at their chateau of St Saturnin in the Auvergne shortly after making her last will and testament on 16 June 1524. She named Catherine de Medici as her heir, but left her most personal possessions to her husband, including her jewellery and household furnishings. Since Catherine later married Henri, duc d'Orleans, the future Henri II, her French inheritance eventually passed to the French crown. 
Albany had little time to mourn his wife, as he was soon obliged to join Francois I's ill-fated Italian campaign of 1525 against Charles V. The king made two disastrous decisions. The first was to lay siege to Pavia, where on 24 February 1525 his army was crushingly defeated and he himself was captured. The second was to detach 6000 troops from his army and send them south under Albany in a bid to conquer the kingdom of Naples. The duke's performance has been condemned as unimpressive: 'If Albany had moved faster, he might have conquered Naples, which was in a rebellious state, but he moved at snail's pace, allowing himself to become embroiled in Sienese politics. His expedition, however, did help to win the pope over to the French side. (Knecht, 216-17)' Albany got no further than Rome, and it is inconceivable that while staying there he did not visit his niece; indeed, it was probably during this period that the duke approached Clement VII with a proposal that Catherine de Medici should marry James V. 
From Rome Albany and his men set off back north, but they had only reached Formello, a few miles from the city, when news of the disaster at Pavia arrived, whereupon they quickly retraced their steps to Rome. According to the English ambassador John Clerk, 'some 200 of them were killed near the town' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/1, no. 1085), but though they were hunted by the imperialists the pope, mindful that Albany had married a kinswoman, took steps to save the rest; most of Albany's men were eventually able to take ship for France from Civitavecchia, and disembarked with their commander at Marseilles in April 1525. 
It appears that shortly after Albany's return to France from Italy the Scots attempted to reactivate his governorship: Louise of Savoy, regent in the absence of King Francois, regretted that his services could not be spared. When he was not on campaign Albany devoted himself to the administration of his estates, but he clearly interested himself in Scottish affairs, for when he next appears in the record, on 17 September 1526, it is as a correspondent of Cardinal Wolsey, offering to serve the latter in the interests of peace between England and Scotland. It seems unlikely that he anticipated a particularly close involvement in the conduct of Anglo-Scottish relations, and he must have received a shock the following spring, when his cousin Francois, vicomte de Turenne, wrote to him in cipher to say that Wolsey had told him that the queen of Scots wished to retire to France; there the king's aid would be enlisted in her campaign to obtain a divorce from the earl of Angus, after which Margaret would be free to marry Albany himself. The news must have been all the more surprising because Margaret had previously asked Albany to assist her in securing a divorce so that she could marry Henry Stewart, the treasurer of her household, who in fact eventually became her third husband. Nevertheless, Turenne repeated the news in a second letter, reporting that it had also greatly embarrassed and displeased Henry VIII. Probably the report was a 'canard', for having finally obtained her divorce (with Albany's help, both financial and diplomatic), Margaret quickly married Henry Stewart. 
Albany remained a soldier in the service of the French crown. Thus on 13 August 1527 he was paid 180 livres tournois for the previous three months as the captain of sixty lances, and he was also a member of the king's military order of St Michel. But it would seem that he never ceased to concern himself with the welfare of James V and the kingdom of Scotland, to the extent that the possibility of his return could never be discounted. There was probably an inherent plausibility to the rumour which the earl of Angus communicated to Henry VIII at the end of 1527, that Albany was trying to secure an English safe conduct, 'to return to trouble Scotland' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/2, no. 3704), and to the similar stories which James V reported to Francois shortly afterwards, telling how Albany and his kinsman Robert Stuart, seigneur d'Aubigny, had been hiring ships and sending them to Scotland. 
Notwithstanding his genuine affection for and sense of obligation to James V, and his services as tutor and governor of Scotland during the young king's minority, devoted service to the French crown lay at the heart of Albany's whole life. That service was both military and diplomatic. As a soldier he lacked flair, but he was a good and just leader of men, as he showed by the skill with which he handled fractious Scottish magnates, something appreciated and attested by the Scottish lords themselves. In truth he was a much better talker than fighter, possessing all the patience, endurance, and consummate 'politesse' required of a diplomat, as he showed in his numerous attempts to negotiate Anglo-Scottish treaties or truces. Between 1530 and 1533 he showed the same skills in his dealings on behalf of Francois, when he acted as the chief negotiator for the marriage of his niece Catherine de Medici and the duc d'Orleans. On 23 September 1530 John Stokesley, English ambassador in France, reported to Henry VIII from Lyons how he had recently 'met the duke of Albany going with threescore horse to fetch his niece from Florence, to be married in France, as is pretended' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/3, no. 6633). The negotiations were protracted and complicated -- there were numerous interests to be taken into account -- but in mid-August 1533 Albany finally returned to Italy to escort Catherine to France for her wedding. She and her attendants arrived on 6 September at La Spezia, where Albany (who also displayed impressive organizing skills) had provided a fleet of ships, some of which departed the same day for Villefranche. There Catherine and her train waited while Albany and the rest of the fleet picked up Clement VII, accompanied by thirteen cardinals and numerous prelates and officials, before returning to Villefranche on 6 October. On the 9th the entire party set sail for Marseilles, where it arrived two days later. Finally on 27 October the marriage contract was signed by Clement and Francois, and next day the young couple (both aged fourteen) were married by the pope, in a ceremony followed by a great banquet, a masked ball, and festivities which lasted for days. 
Albany's services notwithstanding, Francois ensured that his son and daughter-in-law made the most of their rights in the Auvergne and other lands to which the duke himself had a claim. On 12 October 1534 the king formally barred Albany's rights in many of the Bourbon lands he claimed in the right of his late wife. Those in Picardy were denied to him, as were the fruits of Auvergne since the death of his father-in-law, and he was even required to hand over to Orleans all the furnishings in the chateaux on the de la Tour lands. In the end Albany had to be satisfied with less than half his claims. However, he had no legitimate heir whose interests he could advance or protect; his closest relation in France, apart from Catherine, was his half-brother Philippe de la Chambre, whom the pope made a cardinal during the wedding celebrations at Marseilles on 7 November 1533; he took the title of cardinal de Boulogne. 
Albany's last involvement in dynastic politics involved the marriage of James V, who under the treaty of Rouen was to marry a daughter of Francois. Other European rulers offered sisters or daughters, but James was set on a French bride. However, the French king could not bear to part with his daughter Madeleine, and instead suggested Marie, daughter of the duc de Vendome. Albany (who was still the heir presumptive to the Scottish throne) had no alternative to offer, and on 3 March 1536 Francois therefore signed letters of credence for his ambassadors to negotiate James's marriage to Marie. Albany acted for the Scottish king and signed the marriage contract as his cousin's representative at Cremieu on 6 March, and also the confirmation of it on the 29th. In the event James married Madeleine rather than Marie, but she died shortly after landing in Scotland. 
By March 1536 Albany seems to have been ill. Shortly afterwards he retired to his estates, and died at his chateau of Mirefleur in the Auvergne on 2 June 1536. He was buried next to his wife at the Sainte Chapelle, Chateau de Vic-le-Comte, in a place marked by an inscription. There is no evidence for the survival of a will, but in any case the French king had ensured that the duke's French lands and titles were inherited by his own daughter-in-law, Catherine de Medici, and her husband. It is not known if he left anything to his only child, the comtesse de Choisy, but it seems unlikely that he had much left to bequeath after the French crown had taken its due. 
Among British historians Albany's regency in Scotland has always been regarded as the single most important episode in his career. Yet in a French context, of no less importance is the role he played from 1530 as tutor for his niece Catherine, and in the subsequent negotiations and arrangements for her marriage, and it may well be that further research, especially the analysis of the substantial corpus of his letters surviving in the Bibliotheque Nationale de France, will lead to a greater appreciation of his importance as a servant of the French monarchy, as both courtier and diplomat. The first detailed biography of Albany described him in its title as 'the Scot who was a Frenchman'; it remains to be seen whether he would not be more justly described as the Frenchman who was also a Scot. 


@@@@@


doc= 26489


John Stewart, third earl of Atholl (1507-1542), and his first wife, Grizel (died 'c'.1537), daughter of Sir John Rattray. Without being a leading figure either at court or in government, the third earl performed a number of useful services for James V. He served in the borders early in 1533, and probably accompanied the king both to France in 1536 and to the Orkneys and Hebrides in 1540. In the latter year he was a member of the assize which condemned Sir James Hamilton of Finnart. His most significant employment was in maintaining order in Perthshire, where he acted with a vigour that brought him into confrontation with his local rival, Sir Robert Menzies of that ilk. He lived in magnificent style, and according to Pitscottie spent $1000 a day entertaining the king and the papal nuncio at a great hunting trip to Atholl in 1529. His first wife having died some time after 1537, he married in 1542 Jean or Janet, daughter of John, sixth Lord Forbes. The third earl died later that year, probably in Edinburgh, between 19 October and 9 November, while serving in the royal army. 


@@@@@


doc= 26490


Stewart, John, Lord Darnley (c.1531-1563), nobleman, was the illegitimate son of King James V (1512-1542) and Elizabeth (or Katherine), daughter of Sir John Carmichael. James had seven natural sons from a number of liaisons, and most of them were destined for the church from an early age; John, already proposed as a monastic superior in 1538, was in April 1541 given a large pension from Orkney diocese. On 16 August 1541, termed a clerk of St Andrews diocese and aged nine, he was provided as commendator of the Benedictine priory of Coldingham. He matriculated at St Andrews in 1545, then in July 1548 sailed to France with his young half-sister, Queen Mary, who was later to marry the dauphin. He studied at Paris until 1551 at least, possibly until 1553. 
On 7 February 1551, before returning to Scotland, Stewart received crown legitimation, which removed most drawbacks of illegitimacy. His public career in Scotland now began, and he sat in the privy council from June 1553 and in parliament from April 1554, but little is known about him until the end of the decade. In 1560, when the Reformation crisis reached its climax, Stewart's position was equivocal. Said to be of the queen's party, which was pro-French and Catholic, and receiving letters from her, he yet co-operated with the pro-English protestant party: he joined in ratifying the treaty of Berwick of 22 February, whereby England gave military help, and in thanking Queen Elizabeth for this. He sat in the Reformation parliament of August 1560. Already in January 1560 he had been involved in military affairs round Coldingham, on the east coast near the border, and in August 1561 he was made captain of Dunbar Castle in the same region. In 1561 his tax of one-third, intended to benefit the crown and the reformed church, was remitted, on both his Orkney pension and his Coldingham revenues. During the revolt in the north-east in October 1562 he led a troop of forty horse on the government side. He was created Lord Darnley before 7 February 1563 and later that year he was in Inverness, where he died before 30 October. 
When Mary returned to Scotland in August 1561, she and Stewart were clearly very close, despite her remaining a faithful Catholic while he had become a protestant. The reformer John Knox recorded Stewart's reception of the protestant sacrament and his protection of Mary's Catholic chaplain on the same day. Knox also strongly disapproved of his conduct, and indeed Stewart was (according to an English informant) a fun-loving, boisterous young man, which did not displease Mary, and at times rowdy. On 11 January 1562 Stewart married Lady Janet Hepburn, sister of the fourth earl of Bothwell, who was later to be Mary's husband. Mary attended the wedding at Crichton Castle and at the end of the year travelled to Dunbar to make merry with Stewart at hogmanay. 
Stewart's status in the church requires assessment. Dispensed when still a child from the impediment of defect of birth to allow him to receive holy orders, and appointed to high-church office, he then received a fitting education. The same is true of his half-brothers: James, made commendator of Kelso and Melrose, who died before 1560, a younger James Stewart, commendator of St Andrews, who was later the Regent Moray, and Robert Stewart, commendator of Holyrood. It was hardly their choice, and most probably their father's principal motive in nominating them to Rome was financial: to receive the abbatial revenues himself during their minority and to provide for them in later life without cost to himself. Stewart's career in the later 1550s was mostly secular and he was known by the secular appellation of Lord John, though he sat in parliament and council as a spiritual lord, even after 1560. The date of his marriage is significant because, although never a monk, even as a commendator he was required to be in major holy orders and so could not contract valid marriage before 1560 in either canon or civil law. The date of birth of his illegitimate son is not known; his legitimate son Francis Stewart, who was probably born late in 1562, was commendator of Coldingham in 1565-7, and in the 1580s was commendator again and created earl of Bothwell. 


@@@@@


doc= 26491


Stewart, John, fourth earl of Atholl (d. 1579), magnate, was the only son of 
The younger John Stewart married twice. By 26 May 1547 he had married Elizabeth Gordon, daughter of George Gordon, fourth earl of Huntly, with whom he had two daughters (including Elizabeth Stewart, Lady Lovat and later countess of Arran). She had died by 1 April 1557, when Atholl contracted to marry Margaret (died 1587), widow successively of Robert, Lord Graham, and Thomas, master of Erskine, and daughter of Malcolm, third Lord Fleming. They had a son, John, later fifth earl of Atholl, and five daughters. 
The guiding force in much of the fourth earl's career was his Catholicism. Atholl supported Mary of Guise in 1554 when she claimed the regency, and followed her again at the end of the decade in opposing the lords of the congregation. After the latter's triumph in 1560 he registered his disapproval by voting against acceptance of the protestant confession of faith. His political position was not always consistent, for he supported the attempts to negotiate the marriage of Queen Elizabeth to James Hamilton, third earl of Arran, but then, according to Knox, joined the earl of Huntly and other Catholics in an unsuccessful scheme to capture Edinburgh. On Queen Mary's return from France in 1561 Atholl was made a privy councillor, and he remained her staunch supporter at least until her marriage to Bothwell in 1567. In 1564 he seems to have tried to emulate his father by organizing a spectacular deer-hunt for Mary at Atholl. In 1565 he actively supported the queen when she seemed to be veering towards a distinctly pro-Catholic policy following the unsuccessful coup by the earl of Moray, the so-called chaseabout raid. On 23 August he was made lieutenant in the north, and on 10 October was named as leader of the rearguard in the force raised to suppress Moray's rising. The birth of Mary's son and heir, Prince James, on 19 June 1566 gave rise to superstitious rumours concerning Atholl's wife Margaret, who was said to possess the magical gift of incantation, enabling her to transfer Mary's discomfort in childbirth to a lady-in-waiting. 
As with many of his fellow noblemen, political expediency also influenced Atholl's behaviour during these years. In 1562 his religious sympathies did not prevent his taking an active part in the campaign against the crypto-Catholic earl of Huntly, who had rebelled in protest against Mary's alleged favouritism towards her half-brother, the earl of Moray. About this time, moreover, Atholl seems to have rejected overtures from Huntly for the formation of a Roman Catholic alliance which would challenge the protestant ascendancy in Scotland. He was not involved in the plot against Riccio, and when the queen's secretary was murdered on the night of 9 March 1566 he attempted to escape from Holyrood Palace. He joined Mary at Dunbar shortly afterwards. 
Perhaps less surprisingly, the murder of Darnley and Mary's marriage to Bothwell in 1567 severely affected Atholl's relations with the queen, at least in the short term. Like many others who supported her, he was astonished and dismayed that she should choose to marry a highly unpopular nobleman who was widely believed to have been deeply involved in the murder of her late husband. He was reported to have discussed ways of avenging that murder with the earls of Moray and Morton, and was a leader of the force which confronted the queen at Carberry Hill on 15 June. On 29 June he attended the coronation of James VI at Stirling, where John Knox preached the sermon and James was anointed by Adam Bothwell, the protestant bishop of Orkney. He had been present a few days earlier when the casket letters were opened, and approved Mary's confinement at Lochleven. 
Gradually, however, Atholl began to return to his former loyalty to Mary, and with a view to obtaining her restoration supported proposals in 1569 that she be divorced from Bothwell. In the civil war which broke out following Moray's assassination at Linlithgow on 23 January 1570, Atholl openly renewed his allegiance to Mary, as did the earls of Argyll, Huntly, and Hamilton. Initially their cause prospered as they won over other members of the nobility. Edinburgh was occupied on 13 April, but efforts to persuade the leaders of the king's party to hold a convention with them there failed, and eventually Atholl and his followers assembled at Linlithgow, while their opponents gathered in Edinburgh. In August Atholl played host to a large assembly of Mary's supporters, but the tide gradually turned against them and the queen's party began to disintegrate. By 1572, with the earl of Morton now the leading figure in Regent Mar's government, Atholl was supporting a lost cause. Much to his dismay Morton was elected regent in November 1572, and, although he did not sign the pacification of Perth in February 1573 when the Hamilton and Huntly families made their peace with the regency, Atholl made his submission not long afterwards at Edinburgh in April. 
The five years between 1573 and 1578 constituted a largely uneventful period in Atholl's life, notable only for his religious dissidence and for a bitter feud which developed between him and the earl of Argyll. Atholl's preference for the old faith naturally offended the leaders of the kirk, and one of the principal reasons for the dismissal of James Paton, bishop of Dunkeld, in 1576 was his failure to execute a sentence of excommunication against the earl. The appointment of a team of ministers to offer constant spiritual guidance appears to have been a more effective stratagem, resulting in at least an outward religious conformity on Atholl's part. 
Atholl's quarrel with Argyll was essentially a dispute over legal jurisdiction. Argyll initially raised the issue at a privy council meeting in February 1576 when he complained that Atholl was illegally exercising in his domains a commission of justiciary granted in the previous reign. Morton's administration struggled in vain to tackle this feud effectively, and for the next eighteen months Argyll, Atholl, and their belligerent followers attacked one another. The paradoxical outcome of the affair was that Atholl, convinced that Morton was not doing enough on his behalf, decided to settle his differences with Argyll on his own accord. On 22 October 1577 the two rivals signed a bond of friendship which not only ended their quarrel but marked the beginning of the alliance which ultimately brought Morton's regency to a close. 
In the final years of his life Atholl enjoyed a brief return to his earlier prominence. He played a leading part in the overthrow of Morton early in March 1578, and on the 29th was appointed chancellor following the death of Lord Glamis. Then in July 1578, when the former regent attempted a comeback, Atholl and Argyll gathered a force at Edinburgh estimated at 7000 men and marched toward Stirling, where Morton had ordered parliament to assemble. They confronted the latter's forces on 12 August at Falkirk, where the English ambassador Robert Bowes and two Edinburgh ministers managed to negotiate a truce. Atholl was reported to have been reconciled with Morton, and his death at Kincardine Castle, on 24 April 1579, came a few days after he had attended a banquet given by the latter. He was buried in St Giles's Cathedral, Edinburgh, on 4 July. His family was convinced he had been poisoned and medical opinion largely agreed with this diagnosis. But Morton always vehemently denied any complicity in Atholl's death and one of his final statements on the scaffold on 2 June 1581 was to protest his innocence in this affair. Significantly, perhaps, Atholl had applied for a licence to leave the country in June 1578, giving ill health as the reason for his request. The effect of food poisoning on a weak constitution, rather than a deliberate criminal conspiracy, seems the likeliest explanation of his death, ending a quarter of a century of active involvement in Scottish affairs. 


@@@@@


doc= 26492


Stewart, John, first earl of Traquair (c.1599-1659), politician, was the son of John Stewart of Traquair, Peeblesshire, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Andrew Stewart, master of Ochiltree. His father's early death on 9 March 1606 made him heir to his grandfather, James Stewart of Traquair, whom he succeeded in May 1606. He was placed under the tutelage of his uncle Sir Robert Stewart of Schillinglaw, who supervised his properties and legal affairs, while his early education at home seems to have been entrusted to Thomas Sydserf, future bishop of Galloway. From 1608 onwards Stewart often appears in the Scottish privy council records alongside his tutor, who was frequently obliged to protect his charge against the Turnbull family of Bedrule, whose depredations and deforcements in the Stewart lands at Huntlyhill caused considerable tensions. By August 1619 the Turnbulls had been intercepted while trying to expropriate hay from Traquair property, leading Schillinglaw and Stewart to obtain a conciliar injunction against them. In September the council deployed the earls of Buccleuch and Roxburghe and Lord Cranstoun to apprehend the chief Turnbulls, thus ending a decade of litigation and possibly encouraging Stewart's own move towards a personal assumption of justiciary power within his ancestral territory as a member of the Peebles peace commission once he came of age at some date between August 1619 and 1621. 
Stewart's impressive rise to political prominence began soon after his marriage, by a contract dated 14 September 1620, to Lady Katherine, daughter of David Carnegie, earl of Southesk, a match which brought 20,000 merks scots in tocher. In 1621 Stewart was made a member of the Scottish privy council, and in July and August he participated in the parliament as a commissioner for small barons for Tweeddale. His loyalty to James VI's policies of ecclesiastical congruity was proved by his decision to vote in favour of ratifying the five articles of Perth, and before 29 January 1622 he was knighted. He took an increasing role in parliamentary committees for the exportation of undraped wool (October 1622) and the wool commission (January 1623). His responsibilities as a local landowner in Tweeddale led him to act with fifteen other lords, lairds, and bailies to formulate a 'Temporary Relief Act' for those affected by the famine of 1623. In July that year he was once again serving on a committee, this time for standing manufactures. 
Stewart's rise as an expert in financial management temporarily gave way in 1623 to his interests in local law enforcement, and from this time onwards he served not only as a justice of the peace for Peebles (from August 1623) but as a border commissioner (from July 1624). He reached the apex of his political career only after the accession of Charles I in 1625, resuming his place on the privy council and gaining a promotion on 19 April 1628 with his elevation to the heritable lordship of Traquair. Hereafter, his fiscal acumen gained him the trust of Charles but his penchant for bullying, his high-handed attitude towards administrative red tape, and his improperly defined political loyalties alienated his fellow councillors. 
In 1630 Traquair was appointed co-treasurer-depute with Lord Napier (becoming sole depute in 1631) under Lord Treasurer William Douglas, earl of Morton, as well as an extraordinary lord of the court of session. Traquair's loyalty to the Caroline regime was rewarded during the king's coronation in Edinburgh in June 1633, when he was elevated to the earldom of Traquair and the appurtenant lordships of Linton and Caberston. His apparent lack of personal integrity and reputation as an 'abrasive placeman' soon gained him enemies, however, and his dislike of bishops and episcopal power generally made him an unlikely (and inconsistent) royal agent. Traquair's controversial participation, as chancellor of the jury, in casting the final vote against Lord Balmerino in his trial for seditious libel (1634) gained him immediate notoriety; despite his personal appeal to the king at Whitehall and a subsequent pardon for Balmerino, his public action merely confirmed growing national fears of the king's own vindictive and arbitrary behaviour in a trial that had appeared to be rigged. On 30 November Traquair appeared as a commissioner in the revived border commission, resurrected on account of new disorders throughout the Anglo-Scottish middle shires. 
Traquair's expedition to London in the spring of 1636 resulted in his promotion to lord high treasurer, a position which, for a difficult five-year period, made him the most powerful politician in Scotland. Unfortunately for him, a sequence of events also pinpointed him as the man considered most responsible for attempting to impose the Laudian prayer book on the kingdom in 1637. Ironically, Traquair's personal friendship with Archbishop William Laud did not mitigate the earl's own distrust of diocesan episcopacy, and it was widely rumoured that the Edinburgh riot of 23 July was, if not engineered by him, at least encouraged as a means of discrediting the Scottish bishops. In the months that followed he urged Charles not to pursue further implementation of the new liturgy, a view perhaps strengthened by a personal attack upon him by a presbyterian mob in October. Traquair chaired the parliament at Linlithgow in November and attempted to devise placatory legislation that would suitably revise the prayer book while underlining the illegality of Edinburgh's riot against the crown. 
For the next three years Traquair devoted much of his energy to travelling between Whitehall and Edinburgh in an increasingly unviable attempt to reconcile the king's episcopal policies with the militant presbyterianism of the Scottish elite. On returning from London in February 1638 he was the unwilling bearer of royal instructions meant to reinforce the prayer book by proclamation, over and above the complaints of Scottish ministers and the gentry. The national covenant of 28 February soon endangered the king's policies, and Traquair quickly returned to court as a negotiator, reappearing in Scotland by July as a supporter of the lord high commissioner, the marquess of Montrose. In March 1639 Charles issued private instructions for Traquair to fortify and arm Edinburgh Castle, a task which the treasurer soon found logistically impossible to execute, obliging him to garrison Dalkeith Palace until a suitable opportunity arose to transport the weapons into Edinburgh. This chance never came, as Traquair quickly surrendered the palace and its contents to David Leslie, whose team of 1000 musketeers surrounded Dalkeith on 19 March. Traquair immediately went underground, resurfacing in York with Charles himself in April, and later returned to Scotland as lord high commissioner to the general assembly of August. This session resulted in the abolition of episcopacy in Scotland, but the treasurer seems only to have conceded this as a means of buying time, as shown by his strategic postponement of parliament (which would have ratified the assembly legislation) to June 1640. 
Traquair's personal reputation with the covenanters having plummeted at this point, he was disqualified from serving as commissioner in the negotiations leading to the treaty of Ripon on 30 September 1640. In the ensuing year the Scottish parliament obliged Charles to remove him as lord treasurer, and his fall from grace was compounded on 16 July, when it read out a twenty-six-page charge against him, shortly followed by a general denunciation of him as one of five principal 'incendiaries'. His diminished political status was further confirmed in 1644 by the remarkable decision of the general assembly to declare him an 'enemy to religion' ('DNB'); this condemnation was more a summation of his ecclesiastical indifference and bad faith in dealing with the covenanters than a condemnation of his rumoured Catholic leanings. 
Despite his alignment with the crown, Traquair is rumoured to have been involved in passing information to General Alexander Leslie in his battle against Montrose at Philiphaugh in 1645, as evinced by the last-minute withdrawal of his son John Stewart, Lord Linton ('b'. in or after 1624, died 1666), from the royalist encampment. In March of that year the Scottish parliament again admonished him, but with less severity this time: the earl was fined an agreed sum of 40,000 merks and expected to keep himself confined to his properties in Peebles, Selkirk, and Roxburgh. With the resumption of war in 1648 Traquair and Linton fought together at Preston in August, with the former suffering capture by the sheriff of Cheshire and ultimate long-term imprisonment in Warwick Castle. In June 1650, during his absence, the Scottish parliament declared Traquair a delinquent alongside the duke of Hamilton and earls of Seaforth, Lauderdale, and Dumfries, though he was still periodically permitted to attend to his financial affairs in person, with his wife regularly reporting on the dilapidating condition of his estates during his captivity. 
Traquair's plight drew the attention of Oliver Cromwell himself, who in March 1652 allowed the earl to return to Scotland, where he was met by a dwindling estate income, estrangement from his son, and the litigious efforts of one of his sons-in-law, who attempted to have him tried for perjury. He was forced to sell off both Traquair House in 1656 and Linton in 1657 in order to clear his debts, but found employment under Cromwell as a commissioner for the collection of assessments in the counties of Peebles and Selkirk. The remainder of his life has been the subject of much legend. Despite his recorded death on 27 March 1659 at home, contemporary and later historians envisaged him dying between sermons at a kirk service, or alternatively, panhandling for his subsistence as 'the beggar Earl' on the streets of Edinburgh in 1661 ('Scots peerage'). As one observer carefully summarized his contribution to Scottish politics, Traquair had been 'a man of extraordinary natural parts, and of great learning, but of too much craft' (Smith, fol. 27'v'). With his wife, who was still living on 1 November 1655, he had four daughters, Margaret (died 1673), who married James Douglas, second earl of Queensberry, Elizabeth, Catherine, and Magdalene; he was succeeded as second earl by his only son, John. 


@@@@@


doc= 26493


Stewart, John (c.1700-1747), Jacobite soldier and poet, was born at Knock, Kincardine, Inverness-shire, the son of Donald Stewart and his second wife, Barbara Shaw, who was reputedly fifty-two at the time of his birth. He belonged to the Stewarts of Kincardine, Inverness-shire, who had sold their property to the duke of Gordon in 1683. He was probably the John Stewart commissioned as a lieutenant of an additional company to be added to the Inniskilling dragoons on 25 December 1726, serving as adjutant in 1727. He was certainly recruiting in Inverness in 1727, but was probably placed on half pay in 1729. In the absence of employment he then probably left Britain to serve in the French army and he was present at the siege of Philipsburg from where on 12 June 1734 he reported the death of James Fitzjames, duke of Berwick. 
By 1736 Stewart was engaged in Jacobite intrigues, being arrested and incarcerated in Inverness prison, but he escaped with the connivance of Simon Fraser, twelfth Lord Lovat, who sent him with a message to the court of James Stuart, the Pretender, in Rome. From 1739 he seems to have spent most of his time at Boulogne in France. With the outbreak of war he was again employed in the French army and fought at Fontenoy on 30 April 1745. In August he received leave from the French army and having travelled through Ghent he arrived in the highlands, joining the Jacobite army at Blair Atholl on 30-31 August 1745. His first task was to raise a regiment in the north, but after the battle of Prestonpans on 21 September 1745 he was ordered to raise a regiment in Edinburgh. Initially he seems to have attracted some of General Cope's defeated army, but soon they all left him. Stewart was opposed to the decision to invade England, later referring to it as 'the first great error committed' (Tayler, 253); he preferred to take Edinburgh and Stirling, 'proclaim the King, call a parliament and take full possession of Scotland' (ibid.). Nevertheless, he led the regiment in its march into England and it covered the retreat from Derby and Manchester. While the regiment guarded the baggage at Stirling, Stewart fought at the battle of Falkirk on 17 January 1746. The regiment commanded by Stewart probably fought in the front line at Culloden and after the defeat it managed to rendezvous with the remnants of the Jacobite army at Ruthven. 
Stewart may have been wounded at Culloden, but he attended a meeting at Muir Laggon on Loch Arkaig, Inverness-shire, to consider how to proceed. He may have been sent by Prince Charles to France with news of the defeat, but if so he returned to Scotland and was eventually one of those who sailed from Loch nan Uamh on Skye with the prince back to France. He described his adventures following Culloden in a poem, 'John Roy's Psalm', one of many Gaelic songs and laments. 
In 1747 Stewart was at both Nieuport and Boulogne; he died that year, probably at the end of June. He left a widow, Sarah Hall, and a daughter in dire poverty; the Old Pretender wrote on 7 November 1747 of his concern for them. He may also have left a son, Charles, who served in the French army. His wife and daughter subsequently received a pension which was continued for thirty years. Such was Stewart's reputation that the British authorities were receiving reports of his supposed activities in Scotland well into December 1747. He should not be confused with Prince Charles Edward's valet, who remained with the prince in exile and who received a Jacobite baronetcy in 1784. 


@@@@@


doc= 26494


Stewart, John (1747-1822), philosopher and traveller, was born on 19 February 1747 at 156 New Bond Street, London, the only child of Scottish parents, John and Margaret Stewart, linen drapers at the same address. He attended Harrow School from 1758 to 1761 and Charterhouse from 1761 to 1763, at both of which his character proved to be unconventional and subversive. As an early step in his plan to travel the world, 'to trace the causes of human misery and... welfare, and of determining how the latter might be brought to perfection' ('Life and Adventures', 4), he went to Madras in 1763 to work as a writer with the East India Company. 
Two years later Stewart resigned his post, moving on to work as interpreter and then as army general with Haidar Ali and his son Tippoo, rulers of Mysore, then to the court of the nabob of Arcot as private secretary and eventually as prime minister. Around the mid-1770s he began the first phase of his planned world tour by foot. Traversing the Indian interior, Stewart walked to the Persian Gulf, thence into Africa to southern Ethiopia and on into unmapped central Africa. After recrossing the Arabian desert, 'the only Man of Nature that ever appeared in the World', as he referred to himself in the subtitle of 'The Moral or Intellectual Last Will and Testament of John Stewart' (1810), covered most Adriatic and Mediterranean nations before arriving in London in 1783. He travelled by foot wherever possible, never carried weapons, and lived as a vegetarian. 
In 1784 the journeying recommenced. This time Stewart covered the length and breadth of Europe on foot, pushing his walk into northern Scandinavia and central Asia before returning to London. Here in the early 1790s he began to publish his curious doctrines on human nature. To forward these he would deliberately court notice by presenting himself in Armenian dress in public thoroughfares. Over 6 feet tall, powerfully built, and strikingly handsome, Stewart had no trouble engaging members of the public in conversation, an Ancient Mariner in the role of Socrates. 
Disgusted with the reception of his ideas in Britain, Stewart set off for America in 1791. Seized with a corresponding disgust for American and Canadian incomprehension, he was soon back in England and nearly as soon again on the continent, walking around France. It was in Paris in 1792, just weeks before the execution of Louis XVI, that he met the poet Wordsworth, who was impressed by Stewart's conversational powers and political knowledge. 
Following a spell of relative poverty in London, Stewart spent the mid- to late 1790s back in America and Canada, pursuing his transcontinental walks (pushing them into South America) and earning a little money by lecturing on his 'system'. Back in Britain by 1800, he settled first in Bath and then, in 1803, in London, relentlessly and obsessively publicizing his philosophical ideas, especially after the payment of an outstanding claim of $14,000 on the nabob of Arcot. He remained mostly in London for the rest of his bachelor life, writing, discoursing, pamphleteering, lecturing -- and walking -- until his death on 20 February 1822 in his Northumberland Street rooms, the scene of numerous, well-attended philosophical and musical evenings. The cause of death is unknown, though there is a chance that the ailing Stewart took his own life by overdosing on opium. 
Stewart was a cultivated, genial if eccentric individual whose large circle of friends included politicians, writers, philosophers, and musicians. His erudition was expansive, and, with his fluent command of eight languages (and passing knowledge of many more), truly cosmopolitan. He was well enough known to have been the subject of a popular mass-produced watercolour, and to have been satirized on stage in the 'operatic farce' 'Hartford Bridge' (by 'Mr Pearce') in the 1800s. Problems over interpreting his will, however, meant that a bequest to Edinburgh University of about $1000 to establish a lectureship in 'Intellectual Power' had to be declined. 
Most of Stewart's thirty or so books were printed and distributed privately; many appeared in duodecimo format, their small size intended to lend itself to portability and alfresco reading. They are curious compounds of geography, materialist philosophical speculation, extravagant moral rumination, occasional excursions into verse, and sundry unrelated harangues at the reader. Thomas De Quincey, a good friend, noted of him that while he 'was a man of genius' he lacked the talent to communicate his ideas effectively ('Collected Writings', 3.117). Stewart's intellectual peers designated him a speculative atheist: his philosophical ideal comprises a sort of self-reflexive pantheism, free love, natural democracy, and perfectibilarianism. 
Stewart's most significant books are 'Travels over the Most Interesting Parts of the Globe, to Discover the Source of Moral Motion' (1790), 'Opus maximum' (1803), and 'The Roll of a Tennis Ball through the Moral World' (1812); thematically his whole opus endlessly revolves around the theme of philosophical atomism. Though most of Stewart's readers would agree with De Quincey that the former was probably 'crazy when the wind was at NNE' ('Collected Writings', 3.111), the serious attempt to analyse and codify morality that lies behind the bizarre titles is easy to see. Having a horror of the imminent formation of some 'universal empire of revolutionary police terror' (Salt, 578), which would ban his books, Stewart urged recipients to translate them into Latin (a precaution against the supposed decay of the English language) and bury them 7 feet underground. Their locations would be passed down orally until the dawn of the age of the Stewartian man made their disinterment possible and necessary. 


@@@@@


doc= 26495


Clementina (1702-1735), consort of James Francis Edward, Jacobite claimant to the English, Scottish, and Irish thrones, was born Maria Clementina on 18 July 1702. She was the third and youngest daughter of James Sobieski, prince of Poland, and his wife, Hedwig Elizabeth of Neuberg. Clementina's grandfather was the Polish hero-king John III, who turned the Turks back at the gates of Vienna in 1683, but the Polish crown was not hereditary and her father failed to be elected king on John's death. However, James retained powerful royal connections through his wife, whose sisters were Holy Roman empress and queen of Spain, and Clementina's sisters in turn married well; the elder, Casimira, was betrothed to James Francis Edward's cousin, the duke of Modena, while Charlotte married the powerful duc de Bouillon, great chamberlain of France and regular drinking and gambling partner of Louis XV. 
To the alarm of many Jacobites, by 1718 James Francis Edward (1688-1766) had reached the age of thirty without wife or heir, and had been rejected by the daughter of the duke of Modena. Finding a bride would be a delicate task, partly because he was a king without a throne, but also because the government in London was expected to put every obstacle in the way of a Stuart marriage. James ordered Charles Wogan, a passionately loyal Irish adventurer, to scour the courts of central Europe in search of a suitable bride, adding as an afterthought that he should enquire about the Sobieski prince's daughters 'if they fall in your way or be not much out of it' ('Stuart Papers', 5.284-5). Wogan found the princesses at Ohlau, and was enchanted with the youngest, sixteen-year-old Clementina, who was pious and beautiful, with large glowing eyes, brown hair, and a passionate desire to become queen of Britain one day. The pope was her godfather and she would bring a large dowry. James proposed at once and was accepted. 
George I prevailed upon the Holy Roman emperor to arrest Clementina as she travelled through Austria on her way to Italy, and the young princess was detained in the Schloss Ambras at Innsbruck during winter 1718-19. Wogan again came to James's rescue by spiriting his bride out of the castle disguised as a maid, and after a nightmare journey over the snowbound Brenner Pass, Clementina reached Bologna in April 1719. No bridegroom awaited her; James had departed for Spain to lead what became another ill-fated Jacobite rising, but had left instructions for a proxy marriage ceremony to be performed as soon as his bride arrived. Following this ceremony on 9 May, Clementina continued her journey to Rome, where she was feted as the British queen. Four months later, after the failure of the 1719 rising, Clementina met her husband for the first time on 2 September at Montefiascone, and on the same day a second marriage ceremony took place in the cathedral there. Clementina and James settled in the Palazzo Muti, a small palace in Rome which the pope made over to them, and here, to the great joy of the Jacobite world, their first child, Charles Edward, was born on the last day of the year 1720. A second son, Henry Benedict, followed five years later on 6 March 1725. 
Clementina's happiness was short-lived; even before the birth of Charles it was becoming evident that the marriage was not the success she or Jacobite followers had hoped for. James was twelve years older than his wife, and his 'dour, stoical, pragmatic approach to life failed to strike a chord in her romantic soul' (McLynn, 13). The drab Palazzo Muti offered none of the fun of her father's court at Ohlau, while her husband closeted himself away, writing endless letters and plotting to regain his crown. With a mounting sense of exclusion, it soon became evident to Clementina, that while she might be called queen of Britain in Rome, she would never reign in that country. 
The peace of the Muti was broken by frequent quarrels, which led to tantrums on the part of Clementina and cold withdrawal by James. According to John Hay (later Jacobite earl of Inverness): 'Their tempers are so very different that, although they are never of the same opinion on the smallest trifles, the one will not yield an inch to the other... which must end in something very dismal' (Hay to earl of Mar, 21 April 1722, Stuart papers, 64/93). They argued fiercely whenever they were together, yet missed one another when apart. Clementina wrote on the last day of July 1722: 'I am trying now to overcome my bad temper so as to appear to you in the future as the best girl in the world... I shall know no rest or quietude until I am in the arms of my Carissimo. (ibid., 61/64)' Ever solicitous of his wife's feelings, James intercepted correspondence from Ohlau to cushion the blow when her mother was dying, and he diverted her by taking her to watch the palio and visit religious houses at Bologna and Lucca. 
Charles Edward's development towards boyhood introduced more serious causes for dissent. Both parents were utterly devoted to him, but for different reasons: Clementina to compensate for her husband's neglect, and James because the child was heir to his royal line. Protestant nurses were appointed to care for the child, but the earl of Mar proposed Mrs Sheldon, a Roman Catholic, as governess. Clementina, now lonely and miserable, fell under the influence of this domineering woman, who inflamed new quarrels over the child's education. Sheldon resented every protestant at court and spread rumours that James was having an affair with Hay's wife. Gossip, encouraged by Hanoverian spies, suggested that Charles was a sickly child and that Clementina could never bear a second child. According to rumours, Pope Clement XII was 'commonly supposed' to be her lover ('The Complete Letters of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu', ed. R. Halsband, 3 vols., 1965-7, 2.228). 
As the young prince grew up he became aware of his father's cold withdrawals from family life and his mother's tantrums. As early as the age of three he could be wilful and disobedient, mortifying the court once by refusing to kneel when presented to Pope Benedict XIII. In November 1725 James decided the boy needed a firmer hand, so he took him away from Mrs Sheldon and female nurses and handed him over to male governors, first Andrew Michael Ramsay and later James Murray of Stormont, with Thomas Sheridan as under-governor. Although it has generally been assumed that this was done simply because James wanted a stronger masculine influence around his son, it has been suggested that in the eighteenth century there was a fear among aristocratic parents that children left in the care of females might be sexually molested (McLynn, 13). The truth may lie somewhere in between, and apart from personal dislike of Mrs Sheldon, James was certainly blinkered by a lack of understanding of women. The appointment of Murray and Sheridan could not have come at a worse time, since in March Clementina had proved the gossips wrong by giving the Stuarts a second prince, Henry Benedict. By now, however, she was suffering from some form of hysteria, in all probability post-puerperal depression (State papers, Italian States, quoted in McLynn, 14). Abetted by Mrs Sheldon, Clementina may have seen this thrusting of her first-born into the charge of so many men as an attempt to cut her off from her beloved Charles. 
Clementina now prayed and brooded by turns, storming at her husband that he must get rid of Hay and his wife, as well as Murray, and Winifred, countess of Nithsdale, who had been given charge of Prince Henry. James refused, and dismissed Mrs Sheldon. On 15 November 1725 Clementina drove out of the palace with Sheldon and her other ladies and sought sanctuary in the convent of St Cecilia, where she poured out her marital woes to the nuns. The pope, fearing the Stuarts might abandon the Roman Catholic faith to regain their throne, took Clementina's part and reduced James's allowance. While Clementina wrote 'wronged wife' letters to the king of France and the queen of Spain, her husband wrote to his wife's relatives, at one stage suggesting to her father that she should be sent back to Ohlau (James Francis Edward to Prince James Sobieski, 16 Nov 1725, Stuart papers, 87/81). He visited her at the convent, but no reconciliation resulted, and neither talked afterwards of what was discussed. The quarrel turned into a grim internecine war which left supporters of the movement in Britain and throughout Europe greatly demoralized. By playing on the pope's fear that Prince Charles might abandon his Roman Catholic faith, Cardinal Giulio Alberoni, outwardly Jacobite but in the pay of London, ensured that Clementina remained in the convent and reconciliation proved next to impossible. While James blamed his old enemy, the earl of Mar, Clementina railed against the Dunbar-Hay clique, who were hated even by fellow protestant Jacobites. All this dissent caused irreparable damage to James's cause. 
Although the Hays left James's service in spring 1727, Clementina still refused to leave the convent, and in June, when George I died, her husband set out for France to seek help from Louis XV to mount an invasion of Britain. With tragic mistiming Clementina chose that moment to leave the convent and join her sons at Bologna. She had been separated from husband and children for two years, but now poured out her love to her boys only to abandon them again for long periods to go on pilgrimages. She refused to join James at Avignon, nor would she be reconciled on his return to Italy early in 1728, and she continued to keep Mrs Sheldon at her side. In despair James told Hay: 'She leads a singular life... and when she is not at Church or at Table, is locked up in her room and sees no mortal but her maids or so; she eats meat this Lent, but fasts to the degree that I believe no married woman that pretends to have children ever did; I am very little with her. I let her do what she will. (James to Hay, 7 Feb 1728, Stuart papers, 114/16)' Clementina spent her time fasting and kneeling in prayer in cold, damp churches for such long periods that her health became damaged permanently, and she refused to accompany her family to Albano that summer. Now a deeply pious recluse, she no longer ate with her family, but kept her own little table, where James watched helplessly as she toyed with her food and grew weaker. She also suffered from asthma and manic depression as well as some allergy condition (see correspondence in 'The Scotsman', 15, 22, 26 April 1988, and H. Douglas, 'The Private Passions of Bonnie Prince Charlie', 1998, 45-6). Her health deteriorated alarmingly. 
During 1728 Clementina again fell pregnant but, hardly surprisingly, lost the child. There were rumours of other pregnancies, but the plain fact is that the couple rarely slept together and James lived much of the time at Albano while Clementina remained in Rome. She still showed great love for her children, however. When Charles was sent off to gain military experience with the Spanish army then besieging Gaeta in southern Italy in 1734, she became terrified for his safety and rushed off to church to pray for him. By the end of that year, when the prince attained his fourteenth birthday, it was evident that his mother was dying. Although it is difficult to diagnose at this distance in time and without fuller detail of her medical condition, she now was almost certainly suffering from some form of lung disease, probably tuberculosis. On 12 January 1735 Clementina received the last rites of the church, but remained perfectly lucid and asked to see her sons to plead with them never to abandon their Roman Catholicism for all the kingdoms in the world. On 18 January 1735 she died at the Palazzo Muti, Rome, and was laid to rest in St Peter's. 
Historians have expressed the view that Clementina was quite unfitted to be the wife of an exile such as James, and Sir Charles Petrie goes so far as to say that, had the Pretender been restored to the throne during her lifetime, she must of necessity have become as much his evil genius as Henrietta Maria had been of his grandfather, and more than Mary of Modena had been of his father. As it was, Petrie claimed, she exercised no influence upon the course of the Jacobite movement. That verdict cannot be sustained: the conduct of Clementina and inept response of her husband caused irreparable damage to the Jacobites at a time when their cause was already at a low ebb. As for her son, those frequent withdrawals of a mother's love and abandonment during his formative years lay at the root of Charles Edward's inability to establish lasting stable relationships with men or women; this later played an important part in the failure of the Jacobite cause which he came in time to lead. 


@@@@@


doc= 26496


Stewart, Matthew, eleventh or second earl of Lennox (d. 1513), magnate, was the eldest son of John Stewart, the tenth or first earl of Lennox (d. 1495), and Margaret Montgomery, daughter of Alexander Montgomery, first Lord Montgomery (d. 1470) ['see under 'Montgomery family]. His younger brother was the soldier Robert Stewart (c.1470-1544). He was of age by 1484, when he first attended parliament. Prominently associated with the rebellion of 1488 against James III, after the king's death at Sauchieburn (11 June) Stewart received joint keepership with his father of Dumbarton Castle on 20 October 1488 and extensive powers to pursue criminals in the Lennox. The patronage, however, seems to have been too slowly granted, and did not include a role on the new king's Hepburn-dominated council. 
This appears to have been why Stewart, his father, and Robert, Lord Lyle, raised a rebellion in the Lennox in April 1489 against their allies of the previous year. All three were forfeited by parliament in June and arrangements were made for the siege of the rebel strongholds of Crookston, Duchal, and Dumbarton. The first two fell quickly, but the last was a much more difficult target. Stewart and Lyle were in charge of Dumbarton and, despite a rebel defeat at Gartloaning, near Aberfoyle, on 11 October, they held out until mid-December, when the king's forces admitted defeat, after massive expenditure on men, munitions, and ships. The siege of Dumbarton proved the decisive element in what was effectively a rebel victory, and over the next months many of the rebel demands were met. Parliament was called to negotiate a settlement in February 1490, the forfeitures of June 1489 were annulled, and the king's council was broadened beyond the narrow Hepburn clique. 
Stewart himself was not closely associated with the council in the 1490s, but was employed in letting crown lands. His father resigned the formal ownership of the Lennox and Darnley estates (though not the titles and tenancy) to him on 1 June 1490. On his father's death, between 31 August and 11 September 1495, he became earl of Lennox, and also sheriff of Dumbarton and keeper of Rothesay Castle on Bute (a post he held until 'c'.1501). 
After gaining the earldom, Lennox grew increasingly close to James IV. He is found as a card-playing companion of the king, as an exchequer auditor, and as a royal justiciar (1503). He worked especially in Kintyre and Knapdale, where he was appointed king's lieutenant on 11 May 1499. He was a regular witness of royal charters and a member of the council after 1501: from 1503 he attended some 90 per cent of council meetings. No great rewards came his way, but in January 1512 his main estates were freed of inheritance dues and wardship, he was confirmed in hereditary possession of the whole of the old earldom of Lennox (to which there had been other claimants), and the sheriffdom of Dumbarton (presumably including the castle) was amalgamated with the earldom. In 1513 he probably escorted French troops, guns, and equipment, which had been landed in Dumbarton, to the royal army that invaded England, and he was killed at Flodden on 9 September. He may have contracted, by 13 June 1480, to marry Margaret, daughter of Robert, second Lord Lyle. That marriage, however, either did not take place or was annulled; a grant of lands to Margaret on 15 April 1494, just six days after Lennox contracted to marry Elizabeth (died after 1530), daughter of James Hamilton, first Lord Hamilton (d. 1479) ['see under 'Hamilton family (per. 1295-1479)], suggests that she was bought off. Lennox and Elizabeth had a son, John Stewart (d. 1526), who succeeded. 


