@@@@@


doc= 26497


Stewart, Matthew, thirteenth or fourth earl of Lennox (1516-1571), magnate and regent of Scotland, was born in Dumbarton Castle on 21 September 1516, the eldest surviving son of John Stewart, twelfth or third earl of Lennox (d. 1526), and his wife, Elizabeth (died after 1556), eighth daughter of John Stewart, first earl of Atholl. 
The Lennox Stewart lands lay to the west of the country, mostly north of the Clyde, but the family also had close connections with nobles from the west highlands and the Isles. Matthew's younger brother Robert Stewart was nominated bishop of Caithness in 1541, though he was never consecrated. The Lennox Stewarts were born of one of the major houses of Scotland; if the Hamilton assertion to be second person of the realm was in any way compromised, the Lennoxes had the next strongest claim. They had also gained renown in France; following the example of his kinsman Berault Stewart, Lennox's uncle Robert Stewart, seigneur d'Aubigny (c.1470-1544), had moved to France in the 1490s and there enjoyed a distinguished military career. 
Matthew Stewart was not quite ten when his father was killed near Linlithgow, on 4 September 1526, and the wardship of his earldom was divided between the earls of Angus and Arran; however, it was soon conveyed to Andrew Stewart, Lord Avondale. Matthew's adolescence was overshadowed by a problematic relationship with Sir James Hamilton of Finnart, a powerful figure at the court of James V who had also been the killer of Matthew's father and who was Avondale's associate in exploiting the lands of the earldom -- Finnart's half-sister was Avondale's wife. On 29 April 1531 the new earl and Finnart made an agreement under which Lennox forgave his father's killer, who relinquished his rights in the earl's marriage but was to be left undisturbed in the lands he had come to hold of the earldom of Lennox. At this time the balance of advantage undoubtedly lay with Finnart, and though Lennox was appointed lifetime keeper of Dumbarton Castle (an office resigned by Finnart) on 21 April 1531, and attended parliament as a peer of the realm on 26 April 1531 and 17 May 1532, either concern for his safety or a nose for adventure then took him to France, under a letter of safeguard issued on 1 July 1532. In his absence members of his family looked after his interests, with some assistance from the king. In France Lennox gained command of a company of Scots soldiers, and in summer 1536 he joined his uncle Robert Stewart in Francois I's campaign to Provence. So valiant was his performance in this 'joyage' that in January 1537 he was granted rights of denizenship under the French crown. Francois I was fairly liberal with such awards to Italians, but less so with his allies to the north: Lennox's grant was thus a definite feather in his cap and he settled easily into the life of a French courtier. But the course of his life was redirected by the death of James V on 14 December 1542. 
Francois I, anxious to ensure that French influence was maintained in Scotland during the minority of Mary, queen of Scots, decided to pluck Lennox from the French court and send him to Scotland as the French ambassador. Few Scottish nobles had such a stronghold as formidable as Dumbarton at their disposal, and Lennox sailed to Scotland in March 1543 through an Irish Sea full of English warships. He arrived with supplies of munitions, armour, gold, and silver, lavishly provided by Francois I. He immediately tendered his letters of accreditation to the governor of the realm, James Hamilton, earl of Arran, to which he had had a handsome salutation added, probably penned by his indefatigable secretary, Thomas Bishop. 
Although Lennox's return was not entirely unforeseen, it still created problems. In his own eyes he was heir to the throne, as there were doubts over Arran's legitimacy -- Cardinal David Beaton spoke up for his claims in preference to those of Queen Mary on the ground that Scotland needed an adult male as monarch -- and for the furtherance of his mission, as well as his personal ambitions, he needed allies. Once off ship and his supplies secured, Lennox made haste to speak with the queen dowager, Mary of Guise. He was received with enough grace to arouse suspicion of Mary of Guise's intentions, but in fact neither the queen dowager nor other potential supporters, such as Archibald Douglas, sixth earl of Angus, and William Cunningham, third earl of Glencairn, were willing to support Lennox's claim to the governorship over that of Arran. 
None the less, when parliament met at the end of April 1543 Lennox, who attended as French ambassador and in that capacity demanded a renewal of Scotland's treaty with France, refused to subscribe the act acknowledging Arran as governor and second person of the realm; Arran thereupon demanded he surrender Dumbarton Castle. Lennox refused and fled to the security of the highlands where his family still had many supporters. He formed an alliance with Beaton, who was also a supporter of French interests in Scotland, and on 21 July brought a force of highlanders to Linlithgow, where Arran had fortified the palace. Three days later Lennox and his allies subscribed a bond to defend the infant queen against English policy, and as they outnumbered Arran they were able to win him over. Lennox escorted the queen and her mother to Stirling Castle on 27 July, and Mary was crowned there on 9 September: Lennox carried the sceptre. Any realistic chance that the Scottish queen would marry Prince Edward was now at an end. 
For a short period Lennox became involved in the government of Scotland, and there was even talk of his marrying the queen dowager -- he is described (by Robert Lindsay of Pitscottie) as having been 'a strong man of personage well shaped... fair and pleasant faced, with a good and manly countenance... and upright in his passage. Therefore at that time he was most pleasant for a lady' (Marshall, 135). Mary of Guise may have encouraged Lennox's hopes for political reasons, but she did nothing to satisfy them. Meanwhile Francois I continued to regard him as an ambassador of France, and when the French king finally sent representatives (Jacques de la Brosse and Jules de Menage) to Scotland they were strictly instructed to liaise with Lennox and to place all their trust in him. Thus they went to Dumbarton in late September and unloaded the entire contents (weapons, powder, presents, and money) of their seven vessels into the castle's keeping. Just how much was brought by them is not certain, but during their embassy they promised pensions of over 2500 crowns of the sun and their total costs came to 41,700 livres tournois. None of these moneys were ever seen again: Lennox was becoming a very rich and well-armed man. The money and supplies were not intended for the earl's personal use, however, and by commandeering them he was weakening the French cause in Scotland, faced as it was by a party backed by England. Lennox's reluctance to co-operate with potential allies in Scotland itself worked to the same effect. It is not clear how much policy lay behind his dissembling in his numerous interviews with Beaton and the queen dowager; he may not have known what to do and so he fished for advantage. Presumably it was in the hope of retaining his loyalty that Mary of Guise proposed that he should marry her daughter, Queen Mary, on condition of his handing over the French money and supporting the Franco-Scottish alliance. To the French ambassadors Lennox was cordiality itself, declaring that he was determined to die for Francois's service. It was not until November 1543 that the French appreciated how damaging to their cause his actions had become. 
The December parliament finally ousted Lennox from the governor's council, and in January 1544 the earl executed a breathtaking 'volte face', abandoning any pretence of alliance with Arran and Beaton, and joining with Angus, Glencairn, Gilbert Kennedy, third earl of Cassillis, and other supporters of Queen Mary's English marriage. These 'men of the west' mustered a force of retainers and marched in the dead of winter to force Arran to accept the betrothal. However, when they reached Leith, they found themselves vastly outnumbered by Arran's force. Consequently they had no alternative but to accept on 23 January a dictated acknowledgement of the governor's authority, the Greenlaw agreement, to lay hostages (such as George Douglas), to lay surety (Lennox's was $10,000 Scots), and to retire to their estates. In an eloquent letter of 13 February 1544 Francois tried to lure his former ambassador back to France, though one of Lennox's own agents in France was considerably blunter, telling the earl that 'you have had yourself marvellous evil to the Queen's Grace in many cases... which, my lord, will not fail to come to your great displeasure' (Marshall, 143). The French ambassadors exercised what charms they could muster, but by then it was too late. 
After their humiliation at Greenlaw, it was no surprise that Lennox and Glencairn should have turned to Henry VIII. They agreed on 17 March 1544 to deliver various strongholds, to promote Mary's marriage to Prince Edward, and to become protestants. Lennox's reward was to be the hand of Lady Margaret Douglas (1515-1578), Angus's daughter from his marriage with James IV's queen, Margaret Tudor, and land in England. Once Henry had prevailed in Scotland, Lennox was to be made governor. Meanwhile Lennox defied the government by placing a garrison in Glasgow steeple and in Dumbarton and with Glencairn gathered about him a small army. Arran then lost all patience and sent yet another army against him in April-May, savaging his retinue on Glasgow Moor and taking the city. 
Having lost his Glasgow outworks to Arran, Lennox realized that he had no viable options in Scotland. He therefore engaged in further negotiations with Henry and a formal pact was concluded on 17 May 1544. While Arran was distracted by Hertford's attack on Edinburgh, Lennox mustered a small navy, set his affairs in order, and slipped away from Dumbarton on 28 May; he arrived in Chester by sea on 7 June and proceeded to London. On 26 June his marriage contract was finalized, and three days later he married Lady Margaret Douglas at St James's Palace in the presence of Henry and Queen Katherine Howard. On 10 July he became an English subject. He was then granted lands at Temple Newsam in Yorkshire, worth 1700 marks yearly. In Scotland he was forfeited by parliament on 1 October 1545. The Lennoxes had two surviving sons, Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley, and Charles Stewart, later earl of Lennox, but their other six children died in infancy. 
Henry VIII had an unshakeable belief that Dumbarton, though strategically less important than Leith or Stirling, was the key to Scotland, and that Lennox's allegiance was crucial for securing it. Acting simultaneously now both as a political negotiator and as a mercenary, Lennox spent much time and effort trying unsuccessfully to bend his ally Angus to Henry's will. In July 1544 the English king sent him with sixteen vessels and 600 soldiers on a futile expedition against the west of Scotland, and in the following month he appointed him lieutenant for the north of England and the south of Scotland: a pointless combination of imaginary offices since the earl had insufficient territorial connections in either area. Another of Henry's fixations was the raising of the highlands. Arran had released from captivity Donald Dubh MacDonald, claimant to the lordship of the Isles. In 1545 Lennox, MacDonald, and other chiefs quickly hammered out an alliance with the English king. Lennox then organized a massive naval assault force which initially harboured at Carrickfergus, preparatory to an attack on the Clyde. 
But Henry then ordered Lennox to leave Ireland and liaise with Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, to advise him where best to lead the army with which in September 1545 he attacked the Scots and the French on the east marches. Lennox dutifully took ship to Chester and thence made his way to the other side of the country. Left without leadership, his laboriously collected maritime army disintegrated, and by the time he was able to return to base his force had dwindled considerably and drifted down to Dublin. Thus when in November Lennox battled his way up the Clyde, it was at the head of an army too small to accomplish anything of value. In 1546 Lennox again took to the water and attempted to regain Dumbarton. In May he approached the keeper, George Stirling of Gloret, with a demand for the surrender of his principal stronghold, backed up by a naval force. Gloret admitted Lennox and his brother Robert into the hold, but baulked at handing it over. Arran laid siege to the castle, hounded Lennox back to England, and then lured Robert Stewart away from his brother by restoring his ecclesiastical revenues. 
Following Henry VIII's death in 1547 Lennox supported the more intelligent strategy for Scotland of Edward Seymour, now protector and duke of Somerset. Based in Carlisle with Thomas Wharton, first Baron Wharton, he once again attacked the west of his country, pounding down Annan steeple, taking and fortifying Castlemilk, and capturing Dumfries. He returned in February 1548. After Angus defeated Wharton near Drumlanrig, however, Lennox had to retire in ignominy (his own secretary Thomas Bishop later sneered that the earl was '16 myles from ws sleping in his bed' when the action took place). Thereafter he took little part in English war plans during the rough wooing. 
Instead Lennox wrote and schemed. He and his wife maintained communication with family members: Lennox with his brother Robert, and his wife with her father, Angus. Lennox knew that Angus could no longer be persuaded to join an English alliance, but he carried on a lively correspondence with Angus's brother George Douglas, and between 1547 and 1550 he sought to secure the support of Glencairn. Glencairn was replete with promises but in 1548 became a pensioner of the French. Lennox also funded numerous spies within Scotland; as a result the English government was never ignorant as to what the French were doing or preparing to do. Considerable sums were paid out, some from his own pocket, in these information-gathering exercises. Lennox knew that the English position in Scotland was too weak to determine the course of events, but his espionage made him seem useful to Somerset, in particular his liaising with Patrick Hepburn, third earl of Bothwell, in 1549. One important aspect of his work during this period was the acquisition, execution, and forwarding of maps of Scotland. Throughout the rough wooings English efforts were seriously hindered by ignorance of Scotland's topography, resulting in the flowering of a remarkable cartographic collection. Many of these 'plates' were subsequently lost, but enough survived for William Cecil to amass a remarkable portfolio which he used until the 1590s. 
In 1551 Lennox was implicated in the activities of one Robert Stewart, who had come to London from France with a plan to murder the young Mary, queen of Scots, by poisoning her favourite sweet, frittered pears. Stewart was eventually arrested, gaoled, returned to France, and executed, but the ramifications of his bizarre scheme were extensive, and among those allegedly implicated was Lennox, who was so intimidated by the rumours of his involvement that he publicly renounced any desire or possibility of becoming king of Scots. He made no such statement concerning the possibility of his wife becoming queen of England, and privately he must have envisaged circumstances where his renunciation of the Scottish throne could be put aside. The Lennoxes and their sons were protected by their dynastic position; French, English, and Scots all kept in contact, however clandestinely, in the hope that circumstances might arise in which Lennox and his family might become useful. 
During the early 1550s Lennox lived in retirement from the court in Yorkshire. Despite his promise of 1544 to convert to protestantism, both he and his wife harboured Roman Catholic sympathies and did what they could to foster the faith under Edward VI. Their circumstances changed when Margaret's friend Mary I became queen of England in 1553. Now they found themselves feted, and the earl became an English privy councillor. Religious differences did not prevent John Elder, a highland Scot of a strong protestant hue, becoming drawn into Lennox's family circle. He became tutor to the earl's children and published a description of the ceremonies at Queen Mary's marriage to Philip of Spain in 1554. It was crafted as a report for Lennox's brother Robert. 
Following the accession of Elizabeth in 1558, the same dynastic considerations that had earlier made Lennox a figure to be reckoned with brought him under suspicion and led to the imprisonment of both earl and countess (who was as passionate in promoting the interests of her family as her husband) in the Tower of London. Their son Lord Darnley was a great-grandson through his mother of Henry VII, and the new queen looked without favour on potential rivals, or at any rate possible successors, to herself. In the policy of Anglo-Scottish alliance, which Elizabeth pursued from 1559, moreover, her principal allies in Scotland were Lennox's old rival James Hamilton, now duke of Chatelherault, and James Stewart, earl of Moray, who following the death of her father was a rival to the countess of Lennox for the earldom of Angus. Henry VIII's pledge to see Lennox restored to his lands and honours in Scotland was overlooked, and in 1561 the earl appealed to Mary, queen of Scots, for restoration, which merely deepened the suspicion in which he was held south of the border. In 1562 the English privy council subjected the actions of the Lennoxes to a narrow scrutiny, but nothing dangerous was found and by February 1563 both had been released from custody. 
In April 1564 Mary approved Lennox's restoration. Although Elizabeth was at first unwilling to let him go, the earl was eventually allowed to go north in September. Hindsight shows that from this stemmed the process whereby Darnley, too, travelled to Scotland and there won the hand of Queen Mary, so forging a potentially momentous union of two lines of descent from Margaret Tudor. But at the time it was by no means obvious that such a development would follow from Lennox's being allowed to go home. Elizabeth may well have won a pledge from Lennox that he would not act in a manner contrary to English interests, and in any case she was promoting Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, as a husband for Mary, and it probably did not occur to her that Darnley might be a rival to her own favourite. Only Dudley's refusal to consider marrying Mary gave Darnley his chance; when the latter returned to Scotland in February 1565 his arrival there aroused little interest. 
Meanwhile Lennox had thrown himself into achieving his restoration: he was pardoned in December 1564 and had his lands and honours restored on 1 October 1565. He also set about securing a place at the heart of government, and quickly built up a following of nobles and lairds, principally from among those excluded from office and patronage by the regime of Moray and the Hamiltons. Several of his supporters were protestants, showing that he did not allow religion to become a bar to the pursuit of power. His rehabilitation and advancement, reinforced by Mary's marriage to Darnley on 29 July, provoked the rising by Moray and his supporters in August known as the chaseabout raid, a rising which the queen suppressed without difficulty. Problems soon arose, however, when it looked as though the rebels would be rehabilitated. Lennox and his son had no desire to see their recent enemies restored, and accordingly fell out with the queen. The earl had gone along with the queen's recent reassertion of her Catholicism, attending mass on Candlemas day, but facing the possibility of exclusion from power he aligned himself with the malcontents, including both Darnley and the rebels of the previous year, who murdered Mary's secretary David Riccio on 9 March 1566. 
With the birth of the future James VI (1566-1625) on 19 June 1566 Lennox's star must have seemed firmly in the ascendant. But his son's was on the verge of sinking; Mary had never forgiven his involvement in the murder of Riccio, and Darnley was murdered, with or without her connivance, on 9 February 1567. Whether or not Lennox mourned the death of his son, convention required that he avenge it, and he had little choice but to pursue the fourth earl of Bothwell, almost universally named as the man who had engineered the deed, in the courts. On 24 March he formally charged Bothwell, but so comprehensively had the latter packed Edinburgh with his supporters that Lennox did not dare appear at the trial, with the result that the accused was acquitted. On 29 April Lennox once again took to the sea and removed to England, but he was able to return in July following Mary's defeat at Carberry on 15 June 1567 and then her internal exile at Lochleven. When she escaped and was at once supported by the Hamiltons, it was hardly surprising that Lennox should have joined the forces which defeated her at Langside on 12 May 1568. Thereafter he continued to hound the wife of his son's killer, giving evidence in person at the Westminster conference in November and December. 
Following Mary's enforced abdication James Stewart, earl of Moray, had become regent for the infant King James. But he was assassinated at Linlithgow on 23 January 1570, leaving no obvious successor. Despite Queen Elizabeth's strong misgivings, Lennox was chosen, even though he seems to have been in England at the time. He crossed the border in May, in a force from the Berwick garrison led by Sir William Drury, though his wife was detained in England. At first Lennox was appointed lieutenant-general of Scotland, but on 12 July he was formally elected regent. He was a highly divisive choice: he was bitterly opposed by the Hamiltons, and by the associates of Bothwell whom he had continued to prosecute for his son's murder, as well as by supporters of Queen Mary who sought her restoration. A bitter civil dispute developed between the king's party, which aspired to govern in the name of James VI, and the queen's party, which conducted a rival administration from Edinburgh Castle in Mary's name. The queen's adherents held a 'parliament' in Linlithgow on 10 August renouncing Lennox's authority, and the sixth earl of Huntly, who was prominent among them, led an army against the regent but was utterly routed at Brechin. Lennox then issued a proclamation against Huntly's 'calumnies' that he was a closet Englishman, marched his forces to just above Stirling, and captured the castle of Doune. In September a six-month truce was brokered (largely through English intervention), but in the following February hostilities resumed; Lennox defeated a force of Hamiltons, took Paisley, and finally recaptured Dumbarton on 2 April 1571. He forced his way into Leith with a small army on 11 May, and then on 14 May entered the Edinburgh Canongate, where he held the so-called 'creeping' parliament, whose members crawled about their business under fire from the Marians in the castle. When parliament reassembled at Stirling, it was disrupted by an attack of the queen's party. Lennox was captured in this brawl but then escaped; however, he was eventually fatally wounded from behind by a Captain James Calder. He died in Stirling Castle on the afternoon of 4 September 1571. Before he expired he made a rambling speech, forgiving his enemies, summing up his life, and beseeching the nobility of the realm to care for and protect James VI. Lastly he entreated John Erskine, earl of Mar, to convey all his love to his wife. He was interred in the Chapel Royal at Stirling, a fitting last resting place for a Stewart. Lennox was succeeded in his titles and estates by James VI, but in 1572 these were granted to his surviving son Charles, the father of Lady Arabella Stuart (1575-1616). 
Few Europeans had so many different homes in so many different countries as the thirteenth earl of Lennox. In 1537 he became French; in 1544 he was English; in 1564 he was Scottish again. Quite possibly the first man to own land on both sides of the Anglo-Scottish border since the fourteenth century's wars of independence, he may well have enjoyed a uniquely 'British' perspective on events in the two countries. He was certainly blessed with one critical virtue: perseverance. When berated by Elizabeth for wanting to return to Scotland, he retorted that he was only 'travelling for his right', which he had been doing throughout his mature life. His effort was crowned with success when in 1570 he became what Arran had been -- regent: not king, but James VI could have died any afternoon. Such a triumph over his old rival after twenty-six years must have been sweet, even if it was agonizingly short-lived. Opinions concerning Lennox's sagacity and political shrewdness vary. Buchanan was an ardent admirer and composed a handsome epitaph on his death. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' havered between condemning his 'haughty manners' and his pretensions, and praising his occasional wisdom. But Lennox was not just a 'strong man', as Pitscottie described him; he was the heir to his family's lands and claims, and his desire to protect the interests of his dynasty only increased when he had first two sons of his own and then a king for a grandson. 


@@@@@


doc= 26498


Stewart, Matthew (1717-1785), mathematician, was born at Rothesay in the Isle of Bute on 28 June 1717, the second son of Dugald Stewart (died 1753), minister of Rothesay, and his wife, Janet Bannatyne (died 1761). He was the father of the much more famous Dugald Stewart, the leading Scottish philosopher of the early nineteenth century. Educated at the town grammar school, he entered Glasgow University in 1734. There he enjoyed the friendship of Francis Hutcheson (1694-1746) and of Robert Simson, the mathematician, to whom he owed his marked predilection for the Greek geometricians. The interest in the rediscovery of Greek geometry led Simson and Stewart to develop an extremely innovative approach, and in the nineteenth century Michel Chasles ranked the two among the most important contributors to the progress of geometry. In 1741 Stewart proceeded to Edinburgh University and studied under Colin MacLaurin but regularly corresponded with Simson on the subject of ancient geometrical methods. Simson was at that time engaged in restoring Euclid's porisms, and Stewart pursued the same subject in a different direction. In 1746 he published 'Some General Theorems of Considerable Use in the Higher Parts of Mathematics'. Several of these theorems were in fact porisms, but Stewart avoided the name through fear of seeming to anticipate his friend. 
On 6 May 1744 Stewart was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Dunoon, and on 9 May 1745, on the presentation of the duke of Argyll, he was ordained minister of Rosneath, Dunbartonshire, which charge, however, he resigned on being elected professor of mathematics at Edinburgh University in the beginning of September 1747, succeeding the recently deceased Colin MacLaurin. On 20 May 1750 he married Marjorie (died 1771), the only daughter of Archibald Stewart, writer to the signet. Dugald Stewart was their only son to survive infancy. 
In 1756 Stewart published, in the second volume of the 'Essays and Observations' of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, a solution of the so-called 'Kepler's problem' (which required the determination of the area of a focal sector of the ellipse). In 1761, pursuing his plan of introducing the simplicity of ancient geometrical demonstrations into astronomic investigations, he published 'Tracts, Physical and Mathematical, Containing an Explication of Several Points in Physical Astronomy', in which he developed a treatment of centripetal forces in a series of propositions requiring only a knowledge of the elements of plane geometry and of conic sections. He even tried to deal (employing geometrical methods similar to those of Newton's 'Principia mathematica') with the difficult 'three body problem' (the study of the trajectories of three masses in mutual gravitational interaction) that had defeated many eighteenth-century mathematicians. A theorem in which he deduced the motion of the moon's apsides attained an accuracy far surpassing that reached by Newton. The result confirmed that arrived at through algebraical methods by Charles Walmesley in 1749. In 1763 Stewart issued a supplement entitled 'The Distance of the Sun from the Earth Determined by the Theory of Gravity', in which he computed the distance at 29,875 semi-diameters of the earth, a result whose inaccuracy was due to the difficulty of treating so complex a subject geometrically. The nature of his fault was first pointed out in 1769 by John Dawson in a pamphlet entitled 'Four Propositions', and in 1771 John Landen published an independent refutation of Stewart's conclusions. 
In 1756 Stewart was created DD of Glasgow University. He was a founder member of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, being elected a fellow of the first meeting of its physical class on 3 November 1783. On 21 June 1764 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. In 1772 the failing state of his health compelled him to retire to his estate at Catrine in Ayrshire, and from then the duties of his mathematical professorship were performed by his son, Dugald, who in 1775 was elected joint professor. Stewart died on 23 January 1785. 


@@@@@


doc= 26499


Stewart, Murdoch, second duke of Albany (c.1362-1425), magnate, was the eldest son of Robert Stewart, first duke of Albany (d. 1420), son of Robert II (1316-1390), and only son of Albany's first marriage, to Margaret Graham, countess of Menteith (died in or before 1380). He was made justiciar north of Forth in 1389 in succession to his uncle Alexander Stewart, earl of Buchan and lord of Badenoch, as part of his father's attack on that magnate. In 1391 or 1392 Murdoch married Isabella Stewart (died 1458/9), eldest daughter and coheir of Duncan, eighth earl of Lennox. The terms of their marriage included the entailing of the Lennox on Murdoch and his heirs. As the heir to three earldoms, those of Fife and Menteith, which his father held, as well as that of Lennox, Murdoch had glittering prospects. In 1402, however, his situation altered drastically. Leading a force drawn from Albany's following in central Scotland to support the army led by the fourth earl of Douglas, he was captured at Homildon. 
Stewart was handed over to Henry IV by the earl of Northumberland and remained a prisoner for the next thirteen years. He was largely detained in the Tower of London, in company for part of the time with his captive king, James I, and he sealed letters sent to Scotland by James in 1412. However, while James was left in prison until 1424, Stewart's release was negotiated in exchange for the return of the exile Henry Percy, second earl of Northumberland, in 1415. The disparity of their treatment may have rankled with James, and certainly suggests that the priority of the duke of Albany, the governor of Scotland in the king's absence, was the release of his heir. From the English point of view, Henry V's motive was probably to ensure the stability of his northern borders, at a time of renewed war with France. The absence of Murdoch had caused Albany to worry about the future of his family's position. The duke was in his sixties, and promoted first his younger son, John Stewart, earl of Buchan, and then, as they reached adulthood, Murdoch's sons as potential successors. Murdoch's eldest son, Robert, appeared as a regular councillor of the governor from 1407, while his younger brother Walter was associated with their other grandfather, Duncan, earl of Lennox, also an old man. These moves protected the rights of Murdoch and his family in his lands, but also had the effect of creating expectations of regional power in his sons. Robert was referred to as Robert Stewart of Fife and Walter held the title of Lennox. Both must have built up significant influence in Albany's following, which their father, absent since 1402, would be unable to match. Although Robert of Fife died before Albany, in 1419, Walter's personal connections within the Lennox were to be a serious problem for Murdoch's authority when he became governor. 
Murdoch succeeded to his father's lands on the first duke's death in September 1420. By late October he had also succeeded to the office of governor of Scotland. His reputation as governor has always been low, contrasting with the praise heaped on his father. The view of both men derives from the contemporary opinion of Walter Bower, who described Murdoch as 'too slack in the exercise of this office' and unable to control his 'arrogant' sons (Bower, 8.135). Bower's view ignores Murdoch's success in maintaining Scottish interests abroad and in keeping the support of a number of significant magnates, most importantly Alexander Stewart, earl of Mar, the lieutenant of the governors in the north, with whom Murdoch concluded an indenture in late 1420. Despite these achievements, though, Bower's verdict reflects Murdoch's inability to maintain the Albany regime, a failure due to two factors. 
First, Murdoch could not hold together the affinity which the first duke had created in central Scotland. The personal standing of his father, a major figure in Scottish politics since the 1360s, was impossible to recreate, and Murdoch was hampered further by the challenge to his authority mounted by his son Walter. The initial dispute between the two revolved around the succession to Murdoch's estates. Walter seems to have been intended as heir to Duncan, earl of Lennox, but following the death of his elder brother, Robert, he now stood to inherit his father's lands as well. An attempt by Murdoch to make Walter abandon his claims to the Lennox to his younger brother Alexander led to open conflict between the governor and his heir. Walter won the support of Earl Duncan and of numerous other members of the Albany affinity, which severely weakened Murdoch's power and led to later stories about his failure to control his own sons. 
The second factor was the dissent that stemmed from the fourth earl of Douglas. Douglas had probably only ever tolerated the Albany governorship in return for a free hand in Scotland south of Forth. In such a scenario Douglas's adoption of grander titles for himself and his search for international status would have symbolized his limited acceptance of Albany Stewart authority. More worrying were Douglas's approaches to England concerning the return of James I. The death of Henry V in 1422 made the English ready to free their captive on the right terms. Although Murdoch may have delayed negotiations on the issue throughout early 1423, support for James's release, even from Murdoch's own councillors, forced the governor to enter talks in August. While this satisfied Douglas, it alienated Walter, whose ambitions of inheriting the governorship were dashed. Walter was clearly on the brink of open rebellion, seeking French military intervention, before a settlement was reached with his father. Murdoch had meanwhile been preparing his own future by consolidating his ties with Mar and with his brother Buchan, the leader of the Scots in French service. Appreciating the problems ahead, the duke was making sensible plans to stave off royal hostility. 
In the first months of James I's reign Murdoch appeared to have achieved his goal. James's arrest of Walter was in Murdoch's interest as much as the king's. The favour shown to Murdoch's third and favourite son, Alexander, suggests the duke had survived the transition of power safely. Even his withdrawal from the council from June 1424 may have been part of a deliberate maintenance of a low profile. The death of Buchan and the destruction of his army at Verneuil in 1424 changed this. Murdoch had lost the insurance of a returning Scottish army. The king reacted by taking control of Buchan's lands and arresting Duncan of Lennox and other supporters of Walter. By the end of 1424 James had begun to interfere in Murdoch's lands. Criticism of the king in parliament in March 1425 may have been promoted by Murdoch in response. Perhaps he hoped to win backing from the estates, but James had eroded his support beyond repair. On 21 March Murdoch, his wife, Isabella, and his son Alexander were arrested and his principal castles of Doune and Falkland were seized. The escape of Murdoch's youngest son, James the Fat, to the Lennox to lead a local rebellion merely provided the king with the justification to execute all the male leaders of the Albany family. Murdoch was tried on 25 May by James I and an assize of great magnates, indicating the extent to which royal aggression and promises had isolated him. Even his ally Mar joined in passing the sentence. The following day he was executed, traditionally on the Heading Hill to the north of Stirling Castle. Along with his sons Walter and Alexander, he was buried in the Dominican friary in Stirling. 
Without his father's status and challenged by his own family, Murdoch found it impossible to prolong the Albany regime in the face of English readiness to release the adult James I. Sensible attempts to ensure his family's survival suggest he was no fool, but rather a man facing too many pressures on his position to survive. 


@@@@@


doc= 26500


Stewart, Patrick, second earl of Orkney (c.1566/7-1615), magnate and rebel, was the second son and fourth of the eight legitimate children of Robert Stewart, first earl of Orkney (1533-1593), and his wife, Jean Kennedy (died 1598). His birth date can be arrived at only by conjecture. He was placed for a time under the tutelage of Sir Patrick Waus of Barnbarroch, his godfather, and in 1582 received the 'commenda' of the priory of Whithorn, previously held by his uncle, James V's illegitimate son Robert Stewart 'secundus'. Neither Patrick nor his elder brother, Henry Stewart, master of Orkney, enjoyed good relations with their father. Henry, who died in 1585, had been suspected of dealings with Robert's enemy the earl of Caithness, and Robert was not anxious that Patrick should cut any sort of figure at court, as he might 'rather do evill thair nor guid' (Anderson, 'Black Patie', 17). 
The troubles which Robert Stewart experienced at the hands of Sir Lewis Bellenden and Sir John Maitland of Thirlestane in the late 1580s created difficulties for Patrick himself for a time, but James VI took an interest in him, created him lord of Shetland ('c'.1590), and granted him a tack (lease) of the revenues of those islands to sustain him at court. By the time of his father's death in 1593 he had effectively been advanced to the dignity of earl, though he was not to receive charters of the earldom and bishopric lands for some years. He aimed high in matrimony, sending an envoy to plead his suit with the sister of Maurice of Nassau, the stadholder of the Netherlands, but had to settle for a dispute-resolving match with Margaret Livingston (died in or after 1619), the widow of his father's old adversary Sir Lewis Bellenden of Auchnoull. They were married on 17 August 1596; the king was present at the festivities, though Stewart had already begun to antagonize him by supporting the queen in quarrels over the upbringing of Prince Henry. 
During the 1590s opposition to Stewart built up in Orkney and Shetland as he sought to reappropriate land previously alienated by his father. His adversaries included his own brothers John Stewart, master of Orkney (who was alleged to have employed witchcraft against him), and the illegitimate James Stewart of Graemsay. Also involved were members of the class of Scottish lairds who had grown up since the feuing-off of the bishopric lands under Bishop Adam Bothwell in the early 1560s and Patrick's father in the 1580s. Prominent among the Orcadians were Robert Monteith of Egilsay, as well as members of the Balfour family and the Sinclairs of Eday, who had financial backing from the earl of Caithness. In Shetland, Patrick's uncle Laurence Bruce of Cultmalindie was the most determined of his opponents. These disputes between the earl and his clients were ostensibly resolved in 1597 by arbitration and a general finding of sureties by all concerned. In 1600 he was granted charters of the earldom and bishopric. 
This was simply a signal for Stewart to pursue with even more vigour a fatally extravagant way of life, surrounding himself with a pretentious retinue and embarking on a magnificent building programme, at the expense of the island lairds and also his own purse. Monteith of Egilsay, Bruce of Cultmalindie, and the rest appealed against his activities and finally reached the ear of the king, who became more and more angered by Stewart's continued refusal to pay heed to his critics. Attempts to curb his excesses through the advice of Sir John Arnot of Barswick and the appointment of a strong bishop of Orkney in James Law came to nothing, and he was eventually warded in Edinburgh Castle. He spent the last seven years of his life in increasing degrees of restriction and humiliation as, 'drownit in debt' (Anderson, 'Black Patie', 80), his supplies of cash petered out to nothing. 
Stewart's final downfall came slowly, however, since all, from the king downwards, were extremely reluctant to humiliate him totally. He was invited to surrender the earldom in exchange for the keepership of one of the royal palaces, but refused. The end came with his execution, an event which was made possible only because of his curious refusal at the last to distance himself from the rebellion of Robert Stewart, the illegitimate son of his liaison with Marjorie Sinclair. Robert had made two attempts to take over the strongholds of Orkney -- the earl's palaces in Birsay and Kirkwall and the cathedral and castle in Kirkwall -- in 1612 and again in 1614. On the second occasion he was for a time successful, and the earl of Caithness led an expedition to put down the rebellion. Caithness found Kirkwall Castle a difficult house to attack, but Robert was a weak and indecisive leader and in the end the rebels surrendered their strongholds one by one, the castle being last. 
Robert Stewart and several of his followers were executed. While the earl had up to this point been extremely adept at covering up his complicity in Robert's actions, the execution of his son seems to have broken his nerve. He confessed that he had ordered Robert to rise in rebellion and threw himself on the mercy of the king. He was sentenced to death and executed by the maiden, an early form of guillotine, on 6 February 1615 at the Mercat Cross, Edinburgh. Stories of his being too ignorant to repeat the Lord's prayer appear fanciful, and it is more likely that he required comfort and counsel before he could face execution, which was postponed by a couple of days. 
Stewart's fall brought indigence to many, including his wife, and an end to the Stewart earldom. His brother John Stewart was created earl of Carrick, the name apparently deriving from the place of that name in Eday, but he failed in his attempts to gain possession of his brother's former lands. 
Although Patrick Stewart had no legitimate children, he has cast a long shadow over the northern isles. On the one hand there are the visible traces of his rule, his buildings. These, the castle of Scalloway and the earl's palace in Kirkwall, are thought to have been the work of Andrew Crawford, his master of works. The palace is a triumph, described as 'possibly the most mature and accomplished piece of Renaissance architecture left in Scotland' ('Inventory of... Orkney', 142). On the other there has been a long tradition of his reputation as Black Patie, a symbol of evil and misrule. Much of the detail of the Black Patie legend is fanciful, but it is strong enough for Stewart's name to reappear from time to time, in uncomplimentary terms, in modern political discourse within the islands. 


@@@@@


doc= 26501


Stewart, Patrick (1832-1865), army officer, second son of James Stewart (died 19 Sept 1877) of Cairnsmore, Kirkcudbrightshire, and of his wife, Elizabeth (died 18 April 1872), only daughter of Dr Gilbert Macleod of the East India Company, was born at Cairnsmore on 28 January 1832. He was educated at Dr Cowan's school, The Grange, Sunderland, and at Perry Hill, Sydenham, and entered the East India Company's military college, Addiscombe College, in August 1848. He passed out at the head of his term and won the Pollock medal. He was commissioned second lieutenant in the Bengal Engineers on 14 June 1850. His further commissions were: lieutenant (1 August 1854), second captain (27 August 1858), and brevet major (28 August 1858). 
After the usual course at Chatham, Stewart arrived at Calcutta on 13 October 1852. In May 1853 he was appointed acting superintendent of electric telegraphs during the absence of Dr William Brooke O'Shaughnessy in Europe. The establishment of telegraphs in India had just begun, and Stewart's work was the construction of lines from Calcutta to Lahore and from Agra to Indore, some 1700 miles. The energy and rapidity with which he carried it on won great praise. In November 1853 he took up the duty of aide-de-camp to the lieutenant-governor of the North-Western Provinces. An ardent sportsman, he had ample opportunities for hunting, and experienced many accidents. Lady Canning observed on the occasion of one of his frequent visits to Calcutta: 'We have had Lady Selkirk's friend of the electric telegraph here -- Lieutenant P. Stewart. He has been mauled by a tiger, hugged by a bear, kicked off by wild asses, and lately had the cholera.' 
From January 1854 to July 1856 Stewart was employed in the Punjab on public works. He then again officiated as head of the telegraph department, and was in Ceylon on telegraph business when the mutiny caused him to hasten back to Calcutta. Calling at Madras on 9 June 1857, he found that most important messages for the governor-general had arrived there from the Punjab and the North-Western Provinces, the line having been cut at Cawnpore. These he took with him by sea to Calcutta, and on his own responsibility ordered the immediate commencement of a coast telegraph line from Madras to Calcutta. 
From Calcutta, Stewart went on 18 June to Benares and Allahabad, and lent valuable assistance to Colonel John Neill. With 200 Sikhs and some irregular cavalry he crossed the Ganges and destroyed a rebel stronghold on 25 June, inspected the telegraph line accompanying Major Renaud's force, and returned to Calcutta on 9 July to hurry on the new coast line. A few weeks later he was again at Benares constructing, with the assistance of Lieutenant Limond RE, and many thousand Indian workmen, a fortified position at the Raj Ghat, which he had himself suggested to Lord Canning. In six weeks a position was fortified capable of holding 5000 men if necessary, but easily defended by 500. Guns and stores were placed in it, and Benares was made secure. This done, he was back in Calcutta in the middle of September on telegraph duty. 
Stewart accompanied Windham's force in October for more than 300 miles, and went on in advance to arrange for transport. On 2 November he was with Sir Colin Campbell at Allahabad. He was attached to the headquarters staff during the relief of Lucknow, and was mentioned in dispatches. He accompanied Sir Colin to Cawnpore, and took part in the battle of 6 December 1857 and in the pursuit of the Gwalior contingent. On 8 December he returned to Calcutta on urgent telegraph duties, and gave Lord Canning a detailed account of the relief of Lucknow. 
On 18 January 1858 O'Shaughnessy, who had returned to India, highly praised Stewart's services during his absence and recommended him for some substantial reward. Despite bad health Stewart accompanied Canning to Allahabad at the end of January. He was then deputy superintendent of telegraphs, but was attached to the staff of the commander-in-chief in India and given charge of the 'Times' correspondent, William Howard Russell, who wrote that Stewart's duty was to put the end of the telegraph wire into Sir Colin's hand wherever he went. No sooner were headquarters established than the post and the wire were established also. It was the first time that the telegraph had been made to keep pace with the advance of an army in the field, and Stewart had many a narrow escape from the enemy's cavalry. He was honourably mentioned in the governor-general's order of 5 April 1858 for his services at the siege and capture of Lucknow, and received a brevet majority. 
Ill-health compelled Stewart to return home. In 1859 he was employed in various scientific enquiries in connection with telegraph cables. He married in August 1860 Jane (died 28 Dec 1895), daughter of Colonel McDouall of Logan, Wigtownshire; they had no children. He returned to India at the end of the year. In the following year he was employed on a commission to ascertain the cause of the great mortality from cholera, and visited many parts of the country. The report of the commission was rendered in January 1862. 
In February 1862 Stewart was sent to Persia in connection with the construction of a proposed telegraph through that country. In June sickness compelled him to leave Tehran, and he went home through Russia. In England he was entrusted with the completion of the arrangements for the Persian Gulf cable. In November 1863 he went to Bombay as director-general of the government Indo-European telegraph, laid the cable from Gwadar to Fao, returned to Bombay, and in August 1864 went to Constantinople and made successful arrangements with the Turkish government. For these services he was made CB. His achievements were described in Sir Frederick Goldsmid's 'Telegraph and Travel' (1874), which contained a memoir of his life. He died at Misseri's Hotel, Constantinople, on 16 January 1865, and was buried the following day at the Scutari cemetery. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26502


Stewart, Robert, first duke of Albany (c.1340-1420), prince and governor of Scotland, was the third son of Robert II (1316-1390), son of Walter Stewart ['see under 'Stewart family (per. c.1110-c.1350)], and his first wife, Elizabeth Mure (died before 1355), daughter of Adam Mure of Rowallan. The younger Robert was probably born about 1340, since he was described as an octogenarian when he died. His parents were not in a canonically legitimate marriage at the time of his birth. It was only in 1347 that the elder Robert sought a retrospective papal legitimation for the children born of his relationship with Elizabeth, and the couple's formal marriage ceremony may not have occurred until 1349. In 1361 the younger Robert found a prestigious and lucrative wife in Margaret Graham, countess of Menteith in her own right, the papal dispensation for the union being obtained on 9 September of that year. The marriage was certainly completed before 14 May 1363, when Robert was styled 'of Menteith'. 
On 22 February 1371 David II died, and his nephew, Robert's father, hereditary steward of Scotland, succeeded to the throne as Robert II. As a member of the new royal dynasty Robert, who soon became tenth earl of Menteith, was the beneficiary of considerable patronage in the years after 1371. One of the most significant gains he made, however, came as the result of a deal he concluded on 30 March 1371 with Isabel, countess of Fife. By the terms of the arrangement the childless countess recognized Robert as her heir in the earldom of Fife in accordance with an agreement made in 1315 between Isabel's father, Duncan, earl of Fife, and Robert I. The transaction of 1315 had stipulated that on the failure of Duncan's legitimate heirs the earldom of Fife was to go to Robert I and the king's lawful heirs, although it was also stated that the earldom could not be held directly by the king because the earl of Fife played a key role in the enthronement of Scottish monarchs. If Robert I died without a lawful heir to whom the earldom could be assigned, then it was to revert to Earl Duncan's heir Allan, son of Allan, earl of Menteith. Robert fulfilled all the conditions of the 1315 indenture, being both the third son of Robert II, Robert I's grandson and heir, and also the husband of Margaret, countess of Menteith, the grandniece and heir of the Allan of Menteith named in the agreement. Unfortunately, in 1370 Isabel had been persuaded to resign her rights of lordship over Fife to John Dunbar, a favourite of David II. Dunbar contested Robert's claims to the earldom of Fife for a year after the arrangement of March 1371. Finally, during a parliament of March 1372, and certainly before 8 April 1372, Robert became twelfth earl of Fife following a settlement with John Dunbar, which saw Dunbar compensated with a grant of the northern earldom of Moray. 
Fife played a leading role in his father's administration of the realm after 1371, becoming a regular witness to royal charters and on 7 February 1373 receiving a grant of the hereditary constableship of Stirling Castle. On 4 April 1373 his position in the royal succession was confirmed when a parliament at Scone approved the creation of a male entail to govern the descent of the kingship, naming the five sons of Robert II with his first and second wives in order of seniority. The heir to the throne, Fife's elder brother, John, earl of Carrick (the future Robert III), had no son in 1373, while Fife's marriage to Margaret Graham had produced a male heir, Murdoch. From 1373 until the birth of Carrick's eldest son, David Stewart, in 1378 Fife and his son were second and third in line to the throne. Fife's importance in central government was also reflected in his appointment as chamberlain, the chief financial officer of the crown, after the assassination of the previous office-holder, Sir John Lyon, on 4 November 1382. Robert II may have chosen Fife for this post to set up a powerful counter-weight inside the royal administration to the influence of the king's eldest son, Carrick. Lyon's assassin, Sir James Lindsay of Crawford, was a member of Carrick's affinity. Fife was to hold the chamberlainship until 12 March 1407, when it was granted to his son John. 
In the autumn of 1384 Carrick organized a bloodless coup against his ageing father and was appointed guardian of the kingdom by a general council which met in Edinburgh in November 1384. Fife retained the office of chamberlain, however, and maintained a prominent role in Anglo-Scottish warfare and diplomacy during the 1380s. In particular, he was credited with the leadership of Scottish forces which raided the English west marches in 1385 and 1388, although his military record and abilities seem to have been exaggerated as a result of a propaganda battle between him and his elder brother from 1388 to 1392. Their rivalry entered a new phase during 1388 after the death of Carrick's principal political ally, James, second earl of Douglas, at the battle of Otterburn on 5 August that year. James died childless and a struggle over his vast inheritance broke out between his sister's husband, Sir Malcolm Drummond, and James's kinsman Archibald Douglas, lord of Galloway, who claimed the bulk of the earl's estates by virtue of a charter of entail dating from 1342. While Carrick supported Drummond's rights, Fife backed the powerful lord of Galloway. Carrick's position as guardian was undermined by the loss of key adherents and supporters at Otterburn, and also through fighting within his own affinity over the Douglas inheritance. In addition, Carrick seems to have been left lame (and perhaps with more severe injuries) after being kicked by a horse, a condition which was used by his opponents to question his ability to perform the role of guardian, particularly with regard to leading the military defence of the kingdom. On 1 December 1388 Carrick was forced to surrender the guardianship of the kingdom to Fife during a general council at Edinburgh. 
Fife's guardianship after December 1388 was marked by the triumph of Archibald, lord of Galloway, in the matter of the Douglas inheritance and by a dramatic expansion of the political and territorial interests of Fife and his family in the north of the kingdom, an advance achieved at the expense of his younger brother, Alexander Stewart, earl of Buchan and lord of Ross and Badenoch. On 7 April 1389 the first general council of Fife's guardianship ratified the entail by which Archibald Douglas claimed a substantial part of the inheritance of the second earl of Douglas; by 10 April Archibald was using the title earl of Douglas. Fife's personal support for Archibald's cause is suggested by the fact that Douglas's chief rival, Sir Malcolm Drummond, refused to attend the April 1389 council without an explicit assurance of his personal safety from Fife. While Archibald Douglas flourished, Fife's younger brother, Buchan, whose exercise of royal judicial offices in the north had aroused considerable resentment, suffered a catastrophic decline in power and influence. On 11 December 1388, within ten days of his becoming guardian, Fife removed Buchan from the office of justiciar north of Forth. His replacement, appointed on 2 April 1389, was Fife's own son Murdoch Stewart. Fife also encouraged the divorce action initiated by Buchan's estranged wife, Euphemia, countess of Ross, against her husband. The annulment of the marriage in 1392 saw Buchan lose his rights to lordship in the earldom of Ross, control of which passed to the countess and her son from her first marriage, Alexander Leslie, who was contracted in marriage to Fife's daughter. 
On 19 April 1390 Robert II died. Fife's elder brother Carrick, who had been declared incapable of governing the kingdom as a royal lieutenant in December 1388, succeeded to the throne as Robert III, but Fife's position as guardian was maintained because of the new king's continued incapacity. This may well have contributed to the attacks on the burghs of Elgin and Forres by his arch-rival, the earl of Buchan, in the summer of 1390. During the early 1390s Fife arranged a series of marriage alliances with prominent families in Argyll and Lennox which strengthened his hold on the south-western highlands. In particular, in February 1392 Fife concluded a deal with Duncan, earl of Lennox, by which his son Murdoch was to marry Isabella, Lennox's eldest daughter and the heir to the earldom of Lennox. 
In February 1393 Fife's guardianship was terminated, possibly because of the increasing influence in royal government of Robert III's young son and heir, David, earl of Carrick (later duke of Rothesay). On 8 February Fife was granted a royal pension of 200 merks in return for his service to Carrick. The pension partly offset the loss of the 1000 merk annuity associated with the office of guardian. Despite the earl of Carrick's growing authority and the withdrawal of the guardianship, Fife remained a hugely important figure in the kingdom. The status of Fife and his nephew, as the most influential and active members of the royal family, exercising many of the functions of government for the infirm Robert III, was reflected in their joint elevation to ducal rank in a ceremony at the abbey of Scone on 28 April 1398. Robert took the title duke of Albany, which appears to derive from the ancient name given to Scotland north of the Forth, while David became duke of Rothesay. The titles were bestowed during the course of a general council in Perth at which the two new royal dukes were assigned the task of leading royal forces in an expedition against Donald of the Isles in the summer of 1398. The April general council also witnessed direct criticism of Robert III's role in government. As a result of King Robert's incapacity, Rothesay was officially appointed lieutenant of the realm for a three-year period in January 1399, to act with the advice of a council of twenty-one named men, headed by his uncle. 
During 1401 Albany became alarmed by Rothesay's increasingly independent and aggressive approach to the administration of the realm. Late in that year he plotted the arrest of Rothesay, who was subsequently imprisoned in Albany's castle of Falkland, where he died in suspicious circumstances the following spring (25-27 March 1402). Many clearly felt that Albany had arranged for his nephew to be starved to death, although Robert and his supporters argued that Rothesay had died of natural causes and that his initial arrest was justified by the danger his political aggression presented to the common good. Later chronicle and literary portrayals of Rothesay's death did much to secure Albany's reputation as the archetypal 'wicked uncle'. A general council held in May 1402, however, officially exonerated Albany and the fourth earl of Douglas of any responsibility for Rothesay's death and declared that the heir to the throne had died through God's will and not otherwise. In the same council Albany was appointed lieutenant of the kingdom for two years as successor to his dead nephew, a commission which was renewed for a further two years in May 1404. In addition, Albany took on the role of justiciar north of Forth after the capture of his son Murdoch, the previous office-holder, at the battle of Homildon Hill on 14 September 1402. 
Albany's activity as lieutenant after 1402 was largely concerned with the north of the kingdom, although he led an army to the relief of Cocklaws tower in Teviotdale during 1403. The chronicler Bower relates a highly favourable tale of Albany's part in the Cocklaws campaign. Faced with an assembly of Scottish magnates chastened by the disastrous defeat at Homildon Hill and unwilling to commit themselves to an attempt to relieve the Scottish garrison in Cocklaws, Albany roused them to action with a stirring speech: 'I vow to God and St Fillan that if I am spared I shall be there on the appointed day even if no one comes with me save my boy Patrick as rider of my warhorse' (Bower, 8.55). In the north Albany's principal aim was to uphold and exercise the rights of his infant granddaughter, Euphemia Leslie, in the earldom of Ross, and to prevent the earldom from falling into the hands of Donald, lord of the Isles, the husband of Euphemia's aunt. 
During the early months of 1406 a new crisis affected the family of Albany's incapacitated brother, Robert III. David Fleming, one of the guardians of King Robert's only remaining son, James, earl of Carrick (the future James I), was killed in a conflict with James Douglas of Balvenie. At the same time the king's ill health prompted concern about arrangements for the young earl of Carrick after his father's death. The king and his advisers were clearly unwilling to let James fall into the custody of his uncle Albany, and made secret plans for the heir to the throne to be sent to the French king for safe keeping until his minority was ended. But on 22 March 1406 James was captured at sea by English ships and delivered into the custody of Henry IV. Shortly afterwards, on 4 April 1406, Robert III died. 
In July 1406 Albany, in the absence of the late king's son and heir, was appointed governor of the Scottish kingdom by a general council at Perth. Albany's governorship (1406-20) has traditionally been seen as a period in which the duke, lacking the natural authority of a king, was routinely defied by his fellow great magnates, leading to endemic political disorder and the systematic plundering of royal resources and revenues. The dissipation of royal authority was also said to have been advanced by Albany's use of his power to promote the interests of his own family and retainers. Moreover, his issuing of charters dated by the year of his governorship, rather than by the regnal year of James I, along with his failure to obtain the release of his nephew from English captivity, has been used to suggest that he harboured ambitions to usurp his nephew and secure the position of his immediate family as Scotland's royal dynasty. 
The view of Albany as a weak and ineffective governor with little commitment to the defence of royal resources has been thoroughly rejected in recent analysis. During his governorship and, indeed, during his numerous spells as guardian of the kingdom from 1388 Albany was noted as a strong and active administrator and an able and energetic war leader. Scottish chroniclers writing in or shortly after his lifetime are universally positive in their appraisal of the duke's personal qualities and his governance of the realm. Bower comments on the 'honourable fashion' in which Albany conducted himself as governor and notes: 'If... outrages were committed by powerful men in the kingdom, he patiently hid his feelings for the time being. He knew how to put things of this kind right wisely enough when the time came and to secure reparation as he wished. (Bower, 8.133-5)' Andrew Wyntoun produced a similarly glowing obituary for the governor, emphasizing his status as a descendant of the eleventh-century royal saint Queen Margaret and suggesting that his conduct resembled that of 'a mychty King', while an anonymous chronicler of the 1390s presents Robert, then earl of Fife, as an accomplished and skilful general. The record evidence generally supports the chronicle view that, within the restrictions of his position as governor, Albany remained a remarkably energetic ruler despite his advancing years. In 1412, for example, he personally led royal forces into the west to extract oaths of submission and hostages from Donald, lord of the Isles. His action was prompted by events of the previous year when Donald's continuing struggle with Albany over the earldom of Ross had encouraged the lord of the Isles to threaten Aberdeenshire with an army drawn from the Hebrides and Ross. On 24 July 1411, at Harlaw near Aberdeen, Donald's force was fought to a standstill by an army headed by Albany's lieutenant in the north, Alexander Stewart, earl of Mar. As governor, Albany may have increasingly relied on co-operation and alliances with powerful regional magnates such as Mar to defend the crown's interests in the localities, but this was not a noticeable departure from the style of government deployed by Albany's father and brother. 
Recent research has further attempted to modify the view that Albany harboured sinister ambitions in terms of his nephew's position as king of Scots. His appointment as governor, rather than as guardian or lieutenant in the name of King James, was not a unilateral act, but was sanctioned by a meeting of the three estates in 1406. The novelty of the title probably reflected the fact that James had not been formally invested as king before his capture by the English in 1406. Moreover, Albany's creation as lieutenant or guardian would have implied that the ruler of the Scottish realm had his position sanctioned by, and was thus ultimately answerable to, someone who was in the power of the English crown. 
The governor's supposed lack of enthusiasm in attempting to secure the release of his nephew James from English captivity has also been disputed. The release of Albany's own son and heir, Murdoch (held since 1402), in February 1416 is not proof that the duke lobbied harder in the interests of his immediate family. The key to James's release was the attitude of successive English kings, and Henry V, in particular, never gave any indication that he was prepared to countenance the surrender of such a valuable hostage. James would be liberated only after Henry's death and as a result of factional politics in and around the English court. 
Although he obtained Murdoch's freedom, Albany generally maintained the traditional Scottish foreign policy position of alliance with the French and hostility towards England. In 1417 he commanded an unsuccessful siege of Berwick, the so-called Foul Raid, while his son John Stewart, earl of Buchan, was one of the principal commanders of a large Scottish expeditionary force which arrived in France in October 1419 to assist the dauphin, Charles, against the English. In ecclesiastical affairs Albany, who was lauded as a hater of heretics by Wyntoun, initially ignored the attempts of the Council of Constance to end the papal schism and maintained a conservative adherence to the Avignon pope Benedict XIII, deposed by the council on 26 July 1417. There was considerable opposition to Albany's policy within Scotland, and in a general council at Perth in October 1418 Albany agreed to abandon Benedict and adhere to Martin V, the pope appointed by the Council of Constance. 
Albany died about 3 September 1420 in Stirling Castle, when he must have been about eighty years of age, and was buried in the abbey of Dunfermline, a traditional burial site for members of the Scottish royal dynasty. Wyntoun and Bower both wrote glowing obituaries of him. He was succeeded as duke of Albany and governor of the kingdom by his eldest son, Murdoch, who remained governor until James I's release from captivity in April 1424. In the following year, on 25 May 1425, Murdoch was executed at Stirling on the king's orders. The title duke of Albany thereafter lapsed until it was bestowed on Alexander Stewart, second son of James II, in the 1450s. 
Albany's first wife, Margaret Graham, countess of Menteith ('b'. 'c'.1334, died in or before 1380), was the daughter and heir of Sir John Graham and Mary, countess of Menteith. About 1380 he married Muriella Keith, eldest daughter of Sir William Keith, great marischal of Scotland ['see under 'Keith family (per. c.1300-c.1530)]; she survived her husband and died shortly before Whit Sunday 1449. Murdoch was the only son of Albany's first marriage, but he and his second wife had at least three sons, who were named together in charters of entail from 1389 and 1406. The eldest, John, became chamberlain of Scotland in place of his father on 12 March 1407 and led the Scottish expeditionary force to France in 1419. He was killed at the battle of Verneuil on 17 August 1424, leaving a daughter, Margaret, who became the wife of George, Lord Seton. John's younger brother Andrew died young without heirs, while the youngest brother, Robert, also seems to have left no children, although he was alive as late as April 1431. 
Albany's two marriages produced a number of daughters. The eldest, Janet, was still under age when contracted in marriage on 20 July 1372 to David Loen, son of Sir Bartholomew Loen and Philipa Mowbray of Barnbougle, as part of a settlement of Albany's claims to the barony of Barnbougle. It is uncertain whether the Loen marriage was ever concluded, and Janet may have been the daughter of Albany who married Sir William Abernethy of Saltoun. Sir William's sons, William and Patrick, were described as Albany's grandsons on a number of occasions before the younger William's death at the battle of Harlaw in 1411. Another daughter, Margaret, apparently married Sir John Swinton of Swinton, who was killed at the battle of Homildon Hill -- Swinton's son and heir, also John, was described as the nephew (sister's son) of John, earl of Buchan, and as Albany's grandson in Bower's account of the battles of Bauge and Verneuil. Albany used the marriages of several of his other daughters to cement his alliances with important lords in the north and west of Scotland during the 1390s. Before 1398 his daughter Isabel married Alexander Leslie, earl of Ross, who died on 8 May 1402, and the prosecution and defence of the rights of their daughter, Euphemia, in the earldom of Ross absorbed much of Albany's energy after 1402. Isabel subsequently married Walter Haliburton, lord of Dirleton. Albany's daughter Johanna received a dispensation to marry Robert Stewart, son of John Stewart of Lorne, on 27 September 1397, and at about the same time Johanna's sister Marjory married Duncan Campbell, son and heir of Sir Colin Campbell of Loch Awe. Finally, on a date before 28 June 1413 Albany's daughter Elizabeth married Malcolm Fleming of Biggar and Cumbernauld. 


@@@@@


doc= 26503


Stewart, Robert (c.1470-1544), soldier, was the fourth of the five sons of John Stewart, tenth or first earl of Lennox (d. 1495), and his wife, Margaret Montgomerie. Matthew Stewart, eleventh or second earl of Lennox, was his eldest brother, and he also had four sisters. Robert seems to have gone to France after his father's death in 1495, enrolling in the army in which his cousin Berault Stuart (the usual French spelling of his family's name) was a commander. By summer 1498 he was a lieutenant in a force led by his brother William, and in the following year he served in the army with which Louis XII of France invaded Lombardy; he was then continuously involved in the Italian wars which followed. He did distinguished service -- in 1500 he assisted in the capture of Ludovico 'il Moro' Sforza, duke of Milan -- and by April 1508 had command of a body of 100 Scots lances. When his cousin Berault died that year he was appointed on 22 August to replace him as captain of Harfleur and Montivilliers in Normandy. Stuart had earlier married Berault's daughter Anne (died 1517) and also inherited his cousin's seigneurie of Aubigny, granted to their ancestor John Stewart of Darnley in 1423. He built the chateau of Aubigny following a fire which destroyed most of the town, and later also converted the chateau of La Verrerie, erected by Berault at Oizon some 6 miles away, into a magnificent example of Renaissance architecture, influenced by Francois I's building programme in the Loire valley. 
On 4 October 1512 Stuart was appointed captain of the king's Scots guards. Although he continued to fight in Italy under such famous generals as Gaston de Foix, duc de Nemours, and Chevalier Bayard, he also performed the ceremonial duties associated with his new position. Thus he was back in Paris for the wedding of Louis XII to Henry VIII's sister Mary Tudor on 9 October 1514, and on 25 January 1515 he attended the coronation of Francois I. By this time he had become a marshal of France. Later in 1515 he accompanied the new king to Italy, and he was present at his great victory at Marignano on 13-14 September. Five years later he was one of the French judges at the Field of Cloth of Gold, and then in November he was sent to Scotland by Francois as one of two envoys charged with explaining French policy there. On 25 May 1522 he was appointed lieutenant-general of the king's army in Italy, and on 26 October 1523 he was commissioned to bring law and order to the duchy of Burgundy. In the autumn of 1524 Stuart accompanied Francois to Italy again. He was captured with him at the battle of Pavia on 24 February 1525, but was soon ransomed with help from the French treasury. By 15 June 1527 he had remarried; he and his second wife, Jacqueline de la Queille (died 'c'.1547/8), who was of an ancient Auvergnat family, received a life grant in survivorship of the comte of Beaumont-le-Roger in Normandy. In the same year Stuart took custody of his great-nephews Matthew and John Stewart, the sons of John Stewart, twelfth earl of Lennox, who were sent to France after their father was killed by Sir James Hamilton of Finnart in 1526. 
Robert Stuart continued to perform his military and ceremonial duties well into his fifties. Thus he served in Italy again in 1528, was present at the wedding of the future Henri II to Catherine de Medici at Marseilles on 28 October 1533, and in 1536 took part in the king's campaign against the emperor in Provence, accompanied by his great-nephews. But some letters which survive from the 1530s also refer to bouts of ill health, one of which prevented his attending the marriage of James V to Princess Madeleine in Paris on 1 January 1537. No doubt as a result the command of the Scots lances was entrusted to Matthew Stewart, whose incompetence allowed their discipline to collapse, provoking a strongly worded letter of complaint to his great-uncle from the king. 
Robert Stuart died at Chateau d'Aubigny in March or April 1544. Expert analysis during 2002 confirmed earlier surmises that three representations of him survive at La Verrerie -- a full-length portrait on wood and a medallion, both of about 1525, and a late nineteenth-century copy of an equestrian portrait, now in the chateau courtyard, which was taken from an early sixteenth-century fresco. He is also commemorated in words: according to the memorialist Brantome, Bayard described Stuart as 'his great companion and faithful friend' (Prevost and d'Amat, 4.186). 


@@@@@


doc= 26504


Stewart, Robert, first earl of Orkney (1533-1593), magnate, was born in the spring of 1533, the third or fourth of the seven known illegitimate sons of James V, king of Scots (1512-1542). His mother was Euphemia Elphinstone ('b'. 1509, died after 1564), who went on to marry John Bruce of Cultmalindie; the son of their marriage, Laurence Bruce, became notorious for oppression in Shetland under Robert's general sway. 
Like his half-brothers, Robert Stewart was granted ecclesiastical preferment, receiving the 'commenda' of the abbey of Holyrood at the age of five, including the regality and barony of Broughton, the burgh of the Canongate, and the baronies of Whitekirk, the Kerse, and Ogleface. All these lay along the south side of the Forth between Grangemouth and Dunbar. He was also given the barony of Dunrod near Kirkcudbright. Stewart was educated in the diocese of St Andrews ('c'.1534-1548) and at the French court (1548-51). During the 1550s he is glimpsed at the Scottish court, generally under the influence of his half-brother Lord James Stewart, later earl of Moray, with whom in 1557 he joined the protestant lords of the congregation in opposition to the regent, Mary of Guise. During the Reformation crisis he changed sides twice and earned himself a reputation for untrustworthiness. When Queen Mary returned to Scotland in 1561, he was among the first to greet her, and he, Lord John Stewart, Lord James, and their sister Jean attended her thereafter. In December 1561 Robert married Jean Kennedy (died 1598), daughter of Gilbert Kennedy, third earl of Cassillis; they had eight children, among them Patrick Stewart, his successor as earl. 
Robert Stewart became for a time a hanger-on of Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley, Queen Mary's second husband, and was knighted by him in 1565, receiving a regrant of a previous charter of the lordship and barony of Strathdon. The queen's estrangement from Darnley harmed Robert's fortunes, however, and he took little direct part in the events of 1566-7, though he and his sister were with the queen when her secretary, David Rizzio, was murdered on 9 March 1566 by a gang including Patrick Bellenden of Stenness, later a lifelong adversary. 
In December 1564 Stewart was given a privy seal charter of the royal and earldom lands in Orkney and Shetland. His interest in these islands almost certainly derived from the families who were his Holyrood vassals: the Bellendens, in particular Sir John Bellenden of Auchnoull, the justice clerk, and his brother Patrick; and the Sinclairs, notably Sir Oliver Sinclair of Pitcairns and Whitekirk, a member of the old Orkney earldom family and a former favourite of Stewart's father. In 1558 Adam Bothwell, bishop of Orkney, had feued off -- granted in exchange for payments, usually of grain, butter, and other goods -- large portions of bishopric land to his relatives of both houses. Presumably the possibilities suggested by this also excited Stewart's interest, but for three years he was unable to take advantage of his grant, owing to the turbulence of events at court. 
Stewart finally arrived in Orkney in October 1567 and immediately started to make himself master of the islands. He pressured Bishop Bothwell into parting with unfeued bishopric land in exchange for those of Holyrood, except for those of the Kerse, which were exchanged with Sir John Bellenden for his lands of Birsay, an ancient bishopric centre. Also, with less success, Stewart sought to wrest feued land from Sir Patrick Bellenden and Gilbert Balfour of Westray, Adam Bothwell's brother-in-law. Both Bishop Bothwell and Sir John Bellenden felt that they had been cheated, and Stewart was pursued for the rest of his life in search of redress. In the early 1570s Sir John found the ear of the regent, Morton, and Stewart was warded in Edinburgh and Linlithgow and forced to part with large sums of money. It was probably at Morton's behest that investigations were carried out in Orkney and Shetland into allegations of abuse and oppression, both by Stewart himself and by his half-brother Bruce of Cultmalindie. The complaints against Stewart are a mixed bag: increasing and misusing taxes and the Norse law of the islands and, more seriously, treason in his dealings with Denmark, erstwhile overlord of the islands, to whom he was alleged to have offered them. But the record of the investigation into Cultmalindie's doings in Shetland (republished in 1999) provides an extraordinary insight into the Shetland society of the time; the commons, publicly assembled, testified in great detail to Bruce's abuses of weights, measures, and other customs. 
Despite this, Stewart managed to escape blame. He had attracted the favour of the young king James VI, and in 1581, shortly after Morton's fall, he was created earl of Orkney and lord of Shetland. This did not end his feud with the Bellendens, however, since Sir Lewis Bellenden had inherited his late father's cause. Stewart's unscrupulous and treacherous nature became evident to the king, and Bellenden, allied with the secretary John Maitland of Thirlestane, prevailed upon James to revoke Stewart's earldom grant on coming of age in 1587. An expedition under Sir Patrick Bellenden to bring Stewart to justice was unsuccessful, but the latter was forced to feu off estates in order to meet the large sums demanded of him, including land intended for his wife's marriage portion. Latterly he was greatly impoverished, and his earldom had passed in all but name to his second son, Patrick; his eldest, Henry, had died in 1585. 
Stewart died on 4 February 1593 in the Palace of the Yards in Kirkwall and was buried in St Magnus Cathedral, though the site of his tomb is lost. He had three known mistresses, with all of whom he had children, in particular Marjorie Sandilands, wife of the laird of Avochie, mother of three sons and two daughters. These infidelities, coupled with difficulties over her marriage settlement, proved too much for Stewart's wife, and at the time of his death she was suing him for divorce on the grounds of adultery. His relations with his sons were also difficult. His original heir, Henry Sinclair, died amid allegations of a treacherous liaison with the earl of Caithness, a long-standing opponent of whoever controlled Orkney and Shetland, and the earl tried to have Patrick sent home to Orkney by his tutor, Patrick Waus of Barnbarroch, so that he could keep an eye on him there. 
Robert Stewart's chief monument in Orkney and Shetland is the palace which he built at Birsay. Though now ruinous and architecturally overshadowed by his son's achievements, it was for its time an impressive and civilized building. 


@@@@@


doc= 26505


Stewart, Sir Robert (d. 1670?), royalist army officer, was probably the fourth son of Robert Stewart, first earl of Orkney (1533-1593), and his wife, Jean Kennedy (died 1598), who had been born by 1584. Through their common grandfather, James V, Robert was a kinsman of James VI and I, and his financial misfortunes and foreign engagements can be traced in some detail in Jacobean state papers. It is likely that he was the same Sir Robert Stewart who served as a royalist army officer, constant in his allegiance to the king in Ireland in the 1640s. However, the civil-war soldier has also been identified as the third son of Archibald Stewart of Bardyce, Wigtownshire, and younger brother of Sir William Stewart (died 1662). Robert and William served together in the civil wars: the latter was an undertaker for the plantation of Ulster and MP for co. Donegal in 1613-15; and the two men served together in Ulster in the 1640s. If Sir Robert was indeed William's brother he married Helen McKie, daughter of John McKie of Palgown, Dumfriesshire, with whom he had a son and daughter, George and Agnes. However, while it is possible that the careers of two men named Sir Robert Stewart, sharing experience in the armies of Sweden, have been conflated into one long life, on balance it seems most likely that the Jacobean courtier and the civil-war army officer who was governor of Culmore by 1638 were one and the same man, the earl of Orkney's son. 
By the time the courtier Stewart accompanied his royal kinsman to England he had been knighted. On 3 July 1604 he was granted letters of denization. His name crops up in the state papers and the correspondence of Robert Cecil, seeking and receiving places and positions of profit. He became a gentleman of the privy chamber and received the grant for life of the keepership of Bewdley Park, Worcestershire, and Ticknall House, Derbyshire; he also sought a monopoly to police the proper keeping of parish registers, for a fee of a shilling a year from each parish. He needed to be bailed out of his financial difficulties on several occasions. In early 1605 both the king and Cecil wrote supporting his pursuit of the eleven-year-old daughter of Frances Stallinge. Stewart continued to press his suit even after the child's mother had politely but firmly turned him away. She explained to Cecil: 'I always wished him to take all opportunities for his best fortune elsewhere and not to rely upon marriage with my daughter, considering how unfit it were for him to stay until she were of ripe years, being yet but a child, and that it was uncertain how she would be affected towards him hereafter. ('Salisbury MSS', 17.152)' The following year Stewart had to be rescued from debtors' prison over a debt of $1600 by his kinsman Lord Lindores, who in turn had to appeal to the king for money the following year when he found himself pursued by both Stewart's and his own creditors. 
There seems to have been more to Stewart than seeking after place and a dowry, however. In 1608 he served in the suppression of the short-lived rising in Ulster of Sir Cahir O'Doherty, who succeeded in capturing Culmore and Derry. The following year, when it was decided to send 800 men from Ireland to serve as mercenaries in the armies of the king of Sweden as part of the policy to remove kerns (swordsmen) loyal to Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone, from Ulster, Stewart's name was put forward to command it. The king's initial resistance to the idea ('For satisfaction of the competitors, he cares not greatly for the satisfaction of Sir Robert Steward, but refers all that to your determination', Cecil was told) in the event proved entirely justified ('Salisbury MSS', 20.193). In September 1609, while Sir Arthur Chichester, the lord deputy, was waiting in Dublin for his arrival, Stewart was in London interceding on behalf of Sir John Kennedy who had been accused by his wife of bigamy, cruelty, and adultery. Stewart apparently reached Ireland in early October (ambiguity is caused by Chichester's referring to him as 'Sir William' in a letter of 8 October). 
The small fleet of three ships sailed that month but only got as far as Newcastle upon Tyne. Early in December Stewart was arrested in London for a debt of $2500 which he had owed to the now-dead Lindores, and which was being claimed by the latter's son-in-law James Leslie. In dispute was partly whether $2500 paid by the crown to Lindores had been as a reward for service or to pay off the debts of Stewart's he had taken on, and great efforts were made by senior ministers to block Leslie's suit. In January 1610 the king granted Stewart the 'tops and lops' in the royal parks, but even if he succeeded in evading Leslie's claims, his financial situation remained parlous; a year later he sought the right to two trees out of every hundred decayed or fuel trees, as the earlier grant was not enough to cover his debts. In May 1611 he took refuge at the court at Greenwich to escape his creditors. His debts, he explained to Cecil, were a round sum, but he hoped that the king would pay them as he had neither the liberty nor means to pursue ways of improving his lot himself. 
The way out of this situation was to find Stewart employment overseas, and in August 1611 he left England for Sweden. His attempt to involve James VI and I in diplomatic mediation between the kings of Denmark and Sweden was rebuffed in December 1611. He may be the Robert Stewart who served as a lieutenant in the regiment of Samuel Cockburn between 1611 and 1617. In 1617 he was granted lands to the value of $100 in the planted Ulster counties of Leitrim, Cavan, and Fermanagh. In 1623, with Captain Butler, he attempted to raise 8000-10,000 troops for the service of Sigismund III, king of Poland, which he was to command in a planned Polish-Spanish attack on Sweden. The Swedish ambassador was successful in blocking Stewart's scheme, persuading James VI and I to withdraw his unconditional consent to a levy designed to attack a Christian monarch. By the summer of 1624 the king was able to assure the ambassador that he doubted that Stewart's force would ever come to anything given what he had imposed on it in the way of the logistical problems and the conditions (which included not landing on any Swedish territory or fighting the Swedes anywhere). The king also made clear that he would not be answerable for any debts that Stewart might end up owing Sigismund. A significant proportion of the levy, a mix of Gaelic Irish, Ulster Scots, English, and Old English, never reached Poland and many were later arrested 'lurking on obscure places' by the Scottish authorities ('Reg. PCS', '1622-5', 364). 
Stewart's dealings with Catholic Poland were clearly just business. He rejoined the Swedish army, in 1629 serving at the siege of Wurzburg in Alexander Hamilton's regiment, and later becoming colonel of Lumsden's pikemen. He was sent on recruiting missions to Britain and Ireland in 1635 and 1637, in the latter year raising Irish troops. However, by the following year he had left Swedish service to serve Charles I in Ireland. On 11 April 1638 Stewart was appointed governor of the strategic fort at Culmore on Lough Foyle guarding the entrance to the port of Londonderry. He was returned as MP for the city in the Irish parliament of 1639. After the outbreak of the Irish rising in October 1641 his military experience was invaluable. Even more than Sir William Stewart he was the natural choice of commander for the hastily assembled militia forces raised from the largely Scots (but also English) settlers in the Laggan district of Donegal and north-west Ulster. His position was officially sanctioned by a commission of 16 November from Charles I to raise 1000 foot and a troop of horse. The Laggan, or 'British', forces acted almost independently, managing to hold their own against the disorganized Irish levies and securing a home base in the areas around Derry and Raphoe. Stewart's troops were initially deployed in a mainly defensive and reactive posture because of a lack of supplies from either Dublin or England though they did manage to relieve other isolated protestant garrisons such as that of Sir Audley Mervyn at Augher in Fermanagh, and to defeat Sir Phelim O'Neill at Glenmaquin in June 1642. 
Living off the land allowed Stewart and the Laggan forces to take the offensive against the Irish, raiding as far as co. Monaghan, capturing and burning Strabane, even surprising and heavily defeating Eoghain Ruadh O'Neill (Owen Roe O'Neill) near Clones on 13 June, and capturing many officers who had travelled from the continent to Ireland. These successes were undoubtedly facilitated by the arrival in east Ulster between April and July 1642 of a Scots army paid by the English parliament under the command of another continental veteran, Major-General Robert Monro. Lack of munitions and the scarcity of provisions in the ravaged province prevented Stewart from following up his achievements. On the death of Sir John Vaughan in 1643, after forceful lobbying by the royalist commander James Butler, marquess of Ormond, Stewart was appointed in April governor of Londonderry over Sir William Stewart, whose sympathies were with the covenanters and lords justices. He was replaced as governor of Londonderry by Sir Audley Mervyn in 1644. 
Stewart's position as a royalist became increasingly difficult. He was fully inclined to obey Ormond's orders but though the British regiments in Ulster were generally well disposed to Charles I they were in a poor state, unpaid since the beginning of the war and lacking in all essential supplies, while most of the rank and file could not stomach the cessation of arms between the king and the Irish confederates in September 1643. His difficulties were exacerbated by the proclamation of the solemn league and covenant in September and its condemnation by the lords justices at Dublin in December. Unless he joined the Scots and complied with parliament Stewart could not hope for supply, and unless he accepted the covenant he might lose authority over his troops, or Monro might attack and impose the covenant by force. In addition he had been ordered by Ormond to keep Monro's forces in Ulster. In January 1644 it was privately agreed by Stewart, Lord Montgomery of Ards, and others to remain loyal to king and Ormond, and not to accept the covenant, nor any other commander over them. Stewart was finally forced to comply in April 1644 when Monro was issued with a commission from parliament to command all the English and Scots forces in Ulster. 
Resupplied by the committee of both kingdoms, Stewart routed an Irish cavalry force near Sligo on 17 August 1645 and captured the town itself on 8 October. He was appointed governor in June following. His troops were fortunate to escape the destruction of Monro's army by Owen Roe O'Neill at Benburb on 5 June 1646 and Stewart was able to retreat and consolidate at Derry. In December 1648 Sir Charles Coote seized the city on behalf of parliament and arrested Stewart after luring him from Culmore on the pretext of attending a baptism. He was sent a prisoner to London but managed to escape in January 1649. On 26 May he rejoined his troops besieging the parliamentarian army at Londonderry and on Ormond's instructions surrendered Sligo to Ulick Burke, marquess of Clanricarde, on 7 July. Undoubtedly ill at ease with the new alliance of Catholics and protestants in the royalist camp, he none the less remained in Ireland after his forces were driven off and defeated at Derry in early August by the unlikely combination of parliamentarian and Ulster Irish forces under Sir Charles Coote and Owen Roe O'Neill. He voted at the council of war on 23 August to defend Drogheda. 
After the royalist collapse in Ireland, Stewart retired to Scotland. The 'Settlement Act' for Ireland of 12 August 1652 excepted him from pardon for life and estate. At the Restoration he regained the governorship of Culmore, and was reappointed governor of Londonderry, city and county, and given a company of foot. He was superseded in most of these positions on 17 September 1661 by Colonel John Gorges, though he seems to have retained the governorship of Culmore. On 22 May 1662 he was appointed a trustee for the officers of 1649. He probably died at the end of 1670, this being when he was succeeded as governor of Culmore. 


@@@@@


doc= 26506


Stewart, Robert, first marquess of Londonderry (1739-1821), politician, was born in Ireland on 27 September 1739, the elder of the two sons of Alexander Stewart (1700-1781), landowner and MP for Londonderry, of Ballylawn Castle, co. Donegal, and Mount Stewart, co. Down, and his wife, Mary (1713-1788), the only daughter of Alderman John Cowan of St Johnston, Londonderry, and the niece and eventual heir of Sir Robert Cowan (d. 1737), governor of Bombay (1728-34). His family roots were Scottish and Presbyterian. His education is obscure, but during his grand tour he was portrayed by Anton Mengs in Rome about 1758. He probably met Lord Charlemont, long his friend, in Italy. He was twice married: first, on 3 June 1766, to Lady Sarah Frances (1747-1770), the second daughter of Francis Seymour Conway, marquess of Hertford (1718-1794), a courtier, and his wife, Isabella Fitzroy; his future father-in-law wrote of him just before the marriage that he was 'heir to a great property and already in possession of many amiable and good qualities' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 39.71). Robert Stewart, second marquess of Londonderry (1769-1822), the future foreign secretary, was the younger of their two sons; his elder brother, Alexander Francis, died young in 1767. Stewart married second, on 7 June 1775, Lady Frances Pratt (1750-1833), the eldest daughter of Charles Pratt, first Earl Camden (1714-1794), lord chancellor, and his wife, Elizabeth Jeffreys. They had three sons and eight daughters. Of his second family, General Charles William Vane (1778-1854), an army officer and diplomatist, later third marquess, was the eldest son. 
Stewart's family was influential in Down, for which constituency he was elected to the Irish parliament in 1771. He was re-elected in 1776, but lost the seat in 1783 in an embarrassing contest, which diminished his popularity. At the next election, in 1790, by which time he had become a peer, he financed his son Robert's successful contest for the same constituency. He was never a prominent public figure after 1783, though during the Irish volunteer movement he had been one of their colonels, and as a delegate to the second Dungannon convention in 1783 chaired their reform debates, leaving it to Henry Flood to formulate their wishes. He was advanced to the peerage by William Pitt as Baron Londonderry on 20 September 1789, having previously been sworn of the Irish privy council on 17 September 1782 and made a trustee of the linen board during Lord Lansdowne's ministry. He had then declined a peerage. After his brother-in-law, the second Earl Camden, became lord lieutenant, he was created Viscount Castlereagh on 1 October 1795, earl of Londonderry on 8 August 1796, and marquess of Londonderry on 13 January 1816. 
From 1801 Londonderry was an Irish representative peer in the Westminster parliament. He had reported to his son Robert and to his brother-in-law in December 1798 that, while the prospect of Anglo-Irish union did not enthuse Ulster, there had been more support for it among leading figures than he expected, and he attributed this to disgust with the corruption of the Dublin parliament. He was appointed in 1801 and 1803 governor and custos of the counties of Down and Londonderry respectively. His claims to be made a peer of the United Kingdom in 1800, in consideration of his son Robert's services, though unsolicited by either father or son, were favourably considered by the crown, and an assurance was given that, if in future he or his descendants should desire the honour, their wish would be granted. Neither he nor his son claimed the fulfilment of this promise, most probably because they wished to prevent Robert's removal from the House of Commons. 
In private life Londonderry was not only charitable, but enlightened. He resided on his estates almost exclusively, and encouraged tenant right; he never accepted paper money from tenants, but remitted rents in hard times; he provided work for the unemployed and imported food supplies for the distressed. To his family, and particularly to the career of his son Robert, of whose success he lived to be proud, he was devoted. He remodelled Mount Stewart in 1803-6 after a design by George Dance, who also painted his portrait. He died at Mount Stewart on 6 April 1821, and was buried at Newtownards on 9 April. His widow died on 18 January 1833 at Hastings, Sussex, and was buried at Bayham Abbey, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 26507


Stewart, Robert, Viscount Castlereagh and second marquess of Londonderry (1769-1822), politician, was born in Dublin on 18 June 1769, second but only surviving son of the first marriage of Robert Stewart (1739-1821) of Mount Stewart, co. Down, to Lady Sarah Frances Seymour Conway (1747-1770), daughter of Francis, first marquess of Hertford. He was baptized a Presbyterian on 5 July 1769, as befitted the heir of one of the denominational leaders in Ulster. His mother died on 18 July 1770, bequeathing him the physical allure of her family. His father, member for County Down in the Dublin parliament from 1771 to 1783, remarried in 1775 and had three sons and eight daughters. Their mother, Frances, was the eldest daughter of Charles, first Baron (later Earl) Camden, the lord chancellor, and it was at his instigation that Stewart, who had been educated at the Royal School, Armagh, from 1777 to 1781 and thereafter by a tutor, the Revd William Sturrock of Portaferry, entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1786. There he was regarded as a first-class student, though he did not graduate. 
In 1790, after a continental tour, Stewart returned home to win a seat for Down in the Irish parliament. This involved him in a highly expensive contest lasting forty-two days, during which he came of age, to wrest one of the two county seats from the monopoly of the marquess of Downshire. His father, despite his previous volunteering and reformist activities, which bespoke a critic of the Irish establishment, had in 1789 become an Irish peer, as Baron Londonderry, though Stewart himself joined the Northern Whig Club. Several other circumstances, however, combined to curb the opposition politics expected of him. His stepgrandfather and confidant, Earl Camden, was a committed adherent of Pitt the younger in office, and Stewart had admired Pitt's oratory from the public gallery of the Commons. During a visit to Paris in 1791 he conceived an immediate dislike for the proceedings he witnessed in the national assembly and became a critic of the new French constitution. He returned prepared to tolerate any government, even the Irish one, as long as it shunned revolution. In Dublin he walked a political tightrope for a time: favourable to Catholic relief, but cautious about extending this indulgence to political enfranchisement; supportive of war against France, yet prepared to be critical of the conduct of it. He became a lieutenant-colonel of the County Londonderry militia on 26 April 1793 (colonel in 1798). Suddenly in April 1794 Pitt swooped on him, offering him a seat for Tregony, a Cornish borough, in the Westminster parliament as a ministerial nominee. He accepted the bargain, and was duly elected on 12 May, though he did not then take his seat. On 9 June of that year, in London, he married Lady Amelia Anne Hobart (1772-1829), youngest daughter (only surviving child of a second marriage) and coheir of John Hobart, second earl of Buckinghamshire, formerly lord lieutenant of Ireland: there were no children of the marriage. Required to second the address in Dublin on 22 January 1795, which he did in a drawling, verbose manner that triggered the first of many criticisms of his speech-making, Stewart had to speak again later in the session to oblige his step-uncle, John Jeffreys Pratt, second Earl Camden, who became lord lieutenant of Ireland soon afterwards. His debut at Westminster on 29 October 1795, when he took more pains as seconder of the address commending the counter-revolutionary war against France, was an unmistakable omen of his ambition for future Anglicization. 
Stewart himself did not yet realize this. Unbeknown to him, Camden had suggested him to Pitt as his chief secretary in Dublin, commending his lack of Irish prejudices. Stewart defended Pitt in the Irish parliament in January 1796, but in April and May was back at Westminster after assuring Camden, Janus-faced, that his preference was for an Irish political career. On 4 May Camden, who advised him to make the most of sitting in both parliaments, informed Pitt that Stewart wished for a seat in the next English parliament, placing a ceiling of $2000 on its acquisition. His seat, for Orford, was in fact provided by his uncle, Lord Hertford, as patron of that borough. He arrived in England in July when the session was prorogued, and did not appear at Westminster again before resigning his seat there on 19 July 1797. Events in Ireland had dictated this. On 8 August 1796 his father became earl of Londonderry, and Stewart became by courtesy Viscount Castlereagh (a title obtained by his father the year before). Camden, who wished to retain him in Ireland as long as he himself remained there, leaned on his local experience, and entrusted the seizure of the United Irish ringleaders in Belfast to him in September. Unrest among his father's tenantry also preoccupied him. In February 1797 he proposed defence measures in the Irish parliament, and in May moved a loyal address. He was rewarded, on 25 July, with a sinecure worth $1500, the keepership of the Irish privy seal. In October he became a lord of the Irish treasury and an Irish privy councillor. He retained his county seat in the Dublin parliament of 1798, though also elected for the borough of Newtownlimavady, co. Londonderry, as security. Camden secured Castlereagh as his chief secretary on 29 March 1798, though he admitted that the recipient himself was reluctant: this was nominally a temporary appointment during the illness of his predecessor Thomas Pelham. A proclamation against sedition a day later was followed by strong-arm tactics directed against the United Irish leaders by the militia, for which Castlereagh, who promptly sent to England for regular military aid, was later blamed. His detention of the leaders in May, however, was commended at the time as the frustration of a plot to take over Dublin. The subsequent abortive insurrection in June led to Camden's replacement as lord lieutenant by Lord Cornwallis, who expressed a high opinion of Castlereagh's talents and commitment to the British empire, though their joint plea to London for leniency towards the rebels was little regarded. Pelham, ready to resume office a year later, tried to get Castlereagh made chancellor of the Irish exchequer, with an English peerage as bait, but he resisted, and in October 1798 Pelham resigned his pretensions. Only the king clung to the notion that an Irishman should not hold the office, but yielded to Cornwallis's importunity. 
As a supporter of Irish union with Great Britain, in the face of the French revolutionary and United Irish threats, Castlereagh was invited to London in December 1798 to discuss it. He secured cabinet support for his proposals for Irish representation at Westminster, and was appointed an English privy councillor on the 19th. In Dublin he carried two of three divisions on the proposals in January 1799, but conceded that opposition was still strong enough to warrant delay. Hitherto inclining to a protestant union, he concluded in February that the Irish Catholics must be conciliated; full relief would come later, but the Catholic clergy (as well as their Presbyterian counterparts) should be subsidized in token of this pledge. At the same time, he believed, compensation should be found for the Irish borough patrons who would lose their influence as a result of the reduction in the number of constituencies. His own family borough was one of the eighty-four intended to be bought out for a total of $1,260,000. Peerages, promotions, and pensions were also held out as bait. This strategy, approved by Pitt and Dundas, was disliked by some members of the cabinet and by the king. Although Castlereagh was confident by June 1799 that it could be brought off, he was told in September, when he sought reassurance on measures of Catholic relief, that although it had government approval in principle there were reservations about future concessions, and that the king was likely to oppose them, so no promises should be made. The business of carrying the union proposals in the Dublin parliament, for which he obtained a vote of consent on principle on 5 February 1800, did something to melt the reserve which had so little recommended Castlereagh to the Irish. His speech that day was published. When the union was finally passed on 7 June 1800 he claimed to be proud of being less Irish and more English than hitherto. But Cornwallis and he threatened resignation soon afterwards when the English government attempted to diminish the promised rewards of union. As he declined to be among the thirty-eight creations or promotions in the peerage on the occasion, he agreed that his father, who would shortly become one of the Irish representative peers, might be promised the British peerage intended for him whenever he chose. Although, as he later reported, Pitt offered him the government of Bengal at this time (his father's maternal uncle had been governor of Bombay), he did not accept it. On 30 September 1800 he presented the cabinet with a memo on the expediency of offering further concessions to the Catholics. His proposals for subsidizing the sectarian clergy, and recognizing their hierarchy and educational establishments in the interest of replacing coercive by consensual government in Ireland, were accepted, but further measures of Catholic emancipation were shelved on 9 October. He returned to London in December to find that Lord Chancellor Loughborough had led a cabinet revolt against any further concessions. On 1 January 1801, the day the union came into operation, he protested to Pitt, who resigned office soon afterwards. He was duly blamed by the king for his influence over Pitt, who had at first promised to reintroduce Catholic emancipation in the future. 
Castlereagh had intended to resign with Pitt, but the king's illness detained him in office. Addington, the new premier, offered him his Irish privy seal sinecure for life, but Castlereagh had proffered it to Pitt for Pelham's benefit several months before and now surrendered it to his successor as chief secretary, Charles Abbot, who took over from him on 21 May. In the meantime, while sitting for County Down at Westminster, Castlereagh continued to manage Irish business from there, and thus effectively established the Irish Office in London. He carried measures continuing martial law and the suspension of habeas corpus (detention without trial) in Ireland (12 and 16 March 1801): on the latter occasion he answered charges about his conduct in 1798 and was also named to the secret committee on Ireland. He was at this time a particular favourite of Pitt, sitting with him on the third row behind the Treasury bench, and urged him to resume the helm. But after Abbot succeeded him Castlereagh became depressed and took no further part that session, though he advised the ministry, who were deaf to his pleas, on how to make practical steps towards Irish Catholic relief. By the autumn he was well enough to go to Ireland and clarify union engagements for the benefit of Hardwicke, the new lord lieutenant. In October 1801 he was headhunted by Pitt's cousin Lord Grenville, who wished him to lead the opposition to Addington in the Commons, a role he immediately refused, for Pitt wished him to accept office under Addington. This tug of war probably induced the ambiguity of his speech on the peace preliminaries with France on 3 November 1801, which he welcomed very cautiously: he was in favour of the retention of Malta. He made himself serviceable to the ministry in committee and in full debate, not least on Irish questions, and although he communicated to Addington his reservations about the Anglo-French peace treaty in April, he justified it in debate on 14 May 1802. His contrary counsels on Ireland were muzzled when he was offered, and accepted on 17 July, the presidency of the Board of Control for India; once again the king disliked the appointment. In any case, the refusal of the Irish Catholic clergy to accept subsidy unless the laity obtained civil rights had effectively let him off the hook. 
Castlereagh's appointment to the India board had the ulterior motive of securing a reconciliation between Lord Wellesley and the East India Company directors, who were at loggerheads; in this he had the blessing of Pitt and Henry Dundas. Addington needed a right-hand man in the Commons, and in October Castlereagh joined the cabinet. In December Addington sent him to parley with Pitt at Bath, and as grounds for a resumption of hostilities with Bonaparte accumulated Castlereagh himself was eager to see Pitt back in office, and was again the premier's emissary to Pitt in April 1803. Pitt's indifference to this appeal led to Castlereagh's expression in debate of the difference between them (3 June 1803) on the renewal of war with France. He was unhappy, mauled by opposition in debate, and talked of for the Home Office or the Admiralty; the prescient Lord Malmesbury suggested that a diplomatic mission on the continent would suit him best. In fact his reservations about the Hardwicke administration in Ireland deterred him from aspiring to the Home Office, though he tried to conceal them when opposing the inquiry into the Dublin rising (11 August 1803) and supported coercive legislation for Ireland in December, when he was also useful in debate on the army estimates: his speech of 9 December was published. Temporarily estranged from Pitt, he again drew attention twice to their differences in debate, in which he featured increasingly as the ministry tottered, and was against further government overtures to him. His diplomacy came to the fore, both in negotiations with Persia and when he proposed parliamentary thanks to Lord Wellesley for his expansion of British interests in India (3 May), despite his own doubts about the expediency of the Maratha War: but their relations, never easy, subsequently deteriorated. On Pitt's return to power that month Addington sent Castlereagh to him in a bid to ensure the exclusion of Lord Grenville and the Foxite whigs from his ministry, in which Castlereagh retained his Indian office, giving up his seat at the Irish treasury board. He was kept busy in the house parrying opposition attacks on the cost and scope of Wellesley's warfare in India; he was thought likely to succeed him there, but had no such wish. He went on to reinstate himself in Pitt's good graces by support of his 'Additional Force Bill', notably on 3 June 1804 and 6 March 1805 when its repeal was moved. He had the first of many clashes, however, with William Wilberforce, being dissatisfied with a unilateral abolition of the slave trade and holding out for an international agreement (7 June 1804). 
There were reports in October 1804 that Castlereagh would get the Foreign Office, but the only suggestion for him that Pitt heard with approval was Lord Camden's, in December, that he should become secretary of state for war and the colonies. Pitt's reconciliation with Addington intervened and received Castlereagh's encouragement, but he was uneasy when it was implemented. His reply to the opposition motion against war with Spain was languid (11 February), and he was impatiently heard when he opposed the censure of Melville's Admiralty administration on 8 April 1805. To perform well in debate he had to be goaded, as on 29 April, when he defended Pitt's reputation against Fox, and the next day, when he objected to Whitbread's attempt to exclude him from the committee of inquiry into Melville's conduct. Had he succeeded Melville at the Admiralty the ensuing rupture between Pitt and Addington might have been avoided, and this time the king would have approved the appointment, Castlereagh's being one of four names he recommended. In July, however, Pitt appointed him secretary for war and the colonies without displacing him, for the time being, at the Board of Control; but on seeking re-election, although returned unopposed in 1802, he yielded the field, on the twelfth day, to a candidate sponsored by Lady Downshire. The only consolation was Pitt's unwavering attentiveness. Although he did not resume his seat (for Boroughbridge, found for him by the Treasury) until 21 January 1806, he had meanwhile been preoccupied with the planning of the abortive Elbe expedition and a futile scheme to set fire to the French vessels at Boulogne. As Pitt lay dying, he and Lord Hawkesbury drafted the speech from the throne for the impending session and obtained Pitt's amendments. Castlereagh acted as spokesman for Pitt at Downing Street and in the house: he wished Pitt's friends to stay together, preferably in power, but these hopes were dashed. In his tribute to Pitt on 27 January 1806 he predicted that the policies for which Pitt had stood would revive. He had supposed that the Pittites might rally to Lord Grenville, but the latter's readiness to head a coalition ministry with the Foxite whigs and Addington, with whom he would not join, put paid to this. Deprived of office, he marked his hostility to the new administration on 3 March by opposing Lord Chancellor Ellenborough's sitting in cabinet. 
Castlereagh was a consistent opponent of the military measures of William Windham, who had succeeded him at the War Office, though he showed more persistence than skill in debate on them and clung stubbornly to Pitt's plan. His main criticisms were of the neglect of voluntary corps and of limitation of enlistment to seven years. He was also an opposition spokesman on Indian and American matters, and on 12 June attempted a general denunciation of the government. He joined the opposition caucus of 4 July which ruled against acceptance of ministerial overtures to individual members of the opposition: he might have been more seriously tempted if Lord Wellesley, the first go-between recruited by ministers, had been prepared to consider him cabinet material. In subsequent overtures of July and October 1806 the Board of Control or the Royal Mint were the only bait. At the ensuing dissolution, having entrusted his Irish constituency to his half-brother Charles rather than risk another defeat, he was found another for Plympton Erle, a pocket borough belonging to one of his wife's family circle, Lord Mount Edgcumbe, which he held until 1812, despite the patron's initial reluctance to accommodate him. He was certainly not popular, but he was a businesslike spokesman for opposition and, as such, was approved of by the formerly disdainful George Canning, a fellow Ulsterman who had resented his intimacy with Pitt, and by Spencer Perceval, two of the leading lights of his party. In January 1807 he made a notably able attack on the army estimates, having previously dismissed ministerial hopes for peace with Bonaparte as chimerical. He was also capable of taking a line of his own, and not always a safe one, as shown by his insistence on countering the government's financial plan in February 1807 on the grounds of faulty data, while his colleagues preferred to question their validity. Typically, however, he persevered, and presented resolutions on 26 February which predicated, prophetically, a financial plan of nine years in preference to one of twenty. There was speculation that he was staking a claim to the exchequer, and this was indeed the office that Canning suggested for him when he was negotiating a possible merger with the Grenville administration in March 1807, but Castlereagh was reluctant. Grenville, while willing to take Castlereagh on board, had offered no prize for him other than the Board of Control or the government of Madras. Canning, setting his own sights higher, threw in the bait of the leadership of the house if Castlereagh was content to take the exchequer: this was on the assumption that Canning himself would be foreign secretary. When, however, Castlereagh showed an interest in resuming the war and colonial office Canning (who was by then prepared to take the Admiralty) approved. Castlereagh's last bid to restore the principle of military enlistment for life failed on 12 March 1807, but office for him was at hand as a consolation. On 15 April he expressed his approval of George III's dismissal of the ministry, basing it on the king's religious scruples, and he denigrated their record in office. 
In the Portland administration Castlereagh resumed the War Office (25 March 1807), while Canning obtained the Foreign Office: the pair had agreed since December 1806 that the lead in the Commons should go to Perceval, and so it did. Illness prevented Castlereagh from introducing new military measures until 22 July, when he outflanked Windham by proposing enlistment either for seven years or for life, this being part of a package that doubled the battalions of each regiment by recruiting 28,000 men from the militia for regular service while supplying the militia deficit by ballot on a county basis. That done, he relapsed, reduced to a corpse-like appearance by internal haemorrhaging: his dispatch to the House of Lords with minor office was talked of. By 28 January 1808 he had recovered, moving the house's thanks for the destruction of the Danish fleet, which along with the preservation of the Swedish and Portuguese ones gave him better prospects in office. Hawkish by his own admission, he welcomed intervention in the Iberian peninsula, though he would have preferred to see the revival of Pitt's policy of a continental coalition against Bonaparte, which was at that time thwarted by the defection of Prussia and Russia. He also invoked Pitt when approving Catholic relief in principle, on 25 May 1808, though he thought agitation for it inopportune. When things went badly for Sir Arthur Wellesley and Sir John Moore in the Peninsula later that year he refused to be ruffled by his colleagues' dismay, and in January and February 1809 defended both their prosecution of the war in the field and the conduct of ministers, while calling for increased military exertion. His militia bills, legislation for which was completed in March 1809, were aimed at this, and he at the same time attempted, in vain, the rescue of the duke of York, commander-in-chief of the army, when his conduct was arraigned in debate. He himself faced an opposition motion alleging corruption (25 April 1809) over a promise made in 1805 to Lord Clancarty, an Irish friend, to procure a writership in India in order to improve his prospects of a seat in parliament. The promise was not fulfilled and the motion was defeated, after he had defended himself and withdrawn, by 216 to 167, while a motion of Canning's which exonerated Castlereagh, but saved the principle, was carried by 214 to 167. A month before, Canning had obtained the duke of Portland's secret promise that Castlereagh should be moved from the War Office at the end of the session. In May he successfully resisted one opposition motion against the Peninsular campaign as well as another implicating Perceval and himself in corrupt practice in the return of members on the Treasury interest for certain constituencies and in the subsequent unseating of one of them for political disloyalty. Canning, who was threatening to resign, found his colleagues anxious not to alienate Castlereagh, but was unable to suggest an alternative office for him, and was further stymied by the king's insistence that these machinations should not be disclosed to Castlereagh. Canning, who believed Lord Camden must have informed Castlereagh, was opposed to this concealment while Castlereagh was preparing the expedition to Walcheren under Lord Chatham. There were mixed reactions as more of his colleagues learned of the plot, but Castlereagh was told at the end of the session that his office would be remodelled. Several proposals for his future were put forward, which involved his taking a lead in the House of Lords, but a decision was to be postponed until the Walcheren expedition was over. On 3 September came the news that the expedition had failed in its objective of taking Antwerp, where Bonaparte was building a fleet: Canning, on being told by Portland that Castlereagh would be moved to another office, resigned, and Camden told the whole story to Castlereagh, who resigned next day, refusing any alternative. On 19 September he challenged Canning, whom he wounded in the thigh at the second exchange in a duel at dawn on Putney Heath two days later, losing only a coat button himself. 
When Spencer Perceval replaced Portland as premier on 2 October 1809, Castlereagh refused office; privately he was appalled at the prospect of serving such shabby friends. He had sent a memorial to the king the day before complaining of Canning's unjustified treatment of his official conduct. The king returned a soft answer, and Canning felt obliged to publish an apologia addressed to Lord Camden, but could not escape hostile comment to the effect that he had launched the intrigue to promote his own ambitions by denigrating Castlereagh. The latter got his revenge on 23 January 1810 when he vindicated himself before a sympathetic house, and still more when he and four friends, by their silent votes, ensured a tiny majority for the opposition motion for inquiry into the failure of the Walcheren expedition. On 1 February he supported the vote of thanks to Wellington for his victory at Talavera. Canning commented that pity worked for Castlereagh, who claimed success for his military recruitment plans on 1 March. On the question of Lord Chatham's expeditionary fiasco he at first abstained, but on 5 March condemned him markedly for not consulting his cabinet colleagues. While some supposed that he would join opposition, there were reports of his return to office in mid-March. Certainly on the 26th he delivered a long speech defending the grounds for the failed expedition, and he and his small group of friends supported the government at the conclusion of the inquiry. This provoked an opposition bid to soften him by expunging the record of the charge of corruption against him the year before from the house's journals (18 May), but he snubbed it. As in May 1809 he remained hostile to parliamentary reform, and his windows were broken by protesters egged on by the propaganda of the radical Sir Francis Burdett. Nor did he consider the time yet ripe for Catholic relief; his speech of 25 May to that effect was published. On 4 September he rejected a proposal of the Admiralty from Perceval as it was part of an implausible package involving Canning and Lord Sidmouth which, he claimed, the public would not swallow. 
The king's illness and the ensuing regency tested Castlereagh's political allegiance, and he steered an uncertain course. The ministry was impeded from making fresh overtures to him and to Sidmouth by Lord Wellesley's insistence on recruiting Canning as well. Castlereagh's kinship with the prince regent's favourite, Lord Yarmouth, complicated matters for him, and he wavered between initial support for restrictions on the regent's powers and criticism of the extent of the limits imposed. He consistently opposed two royal households, and therefore on 21 January 1811 tried in vain to lessen the queen's powers and transfer the major household officers to the prince regent, but subject to removal. He displayed his range in March and April when he criticized alterations to his military recruitment policies and urged interchange of militias between the mainland and Ireland. He praised successes in the Peninsular War. He also espoused the bullion question and, as one of the dissenting minority, condemned the committee report advocating the resumption of cash payments by the bank in two years' time, preferring to delay until the war was over; this speech of 8 May was published. Early in 1812 he was involved in a fresh ministerial bid to recruit him and other trimmers: Robert Peel was sent to him by Perceval with the prince regent's consent but found him reluctant to come in alone, and overtures to Sidmouth and the whig leaders had failed. On 4 February his usual temporizing support for Catholic relief, upon which he had stipulated for freedom of action in negotiations about his joining the government, was viewed with more cynicism than before, though even his critics drew attention to his good nature and conciliatory behaviour. 
Lord Wellesley's resignation of the Foreign Office, which he had wanted Canning to have, preceded Castlereagh's acceptance of it on 19 February 1812. He had, if anything, expected to be offered the War Office: his only requirement, apart from freedom of action on the Catholic question (which, he had suggested to Lord Hertford on 27 June previous, should be declared a non-party issue by the regent), was the eviction of Lord Camden from his office. His revenge thus complete, Castlereagh aired his more liberal views on Catholic relief in debate on 27 February 1812, but at the same time criticized the whigs for making it a party question. He declined to support Grattan's motion for relief on 24 April because no securities were offered: he suggested that the Catholics should define their objectives. In other respects he was a reliable supporter of the ministry, and renewed his opposition to parliamentary reform on 8 May. It was Castlereagh who four days later moved the address for 'blood money' for the assassinated Perceval's family, and broke down in so doing. When his colleagues attempted to recruit Canning and Lord Wellesley for the government, Castlereagh at first sent the regent his resignation, but retracted it on discovering that Lord Liverpool, not Wellesley, was to head the ministry, and that, in addition to retaining the Foreign Office, he would have the leadership of the Commons. Negotiations with Canning foundered because of his objections to this arrangement; he wished to share the management of government business in the house with Castlereagh, himself taking War Office questions, and to move Castlereagh to the exchequer, vacating the Foreign Office for himself. These were matters which Castlereagh chose not to divulge in debate on 21 May, when he led the ministerial opposition to a motion from the other side to strengthen the administration. The motion was successful, and Castlereagh failed in a petulant bid to confine the conveyance of the address to the prince regent to privy councillors. Attempts were made by the regent to sweeten him to the recruitment of Canning, but Castlereagh stood aside until his colleagues informed the regent that they had decided to abandon the attempt. The latter turned to Lord Moira to form an administration, but the venture failed when it became clear that Canning's friends wished to keep him and Castlereagh apart by sending the latter to the Lords; Castlereagh resented their interference, and Canning himself was to rue it. It fell to Castlereagh to inform the house of Liverpool's resumption of office on 8 June and to shrug off opposition bids to revive the issue. His competence as leader of the house was being called into question, particularly after he had announced the revocation of the orders in council on foreign trading later that month after vehemently opposing Brougham's motion for their repeal a week before, and lamely supported Canning's motion for Catholic relief (22 June) after declaring it a non-party question on the 10th. Government supporters who believed Canning was a necessary acquisition to preserve the ministry regarded Castlereagh as the chief obstacle to their hopes. On 17 July Liverpool met with them both. Castlereagh was willing to exchange the Foreign Office for the exchequer, but would not cede the lead of the house to Canning, which the latter wished at least to share, for the same reason he had steadily resisted ongoing bids by the regent to accept a peerage. A further bid to fix a basis for negotiation in the next few days failed, despite Castlereagh's willingness to concede War Office matters in the house to Canning, when the latter gave up, suspecting that Castlereagh was not in effect surrendering his superiority. 
Despite a shaky start Castlereagh persisted in his attempts to vindicate his leadership of the house after the 1812 election. Though elected for Clitheroe as security, he had retrieved his seat for County Down with the compliance of Lord Downshire, and went on to retain it until the death of his father in 1821. By the end of the first session he had done much to recover his reputation. He committed himself to Catholic relief and had a say in the 'Relief Bill', as finally drafted. He went so far as to condemn the Orange lodges in Ireland on 29 June, and was the only minister in the Commons who took this line. He also managed the renewal of the East India Company charter, and took the regent's part against Whitbread's championship of the princess of Wales's grievances. In short, he left a gap not readily supplied when on 31 December 1813 he left England on his first foreign engagement, accompanied by his wife. She gradually developed a taste for a new role as a glamorous accessory to her husband's international importance. 
Castlereagh was fortunate in his moment of obtaining the Foreign Office seals -- 28 February 1812. The Peninsular campaign was in successful impetus. His first task was to move subsidies to Portugal and Sicily in March. This foreshadowed the revival of Pitt's system of continental alliances in the so-called fourth coalition, the construction of which, begun in June 1812, enabled Castlereagh to justify rejection of recent French peace overtures in the house. Even so, in the ensuing negotiations to recruit Canning for the government he was conditionally willing to surrender the Foreign Office. In February 1813 he obtained the house's concurrence in hostilities with the USA. In November he obtained fresh subsidies for the allies in Europe, who now had the upper hand over Bonaparte. He disliked the terms of peace proposed by the allies, and the cabinet sent him informally to the allied headquarters at Basel and the ensuing conference at Chatillon, with a mission to the prince of Orange 'en route'. This tour revealed allied differences, but Castlereagh first made his mark as a diplomat in attempting to compose them. At this point a temporary success of Bonaparte's put him on the defensive, and he rescued the alliance by renewing it in the treaty of Chaumont on 1 March. He was at Dijon with the Austrians when Bonaparte abdicated. He went on as plenipotentiary to Paris, where the peace preliminaries had been signed on 30 March 1814. These obtained his signature on 11 April, but he made it clear that he believed that Bonaparte still represented a threat. When he returned and presented this to the Commons on 6 June, he was the hero of the hour. He was awarded the Garter that month: though a commoner, he received it in order that he could, on his subsequent travels, be commissioned to confer the like honour on the prince of Orange and the Austrian emperor. The only criticism came from Wilberforce on 29 June, when Castlereagh explained his failure to win unconditional allied support for an international ban on the slave trade. On 1 July he delivered the last of his encomia on the returning Wellington. As leader of the house he also announced the pensioning of the princess of Wales out of the country, and called for moderation of hasty demands for the removal of wartime restrictions on civil liberty. 
Castlereagh returned to the continent in the summer of 1814 on a series of missions: to make peace with the Americans at Ghent, to establish a Dutch monarchy of the Netherlands at Brussels, and then to travel, via Switzerland, to Vienna, where the powers met in September to implement the peace preliminaries. Protracted negotiations, during which he played off France and Austria against Russia and Prussia, detained him there until agreement was wrested from the latter states by a treaty between Britain, France, and Austria on 3 January 1815. Even so, he had to sacrifice some of his objectives, notably that of an independent Poland. He arrived home via Paris, where he parleyed with the restored Bourbon monarch, on 3 March 1815, before ratification, and a week later informed the house of Bonaparte's escape from Elba, which he had feared all along. He was meanwhile a stoical spectator while the windows of his London house were broken by anti-cornlaw rioters, but defended the use of the military to protect parliament. On 16 March he announced the government's intention to prevent the restoration of Bonaparte in France, and delivered a four-hour speech on his peace negotiations four days later. On 7 April he justified the reinforcement of the armed services to meet the new threat to European security. He resisted Whitbread's bid for a negotiation with Bonaparte, who had made an overture to him for an Anglo-French armistice, which he referred to the allies and later disclosed to the house. On 11 April he had carried the Anglo-American treaty of Ghent, and on 23 April the treaty of Vienna, which had been signed on 25 March. He carried a series of measures renewing alliances and subsidies and embodying militia to confront Bonaparte (25 May), and in June was able to move the thanks of the house for victory at Waterloo. Domestic questions were more troublesome: his coolly defiant stance in debate, where he shouldered the burden of post-war discontent, made him a focus for opposition and popular incrimination, though in Ireland his principled support for Catholic relief conciliated its champions. 
In the summer of 1815 Castlereagh went back to Paris to negotiate, in congress, a new peace treaty and renew the quadruple alliance. This, designed to contain France in the future, was achieved on 20 November, and he had a starring role in it, not least in preventing the allies from inflicting punitive measures on France. His father obtained the Irish marquessate of Londonderry in January 1816. In February he vindicated in the house the equilibrium attained in Europe, criticized the tendency of opposition to denigrate the allies as reactionaries, and upheld the maintenance of a large military establishment in peacetime. He particularly objected to Brougham's championship of the suppressed Spanish liberals, which he saw as an instance of unwarranted interference in the affairs of other countries. He carried the peace treaty on 20 February: his aim was a concert of Europe sustained by open diplomacy. After a brief illness he found the house far more unmanageable in peacetime than in war: the army estimates were strongly challenged and the renewal of the property tax defeated. He had to lecture the house on 'an ignorant impatience to be relieved from taxation' ('Hansard 1', 32, 45) and deliver a similar sermon to about fifty country gentlemen at his office in order to secure the 'Civil List Regulation Bill' he brought in on 3 May. By its separation of royal from state expenditure, this sought to diminish the outcry about the royal family's cost to the nation, to which he had previously alerted the regent. Subsequently that session he had more success with government measures, and although the standard criticism that, as Byron mocked, he was guilty of 'the strange displays / Of that odd string of words, all in a row, / Which none divine, and everyone obeys' (Byron, IX.49) continued, it was widely acknowledged that the government would be the worse for his transfer to the Lords: the home secretary, Lord Sidmouth, whose measures gave Castlereagh so much trouble, sat there. 
The pressure on Castlereagh was, however, relentless in the 1817 session, when he faced opposition attacks on legislation against sedition and the suspension of habeas corpus; on public expenditure, despite undoubted retrenchments; and on commercial depression. His corpulent and gouty appearance was noted, while his workload was described as 'enough to destroy the health of Hercules' (W. Wellesley to C. Bagot, 4 May 1817, Bagot MSS, Cumbria AS). On 11 July he furiously rebuffed an attempt by Brougham to discredit him on the old charge of cruelty in Ireland during the rising of 1798. His good standing with the regent, enhanced by his arrangement of Princess Charlotte's marriage to Prince Leopold, was thought to make Lord Liverpool jealous, though the princess refused to have Lady Castlereagh as lady-in-waiting, and it was her husband that Castlereagh counted on influencing. The princess's death in childbed late in 1817 disposed of further speculation. It spelt more trouble for Castlereagh in the 1818 session, when he had to swallow reduced grants to three of the regent's brothers as they married in competition to produce a new heir to the throne, following keen opposition. Previously he had repealed the suspension of habeas corpus, but renewed the secret committee on internal unrest and assured indemnity to government agents. He also placated Wilberforce somewhat by producing an Anglo-Spanish treaty on the slave trade, followed by others with Portugal and the Netherlands. Parliamentary reform remained out of the question for him; nor did he regard the plight of the needy as a government matter. After attending the congress of Aix-la-Chapelle in the recess of 1818 he was able to report the pacification of Europe, with the allied evacuation of France, to the new parliament in February 1819. His worst problem in the house resulted from the death of Queen Charlotte, and this he solved by halving the regent's income. The opposition, under George Tierney's leadership, harassed him also on the resumption of cash payments by the bank, which he had steadily opposed but now consented to legislate for, and on criminal law reform, which he opposed while favouring prison reform. In one of his ablest speeches he reduced Tierney's censure motion of 18 May to a partisan attempt to overthrow the government. His opposition to the emancipation of the Spanish American colonies was made plain in his promotion of the bill against foreign enlistment a month later. He also supported a 'Charitable Foundation Bill' framed to meet Brougham's exposure of abuses in charitable educational institutions. 
The suppression of the radical meeting at St Peter's Fields, Manchester (the Peterloo massacre), in 1819 led to a stormy session in parliament during which Castlereagh introduced legislation to outlaw such assemblies, prevent training of dissidents, and seize arms. For this he was the target of abuse from political opponents and radical populists. His comment was 'I feel no wrath against the people, I am only doing my duty' ('Hansard 1', 41, 3 Dec 1819, 702). The substance of these speeches was published 'en bloc'. To ensure support he made some concessions, and even granted that there was a case for disfranchising the most notorious rotten boroughs, such as Grampound (14 December), though he believed that each case should be treated on its merits. On the death of George III in January 1820, Castlereagh seemed well placed to take a leading part during the reign of George IV, but radicalism found a new focus in support of the claims of the king's estranged wife, Caroline, who returned to England in June 1820, while George's abandonment of the Hertfords in favour of the Conynghams as intimates damaged his standing at court; this difficulty was aggravated by a quarrel between Lady Castlereagh and Lady Conyngham. Castlereagh sent his half-brother Charles to the continental congresses at Troppau and Laibach late in 1820, guided by a state paper of 5 May, aimed at preserving British interests in the face of the holy alliance promoted by the tsar, who wished to instate a mutual allied guarantee against political revolutions. The allies' readiness to countenance such intervention in the affairs of Naples stung him into rebuke in January 1821. 
On the death of his father on 6 April 1821 Castlereagh became second marquess of Londonderry and 'custos' of that county, of which he had been a governor since 1805. As an Irish peer he could no longer sit for an Irish constituency, and he transferred on 28 April to a seat for Orford on Lord Hertford's interest. He remained at home to face the repercussions in the house of the royal marital breakdown, a subject highly distasteful to him. He was relieved when the bill of pains and penalties against Caroline was abandoned, and her death in 1821 closed that chapter, during which he had been extensively lampooned. Meanwhile he had accompanied the king to Dublin and to Hanover, whereupon he was awarded a GCH (civil) and was privately regarded as both the king's and Lord Liverpool's choice to succeed the latter as premier. Castlereagh was not keen, however, to promote the up and coming Robert Peel until the latter accepted the Home Office, which did not constitute a threat to him: it seems his sole remaining ambition was for the premiership. The wear and tear of leading the house had taken its toll on him. In his last speech on foreign affairs, on 21 February 1822, he had to take note of the rift between Britain and her reactionary allies. In his last published speeches of 15 February and 29 April 1822 he disclaimed government responsibility for agricultural distress. In the recess that followed he had a breakdown which threatened his mental stability, and it became evident that the anxieties previously kept under rein were now overtaking him. One of them allegedly related to blackmail, after a chance encounter with a hostile transvestite male who deliberately attempted to compromise him, but no confirmation exists for the authenticity of this or of homosexual vagaries imputed to him (see Hyde, 'Strange Death of Lord Castlereagh'). Evading the attentions of his doctor, who had removed the pistols he had carried since the Cato Street conspiracy to assassinate the entire cabinet in 1820, as well as his razors, he cut his throat with a penknife in his dressing room at his county retreat in Kent, North Cray Place, on 12 August 1822. The inquest pointed to the onset of a state of mental delusion, of which several of his colleagues were aware. On 20 August, after his hearse had been reviled by some malicious spectators, he was buried next to Pitt in Westminster Abbey. He had become a fellow of the Royal Society on 11 November 1802 and an elder of Trinity House in 1817: but in a life short of leisure, his favourite pursuit was gardening. In his will he left the Mount Stewart estate in co. Down to his half-brother Sir Charles William Stewart, who succeeded to the marquessate, and the rest to his wife. He provided for all his household servants at North Cray. 
Shelley's lines on Castlereagh in 'The Mask of Anarchy' (1819) were some of the most vicious in the history of British political satire: '
I met Murder on the way -- 

He had a mask like Castlereagh --. 

' Attacks on him were also made by Byron, Southey, Moore, and Cobbett. But pity again worked for him once the circumstances of his death became known. Even opponents then paid tribute to the courtesy and tact, personal courage and integrity which informed his business and diplomatic abilities, and to his good humour and amiability off the stage once he had overcome a certain social reserve. The want of ornament and coherence in his speeches was admitted on all sides, but oratorical fashions changed, and the plain, factual manner he preferred was to be used effectively by Robert Peel. While he regarded himself as a mere disciple of Pitt, his post-war foreign policy, despite the amendments of his successor, Canning, was firmly based on an objective of European consensus, which made for a long-lasting peace on a war-weary continent. In this respect he became a model of diplomacy and statesmanship for a century. The publication of his state papers by his half-brother (1848-53) exacted admiration for his political and diplomatic clear-headedness and resourcefulness, and exonerated him from many then prevalent criticisms. Nineteenth-century liberals thought him too tender to the restored monarchies and disrespectful of subjugated nations, but he was a ready critic of the excessive zeal of the holy alliance, just as he had sought to moderate Wellesley's empire-building in India as colonial secretary and been anxious not to saddle Britain with most of the overseas colonies seized in wartime. These favourable qualifications have surfaced in twentieth-century biographical profiles by Sir Charles Wheeler, J. A. R. Marriott, Ione Leigh, and Wendy Hinde. His diplomatic powers, as analysed by Henry Kissinger in 'A World Restored', adumbrated its author's own career. As one of the first of a galaxy of statesmen to emerge from the Anglo-Irish union, of which Castlereagh remained a firm advocate, he was remarkable, given his Ulster background, for his support of Catholic relief, and saw that the long delay in granting this, during which he had himself been hesitant for political reasons, was bound to jeopardize the success of the 'Act of Union'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26508


Stewart, Sir Robert Prescott (1825-1894), organist and composer, born at Dublin on 16 December 1825, was the son of Charles F. Stewart, a librarian of the King's Inns, Dublin. He received his musical education in the school attached to Christ Church, Dublin, of which church he became organist in 1844. He was also appointed in the same year organist to Trinity College, Dublin, and in 1852 to St Patrick's Cathedral, where he also was a vicar-choral. In 1846 he married Mary Anne, the daughter of Peter Browne of Rahurs, Castlebar. Also in 1846 he became conductor of the Dublin University Choral Society, which presented him with his robes and a jewelled baton when he graduated DMus in 1851. Ten years later he became professor of music at Dublin University. In 1872 Stewart declined an invitation to represent Ireland at the peace festival at Boston, USA. In the same year he became professor of theory at the Royal Irish Academy of Music, and was knighted by Earl Spencer. In 1873 he was appointed conductor of the Dublin Philharmonic. After his first wife died, on 7 August 1887, Stewart married, on 9 August 1888, Marie, the daughter of Joseph Wheeler of Westlands, Queenstown. 
Stewart was a remarkable organist and extemporizer, while his memory is said to have been phenomenal. His compositions, many of which gained prizes, were numerous, the most popular being his glees and church music. He wrote various odes, for the opening of the Cork exhibition (1852), the Birmingham festival (1870), the Boston peace festival (1872), and the tercentenary festival of Trinity College, Dublin (1892). The list of his published works includes a number of cantatas, songs, and organ music. Stewart delivered many series of lectures on subjects ranging from Bach and Handel to musical styles, lyrical drama, and Irish music, including one on bagpipes, on which he was an acknowledged authority. He instituted the requirement for candidates for musical degrees at Dublin to pass a literary test, an example followed some years later at Oxford and Cambridge. He was also editor of the 'Irish Church Hymnal' (1876), and a contributor to Sir George Grove's 'Dictionary of Music and Musicians' (1879-89). At the time of his death he was vice-president of the Royal Academy of Music as well as of the Royal College of Organists. He died at his residence in Upper Fitzwilliam Street, Dublin, suddenly but peacefully, on 24 March 1894. A statue was erected in his memory on Leinster Lawn, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 26509


Stewart, Sir Thomas Grainger (1837-1900), physician, son of Alexander Stewart, decorator in Edinburgh, and Agnes, daughter of Hugh Grainger of Gogar Green, was born in Edinburgh on 23 September 1837. He was educated at Edinburgh high school and at the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated MD in 1858. While an undergraduate he was elected one of the presidents of the Royal Medical Society. After graduation he studied medicine at the universities and hospitals of Berlin, Prague, and Vienna, under, among others, R. Virchow, J. L. Schoenlein, and L. Traube. 
After his return to Edinburgh, Stewart became house physician at the old infirmary under Professor John Hughes Bennett and Professor Thomas Laycock. In 1861 he lectured on materia medica and dietetics. In 1862 he was appointed pathologist to the infirmary, and lecturer on pathology at Surgeons' Hall, as well as a physician to the Edinburgh Hospital for Sick Children. Stewart married in 1863 Josephine Dubois, daughter of Charles Anderson of Riverhead, Jamaica. Following her death in 1864, he married in 1866 Jessy Dingwall Fordyce, daughter of the Revd Robert Macdonald. Also in 1866 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. During these early years Stewart worked incessantly; made numerous detailed observations on the symptoms and pathology of waxy kidney; and wrote papers on various kidney conditions, on dilatation of the bronchi, on acute atrophy of the liver, and on other subjects. In 1869 he published 'A Practical Treatise on Bright's Disease of the Kidneys', which was well received in Britain and in the USA. 
Unsuccessful in his application for the chair of pathology in 1869 -- obtained by William Rutherford Sanders -- Stewart resigned his appointments to fill the posts of junior ordinary physician in the infirmary and lecturer on clinical medicine. His clear and painstaking method of lecturing, and the interest he took in the work of his students, soon led to a large increase in their number. In 1873 he began to lecture in the extramural school on the practice of physic; he swiftly became the most popular teacher on medicine outside the university, and introduced many practical improvements in teaching methods. 
In 1876 Stewart devoted himself exclusively to teaching and consultation work. In the same year, on the death of Professor Laycock, his success as a teacher and physician had been so marked that he was appointed professor of the practice of physic in Edinburgh University -- 'the blue ribbon of medicine' -- becoming also one of the professors of clinical medicine, with wards in the Royal Infirmary, of which he was afterwards for many years senior physician. Stewart showed himself to be one of the most successful lecturers in the university; moreover, in consultation work he had one of the largest practices in Scotland, and on many occasions he was called to cases abroad. 
In 1878 Stewart was president of the section of medicine at the meeting of the British Medical Association at Bath, and at the International Medical Congress in London in 1881 he introduced the discussion on Bright's disease. In 1882, on the death of Sir Robert Christison, he was appointed physician-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria in Scotland. In 1887 he received the honorary degree of MD from the Royal University of Ireland, was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland, and also obtained the honorary degree of MD of the University of Dublin. In 1892 he was elected an honorary fellow of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia. He was president of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh (of which he was a fellow) from 1889 to 1891, and for two years was also president of the Edinburgh Medico-Chirurgical Society. In 1894 he was knighted. Later in the same year he addressed the British Medical Association at Bristol on influenza. In 1897 he received the degree of LLD from Aberdeen University, and in 1898 he acted as president of the British Medical Association at Edinburgh. In 1899 he went as representative of Edinburgh University to the Berlin congress on tuberculosis; he was appointed one of the congress vice-presidents, and Virchow introduced him as 'mein beruhmtester Schuler' -- 'my most eminent pupil'. 
As a clinical teacher Stewart was clear and systematic, and he conducted his class by means of question and answer, while the students in rotation listened to abnormal sounds in the patient's chest or otherwise examined him. As a lecturer he was equally lucid and precise, with an ability to go straight to the main point in each case, so that his instruction was easily followed and understood even by the least experienced student. Stewart was a man of wide and general culture, and devoted much time to the study of Scottish history and archaeology. His main effort in literature was 'The Good Regent: a Chronicle Play', a drama on the subject of the Regent Moray, published in 1898. Stewart had previously contributed anonymous verses and translations to different periodicals. He had, according to contemporaries, 'a great gift of ready and attractive and charming speech, and this was enhanced by his tall, commanding and dignified presence' ('BMJ', 355). 
Stewart took a foremost part in founding and organizing the Medical Students' Association, and for two terms was president of the Medical Missionary Society, in which he was keenly interested. His views on diseases of the kidneys were widely accepted by his peers. He was also one of the first in Britain to draw attention to the deep reflexes in neuritis, and described the condition known as multiple neuritis. Long before brain surgery became common, he persuaded Joseph Lister to perform operations on the brain for traumatic epilepsy. Stewart's lectures were widely quoted on the continent, and several of them were translated into French, German, and Russian, even becoming set texts in several German universities. 
Stewart died at his address at 19 Charlotte Square, Edinburgh, on 3 February 1900, and was buried four days later in the Dean cemetery, following a service at the Free St George's Church, Edinburgh, where he had been an elder. His wife, four sons, and four daughters survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26510


Walter Fitzalan (c.1110-1177), third son of Alan son of Flaald, a favoured supporter of Henry I, who was descended from the hereditary stewards of Dol in Brittany. Walter's elder brother William was lord of Oswestry and Clun in Shropshire, and ancestor of the Fitzalans who were later earls of Arundel. Walter entered the service of David I, king of Scots, about 1136, and towards the end of David's reign became the king's 'dapifer', or steward, an office which was to be held heritably. Walter was granted extensive lands by the Scottish king and his grandson Malcolm IV ('r'. 1153-65): Renfrew, with the district later to become Renfrewshire, the northern half of Kyle (the central portion of Ayrshire), together with sizeable estates in Berwickshire, Roxburghshire, and Haddingtonshire. On these lands Walter and his immediate descendants settled knights and other military fief-holders recruited from the Welsh border country where the Fitzalans were well established. The head of the family, from Walter Fitzalan's time onward, became one of the most powerful barons of the Scottish kingdom, a position symbolized by the Stewarts' possession of Renfrew Castle and burgh and by their building Dundonald Castle and founding the Cluniac priory (later abbey) of Paisley. 
Walter died in 1177, his heir, from his marriage to Eschina, evidently of a family native to southern Scotland, being Alan [


@@@@@


doc= 26511


Sir Walter Stewart (c.1296-1327), who commanded one of the four Scottish brigades at Bannockburn in 1314, after which battle he was knighted. A year later Walter was given the eldest child of Robert I, 


@@@@@


doc= 26512


Stewart, Walter, earl of Atholl, first earl of Caithness, and earl of Strathearn (early 1360s-1437), magnate, was the youngest legitimate son of Robert II (1316-1390), king of Scots, and second son of his second marriage, to Euphemia Ross ['see 'Euphemia (b. in or before 1329?, d. 1388/)]. He was born in the early 1360s, but first appears at his marriage in 1378 to Margaret, daughter and heir of David Barclay of Brechin. By comparison with the lands and titles given to his elder brothers, Walter received only limited grants from his father, and did not become an earl until in his forties. His slow rise to importance was undertaken in alliance with his half-brother Robert Stewart, earl of Fife and duke of Albany, and grants of customs revenue and landed significance coincided with the latter's periods of authority after 1388. Walter also benefited from the death of his only full brother, David Stewart, earl of Strathearn and Caithness, before March 1389. Acting as tutor, or guardian, for David's daughter, Euphemia, Walter ran Strathearn for the next fifteen years. In this role he supported the interests of Robert, earl of Fife, in the region, leading military expeditions into the highlands against another brother, Alexander Stewart of Badenoch, in the 1390s. Walter also backed Robert (now duke of Albany) in his coup of 1402 against David, duke of Rothesay; Walter Bower, writing in the 1440s, even accused Walter Stewart of being the instigator of Rothesay's death. Albany certainly diverted patronage to his brother from 1402. Rothesay's earldom of Atholl and lordship of Methven were with dubious legality granted to Walter by Albany in 1404, following an earlier resignation to him of the earldom of Caithness by his niece Euphemia ('c'.1400). 
These rewards may have been intended to compensate Atholl for the loss of Strathearn on Euphemia's marriage to Patrick Graham, an adherent of Albany. However, Atholl may have continued to interfere in Strathearn and seems to have exploited, possibly even arranged, Graham's murder in 1413 to renew his hold on the earldom as tutor for Patrick's son, Malise Graham. His recovery of Strathearn was probably achieved against the wishes of Albany, perhaps indicating a rivalry for influence in Perthshire between the two. That may in turn have determined Atholl's stance in 1424 on the return of James I. His support of the king's execution of Murdoch, duke of Albany, and his sons in 1425 removed his powerful neighbour, and from that year Atholl was administering the former Albany lordships in Perthshire as both sheriff and justiciar. The king also secured Atholl's hold on Strathearn by forcing Earl Malise to resign his lands to his tutor before departing to England as a hostage for the king in 1427. Such rewards emphasize the good relations between James I and his half-uncle and although Atholl's elder son, David, was also sent as a hostage, he and his other kin received frequent signs of royal favour. His second son, Alan, received his father's earldom of Caithness in 1430 and was given a major role in the king's war against the lordship of the Isles, in which he was killed at the battle of Inverlochy in 1431. His place was filled by Atholl's grandson, Robert, the son of David. As he reached adulthood Robert was made the king's personal chamberlain and both grandson and grandfather retained a special place as James's closest kinsmen and, after his young son, heirs to the throne. 
While Atholl and Robert enjoyed the king's full trust, by early 1437 their attitude to him had altered. The root of this was insecurity about the long-term prospects of their family -- an insecurity which the death of Atholl's elder son, David, who had never been redeemed from his captivity in England, can only have increased, just as it must also have engendered hostility towards the king on the part of Atholl and his kin. Atholl's successful management of crown lands in Perthshire had seen them removed from his custody as they came to profit and, since Strathearn was held by Walter in liferent, he feared that it too would be annexed by a king who was increasingly desperate for funds. These losses would reverse Atholl's efforts since 1389 and were encouraged by evidence of royal favour going elsewhere. Queen Joan, William, earl of Angus, and Archibald, earl of Douglas, all now rivalled Atholl's influence with James. Royal interference in Atholl's power base was the last straw. In January 1437 the king overrode local wishes to appoint his nephew James Kennedy as bishop of Dunkeld. Fears of a rival in the region and loss of face with the community combined with wider concerns to prompt Atholl, who was perhaps also encouraged by the ambitions of his grandson, Robert, to launch a 'coup d'etat'. 
Early 1437 was the ideal time for such an attack. The king had suffered a series of setbacks, stemming from his failed campaign on the borders the previous year, and appeared vulnerable. Atholl's connections put him in a position to take advantage of this. Links with servants of the dukes of Albany such as Sir Robert Graham (even though Graham could plausibly have resented Atholl's activities in 1413, anent the death of Sir Robert's brother Patrick) provided him with a group of irreconcilable opponents of the king, while his own adherents, his grandson, Robert Stewart, as an important figure at court, and John Spens, steward of the heir to the throne, the future James II, were well placed to assist the killing of the king and seizure of the young James. The assassination of James I at Perth on 21 February 1437 showed the value of these connections. Atholl sought to distance himself from events by withdrawing to his principal residence at Methven Castle, 4 miles from Perth. But the failure of his agents to kill the queen and to secure the new king in Edinburgh proved fatal. Although he maintained resistance for perhaps three weeks after the murder, Atholl was eventually captured by the earl of Angus at the head of the queen's forces. He was taken to Edinburgh and tried before a parliament dominated by the queen's partisans. Despite protestations of innocence he was found guilty and on the afternoon of 26 March 1437 was beheaded. 
As the instigator of a failed coup, Atholl received universal vilification from Scottish writers. He was 'that old serpent' (Skene, 2.289) and 'a man grown old in a life of evil-doing' (Bower, 8.301) who clawed his way towards the throne in fulfilment of a Gypsy's prophecy. Atholl's career displayed ambition and a readiness to use force to achieve his ends, yet his methods were not exceptional. Other magnates, most notably his brother Albany, could show a similar approach to the maintenance of magnate power. 


@@@@@


doc= 26513


Stewart, Walter, first Lord Blantyre (d. 1617), judge and administrator, was the eldest son of Sir John Stewart of Minto, provost of Glasgow, and his second wife, Margaret, second daughter of James Stewart of Cardonald. The Minto lairds had a long history of service to the nation, including an ancestor who fell at Flodden in 1513. As a younger son of a protestant noble family who could claim kinship to the royal house, Walter was raised with James VI under the rigorous tutelage of George Buchanan during the 1570s. It was largely upon this set of circumstances that the career of Walter Stewart was founded. 
By 1580 Stewart had become commendator of the priory of Blantyre by royal gift; the priory's lands were just outside Glasgow, where the Minto branch of the Stewart family exerted great influence. James VI further rewarded his schoolmate in 1580 by appointing him one of the gentlemen of the chamber. Calderwood records that Stewart signed the second confession of faith on 28 January 1581. He became a privy councillor on 14 November 1582 and was also made keeper of the privy seal following the death of George Buchanan on 28 September 1582. He became also an assessor to the treasurer on 26 April 1583 and tutor to the duke of Lennox. On 29 July 1583 he received a grant of the lands of Calderhall and on 3 November 1587 of the lands and barony of Glasgow. Although he attended at court during the 1580s and early 1590s, he spent much of his time administering his estates and attending to family matters. On 28 May 1593 he became a judge extraordinary of the court of session, the highest civil court in Scotland; extraordinary judgeships were not uncommonly held by noblemen not necessarily trained in law, and Stewart's holding of a recently defunct ecclesiastic office, and his kinship to the king, undoubtedly helped to justify his appointment. 
In January 1596 Stewart was appointed one of the eight commissioners of the treasury, known as Octavians; Stewart acted as unofficial chancellor for this group until he was appointed royal treasurer on 6 March 1596, when he resigned the office of the privy seal. James VI ended his experiment of the Octavian administration in January 1597, but Stewart retained the office of treasurer. He was also comptroller between January and December 1597. In December 1597 he assigned the financial responsibilities of the treasurership to Thomas Foulis, goldsmith and financier, but the scheme collapsed in January 1598 when the king failed to meet his obligations to Foulis; Stewart then resumed office. On 18 January 1599 he received a charter of the barony of Blantyre, Wrightslands, and Cardonald. 
In March 1599 Stewart was caught up in a dispute between James VI and the outspoken presbyterian minister Robert Bruce. A month earlier the king had revoked a pension held by Bruce, who sought redress before the court of session. Stewart was among the judges who decided the case in Bruce's favour, a triumph for judicial independence, despite the king's overt efforts to influence the proceedings. James VI's ire over the case fell disproportionately on Stewart, who was placed under ward in Edinburgh Castle and ordered to resign his offices; Stewart refused to resign as treasurer until all amounts owed to him by the king (in excess of $18,000 Scots) were paid. Treasurers to the Stewart kings often undertook significant personal liabilities in connection with the execution of that office, frequently collecting these obligations over a period of years following their official service. By April 1599 the king ordered Stewart to be sent to Inverness as a prisoner, and he was finally compelled to resign as treasurer on 17 April, whereupon he was released and attended a meeting of the privy council on 17 May, during preparations for a convention of the estates. Alexander, master of Elphinstone, succeeded Stewart as both treasurer and as judge of the court of session. However, Stewart appears to have been quickly reconciled to the king and he remained a member of the privy council, with his absence expressly excused for the period from 24 May to 1 November 1599, although in fact he reappears in council records regularly from July. On 11 March 1600 an act was passed confirming the financial obligations (determined to be $7000 Scots upon settlement of accounts) owed to Stewart and recognizing his long and faithful service. 
In 1604 Stewart was appointed one of the commissioners for the proposed treaty of union between England and Scotland. Raised in the protestant discipline, but supportive of a church subservient to the polity of the state, Stewart was among the many councillors who met on 20 June 1605 to promulgate the king's order to abandon the general assembly scheduled to meet in Aberdeen on 2 July 1605. Nineteen ministers met in contravention of the order and were imprisoned and tried in a trial that signified the king's determination to curb the kirk's independence of action; Stewart was appointed one of four delegates to reason with the imprisoned ministers and bring them to submission. On 10 July 1606 he was created a peer by the title of Lord Blantyre. In March 1607 he was a commissioner to the synod of Lothian on the subject of constant moderatorships. He was an assessor at the trial on 12 August 1608 of George Sprott, for concealment of the Gowrie conspiracy, and also at that of Lord Balmerino on 4 March 1609. He was reconstituted a judge extraordinary of the court of session on 13 January 1610, and on 15 November following he was appointed an assessor of the treasury. 
Stewart married Nichola, fourth daughter of Sir James Somerville of Cambusnethan, on 31 December 1582; she survived him and delivered his testament, in which she is described as his relict. They had six sons: Sir James, who fought a duel with Sir George Wharton at Islington on 8 November 1609, when both combatants were killed; William, who succeeded his father as second Lord Blantyre; Walter, a doctor of medicine and father of Frances Teresa Stuart, a famous beauty at Charles II's court who became duchess of Richmond, and of the Jacobite supporter Lady Sophia Bulkeley; Mr John; Alexander; and Ludovic; and a daughter Anne, who married John, eighth Lord Abernethy of Saltoun. According to the testament and inventory recorded on 12 June 1618, Lord Blantyre died in late February 1617, although most historians record his death on 8 March 1617. At his death his debts to creditors were $1340 Scots and his residual goods and debts owed to him amounted to $3770 Scots and $6371 Scots, respectively, exclusive of the value of his lands. 


@@@@@


doc= 26514


Stewart, Sir William, of Jedworth (d. 1402), soldier and administrator, is often thought to have been a younger son of Sir Alexander Stewart of Darnley, but the evidence to this effect is inconclusive and he may instead have come from a branch of the Stewarts in Teviotdale, Roxburghshire. He was possibly a son of Sir John Stewart of Jedworth, who was active in the English allegiance in the 1350s and 1360s, and his wife, a sister of Sir John Turnbull of Minto. 
It is thought that Stewart, himself a Teviotdale landholder, was an ally of the English until 1384, when a major Scottish offensive recaptured the area. Like many around him, he appears to have participated enthusiastically in the process of reconquest, and on 2 July 1384 he was rewarded by Robert II with a grant of Roxburghshire lands. That Stewart was active in further Scottish attacks on England during the 1380s is indicated by his receipt of 100 livres tournois from the French expeditionary force to Scotland of 1385 and by his presence in 1388 in the Scottish host at the battle of Otterburn. Quick assimilation into Scottish aristocratic society is the striking feature of Stewart's career after his change of allegiance. He was knighted between 1385 and December 1390, and throughout the next decade served in official positions in the Scottish government. He frequently acted as an auditor of the exchequer and in the late 1390s took part in diplomatic missions to England, was a commissioner at march days, and was one of those in charge of enforcing border law on the Scottish middle march. He also became sheriff of Roxburghshire. 
Stewart received regular pensions and annuities from the royal exchequer in the 1390s, including a retaining fee from 1392 for his services to Robert III's eldest son, David, future duke of Rothesay. A regular witness of royal charters at this time, Stewart seems to have emerged as a prominent figure in national politics; he served on parliamentary commissions, most notably the council of 1399 which was designed to oversee the lieutenancy of the duke of Rothesay. This suggests strong links with the royal household, but Stewart survived the political eclipse of Rothesay in 1401, and apparently retained close ties to the Douglas affinity. He had been involved in attacking Roxburgh some time in the 1390s in the company of Archibald Douglas, later fourth earl of Douglas. The Roxburgh attack, in breach of the Anglo-Scottish truce, and despite the border offices held by Stewart, is an indication of his personal bellicosity towards England, a tendency shared at the time by much of the Scottish nobility. This predilection was given free rein in the climate of severely worsened relations between the two after the deposition of Richard II in 1399. 
In 1400 Stewart appears to have made an unsuccessful raid on Northumberland, and he was in the Scottish host which was heavily defeated at Hamildon Hill on 14 September 1402. Stewart's death must have occurred shortly afterwards, as he was captured in the battle, tried, and executed for treason at the instigation of Sir Henry Percy (died 1403). Stewart had previously been in the allegiance of the English king, which gave a legal justification for his treatment, and there was a precedent in Edward III's execution of the earl of Menteith after his capture in 1346 at the battle of Nevilles Cross. It is hard, though, not to perceive a personal element in Percy's reaction to Stewart's capture. Within the context of Anglo-Scottish warfare in the late fourteenth century there may well have developed a highly charged animosity between Stewart and Percy, which found its expression in 1402. Only the first name is known of Stewart's wife, Isabel, and she was probably still alive in 1420. They had at least two sons, of whom John succeeded. 


@@@@@


doc= 26515


Stewart, William (c.1490-1545), ecclesiastical administrator and bishop of Aberdeen, was the son of Sir Thomas Stewart of Minto, Roxburghshire, and Isabella, daughter of Sir Walter Stewart and Janet Cameron of Arthurlie, Renfrewshire. He was born in Glasgow and educated at its university, before proceeding abroad to study canon law and theology. Successively vicar of Lochmaben and rector of Ayr, he was elected dean of Glasgow on 21 January 1531, being then described as about forty years old. He had, however, already been called to parliament by then as a lord of council, and had been appointed lord high treasurer of Scotland on 2 October 1530, which office he held until 4 June 1537, and with it the provostry of Lincluden, to which he had been presented in expectation in 1529. On the death of Gavin Dunbar, bishop of Aberdeen, on 10 March 1532, James V urged Clement VII to appoint Stewart as his successor. Accordingly the pope provided him to the see on 13 November of that year, and Stewart was consecrated at St Machar's Cathedral some time between 22 March and 10 April 1533. From the sources still available it is clear that the confidence placed in his abilities by the crown and papacy at this time was justified: his accounts throughout his treasurership were scrupulously presented, and he regularly attended parliamentary sessions and served prudently on the committees to which he was assigned. Despite the unstable political relationship between James V and Henry VIII throughout the whole of this period, he successfully concluded a peace treaty between their respective countries in London on 11 May 1534. The treaty was ratified by both monarchs in June and August of that year, and in December 1541 Stewart was again called by James to arrange a meeting between the two kings in York on 15 January 1542 to resolve the continuing depredations being committed on the English border. Stewart also served as ambassador to France, on 6 March 1536 being one of the commissioners who drew up the contract for King James's marriage to Mary of Guise. 
As for his work as bishop of Aberdeen, the same integrity and careful attention to detail may equally be discerned throughout the twelve difficult years of Stewart's episcopate. He firmly resisted heresy in his diocese, and is recorded as attending the condemnation of heretics in 1534 and 1540. His constitutions of 1537 and 1540 for his cathedral clergy reinforced those meticulously laid down by Bishop William Elphinstone in 1506. He was a friend to the Franciscans of Aberdeen, but for reasons of jurisdiction his relations with the Benedictines and Augustinians in his diocese were often troubled. As chancellor of the University of Aberdeen, Stewart completed the building programme at King's College planned by his predecessors, and added its library, sacristy, and jewel house; he was a generous benefactor to its chapel, and actively encouraged the advancement of humanist studies within the university. Writing in March 1532, James V described Stewart as 'a man whose qualities and industry speak for themselves' (Hannay, 'Letters', 217). Stewart died on 10 April 1545 and was buried in the south transept of St Machar's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 26516


Stewart, William (fl. 1499-1541), chronicler and poet, was great-grandson of one of the illegitimate sons of Alexander Stewart, earl of Buchan. He was educated at St Andrews, where apparently he was a determinant in 1499, and first of the licentiates in 1501. Stewart was destined for the church, and possibly some of the minor preferments assigned to the future bishop of Aberdeen, William Stewart ('c'.1490-1545), were really held by the chronicler. Before 1526 he became a frequenter of the court, and the treasurer's accounts from then contain entries of various payments and presents to him from James V; in 1527 he held a pension of $20 which was doubled before 1530. The last entry referring to him occurs in 1541, and he was dead before 1560. 
Sir David Lyndsay, writing in 1530, mentions Stewart among the poets of James V's court, and John Rolland, in his prologue to the 'Seven Sages' (1560), classes him with John Bellenden and Bishop Andrew Durie (died 1558) among his 'masters'. The collections of George Bannatyne (1545-1607/8) and Sir Richard Maitland, Lord Lethington, contain several poems ascribed to Stewart, but only one, beginning 'This hinder nicht, neir by the hour of nyne', is inscribed with his name. But he had probably written much verse, which has been lost, before 1528, when he and Bellenden were commissioned by James V to prepare Scottish verse and prose translations, respectively, of the history of Hector Boece. Bellenden's version appeared in 1536, but Stewart's, which was begun in 1531, remained in manuscript until 1858, when it was published in three volumes in the 'Rolls Series'. It was edited by William Barclay Turnbull from a unique manuscript which, after being in the possession of Hew Craufurd of Cloverhill, Bishop Moore, and George I, was presented by the last-named to Cambridge University Library (Kk.ii.16). Stewart's style is rugged and ungrammatical, but his translation contains some graphic descriptions. He shows an acquaintance with the works of John Mair or Major, Froissart, and Fordun, and he made some notable additions to Boece's original -- for example in the account of the siege of Perth by the Danes in 1041, in which he introduces Macbeth and Banquo. Stewart's account is fuller than that of Boece. C. C. Stopes has suggested that Stewart's history may have been a source for Shakespeare's 'Macbeth' ('Shakespeare's 'Macbeth' and Holinshed', 'N&Q', 8th ser., 11, 1897, 321-2). 


@@@@@


doc= 26517


Stewart, Sir William, of Monkton (c.1550-1588), soldier, was the third son of Andrew Stewart, second Lord Ochiltree (1521?-1594?), and his first wife, Agnes, daughter of John Cunningham of Caprington. Details of William's early life are scarce but it is likely that he was well educated, before serving as a mercenary in France and Sweden. He married Helen Cunningham, widow of John Stewart, burgess of Ayr, and they had at least two sons and one daughter. Throughout his life he was associated with the activities of his elder brother, James Stewart of Bothwellmuir (from 1581 earl of Arran), and by 1582 the pair were considered to have 'committed sundry odious murders' ('CSP Scot.', '1581-3', 172). For his share in such deeds William was later known as William the Sticker (ibid., '1585-6', 245). In August 1582 William commanded his brother's troops during the Ruthven raid while the earl rode alone to Ruthven Castle to confront his political opponents. Surprised by a force headed by the earl of Mar, William Stewart's troops were routed and he lost two fingers in the skirmish. 
The period of Arran's political ascendancy was inevitably that of William Stewart's greatest prominence. A possible candidate for the provostship of Edinburgh in September 1583, he was knighted on 18 March 1584. With Andrew Keith, Lord Dingwall, Sir William went on embassy to the Swedish court and on his return acted in the king's name in an attempt to capture Lord John Hamilton, later marquess of Hamilton. After the fall of Arran, Stewart was himself captured in 1586 by Hamilton and imprisoned in Edinburgh. On his release he continued to work as close liaison between his banished brother and prominent nobles at court, notably Francis Stewart, first earl of Bothwell. He was active, too, in manoeuvres against Hamilton and also against the vice-chancellor, John Maitland. It was in Bothwell's train that Sir William attended negotiations for an Anglo-Scottish peace at Berwick in July 1586. On 26 March 1587, following the execution of Queen Mary, Stewart was sent to treat for a renewal of Scotland's league with France. On his return he accused Patrick, master of Gray, of spying, subversion of religion, and having consented to Queen Mary's death. Stewart and Gray were committed to ward in Edinburgh Castle, and when Gray was convicted Stewart was freed. In May 1588 Sir William was commissioned to pursue the Catholic John, seventh Lord Maxwell, who had been conspiring with Spain, and after capturing him in a cave on 5 June, obtained the surrender of his castle of Lochmaben. 
On 10 July 1588 Sir William had a heated argument with Bothwell, in the king's presence, in the course of which 'eache one gave the other the lee [lie], Sir William bade Bothwell kisse his arse. Bothwell vowed to kisse his arse where few sould be to red [intervene]' ('History of the Kirk', 4.680). On 30 July, after James had left his capital, the protagonists came to blows in the high street of Edinburgh. Stewart stabbed one of Bothwell's followers, and was himself attacked by the earl. Having been wounded with a rapier he fled into a cellar in Blackfriar's Wynd, where he was put to death. 


@@@@@


doc= 26518


Stewart, Sir William (d. 1602x4), soldier and diplomat, is believed to have been the younger son of Thomas Stewart (died 1542/1545), laird of Galston in Ayrshire, and his wife, Isobel, daughter of James Henderson of Fordell, justice-clerk. Of his early life all that can be said is that he is reported to have spent much of his youth in England, and that from 1570 he was servant to the earl of Lennox, regent of Scotland, and then to his widow ('CSP Scot.', '1569-71', 3.369). He had been recommended to Lennox by Lord Burghley, and in October 1572 he was reporting to Burghley on the activities of the French ambassador in Scotland, Philibert du Crocq. 
By 1574 Stewart had gone to the Low Countries to join the growing number of Scots employed in the army of the rebel provinces of the Netherlands. Recorded in that year first as lieutenant-colonel and then colonel of Scottish forces in the service of the states of Holland, he fought in defence of Oudewater and Schoonhoven in August 1575 and of Zierikzee in Zeeland during its nine-month siege (from October 1575 to 29 July 1576), when he was responsible for bringing over more companies of soldiers from Scotland and importing arms from England. But all three towns fell to the Spanish, and after the surrender of Zierikzee Stewart took his men off to fight for the semi-independent city of Danzig, then in revolt against the king of Poland. Whether the reasons for this move were military or financial (the first of Stewart's many complaints to the Dutch authorities over arrears of pay owed to him date from this time), his change of allegiance did not outlast the peace concluded at Malborg in December 1577. By June 1578 he and eight Scottish companies under his command were again in the Netherlands and had entered the service of the states general. They played a conspicuous part in the battle of Rijmenant (1 August 1578), the states' first victory in the field over the supposedly invincible Spanish; and during the next four years Stewart's name appears frequently in the Dutch records as colonel of the 2nd Scottish regiment, commanding ten companies of foot and one of horse in Brabant and Flanders. The records also reveal his financial difficulties and deteriorating relations with his men. Every year his troops mutinied for lack of pay and in May 1582 they took their complaints to the duke of Anjou, who put Stewart under three weeks' house arrest for striking one of his own captains. When in August 1582 one of his companies garrisoned at Lier betrayed the town to the Spanish, part of the explanation given was that their captain, William Sempill, wanted 'revenge against Col. Stewart', who had recently punished him with the bastinado ('CSP for.', '1582', 221, 240-41). 
Early in July 1582 Stewart married Erica Bronkhorst-Batenburg, countess of Batenburg, a member of one of Gelderland's most militantly protestant families and widow of Count von Manderscheidt. Yet within two months Batenburg itself and its castle had also been surrendered to the Spanish by the garrison which Stewart had placed there, and with it his wife's dowry was lost. By this time Stewart had been recalled to Scotland, apparently on the order of Esme Stewart, first duke of Lennox, the former regent's nephew, and he was soon carving out a new career for himself in the faction-ridden politics of the Scottish court. He attached himself first to the group of protestant, pro-English nobles who had seized power in the so-called Ruthven raid of August 1582, and it was thanks to the patronage of William Ruthven, earl of Gowrie, that he was appointed captain of the recently formed king's guard, the essential means by which the new regime secured the person of the sixteen-year-old James VI and hence kept its own grip on power. 
In May 1583 Stewart was sent with John Colville on an embassy to the court of Elizabeth I, ostensibly to seek her advice on the king's marriage and to request a loan towards maintaining the royal guard, in which 'the life of our cause consists' ('Original Letters', 26-7). From Stewart's point of view, however, the real purpose of the mission was to determine whether Scotland was likely to benefit more from an alliance with England than from one with France. So when the queen's advice was forthcoming but not her money, he drew the obvious conclusion. Quarrelling with Colville, who remained loyal to the English connection, and abandoning his patron Gowrie, he returned to Scotland in June and used the forces of the guard to provide support for the counter-revolution by which James VI freed himself from the Ruthven regime and restored the pro-French James Stewart, earl of Arran, to power. On 29 August 1583 Stewart was made a member of the privy council of Scotland, and the following spring he overthrew a plot against Arran, capturing Gowrie in his castle at Dundee and defeating what remained of his supporters at Stirling. For all this he was duly rewarded -- first, in July 1583, with the lands and priory of Pittenweem, of which he was appointed commendator, and then in December 1584 with a grant from the revenues of Dunfermline Abbey. At the same time there is evidence that the troops under his command were being better paid and were growing in numbers. In the summer of 1584 he was urging veteran Scots in the Netherlands to return home and enlist in the king's guard, with the promise of 'satisfaction for what the States owe them' ('CSP for.', '1584-5', 19.54). The following April he led them against another of Arran's enemies, the Roman Catholic convert Lord Maxwell, in the borders. 
Stewart's power was now at its height. 'Accounted the great man in Scotland' by soldiers ('CSP for.', '1584-5', 19.54), he was seen by diplomats as 'the chief ruler' at court, vying with Arran for influence over the young king ('CSP Scot.', '1581-3', 6.649). But this situation did not last. Early in November 1585 Arran was overthrown in a coup engineered by the English ambassador, Sir Edward Wotton; and Stewart, who had sought to halt the advancing forces of Angus and the other formerly exiled earls at Jedburgh, was dismissed from his captaincy and placed in the custody of Maxwell at Dumfries. Characteristically, however, he soon adjusted to the change of circumstances, making friends with Maxwell and even reappearing at court during the early months of 1586. Granted licence to travel abroad, he was in Denmark by November, persuading King Frederik II (as he had earlier persuaded James VI and his mother) to intercede with the Spanish authorities for the return of his wife's property in Gelderland. However, only when he went on to the Netherlands himself in 1587, appealing directly to the prince of Parma, was the property finally restored. 
By this time he had also become involved in the intrigues of Lord Maxwell and the sixth earl of Huntly to mount a Catholic uprising in Scotland with Spanish assistance. While Maxwell himself was in Portugal and Spain canvassing support, Stewart (from December 1586 and intermittently during 1587) had conversations with Parma and with the Spanish ambassador in Paris, Mendoza, in which he presented himself as the agent of 'certain Scottish Catholic nobles', explaining their plans to seize King James, re-establish Catholicism in Scotland, and then move against the queen of England ('CSP Spain', '1580-86', 3.681-2). 
Yet if Stewart really believed that the king could be drawn into a league of Catholic powers against Elizabeth, he abandoned the notion soon after returning to the Scottish court in spring 1588. Faced by growing dissension among the Catholic earls, and (from August) by the defeat and dispersal of the Spanish Armada, he realized that there was little prospect of persuading James into alliance with Spain 'for the revenge of the wrongs done him by his mother's [Mary's] death' ('CSP Scot.', '1586-9', 9.613). When the scheme was put to the king in September, James's response was dismissive, and Stewart quickly cut his links with the Catholic conspirators. 
Instead Stewart took up the matter of pay arrears which he claimed were still owing to him and to his regiment from the time of his military service in the Low Countries between 1578 and 1582. Having sought a settlement for some years without success, he now obtained from James VI an undertaking to grant him letters of marque to attack Dutch merchant ships if payment continued to be withheld. This was a serious threat to the commercial economy of the Netherlands and provoked an immediate response from The Hague. The states general sent three special embassies -- one to London in October 1588, asking Queen Elizabeth 'to interpose her authority' in order to prevent the Scots resorting to reprisals ('CSP for.', '1588', 22.221); another the following May to Edinburgh, where the same request was made to James VI; and a third in November 1589 to discuss Stewart's claim with the Scottish privy council. Not until July 1593, however, when Stewart was at The Hague on a mission concerned primarily with the formation of an anti-Catholic league, was a settlement finally agreed, under which he was paid arrears of 56,000 florins on condition that he surrender to the states general the letters of marque granted to him. 
Commenting on this negotiation the English envoy George Gilpin remarked that Stewart had 'sped better than ever I knew any other afore him' ('CSP for.', '1593-4'); and there can be no doubt that he was a diplomat of considerable ability, despite his blunt manner and relative lack of education, which prevented him from conversing in Latin. In addition to this embassy he was sent several times to Denmark, initially to negotiate King James's marriage to the Princess Anne and later, in 1598, to seek Danish support for James's right of succession to the English throne. In the summer of 1590, at Brunswick and other north German courts, he put forward the king's rather utopian proposals for securing European peace through mediation; and in February 1595 he returned to The Hague with the more mundane task of negotiating a loan of 1500 men to fight the Roman Catholic earls in Scotland. 
A few years earlier, during the first domestic crisis of James VI's personal rule in 1592, Stewart had been twice accused of collaborating in the fifth earl of Bothwell's raids on Holyrood and other royal palaces and was briefly imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle. But the charges against him were not pressed. Nor apparently did they have any lasting effect on the attitude of the king, who continued to employ, and reward, his services. Reappointed to the privy council in 1590, Stewart was knighted in 1594 on the occasion of the baptism of Prince Henry, and the same year was granted the lands of Houston (though he sold the estate within five years). As part of James VI's policy of taming the Gaelic highlands and isles, he received a commission of lieutenancy in June 1596, and he mounted an expedition to Kintyre, where he took 'pledges of certain of the clans of the country for their dutiful obedience' ('Reg. PCS', 5.324). Two years later he was nominated to a committee considering the establishment of three royal burghs in the region; and he was one of the group of lowland entrepreneurs who tried, without success, to colonize the Isle of Lewis in 1598-9. His last recorded appointment, in 1602, was to the Scottish council of war providing armed assistance for Queen Elizabeth's forces in Ireland. 
Evidence of Stewart's family life is fragmentary. From his marriage to Lady Batenburg he had a son, who died young, and possibly other children: the duke of Batenburg mentioned as his 'guid son' in a letter of 1595 was presumably his son-in-law ('CSP for.', '1595', 262). On 7 June 1590 Stewart married Isobel, daughter of Sir Patrick Hepburn of Waughton and widow of George Halkett of Pitfirrane, provost of Edinburgh, in Holyrood church; the children of this marriage were Frederick (1591-1625), created Lord Pittenweem in 1609, and Anna ('b'. 1595). It is unclear whether his first marriage had meanwhile been dissolved: probably not, since in 1592 he was accused of being 'infamous by marriage of sundry wives living' ('CSP Scot.', '1589-93', 758). The date of Stewart's death is unknown, though it must have been before 27 December 1604, when he was mentioned in a charter as the late Sir William Stewart. 
According to one of his fellow captains in Flanders, Stewart was 'a man without religion, avaricious and ambitious' ('CSP for.', '1583-4', 18.153). But perhaps a fairer assessment of his character is to be found in letters of two of his fellow diplomats, Mendoza and Menainville. They described him as a 'politique' in religion, an adventurer 'with his own fortune at heart' who had to 'trim with the times' ('CSP Spain', '1580-86', 3.682; Tytler, 8.156). He was certainly, in Mendoza's phrase, 'a man of influence and a soldier to whom the king [James VI] is much attached' ('CSP Spain', '1580-86', 3.682). If he was also a man preoccupied with money and nearly always short of it, that is hardly surprising. As a younger son, he had inherited little; and he lived in an age when soldiers were paid irregularly and inadequately and diplomats were often expected to finance themselves. 


@@@@@


doc= 26519


Stewart, William, first Viscount Mountjoy (c.1650-1692), army officer, was the only son of Sir Alexander Stewart, second baronet (died 1650), and Catherine (died 1714), daughter of Sir Robert Newcomen, bt. He was born shortly before or, in some accounts, six weeks after his father died fighting Cromwell at Dunbar on 3 September 1650. His mother then married Sir Arthur Forbes, who was created earl of Granard in 1684. His grandfather Sir William Stewart (died 'c'.1647) was an undertaker for the plantation of Ulster, sat in the Irish parliament for co. Donegal in 1613-15, was created a baronet in 1623, and fought with great distinction in the 1641 rising. Stewart succeeded his father as the third baronet and on his majority inherited much property in Donegal and Tyrone. He married Mary Coote, daughter of Richard, first Baron Coote of Coloony, and Mary, daughter of George St George, with whom he had six sons and two daughters. 
Stewart became a privy councillor in 1672 and in 1678 was appointed the chief magistrate of co. Donegal. He was also the commissioner of revenue for that county from 1682 until 1687. He was active in enforcing the laws against protestant dissenters and in suppressing banditry. 'There never was such a winter for country sports as the past and I have enjoyed them in much perfection', he wrote in early 1683. 'We have not had more success in any sport than Tory hunting. Of thirteen in the country where I live in November, the last was killed two days before I left home' ('Ormonde MSS', 6.544). By a patent dated 19 March 1683 he was created baron of Ramelton and Viscount Mountjoy, after which he took the lease of Mountjoy Castle, co. Tyrone. On 9 May 1684 he sold his commission as the captain of the King's company of guards in Ireland, a post he had held since 1677, and purchased from Lord Longford the life appointment of master-general of the ordnance in Ireland. In March 1685 he was appointed the colonel of a new regiment of foot on the Irish establishment. He was a patron of the Dublin Philosophical Society, to whom his paper on specific gravity 'Archimedes's problem of King Hiero's crown' was read in 1685. In that year he arranged for his son to tour Europe with William Molyneux. In 1686 he travelled to London intending to meet his son from France and then send him on his way to Hungary, where the imperialists were at war with the Turks. He was preceded by letters from Clarendon, the lord lieutenant of Ireland, to Lord Dartmouth describing him as 'a man of great worth and honour, and one who makes it his business to serve the king', and to John Evelyn as a man 'of vertu, and an encourager of ingenuity'. His stay in London was brief. 'He had nothing in his head, when he was in England, but the wars of Hungary, whither he was resolved to go against the opinion of all his friends' ('Correspondence of Henry Hyde', 1.241, 251, 407). With his son and half-brother he set out for Buda, which was under siege. He joined the imperial army as a volunteer and in a night attack on the breach was 'insignificantly hurt at the eye' by a stone fired from a cannon ('Downshire MSS', 191). Buda fell to the imperialists in September 1686, after which he returned to Ireland and was promoted to brigadier-general in 1687. He was by then one of the few protestants in senior positions in the army as the new lord deputy, Tyrconnell, was purging the army. 
Mountjoy's regiment was garrisoned in Londonderry at the time of the English revolution, but was ordered to Dublin in November 1688 so that it could be replaced by Lord Antrim's newly raised regiment of Catholics, who were mostly trouserless highlanders, colloquially known as the Redshanks. Mountjoy left the city on 23 November 1688, but Lord Antrim's men did not arrive until 7 December, which gave the citizens the opportunity to shut the city gates on them and deny them entry. When news of this reached Dublin, Tyrconnell ordered Mountjoy and his regiment to return and secure Londonderry. On 21 December 1688 at Raphoe, Mountjoy met a deputation from the city led by George Phillips, the acting governor. Mountjoy entreated them to 'be cautious of falling into blood' (McCarmick, 11) and got them to agree to allow two companies of protestant troops into the city while he went back to Dublin to procure a general pardon. He left behind him two of his sons as pledges and his lieutenant-colonel, Robert Lundy, in charge of the garrison. In Dublin he urged the lord deputy not to provoke a civil war. Tyrconnell appeared to be sympathetic, fearing that Mountjoy would 'take the occasion of heading the considerable numbers of northern Protestants, who in all likelihood would choose him for their general, as being the best soldier amongst them all, and the most leading Protestant of Ulster' (Gilbert, 43). To get him out of the way, Tyrconnell agreed to send Mountjoy to France to advise King James to make terms with William so as to avoid turning Ireland into 'a heap of rubbish' ('Ormonde MSS', 8.14). Before leaving Dublin, Mountjoy left a circular letter announcing, 'I am morally assured that this must do our work without blood, or the misery of the kingdom' (King, 339). Tyrconnell arranged for Mountjoy to be accompanied by Sir Stephen Rice, who had secret instructions to advise the king otherwise. They arrived at St Germain on 11 February 1689 and Mountjoy was arrested on James's orders ten days later, shortly before James left for Ireland. Mountjoy spent the duration of the Irish war in the Bastille, during which time he was attainted by the Dublin parliament and deprived of his lands. It was thought imprudent to exchange him because of the danger he would pose in Ireland. He was eventually exchanged for Richard Hamilton only when the Irish war was over, and arrived in London on 28 April 1692. 
That summer King William was with the Anglo-Dutch army in Flanders. Mountjoy travelled back to the continent in the hope of getting some form of compensation for his three years of incarceration, but had the misfortune to arrive at the royal camp on the eve of the battle of Steenkerke. During the next day, 3 August 1692, he was 'killed by a cannon bullet as he was watching the action' ('Finch MSS', 340). He was survived by his wife, and succeeded in the title by his eldest son, William (died 1728). 


@@@@@


doc= 26520


Stewart, Sir William (1774-1827), army officer, born on 10 January 1774, was the second surviving son of John Stewart, seventh earl of Galloway (1736-1806), and his second wife, Anne (1742/3-1830), daughter of Sir James Dashwood, baronet. Charles James Stewart was his younger brother. William received a commission as ensign in the 42nd foot on 8 March 1786, became lieutenant in the 67th on 14 October 1787, and captain of an independent company on 24 January 1791. In that year he went with Sir Robert Murray Keith to Vienna and to the congress of Sistova. His company was disbanded in December, and he was appointed to the 22nd foot on 31 October 1792. He served with it in the West Indies in 1793-4, and commanded a company in the grenadier battalion at the capture of Martinique and Guadeloupe. He was wounded in the unsuccessful attempt on Point-a-Pitre on 2 July 1794, when Guadeloupe had been recovered by the French. He returned to Britain in November, and obtained a majority in the 31st foot. 
Stewart was made lieutenant-colonel in the army and assistant adjutant-general to Lord Moira's corps on 14 January 1795, and in June he served on the staff of the expedition to Quiberon. On 1 September he was given command of the 67th foot, and went with it to San Domingo. He was commandant at Mole St Nicholas, with the local rank of colonel, until it was handed over to Toussaint l'Ouverture in August 1798. After returning to Europe he obtained leave to serve with the Austrian and Russian armies in the campaign of 1799, and was at the battle of Zurich. 
It was probably what he saw of Croats and Tyrolese in this campaign that led him to propose, in concert with Colonel Coote Manningham, that there should be a corps of riflemen in the British army. The proposal was adopted, and an experimental 'corps of riflemen' was formed in January 1800 by detachments from fourteen regiments. This was brought into the line two years afterwards as the 95th, and eventually became the rifle brigade. Manningham was colonel and Stewart lieutenant-colonel of the brigade, his commission being dated 25 August 1800. The organization and training of the corps fell to Stewart, for Manningham was equerry to the king. The standing orders show how much he was in advance of most soldiers of his time. Medals for good conduct and for valour, lectures, school, library, classification in shooting, and athletic exercises were among his means to increase efficiency. He preferred Irish recruits, as 'perhaps, from being less spoiled and more hardy than British soldiers, better calculated for light troops'. Charles James Napier was a subaltern in the corps in 1802, and wrote of Stewart as open-hearted and honourable in the highest degree, but with much passion, much zeal, and not the least judgement. 
In August 1800 Stewart went with three companies of his rifles to Ferrol in Pulteney's expedition, and was dangerously wounded in the first skirmish. He commanded the troops which served as marines in the fleet sent to the Baltic in 1801. He was himself on Nelson's flagship at Copenhagen, and wrote what was regarded as the best account of the battle (in J. S. Clarke and J. McArthur, 'The Life of Admiral Lord Nelson', 2 vols., 1809, based on a journal later printed in the 'Cumloden Papers'). Nelson wrote of him to St Vincent as 'the rising hope of our army', and there was a cordial and lasting friendship between them. By Nelson's wish Stewart's son was named Horatio. Stewart was included in the vote of thanks of parliament, and was made colonel from 2 April. 
In 1804 he was appointed brigadier of volunteers in the eastern counties, and in 1805 he published 'Outlines of a Plan for the General Reform of the British Land Forces', recommending many of the changes which he had already introduced into his own corps. In December 1806 he took command of a brigade in Sicily, and three months afterwards he went on to Egypt with Fraser's expedition. On 3 April he was sent to Rosetta with 2500 men to avenge Wauchope's repulse. Though a most ardent soldier he was afraid of responsibility; he wished that the command had devolved on someone else, and felt 'a sort of inward presentiment that matters would not go well'. In his first reconnaissance he received a bullet-wound in the arm. He invested the town and made batteries, but did not risk an assault. On 21 April the Turks received reinforcements from Cairo, and cut to pieces a detachment of 700 men which he had placed at al-Hamed, and he had to fight his way back to Alexandria, losing 300 more on the road. 
The expedition returned to Sicily in September, and Stewart was commandant of Syracuse until February 1809, when he came home. He had been promoted major-general on 25 April 1808, and on 31 August 1809 he was made colonel of the 3rd battalion, 95th rifles. He commanded the light brigade in the Walcheren expedition, but was invalided early in September. 
In January 1810 he was sent to the Peninsula to command the British and Portuguese troops which were to form part of the garrison of Cadiz. He did well there, but was soon superseded in the chief command by Thomas Graham (afterwards Baron Lynedoch). In July he left Cadiz, and was appointed to the 2nd division of Wellington's army under Hill. He was present at Busaco, but could not obtain the medal, as he was not 'personally and particularly engaged'. In December Hill was invalided, and Stewart commanded his corps for a time, but his self-distrust led Wellington to send Beresford to take Hill's place. 
In May 1811, after Massena's retreat, the 2nd division -- still forming part of Beresford's corps -- shared in the first siege of Badajoz, and bore the brunt of the battle of Albuera. The division's 1st brigade (Colborne's) was nearly destroyed there by a sudden attack of French lancers on its rear as it was advancing to charge the French infantry. According to Napier this happened because 'Stewart, whose boiling courage generally overlaid his judgment, heedlessly led up in column of companies', without waiting to deploy, as Colborne wished to do. But the charge was made by three deployed battalions (out of four), and, according to Sir Benjamin d'Urban, Beresford's quartermaster-general, Stewart's fault lay rather in rejecting Colborne's proposal to keep a wing of one regiment in column. There can be no doubt that his impetuosity had something to do with the result; but the urgency of the case and the mist which hid the French cavalry go far to excuse him. Beresford had nothing but praise for him in his dispatch, and he was thanked by parliament. In July he went home on account of ill health, and was employed in the eastern district. 
In August 1812 Stewart was again appointed to the army in the Peninsula, with the local rank of lieutenant-general. He joined on 6 December, and was given command of the 1st division. It comprised the brigade of guards, and a question of privilege soon arose, as he was not a guardsman. In April 1813 he was transferred to his old division, the 2nd. On 4 June he became lieutenant-general. At Vitoria he was on the right under Hill, who spoke highly of his conduct. He was included in the thanks of parliament, and was made KB on 11 September. When Soult tried to relieve Pampeluna, the 2nd division was guarding the passes near Maya, and was attacked on 25 July by three divisions of d'Erlon's corps and forced back. Stewart reached the field late, having been at Elisondo with Hill, and reformed his line. Four Portuguese guns, which were moving by his order to the new position, stuck fast, and were taken by the French. Wellington referred with some asperity to the loss of these guns in a postscript to his dispatch. 
Stewart took part in Hill's action at Buenza on 30 July, and next day he led the attack on the French rearguard at the Dona Maria Pass. In this attack he was badly wounded, having been already slightly wounded during the 25 July action. He was present at the Nivelle, Nive, and Orthes, and had a prominent part in the combat of Aire and a minor part at Toulouse. He was popular with the men of his division, among whom he was known as 'auld grog Willie' on account of the extra allowances of rum which he authorized, and which Wellington made him pay for. For his services in the Peninsula he received the gold cross with two clasps, the Portuguese order of the Tower and Sword, and the Spanish order of San Fernando. On 2 January 1815 (on the enlargement of the Order of the Bath) he was made GCB. He saw no further service and reportedly declined a peerage 'from prudential motives' (HoP, 'Commons', 298). 
Through family influence Stewart had been MP for Saltash (1795-6), Wigtownshire (1796-1802; 1812-16), and Wigtown burghs (1803-5), supporting the tory government. His health had been broken by seventeen campaigns, in which he had received six wounds and four contusions, and for this reason, or possibly because of political disagreement with his brother, Lord Galloway, he resigned from parliament in 1816. In July 1818 he was transferred to the colonelcy of the 1st battalion of what had then become the rifle brigade. On 21 April 1804 Stewart had married Frances (died 6 Aug 1833), daughter of John Douglas (second son of the earl of Morton), and they had one son, Horatio (1806-1835), a captain in the rifle brigade, and one daughter, Louisa. In 1817 he purchased and retired to a property in Cumloden, near Newton Stewart, Wigtownshire, near the family seat. He died there on 7 January 1827, and was buried at Minnigaff. Extracts from his journals and correspondence were privately printed in 1871 as the 'Cumloden Papers'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26521


Mackenzie, Mary Elizabeth Frederica Stewart-, Lady Hood (1783-1862), chief of clan Mackenzie, eldest of the six daughters and coheirs of Francis Humberston Mackenzie, Baron Seaforth (1754-1815), and Mary (1754/5-1829), daughter of Baptist Proby, dean of Lichfield, and brother of Lord Carysfort, was born at Tarnadale on 27 March 1783. In 1801 she went with her family to Barbados, where her father was governor; she met there, and married at Bridgetown, on 6 November 1804, Sir Samuel Hood (1762-1814), vice-admiral of the white. They returned to Britain, where Lady Hood established a firm friendship with Sir Walter Scott, despite her whig sympathies; he described her as having 'the spirit of the chieftainess in every drop of her blood' (Lockhart, 306). In 1814 she accompanied her husband to the East Indies on his appointment as commander-in-chief. She travelled extensively in India, and claimed to be the first British woman to shoot a tiger in that country. Sir Samuel Hood died on 24 December 1814, and in the following year his widow succeeded to the family estates on the death of her father, his four sons having predeceased him. She thus became the chief of clan Mackenzie. The failure of the male line when there should be a deaf clan chief had been predicted in an old curse, and was apparently fulfilled in this generation. 
On 21 May 1817 Lady Hood married James Alexander Stewart of Glasserton (1784-1843), elder son of Admiral Keith Stewart (died 1795), third son of Alexander Stewart, sixth earl of Galloway. On their marriage the name Mackenzie was added to that of Stewart. They had three sons and three daughters. Her husband was MP for Ross and Cromarty from 1831 to 1837, governor of Ceylon in 1837-40, and lord high commissioner of the Ionian Islands from 1840 to 1843. Her granddaughter, by her son, Keith William (1818-1881), was the hostess Mary Jeune, Lady St Helier. 
Ill health and the financial difficulties which threatened to overwhelm the Seaforth estates prevented Mary Stewart-Mackenzie from leading the Mackenzies at Scott's pageant to welcome George IV to Scotland in 1822. Her financial difficulties were resolved only on the marriage of her third daughter, Louisa, to William Baring, second Lord Ashburton, in 1858 ['see 'Baring, Louisa]. She died at Brahan Castle, Ross-shire, on 28 November 1862, her second husband having died in 1843; a lengthy procession of mourners, led by pipers, followed her coffin for the 20 miles to Fortrose Cathedral where she was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 26522


Stichill, Robert of (d. 1274), bishop of Durham, presumably took his name from the village in Roxburghshire where Durham Priory held the patronage of the parish church. He was the son of a priest, quite possibly Master William Scot (or William of Stichill), rector of one of Durham's Yorkshire churches and archdeacon of Worcester, who was elected (abortively) to the see of Durham in 1226. Robert of Stichill became a monk of Durham and, having put aside youthful levity, rebelliousness, and ill temper in favour of the study of scripture, was one of the monks entrusted with obtaining the bishop's licence for the election of a prior in 1244; in 1249 he was one of those sent to the king for licence to elect a bishop. By 1246 he was sacrist of the monastery, and he was prior of the highly favoured dependent cell at Finchale when, on 30 September 1260, he was the first of their number to be successfully elected bishop by the Durham monks; a dispensation for the defect of his birth had apparently already been obtained by his fellow monk Henry of Horncastle. The temporalities of the see were restored to him on 5 December and he was consecrated by the archbishop of York, Godfrey of Ludham (died 1265), in Southwell on 13 February 1261. 
The best-attested activities of Stichill's pontificate are those relating to his relations with the Durham community. He granted to the priory tracts of wood and moorland amounting to 1300 acres; one of the books that the monks claimed against Bishop Antony (I) Bek in 1302 was a copy of a volume of the 'Decretals', said to be a gift of Stichill and worth 80 marks. But there was also dissension, for during December 1272 and January 1273 Stichill, having resisted Prior Hugh of Darlington's repeated requests to be allowed to resign, then objected to details of the provision made for his support in retirement. He went on to complain of the monks' failure to make their professions before him as head of the cathedral community, to appoint as custodian of the vacant priory the constable of Durham Castle, a layman, whose unprecedented intrusions he declined to restrain, and to cavil over the wording of the monks' petition for licence to elect a new prior. The Lanercost chronicle also reports that there was a three-year dispute over visitation. 
Stichill was prompt in defence of his secular rights, most notably those pertaining to the palatinate -- the regalian liberty of the bishopric of Durham. In November 1266 his officers were obstructing the payment of aid on merchandise to the king. When Henry III made a grant of the manor of Greatham in co. Durham, forfeited by Peter de Montfort for his rebellion in the barons' war, Stichill secured a royal revocation in May 1267 that acknowledged the bishop's right to forfeitures within his regality, so establishing an important precedent. When he obtained the assistance of the royal courts in a case before his own court in December 1269, it was acknowledged that his liberty was held of the king and the crown as the king's special alms. Elsewhere he was successful, defending in 1268 his right to the return of writs in the liberty of Howden, in accordance with a grant of Richard I. The Lanercost chronicle records that he deprived the burgesses of Durham of free pasture. 
Having bought out any claim to the manor of Greatham by the Bertram family, Stichill founded there in 1273 a hospital for forty paupers; this still flourishes. In 1274 he attended the second Council of Lyons, and obtained permission to resign his see, but he died at the castle of l'Arbresle near Lyons, on 4 August, and was buried at the Benedictine abbey of Savigny. His heart was taken back to Durham for interment. 


@@@@@


doc= 26523


Stigand (d. 1072), archbishop of Canterbury, appears to have come from a substantial Anglo-Norse family with property in and around Norwich (his name is Norse while that of his brother AEthelmaer is English). He emerges in 1020 as the royal clerk to whom King Cnut gave a church that he built on the battlefield of 'Assandun' (Essex), where in 1016 he had won the kingdom. For the next twenty-three years little is known of Stigand although he occasionally witnessed royal charters. In 1043, early in Edward the Confessor's reign, he was consecrated bishop of the East Anglian see of Elmham. Because he was a protege of the king's mother, Emma (AElfgifu), who was the widow of kings AEthelred and Cnut and who temporarily forfeited the king's favour, he was quickly deposed. According to later authors, Elmham passed simoniacally to Grimketel, bishop of Selsey, who briefly held two sees. However, Stigand was restored early in 1044. In 1046, he witnessed two royal charters and was thus at least occasionally at court. 
In late August 1047 Stigand was translated to Winchester where his patron Emma resided, while Elmham passed to his brother AEthelmaer. Between 1047 and 1052 Stigand regularly witnessed the Confessor's charters, so was evidently much at court. This was so during the political crisis of the Confessor's reign in 1051 and 1052 when Earl Godwine and his family were for a time banished from the kingdom. It is uncertain how far, as bishop of Winchester, Stigand had attached himself to Godwine, but he did not share his exile; indeed, at the onset of the crisis he acted in the king's interest. After the monks of Christ Church, Canterbury, had elected to the vacant see one of themselves, Godwine's kinsman AElric, the king translated from London his Norman favourite, Robert of Jumieges, replacing him at London with his goldsmith, Abbot Spearhafoc of Abingdon. Spearhafoc was later reputed to have paid Stigand for his advancement. He was quickly expelled, apparently at the behest of Pope Leo IX ('r'. 1049-54). Stigand thereafter acted as an adviser and mediator. King William I's panegyrist, William of Poitiers, had William in 1066 name 'Archbishop' Stigand with earls Godwine, Leofric, and Siward as chief among the counsellors who, early in 1051, swore that, after Edward's death, they would receive him as their lord. Later in the year, Stigand sought to mediate between Edward and Godwine; according to the life of King Edward, Stigand wept exceedingly when delivering to Godwine the king's decision to banish him. If true, it is the only personal touch in anything relating to Stigand. When, in September 1052, Godwine and his sons returned to London with an armed force, Stigand was to the fore in arranging an exchange of hostages with the king and thus in resolving the confrontation. At a council held outside London, perhaps at Westminster, Godwine and his family were restored to their positions and property. Archbishop Robert of Jumieges was outlawed for sowing discord between Godwine and the king, while Stigand succeeded to the see of Canterbury which he held in plurality with Winchester. 
At least in the short term, Stigand's position as archbishop looked strong, yet the appearance was deceptive. The first non-monk to be archbishop of Canterbury for almost a hundred years, he had no prior connection with the monks of his cathedral, among whom the formerly elected AElric still lived. At Rome, Pope Leo was conversant with English affairs, for English bishops had attended his councils. Whether or not Rome considered Stigand's sponsorship of Spearhafoc simoniacal, his holding in plurality the two richest sees in England was objectionable. Unsurprisingly, Stigand did not venture to Rome for his pallium -- the stole of white wool which symbolized a metropolitan's participation in the apostolic pastoral office. Instead, he appropriated the pallium, conferred at Rome by Leo IX, that Robert of Jumieges had abandoned. Prudently, in 1053, the bishops-elect Wulfwig of Dorchester and Leofwine of Lichfield sought consecration abroad. In 1058, through action by Roman families, the papacy briefly fell to Benedict X, who quickly dispatched a pallium to Stigand in England. Benedict had a reforming past; but in 1059 he was deposed in favour of Nicholas II ('r'. 1059-61). Stigand bore the blemish of one who received his pallium from a usurper. Although from 1058 he was regularly styled archbishop, two further bishops-elect, Giso of Wells and Walter of Hereford, sought consecration at Rome, where they no doubt explained their reasons; and in 1062 Bishop Wulfstan of Worcester was consecrated at York. Stigand consecrated only abbots: in his own diocese, AEthelsige of St Augustine's at Canterbury (1061); and in East Anglia, where he had secular power, Baldwin of Bury St Edmunds (1065) and Thurstan of Ely (1066, during Harold's reign). In 1062, while still earl, Harold did not, however, allow Stigand to consecrate his collegiate church at Waltham Cross. Yet under Nicholas II the papacy did not view Stigand with complete disfavour. During King Edward's Easter court at Worcester in 1062, two papal legates, one of whom was Bishop Ermenfrid of Sion, were willing for Stigand, as well as Archbishop Ealdred of York, to accede to their choice of Wulfstan to be bishop of Worcester; Wulfstan's biographer wrote of Stigand's doing so with goodwill and with judgement. However cautious some were about Stigand and his ministrations, under the Anglo-Saxon kings he was acknowledged to be a bishop. 
In secular affairs, Stigand was not only prominent in the king's court and a friend of the Godwines, but he also commanded the power that came from the accumulation of wealth and resources to rival that of the greatest earls. On the latest estimate, the 'Domesday' values of his resources in 1066 were some $755 for his personal wealth, $1145 for the see of Canterbury, and $1040 for the see of Winchester -- making a total of some $2940. He had begun early to amass personal wealth. If 'Assandun' is Ashdon in far north-west Essex, his years there may account for a concentration of early interests near where Essex, Cambridgeshire, and Suffolk meet. 'Domesday' shows him with a stake in ten shires; almost a third of his personal wealth came from Norfolk, but he had $60 or more from Dorset, Gloucestershire, Hampshire, Hertfordshire, Kent, and Suffolk. His resources were not to be numbered only in possessions and cash; in East Anglia alone, he had claims upon the personal loyalty of over a thousand thegns (mostly, it is true, of only middling or lower status) and freemen. His brother AEthelmaer was bishop of his sometime see of Elmham; it was not wealthy, but the continuing family association augmented Stigand's position in East Anglia. 
The estates of the see of Canterbury were heavily concentrated in the south-east of England; however, they were not only rich in themselves but they were a link between Stigand's largely personal holdings in East Anglia and his resources as bishop of Winchester from Surrey through Hampshire to Wiltshire and Somerset. More than three-quarters of the 'Domesday' value of the see of Canterbury came from Kent, with Essex, Surrey, and Sussex each yielding $65 or more among six further counties. More than half of the value of the see of Winchester arose from Hampshire; Wiltshire and Somerset were to the fore among seven other shires. In total, Stigand had sources of wealth in eighteen shires which dovetailed well across the areas of southern and south-eastern England, the south midlands, and East Anglia. He was powerful in many areas that mattered most for the Anglo-Saxon and early Anglo-Norman regimes. 
It must be asked whether Stigand was guilty of misappropriating or maladministering the property and interests of the ecclesiastical institutions with which he was connected. At Canterbury, he has been judged to have neglected rather than misused the endowments of the see. He did little to augment them, while he did not check the losses of land (especially to his friends the Godwines) before the conquest, which after it were to present serious problems; and he acquiesced in leases to the Godwines which were to Canterbury's disadvantage. At Winchester, 'Domesday Book' establishes that Stigand at first held the valuable manor of East Meon in Hampshire for the use of the monks but later 'for his own lifetime' ('Domesday Book', fol. 38b); however, there is no further evidence of major depredation of its estates. The worst that can be said is that there was a glaring contrast between the little care that Stigand gave to the estates of Canterbury and Winchester, and his assiduity in building up his personal fortune by inheritance, royal favour, and shrewd dealing with church property. 
Much the same may be said of Stigand's dealings with monasteries. The most damaging specific allegation against him, that he extorted the manor of Cerney in Gloucestershire from Abingdon in return for supporting Abbot Spearhafoc's candidature for the see of London, is insecure. But in some transactions with Bath and Bury St Edmunds he drove hard bargains with the monks and took excessive advantage of his own power and position. More serious is the general allegation made at Ely that he kept vacant abbeys, as well as bishoprics, in his own hands and exploited them as his property. During a vacancy at Ely, probably in 1066, he held the abbey and diverted some of its possessions to his own use. Yet he also made Ely magnificent gifts: gold and silver altar vessels; a crucifix covered with silver which bore a life-size image of Christ and was accompanied by bronze figures of St Mary and St John; an alb and cope for the precentor; and a chasuble richer than any other in the kingdom. The Ely crucifix repeated his gift in 1047 to the Old Minster at Winchester of a similar crucifixion group, covered in precious metals, which he paid for from gifts of Queen Emma. He gave a third crucifixion group to Bury St Edmunds, and a cross and other benefactions to St Augustine's at Canterbury. If he could be rapacious, he could also be generous. At none of the monasteries that the Ely record alleged that he held -- Winchester, Glastonbury, St Albans, St Augustine's, and Ely itself -- do gaps in the lists of abbots leave room for prolonged exploitation. The Old Minster at Winchester, St Augustine's, and Ely included him in their necrologies. His dealings with monasteries were chequered; he could be neglectful, heavy-handed, and unscrupulous, but he cannot be called scandalous or oppressive. 
William of Poitiers insisted upon Stigand's power and his influence over the English, but because of his canonical position his power was fatally flawed. According to William of Poitiers (Guillaume de Poitiers, 146), the Waltham chronicle (Watkiss and Chibnall, 44), and the Bayeux tapestry, he crowned Harold on 6 January 1066; John of Worcester states, more credibly, that Archbishop Ealdred of York did so (John of Worcester, 'Chron'., 2.601). After the battle of Hastings, Stigand briefly sponsored Edgar AEtheling to succeed Harold, but early in December he did homage to William of Normandy at Wallingford, Berkshire, before Ealdred followed suit. Yet on Christmas day it was Ealdred who crowned William king at Westminster, possibly with Stigand assisting. In 1067 Stigand was foremost among the English magnates who, because William mistrusted their loyalty and power, perforce accompanied him on his triumphal return to Normandy; when back in England, Stigand consecrated Remigius as bishop of Dorchester. At William's Pentecost court in 1068, he witnessed two royal diplomas, taking precedence over Ealdred; but Ealdred crowned Queen Matilda and was alone named in the associated 'Laudes regiae' chant. Until Ealdred's death in 1069, Stigand was too powerful a figure for William to discard or ignore. 
By 1069, however, the conquest was consolidated sufficiently for William to have a freer choice of agents; and with the consecration of a new archbishop of York in prospect he could scarcely ignore Stigand's canonical position. Moreover, the king stood to gain materially from Stigand's fall. The papacy was more than prepared to collaborate. Fuelled, no doubt, by Norman representations at Rome to secure sanction for the conquest of England and by Lanfranc's visit in 1067, Alexander II's hostility to Stigand became extreme. Writing to King William, he referred to national apostasy in pre-conquest England and to a 'source of evil' by which he clearly intended Stigand ('Patrologia Latina', 146.1413). In 1070 legates from Rome, assisted by Bishop Ermenfrid of Sion, deposed Stigand and his brother AEthelmaer of Elmham at the Eastertide Council of Winchester. According to John of Worcester, the charges against Stigand were that he had illegally held Winchester with Canterbury in plurality, that during Robert of Jumieges's lifetime he not only assumed the archiepiscopate but wore at mass the pallium that Robert left behind when unjustly expelled, and that he later accepted his own pallium from the excommunicated simoniac Benedict. There was no mention of simony on Stigand's part. Lanfranc was consecrated to succeed him on 29 August. 
Lanfranc was committed to Alexander II by personal loyalty and by shared ecclesiastical ideals. He refused even the degree of recognition that kings Edward and Harold, and rather more William I, had conceded to Stigand; he treated Stigand's archiepiscopate as null and void. The principal source for his rigour is the professions of obedience which he quickly required from three bishops whom he found in office -- Wulfstan of Worcester, Remigius of Dorchester, and Herfast of Elmham. They were made particularly to acknowledge the second charge levelled against Stigand at Winchester, and in addition to allege that he had himself expelled his predecessor by force and guile, and assumed his pallium in defiance of papal authority; therefore, five successive popes from Leo IX to Alexander II (all reference to Benedict X was suppressed) had condemned him and inhibited him from consecrating bishops, and they had sent letters or legates to England against a consistently obdurate archbishop. For any such sustained papal campaign there is neither evidence nor probability; in 1062, for example, Stigand had worked with papal legates, including Ermenfrid of Sion, at Worcester. Other sources, particularly William of Poitiers and the Bayeux tapestry, share a concern after 1070 to blacken Stigand's reputation. 
Stigand's confiscated wealth and consequential opportunities for plundering monasteries no doubt helped King William to concur in such a presentation of Stigand. Before his deposition, he may have fled with some of his possessions, eventually reaching Ely. He was captured by royal order and detained at Winchester, where he was allowed a meagre pension. Queen Edith, Harold's sister, was among those said to have urged him to dress and feed himself better. His pleas of poverty were discounted after his death in Winchester on 21 or 22 February 1072, when a key suspended from his neck was said to have led to the discovery of hidden riches. He was honourably buried in the Old Minster, Winchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 26524


Still, John (c.1544-1608), bishop of Bath and Wells, was the second son of William Still of Grantham, Lincolnshire. Little is known of his early years. Sir John Harington, who knew Still from his student days in Cambridge, relates that his breeding was 'from his childhood in good literature and partly in musicke, which was counted in those days a preparative to divinity' (Harington, 157). His father was clearly a man of some substance, sending two of his sons to Cambridge and marrying a daughter into the Winthrop family of Groton in Suffolk. 
In November 1559 Still matriculated pensioner from Christ's College, Cambridge, where his ability shone and he graduated BA in March 1562. He was elected a fellow of Christ's before midsummer 1562 and proceeded MA in 1565 and BD in 1570. His reputation at Cambridge was high. Gabriel Harvey, who was a contemporary at Christ's, acknowledged him as 'an excellent philosopher, a reasonable good historian, a learned divine, and a wise man' ('DNB'). Harington, who relates that when he came to Still 'to sue for my grace to be a batchelour first he examined me stricktly, and after answered me kindly, that the grace he granted me was not of grace but of merit', had the highest admiration for his examiner: 'to whom I never came but I grew more religious, from whom I never went but I parted better instructed'. Known as Divine Still by his friends, he was generally acknowledged to be an excellent preacher and particularly effective in public disputations, so much so that the 'learned'st were even affraid to dispute with him' (Harington, 157-8). 
Still's intellectual abilities gave him his reputation and brought him preferment in both the university and the church. While a fellow of Christ's College, or perhaps while serving as a chaplain to the archbishop of Canterbury, Matthew Parker, Still had clearly impressed Parker, who preferred this young Cambridge don to a number of livings in his gift. On 30 July 1571 Still was appointed to the rectory of Hadleigh, Suffolk, an archiepiscopal peculiar. On 4 November 1572 he and Thomas Watts, archdeacon of Middlesex, were jointly appointed to oversee the archbishop's scattered peculiars in Essex and Suffolk, a jurisdiction known as the deanery of Bocking. On 18 July 1573 he was instituted to the vicarage of East Markham, Nottinghamshire, and in the same year became a canon of Westminster in place of the deprived Thomas Aldridge. In November 1573 Parker recommended Still to Burghley for the vacant deanery of Norwich, explaining that he regarded Still 'although so young to be more mortified than others of forty or fifty' (Bruce and Perowne, 450), but the request was not granted. In March 1577 Still was collated archdeacon of Sudbury in Suffolk. 
These ecclesiastical preferments were more than matched by Still's promotions in Cambridge. On 25 October 1570 he was appointed Lady Margaret preacher and two months later became Lady Margaret professor of divinity in the place of Thomas Cartwright, who had been deprived on account of his presbyterian convictions; this post he held until 1573. On 14 July 1574, at the age of only about thirty, Still was elected master of St John's College, Cambridge, where he proved an able administrator and an astute financial manager. He was created DD in 1575 and on 4 November of that year was elected vice-chancellor. On 30 May 1577, in response to his own request, Still moved to become master of Trinity College, despite the objections of his predecessor, John Whitgift, that it was contrary to college statutes to appoint a married man to the position. At Trinity also he was a prudent manager of college estates. Still also succeeded in changing the length of appointment of master from seven years to life, which gave rise to the 'common saying that the College was a good horse but that it would kick till Still went to court and got new girts' (Pigot, 135). 
Harington states that the 'Puritans in Cambridge wooed him, and would fayne have wonne him to their part'. Still was certainly a signatory to a letter to the chancellor of the university, William Cecil, urging that Thomas Cartwright might be dealt with leniently, but he was no puritan, and since he had replaced Cartwright and Aldridge when they were deprived, evidently not seen as a puritan either. Both as rector of Hadleigh and as archdeacon of Sudbury, Still is likely to have been familiar with and perhaps sympathetic to the stance of the godly clergy of Suffolk while remaining a stout defender of conformity to the established church. Some fifteen years later, admittedly in the very different context of the Marprelate controversy, when Still was chosen to preach before convocation in February 1589, he sharply inveighed against those that sought a further reformation of the church. In the 1570s his defence of conformity and his frequent preferment left him open to the charge that he was ambitious for office; it was said in a sermon preached in Cambridge that 'some could not have a living worth $100 a year, another worth $120, but Still will have more' (Harington, 157-8). 
The 1580s represented a more settled period in Still's life in which he divided his time between Trinity College and his ministry in Hadleigh. Despite his duties elsewhere the rectory in Hadleigh was home. By 1574 he had married Anne (died 1593), daughter of Thomas Alabaster, a wealthy clothier of Hadleigh. Between 1575 and 1589 nine children, five sons and four daughters, were born and baptized in Hadleigh, three of them dying in infancy. Still took an active role in the affairs of this cloth-making town, meeting regularly with the churchwardens and chief bailiffs as they sought to establish innovative schemes to provide work and relief for the poor and for the 'restreynt of idle and evill disposed persons and roges in the said towne' (Pigot, 135). Still also took a particular interest in the grammar school in Hadleigh: promising pupils such as John Bois, later one of the translators of the Authorized Version, and John Overall, later bishop first of Coventry and Lichfield and then of Norwich, were recipients of his patronage. Another protege was William Alabaster, his wife's first cousin. Even after Still moved to Wells, he retained lands in and around Hadleigh and in his will he left $50 'to the oulde poore people of Hadley in Suffolke as a token of my oulde love to the place of my mynisterye' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/111, fol. 275'v'). 
Still had been spoken of as a candidate for a bishopric as early as 1579 in a letter written by Gabriel Harvey to the earl of Leicester. In November 1592 Still was once again elected vice-chancellor of the university but served only part of the year as he was elected bishop of Bath and Wells under a 'conge d'elire' dated 16 January 1593. Following royal assent on 7 February, his election was confirmed on 10 February and Still was consecrated on the following day. He plunged into his new office with characteristic energy. The see had been left vacant since the death of Bishop Thomas Godwin in November 1590 and the diocese had suffered from neglect. Still commenced an episcopal visitation on 17 June 1594 and presided personally over the first main court for each deanery in order to set his stamp on the proceedings. The surviving records of the visitation provide ample proof of his determination to rule the diocese with care and moderation. By restraining manifestations of nonconformity through the 1590s, he was able to avoid substantial deprivations of clergy in the next decade. He worked closely at Wells with his chancellor, Francis James, appointed early in the episcopate, and when absent could rely on the deputizing activities of his chaplains. Two months after his consecration, Still lost his wife, Anne, who died on 15 April 1593, leaving him with six children under nineteen. Ever prudent, Still effected a strategic alliance with an influential and wealthy Somerset family. On 16 December 1594 he married Jane, daughter of Sir John Horner of Cloford, Somerset, who brought with her a dowry of $1050 invested in the manor of Mourton Wroughton in Compton Martin and valuable connections in the local gentry community. The couple had one son, Thomas. 
Still was probably a regular attender at quarter sessions and he was an active bishop in parliament, serving on no fewer than seven committees. In November 1597 he made proposals in convocation for the better keeping of parish registers and he attended convocation again in March 1604. He appears to have turned his considerable talent for profitable estate management to his episcopal estates and in so doing amassed a fortune, most notably from the profits of the Mendip lead mines but also from increasing the rents and imposing heavy fines for the renewal of leases. The best evidence of Still's wealth may be found in his lengthy will, drawn up on 4 February 1608, in which he bequeathed lands in Suffolk to his eldest son, Nathaniel, various estates in Somerset to sons John and Thomas, and a variety of cash sums (including a bequest of $500 towards almshouses in Wells) that amounted to more than $3000, as well as legacies of gilt vessels, silver bowls, rings, pewter, and tapestries. He left all his books to be equally divided between his three surviving sons urging them 'so farre as their occasions can convenientlie permytte' to be 'studiouslie occupied in the readinge and studienge thereof especialie in the devine bookes of Godes holie Scriptures and dailie to meditate therein and to expresse the same in their godlye life and vertuous conversacion' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/111, fol. 276), but none of his sons pursued clerical careers. Still died in the palace at Wells on 26 February 1608, having left 400 marks for funeral expenses. He was buried on 4 April in the cathedral, where an effigy of him in full academic dress with an inscription penned by William Camden stands hard by the steps leading to the chapter room. His widow died later that year and was buried on 29 September. 
Often erroneously identified as the author of the boisterous comedy, 'Gammer Gurton's Needle', now convincingly ascribed to William Stevenson, Still was the author and composer of 'A hymne to be sung by all England -- women, youthes, clerkes and souldiers', dated 1588. Patriotically it invoked God's help against 'mercilesse Envaders' asking that he 'sink deep their potent navies' and 'their strength and courage break'. Even if 'cruel Spain and Parma with heathen legions' broke through, the English would not 'change our 'Bible''; if Apollyon himself should come, 'His fiery darts we'll quell'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26525


Stillingfleet, Benjamin (1702-1771), botanist and writer, was born in the rectory at Wood Norton, Norfolk, the eldest child and only son of the four children born to 
Edward Stillingfleet was the only son of Edward Stillingfleet (1635-1699), bishop of Worcester, and his first wife, Andrea Dobyns. He was born in February 1661 at his father's rectory in Sutton, Bedfordshire. Misfortune clouded his early years for his two younger sisters died in infancy, soon to be followed by their mother, and Edward himself suffered a permanent deformity caused by a hunting accident. In 1665 his father was appointed rector of St Andrew's, Holborn, London, and by 1667 he had embarked on a second marriage which brought him a further seven children. A few years later Edward entered St Paul's School, which had reopened in 1671 after its destruction in the great fire of 1666. There pupils could study Arabic and Hebrew as well as the customary Latin and Greek. Like his father, Edward completed his education at St John's College, Cambridge, and was elected a Lady Margaret scholar, graduating BA in 1682 and MA in 1685, with a college fellowship in 1683. After election as FRS in 1688 he was appointed Gresham professor of physic from 1689 until 1692, when he was awarded a doctorate in medicine. 
Influential family connections and academic success should have led to a prosperous career, but Edward Stillingfleet's Jacobite sympathies, fecklessness in money matters, and a disastrous marriage in 1692 enraged the bishop and caused a lasting rift between father and son. His marriage also lost him his lucrative academic appointments and he spent the next few years as a struggling physician in Lynn, Norfolk. He was ordained priest in 1698 and obtained the living of Wood Norton and Swanton, Norfolk, where he remained until his death at home in June 1708. Edward Stillingfleet, having inherited nothing from his father, left his widow, Mary Ann, his son, Benjamin, and his three daughters in considerably reduced circumstances. 
Benjamin Stillingfleet was educated at Norwich School where he excelled in classical language and literature. In 1720 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a sizar at the request of the master, Dr Richard Bentley, former domestic chaplain to Bishop Stillingfleet and private tutor to James, the son of his second marriage. Distinction in both classics and mathematics led to a scholarship in 1723 and the degree of BA the following year. The next fourteen years were spent at Felbrigg Hall, Norfolk, as tutor to William, aged seven when Stillingfleet arrived, the only son of Elizabeth Windham or Wyndham, a niece of Bishop Stillingfleet. She and her husband treated their young cousin with friendship and respect, while Stillingfleet devoted himself wholeheartedly to the education of his pupil. However, he did not entirely relish his subordinate status and dependence on the generosity of others and in 1726 he applied for a fellowship at his old college. His rejection was ascribed to the formidable Dr Bentley, whose supposed excuse was that Stillingfleet was too fine a gentleman to be buried in a college. Whatever the reason, Stillingfleet seldom afterwards missed an opportunity of expressing his resentment towards Bentley. 
Meanwhile, at Felbrigg, Stillingfleet enjoyed the esteem and affection of his pupil, making study enjoyable by mingling instruction and amusement. When William's father, Ashe Windham, a typical country gentleman devoted to the pleasures of the field, expressed concern at the amount of time devoted to Latin and Greek in the course of a liberal education, Stillingfleet wisely refrained from dispute with his benefactor and quietly continued to instil in his pupil the advantages of classical learning, particularly that of the Greeks. When William came of age his mentor wrote him a long letter of advice quoted in full by his friend William Coxe in his 'Literary Life and Select Works of Benjamin Stillingfleet' (1811, vol. 1, chap. 3). This document gives a fascinating insight into the author's own philosophy of life; he condemns freethinkers, recommending the protestant view of Christianity and the study of scripture from the original sources. Wealth should be used charitably to bring joy to others. He regards incontinence before marriage as the source of much unhappiness after it, although women are partly to blame for thinking that a reformed rake makes the best husband. Less conventional and more revealing of his own predilections is his choice of a little farming as the most suitable diversion for a man of fortune. His didactic prose becomes more animated as he lists the dire results of the current neglect of agriculture: 'the want of this taste has filled the nation with gamesters, dancing masters, fiddlers, French tailors and Italian singers; it has crowded the town with gaudy beggars and distressed the country with racking landlords, who think they have nothing to do upon their estate but go once a year to gather their rent, and pass a few months in a pitiful obscurity, the better to make a figure in town.' Next he recommends the lifelong pursuit of all branches of learning, above all natural and experimental philosophy to which mathematics is an important adjunct. He concludes with another appeal for generosity to the less fortunate, a virtue from which he benefited all his life and which he practised in his turn. 
Stillingfleet's own strength of character had already been put to the test when, in his early twenties, he fell in love with Anne Barnes, a frequent visitor to Felbrigg. He hoped that an improvement in his circumstances might make marriage possible, but after ten years' courtship the lady's prudence outweighed her affection and she accepted a more advantageous offer. This disappointment induced a profound melancholia in the young man which never entirely left him. To raise his spirits and remove him from the object of his hopeless passion, Ashe Windham sent Stillingfleet on a tour to the continent with William. They set off in 1737 for Italy and Switzerland where they met other wealthy young men making the grand tour, notably Robert Price and Richard Aldworth Neville, both to become lifelong friends of Stillingfleet. In 1740 the friends settled in Geneva, a city much favoured by the English, where French could be studied in a safely protestant environment. They formed a community known as the 'Common Room', which was dedicated to the pursuit of literary discussion and play-reading. Ambitious theatrical productions were performed, which fellow expatriates attended with flattering enthusiasm for their novelty and naturalistic style of acting later adopted by Garrick. Stillingfleet was in charge of stage machinery and assisted Price with the orchestra and with writing music for the pantomimes. More strenuous outdoor pursuits were not neglected, however, and Stillingfleet and his pupil, attracted by the spectacular scenery, made frequent excursions into the valleys of the Alps. In 1741 they joined Dr Richard Pococke in an exploration of the Mer de Glace in the valley of Chamonix. Windham and Price, with the assistance of Stillingfleet, published in 1744 ''An Account of the Glacieres or Ice Alps in Savoy'' which helped to popularize those stupendous works of nature, at that time largely unknown in England and Europe. 
By 1743 this life of carefree indulgence was at an end. Stillingfleet returned to England with his pupil, but not to Felbrigg, where he was no longer needed as a tutor and where he risked a painful encounter with his lost love. Thus homeless and with no apparent ambition to enter a profession, he found himself dependent on the bounty of Ashe Windham, who gave him an annuity of $100 a year. When his patron died in 1749 Stillingfleet continued to receive an allowance from William Windham, his former pupil. Stillingfleet then settled in a house in Panton Square, London, rented by William Windham and Price. He made frequent visits to the country estates of friends such as Neville and Robert Marsham, occupying himself mainly with literary pursuits and the study of classic authors, particularly Homer, Plato, and above all Aristotle. His own critical and philosophical writings at this time were never published. A more serious project, a commentary on Milton's 'Paradise Lost', intended to correct the errors of Stillingfleet's old enemy Richard Bentley, also remained unpublished, but his notes were used in Henry Todd's edition of 1801. Stillingfleet expressed his admiration for Milton in sonnets dedicated to his friends. These and a poem entitled 'Essay on conversation', addressed to William Windham, were published in volume two of Coxe's biography, but Stillingfleet is not remembered as a poet; his verse, though enlivened by the occasional satirical jibe against the hated Bentley, was competent but mostly uninspired. 
When in 1746 Price married and went to live on the family estate of Foxley, Herefordshire, Stillingfleet began to spend much of his time in a cottage near his friend's mansion, happily engaged in studious and rural pursuits. He declined several offers to travel as tutor to sons of distinguished families, offering as excuse to his anxious friends his delicate health and lack of worldly ambition. Poor eyesight made study difficult, so strenuous outdoor pursuits, in particular gardening, became the remedy for his ills. It was natural that Stillingfleet, with his wide-ranging intellectual curiosity, should next develop an enthusiasm for botany. After an initial study of the early Greek writers Dioscorides and Theophrastus and of more recent botanists such as Gerard and Ray, Stillingfleet later (1750-55) came to recognize the superiority of the system of classification promulgated by Linnaeus. The works of the great Swedish botanist were little known in England at that time and it was the publication in 1759 of Stillingfleet's 'Miscellaneous Tracts' that gave the Linnaean system wider recognition. 
This work, Stillingfleet's most significant achievement, consists of translations of selected essays from the 'Amoenitates academicae' ('Philosophical Diversions') of Linnaeus and his pupils. Stillingfleet added his own comments and concluded the work with an original treatise, 'Observations on Grasses', which included suggestions for the best species for the improvement of turf and the nourishment of cattle. A second edition was published in 1762 with several additions including a 'Calendar of flora' and eleven plates, drawn by Robert Price, illustrating the different species of grasses recommended by the author. In his portrait by Zoffany ('c'.1762) Stillingfleet is shown holding a magnifying glass and a volume with grasses on the table, an allusion to his treatise. 
In the remarkable preface to the 'Miscellaneous Tracts', Stillingfleet not only gave a lucid account of the Linnaean system but also made a vigorous plea for the study of natural science, arguing that mere curiosity in one age may lead to practical benefits in another. The publication of this work was considered to be the beginning of the establishment of Linnaean botany in England, a view certainly endorsed by Sir James Edward Smith in his article on Richard Pulteney in Rees's 'Cyclopaedia' (1819, vol. 23). In the preface Stillingfleet expressly thanked Dr William Watson for his assistance in his work. Watson, Solander, and William Hudson were botanist friends whose company he enjoyed when in London. It was Stillingfleet who introduced the writings of Linnaeus to his neighbour William Hudson, and encouraged him to write the 'Flora Anglica' published in 1762. 
In 1760 Stillingfleet was offered by Lord Barrington, Price's brother-in-law, the unlikely post of barrack master at Kensington, a mainly honorary position bringing in about $100 a year. Unfortunately this increase in income was accompanied by new responsibilities, for the deaths of two sisters and their husbands left Stillingfleet with the care of two nephews and a niece. The deaths of his friends Windham and Price in 1761 caused him further anguish. Now permanently based in London, Stillingfleet found the practice of botany less convenient and he began to cultivate his interest in music. He published anonymously in 1771 his last work, 'Principles and Power of Harmony', a translation from the Italian of Tartini's 'Trattato di musica', which clarified and corrected the original. It won the approval of Dr Charles Burney and a remarkably large proportion of the article on Stillingfleet in the 'Cyclopaedia' (1819, vol. 34) is devoted to an analysis of this work, in which it is called 'the most clear, agreeable and interesting tract on a dark, obscure and speculative subject'. 
In a letter from London, dated 7 June 1760, the poet Thomas Gray wrote of his acquaintance with Stillingfleet, 'who lives in a garret here in the winter, that he may support some near relations who depend upon him. He is always employed and always cheerful, and seems to me a very worthy honest man.' Stillingfleet's versatility and amiable but modest character made him welcome in literary circles in spite of a few (endearing) eccentricities. His habit of wearing blue instead of formal black stockings at ladies' evening assemblies is supposed to have given rise to the title 'Blue-stocking Clubs' from which the word bluestocking is derived. James Boswell repeated this story in his 'Life of Johnson' (part 8, 1779-81), adding that the excellence of Stillingfleet's conversation was so greatly missed when he was absent that it used to be said, 'We can do nothing without the blue stockings'. 
Benjamin Stillingfleet died at his lodgings in Piccadilly on 15 December 1771, leaving most of his modest estate to his remaining sister. He ordered his manuscripts to be burned but left a few to his friend Thomas Pennant. He was buried on 19 December in nearby St James's Church, where some years later Edward Hawke Locker, grandson of Stillingfleet's favourite sister, Elizabeth, erected a memorial tablet. 


@@@@@


doc= 26526


Stillingfleet, Edward (1635-1699), bishop of Worcester and theologian, was born at Cranborne, Dorset, on 17 April 1635. He was the seventh son of Samuel Stillingfleet and his wife, Susanna, daughter of Edward Norris of Petworth. His father's family came originally from Yorkshire and had estates at Stillingfleet, near York. He was educated at Cranborne grammar school and after 1648 at Ringwood, Hampshire. In 1649 he entered St John's College, Cambridge, and obtained a scholarship on the earl of Salisbury's nomination. He graduated BA in 1653 and was immediately elected into a fellowship on 31 March. He proceeded MA in 1656 and was awarded his DD in 1668. 
In 1654 Stillingfleet went to live at Wroxhall, Warwickshire, with Sir Roger Burgoyne, who in 1657 appointed him to the rectory of Sutton in Bedfordshire. Meanwhile he had been clandestinely ordained by Ralph Brownrigg, the deprived bishop of Exeter. In 1659 he married Andrea, daughter of William Dobyns of Dumbleton. They had two daughters who died in infancy and a son, Edward Stillingfleet (1661-1708) ['see under 'Stillingfleet, Benjamin (1702-1771)], who became Gresham professor of physic in 1698, and also, through the influence of his father, rector of Wood Norton and Swanton Novers, Norfolk. His second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Nicholas Pedley, a serjeant-at-law, died in 1697. They had seven children, of whom, on the evidence of his will, only two certainly survived, Anne Fyshe, who married Humphrey Fyshe of Gray's Inn, and James, who became rector of Hartlebury, Worcestershire, when Stillingfleet became bishop of Worcester. 
After the Restoration Stillingfleet became preacher and lecturer at the Rolls Chapel, and held posts at the Temple Church and at Serjeants' Inn. His family connections and these posts 'brought him into acquaintance and great esteem with all the judges and gentlemen of station' in the law, among them Sir Matthew Hale and Chief Justice Vaughan (DWL, MS 201.30, fol. 30). This interest in legal and constitutional matters emerged in his later writings. Though he was able to conform at the Restoration Stillingfleet did not forget his friends who had not found this possible. For instance Richard Kennet had been ejected from a parish in Cheshire; Stillingfleet helped him find a large house in Sutton where he ran a successful school. In January 1665 Stillingfleet was appointed to the rectory of St Andrews, Holborn, which he held until 1689. Being outside the cramped space of the City, St Andrews was a large church with a substantial auditorium; it was not damaged by the fire of London but under Stillingfleet's aegis was nevertheless rebuilt by Wren between 1684 and 1686. In this large church Stillingfleet rapidly became a popular preacher and as such first made his name. On 23 April 1665 Samuel Pepys went to the Whitehall Chapel and 'heard the famous young preacher' whom the archbishop of Canterbury and the bishop of London 'believe is the ablest young man to preach the gospel since the apostles. He did make a most plain, honest, good, grave sermon in the most unconcerned manner that ever I heard in my life'. On 9 May 1669 Pepys 'could not get a place at St Andrews' (Pepys, 'Diary', 6.87 and 9.548). A very different sort of auditor for Stillingfleet was the extremely devout and puritanical Mary Rich, countess of Warwick, who recorded four times on hearing or reading one of his sermons that her heart was 'affected' or 'melted' ('Memoir of Lady Warwick', 1847, 89, 90, 144, 215). On the other hand there were parishioners who complained that he only 'vouchsafes' to preach, 'coming in late when the reading of prayers is over' ('DNB'). Pepys's summary of his style is, no doubt, just. His sermons covered a great range of subjects: doctrinal, historical, pastoral, devotional, and even, on occasions, political. They were, as Pepys said, 'plain' in the style of the day, and expository, eschewing the rhetorical flourishes of preachers of a former generation. Stillingfleet, however, did not lack courage as a preacher: on 13 March 1667 he preached before the king on the text 'fools make a mock of sin' ('Works', 1.17-30). On another occasion he told the king: 'it is the love of sensual pleasure which is most apt to ensnare men in the practice of sin' (ibid., 1.224). (This sermon may in fact have been aimed at John Wilmot, earl of Rochester, the libertine and freethinker, who had published a satirical attack on reason.) 
Alongside his fame as a preacher Stillingfleet soon became known as a writer. Throughout his life he produced a steady stream of lengthy works of immense learning, so that when he died forty years after his first publication he was, without doubt, the leading theologian and apologist of the Church of England. His work fell into three phases. Up to the revolution of 1688 he wrote on issues which were of paramount importance to the Church of England in positioning it in relation to a broader protestantism and to Rome. During the early years of his episcopate he wrote at slightly less length on more immediately practical concerns; for his last three years he returned to major theological controversies prompted by what he felt were attacks on, or dangers to, the fundamentals of Christianity. His first published work was 'A Weapon Salve for the Church's Wounds', usually known as the 'Irenicum' (1659). Acutely aware of the church's divisions at the end of the interregnum, and of the chances of healing them at the forthcoming Restoration, he addressed mainly the question of the form of church government which underlay the divisions. 'Christ never intended any one form as the only means of peace in the church -- or he would have made it clear' ('Works', 2.55). There was no 'law of nature' which determined church practice and this left the magistrate free 'in determining things left at liberty by the word of God, in order to the peace and government of the church' (ibid., 2.185). Matters left thus indifferent must be determined by the lawful authority of the church and must be obeyed by church members on opting to join the church. But these indifferent matters were not unalterable, 'but may be reversed, limited or changed according to the different ages, tempers or inclinations of men by the same power which did determine them' (ibid., 2.198). (This rule was repeated in the preamble to the commission on comprehension of September 1689 which Stillingfleet must have had a part in drafting.) There was 'no single model for the form of church government in scripture' or in apostolic practice: 'it is a matter of liberty... a nation joining in the performance of Christian liberty is a true church of God... there must be a form of ecclesiastical government in a nation as a church, as well as of civil government over it' (ibid., 2.225, 2.253). Episcopacy was not at first universal and 'even after episcopal government was settled in the church, yet ordination by presbyters was looked on as valid' (ibid., 2.392). Bishops and priests were one office and 'in extremis' princes as well as bishops might ordain priests since 'all Christian princes have committed unto them immediately by God the whole care of all their subjects, as well concerning the administration of God's word for the cure of the soul, as concerning the ministration of things political' (ibid., 2.400). Here Stillingfleet was quoting a highly Erastian paper of Thomas Cranmer's 'now just published' (ibid., 2.396) on the power of the state over the church. This was indeed an eirenic starting point for church negotiations and one in line with reformed practice on the continent, but Stillingfleet backed away from its extreme Erastianism in the second (1662) edition of the 'Irenicum' without ever entirely retracting it. 
Stillingfleet was twice involved in negotiations for comprehension in the 1670s. In 1675 he and John Tillotson, dean of Canterbury, met the leading nonconformists Richard Baxter, William Bates, Thomas Manton, and Matthew Poole to discuss a comprehension bill in negotiations instigated by bishops George Morley and Seth Ward; the negotiators came to an agreement, but the scheme was dropped given the impossibility of the bill getting passed in the face of the antipathy of most of the bishops. In late 1679 the presbyterians Manton and John Howe waited -- in vain, as it turned out -- at Stillingfleet's house to meet Bishop William Lloyd of St Asaph to discuss further proposals for comprehension. Stillingfleet was also a member of the circle of rising London clergy -- who also included Tillotson, John Sharp, and Thomas Tenison -- patronized by the Finch family: the lord chancellor, the first earl of Nottingham, and his eldest son, Daniel. The latter, a moderate tory Anglican, was a strong advocate of comprehension in 1679-80 (as he was to be ten years later) as a means of forging protestant unity against the common Catholic threat. 
The failure of the comprehension schemes in the 1670s and the mounting exclusion crisis meant that times had indeed changed by the time Stillingfleet next entered into print on the battlefield of protestant ecumenical politics in 1680. When he preached his sermon 'The Mischief of Separation' on 11 May 1680, delivered before the whig lord mayor of London, Sir Robert Clayton, times had changed. It was no longer a matter of negotiations for a church from a virtual 'tabula rasa', but of forming a united protestant front in the wake of the Popish Plot and with the prospect of a Roman Catholic 'magistrate' should James, duke of York, succeed to the throne. Moreover Stillingfleet admitted to his bishop, Henry Compton, that his own view had changed: 'I do not deny... that I now think much more is to be said of the apostolical institution of episcopacy than I at that time apprehended' ('Works', 1.138). He started his sermon with a simple proposition: 'the true notion of a church is no more than of a society of men united together for their order and government according to the rules of the Christian religion' (ibid., 1.283). The dissenters did not deny that the Church of England had true doctrine and right sacraments, 'but they blame their non-conformity on the strict obligation to all of conformity' (ibid., 1.290). But if they could join the services occasionally without sin, 'why not constantly' (ibid., 1.291). He recognized that many nonconformists were accepting their sectarian position, and therefore would prefer toleration to comprehension within the Church of England, but since 'wise and good men will bear with anything for the sake of order... they will consider the common danger that threatens us all by means of our divisions' (ibid., 1.299). 
The sermon caused a furore. Dissenters led by Richard Baxter and John Owen rose up against it. Baxter protested that his own practice was always to avoid clashing with the work of the established church and never to separate or support a rival congregation unless driven to do so. But where conformists say that 'bishops and presbyters are distinct orders... the churches are differing in the very order or species of the constitutive government' (R. Baxter, 'Mr Baxter's Answer to Dr Edward Stillingfleet's Charge of Separation', 1680, 8). Baxter was constantly attacking Stillingfleet's pragmatism and asking 'which is the constitutive? Whether the king or a sacerdotal head?' (ibid., 8). In his reply Stillingfleet ignored this. However, William Sherlock, writing ostensibly in his defence, did respond to the idea of the constitutive part of the church: 'the nature and essence of the church does not consent in religious assembling, but in its union with Christ', which 'requires that the national church be governed by common advice and consent', which is achieved by bishops and some presbyters in synod (W. Sherlock, 'A Discourse about Church Unity', 1681, 305, 504). Another Anglican who found Stillingfleet's doctrine of the church wanting was Samuel Lowth, later a nonjuror. In his 'Of the Subject of Church Power' (1665) he had attacked the 'Irenicum' and, replying to Stillingfleet's further development of the argument of 'The Mischief', held that the church is 'a particular society... distinct from the commonwealth, subsisting by powers of its own' (S. Lowth, 'A Letter to Dr Stillingfleet', 1687, 9). A very different person writing against Stillingfleet was John Locke, who must have been known to Stillingfleet about this time. His 'Critical Notes' were an unpublished critique of Stillingfleet: 'it suffices for the union of protestants that they keep up a friendship under different forms or modes of worship' (Marshall, 102). 
Stillingfleet was clearly taken aback by the opposition to his sermon. In 1683 he produced a major work, 'The Unreasonableness of Separation', which enlarged upon the earlier sermon. Even if occasional conformity were accepted as the norm there would be no end to dissenters pressing for their various ideas of a perfect church, and so perpetuating schism. He admitted that various reforms were desirable in the Church of England, especially in the church courts to restore the puritan ideal of church discipline; but dissenters maintained their nonconformity only because of certain 'accidental appendices' and some 'circumstantials of worship' whereas the Church of England's schism with Rome rested on doctrinal issues -- a very different matter ('Works', 2.621, 636). 
The 'Irenicum' had been followed in 1662 by 'Origines sacrae', written while Stillingfleet was still at Sutton. This monumental work of natural theology 'made him known to the world' and went into five editions before 1680 ('Works', 1.18). He believed that there was 'sufficient evidence in point of reason to prove... the existence of the deity' and that this belief was universal (ibid., 2.231). Those who were squeamish about accepting revelation could have 'sufficient evidence in point of reason to prove to them the existence of a deity' (ibid., 2.231). The idea of God was imprinted on man's mind by God who 'hath stamped an universal character of himself upon the minds of men' (ibid., 2.234, 242). The truth of religion was attested to by 'the necessity of the belief of the creation of the world' (ibid., 2.265). In four long sermons (which were probably never preached as no date is given for them) Stillingfleet argued that the immortality of the soul could be deduced 'by the force of natural reason' and was the basis, even for non-Christians, 'of moral happiness through virtue and quelling passions', and of the coherence of society (sermons 41, 42, and 44, 'Works', 1.625-78). 
Stillingfleet's next major writings, which occupied him until -- and indeed after -- the Revolution were polemical works against Roman Catholics, in which labour he had been encouraged by Humphrey Henchman, bishop of London from 1663 to 1675. The main works were 'A Rational Account of the Grounds of Protestant Religion' (1665), 'A Discourse Concerning the Idolatry Practiced in the Church of Rome' (1671), 'An Answer to Mr Cressy's Epistle' (1674), 'A Defence of a Discourse Concerning Idolatry' (1676), and 'Several Conferences Concerning the Idolatry of the Church of Rome' (1679), with many shorter works and pamphlets. In this lengthy series Stillingfleet had three main opponents. These were John Sergeant, Hugh Cressy, and Thomas Godden. All three were former Anglicans who had converted to Rome, and who had trained in France and returned to England as controversialists. Sergeant was the most prolific, but Stillingfleet regarded him as 'unfit of all men to undertake this cause' ('Works', 6.362). The main arguments tended to be repetitive, but as the years went on Stillingfleet, in his advocate's way, piled detail upon detail. Nowhere is his prodigious historical learning more evident, not only in patristic and orthodox, but also in medieval, theology. The first issue was the Roman Catholic accusation against the Church of England of schism. Here he adopted the traditional Anglican defence: the schismatics were not the Anglicans: 'it was not we who left your church, but your church that left her primitive faith and purity' (ibid., 3.325). The Romans compounded this by setting up such absolute conditions for the return of non-Catholics to their fold: 'you are the greatest schismatics in the world' (ibid., 3.324). But the issue which most exercised him was that of the Roman claim of infallibility. He said that it added nothing to Christian belief: 'it is impossible for you to give a better account of faith by the infallibility of your church, than we can do without it' (ibid., 3.110). Scripture, tradition, and the exercise of reason to judge credibility were sufficient, especially as absolute certainty was not possible as the human mind could not encompass the truths of Christianity. Stillingfleet was in any case deeply affronted by the fact that infallibility left no place, as he saw it, for human judgement and reason. It was, in fact, a recipe for scepticism. He also made great play with the circular reasoning of infallibility. Where did it lie? How could a final statement be reached? And so on: 'you avoid not the circle' (ibid., 3.123). For himself, as he constantly reiterated, he was content with the moral certainty provided by scripture, tradition, and reason, provided that reason was not contradicted. Scripture was not irrational, but was above reason. For Stillingfleet faith was 'a rational, discursive act of the mind', not of the will (ibid., 4.134). In the later works of this series Stillingfleet concentrated more on the 'errors and corruptions' which had infiltrated the Roman church since it departed from primitive tradition. There were the usual protestant accusations, though delivered in more than usual detail: the corruptions and irregularities of general councils, especially the Council of Trent, which created more difficulties than it solved; the doctrine of purgatory, which undermined the necessity of virtuous living as did the easiness of gaining absolution through the confessional; the 'dangerous enthusiasms and raptures' (ibid., 4.615), which were encouraged and found especially in the monastic orders. He particularly attacked the doctrine of transubstantiation which 'overthrows the very nature of a sacrament, leaving no external visible sign' whereas the consubstantial view of both the bread and the body together in the sacrament avoided this (ibid., 6.437). Finally, he felt that the invocation of saints and the multiplication of miracles (he made great play with the Holy House of Loreto) did indeed introduce an idolatry which was akin to pagan practices, and he refused to accept the Roman Catholic justification of 'relative worship' of the saints (ibid., 6.79). This was a position also reached at the same time by the future nonjuror Henry Dodwell in a series of volumes which ran parallel to those of Stillingfleet. It was an accusation which Archbishop Gilbert Sheldon regretted. 
In 1685 Stillingfleet published his 'Origines Britannicae'. The book aimed at 'the rescuing of this part of church history... from the fabulous antiquities which have so much debased the value and eclipsed the glory of it' ('Works', 3.1). He had in mind the contemporary accusations that Christianity was shored up by the complicated teachings of 'priestcraft' -- a theme to which he often returned especially after John Toland published his 'Christianity not Mysterious' in 1695. He set about, therefore, to explain his system in sifting historical evidence to arrive at 'evident demonstration'. This had required 'much labour and industry in searching and comparing good and bad authors' (ibid., 3.1). His second purpose in the book was to show that the church had been founded in England independent of Rome. Early kings had not been converted by the pope, and Joseph of Arimathea was a fabled figure, invented by later monks. Nevertheless the church in England went back to apostolic times and may have been founded by St Paul, a claim which was accepted well into the nineteenth century. This and his other purely historical works, such as the posthumously published ''Discourse of the true antiquity of London and its state in Roman times'', were much valued and quoted in the eighteenth century. 
While engaged in these writings Stillingfleet was also steadily advancing in the hierarchy of the church. In 1667 he received the prebend of Islington at St Paul's, which he exchanged for Newington in 1672. In a letter to the dean and chapter on 9 June 1670 the king recommended that he be given the 'next vacant place' as 'he hath by his learned writings done such excellent service for the Church of England, particularly in defence of Christian truth' (Worcs. RO, BA 9832 I). In 1672 he became a residentiary canon of St Paul's and on 22 September 1673 he and another residentiary were reported as 'making all the haste they can to come into their new houses' rebuilt after the great fire (Bodl. Oxf., Tanner MS 145, no. 183). In December 1674 Dean William Sancroft appointed him receiver and chamberlain, acknowledging 'how many and weighty your employments are' (DWL, MS 201.38, fol. 10). He was also a chaplain to the king and a canon of Canterbury. In 1677 he was appointed archdeacon of London, the senior of the four London diocesan archdeacons. There he would have had his first practical experience of the workings of the ecclesiastical courts, which were later to exercise him so greatly. He was also in 1678 prolocutor of the lower house of the Canterbury convocation, not a weighty commitment at this time since convocation, though meeting formally, had in fact been in abeyance since 1662. But with a few exceptions there is very little evidence of his actual activities in these various offices. In 1673 Burnet persuaded the duke of York, newly converted to Catholicism, to see Stillingfleet though the latter 'had no hopes of success' in converting him back to the Church of England ('Bishop Burnet's History', 2.26). The discussion turned on the sensitive issue of the pope's powers of deposing princes, but predictably the duke remained unimpressed. 
Also in 1673 Stillingfleet was appointed a commissioner for the rebuilding of St Paul's. On 18 May 1674 the full commission met and, to Christopher Wren's dismay, turned down the previously accepted Greek cross plan for the cathedral, of which he had had made a model 20 feet long. The opposition was led by the three residentiary canons, of whom Stillingfleet must have been the most influential. Criticisms of the Greek cross centred on the fact that the choir, with semicircular seating, would not be suitable as a separate space for smaller congregations. It was also realized that it would not be possible to build the cathedral in sections and so start services before the whole building was completed. But no doubt the fundamental objection was conservative opposition to a ground-plan which was so at variance with the traditional plan of English cathedrals. Around this opposition clerical opinion gathered, and the king and Archbishop Sheldon did not feel able to uphold the more radical -- and continental -- scheme. So Wren was sent back to his drawing board. Stillingfleet continued as a commissioner, attending most of the committee meetings which oversaw accounts and issued the detailed individual contracts to the craftsmen concerned. During Compton's suspension as bishop of London by James II from 1686 to 1688 Stillingfleet was particularly responsible, as either the dean or the bishop had to be present at every meeting of the commission. 
In January 1678 Stillingfleet succeeded William Sancroft as dean of St Paul's. In October, at the time of the Popish Plot, there was a rumour that he might be kidnapped and murdered, and 'thereupon on Sunday about forty persons for a guard waited on the doctor to church and home' ('House of Lords MSS', 2.68). In November 1678 he preached the sermon to the Commons on the fast day appointed in response to the discovery of the plot. 
In 1680 Stillingfleet entered into the pamphlet debates which followed the failure of the whig attempt to impeach the king's first minister, the earl of Danby, when the case fell through the votes on his behalf of the bishops. The whigs claimed that the bishops could not sit as judges in cases (such as impeachments) which could involve the death penalty. In the vigorous tract warfare that ensued medieval precedents were freely bandied. Stillingfleet entered the lists somewhat late with 'The Grand Question Concerning the Bishops' Right to Vote in Cases Capital'. He was specifically responding to Denzil, Lord Holles's 'A Letter of a Gentleman to a Friend'. Much argument had turned on Henry II's constitutions of Clarendon and his case against Archbishop Becket. Stillingfleet 'showed that Holles's handling... was upside down' (Goldie, 94): Henry had actually intended the bishops to do their secular duty by taking part in the prosecution. The argument from canon law that they should not be involved in capital cases was an attempt by the papacy to draw them from the king's service into the papal power. Stillingfleet showed that the bishops were not a third estate of the realm but full members of the Lords summoned by royal writ as were the hereditary peers. This was an argument for the centrality of the bishops in the English polity which paralleled his Erastian arguments against separation from the Church of England in 'The Mischief of Separation', published in the same year. Gilbert Burnet, who much admired Stillingfleet's learning, commented that 'The Grand Question' 'put an end to the controversy in the opinion of all impartial men, showing more skill and exactness in judging these matters than all that had gone before him' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 2.215). It was the beginning of a new role for Stillingfleet -- that of advising on legal, and especially constitutional, matters. 
With the accession of James II, Stillingfleet moved centre stage. He and a group of leading London clergy, which included John Tillotson, Thomas Tenison, and Simon Patrick, as well as Bishop William Lloyd of St Asaph, organized the opposition to the reading from church pulpits of the declaration of indulgence of 4 April 1687 by which the king offered a much wider toleration to protestant dissenters and Roman Catholics than was eventually incorporated in the 'Toleration Act' of 1689. They also formed a pressure group to strengthen Sancroft and other bishops in their opposition; this was based on the king's illegal use of his suspending power, a formula in which Stillingfleet had a hand. In the end the clergy in London and elsewhere refused by huge majorities to read the declaration, though Stillingfleet absented himself from the cathedral that day. At this time, too, tentative steps were taken, in which Stillingfleet was fully involved, to draft a scheme of comprehension to bring dissenters into the church and, as part of this in 1688, to revise the liturgy. These moves were frustrated by the arrival on 5 November of William of Orange and his subsequent march on London. Stillingfleet took no part in the invitation to William. Indeed in the spring of 1688 he and Tillotson had advised Daniel Finch (by now second earl of Nottingham) against becoming involved. But on 14 January 1689 the old pressure group met at the deanery to set on foot proposals for comprehension which included the problem of the re-ordination of nonconformist ministers, liturgical and ceremonial change, the revision of the ecclesiastical canons, and the reform of the church courts to make them more effective in enforcing discipline. These plans were delayed when William made a supremely tactless speech to parliament on 16 March 1689 urging 'the admission to public office of all protestants that are willing and able to serve' (J. Israel, 'William III and Toleration', 'From Persecution to Toleration', 1991, 129-70). The tories rallied to the cry of 'the church in danger' and for the moment plans for both toleration and comprehension were shelved. On 8 March Stillingfleet had advised Nottingham that the idea of comprehension would be better presented to convocation 'without which our clergy will hardly come to it'. But since at the moment convocation was not possible it would be better to appoint a committee to consider the revision of the canons and the reform of the courts, 'a work too great to be undertaken by any one person... I rather think the whole summer will be little enough for it' ('Finch MSS', 2.194). At length on 4 September a royal warrant appointed a commission of ten bishops and twenty senior clergy to draw up proposals for comprehension. The agenda commenced with 'rites and ceremonies... Being things in their nature indifferent and alterable... it is reasonable upon weighty and important consideration, according to the exigencies of times and occasions [that] changes and alterations should be made therein, as those that are in place and authority should from time to time deem either necessary or expedient.' (This formula can be attributed to Stillingfleet.) The writ also proposed reform of church discipline: 'And whereas the book of canons is fit to be reviewed and made more suitable to the state of the church, and whereas there are divers defects and abuses in the ecclesiastical courts... and particularly there is not sufficient provision made for the removing of scandalous ministers and for reformation of manners either in ministers or people. ('CSP dom.', '1689', 242-3)' Stillingfleet was elected bishop of Worcester on 12 October 1689 and was consecrated at Fulham on the following day. He was one of the first of William III's appointments, the see being vacant by the death of William Thomas. But he did not proceed at once to Worcester, being engaged on preparing the terms for comprehension. The commission met twenty-two times between 3 October and 18 November. Stillingfleet attended thirteen of these meetings but was not present at the meetings after 3 November, though in fact he was still in London and attending the House of Lords as the new bishop of Worcester. The early discussions were almost entirely on the revision of the liturgy and here Patrick and Tenison took the lead, drawing on the liturgical draft of 1688. Stillingfleet took little or no part except in the discussion on the use of the Athanasian creed. His interest had been in the revision of the canons and the reform of the courts, matters which were not reached before convocation voted comprehension down. He had, as noted above, been involved with Tillotson in previous comprehension discussions in 1675, and he must have known about the plans of 1680 and 1688, which were those which incorporated the latest thinking. But his proposals for the canons and the courts, preserved at Lambeth, were the most radical to date. The canon requiring church attendance should be dropped; canons 'with no penalty annexed' should be revised; 'causes not of their own nature spiritual' should be taken out of the church courts 'to avoid the objections of civil lawyers' and make the church courts more credible; the sentence of excommunication in cases not relating to religion, such as tithes, should be replaced, especially as the follow-up to it to secure a prison sentence was so often ineffectual; exempt jurisdictions and peculiars with independent jurisdiction within a diocese should be abolished, which would avoid many abuses such as clandestine matrimony. These and other proposed reforms, long overdue, would have revolutionized the church courts (LPL, MS 1743, 111). 
Some time later, no doubt as a result of his direct experience of his own courts, Stillingfleet had even more drastic thoughts about reform. He diagnosed the main problem as being the exercise of plenary instead of summary jurisdiction in the church courts, even for trifling cases. This drew out time and increased the fees involved. He also envisaged in 'proposals towards the reviving of discipline among the clergy' the revival of rural deaneries of several parishes under a 'grave and fit' rural dean. He traced the medieval precedents for this and opined that where rural deaneries were 'discontinued it is mainly through the neglect of discipline which hath been too notorious among us, the consistory courts drawing all to themselves'. The deanery meetings should be for mutual edification and the reporting of recalcitrant clergy to the bishop. 'It cannot be denied that, while the church hath been much concerned to preserve its doctrine and worship the cause of discipline hath been too much neglected' (DWL, MS 201.39, fol. 25). These thoughts echoed to a remarkable degree the proposals put forward in the aborted Worcester House declaration of 1660. He also quoted a short canon in Cranmer's abortive 'Reformation legum ecclesiasticarum' of 1553 of which printed editions existed at this time. Tucked away among its various very conservative regulations for church courts there was provision for an annual 'archpresbyter' in each deanery to keep his area under inspection and report malfeasance to the bishop for summary examination (G. Bray, ed., 'Tudor Church Reform', 2000, canon 26S, 351f). 
Stillingfleet knew that such radical reforms would be hard to implement, as proved to be the case. The nearest he came to improving the workings of the courts was in his 'Small Tithes Act' of April 1694. By this the recovery of small tithes by vicars was removed from the consistory courts and vested in the plenary jurisdiction of justices of the peace. He recognized that there could be problems because some of the justices might have local interests but they would have to proceed 'according to the rights and customs and usages of the several places', and the vicars would be spared the expenses and delays of plenary procedure in the consistory court ('Miscellaneous Discourses', 393). In the event, though he was in London, Stillingfleet was ill and it was John Sharp, archbishop of York, who piloted the bill through the Lords. 
Once he reached his diocese Stillingfleet was an exemplary bishop, within the constraints of illness and the traditions of the time which required bishops to reside in London for the House of Lords in the winter. During his ten-year episcopate he conducted three visitations, in 1690, 1693, and 1696. The primary visitation in 1690 was presumably peripatetic but by 1696 he was probably too ill with gout to undertake the travelling and attendant entertaining; of the 1693 visitation no records remain. The primary charge to his clergy was typical of that which a thorough bishop would issue: residence, daily offices and frequent celebrations of holy communion, preaching, and catechizing were all emphasized; a full list of confirmands must be sent to the bishop beforehand. He condemned extempore preaching: 'loose and careless... an ill habit' ('Works', 3.627). Towards nonconformists he recommended 'such an open temper as is constant with the preserving of the constitution of our church' (ibid., 3.361). Diligence in visiting as great as that of dissenting clergy was vital, especially with the sick: 'it is no matter to run over some prayers and so take leave' (ibid., 3.362). The clergy must have a 'great care of your conversations', an exhortation repeated in his third charge, 'for we live in an age whereas the contempt of the clergy is too notorious not to be observed' (ibid., 3.661). Clerical demeanour must not be so high as to put off the parishioner nor so low as to cause scandal: 'the doing good of your people's souls ought to be the principal and chief design of your thoughts, studies and endeavours' (ibid., 3.657). 
In August 1692 Stillingfleet visited his cathedral where the open scandals exasperated him: cathedrals ought to be 'the nurseries of the church' ('Miscellaneous Discourses', 264ff). He asked the most detailed questions as to the behaviour, learning, residence, and church attendance of the clergy. The answers of the dean and chapter were not satisfactory. The chapter claimed that immemorial practice justified their performance, especially on the matter of residence. Stillingfleet would have none of it. How, he asked, could immemorial practice supersede the obligations of the statutes: 'wherein is this ambiguity? Can any words be plainer on the intentions of the founder?' Even a royal mandate could not override the statutes (DWL, MS 201.39, fols. 16-22). Another local dispute in which he was involved concerned the administration of Worcester charities and his right as bishop to be a trustee; this called forth the usual barrage of medieval precedents. 
The only other evidence on Stillingfleet's Worcester episcopate is to be found in the archives of his consistory court. His first biographer records the 'general satisfaction' given by his presiding there, where 'he soon found it sunk in its reputation' ('Works', 1.110-11). In fact it was not so deplorable (compared with courts in other dioceses) as he painted it: the chancellor, Sir Timothy Baldwyn, was not a regular absentee and Stillingfleet's predecessor, William Thomas, did occasionally sit himself, for example on 15 April 1685 and 16 September 1686. Nevertheless the bishop would have found most of the daily entries deferred until the next court day when he himself started sitting on 28 August 1690. After a gap until 14 July 1692 he sat reasonably regularly between spring and autumn, when he would not have been in London for parliament. In 1692 he presided five times; in 1693 twelve; in 1694 three; and in 1695 eleven. On 30 July 1695 John Price LLB appears for the first time, often thereafter sitting with Stillingfleet; in 1696 the bishop only sat twice and Price appeared as chancellor: Stillingfleet had evidently been running Price in until he was satisfied, for the bishop's last appearance was on 3 June 1696. It is difficult to see from the records what the precise effects were of his frequent appearances (unprecedented in other dioceses) but no doubt he was justified in saying that he succeeded in speeding up the proceedings by punishing 'vexatious and dilatory subterfuges': when he was sitting in 1695 proctors were often fined for 'retarding the process' (Worcs. RO, BA 2722, 794.011. 4a, 4b, 4.iii). His biographer says that he drew up new rules for his court, which did away with 'many useless obsolete terms and forms', but if that is true they have not survived ('Works', 1.113). 
During the early years of his episcopate Stillingfleet produced a number of (for him) short works on issues which were exercising the minds of churchmen. He had been under some threat from James II's commission to oversee the affairs of the church. He wrote about it at the time but did not publish 'Of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction with Respect to the Legal Supremacy' until 1689. The definition of the monarch's supremacy and dispensing power was a very complex legal and historical issue, involving in particular the key statutes of the English Reformation. But Stillingfleet insisted that the act of 13 Chas II. c.12. at the Restoration overthrew all these in abolishing the court of high commission. As to the dispensing power the king could not dispense in matters which were 'mala per se' ('inherently wrong in themselves') rather than merely 'mala prohibita' ('wrong by human decree'): 'I cannot but conclude that the dispensing power is a kind of mental reservation which quite alters the meaning and design of law' ('Works', 3.762). 
In the same year Stillingfleet published a book with what was no doubt the intentionally ironic title of 'The Unreasonableness of a New Separation'. This was a contribution to the nonjuring debate about the position of those who felt bound by the oath of allegiance they had taken to James II. He took the pragmatic view that James had forsaken the public good and so nullified the oaths taken to him 'with apostasy from the principals of the Church of England.... Under a state of usurpation, notwithstanding these oaths taken to the rightful prince, men are bound to do those things which tend to the public safety as well as their own' ('Works', 3.940). Bishop Thomas of Worcester would have been a nonjuror, but died before his principles could be put to the test. So Stillingfleet escaped the strictures of Henry Dodwell and other nonjurors that in accepting the bishopric he was creating a schism in the church. But that did not inhibit him from entering the lists against the nonjurors. In 1691 he produced his 'Vindication of their Majesties' Authority to Fill the Sees of the Deprived Bishops'. It was reasonable not to accept a see where the deprived incumbent was an old friend; but otherwise the deprived bishop had lost his post and brought 'unpardonable scandal both to the enemies and to the friends of government and to the government itself' (ibid., 3.960). These views may reflect his earlier Erastianism. 

'A Discourse Concerning Bonds of Resignation' followed in 1695. Stillingfleet believed that the practice of giving a bond to resign a post at a later request on being appointed (usually to a living which was being reserved by the patron for a relative when he was old enough to be ordained) was a 'growing mischief' ('Works', 3.738). The practice was simoniacal as it involved the biblical sin of buying a religious position -- what he called 'trafficking' (ibid., 3.719). Even though not strictly illegal an 'equitable construction' would supply the 'defects of our law' and Sir Edward Coke had declared 'our common law doth detest simony' (ibid., 3.735). In the end its rejection lay with the conscience of the patron and the incumbent. Many bishops must have been under pressure from influential landowner patrons to turn a blind eye to bonds, and even Burnet had accepted such an arrangement to finance other posts in his diocese. Tenison consulted Stillingfleet as to whether such an arrangement was acceptable and Stillingfleet replied emphatically in the negative, however good the cause: 'such examples are dangerous.... It was to no purpose to go about to persuade lay patrons against bonds of resignation, so long as bishops gave such examples' ('Miscellaneous Discourses', 38). Perhaps no book of his brought him more letters of gratitude. Tillotson had consulted him and Nicholas Stratford, bishop of Chester, wrote that the work came 'seasonably at a time when I stood in need of it' as he had been 'in discourse with several of my clergy' who considered the practice acceptable (DWL, MS 201.38, fol. 38). 
Stillingfleet attended the winter sittings of the House of Lords as often as his gout allowed -- on an average six times a year until 1696 and 1697. Undoubtedly this decline was due to the worsening of his affliction after more than twenty years. On 4 December 1697, for instance, Tenison wrote to say that he had been dispensed by the king because he was not fit for the journey to London, but must attend if he improved. Most of the letters to him from his colleagues refer to his affliction and on 3 May 1698 William Stanley, who had succeeded him as archdeacon of London, wrote with an infallible cure -- 'drinking fresh urine of a cow, then fasting, a pint every morning' (DWL, MS 201.38, fol. 17). On 11 December 1697 Bishop Edward Fowler of Gloucester wrote to thank him for his book against John Locke: whatever malady Stillingfleet has, it is not to his head, 'such books, so fast from the press' (DWL, MS 201.38, fol. 54). In fact Stillingfleet's advice was sought by almost half the members of the episcopal bench including archbishops Tillotson and Tenison (often on appointments) and Compton, his old bishop in London. William Lloyd, formerly bishop of St Asaph and latterly of Lichfield, was his most frequent correspondent with queries about statutes for his cathedral, visitations, recalcitrant clergy, and, above all, his courts. These letters testify to Stillingfleet's reputation as a man not only of unrivalled learning but of great wisdom, as does the fact that he was frequently chosen to sit on the court of delegates, the final court of appeal on ecclesiastical cases, established at the Reformation to take the place of Rome. This court did not have a permanent existence but, rather, judges were appointed 'ad hoc' for each case: a panel of three or four bishops aided by common law judges sat on the most important cases, otherwise they were left to lay judges. Between 4 November 1689, when Stillingfleet made his first appearance, and his death in 1699 the delegates heard 233 cases; of these fifty-three had episcopal delegates; Stillingfleet sat on thirty-five of them, while seven of the cases from which he was absent came in a period between January 1696 and November 1697 when his gout was increasingly incapacitating him. In sum, during this decade Stillingfleet established an unprecedented hegemony over the court of delegates, none of the other bishops being appointed so often. 
Stillingfleet was appointed by William III to a number of episcopal committees, for instance on church appointments and to supervise the reconstruction of the Irish church. He was an early supporter of the lay and ecumenical movement of the Society for the Reformation of Manners. Indeed it was he who in 1691 persuaded Queen Mary to patronize the society with the Middlesex justices, which first brought the movement to public attention. The pious Queen Mary was an ardent supporter of Stillingfleet and, on Tillotson's death in 1694, urged his candidature for Canterbury on her husband. She 'pressed the king earnestly for him', recorded Burnet, 'but as his ill health made him not capable of the fatigue that belonged to this province, so the whigs did generally apprehend that both his notions and his temper were too high', whereas Tenison had 'many friends and no enemies' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.238). 
From 1695 Stillingfleet turned his pen back to major themes of theology and philosophy with a number of works, the common theme of which was that the church was in danger from the undermining of its fundamental beliefs. First he revised (or continued) his earlier 'Origines sacrae', examining 'modern atheistical hypotheses'. He attacked Thomas Hobbes's thesis 'that religion is owing to man's ignorance and superstitious fear' ('Works', 1.61). Next he condemned Descartes's ideas of motion and the mechanical laws of nature as explaining the universe without the intervention of providence. Both these thinkers, he would have believed, undermined natural theology which claimed that belief in God and the immortality of the soul could be reached without recourse to scripture. This work was laid aside because of his controversy with John Locke and was only published posthumously. 
Instead in 1696 Stillingfleet published 'Two Discourses Concerning Christ's Satisfaction', written against Socinians and antinomians. He identified 'the main point of difference between us seems to be whether the death of Christ had respect to the justice or the mercy of God.... Whether [Christ] did really undergo the punishment of our sins in order to bring a sacrifice of atonement for them' ('Works', 3.229, 405). On these issues the bishop insisted on a full penal substitutionary theory of atonement against the Socinian argument that Christ's sacrifice was not 'performed on earth' but 'offered in heaven' (ibid., 3.295). 'A Discourse in Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity' followed in 1697. Socinian pamphlets had 'swarmed so much among us within a few years', he complained (ibid., 3.413). Indeed Socinianism had now become in England unitarianism, with the controversy started by Stephen Nye's 'Brief History of the Unitarians' of 1687. To the unitarian accusation that trinitarian doctrine was neither scriptural nor logical Stillingfleet replied 'the doctrine of the trinity [was] not received in the Christian church by force or interest', and fell back on his usual argument that 'God asks us to believe things beyond our comprehension... but he never requires us to believe contradictions' (ibid., 3.435, 448). 
The 'Vindication' also provided the first salvo in what became the last great crusade of Stillingfleet's life -- the controversy with John Locke -- where he criticized Locke's 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding', whose philosophy of knowledge had been appropriated and deployed against trinitarian Christianity by the deist John Toland. Stillingfleet clearly felt that Locke's position and influence as a philosopher -- and in particular his central and revolutionary theory of knowledge -- constituted the greatest danger undermining the accepted theology of the church. He, perhaps better than anyone, was in a position to confute the threat presented by Locke. He wrote two more books against Locke in the form of letters, in 1697 and 1698, to which Locke replied with three substantial volumes, the last published after the bishop's death; these were 'Letter to the Right Reverend Edward, Lord Bishop of Worcester' (1697), 'Mr Locke's Reply... to the Bishop of Worcester' (1697), and 'Mr Locke's Reply to... the... Bishop of Worcester's Answer to his Second Letter' (1699). Stillingfleet accepted that Locke was a Christian but said 'I cannot believe that you intended to give any advantage to the enemies of the Christian faith.... But consider in our age wherein the mysteries of faith are so much exposed by the promotion of scepticism and infidelity, it is a thing of dangerous consequence to start such new methods of certainty as are apt to leave men's minds more doubtful than before. ('Works', 3.530)' (The theme of certainty was recurrent in these interchanges.) Locke denied that this was the result of his writing but Stillingfleet cited to him Toland's 'Christianity not Mysterious' which clearly echoed Locke: 'our knowledge is in effect nothing else but the perception of the agreement or disagreement of our ideas' (J. Toland, 'Christianity not Mysterious', 2nd edn, 1697, 10). Toland, Stillingfleet argued, 'thought he had reason to reject all mysteries of faith which are contained in propositions upon your grounds of certainty' ('Works', 3.531). Stillingfleet's thoroughness in pursuing the controversy (even into Toland's second edition) at the end of his life, and in increasing pain, is surely remarkable. After this Locke 'distanced himself from Toland' (Marshall, 409). 
Stillingfleet attacked Locke's epistemological formula that sensation and reflection were the basis of knowledge as 'very insufficient' to provide an analysis of all thought and experience. There must also be 'some general ideas which the mind doth form' ('Works', 3.504). He was willing to 'grant that by sensation and reflection we can come to the powers and properties of things, but our reason is satisfied that there must be something beyond these, because it is impossible that they should subsist by themselves' (ibid., 3.509). He wanted an underlying common substructure of substance or essence which was more than Locke's 'modes and accidents' (Locke, 'Letter', 38). Locke would grant no more than that such substance was 'a collection of several ideas combined into one abstract idea' (ibid., 165). He insisted that such a collection could have no more reality than a name it was given: 'the complex idea is the nominal essence and nothing else' (ibid., 206). Stillingfleet's reaction to this new form of the medieval heresy of nominalism was that 'I do think that there is a difference between that [that is, a belief in universals] and making them mere names or signs of ideas' ('Works', 3.350). Locke's ideas were too destructive: 'if we cannot come at a rational idea of substance, we can have no principle of certainty to go upon in this debate' (Locke, 'Letter', 15, quoting Stillingfleet). 
In the Christian context Stillingfleet felt that Locke's teaching attacked by implication the doctrine of the Trinity: 'upon your notions of nature and persons [that is, as particular individuals] I do not see how it is possible to defend the doctrine of the Trinity... the doctrine of the Trinity and Incarnation are past recovery gone' ('Works', 3.576, 579). Second, the two differed on the resurrection of the body. Here Locke challenged the later overlay which Christian theologians put on scripture: scripture spoke of the resurrection of the dead, not of the body. And in any case the human body changed many times in one lifetime; personal identity was the key to continuity and therefore resurrection. Stillingfleet would have none of this: it must be the same body which is resurrected (Locke, 'Reply to... Second Letter', 168). Third, there was the immortality of the soul. For Stillingfleet 'the great ends of religion and morality are best secured by proofs of the immortality of the soul from its nature and properties' ('Works', 3.513). But Locke could not contemplate 'that the soul is immaterial put together in this way' (Locke, 'Reply to... Second Letter', 148). 
Stillingfleet was the only critic to whom Locke deigned to reply. The works are full of quotation and counter-quotation -- Locke always meticulously accurate, Stillingfleet less so. But for all that there is a feeling that they never really encountered each other. Locke drew a distinction between faith and knowledge and was determined to defend his epistemology, whatever its consequences; Stillingfleet felt that faith and knowledge could not be separated, that however much he protested to the contrary Locke's thinking was a Trojan horse inside traditional Christian philosophical scholasticism, and that 'all the work of centuries of harmonizing belief and human knowledge was falling apart'; Stillingfleet was 'trying to hold on to the possibility of a meaningful religious world... The bishop keenly pointed out some of the basic difficulties in Locke's thinking' (Popkin, 316-17). 
It is easy to see that as he approached death Stillingfleet felt that his world was indeed falling apart, and that he must do his best to deploy all his knowledge and scholarship to hold everything together. The extent of his success is showed by the fact that in the eighteenth century those theologians who continued the controversy with Locke trod in his footsteps. 
Stillingfleet died on 27 March 1699 at his London home in Park Street, Westminster, and was buried in Worcester Cathedral. His 'noble' library was split at sale, the manuscripts going to Robert Harley and the books, said to number 6000, after prolonged negotiation to the archbishop of Armagh, to be housed in a special building in Dublin. In his will dated 4 April 1698, he left virtually his whole estate to his son James, rector of Hartlebury; bequests went to his other son, Edward Stillingfleet, and to his married daughter, Anne Fyshe; lesser sums went to more distant relatives and $20 to his housekeeper, Mary Bryan, 'who hath been a careful servant in my illness' (Worcs. RO, BA 982 (ii) 899.918). This suggests that none of his other daughters survived him. His first -- and only -- biography prefaces the six folio volumes of his 'Works'. It was thought that its author was Richard Bentley, who had been his chaplain and tutor to his son James. But a more likely candidate is Timothy Goodwin, who was his chaplain when he died and composed the Latin eulogy on his tomb in Worcester. However, Bentley, later the highly litigious master of Trinity College, Cambridge, and certainly never one to award easy praise, shall have the last word on Stillingfleet: 'whom even envy itself will allow to be the glory of our church and nation; who, by his vast and comprehensive genius, is as great in all parts of learning as the greatest next to himself are in any' ('The Works of Richard Bentley', 3 vols., ed. A. Dyce, 1836, 1. pref. xlix. 1). 
It is not difficult to agree with this handsome estimate. It is much more difficult to arrive at an estimate of Stillingfleet in the light of contemporary knowledge, especially as so little archival material about him survives. He is often classified as a latitudinarian, or low- or broad-churchman, along with Tillotson and other contemporaries. But, apart from the fact that the label latitudinarian is unsatisfactory because it is virtually impossible to define, he does not fit happily into this stable. Tillotson and Tenison were without doubt more low church than he, and Burnet was probably right in saying that the whigs thought both his notions and his temper were too high for them. Clearly he moved away from the liberal notions expressed in the 'Irenicum'. From the time of his elevation to Worcester he was a particular friend of the high-church Archbishop Sharp of York, who wrote to him in the most affectionate terms. In fact Stillingfleet was, no doubt, his own man and undoubtedly conscious of his standing in intellect and learning. At the same time he was essentially conservative, summing up in himself the core Anglican beliefs of the seventeenth century while not espousing their more extreme forms. Perhaps this is why when, in the eighteenth century, the concerns and interests shifted, his theological -- though not his historical -- influence declined. Yet in the end one is left with great admiration for his industry, courage, and integrity. 


@@@@@


doc= 26527


Edward Stillingfleet (1661-1708), physician and Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Mary Ann ('fl'. 1670-1710). 


@@@@@


doc= 26528


Stillington, Robert (d. 1491), administrator and bishop of Bath and Wells, is first recorded as a senior Oxford academic in 1442, and was therefore probably born before 1410. He was the son of John Stillington of Nether Acaster near York. By November 1442, when he acted as proctor for Lincoln College, he was already principal of Deep Hall, and by June the next year he had graduated as doctor of civil law. Still at Deep Hall in September 1444, he seems thereafter to have embarked on an official career. His first living, as rector of Beverstone, Gloucestershire, in 1443, preceded his ordination as acolyte, subdeacon (1444), deacon (1445), and priest (1447), all in the diocese of Bath and Wells, where from at least 1445 to 1448 he was chancellor to Bishop Thomas Beckington (died 1465). Beckington collated him to a series of livings, beginning with a prebend in Wells Cathedral in 1445 and culminating in the archdeaconry of Taunton in 1450. As early as 1446 Stillington was dispensed to hold a second, and in 1451 a third, incompatible benefice. A whole series was bestowed by other bishops active at court and in government, such as William Aiscough of Salisbury (died 1450), John Kemp of York (died 1454; who collated him to prebends in York, Ripon, Southwell, and the chapel of St Mary and the Holy Angels in York), and Thomas Kemp of London; in 1458 Henry VI appointed him dean of the royal free chapel of St Martin's-le-Grand in London. 
By fifteenth-century standards Stillington was a notable pluralist: in 1461 he was confirmed as dean of St Martin's and archdeacon of Colchester and Taunton; held three additional prebends at York, St David's, and St Stephen's, Westminster; and was rector of Ashbury in Berkshire. He was to become archdeacon of Berkshire in 1464 and in 1465 archdeacon of Wells. He gave little or no service in person to any of these preferments, and was licensed to visit his archdeaconry by deputy from 1451. Provided to succeed Beckington as bishop of Bath and Wells on 30 June 1465 and consecrated on 16 March 1466, he gave up all his benefices except St Martin's, which he retained until 1485. During his 25-year episcopate he is recorded in Somerset only once, in 1476, which is evidence for an exceptional lack of commitment to his pastoral duties. In 1448 Stillington was appointed a commissioner to negotiate with Burgundy over recent breaches of a truce, and in the next thirty years he took part in several foreign embassies. In 1449 he became a royal councillor, but although he continued to acquire benefices, his secular career during the 1450s remains obscure, until on 28 July 1460 the Yorkist-dominated government appointed him keeper of the privy seal, with a salary of $365 a year. Stillington remained keeper until his appointment as chancellor on 20 June 1467, after the dismissal of Archbishop George Neville (died 1476). As chancellor he influenced the development of procedure along civil-law lines in the court of chancery. He remained in office until 25 July 1473 with the exception of the six months of Henry VI's readeption in 1470-71, when he was supplanted by his predecessor, Archbishop Neville. During the latter period he took sanctuary in St Martin's. Though a pardon on 25 February 1471 implies that he made his peace with the Lancastrians, he nevertheless helped persuade George, duke of Clarence, to return to his Yorkist allegiance. 
Following the restoration of Edward IV, Stillington is reported to have sought to protect the elderly countess of Oxford against attempts to disinherit her by Richard, duke of Gloucester. Illness prevented his attending the first session of the parliament of 1472, and thereafter, the Crowland continuator reports, he was less effective and 'did nothing except through his pupil [John Alcock (died 1500)]' (Pronay and Cox, 133). Old age and failing health may therefore explain his replacement; he was not out of favour, sharing in a grant of the presentation to the deanery of St Stephen's in 1477 and acting as a royal ambassador as late as 1479. Right at the heart of the Yorkist regime, he acted as feoffee to the king, to the duke of Clarence, and to Edward's stepson, the marquess of Dorset, among others. At the coronation of Richard III and Queen Anne, on 6 July 1483, he took the prominent supporting role traditionally reserved for the bishop of Bath. 
Stillington's brushes with the crown are difficult to explain. Between 27 February and 5 March 1478 he was arrested and imprisoned in the Tower of London. He was examined by the king and council, but having satisfied them that he had been faithful to the king, and had done nothing contrary to his oath of fealty, he was pardoned on 20 June 1478. This episode is sometimes explained by collusion in Clarence's treason, perhaps by telling the duke of Edward IV's precontract of marriage, but this interpretation seems unlikely, both because Stillington was only arrested after the dissolution of the parliament during which Clarence was tried and executed, and because no mention of the precontract is known at this stage; the allegation that Edward was a bastard, supposedly repeated by Clarence, can be backdated to 1469. 
Richard III's usurpation, on 26 June 1483, was justified in sermons and speeches, and especially in the manifesto 'Titulus regius', known only through its confirmation by the parliament of 1484, but circulated to members of the Calais garrison in June 1483. This strictly contemporary document disqualifies Edward V and his siblings from the crown, both because their father Edward IV had been illegitimate, and because his marriage to Elizabeth Woodville was invalidated by a prior contract that he had made with Eleanor Butler. The Burgundian chronicler Philippe de Commines attributes the precontract story to Stillington, 'ce mauvais evesque', whom he claimed had officiated. Such a precontract must have taken place before Edward IV's marriage on 1 May 1464, when Stillington was still keeper of the privy seal. However, there is no confirmatory evidence -- historians have not even been able satisfactorily to identify Eleanor Butler -- and Stillington was not noticeably favoured by Richard III. A year-book of 1488 does, however, contain the claim that it was Stillington who drew up the petition in which the Lords and Commons asked Gloucester to take the crown, suggesting that by then he had become popularly associated with Richard's usurpation. 
Henry VII was hostile to Stillington and on 22 August 1485, the very day of Bosworth, a warrant was issued for his arrest. Five days later he was already in prison at York, 'sore crased by reason of his trouble and carying' (Drake, 122). For his 'horrible and haneous offences ymagined and done' against Henry VII ('RotP', 6.292), he was deprived of his deanery of St Martin's but not of his bishopric, and was pardoned on 22 November in view of his 'grete age, long infirmite, and feeblenesse' (Campbell, 1.172). Apparently implicated in treason, presumably that of Lambert Simnel, he took refuge at the University of Oxford, which, although embarrassed, initially refused six requests in March-April 1488 to surrender him on grounds of franchise. He was imprisoned at Windsor until 1489, and died in April or May 1491. 
Stillington was buried in the large chapel, demolished in 1552-3, that he had erected by 1488 off the cloister to the south of Wells Cathedral. Extremely large for a chantry, Stillington's chapel was cruciform, stone-vaulted, and high quality: the elaborate panelled west wall is still visible where it abutted on the cloister. Stillington also founded a chantry school of St Andrew at Nether Acaster, Yorkshire, on ground inherited from his father. There is no evidence to confirm Commines's story that Stillington had a bastard son, whom Richard III intended as husband for Elizabeth of York and who was captured off Normandy and died in Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 26529


Stirling, Charles (1760-1833), naval officer, the younger son of Captain Sir Walter Stirling RN (1718-1786) and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of Charles Willing of Philadelphia, was born on 28 April 1760. Having entered the navy, he was promoted lieutenant in June 1778 and served in that rank under Sir Edward Hughes in the East Indies. He was promoted commander in May 1780 and then on 15 January 1783 was promoted captain for having in the 'Savage' (14 guns, 125 crew) fought the American privateer 'Congress' (20 guns, 215 crew) on 6 September 1781; he had refused to surrender until his mizzen-mast had been brought down and his mainmast nearly so. He was subsequently appointed to the 'Unicorn' (20 guns), serving in the West Indies, and, at the beginning of the French Revolutionary War, to the frigate 'Venus'. 
In the summer of 1795 Stirling commanded the 44-gun 'Jason' with the expedition of Sir John Borlase Warren to Quiberon Bay; in 1797 was active with a squadron attacking French shipping off the mouths of the rivers Sable d'Olonne and Garonne; and on 26 June 1798, in company with the 'Pique' and 'Mermaid', after a chase of sixteen hours, captured the 42-gun French frigate 'La Seine'. On 11 October 1798 the 'Jason' was wrecked while chasing a French squadron near Brest but, after an exchange of prisoners, Stirling was appointed to the 80-gun 'Pompee', which was damaged in the battle of Algeciras on 6 July 1801, and then employed in the blockade of Cadiz. 
From the renewal of hostilities until April 1804 Stirling was resident naval commissioner at Jamaica. In 1805, in the 98-gun 'Glory', he had command of the Rochefort squadron, before being dispatched to reinforce Sir Robert Calder, with whom he took part on 22 July in the action of Cape Finisterre which resulted in the capture of two Spanish line-of-battle ships. Stirling was promoted rear-admiral on 9 November 1805 and in the autumn of 1806 commanded the squadron that conveyed troops under Sir Samuel Auchmuty to the River Plate, where he co-operated with them in their siege of Montevideo, before becoming commander-in-chief at the Cape of Good Hope. 
Promoted vice-admiral on 31 July 1810, Stirling was transferred to command on the Jamaica station the following year. However, he was recalled in 1813 to face a charge at court martial of taking a bribe of $2000 for providing a convoy escort to a merchant schooner. In May 1814 the court found the charge partly proved and Stirling was sentenced to remain on the half-pay list without any further promotion. He married Charlotte, second daughter of Andrew Grote, a banker in London, and was elected a member of the Royal Society. He died at his home, Woburn Farm, Weybridge, Surrey, on 7 November 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 26530


Stirling, James (1692-1770), mathematician and mine manager, known within his family as the Venetian, was born in May 1692, the third son of Archibald Stirling (1651-1715), of Garden, Stirlingshire, and his second wife, Anna, eldest daughter of Sir Alexander Hamilton of Haggs and his wife, Dame Mary Murray; there were also five daughters and another son by this marriage and Archibald Stirling had a son by his first marriage. Stirling matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, as a Snell exhibitioner on 18 January 1711. These exhibitions were intended for undergraduates who had spent at least one year at Glasgow University but there is no documentary evidence of Stirling's having studied at Glasgow and there is reason to believe that he was actually a student at Edinburgh University in 1710. In October 1711 a Bishop Warner exhibition was also secured for him. Stirling had been admitted to Balliol College as a nonjuring student, his family having staunchly Jacobite sympathies, but in the aftermath of the 1715 Jacobite rising this concession was removed and he was deprived of his scholarships, although he remained in Oxford until 1717. 
Stirling had formed a friendship with Nicholas Tron, the Venetian ambassador in London (1714-17). At Tron's instigation Stirling then went to the Venetian Republic, probably accompanying Tron, and remained there for several years. Apparently Stirling had the expectation of a professorship of mathematics but this fell through on religious grounds. Little is known about what Stirling did during this period. He did make the acquaintance of Niklaus Bernoulli, professor of mathematics at the University of Padua (1716-22) and there is a record of his being at that university in 1721. He also appears to have been asked to obtain information about the Venetian glass industry for some merchants in England; according to some accounts he had to flee for his life, having discovered some of its closely guarded secrets. 
By the second half of 1722 Stirling was back in Scotland but again there is little information on him until he went to London in 1724 or 1725. In 1725 he became a teacher and later a partner in Watts' Academy in Little Tower Street, Covent Garden. He soon made his mark in the scientific community and was elected to the Royal Society on 3 November 1726, having been proposed by Dr John Arbuthnot and recommended by Sir Alexander Cuming. Stirling's affairs generally prospered during the twelve years or so that he spent in London. 
Stirling was employed during the summers of 1734-6 by the London-based directors of the Scotch Mines Company at Leadhills in Lanarkshire. In May 1737 he moved permanently from London to Leadhills as the company's chief agent, remaining in this post until the end of his life. By all accounts his management of the mines and his enlightened measures for the welfare of the mining community were highly successful. Unfortunately, mathematical activities could now occupy less and less of his time. 
On 30 June 1746 Stirling was elected to membership of the Royal Academy of Berlin, probably at the instigation of Euler, with whom he had conducted a brief mathematical correspondence (1736-8). In the same year, following the death of Colin MacLaurin, Stirling was offered the professorship of mathematics at Edinburgh University but declined it. In 1752 Stirling conducted for the corporation of Glasgow the first of a series of surveys of the River Clyde aimed at improving its navigability and thereby establishing Glasgow as a major commercial centre. For this work he was presented with a silver tea kettle and lamp by the corporation. Stirling resigned from the Royal Society on 17 December 1753 after being pressed for arrears of subscription and refused any concession for his remote domicile. He married rather late in life, some time after 1745, and his wife, Barbara Watson, died in February 1753; they had one daughter, Christian. 
Stirling's first published work was his 'Lineae tertii ordinis Neutonianae' (1717), which is an account with some extensions of Newton's classification of plane curves determined by third degree polynomial equations in two variables. This little volume was published in Oxford and dedicated to Nicholas Tron. Also included in it are Stirling's solutions to three problems, one of which, on orthogonal trajectories, had been proposed by Leibniz. In 1719 Stirling communicated to the Royal Society from Venice his paper 'Methodus differentialis Newtoniana illustrata' ('PTRS', 30, 1717-19, 1050-70). It is concerned with interpolation, quadrature, summation, and limits and certainly contains some original work. The theme of this paper was continued and much extended in Stirling's principal contribution to mathematics, the 'Methodus differentialis, sive, Tractatus de summatione et interpolatione serierum infinitarum' (1730). Its introductory section contains Stirling's discussion of what are now called 'Stirling numbers' (important in modern combinatorial theory) and in example 2 of proposition 28 there is his version of 'Stirling's formula' for approximating to the logarithm of a large factorial (an early example of an asymptotic series). The results which posterity has chosen to label as Stirling's formula are, however, more directly related to work of De Moivre, whose early investigations led Stirling into this topic and who found a simpler version after learning of Stirling's result. Stirling's book was well received by his contemporaries and was a source of inspiration for later mathematicians. A translation by Francis Holliday entitled 'The Differential Method' was published in 1749. 
Stirling also wrote a paper entitled 'Of the figure of the earth, and the variation of gravity on the surface' ('PTRS', 39, 1735-6, 98-105), an important contribution to the theoretical study of the earth's shape and its gravitational forces. In this work he was overtaken by MacLaurin, Thomas Simpson, and A. C. Clairaut. It is, however, clear from his correspondence that he would have contributed substantially more but for his commitments at Leadhills. 
Stirling also wrote on non-mathematical subjects. In 'A Description of a Machine to Blow Fire by the Fall of Water' ('PTRS', 43, 1744-5, 315-17) he described a system employed at Leadhills to produce a blast of air for use in smelters or for ventilation of shafts. Among his manuscripts are many items on weights, measures, and coinage, a short extract from which was published posthumously as 'An account of the money, coins, and weights, used in England, during the reigns of the Saxon princes' ('Transactions of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland', 1, 1792, 216-33). Stirling died in Edinburgh on 5 December 1770 and was buried there in Greyfriars churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 26531


Stirling, Sir James, first baronet (1740-1805), banker, was born on 26 January 1740 in Edinburgh, the eldest of seven children of an Edinburgh merchant, Alexander Stirling, and his wife, Jean Moir (1715/16-1810). Early in life he travelled to the West Indies as clerk to Archibald Stirling of Keir, a planter in Jamaica. The anecdotal biography of Stirling in 'Kay's Edinburgh Portraits' is the sole account of these early years, but it is confused in some of its details. It tells how Stirling became secretary to the governor, Sir Charles Dalling (presumably Sir John Dalling), though Stirling appears to have returned to Scotland before Dalling ever became governor. Certainly Stirling was well enough set up that on his return to Edinburgh he became a partner in the banking house of Mansfield, Ramsay & Co. He married on 16 August 1772 Alison Mansfield (1749/50-1823), youngest daughter of his business partner James Mansfield. The couple had three sons, two of whom died in infancy, and two daughters. Stirling purchased the estate of Garrieve or Gartlochs, in the parish of New Cumnock, Ayrshire, and changed its name to Mansfield. 
Stirling first entered the Edinburgh town council in 1771, serving as treasurer in 1773-4. In 1790 he became lord provost for the first of three terms (1790-92, 1794-6, 1798-1800). His role in the popular riots of 1792, in which he supported the robust measures taken to quell discontent, earned him the odium of the public but the gratitude of a government that rewarded him with a baronetcy on 19 July 1792. He later redeemed himself somewhat in popular estimation by his actions in seeking protection for Scottish shipping, through convoys, when they were at risk from French and Dutch privateers. 
Stirling died at his home in Queen Street, Edinburgh, on 17 February 1805, aged sixty-five, and was buried in Greyfriars churchyard. 'In private life, he was very much respected: of mild, gentlemanly manners, but firm in what he judged to be right. His habits were economical, but not parsimonious; and the party entertainments given at his house were always in a style of magnificence. In person, he was tall and extremely attenuated. (Paterson and Maidment, 251)' 



@@@@@


doc= 26532


Stirling, Sir James (1791-1865), naval officer and colonial governor, born at Drumpellier, Lanarkshire, was the fifth son of Andrew Stirling of Drumpellier and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Walter Stirling (1718-1786). He entered the navy in August 1803 and went out to the West Indies, where he joined the 'Hercules' (74 guns), flagship of Sir John Thomas Duckworth. In 1805 he was in the 'Glory', flagship of his uncle, Rear-Admiral Charles Stirling, at Calder's action off Cape Finisterre on 22 July. He continued with his uncle in the 'Sampson', and again in the 'Diadem', in which he served during the operations in the River Plate in 1807. He was promoted lieutenant on 12 August 1809, and in 1811 returned to the West Indies as flag-lieutenant to his uncle, who promoted him, on 19 June 1812, to command the sloop 'Brazen', in which for some months he cruised successfully off the mouths of the Mississippi. Still in the 'Brazen' he was afterwards in Hudson's Bay, in the North Sea, on the coast of Ireland, and again in the Gulf of Mexico, and after the peace commanded her in the West Indies until 1818. On the special recommendation of the commander-in-chief he was promoted to post rank on 7 December 1818. He married, on 3 September 1823, her sixteenth birthday, Ellen (1807-1874), third daughter of James Mangles of Woodbridge in Surrey, MP for Guildford 1832-7. They had five sons and six daughters. 
On 25 January 1826 Stirling was appointed to the 'Success' and was sent to form a settlement in Raffles Bay, Torres Strait. For his success he was highly complimented by the commander-in-chief and by the government of New South Wales. His report of further explorations in 1827 determined the government to attempt a strategic settlement in Western Australia to forestall an announced French settlement. In October 1828 he was appointed by Sir George Murray, the colonial secretary and an old family friend, to command a party of intending colonists. The expedition sailed in spring 1829 and reached its destination in June. The sites of two towns, Fremantle and Perth, were marked out, and within four months of its foundation the colony had a population of 1300. Stirling returned to England in 1832 for two years, and was knighted in 1833. His commitment and ingenuity preserved the fledgeling colony during a decade of difficulties, many of which reflected the over-optimistic report of 1827. He was also given 100,000 acres of land, and remained committed to the colony for the rest of his life. 
Stirling remained governor of Western Australia until 1839, when the apparent imminence of a war with France, and disappointment at the lack of progress in the colony, led him to resign in order to return to active service. From 1840 to 1844 he commanded the 'Indus' (78 guns) in the Mediterranean, and from 1847 to 1850 the 'Howe' (120 guns) on the same station. On 8 July 1851 he was promoted rear-admiral, and served briefly as a lord of the Admiralty in February 1852. He was commander-in-chief in China and the East Indies from January 1854 to February 1856, during a complex period, involving large-scale piracy, the Taiping uprising, commercial negotiations, and war with Russia, which last scarcely interfered with the routine of the station. His colonizing experience, Russophobia, and fine sense of commercial opportunities led him to propose that Britain take control of China. This ambitious plan was ignored. He became vice-admiral on 22 August 1857, and admiral on 22 November 1862. He was a knight grand cross of the Redeemer of Greece. Stirling died at Woodbridge, near Guildford, Surrey, on 22 April 1865. His daughter Georgiana Janet married first Sir Henry Tombs and second Sir Herbert Stewart. Although more enthusiastic and active than reflective and analytical, Stirling was a capable and effective naval officer, and played a vital role in the creation of Western Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 26533


Stirling, Mary Anne (1813-1895), actress, was born on 29 July 1813 in Queen Street, Mayfair, Westminster, one of the three children of Captain Simon Hehl ('fl'. 1780-1840) of the regiment of foot guards and his wife, Mary Anne, 'nee' Lucas ('fl'. 1780-1840). Her stage career, prompted by her father's improvidence, was largely in London's principal theatres and spanned more than fifty years. She excelled in comedy, in which she was regarded as the successor of Dorothy Jordan (1761-1816) and Julia Glover (1781-1850), but was remarkable for her versatility. She was educated at the Catholic seminary Brook Green House, Hammersmith, and at a convent abroad. There are conflicting accounts of her first years on the stage, possibly at the East London Theatre, but on 9 January 1832, under the name of Fanny Clifton, she appeared as Zephyrina in 'The Devil and the Widow' at the Pavilion Theatre, Whitechapel. Here she met the actor (and later manager and prolific playwright) Edward Lambert (1807-1894), whom she married on 3 July 1832. In the next years the couple, known as Mr and Mrs Stirling, were engaged at the Liverpool Amphitheatre, the Queen's Theatre, Manchester -- where what was probably Stirling's first play, 'Sadak and Kalasrade', was performed -- and, in 1835, the Theatre Royal, Birmingham. 
Mrs Stirling's reputation now took her to the Adelphi Theatre, London, where she first appeared on 1 January 1836 as Biddy Nutts in J. B. Buckstone's melodrama 'The Dream at Sea'. The next two years saw her as a leading player in companies at the New Strand and St James's theatres and, briefly, the Garrick Theatre, Whitechapel. In May 1837 at the New Strand, as Nell Gwynne in Douglas Jerrold's eponymous play, she provided the first of her interpretations of past actresses. Five days later she played Emily Wilton in 'Bachelors Buttons', written specially for her by her husband. For a short period she was 'withdrawn' from the stage by Stirling and it was probably at about this time that the couple separated. She resumed her career in 1839 at the Lyceum, went on to Drury Lane, and, after a brief spell at the Olympic, was recruited by William Charles Macready in September 1840 for the Haymarket Theatre. Here she earned some praise as Constance in Sheridan Knowles's 'The Love Chase', Sophia in Thomas Holcroft's 'The Road to Ruin', and Clara in Bulwer Lytton's 'Money'; Macready observed of this last that 'She speaks with a freshness and truth of tone that no other actress... can now do' ('Diaries', 2.114). 
Fanny Stirling's daughter, also named Fanny, who was to have a brief stage career and from whom she became alienated, was born on 7 February 1842. Mrs Stirling returned to the theatre for Macready's second season at Drury Lane. Here, on 1 October 1842 as Celia, she shared the company's acclaim for 'As You Like It' and won personal praise the following month as Mrs Foresight in William Congreve's 'Love for Love'. Robert Browning's 'A Blot in the Scutcheon', in which she was badly cast as Gwendolen, was a comprehensive failure. Short periods again at the Strand Theatre and Drury Lane were followed by three years (until June 1847) at the Princess's Theatre, where her many parts included Desdemona in 'Othello', Cordelia in 'King Lear', Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice', Rosalind in 'As You Like It', and Hermia in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'. She created the title role in Thomas Lacy's 'Clarissa Harlowe'. 
Mrs Stirling's most sustained period of success began in 1848 under Madame Vestris at the Lyceum Theatre, where in December she portrayed another actress, Mrs Bracegirdle, in John Oxenford's 'The Tragedy Queen'. At the Olympic Theatre she was noted for her mixture of tenderness and vivacity as Laura Leeson in Courtnay's 'Time Tries All'. At the New Strand Theatre in October 1849 she gave what she believed were her best performances, as the tragic Adrienne Lecouvreur in 'The Reigning Favourite', a play translated from the French by Oxenford and based on the life of an eighteenth-century French actress. Her chief success in the first season at the newly rebuilt Olympic was in January 1851 as Martha Gibbs in 'All that Glitters is not Gold', by John M. Morton and Thomas Morton junior. Among other new plays in which she shone was Charles Reade's 'The Ladies' Battle', in which, on 7 May 1851, she created the role of the Countess. At the Haymarket she starred from 20 November 1852 in what was to become one of her most popular parts, as the actress Peg Woffington in Reade and Tom Taylor's 'Masks and Faces'. In October 1853 she was back at the Olympic, where Taylor's 'Plot and Passion' was first mounted on 17 October with Mrs Stirling as Marie de Fontanges. In March 1854 she played Mrs Trotter Southdown in the same author's 'To Oblige Benson'. 
In succeeding years Mrs Stirling was dogged by poor health and failing sight and performed less frequently. In the 1860s she turned increasingly to giving readings and teaching elocution privately -- for a time at the London Academy of Music. However, she had not wholly retired. She was criticized for 'stealing the show' as the Nurse in a celebrated production of 'Romeo and Juliet' at the Lyceum Theatre, with Henry Irving as Romeo and Ellen Terry as Juliet, which ran from 8 March 1882 for 130 performances. She played the Nurse again in the Lyceum's 1884 production. Her last original part was as Lady Caryll in A. W. Pinero's 'Lords and Commons' at the Haymarket Theatre, which opened in March 1885, while her final appearances, again with Irving and Terry at the Lyceum, were as Martha in W. G. Wills's version of Goethe's 'Faust' between 19 December 1885 and 31 July 1886. 
Mrs Stirling was beautiful, graceful, and indomitable, and was regarded as 'one of the most vivacious and bewitching comedy actresses of her time' ('The Times', 31 Dec 1895). Her first husband described her style, which could tend to exaggeration, as 'essentially of the French school, elegant and piquant' (Stirling, 2.220). 
Within weeks of her first husband's death Mrs Stirling married an old friend, Sir Charles Hutton Gregory KCMG (1817-1898), a civil engineer. She died of dropsy on 28 December 1895 at 3 Duchess Street, Marylebone, London, and was buried at Brompton cemetery on 1 January 1896. 


@@@@@


doc= 26534


Stirling, Robert (1790-1878), Church of Scotland minister and inventor of a hot-air engine, was born on 25 October 1790 in the parish of Methven, Perthshire, the son of Peter Stirling, farmer at Cloag. He studied at the University of Edinburgh (1805-6) and was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Dumbarton in July 1815. He was presented by the duke and duchess of Portland to the second charge at the Laigh Kirk, Kilmarnock, the next year, and ordained in September 1816. On 10 July 1819 he married Jane (died 1892), eldest daughter of William Rankine, postmaster and wine merchant of Galston. They had two daughters (Jane and Agnes) and five sons, four of whom were innovative locomotive and railway engineers in Britain (Patrick Stirling and his brother James) and South America (William and Robert). Another son, David, entered the church. 
After seven years at Kilmarnock, Stirling was presented by Portland to the neighbouring parish of Galston and admitted in February 1824. As a parochial pastor he delivered well wrought sermons with a rapidity which did not guarantee attention, worked to establish the free school in Kilmarnock, ministered to his ailing congregation during the cholera epidemic of 1848-9, and promoted the enlargement of the psalmody of the Church of Scotland. His excellence in classical scholarship, and as a student of science, earned him the honorary degree of DD from St Andrews (11 January 1840), even though his only published work was a dutiful 1837 sketch of the political economy (and moral decline) of his parish for 'The New Statistical Account' (1845). His career faltered during the acrimonious prelude to the Disruption (1843). On 30 May 1842 Stirling was severely censured by the general assembly for supporting the ministers of Strathbogie who had been suspended when church and legislature came into conflict over patronage in clerical appointments. Stirling was suspended from his judicial functions in the presbytery and other church judicatories until 1 March 1843. He survived to become father of the church (1876) but thereafter his health failed and he died at the manse on 6 June 1878. He was buried in Galston churchyard four days later. 
Michael Stirling, Stirling's grandfather, was the inventor of a threshing machine. Robert Stirling himself was hardly 'one of your lavender glove people' ('Kilmarnock Standard', 6 July 1878). He studied practical mechanics as a boy. At Galston he maintained a workshop adjoining the manse where he dextrously constructed scientific instruments. In November 1816, shortly after his ordination, he patented an engine which produced motive power from heated air: this machine's economizer (a heat exchanger, or regenerator) aimed to reuse caloric (or heat) otherwise wasted. Stirling foresaw fuel efficiencies significantly higher than those of contemporary steam engines, and he speculated on the use of the economizer principle to cheapen iron smelting. In February 1827 and October 1840 he patented improved hot-air engines with his brother James Stirling (1800-1876), a civil engineer. An engine of 45 hp overcame many, but not all, practical difficulties, working sporadically during the early 1840s to drive the machinery at James's Dundee foundry. Until the mid-1850s Stirling engines attracted considerable attention and controversy among mechanical engineers looking for a substitute for steam and natural philosophers reforming the science of heat. 


@@@@@


doc= 26535


Stirling, Sir Thomas, of Strowan, fifth baronet (1733-1808), army officer, was born on 8 October 1733, the second son of Sir Henry Stirling of Ardoch, Perthshire, third baronet (1688-1753), and his wife, Anna (died 1776), the third daughter of Thomas Gordon, admiral of the Russian fleet and governor of Kronstadt. He received a commission from William IV, prince of Orange, stadholder of the United Provinces, on 11 October 1747, and served for ten years in the Scots brigade (afterwards the 94th), then in Dutch service. On 24 March 1757 he was made captain in the 42nd highlanders (the Black Watch), having raised a company for it. He served in the conquest of Canada (1758-9) and the capture of both Martinique (1759) and Havana (1762), when he gained prize money. In 1765 he was sent to take possession of the Illinois territory ceded to Great Britain by the peace of 1763. 
The 42nd returned from North America in October 1767 but was sent back in May 1776, after the War of Independence had begun. Stirling had become major on 12 December 1770 and lieutenant-colonel on 7 September 1771, and had raised the strength of the regiment from 350 to 1200 men in five months in 1775. Under his command it took a very active part in the war, and was especially distinguished at the successful storming of Fort Washington, Manhattan Island, New York, on 16 November 1776. Stirling and his men were thanked in general orders. They were again thanked for the capture of a post at Elizabethtown in February 1779. On 19 February Stirling was appointed aide-de-camp to the king and colonel in the army. In the attempt upon Springfield, Massachusetts, in June 1780 he commanded a brigade. His thigh was broken by a shot, but he refused amputation, as it would have disabled him for active service. He was given the colonelcy of the 71st foot on 13 February 1782, but it was reduced soon afterwards. On 20 November he was promoted major-general, and on 13 January 1790 he was made colonel of the 41st foot. He became lieutenant-general on 3 May 1796 and general on 1 January 1801. In 1794 he had bought the estate of Strowan, near Crieff, Perthshire. On the death of his elder brother, Sir William Stirling, fourth baronet, on 26 July 1799, he succeeded as fifth baronet, but did not inherit the Ardoch estate, which passed to his niece and her husband. He died, unmarried, at Strowan on 8 May 1808, when the baronetcy became extinct. He left his property to his sister Ann's son, Thomas Graham (1768-1836) of Airth, Stirlingshire, with reversion to Graham's second son, Thomas James Graham (1811-1896), 42nd highlanders, who took the additional name of Stirling. 


@@@@@


doc= 26536


Stirling, Sir Walter (1718-1786), naval officer, only son of Walter Stirling (1686-1732) of Sheva, in Stirlingshire, and Janet, daughter of William Ruthven of Torryburn, Fife, was born in Scotland on 18 May 1718. He was promoted lieutenant on 18 February 1745 and commander on 9 December 1756. In 1753 he married Dorothy (died 1782), daughter of Charles Willing of Philadelphia. The couple had one daughter, Anne, mother of Sir James Stirling, first governor of Western Australia, and two sons: Walter, who was made baronet in 1800 and who died on 26 August 1832, and Charles Stirling, naval officer. 
On 10 January 1759 Stirling was posted to the 'Lynn', which he commanded for two years; he was then moved to the 'Lowestoft', in which he remained until the peace of 1763. From 1764 to 1766 he commanded the 'Rainbow' (44 guns) on the North American station, and in 1770 he was appointed to the 'Dunkirk' as flag-captain to the commodore, George Mackenzie, at Jamaica. In 1771 he was moved to the 'Portland', in which he returned to England. In 1780 he was appointed to the 'Gibraltar', and sailed to the West Indies with Sir Samuel Hood. After the capture of St Eustatius he was sent home with the dispatches and was knighted (1781). In 1782 he was commodore at the Nore. He had no further employment, and died on 24 November 1786. 


@@@@@


doc= 26537


Maxwell, Sir William Stirling, ninth baronet (1818-1878), art historian, historian, and book collector, was born William Stirling on 8 March 1818 at Kenmure House, Kirkintilloch, near Glasgow, the only son of Archibald Stirling of Keir and Cawder (1769-1847) and Elizabeth Maxwell (1793-1822), daughter of Sir John Maxwell, seventh baronet, of Pollok. He had two sisters, Hannah-Ann (1816-1843) and Elizabeth (1822-1845). 
Stirling was proud to belong to one of Scotland's ancient families, who traced their descent from Walter de Striueling ('fl'. 1150), grandfather of Thomas de Striueling (died 1227), chancellor of Scotland, and he encouraged William Fraser's 'The Stirlings of Keir and their Family Papers' (1858). His family's loyalty to the Stuart kings was reflected in its Episcopalianism and fuelled Stirling's romantic interest in the Jacobites. His mother's equally ancient family, the Maxwells of Pollok, however, brought different traditions: they had a covenanting past and were reforming whigs, in contrast to the Stirlings' conservatism. These opposing standpoints, which sometimes caused family tensions, helped form Sir William's liberal character. His toryism was regarded by many 'as a matter of family tradition rather than of personal predilection' ('The Scotsman', 17 Jan 1878), while his religious tolerance was demonstrated on many occasions, such as in 1853, when he supported the right of Jews to enter parliament. 
Stirling was educated at private schools run by the Revd D. B. Langley at Pilton rectory, Northamptonshire, and by the Revd John Babington at Cossington rectory, Leicestershire, and then at Trinity College, Cambridge. His tutor at Trinity, where he was a fellow-commoner from 1835 to 1839, was William Whewell, and contemporaries such as Ralph W. Grey, Lord John Manners, Francis, Baron Napier, and Trinity fellow John Donaldson became his friends. He graduated BA in 1839 and proceeded MA in 1843. In 1839 he went on a grand tour of Germany, Switzerland, France, and Italy in the company of George Holland and enjoyed the opportunity to sow wild oats as well to see great art and architecture. He failed to become tory candidate for Perthshire before the 1841 election, mainly because, in the crisis over patronage in the Church of Scotland, his family had given support to the non-intrusionists who opposed the right of lairds to veto a congregation's choice of minister. Bitterly disappointed, he set out on an extended tour in 1841, this time including the Middle East, where his experience as 'a dweller in tents, by the Red Sea' resulted in his 'Songs of the Holy Land' (1846), which made rich associative use of biblical language and place names. 
Stirling also paid a first brief visit to Spain, where he was enchanted by Seville. By early 1843 he had decided to write a history of Spanish art to answer a growing demand for publications on Spain. He began collecting the important source books on Spanish art and toured Spain again, as well as visiting British private collections containing Spanish art. The resulting three-volume 'Annals of the Artists of Spain' (1848) was by far the most comprehensive and scholarly work in its field in English by that date. It was a remarkable achievement for an author of thirty and it was innovative in a number of important ways, such as its arrangement of material chronologically according to monarchs' reigns and geographical areas, its placing of art in Spain within a broad social, cultural, and historical context, and its publication of the first catalogues of the works of Velazquez and Murillo. 
The 'Annals' was well received at the time, notably by the art critic Richard Ford, who became a close friend. Ford compared it favourably with the shorter, less ambitious work by Sir Edmund Head which appeared the same year, describing Stirling's work in the 'Quarterly Review' as 'an olla podrida... stuffed with savouries, the national garlic not omitted' ('Quarterly Review', 83, June-September 1848, 11). The scant discussion of artistic technique, however, prompted the German writer Karl Justi to label Stirling as 'far more of a historian... and man of letters than a connoisseur' (Justi, 10). More recently, opinion has swung back in favour of Stirling's broad perspective, with Jonathan Brown's praise of the 'Annals'' 'extraordinary... scope and seriousness' (Brown, 6). A project in 1857-9 to translate the 'Annals' into Spanish unfortunately failed. Stirling's care over the design and illustrations of the 'Annals' was typical: a bibliophile, he was fascinated by printing and reproduction. A fourth volume of twenty-five copies consisted of extra illustrations using the Talbotype photographic process developed by William Fox Talbot and became the first use of photography in an art history book. 
Stirling wrote a number of other books on Spain and Spanish art. In 1855 'Velazquez and his Works' reworked the 'Annals' material on the artist, with a new catalogue of prints after his works. It was soon superseded by Justi's comprehensive study but it heralded the new monographic approach in art history. A Spanish translation was serialized in the 'Gaceta de Madrid' and there were also German and French translations, the latter with notes and a catalogue by the French art critic William Burger (Theodore Thore). 
Stirling's most successful book in terms of sales and editions was 'The Cloister Life of the Emperor Charles the Fifth' (1852), following his two articles on the subject in 'Fraser's Magazine'. It also appeared in German, Dutch, and Spanish translations. The great Renaissance figure was one of Stirling's heroes and, like many historians, Stirling was fascinated by the emperor's decision to abdicate power and retreat to a Spanish monastery. His study was inspired by an evocative drawing of the monastery at Yuste by Ford, to whom he dedicated the book, and he also composed a romantic ballad on the abdication. His book was nevertheless an important and rigorous piece of scholarship as well as a popular and accessible history, but as a standard reference work it was soon eclipsed by studies by Mignet and Gachard. 
Stirling also had a fascination for Charles's illegitimate son Don John of Austria. As early as 1842 he noted that 'a good history of him in English would be popular' ('Hints on things in general', 1842, Stirlings of Keir MSS, T-SK 28/9). His two-volume 'Don John of Austria, or, Passages from the History of the Sixteenth Century' (1883) was finally published posthumously and was a scholarly yet very readable history. Most of the work for the book had been completed by 1859, and in 1864 a single-volume edition of ten copies was printed. The delays reflected Stirling's perfectionism as both historian and book designer. 
Stirling succeeded to his father's estates of Keir and Cawder in 1847, and in 1852 sold the loss-making Jamaica plantations which he had also inherited. Between 1849 and 1852 he commissioned a young London architect, Alfred Jenoure, to carry out alterations to Keir House. The ambitious scheme transformed the neo-classical pile into an idiosyncratic expression of Stirling's tastes and interests. At the centre was his magnificent two-storey library, lined in cedar, with specially designed furniture and fittings. Dr Waagen found it 'too remarkable a room not to be mentioned' and noted that every surface was carved with mottoes, 'the study of which would occupy an ordinary length of life very profitably' (Waagen, 453). The books were beautifully bound and embossed with Stirling's armorial devices, and he himself designed the 'ex libris' slips which incorporated his mottoes, such as 'Gang Forward' and 'Poco a Poco'. 
Stirling's book collecting covered several related areas, as documented by his catalogues: 'An essay towards a collection of books relating to the arts of design, being a catalogue of those at Keir' (1850; updated, 1860) and 'An essay towards a collection of books [of] proverbs, emblems, apophthegms, epitaphs and ana' (1860). The obsessive nature of his collecting was exemplified by his large accumulation of emblem books, now in Glasgow University Library, which numbered around 1200. It was probably the largest collection ever amassed and its owner was one of the most important figures in the nineteenth-century revival of interest in emblems. 
Stirling also became an active art collector, particularly during the 1850s, when there were several important auctions of Spanish art in London, most notably of Louis-Philippe's Galerie Espagnole in 1853, and of Frank Hall Standish's collection, which had been left to the French king. Stirling's Spanish art collection became the most extensive in Britain, with works by (or then attributed to) artists 'whose names have hardly crossed the seas and mountains that bound the Peninsula' ('Annals of the Artists of Spain', 1891, 1.61-2). Its contents reflected many of the themes of the 'Annals', such as the exploration of art patronage by Spanish rulers, which was echoed by the inclusion of many royal portraits. Similarly, as one of the first art historians of Spain to discuss the role and status of the artist, he was attracted to portraits of artists, especially self-portraits. 
Perhaps surprisingly, the collection did not contain major works by Velazquez and Murillo, the best-known Spanish artists in Britain by that date, but Stirling did become the first important British collector of both El Greco and Goya, neither of whom was hitherto much known or appreciated in Britain. The majority of his Goyas, not surprisingly, were prints, most of them rare proofs acquired from his friend Valentin Carderera (1796-1880), one of the most important figures in establishing Goya's reputation in Spain. Another of Stirling's advanced tastes was for the paintings and illustrated books which accompanied the poems of William Blake. The relationship between word and image in Blake's work must have been of special interest to a collector of emblem books. He also collected paintings and prints of the Stuart kings and the Jacobite pretenders. 
Stirling's collecting of copies, both painted copies and prints after paintings, was also unusual. These were the source of many illustrations for his books and often provided valuable visual references before photographs were readily available. His 'Essay towards a catalogue of prints, engraved from the works of... Velazquez and... Murillo' (1873) was based on his own extensive collection and that of his friend Charles Morse. Stirling's interest in copies, and his tendency to focus more on content than on style and technique in art, certainly laid his collecting open to the criticism that it lacked connoisseurship; but equally his approach can be seen as challenging modern assumptions that 'connoisseurship' is the only important quality of a collector. He was also a better connoisseur in the traditional sense than he has generally been given credit for. Further evidence of his commitment to the multiple image was provided by his pioneering books of facsimile prints using the new photolithographic methods, including 'Examples of the Engraved Portraiture of the Sixteenth Century' (1872), 'Solyman the Magnificent Going to Mosque' (1563; facsimile edn, 1877), and the anatomical tables of Vesalius (1538; facsimile edn, 1874). 
In 1852 Stirling became Conservative MP for Perthshire and gained a reputation as an independent who voted according to conscience. He lost his seat in 1868 but regained it in 1874 and held it until his death. Education, particularly higher education, became one of his principal concerns and he served on the Scottish education board and the University of London senate. In the 1860s he campaigned for separate parliamentary representation for graduates of Scottish universities, as was enjoyed by Oxford and Cambridge. He was elected rector of St Andrews University in 1863 and of Edinburgh University in 1871, and in 1875 was elected chancellor of Glasgow University. On the issue of whether women medical students should be awarded degrees, which was fiercely debated at Edinburgh at the time, he supported the women's cause, and was instrumental in getting the law changed on this matter. 
From 1853 Stirling served on the government select committee on the fine arts and he later became a trustee of the National Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery, and the British Museum. He spent much of his time in the reading-room of the latter, where his private writing-case was kept for him in the inner library and was opened with a tiny key from a ring on his finger. He was also one of the founding members of the Philobiblon Society in 1854, along with his friends the duc d'Aumale and Richard Monckton Milnes, and a number of his essays and special editions were published by the society. He was a great admirer of Sir Walter Scott, and many of his ideas on history as well as politics can be traced to Scott's influence. In 1871 he was involved in organizing an exhibition in Edinburgh to celebrate the centenary of Scott's birth. He was also on the committee formed in 1856 to commission stained glass for Glasgow Cathedral, which controversially chose Munich glass. Stirling later asked the committee secretary, the architect Charles Heath Wilson, to design his family monument for Lecropt church, near Keir. 
As an agriculturist, Stirling was an important breeder of traditional strains of livestock, notably shorthorn cattle and Clydesdale horses, and a pedigree which included Keir blood added considerably to an animal's value. He was honorary secretary of the Highland and Agricultural Society from 1868 and also served as president of the Glasgow Agricultural Society. 
In 1865 Stirling succeeded his uncle Sir John Maxwell to the Pollok estate near Glasgow, though he continued to live at Keir. He was also permitted to succeed to the Maxwell baronetcy and became Sir William Stirling Maxwell, while in 1876 he was made knight of the Thistle, a rare honour for a commoner. On 26 April 1865 he married Lady Anna Maria Leslie Melville, daughter of the earl of Leven and Melville; they had two sons, John and Archibald. In 1874 Lady Anna died tragically after a burning accident at Keir. On 1 March 1877, despite the opposition of some of his family, Sir William married his long-time friend Caroline Elizabeth Sarah Norton, 'nee' Sheridan (1808-1877), just months before her death on 15 June that year. His own death from a fever occurred soon afterwards in Venice on 15 January 1878. He was buried on 31 January in the Keir vault at Lecropt church. 
Stirling Maxwell was remembered as a rigorous scholar and a man of enlightened views whose hospitality was enjoyed by many at Keir and his London house at 128 Park Street. His friends included Thackeray and Disraeli, while he corresponded with bibliophiles in many countries and with specialists on Spanish topics in Spain and America. He was made honorary member of Spain's Real Academia de la Historia and corresponding member of its Real Academia de Bellas Artes. He has sometimes been dismissed as a dilettante, an assessment that misses the remarkable originality and modernity of many of his ideas and his seriousness as a scholar. Photographs and descriptions highlight the fierce eyebrows which belied his kind nature. John Gray, curator of the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, lamented the lack of a good portrait which would have recorded: 'the powerful individuality of the furrowed face which one remembers so well. It is greatly to be regretted that we have no more... adequate memorial of this eminent Scotsman, than whom few indeed of our own times have been worthier of perfect portrayal and continued memory. (Gray, 41)' According to his will, Stirling Maxwell's collections were divided equally between his sons, and the elder, John (1866-1956), was required to choose between the Keir and Pollok estates. He chose the latter and succeeded to the baronetcy and represented the College division of Glasgow as a Conservative from 1895 to 1906. Keir House was sold by Sir William's grandson Lieutenant-Colonel William Stirling, and its collection dispersed. Much of his collection can, however, still be seen at Pollok House, Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 26538


Stisted, Sir Henry William (1817-1875), army officer, son of Charles Stisted, lieutenant-colonel of the 3rd hussars (died 1842), and his wife, Eliza, daughter of Major-General Burn, was born at St Omer, France. After Sandhurst he was commissioned ensign in the 2nd foot on 4 December 1835, and served with them in Afghanistan and Baluchistan, taking part in the storming of Ghazni, where he was wounded at the gateway, the capture of Kalat, and the occupation of Kabul. In 1845 he married Maria, sister of Sir Richard Francis Burton. 
On 19 April 1850 Stisted was gazetted lieutenant-colonel of the 78th foot, and in the Anglo-Persian War of 1856-7 commanded a brigade in the night attack and battle of Khushab, and took charge of his own regiment at the bombardment of Muhammarah, after which he received the thanks of the governor-general. He commanded the advanced guard of Havelock's force at the relief of Lucknow on 25 September 1857, when on Brigadier-General James George Smith Neill being killed, he was appointed to command the 1st brigade. That post he held until the close of the operations, when, on 1 January 1858, he was nominated CB. In that year he served also in Rohilkhand, and commanded the 2nd brigade at the battle of Bareilly on 7 May. He became lieutenant-colonel of the 93rd foot on 30 September 1859, and served with the field force against the peoples on the north-west frontier in December 1863. 
Stisted was nominated to a divisional command in Canada in 1867, and appointed lieutenant-governor of Ontario in June of the same year. For his services in this capacity he received the thanks of the governor-general of Canada, and was nominated a KCB on 20 May 1871. On 5 February 1873 he was appointed a lieutenant-general, and was nominated colonel of the 93rd foot on 28 September 1873. He died at Wood House, Upper Norwood, Surrey, on 10 December 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 26539


Stock, Joseph (1740-1813), Church of Ireland bishop of Waterford and Lismore, was born at 1 Dame Street, Dublin, on 22 December 1740 to Luke Stock, a hosier, and his wife, Ann. Having been educated at the Revd John Gast's school in Dublin, in October 1756 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he had a distinguished academic career. Awarded a scholarship in 1759 he graduated BA in 1761, MA in 1764, BD in 1771, and DD in 1776; he was also made a fellow of the college in 1763. 
An accomplished classical scholar and excellent linguist, Stock published editions of works by Aeschines (1769), Demosthenes (1773), and Lucian (1773) and a life of George Berkeley (1776) -- subsequently republished in 'Biographia Britannica' -- that is the only memoir of its subject based on contemporary information. Having taken holy orders he resigned his fellowship in 1779 for the college living of Conwell in the diocese of Raphoe. His publications diminished as a consequence, though he still found time to produce in 1787 an edition of Tacitus and a characteristically temperate endorsement of Bishop Richard Woodward's questioning of Presbyterian loyalty to the constitution, in the form of 'A reply to the Rev Dr. Campbell's vindication of the principles and character of the Presbyterians of Ireland'. In 1793 he was collated prebendary of Lismore but he resigned this preferment in 1795 to become headmaster of Portora Royal School, Enniskillen. The headmastership was described by one visitor, Le Chevalier de la Tocnaye, as equivalent to a bishopric, and it brought Stock an annual income of about $2000. 
In January 1798 Stock was elevated to the episcopal bench as bishop of Killala, in succession to John Porter. He applied himself energetically. In June he and a number of magistrates formed a committee to administer the oath of allegiance to the local Catholic clergy and their congregations. It appeared that the area would escape serious disorder until the unexpected arrival, on 23 August, of a French expeditionary force under General Humbert, while Stock was holding his first episcopal visitation. He was captured and his episcopal residence commandeered as a military headquarters. Things could have been worse. Humbert threatened to send Stock to France when he failed to procure boats and cars for military service, and it was suggested that he should accompany the military as a hostage. Stock was spared this fate and, though his son was chosen instead and the French occupation resulted in his losing goods to the value of $600, both his published and private accounts of his experience betray little evidence of bitterness. Indeed his 'Narrative of what Passed at Killala... during the French Invasion... of 1798' (1800), which was published anonymously, was not only the most authentic published record of what transpired but was also written with an uncommon degree of impartiality. There is little doubt that Stock's decision to stay in the town when he could have fled, combined with his ability to communicate with the French officers in their own language, helped to keep the level of material destruction in the region within bounds, but it would be wrong to conclude that Stock was unaffected by the experience. His diary records his disappointment at the tardiness of the crown forces in delivering protestants 'from perpetual pillage and [the] daily and nightly expectation of murder' (TCD, MS 1690, p. 21) ten days after the French force was defeated at Ballinamuck. 
Stock subsequently lost no opportunity to remind his political superiors of his experiences when he sought translation to another see. His request was regarded sympathetically and might well have been favoured in 1801 but for the opposition of the primate, Archbishop William Stuart, who alleged that Stock had entered into fraudulent leases when master of Portora Royal School and was 'a man of bad character who resided almost all of last year in England' (Brynn, 69). Both accusations were palpably unfair but the primate's opposition ensured that Stock remained bishop of Killala until 1810, when he was translated to Waterford and Lismore. He busied himself meanwhile with biblical scholarship. He published editions of the 'Old Testament' books of 'Isaiah' and 'Job' in 1803 and 1805 respectively. He also endeavoured to promote church reform despite the problems posed by the alienation of glebe land by his predecessors. 
Stock married twice. With his first wife, the widow of a Mr Palmer and sister of primate William Newcome, he had several children. She died in 1795 and in the same year Stock married another widow, Mary Obins. His death at Waterford on 13 August 1813 deprived the Church of Ireland of one of its most learned and reasonable voices. 


@@@@@


doc= 26540


Stock, Richard (1568/9-1626), Church of England clergyman, was born in York. Having matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in his nineteenth year he was elected scholar on 10 November 1587, graduated BA in 1591, and proceeded MA in 1594. The latter degree was incorporated at Oxford on 15 July 1595. Samuel Clarke recorded that William Whitaker, master of St John's, approved of Stock 'for his ingenuity, industry and proficiency in his studies', but no fellowship at St John's was then available. He was offered one instead at newly endowed Sidney Sussex (whose first master was James Montague), but left Cambridge before the college buildings were completed and thereafter had 'no mind' to return there (Clarke, 61). 
According to Clarke, Stock became chaplain to Sir Anthony Cope of Canons Ashby, Northamptonshire, and then to Lady Lane of Bourton on the Water, Gloucestershire, thereafter gravitating to London. Clarke fails to mention that his reason for doing so was probably his appointment as chaplain to Sir William Knollys (from 1616 Viscount Wallingford), controller and then treasurer of the royal household between 1596 and 1616. Probably in 1599 or 1600 Stock also became lecturer at St Augustine and served as curate to Thomas Earle of nearby St Mildred, Bread Street. After Earle's death in 1604 he assisted Thomas Edmunds (died 1611), rector of All Hallows, Bread Street, by that time too infirm to do duty. Accordingly it was Stock who baptized the poet John Milton on 20 December 1608 and took up the parish's newly endowed lectureship. In March 1611 he was collated rector there by the dean and chapter of Canterbury during the brief vacancy of the primatial see between the death of Richard Bancroft and the translation of George Abbot. 
Meanwhile, under Knollys's patronage Stock had emerged as an anti-Catholic polemicist. Probably in 1605 he presented Knollys with a 'small treatise', now apparently lost, whereupon Knollys showed him an English translation of Campion's 'Rationes decem', 'lately taken in a Papists house', and 'commanded' him to translate William Whitaker's 'Ad rationes decem... responsio' (1581) in riposte (Stock, 'An Answere', sigs. 2'v'-3'r'). This appeared in 1606 as 'An answere to the ten reasons of Edmund Campian... whereunto is added in briefe marginall notes, the summe of the defence of those reasons by John Duraeus the Scot'. On 2 November 1606, at Paul's Cross, Stock delivered a denunciation of Catholicism, sober to the point of dullness and heavily dependent on scriptural and patristic texts. 

'The Doctrine and Use of Repentance, Preached in Sundrie Sermons' (1608) was followed by the publication in 1609 of his Paul's Cross sermon with a vivid dedication to James Montague, now bishop of Bath and Wells. Stock entreated Montague, as one close to King James, to 'excite' him 'to waken his sleeping lawes, that as he hath long sung mercie, he would at length tune justice... lest he may seeme to succeeding ages to forget both his God & himself, his posteritie, & people'. Now that Montague was consecrated, 'who knoweth whether you are come to such a place for such a purpose? and whether, when some would have cast you out, you have by God bene kept in, to such an end?' Stock recalled Montague's 'auncient favour' towards him at Cambridge for his 'good and preferment' there and 'the renewing of the same many wayes' ever since (R. Stock, 'A Sermon Preached at Paules Cross, the Second of November 1606', 1609, sigs. *4'v'-*6'v'). 
In 1614 came 'The Churches Lamentation for the Losse of the Godly', Stock's funeral sermon for Montague's kinsman John Harington, second Lord Harington of Exton. The dedication to Harington's sister, Lucy Russell, countess of Bedford, speaks of Harington's 'love' for him and the 'bountie' he had received from the countess (sig. A2). Thereafter Stock published nothing, probably because of his conviction that his vocation was 'not to write, but to preach' and because of the 'corruption in our times' which made writing 'less profitable, because I see men buy bookes more for the Author, than the matter'. Of his contemporaries, however, he especially commended Thomas Bilson, William Fulke, and Andrew Willet for their anti-Catholic teaching and for 'matter of conscience' the works of Richard Greenham, Richard Rogers, and William Perkins (R. Stock, 'An Answere to the Ten Reasons of Edmund Campian', 1606, sigs. greekLetterPi[1]'v'-3'v'). 
Although Stock never seems to have been arraigned for nonconformist practices of any kind he became one of the original feoffees for impropriations, who by the end of James's reign were administering a trust for the purchase of impropriate rectories with the object of restoring them to the church. He was appointed one of the overseers of the will of the London minister Stephen Egerton in 1622, but thereafter his decline seems to have been rapid: from 1623 he employed the future bishop of Chester, Brian Walton, as his curate and made his own will over a year before his death, on 1 April 1625. There were bequests to his daughters, Prudence, Sara, and Judith ('bap'. 1618); to a brother, George; and to a sister, Mistress Mills. His wife, Prudence (died 1662), was appointed sole executor. Although he remembered none of his fellow feoffees $30 was left for 'the releife of such poore ministers and ministers widdowes' as his wife and overseers should 'think fitt and appoint'. Walton, his 'minister and helpe', received $5 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/149, fols. 6'v'-7'r'). 
Stock died on 20 April 1626 and was buried in his church four days later. His parishioners erected a monument, destroyed in the great fire, but the inscription is preserved by Benjamin Brook. His funeral sermon, published as 'Abrahams Decease' (1627), was preached by Thomas Gataker, who had known him since going up to Cambridge. In his epistle dedicatory to Sir Henry Yelverton, a parishioner of All Hallows, Bread Street, Gataker noted that Yelverton 'did in more than ordinary manner respect his person' (Gataker, sig. A3'v') and asserted that at Cambridge, Stock had been an inspiration to many, including himself. He recalled Stock's 'freedome of speech' in reproving sin, 'even to the faces of the greatest, both in publike and private, when occasion required it', and his 'zealous and earnest pursuit of reformation of prophanations of the Sabbath'. He also remembered his 'discreet carriage in the catechizing of the younger sort' (ibid., 11). Gataker omits mention of his status as a feoffee but implies that he worked himself to death, in his last years praying constantly for release from illness so that he might continue his ministry. 
Two posthumous works appeared in 1641, no doubt as part of the parliamentary effort to reinstate the claims of 'godly' preaching. Without stating how he obtained the manuscript James Cranford published 'A Stock of Divine Knowledge, being a Lively Description of the Divine Nature', with a dedicatory epistle to Anne, Lady Yelverton. Samuel Torshell, who had married Stock's daughter Prudence, brought out 'A Learned and Very Usefull Commentary upon... Malachy', dedicating it to all Stock's 'ancient Friends and Hearers' (sig. A3'r'). This was reprinted in 1865 with a verbose memoir by Alexander Grosart. Stock left no manuscripts, but copious notes from two sermon-cycles delivered in 1606-7 on 'Malachi' and the first epistle of 'St John' are preserved in the commonplace book of Gilbert Frevile. 


@@@@@


doc= 26541


Stockdale, John (c.1749-1814), publisher and bookseller, was born in Cumberland, the son of Priscilla Stockdale (1723?-1789); his father is unknown. He reputedly trained as a blacksmith before becoming valet to John Astley of Dukinfield, Cheshire. It was probably during this period of his life that he married Mary Ridgway from Longdendale in Cheshire, the sister of James Ridgway, a well-known London publisher. Stockdale moved to London about 1780 and was employed by the bookseller and radical publisher John Almon, at his shop in Piccadilly near to that of his brother-in-law. When Almon retired in 1781 and his business was taken over by John Debrett, Stockdale set up a rival shop in a neighbouring building. Like that of Debrett, Stockdale's bookshop was reputed to be a fashionable lounging place; however, while Debrett was patronised by whigs, Pitt's supporters preferred to visit Stockdale's establishment. John Stockdale was described as 'a man of strong natural parts... [who] soon became conspicuous in his business, in spite of much eccentricity of conduct, and great coarseness of manners' ('GM', 1st ser., 85/1, 1815, 649). 
Stockdale was a prolific publisher, particularly in the 1780s and 1790s. In 1781 he took over the 'London Courant' newspaper. His other publications included Ferguson's 'Roman Republic' (1783), the 'Debates of Parliament' (1784-90), Dr Johnson's works in 1787, an edition of 'Robinson Crusoe' (1795), and numerous others including topographical and cartographical items and music imprints. Stockdale was indicted for a libel on the House of Commons after publishing John Logan's 'Review of the Charges Against Warren Hastings' in 1788, which it was claimed was intended to vilify the Commons as corrupt and unjust in its impeachment of Hastings. Stockdale was ably defended by Erskine, who argued that the defendant should not be judged by isolated passages, but by the entire context of the publication and its general character and objects. Stockdale was acquitted in December 1789 in a case which was said to have been instrumental in the passing of Fox's 'Libel Act' of 1792. Stockdale was again accused of libel in 1809 by Joseph Nightingale. This time he was not so fortunate and was fined $200. 
Towards the end of his career Stockdale dealt largely in remainders (the surplus stock of other publishers), and his use of auctions to sell large numbers of such books was supposed to have made him unpopular with other traders. Although Stockdale had acquired significant property in his earlier years as a bookseller, he was less successful later on in life and one obituarist blamed his death on 21 June 1814 on his being forced to deal with his creditors and arrange payment of his debts. 
Three of Stockdale's children followed him into the publishing business. His eldest son, 
Like her brother and father, John Stockdale's daughter, Mary R. Stockdale, was a London bookseller and ran a shop on Piccadilly between 1816 and 1833. She was also a poet, and published several volumes of her poetry as well as translating the works of others. Her brother, William Stockdale, one of John Stockdale's younger sons, also ran a shop on Piccadilly from 1817 to 1823. 


@@@@@


doc= 26542


John Joseph Stockdale (1776/7-1847), was a freeman of the Stationers' Company from 1802, ran a shop in Pall Mall between 1807 and 1822, and published a large number of books, including the notorious 'Memoirs of Harriette Wilson' in 1825, which was reported to have attracted crowds of buyers ten deep to his shop. John Joseph Stockdale was also involved in a complicated and protracted libel action between 1836 and 1840 when he charged the Commons' printers, Hansard, after the publication of a report of the inspectors of prisons which accused Stockdale of publishing an obscene and indecent book which prisoners had been found reading. Stockdale was eventually defeated. He died at The Slad, Bushey, Hertfordshire, on 16 February 1847, after two years of paralysis. 


@@@@@


doc= 26543


Stockdale, Percival (1736-1811), writer, the only child of Thomas Stockdale (died 1755), vicar of the parish and perpetual curate of Cornhill, near the Tweed, and his wife, Dorothy Collingwood of Murton, Northumberland, was born on 26 October 1736 at Brauxton, Northumberland. He spent six years in grammar school at Alnwick, from which he transferred to Berwick upon Tweed, where he became proficient in Greek and Latin, learned a smattering of Hebrew, and acquired a love of poetry. He had hoped to attend Oxford or Cambridge, but neither he nor his relatives could, or would, afford it. In 1754 he entered St Andrews University, having obtained a bursary in the united colleges of St Leonard and St Salvador, where he proved a disputatious student. When his father died on 7 April 1755 his already straitened circumstances became even more dire. He returned to St Andrews in October, and in February 1756 left the university and his home at Berwick to become a second lieutenant in the Royal Welch Fusiliers. He served on HMS 'Revenge' during 1756-7 in the unfortunate expedition dispatched, under the command of admirals Byng and West, to relieve the besieged garrison of St Philip on the island of Minorca. 
Stockdale's poor health forced him to leave the army after a short spell as a recruiting officer in Bigglesworth, Bedfordshire. He resigned his commission in November 1757 and set out to rejoin his mother in Berwick, stopping, however, in Durham, where he enjoyed the hospitality of Dr Thomas Sharp, Hebraist and writer of theological works, and his son Thomas. He evidently stayed with the Sharps for some time, a period during which he applied himself to further study of Greek, Latin, Hebrew, and theology. It was at the urging of the Sharps that he took holy orders, being ordained deacon on 29 September 1759. Soon after his ordination as deacon by Dr Richard Trevor, bishop of Durham, he went to London as the young Sharp's substitute in the curacy and lectureship of Duke's Place, Aldgate. He returned to Berwick in 1762 and to a curacy which he enjoyed up to 1767; while there he published two poems, the first of his many publications. When his curacy ended he was at a loose end and travelled to Italy, spending two years in Villafranca, studying and reading and learning Italian and Spanish. There he fell in love with a British woman whom he later married and then abandoned. Most of what is known of this part of his life resides in a letter, dated 19 July 1785, from William Johnson Temple, a friend of the younger James Boswell, to Edward Jerningham, a bad minor poet, although a conscientious correspondent. 'As to Mr. Stockdale, I had known him long. He is a strange eccentrick character & has been guilty of great indiscretions, & it surprises me how he has fallen in your way. I find he attempts to make atonement for something disrespectful he had rhymed of you in some poem of his. He was first in the army, -- then in the Church -- engaged to a young Lady, married an old one -- The young one prosecuted & recovered damages, which he paid. They then ran away together -- to Nice, leaving the woman behind, who went mad & died. The lovers then returned & married & then separated. For some time he was tutor to Lord Craven's children, but left them in disdain, because her Ladyship would not admit him of her private parties. Mr. Pitt it seems has given him a living which he might have bestowed on as good a man.... I believe he can hardly mention a friend or benefactor with whom he has not quarreled for imaginary slights, Dr Thorpe, Dr Johnson & c. He has not yet been able to quarrel with me & I have assisted him out of some humanity when he was in great distress. (Weinbrot, 109)' When Stockdale returned to London in 1769 he was without clerical prospects and hence devoted himself to writing, beginning with a translation of Tasso's 'Amyntas', published in 1770, the same year he met Samuel Johnson. He became editor of the 'Critical Review' and of the 'Universal Magazine' in the following year. A number of Stockdale's works were published in 1772 and 1773, including his best-known poem, simply titled 'The Poet'. It was during this period that Lord Sandwich, first lord of the Admiralty, appointed him chaplain of HMS 'Resolution', a post he held for three years. As a result he found it necessary to reside in Portsmouth, the Isle of Wight, and London. While chaplain of the 'Resolution' he wrote some minor poetry, translated from French, and took issue with the first volume of Joseph Warton's 'Essay on the Genius and Writings of Pope' (1756) in his own 'An Enquiry into the Nature and Genuine Laws of Poetry, Including a Particular Defence of the Writing and Genius of Mr. Pope' (1778). Warton had advocated stripping the metre from a number of lines of a given poem by Pope and enquiring if it could still be adjudged poetry. Stockdale would have none of this, stating that one could tell poetry simply from taste. No single part of a true poem could be omitted. Elsewhere in his criticism he showed a preference for Pope over Dryden, the former better able to arouse emotion. He was a champion for the poetry of Gray and Milton against Johnson's strictures. And in his 'Essay on Misanthropy' (1783) he had some perceptive things to say about 'Gulliver's Travels'. If Jane Porter, the author of the biographical account of Stockdale in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', can be believed, Dr Johnson, speaking of Stockdale's criticism of Warton's 'Essay', said: '
'Stockey'... (that kind of diminutive being used by him toward his familiar acquaintance), is perfectly right. He has defended the cause of Pope with incontrovertible arguments, and with great eloquence; and he must be supported in his defence of that great Poet. ('GM')' As Stockdale had borrowed passages from Johnson's 'Rambler', no. 156, the anecdote may have some validity. Miss Porter, author of the very popular novels 'Thaddeus of Warsaw' (1803) and the more famous 'The Scottish Chiefs' (1810), was Stockdale's correspondent and very great friend. 
After a brief period as tutor to Lord Craven's children, Stockdale left that position and $300 a year in 1780, when he was given the rectory of Hinxworth, Hertfordshire, where, twenty-three years after his diaconate, he took priest's orders. He continued to write, and in 1773 he was presented the vicarage of Lesbury, Northumberland, by Lord Chancellor Thurlow and the vicarage of Long Houghton by the duke of Northumberland. On 28 October 1784 Archbishop More conferred upon him the Lambeth degree of MA, a degree necessary to hold the plural livings. Four years later his verse tragedy 'Ximenes' was printed but not acted, turned down by the manager of the Covent Garden Theatre. 
According to Stockdale, about 1779 or 1780 he was contracted by two booksellers to bring out a new edition of the English poets with biographical accounts, but because of some misunderstanding he was passed over and Dr Johnson was given a contract which resulted in his 'Lives of the English Poets'. Stockdale never forgave Johnson; shortly after Johnson's death he wrote, in a letter of 22 January 1785: 'Dr. Johnson is no more. As I was a friend of his glory, I wish he had died ten years ago, before he wrote his 'Lives of the Poets' and his political pamphlets. But he was a great and good man; and his death has made a large, melancholy, and irreperable chasm in Society. This my generosity, if not my equity, says of him, for he acted very meanly as 'my' friend. (Weinbrot, 115)' Stockdale was angry that Johnson took little notice of his biography of Waller and of his 'Enquiry' when dealing with Pope in his life of that poet. Despite the possibility that he had satirized the poetry of Edward Jerningham, he wrote to him on 30 March 1793, the burden of his remarks being Johnson's 'Lives' of the poets. The letter, a long one, contains such statements as 'I have publickly asserted that Johnson's Lives of the English Poets would, by Posterity, be deemed 'a Disgrace to English Literature'' and that when he wrote the Lives, 'his Faculties were extremely on the Decline, his arrogance had arisen to an insufferable pitch; his high-church and rank Tory-Principles and Prejudices contaminated most of his Criticisms' (Weinbrot, 127, 128). 
After a trip to Tangier, to recuperate from a spell of ill health, Stockdale returned to Lesbury in 1790. There, where he was to spend the rest of his life, he wrote on a number of subjects, published some sermons, and brought his writing career to an end with two works, 'Lectures on the Truly Eminent English Poets' (1807) and the self-adulatory 'Memoirs of the life and writings of Percival Stockdale, containing many interesting anecdotes of the illustrious men with whom he was connected. Written by himself' (2 vols., 1809). Sir Walter Scott, who saw Stockdale in London in 1809 or 1810, and who described him as 'a thin, vivacious, emaciated spectre, fluttering about book-sellers' shops, eager to attract attention', characterized the 'Memoirs' as an 'extraordinary effusion of egotism and vanity' (Weinbrot, 113-14). Stockdale died at Lesbury on 14 September 1811 and was buried at Cornhill-on-Tweed. Possibly only Jane Porter remembered him with any affection, and he is now a largely forgotten figure. There is no modern biography of him and little secondary literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 26544


Stocker, Thomas (fl. 1563-1593), translator, described himself as a gentleman and may have been descended from a noble family, though virtually nothing is known of it. However, his student status -- he matriculated as a sizar at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1563 -- argues against a distinguished pedigree. Apparently he did not take a degree. For a quarter of a century he was an industrious, though undistinguished, translator of works previously published in French. His first translation, issued in 1569, was 'A Righte Noble and Pleasant History of the Successors of Alexander the Great', the first three books of which were by the first-century-BC historian Diodorus Siculus and the fourth by Plutarch; Stocker translated the French edition of Claude de Seyssel and dedicated his volume to Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick. In the same year Stocker delivered an English translation of a work by Barthelemy Causse, 'The Very True Shield, and Buckler of Faith', which he may have prepared, to the printer Henry Wykes; Causse was refuting Nicole Grenier's Catholic polemic 'Le bouclier de la foy'. 
Stocker's keen interest in Reformed protestantism is evinced in a series of nine works translated and published between 1580 and 1592. Four of these were translations of works by John Calvin, entitled: 'Two and Twentie Sermons on Psalm 119' (1580); 'Divers Sermons... Concerning the Divinitie, Humanitie, and Nativitie of... Christe' (1581), dedicated to Edward de Vere, earl of Oxford, with an epistle by Conrad Badius; 'An Excellent Treatise of the Immortalytie of the Soule' (1581); and 'Sermons... on the Historie of Melchisedech... also Abrahams Faith' (1592). Although William Chauncie translated the first part of Pierre Viret's original as 'The Worlde Possessed with Devils' (1583) before Stocker could work on it, the latter prepared the sequel, 'The Second Part of the Demoniacke Worlde' (1583), with an epistle dedicatory to Sir John Higham. He also translated as 'The Cauteles, Canon, and Ceremonies, of the... Popish Masse' (1584) Viret's original annotated edition. 
Stocker contributed to the growing sense of Calvinist internationalism by translating as 'A Tragicall Historie of the Troubles and Civile Warres of the Lowe Countries' (1583) a work written by either the Flemish Calvinist nobleman Philips van Marnix van Sant Aldegonde or Karel Rijckewaert; Stocker dedicated this work to Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. In November 1584 he completed 'The Popes Canons: wherewith the Masters of Sorbone are Confuted' (1584 or 1585), which was based on the views of Theodore Beza. Then he translated as 'The Lamentations and Holy Mourninges of the Prophet Jeremiah, with a Lamentable Paraphrase and Exhortation' (1587?) the work by the Swiss Reformed minister Daniel Tossanus (Toussain). One of Stocker's last known translations was 'The Holy Love of Heavenly Wisdome' (1594), a meditation on some of the psalms, the Lord's prayer, and Jeremiah's 'Lamentations' by the French lawyer and philosopher Guillaume Du Vair. Later editions were published with varying titles, the second edition appearing as 'A Most Heavenly and Plentifull Treasure' (1609). Stocker's importance rests on his translations of Reformed protestant books for an English audience, which helped foster the perception of Calvinism as an international movement. 


@@@@@


doc= 26545


Arthur Stocks (1846-1889), painter, the third son of Lumb and Ellen Stocks, was born on 9 April 1846 at 9 Richmond Villas, Seven Sisters Road, London, and was educated at Islington proprietary school. After an apprenticeship with his father he gave up engraving to enter the Royal Academy Schools, where he gained a silver medal for life studies in 1868. 'Twas a Famous Victory' was exhibited at the Society of British Artists in 1866. Stocks exhibited fifty-nine genre paintings at the Royal Academy and fifty-six elsewhere up to 1890, including the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours, of which he was a member. He died, unmarried, at 63 Hanley Road, Hornsey Rise, London, on 12 October 1889 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26546


Stocks, Lumb (1812-1892), engraver, was born on 29 November 1812, and baptized on 24 January 1813, at Lightcliffe, near Halifax, Yorkshire, the third of the five children of William Stocks (1769-1836), a coalmine owner, and his second wife, Mary (Mally) Lumb (1777-1864), the daughter of John Lumb. He was educated at Horton, near Bradford, where his drawing instructor was C. Cope, the father of Charles West Cope (1811-1890). Determined to take up engraving, he was indentured to Charles Rolls ('c'.1800-1857) on 24 October 1827 for seven years, to run from 30 November 1826, with a 'consideration' of $315, paid by his father. In 1832 he exhibited 'Portrait of a Young Artist' at the Royal Academy, which was followed by the exhibition of works in miniature and crayon up to 1836. At the end of his apprenticeship in 1833 he set up on his own, engraving mainly for the annuals, commencing with 'The Lace Maker' and 'Going into Service', after James Inskipp, in 'The Amulet' for 1835. Two plates appeared in the 'Literary Souvenir' in 1835, and 'The Keepsake' contained fifteen plates between 1836 and 1843. Three engravings were done for 'Findens Royal Gallery of British Art' (1838-40) and were among the last of his book plates. On 10 December 1839 Stocks married Ellen Fryer (1813-1898) and set up home at 12 College Terrace, Islington, London. The couple had eight sons and one daughter. 
The Association for the Promotion of the Fine Arts in Scotland employed Stocks from 1843 to 1846 to engrave their presentation plates, and he did a plate for their 'Six Engravings... of The Lady of the Lake' (1868). From 1849 to 1884 he engraved twenty-three plates for the 'Art Journal', many from the Royal and Vernon collections. A watercolour of Stocks working on 'Autolycus', after C. R. Leslie (1867), was probably painted by his son Arthur ['see below']. For the Art Union of London he engraved 'Raffaelle and the Fornarina' (1842), which was unfavourably reviewed by the critics, so the Art Union did not commission him again until 1865, when he engraved 'Claude Duval', after W. P. Frith. Following this he was commissioned to produce his most important work. In February 1866 he was given until April 1872 to engrave a plate measuring 44 inches by 12 inches of Daniel Maclise's mural 'The Meeting of Wellington and Blucher at Waterloo', painted on the wall of the Royal Gallery of the House of Lords. From about 1864 he appears to have engraved several banknote designs for Bradbury, Wilkinson & Co. 
The death of John Landseer in 1852 created a vacancy for an associate engraver of the old class in the Royal Academy, to which Stocks was elected on 10 February 1853; he was elected to the new class in 1855, and when John Henry Robinson died he was elected a fellow in December 1871. He joined the Royal Academy council in 1873, became its auditor in 1875, in the 1880s was twice on the hanging committee for engravings, and in 1892 was one of the twelve members of the Fine Arts Commission for the Chicago Exhibition. One of his last plates was 'The Spanish Letter-Writer', after J. B. Burgess, exhibited in 1888. He died at 9 Richmond Villas, Seven Sisters Road, Holloway, London (his residence since 1845), on 28 April 1892, of influenza, having been in excellent health until a few days previously, and was buried in the grave of his son Arthur in Highgate cemetery on 3 May. He was one of the most influential exponents of steel line engraving, and his death left the Royal Academy without an engraver in its ranks. Sir Frederick Leighton described him at the 1892 academy dinner as a 'sterling and gentle man [with] many friends' (Stocks, 1). His headstone adds: 'The memory of the just is blessed'. A man of sturdy build, Stocks presented a venerable appearance in later life, with a full beard replacing the 'mutton-chop' whiskers worn in his sixties. His will, dated 5 February 1892 and proved on 8 June, left a personal estate of $37,833; he was one of the very few engravers to have made a modest fortune from his work. His widow, Ellen, died at her daughter's home, Culmington rectory, Shropshire, on 13 March 1898, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


The second son, Walter Fryer Stocks (1842-1915), became a landscape painter in watercolour, and exhibited 275 pictures at the Royal Academy and elsewhere between 1862 and 1893. He married Marian Hill. Katherine Mary Stocks (1844-1908) was the third child. She had thirty paintings, mainly of flowers, exhibited in London between 1877 and 1889 and married the Revd D. E. Holland. Bernard Octavius Stocks (1859-1915), the eighth son, was a mezzotint engraver. He engraved his brother Arthur's 'Sermon Time' (1881), and his three still-life paintings were exhibited at the Royal Academy (1881-90). He died on 1 September 1915 and was buried in the family grave at Highgate cemetery. Philip Stocks (1854-1916) was the seventh child. At one time vicar of Twickenham, he married Frances Knapp Fisher and emigrated to Canada, where his grandson John Philip (Jack) Stocks (1922-1978) published a catalogue listing 113 of Lumb Stocks's engravings. He presented his print collection to the British Museum at his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 26547


Stockton, Owen (1630-1680), nonconformist minister, was born in Chichester, Sussex, on 31 May 1630 and baptized on 3 June in the cathedral there, where his father, Owen Stockton (1577-1635), held two prebends. He was the fourth son of his father and Elizabeth ('bap'. 1592), daughter of John Tyler of Soham, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Catherine. Owen senior, the second son of Owen Stockton of Cuddington, Cheshire, was sometime fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge, and held the rectory of East Lavant, Sussex, from 1612 and his prebends from 1614, both for life. Upon his death in 1635 his widow moved to Ely, where Owen was educated at the grammar school. Owen claimed that a sermon by Richard Vines, intruded master of Pembroke College, was the cause of his conversion, and he will have seen Cromwell order his headmaster, William Hitch, out of the cathedral pulpit, a more seminal experience evidently than being presented, with other boys, to Charles I, who remarked 'Here's a little scholar indeed, God bless him' (Fairfax, 3). At Christ's College, Cambridge, from January 1646 his tutor was Henry More, the Platonist, and he graduated BA in 1649, migrating to Gonville and Caius College on appointment as a junior fellow by the parliamentary commission in 1651. He became a senior fellow in 1652, proceeded MA the following year, and was successively morning lecturer, Hebrew lecturer, steward, and catechist in the years 1651 to 1654. Taking up the study of divinity in London he read theology at Sion College, attended the Gresham lectures, and heard popular preachers; he received presbyterian orders in London on 20 February 1655. As a layman he had preached in villages around Cambridge lacking ministers, and from July 1656 did so fortnightly in St Andrew's Church, Cambridge. He was chosen town lecturer at Colchester by the mayor and aldermen in 1657, giving a morning lecture at St James's Church, as well as afternoon and weekday lectures elsewhere, until officially silenced by the 'Act of Uniformity' of 1662. In 1658 Stockton gave up his fellowship at Gonville and Caius on marrying, on 9 June, that 'most suitable yokefellow' (Fairfax, 2), Elianor (1627/8-1712), one of four daughters of Roger Rant of Swaffham Prior, Cambridgeshire, all of whom married staunch nonconformists. Stockton and his wife had six children, four of whom died as infants. 
After his ejection, in 1662 Stockton and Edmund Warren established a dissenting congregation in Colchester, meeting in the castle by consent of its owner, Speaker Lenthall. Stockton also risked preaching in his own house until St Bartholomew's day 1665, when he moved his wife and family to Chattisham, Suffolk. Here Daniel Meadows, the elder brother of John Meadows, ejected minister of Ousden, whose wife Anne was Elianor's sister, lived at Chattisham Hall. The Stocktons were given a house and grounds large enough for them and Stockton's sister, Sarah, and Stockton's brother Thomas managed the land around. Owen's first published work, 'Counsel to the Afflicted', was published in 1667, and for a time he was allowed by John Maidstone, vicar of Chattisham in 1663-71, to preach in the church occasionally. Stockton frequently visited Colchester, Manningtree, White Colne, and other places in Essex, and sometimes narrowly escaped arrest for preaching, once at Colchester being warned by the constable, one of his flock. In 1669 Stockton was reported to Archbishop Sheldon for holding a conventicle in Colchester, and the next year John Maidstone, no longer friendly, presented him in the ecclesiastical court. A second publication, 'A Treatise of Family Instruction', appeared in 1672, and at the indulgence of that year Stockton immediately took out three licences, for Ipswich, Colchester, and Hadleigh in Suffolk. That for Ipswich allowed him to be 'a Presbyterian and Independent teacher in Grey Friars House in St Nicholas parish' (Browne, 367), where he shared the work with Henry Havers, ejected from Fyfield, Essex. On alternate Sundays he preached at Colchester, and occasionally in John Smith's house at Hadleigh. He lived latterly at Ipswich, where on 31 August 1680 fever struck him. He died in Ipswich on 10 September and was buried two days later in the nave at Chattisham. His funeral sermon, 'The True Dignity of St Paul's Elder' was preached by John Fairfax, his successor at Ipswich. The published text (1681) is appended to a long account of Stockton's life, quoting extensively from the introspective and self-condemnatory content of his manuscript diaries, which with others of his writings and his wife's diary are in Dr Williams's Library. Two posthumous works were published, a funeral sermon for Mrs Ellen Asty (1681) and, echoing Samuel Ward's much earlier 'Woe to Drunkards', 'A Warning to Drunkards' (1682). By his will Stockton endowed a fellowship and a scholarship, and left his library, to Gonville and Caius College, and legacies to his brother William and cousin Owen. His daughter Sarah should, he stipulated, 'attire herself in a sober manner as becometh one professing godliness' (will). Should she die in her minority an annuity of $20 at Harvard College, Massachusetts, would train a convert Indian to preach the gospel in his language. Sarah married Isaac Jermy and died in 1708, aged forty-two. Owen's widow lived to be eighty-four. She died on 3 May 1712 and was buried with her husband three days later; their inscribed ledger slab lies under the altar table at Chattisham. 


@@@@@


doc= 26548


Stockwood, John (d. 1610), schoolmaster and writer, whose early years remain obscure, was receiving a pension from St John's College, Cambridge, at the time of Queen Elizabeth's visitation in 1564. He received his BA from the University of Heidelberg (1567) and MA from Oxford (1575) and was incorporated in each degree respectively at Oxford (1575) and Cambridge (1579), intending at the latter university to establish a 'ludus literarius' (primary or elementary school). Stockwood may have been a minister in Battle in 1571. On 23 April the same year he married Christiana Hopkins, in Tonbridge, Kent. 
The Skinners' Company of London, founders of Tonbridge Free School, appointed Stockwood to be the school's third headmaster in 1574. In 1587 he was appointed vicar of Tonbridge and that same year the school's governors 'warned him to resign', either because he was now a pluralist or they were dissatisfied with his administration of the school, or perhaps a bit of both. Stockwood was famous for his fiery, uncompromising style of preaching, and gave two sermons on topical issues at the famed Paul's Cross (the outdoor pulpit of St Paul's Cathedral) on 24 August 1578 and 10 May 1579. In both he attacked vigorously the acting profession and theatre culture, as part of a larger public debate that had been taking place on this issue since 1575. In addition, he spoke out against other pastimes and entertainments that he believed diverted people away from studying the 'Bible'. His sermons also reflected his ideas on educational reform. Stockwood railed against 'popish schoolteachers' and opposed the inclusion of certain, unedifying classical authors, such as Terence, in the curricula of young pupils. He possessed a strong distaste for ignorant clergy and 'profane' books. 
Stockwood published three religious-pedagogical and three grammatical treatises, in both English and Latin, and four sermons. His grammar primer, 'Disputatiuncularum grammaticalium libellus', was first published in 1598 and was reissued every few years well into the eighteenth century. Stockwood also translated into English from Latin at least nine works (some written by Heinrich Bullinger and Theodore Beza) including a catechism for householders, commentaries on 'Ecclesiastes', 'Esther', and 'Psalm 51', and treatises on surviving plague and keeping the sabbath. He dedicated his writings to such contemporary luminaries as the earl and countess of Huntingdon, Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Henry Sidney, and the earl of Essex, all known for having puritan sympathies, and some for having assisted Stockwood financially. The stern but kindly and humorous tone of his works suggests a committed interest in the moral development of children. He spoke out against corrupt executors who exploited orphaned children, and believed that improper education was responsible for the young's growing up to lead lives of crime, a problem which seemed particularly acute in his day. 
Stockwood had at least two children, both born in Tonbridge: Jonathan ('b'. 1586), who attended St John's College, Cambridge (1605-9), and a daughter, Persis, who married William Dale on 12 July 1593. Stockwood seems to have spent many of his later years in great poverty. The town of Gravesend paid him 40's'. in 1594 at the request of Sir Robert Sidney, and in 1597 Stockwood dedicated his 'Progymnasma scholasticum' to the earl of Essex, whom he thanked for protecting him against detractors and for providing monetary assistance. Stockwood probably remained vicar of Tonbridge until his death in July 1610. He was buried there on 27 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 26549


Stocqueler, Joachim Hayward (1801-1886), writer, was born in London on 21 July 1801, the son of Joachim Christian Stocqueler (died 1813), an insurance broker of Hatton Garden, who was of Portuguese extraction, and his wife Elizabeth, second daughter of Dr Francis Hayward of Hackney. His paternal grandmother was the opera singer, Joanna Stocqueler ['see 'Giovanna Sestini]. He was educated in Camden Town by a French emigre, and completed his education in St Omer, France. Although he had theatrical ambitions (there were suggestions of a family connection with George Siddons, son of the actress Sarah Siddons) he decided to enter the army of the East India Company, and arrived in Bombay in 1819. Buying himself out, he became a clerk in India, serving in the secretariat of the commander-in-chief at Bombay, Sir Charles Colville, while also writing occasionally for the 'Bombay Argus'. After briefly visiting England in 1826 he returned to India, where he edited several newspapers and journals, including 'Iris', the 'Bengal Hurkaru', the 'Bengal Herald', 'The Englishman', the 'Bengal Sporting Magazine', and the 'East India United Services Journal'. In 1829 he married Jane Spencer, with whom he had a son, Edwin Roper Loftus Stocqueler (1829-1895), who became an artist. His 'Fifteen Months' Pilgrimage through Khuzistan and Persia' (2 vols., 1832) was published in London, which he visited in 1832, returning in 1833 to Calcutta, where he was the subject of insolvency proceedings in 1840. 
After Lord Auckland's disastrous military campaign in Afghanistan, Stocqueler returned to England in 1843 to find a wider market for his Indian experience. He wrote 'Memorials of Affghanistan' (1843), which documented the British expedition there in 1838-42, followed by the 'Handbook of India' (1844), the first of several books on British India. Separated from his first wife, who went to Australia, he married, in 1844 Eliza, 'nee' Wilson (1825-1902), the adopted daughter of William Pepper, with whom he had two sons. He became an investor in the Olympic Theatre, in which he lost money (becoming involved in bankruptcy proceedings between 1846 and 1851), and co-wrote a pantomime, 'Robin Hood' ('c'.1846), and a novel, 'Maid Marian' (1849), developing the Robin Hood literary tradition. In 1847 he became editor of the 'United Service Gazette', and in the following year he wrote the memoirs of the Afghanistan commander Sir William Nott. His other activities included cramming candidates for the Sandhurst entrance examinations and giving lectures to accompany dioramas on the overland route to India, the campaigns of the duke of Wellington (of whom he wrote a memoir in 1852), and the Crimean War. A period as a manager for the Professional Life Assurance Office was followed by bankruptcy in 1858. As partner in an agency involved in obtaining commissions in the army he was subject in 1859 to public allegations of jobbery ('The Times', 26 April 1859) and later that year he fled from Maidstone insolvent debtors' court, where proceedings against him were being heard, when he was threatened with indictment for forgery ('The Times', 21 Dec 1859). 
Having arrived in New York in January 1860, Stocqueler served as a newspaper correspondent in the United States throughout the American Civil War and wrote works under the name Joachim Hayward Siddons. Divorced from his second wife, he married, about 1863, Elizabeth Cameron, with whom he had a son. Back in England, he was described as a widower when he married, at Holy Trinity church, Haverstock Hill, on 19 July 1870, Mary Agnes ('b'. 1839/40), daughter of Frederick Ganen Cameron. In 1871, 1872, and 1875 he received grants of financial assistance from the Royal Literary Fund. Among his later works were a biography of the orientalist G. W. Leitner (1872), two historical works on the British army and Horse Guards (1871 and 1873), and a book (1873) professing to be his autobiography (originally published in the 'Times of India') but later withdrawn. His later years were spent in the USA, where he produced a compendium of words occurring in the plays of Shakespeare (1886). He died in Washington, DC, on 14 March 1886. His works are remarkable for their breadth of coverage and their sheer volume. A few were well reviewed at the time: not all are forgotten. 


@@@@@


doc= 26550


Stoddart, Charles (1806-1842?), diplomatist, born at Ipswich on 23 July 1806, was the son of Major Stephen Stoddart (1763-1812), army officer, and his wife, Katherine Randal (1773-1824). His father died in a riding accident near Limerick in 1812. Appointed to the Royal Staff Corps as second-lieutenant in 1823 and lieutenant in 1826, Stoddart was placed on half pay in 1834 with the rank of captain. From 1833 to 1835 he was secretary to the Royal United Service Institution, London, and to the Institution of Civil Engineers. 
In 1835 Stoddart went to Persia as military secretary to the British envoy, Henry Ellis. He continued in his post under John McNeill, Ellis's successor. In February 1838 Stoddart informed Haji Mirza Aghasi, chief adviser to the shah, that Britain would take steps to ensure the continuing independence of Herat, regarded as the western gateway to Afghanistan and then under siege by the shah. Stoddart appears to have been unauthorized to make this threat, and in any case it was unsuccessful. In June 1838 Stoddart was sent back to the shah with a note demanding his withdrawal from Herat, but again went beyond his instructions and told the shah that Britain would declare war if he did not withdraw. His lack of diplomacy made worse a delicate and difficult situation, although it cannot be said to have made a material difference to events. 
Shortly afterwards Stoddart left for Bukhara with instructions from McNeill to negotiate for the release of Russian slaves so as to avert the threat of a Russian attack, and, if possible, to conclude a treaty of friendship with the amir, Nasrullah Khan. Stoddart did not, however, go direct to Bukhara: instead he joined Eldred Pottinger in Herat. Pottinger, a Briton, had in an unofficial capacity been active in Herat during the siege and had acquired great influence there, although his position was contentious, and in November 1838, after a particularly bitter quarrel with the wazir, Stoddart, as Pottinger's colleague, was expelled. It was only after this that Stoddart went on to Bukhara. 
Why Stoddart was chosen by McNeill is a mystery. He was described by a close friend, John Grover, as 'a man of impulse, with no more power of self-control than an infant... for a diplomatic mission, requiring coolness and self-control, a man less adapted to the purpose could not readily have been found' (Yapp, 409). Stoddart arrived in Bukhara on 17 December 1838 and Amir Nasrullah, who had already heard of his behaviour in Herat and who found his manner at their first meeting arrogant and overbearing, imprisoned him. Stoddart's imprisonment dominated British relations with Bukhara for the next three years. The British were reluctant to send a military detachment to force his release and instead tried a series of unsuccessful diplomatic means. In the autumn of 1840 his position improved after the Russian failure at Khiva led to a rise in the esteem in which Britain was held. The amir released Stoddart from prison, but problematic negotiations then followed in which the amir's hopes of British recognition of his ambitious territorial claims were quashed. Stoddart, feeling himself in favour in Bukhara, began to hope for the release of the amir's Russian slaves. It has been suggested that he was offered passage out of Bukhara in 1841 with a Russian mission under Butenev, but that he refused, since he was unwilling to be beholden to Russia. Yapp judges this unlikely, on the basis of letters from Stoddart which make clear his suspicions of the amir. 
At the amir's request Stoddart invited Arthur Conolly to join him at Bukhara. Conolly was in Kokand on an ill-defined diplomatic mission, hoping to further his scheme of the union of Uzbek states against Russia. Conolly arrived in October 1841. In December he and Stoddart were imprisoned by the amir, who felt himself ill-used by the British and emboldened by the Kabul rising the previous month. In June 1842, possibly on the 17th or 24th, or according to other sources in 1843, Stoddart and Conolly were taken to a public square in the city and beheaded. According to a statement made to Joseph Wolff, a Jewish convert, missionary in India, and close friend of Conolly's, who had been sent by a London committee to discover what had happened to the two men, Stoddart had said before he was killed, 'Tell the ameer I die a disbeliever in Muhammad; that I am a Christian, and a Christian I die'. This statement was of importance to his family, who were alarmed by contemporary reports of his conversion to Islam. He and Conolly seem both to have been ardent Christians, but poor diplomatists who suffered from the lack of a clearly articulated policy towards the Uzbek states and Turkestan. 


@@@@@


doc= 26551


Stoddart, Sir John (1773-1856), writer and lawyer, born at Salisbury, Wiltshire, on 6 February 1773, was the eldest child of John Stoddart (1742-1803), lieutenant in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Brown (died 1811), who were married in the following year. His father's naval career was largely spent on the half-pay list, with stints commanding a press gang in Southampton and Poole; his mother became insane. Stoddart was educated at Salisbury grammar school, and matriculated on 25 October 1790 from Christ Church, Oxford, where he was elected a student in 1791, and graduated BA in 1794. At Oxford he found a patron in Shute Barrington, bishop of Durham, to whose nephew he was tutor at Eton in 1795. In the following year, having come under the influence of William Godwin's writings, he took a radical turn and lost Barrington's favour. Described by Charles Lamb as 'a cold hearted, well bred, conceited disciple of Godwin' (D. Wu, 'William Hazlitt', 2008, 72), he embraced republicanism and revolutionary France, looked forward to a Napoleonic military victory, and adopted the cropped hairstyle of the sans-culottes. He read for the bar at Gray's Inn, and lodged with Basil Montagu, at whose chambers he became an associate of radicals and literary figures including William Hazlitt and Wordsworth. He took to writing as a source of income, translating from the French of Joseph Despaze 'The five men, or, A review of the proceedings and principles of the executive directory of France, with the lives of the present members' (1797), and from the German, with Georg Heinrich Noehden, two of Schiller's plays, 'Fiesco' (1796) and 'Don Carlos' (1798). 
By the end of the century Stoddart's republican enthusiasm had waned, and he mixed with nobility on his tour of Scotland, which was the basis for his 'Remarks on the Local Scenery and Manners of Scotland' (1801). In the autumn of 1800, on his return from Scotland, he stayed in the Lake District with Coleridge and Wordsworth, who drew upon passages from Stoddart's book in 'The Prelude'. Stoddart reviewed 'Lyrical Ballads' in the 'British Critic' in 1801. Having undergone the formality of taking the Oxford law degrees of BCL (1798) and DCL (1801) he was admitted a member of the College of Advocates at Doctors' Commons in November 1802. Shortly after, he was reconciled with the bishop of Durham, and on 1 August 1803 married Isabella, eldest daughter of Sir Henry Moncreiff Wellwood, eighth baronet, a Church of Scotland minister. In 1803 he was appointed the king's and the Admiralty advocate in Malta, where he remained until 1807, accompanied by his sister Sarah Stoddart (1774-1840). 
Following their return to Britain, Stoddart's sister married William Hazlitt in May 1808. Concerned about Hazlitt's uncertain finances, Stoddart did not favour the union, and drew up the marriage settlement in terms that limited the annual amount his brother-in-law could draw upon from Sarah's own property. His relationship with Hazlitt, already uneasy, worsened after he became a leader writer on 'The Times' in October 1812, having made occasional contributions since 1810, including a series of letters on American affairs published in December 1811. Following the death of the proprietor, John Walter the first, his influence on the paper grew and the tone of his articles became increasingly violent. In January 1814 he wrote an angry denunciation of Hazlitt's articles in the 'Morning Chronicle' sympathetic to Napoleon, whom Stoddart denounced as a tyrant. Hazlitt retaliated with a personal attack on his brother-in-law, whom he regarded as a renegade from republicanism. The exchanges became sharper as Stoddart rejected the possibility of peace with Napoleon, and embraced the cause of French ultra-royalists. Crabb Robinson complained of 'the Doctor's outrageous Bourbon zeal' ('History of The Times', 159), and Stoddart's extreme French policy alarmed the paper's proprietor, John Walter the second, who brought in Thomas Barnes to tone down Stoddart's articles, but Stoddart resisted curbs on his independence. Hazlitt launched a further sustained attack on Stoddart's writings in 'The Times' in December 1816, and at the end of that month Stoddart was dismissed. He launched a periodical, 'The Correspondent', to counter subversion on both sides of the English channel, with Chateaubriand as a contributor, which lasted for three issues in 1817. 
In February 1817 Stoddart started a rival to 'The Times' entitled the 'New Times', which was soon amalgamated with 'The Day'. For a short time it appeared as the 'Day and New Times', but dropped the first half of the title in 1818. It was funded by the government and by French ultras. It survived as the 'New Times' until about 1828. During the period of his editorship Stoddart was scurrilously known as Dr Slop, and was the subject of several satires, of which 'A Slap at Slop' (1820), by William Hone, ran through four editions. 
Stoddart's connection with the 'New Times' probably ceased in 1826, when he was appointed chief justice and justice of the vice-admiralty court in Malta, and on 27 July was knighted by George IV at St James's Palace. Finding that the Maltese complained that former judges were imperfectly acquainted with their language, he made himself master of Italian. He gave full satisfaction in his office, and the islanders had perfect confidence in his decisions. He published in 1830-32 (3 pts) 'Trial by jury: a speech on the opening of a commission in Malta for establishing a modified trial by jury, translated from the Italian'. During an outbreak of cholera in the island he devoted himself to its elimination with great success. 
Returning to England in 1840, Stoddart formulated an etymological theory, which he believed would supplant that of Horne Tooke, and presented it in a work called 'Glossology, or, The Historical Relations of Languages'. He completed only the first part of this work, which was published in 1858 in the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana'. Stoddart also contributed an entry, 'Grammar', and the introductory chapter, 'The uses of history as a study', to the quarto edition of the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana', and wrote an introduction to the 'Study of universal history' for the 1850 octavo edition. 
Of Stoddart's writings on legal subjects, the most important was 'A Letter to Lord Brougham', one in the minority of the law lords by whom the great Irish marriage case, 'R. v. Millis', was decided in 1844, and, as Stoddart endeavoured to show, erroneously decided. On this case he also published in 1844 a pamphlet entitled 'Irish marriage question: observations on the opinions delivered by Lord Cottenham in the Irish marriage case'. His legal acumen was also shown in his article 'The head of the church' in the 'Law Review' (February 1851). 
Stoddart died at his residence, 13 Brompton Square, London, on 16 February 1856. His wife had predeceased him on 2 February 1846. Of his numerous offspring, two of his sons predeceased him: Henry Moncrieff died while a pupil at Charterhouse School, and John Frederick, a member of the Scottish bar in 1827 and a judge in Ceylon in 1836, died of a jungle fever while on circuit on 29 August 1839. A third son, William Wellwood, vicar of Charlbury, Oxfordshire, died at Genoa on 21 November 1856. 


@@@@@


doc= 26552


Stoddart, Thomas Tod (1810-1880), angler, was born on 14 February 1810 in Argyle Square, Edinburgh. He was the eldest son of the seven children of Captain Pringle Stoddart RN (1768-1848), a descendant of the Stouthearts of Liddesdale and Ettrick, and his wife, Frances, daughter of James Sprot. At the age of ten he was sent to a Moravian school in Lancashire, but soon returned to attend the high school and the university of his native city. In 1833 he was admitted a member of the faculty of advocates, but he never practised. 
From an early age Stoddart developed a passion for angling, which afterwards became the chief business of his life. He was an expert angler, particularly at fly-fishing, with a great knowledge of the haunts and habits of fish, besides being adept at fly making. He wrote articles on angling for 'Chambers's Journal', which were published in book form in 1835 as 'The Art of Angling, as Practised in Scotland' -- the first treatise of its kind in Scotland. In 1836 he married Bessie Macgregor, daughter of a farmer at Contin in Ross-shire, whom he met while on a fishing tour. They had two sons and a daughter, Anna Macgregor Stoddart, who became the biographer of her father. Stoddart settled in Kelso, where he found the surroundings so congenial for fishing in the conjoined trout and salmon rivers Tweed and Teviot that it became his home for life. In 1847 he published 'The Angler's Companion to the Rivers and Lakes of Scotland', which became an angling classic in Scotland. His later life was devoted to fishing in his home streams, and in the Yarrow and other western rivers. He was concerned to stop the pollution of rivers, and several times gave evidence before the Tweed commissioners and parliamentary committees on this subject. 
Stoddart died at his home, Bellevue, Kelso, on 21 November 1880, and was buried in Kelso cemetery. He is remembered chiefly as the Izaak Walton of Scottish anglers and the author of classic angling songs. 


@@@@@


doc= 26553


Stogdon, Hubert (1692-1728), Presbyterian minister and religious controversialist, was born at Bodicote, Oxfordshire, on 9 January 1692, the eldest son of Robert Stogdon (died 1697), Presbyterian minister, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Francis Hubert, or Hubbard (1627-1676), ejected minister, who was disinherited by his father because of his nonconformity. Following his father's death in 1697, the five-year-old Stogdon moved to Devon, where he was looked after by relatives. He was first educated by the Presbyterian minister at Withycombe Raleigh, and afterwards at the free school at Exeter. He then attended Joseph Hallett's academy at Exeter, where he soon became highly regarded for his scholarship. He was successfully examined for public preaching at a meeting of the Exeter assembly on 4 May 1714 and for the next three years regularly attended assembly meetings as a candidate for ordination. For a short time he was chaplain to Sir John Davy, fourth baronet, at Creedy Park, near Crediton, and subsequently preached for two years at Thorverton, a village near Exeter. 
In 1714 a fierce argument broke out in Exeter over the validity of non-episcopally ordained baptisms. Nationally, many high-churchmen had already been refusing to bury the infants of dissenters because they were 'unbaptized'. Benjamin Read, a young local nonconformist designed for the ministry, became persuaded that his original baptism was invalid, and was rebaptized in the parish church of Heavitree. This was too much for John Withers, co-pastor at the Exeter Bow Meeting, who promptly published 'A Caveat Against the New Sect of Anabaptists, Lately Sprung up at Exon' (1714). When Read responded in print, Withers entrusted Stogdon with the task of composing 'A Defence of 'The Caveat'' (1714). At this time Stogdon was strictly orthodox and 'declared himself most decidedly' against the opinions of William Whiston and Samuel Clark regarding the Trinity, 'but his zeal was at all times tempered by charity, and a consciousness of his liability to err' (Murch, 162). 
A small group of students at the Exeter academy, which included Stogdon and Joseph Hallett (1691-1744), the son of his old tutor, none the less met with great caution to discuss this doctrinal controversy. Stogdon agonized greatly, but became 'pleased with a change of sentiment' to the Clarkean viewpoint: 'he came into it by slow degrees, laborious and humble enquiries, with many prayers and tears, with much fear and trembling' (Billingsley, 20). However, he failed to keep secret the changed beliefs of his entourage. In November 1716 he expressed his opinions privately to John Lavington, the youngest and most orthodox of the four Exeter ministers, who published their conversation. Lavington was accused of maliciously spreading the story by his senior minister, James Peirce, who, in turn, was blamed for being the cause of Stogdon's lapse from orthodoxy by Lavington's father-in-law, John Ball of Honiton. Stogdon further exacerbated the controversy by speaking his mind at a student discussion meeting in 1717 'with a great deal of freedom'. He 'did not seem to be in the least on his guard' and declared: 'I am an Arian, and glory in the name' (Brockett, 82). 
Stogdon had been due to seek ordination at the next Exeter assembly, but Peirce now deemed it essential to remove him elsewhere in order to avoid a full-scale confrontation at the meeting with Lavington, Ball, and others, who clearly feared that the younger generation of ministers was falling away into heresy. Accordingly, he extracted a promise from Stogdon to apply himself wholly to practical religion 'without meddling with... points of speculation' (Brockett, 82). In return, Peirce, Joseph Hallett, and John Withers, the three senior ministers in the city, signed a certificate dated 15 July 1717. This carefully made no mention of Stogdon's opinions, but testified that he had been approved as a suitable candidate for the ministry and noted that 'his conversation ever since, as well as before his examination, has been... sober and Christian; and that his preaching in these parts has been met with good acceptance' (ibid., 82). Nicholas Billingsley now procured Stogdon a 'peaceable retreat, though in an obscure corner of the world' (Murch, 163), tending a small congregation at Wookey, Somerset. In August 1718 Stogdon was ordained at the Revd Matthew Toogood's meeting-house at Shepton Mallett, Somerset. Peirce's earlier protective action was promptly vindicated when this news reached the Exeter assembly. The orthodox party had already been advised by the London Presbyterian ministers that no one who maintained 'so great an error' (Brockett, 84) could be recommended for ordination, and an outraged John Ball protested violently to Toogood's brother, who was his near neighbour at Axminster, Devon. As the Exeter controversy continued to rage over the following years, Stogdon contributed two pamphlets: 'The Character of a Primitive Preacher' (1718) and 'Seasonal Advice Relating to the Present Disputes about the Holy Trinity Addressed to Both Contending Parties' (1719). 
From 1717 until 1721 Stogdon resided in Billingsley's home at Ashwick, Somerset, preaching at nearby Coleford as well as at Wookey. Although his antagonists vilified his ordination, local supporters noted his solemn devotion to, and faithful discharge of, his ministry. In 1721 he married a gentlewoman of the neighbourhood, but her name is unknown and the marriage appears to have been childless. The couple remained at Wookey for a further three years. Towards the end of this period Stogdon, 'pursuing his course of free enquiry and acting upon his noble principles', 'became convinced... of the scriptural authority for adult baptism' and was re-baptized by immersion at Barbican in London 'notwithstanding the remonstrances of his friends who thought it might prejudice his interest, which was always the last idea in his own mind' (Murch, 164). In spite of this, however, in 1724 he was called to Trowbridge in Wiltshire by a congregation of paedobaptists, 'where he happily and usefully spent the remainder of his days' (ibid.). 
Stogdon died at Trowbridge on 20 January 1728 and was buried in the parish church the Friday following. His wife survived him. The following year Billingsley published 'Poems and Letters of the Late Reverend Mr. Hubert Stogdon Collected from his Original Papers' (1729). 


@@@@@


doc= 26554


Stokes, David (1590x92-1669), Church of England clergyman, was a native of Lincolnshire. Having been a scholar of Westminster he matriculated as a pensioner from Trinity College, Cambridge, at Easter 1611, graduating BA in 1615 and proceeding MA in 1618. In that year he was admitted to a fellowship at Peterhouse, holding it until 1625, during which tenure he acted as college bursar in 1621-2. On 17 and 18 March 1622 Stokes was ordained deacon and priest in the diocese of Peterborough, and on 7 June 1624 he was admitted as a fellow of Eton College. On 11 July 1628 he was appointed prebend of the third stall of the collegiate church of Windsor, and installed on the following day. On 23 October 1629 he was collated as precentor of the diocese of Chichester and installed on 26 October, resigning the position by 19 March 1631. In 1630 he was awarded a DD at Cambridge. Stokes was also instituted to three rectories, that of Brinklow, Warwickshire, in 1625, of Binfield, Berkshire, which he held from 1631 to 1638, and of Everdon, Northamptonshire, where he was instituted on 19 September 1638. 
By 1634, when their first child, Richard, was born at Aldingbourne, near Chichester, Stokes had married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Mountague (d. 1641), then bishop of Chichester, but from May 1638 bishop of Norwich. On 14 November 1639 Mountague wrote to Sir John Lambe about the advowson of West Halton, in Lincolnshire, which he had given to Stokes, but which was also the subject of a long-standing dispute among the higher clergy. 'My right is unquestionable, and I hope shall be indefeasible', claimed Mountague. Whether or not he and Stokes were thwarted, political events quickly rendered the wrangle nugatory. Though Stokes was instituted to the vicarage of Urchfont in Wiltshire in 1644 on presentation of the dean and chapter of Windsor, he had resigned by the time of the admission of his successor, William Shephard. 
On 12 August 1645, a few months before the fall of the city, Stokes was incorporated DD at Oxford. Shortly afterwards, the university press issued his 'Paraphrastical Explication of the Prophecie of Habakkuk', which reached the London bookseller George Thomason on 8 January 1646. Extolling the 'king, whose unwearied patience and clemency, and frequent loving overtures of peace, deserve a greater conquest of hearts than ever was attained by the sword' the author wished 'that they that have made us so miserable, specially the prime incendiaries, and main fomenters of that under which we groan, could be well chidden out of their new fancies and quarrels and hypocrisies into the old way of true godliness which partakes of that wisdom from above. (D. Stokes, 'Paraphrastical Explication of the Prophecie of Habakkuk', 1646, 22-3)' The House of Lords summarized his recent biography: Stokes had 'for divers year together deserted his fellowship, and adhered to the forces raised against the parliament, and hath resided in the King's quarters and garrisons in open hostility' and it may not be thought especially surprising that on 4 October 1647 they ordered his removal and replacement at Eton by Joseph Symonds ('JHL', 9.486). 
Stokes's movements during the years of the Commonwealth and protectorate are unknown, but in 1660 he was restored to the canonry of Windsor and the fellowship at Eton. He died on 10 May 1669, aged seventy-seven or seventy-eight, and was survived by his wife, Elizabeth, and children Richard, Anne, Mary, and Frances. He was buried at Windsor. 


@@@@@


doc= 26555


Stokes, George Thomas (1843-1898), ecclesiastical historian, the eldest son of John Stokes of Athlone and Margaret Forster, his wife, was born in that town on 28 December 1843. He was educated at Galway grammar school, Queen's College, Galway, and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1864. He subsequently proceeded MA in 1871, BD in 1881, and DD in 1886. In 1866 Stokes was ordained for the curacy of Dunkerrin in the diocese of Killaloe in the established Church of Ireland, and in the following year was appointed to the curacy of St Patrick's, Newry. In 1868 he was nominated first vicar of the newly constituted charge of All Saints, Newtown Park, Blackrock, co. Dublin, which he held until his death. In 1893 he was elected by the chapter of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, to the prebend and canonry of St Andrew. Stokes was twice married: first to Fanny, daughter of Thomas Pusey of Surbiton, Surrey, and second to Katherine, daughter of Henry J. Dudgeon of the Priory, Stillorgan, co. Dublin. 
Stokes early displayed a taste for historical and antiquarian research. From the date of his appointment to All Saints his leisure time was devoted to his work on the ecclesiastical history of his own country. His expertise in this field led to his selection by Dr Reichel as his deputy in the chair of ecclesiastical history in the University of Dublin; and in 1883, on the termination of his principal's period of office, Stokes was appointed his successor. The appointment seemed well justified when, soon after, his researches bore fruit in his 'Ireland and the Celtic Church', published in 1886, which achieved an immediate success. This was followed in 1889 by his 'Ireland and the Anglo-Norman Church', in which the history of Irish Christianity was traced through a further stage. 
Stokes intended to continue his history of the Irish church, but his scheme was interrupted by the laborious task of producing for the 'Expositor's Bible' series his 'Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles' (1892), in which he succeeded in presenting the latest results of historical criticism of the 'New Testament' in a popular and well-written form. 
From 1880 onwards Stokes's great industry enabled him to add largely, and in many directions, to the more important productions above enumerated. In 1887 he published, as the second volume of a 'Sketch of Universal History', a 'Sketch of Medieval History'. In 1891 he published an edition of Bishop Richard Pococke's 'Tour in Ireland' of 1752. He was an occasional contributor on subjects connected with theology and ecclesiastical history to the 'Contemporary Review'. Among his many articles in the periodical, that on 'Alexander Knox and the Oxford Movement' is perhaps the most important (August 1887). He produced numerous papers for the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland in the short period of 1890-99, having been made a member in 1887, and for the Royal Irish Academy, of which he had become a member in 1891. In 1887 he was appointed librarian of Marsh's Library, in Dublin, a position especially suited to his tastes. 
In addition to the works already mentioned Stokes published: 'The Work of the Laity of the Church of Ireland' (1869); various articles in Smith's 'Dictionary of Christian Biography' (1880-87); and, in conjunction with the Revd C. H. Wright, a translation of the writings of St Patrick (1887). He also published 'St Hugh of Rehan: his church, his life and his times and additional note on the MacGeoghegan family' ([1897?]) and edited the 'Liber Niger' (register of Archbishop Alen), held in Trinity College, Dublin, for the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland (1893 and 1897). 
It is, however, upon Stokes's two volumes on the early history of the church in Ireland that his fame mainly rests. These two works are based on lectures which he delivered to the Dublin University school of divinity. He had often been asked to recommend a history of Ireland written in a contemporary and interesting fashion; being unable to do so he decided to write one himself. The works are a synthesis of his historical and ecclesiastical thought. They are written in a stimulating yet amusing style, are non-controversial, non-sectarian, impartial, yet highly interesting. In them Stokes displayed the wealth of his knowledge of early Irish saints and of Christianity, as well as of later political and historical developments. He drew on his own studies of Christianity, on contemporary nineteenth-century scholarship, and on unedited texts. He often complained of the lack of editions of earlier works: some he later edited himself. The history is a synthesis of his thought and research, presented in a most readable form. Some of the early Christian chapters were later developed into works in their own right. Regrettably he did not complete the projected series. 
Stokes did not, however, confine his research and publication to ecclesiastical matters only. The pages of the 'Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland' contain many articles on local history, a number of which later appeared in book form. One of the best-known is 'Guide to Blackrock [co. Dublin], with a description of the neighbourhood and excursions to the numerous objects of interest and attraction' ([1892]); another was a joint publication with John Burgess -- 'Athlone, the Shannon and Lough Ree, a guide-book to their history, scenery and antiquities... with a local directory' ([1897]). In 1891 he had exhibited a manuscript of a tour to Lough Derg to a meeting of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland. To the 'Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy' he contributed papers on Greek. 
In spite of these varied labours Stokes did not neglect his clerical duties. In 1895 he was temporarily disabled by a stroke, from the effects of which he never fully recovered. In 1896 he delivered a series of lectures entitled 'How to write a parochial history', and, in the following year he started an instructive course of lectures entitled 'Great Irish churchmen of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries', which he did not live to complete. They were edited after his death, under the title 'Some Worthies of the Irish Church' (1900), by the Revd H. J. Lawlor, who succeeded to his professorial chair. On 24 March 1898 Stokes succumbed, after a brief struggle, to an attack of pneumonia. He was buried at Dean's Grange, co. Dublin. His obituary might well be taken from his preface to 'Ireland and the Celtic Church': 'I must in the last place, express the hope that no words of mine may help to deepen the wounds of Ireland, or cause pain to any generous heart, no matter what his religion or politics' 


@@@@@


doc= 26556


Stokes, Henry Sewell (1808-1895), poet, was born at Gibraltar on 16 June 1808, the eldest son of Henry Stokes (died 1832), proctor and notary at Gibraltar, who was a native of Dartmouth, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Sewell (1787-1857). Henry Sewell went to England in 1815 and was sent in 1817 to St Saviour's Grammar School at Southwark, and later to William Giles's school at Chatham, where Charles Dickens was his companion. In 1825 he returned to Gibraltar and was taught by French, Spanish, and Italian teachers while studying mercantile law at his father's office. His first poem, 'The Lay of the Desert', designed and in part written on Dartmoor, was published in 1830. 'The Song of Albion: a Poem on the Reform Crisis' and 'Discourses on Opinion' followed in 1831. He was then articled to Mr Bridgman, a solicitor at Tavistock, and was admitted attorney in January 1832 and solicitor in February. For a short time he was a student of the Middle Temple. 
Stokes lived for some weeks at St Austell, Cornwall, acquiring evidence on mining customs in the duchy, and in 1834 settled at Truro, where he practised as a solicitor for many years and played an active role as a Liberal in local politics. He founded the 'Cornish Guardian and Western Chronicle' newspaper (later merged with the 'West Briton') in July 1833 and was its editor for three years. Charles Buller and Sir William Molesworth were occasional leader writers. Stokes also wrote leaders for the 'Devon Independent', which had a large circulation in Cornwall, and was an occasional contributor to the 'West Briton'. 
On 9 August 1834 Stokes married Louisa Rachel Evans (died 1890), daughter of the Revd William Evans of Parkwood, Tavistock. They had one son, William Evans Stokes, and three daughters. 
From the number of poems he wrote about the county, Stokes was sometimes called 'the laureate for Cornwall'. 'The Vale of Lanherne' (1836) included a sketch of Lanherne nunnery and the church of St Mawgan by his wife. Tennyson spent a week with him at Truro in 1848. In addition to the numerous flysheets and small poems that he published, Stokes contributed an article on the court of the vice-warden of the stannaries to the 'Mining Almanac' (1849) of Henry English. 'The Vale of Lanherne' was reissued in 1853 with illustrations by Charles Haghe from designs by James G. Philp and Stokes received letters of appreciation from W. S. Landor, Matthew Arnold, and Edward Bulwer Lytton. 'Echoes of the War' was published in 1855. A critic in the 'Westminster Review' described the volume in July 1855 as 'the sincere response of a warm British heart to the tales of noble deeds, and nobly endured suffering, which have come to us from the Crimea'. Stokes's poem 'Inkerman' was especially singled out for praise as 'an easy, spirited ballad of the kind we wish our war-poets had hit on more frequently, instead of the high-flown metaphysical strain' (Wright, 428). 
In 1856 Stokes was elected mayor of Truro and in 1859 was appointed town clerk. On the nomination of Lord Vivian, lord lieutenant of the county, he became clerk of the peace for Cornwall in February 1865. The duties of this post forced him to move to Bodmin, where he spent the rest of his days, all the while continuing to write and publish his poetry. The 1870s were particularly prolific years, seeing the publication of 'Rhymes of Cornwall' (1871; reissued 1884 as 'The Voyage of Arundel and other Rhymes from Cornwall'), 'Memories' (1872; new edition 1879), 'Poems of Later Years' (1873; reissued in 1881 as 'The Chantry Owl and other Verses'), 'Restormel: a Legend of Piers Gaveston' (1875; republished 1882), and 'The Gate of Heaven: the Plaint of Morwenstow' (1876). On 17 August 1876 Stokes delivered a paper on books and manuscripts relating to Cornwall at a meeting of the British Archaeological Association at Bodmin, which was later printed in its journal. He was elected the first president of the Cornwall Law Society at its inaugural meeting in St Austell on 13 August 1883. In December 1891, at a public meeting held at Truro, Stokes was presented with an oil portrait of himself and a cheque for $500 'as a token of the high esteem in which he was held by all classes throughout Cornwall' (Wright, 429). He was granted the freedom of the city of Truro in 1894. Stokes died at Castle Street, Bodmin, on 7 April 1895 and was buried in Bodmin cemetery on 13 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 26557


Stokes, John Lort (1812-1885), naval officer, was the second son of Henry Stokes of Scotchwell near Haverfordwest, Pembrokeshire, and his wife, Anne, daughter of George Phillips MD of Prickeston, Pembrokeshire. He entered the navy on 20 September 1824 on the 'Prince Regent' (120 guns). In October 1825 he was sent to the 'Beagle', then fitting out under Commander Pringle Stokes, for surveys in South American waters, in company with the 'Adventure', commanded by Captain Philip Parker King. On the death of Commander King in November 1828, Robert FitzRoy was promoted, and Stokes served with him until the return of the 'Beagle' to England in 1830, and again, when the 'Beagle' was recommissioned, from 1831 to 1836, during which period Charles Darwin was naturalist on board. On 10 January 1837 Stokes was promoted lieutenant, and when, in February, the 'Beagle' was recommissioned by her former first lieutenant, Commander John Clements Wickham, for surveying in Australasian waters, Stokes was again appointed to her. In March 1841 Wickham was invalided home, and Stokes succeeded to the command. 
For the next two years Stokes was principally engaged in surveys of Timor and New Zealand. In September 1843 he arrived in England after serving in the 'Beagle' for nearly eighteen years. After his return home he wrote 'Discoveries in Australia, with an account of the coasts and rivers explored and surveyed during the voyage of the Beagle, 1837-1843' (2 vols., 1846). On 4 July 1846 he was promoted captain, and on 14 October 1847 was appointed to the steam vessel 'Acheron' employed for the next four years on surveys of New Zealand. At the end of 1851 the 'Acheron' was paid off at Sydney, and for a few years Stokes was on half pay. From 1860 to 1863 he was employed in surveying the coasts of the English Channel. He was one of three officers considered for the post of hydrographer of the navy after the death of Rear-Admiral John Washington in 1863, but was not selected. Shortly afterwards he retired. He was promoted rear-admiral on the retired list on 9 February 1864, vice-admiral on 14 July 1871, and admiral on 1 August 1877. In January 1841, at Port Phillip, Melbourne, he married Fanny Jane (died 1841), daughter of Major Marlay. He later married Louisa French, daughter of R. Partridge and widow of H. J. Garratt; they had at least one child. His second wife survived him. He died at his home in Scotchwell on 11 June 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 26558


Stokes, Margaret M'Nair (1832-1900), archaeologist, eldest daughter of William Stokes MD (1804-1878), and Mary, daughter of John Black of Glasgow, was born at York Street, Dublin, in March 1832. She was one of a family of distinguished Irish scholars: her grandfather was Whitley Stokes (1763-1845) ['see under 'Stokes, William (1804-1878)], physician and supporter of the United Irishmen and author of an English-Irish dictionary. One brother, also Whitley Stokes (1830-1909), was a philologist; another brother was William Stokes the surgeon. As a young woman, she met the archaeologists and antiquaries James Henthorn Todd, George Petrie, William Reeves, Sir Samuel Ferguson, and Edwin R. W. Quin, third earl of Dunraven, who were her father's friends, and from whom she early derived the taste for archaeological investigation that was so influential on her future work. Her aptitude in this direction was encouraged by her father, with whom, in 1867, she visited the Aran Islands together with George Petre and the earl of Dunraven. But while her taste for research was thus precociously developed, it was not until she was over fifty, when both her parents had died, that her real services to Celtic art and archaeology were made possible. 
Stokes's first important work was the chance outcome of her friendship with and admiration for Sir Samuel Ferguson (feelings which were warmly reciprocated). She illustrated and illuminated Ferguson's poem 'The Cromlech on Howth' with initial letters from examples in the 'Book of Kells'. These were so generally admired that an illustrated edition of the poem was published in 1861. Shortly after its publication, Sir Frederic Burton wrote of Stokes's work: 'The initial letters are exquisite, and form in themselves quite a manual of Scoto-Celtic ornamentation'. Her knowledge of Celtic art led to her undertaking the editorship and illustration of the earl of Dunraven's 'Notes on Irish Architecture', which was published between 1875 and 1877. Dunraven, who died before he could complete his projected work, left a substantial bequest to meet the expenses of the publication of her edition of his 'Notes'. 
Between 1871 and 1895 Stokes edited two books of Irish iconography and wrote 'Early Christian Architecture in Ireland' (1878) and 'Notes on the Cross of Cong' (1895). She also wrote and illustrated two books tracing the travels of early Irish missionaries to Italy and France. In old age she travelled long distances and took enormous care to photograph and transcribe inscriptions; her methods were of particular value in her final book, 'The High Crosses of Ireland' (1898), where she made careful rubbings of each panel and, in order to get clear photographs of the crosses, waited through the day until the sun was at precisely the right angle to reveal the detail of the carvings. 
Stokes was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal Irish Academy, the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland, and the Antiquarian Society of Scotland. She died unmarried at her home, Caraig Breace, Howth, co. Dublin, on 20 September 1900. When she died she was considered to be in the forefront of the Gaelic revival in its interest in Irish antiquities and early Irish history. Her obituary notice in the 'Dublin Daily Express' said that she 'displayed the truest of patriotism, that namely, which puts the land of one's birth and nationality in the forefront, and allows no consideration to override its best interests'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26559


Stokes, Peter (d. 1399), Carmelite friar and theologian, was a member of his order's convent at Hitchin. He was ordained subdeacon in March 1363, deacon on 23 December 1363, and priest on 18 May 1364, while by 1382 he was a doctor of theology at Oxford. In the latter year he was used as an agent by Archbishop William Courtenay (died 1396) in efforts to eradicate Wycliffism in Oxford; throughout the first half of the year Stokes employed notaries to record public statements of support for Wyclif and his views, and in Lent complained to the chancellor about a sermon by Nicholas Hereford. A copy of one of these notarial records survives, summarizing the English sermon that Hereford preached on Ascension day (15 May), advocating the confiscation of the temporalities of the church, and urging his hearers to action. 
On 28 May 1382 Stokes was commissioned by Courtenay to pronounce publicly the condemnation of Wycliffite doctrines issued on 17 May by the Blackfriars Council in London. He demanded that the chancellor, Robert Rygge (died 1410), help him do this before Philip Repyndon (died 1424) preached on Corpus Christi day (5 June), but failed. After Repyndon's English sermon in St Frideswide's churchyard, in which insurrection and Wyclif's eucharistic views were advocated, Repyndon and Rygge retired laughing to the church, but Stokes, fearing violence, dared not follow. Next day Stokes wrote to Courtenay expressing fear for his life; on 9 June Courtenay wrote recalling Stokes to Lambeth. Before receiving this, Stokes determined in the schools against Repyndon, but observed twelve armed men among the listeners. After attending the second meeting of congregation, at which the Blackfriars conclusions were finally condemned, Stokes returned to Lambeth on 12 June. On 14 July 1382 a royal proclamation required the chancellor and proctors of the university not to trouble Stokes for his activities in opposition to Wyclif. A Lollard poem containing many allusions to the events of 1382, and written probably before the recantation of Repyndon in the autumn of that year, describes Stokes as: '
Rufus naturaliter et veste dealbatus 

Omnibus impatiens et nimis elatus. 
(Ruddy in looks and white in his vesture, 

Impatient with all and too proud in gesture.) (Wright, 1.261)' Bale lists thirteen works by Stokes, six with incipits; only the first is identifiable, as Stokes's letter to Courtenay of 6 June recording the failure of Rygge to support him; two without incipit, one against Repyndon and the other against Hereford, may have been deduced by Bale from the account of events given in the 'Fasciculi zizaniorum'. According to Bale, Stokes died at the convent at Hitchin on 28 July 1399, and was buried in the cloister there. 


@@@@@


doc= 26560


Whitley Stokes (1763-1845), a talented physician and surgeon, and his wife, Mary Anne, formerly Picknell, from Loughgall in co. Armagh, whom he married in 1782. As members of the protestant ascendancy with origins in Gloucestershire the Stokes family had long enjoyed a privileged place in Dublin society and also at Trinity College, Dublin. A religious man, Whitley Stokes embraced the radical ideals of the Society of United Irishmen in the early 1790s, earning thereby the respect of Wolfe Tone and the deep mistrust of his anti-Jacobin colleagues at Trinity College, which he attended from 1779. Even though he left the society as soon as the leadership began to espouse insurrection the college authorities suspended him for three years on the grounds of disloyalty. Once reinstated he resumed his university duties and privileges. In 1805 he became a senior fellow and in 1830 he achieved the coveted regius professorship of physic (medicine). His conversion about 1815 to a quasi-Calvinist sect called the Church of God profoundly altered his son's life. Firmly opposed to any kind of Anglican education he tutored the boy at home in the natural sciences, while the charismatic leader of the sect, the Revd John Walker, taught him classics and mathematics. In his youth Stokes also gleaned some knowledge of the world from listening to the table talk of such luminaries as Charles Kendal Bushe, William Magee, John Philpot Curran, and Henry Grattan, who enjoyed the Stokeses' hospitality at 16 Harcourt Street and at their suburban retreat in Ballinteer, south of Dublin. Whitley Stokes died at Harcourt Street on 13 April 1845. 


@@@@@


doc= 26561


Stokes, William (1804-1878), physician, was born in Dublin in July 1804, the second son of Waterford-born 
William Stokes's unorthodox education virtually ruled out matriculation at Trinity College. Determined to pursue his father's profession he studied chemistry and anatomy in Dublin before enrolling at the University of Glasgow. Two years later -- in the spring of 1823 -- he transferred to Edinburgh University to study under the professor of medicine, William Pulteney Alison, who instilled in him compassion for the poor. In 1825 Stokes took his medical degree along with his good friend and rival, Dominic J. Corrigan. 
Born with a silver scapel, Stokes rose rapidly in Dublin's medical hierarchy despite the lack of a Trinity degree. He had more than enough talent and self-confidence to question some of the outmoded assumptions of older colleagues, who still used the primitive methods and cures of their Georgian precursors. Having used in Edinburgh the simple type of stethoscope invented by Rene Laennec of the Necker Hospital in Paris, Stokes promoted its use in a treatise published in 1825 for which he received a royalty of $70. The first doctor in Ireland to adopt this method of auscultation, he paid the usual price for innovation in the form of scepticism and even ridicule from colleagues. Specializing in diseases of the heart and lungs, he embarked on a brilliant career as a healer, teacher, and researcher. A combination of sheer talent and pure nepotism enabled him to become physician to the Meath Hospital, succeeding his father in this post. At the Meath he teamed with the renowned Robert James Graves in treating patients of all social ranks and reforming clinical instruction. Together they made this hospital the flagship of Irish medical teaching and research. 
A fluent and lucid lecturer as well as meticulous researcher, Stokes almost died from typhus during the epidemic of 1826-7 after his resistance crumbled under the strain of overwork. This close call as well as exposure to near starving patients made him aware of the terrible calamity facing the country should the potato crop ever fail. In April 1828 he married Mary, daughter of John Black of Glasgow; he had met her while studying there. In 1845 he succeeded his father as regius professor of physic in the University of Dublin, having already served in this capacity for two years owing to Whitley's failing health. A liberal in social and religious matters, Stokes had welcomed Catholic emancipation in 1829. While he shared Thomas Davis's enthusiasm for Irish culture, he had no time for Daniel O'Connell's repeal movement, and yet he rightly predicted that the Liberator's death would usher in a more militant brand of nationalism. 
During the great famine of 1845-9 Stokes worked long and hard treating victims of famine related fevers. Filling his saddle-bags with cornmeal and bread he would ride into the hills and across the moors offering morsels of food to starving families along the way. He knew personally several landlords and poor-law doctors who died from the diseases they were trying to alleviate. In 1846 he urged a House of Commons committee to raise the pay of dispensary doctors given the hazardous nature of their work. By 1849 the cumulative burdens of patient care, medical research, lecturing, editing, and public health duties had exhausted him. Occasionally the sight of a tumulus, dolmen, or round tower in some remote district would stir his passion for antiquities and divert his attention from the terrible suffering of famine or fever stricken patients. 
Along with most colleagues Stokes believed that fevers were so many divergent species of the same genus but he also noticed how members of the same family would develop different symptoms -- ranging from petechial eruptions (red or purplish spots) to intestinal inflammation. Regarding typhus and typhoid fever as virtually the same 'special morbid state or condition... subject to the law of periodicity', he insisted that no two epidemics were exactly alike and he warned his students (and readers) to be on the lookout for different signs of the same disease (Stokes, 'On Fever', 74). As for a cure, he recommended wine or port, if not a hot brandy punch made with milk and sugar. Such stimulants were most effective among the peasantry in his view because they were not accustomed to wine and were on that account more readily enlivened thereby. On the other hand, upper-class victims of fever were more likely to die because their 'nervous systems' were more highly developed. In addition they were so accustomed to wine that they were less susceptible to its curative powers. Refuting old stereotypes he regarded the peasantry as far more temperate than urban artisans. However, Stokes failed to address the question of how wine or spirits were going to be delivered to the hordes of sick and starving people. 
Like Corrigan, Stokes specialized in coronary and pulmonary diseases as well as epidemic fevers. In 1837 he overcame bouts of depression and headaches to produce 'A Treatise on the Diagnosis and Treatment of Diseases of the Chest', which plugged some of the gaps in Laennec's classic work on this subject (1818). Stokes also explored the nature of pneumonia, bronchitis, and pleurisy, while advocating the stethoscope as the best way to detect problems in the lungs. Praised by both Corrigan and Henry Acland, this text elevated Stokes's reputation on both sides of the Irish Sea. Arguably his most respected work, 'The Diseases of the Heart and the Aorta' (1854), dealt with pericarditis, tachycardia, and inflammation of the aortic valves as well as fatty degeneration, displacement, rupture, and derangement of the heart in the course of twelve long chapters. Translated into French, Italian, and German, this text confirmed his high standing in the profession and enhanced the reputation of Irish medicine abroad. A twentieth-century reviewer praised this work for its 'most comprehensive and complete' assessment of pericarditis as well as its insights into heart murmurs and the mechanism of coronary disease (Mulcahy, 54). In 1839 Trinity College conferred on Stokes an honorary doctorate of medicine. He also became a fellow of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland and joined the leading medical societies of Berlin, Ghent, Hamburg, Leipzig, Vienna, and Philadelphia. 
Stokes is best known for identifying a pattern of periodic breathing in cases of severe illness, when in his own words, the patient's 'inspirations become each one less deep than the preceding until they are all but imperceptible', at which point 'apparent apnoea [no breathing] occurs'. Then comes 'the faintest possible inspiration' until the 'paroxysm of breathing is at its height, again to subside by a descending scale' (O'Brien, 150-51). This syndrome had also caught the eye of his colleague at the Meath, John Cheyne, and was labelled the 'Cheyne-Stokes respiration'. A second eponymous discovery in the realm of cardiology was shared with Robert Adams, also at the Meath. Adams-Stokes disease denoted a slowing of the heart beat or episodic cardiac arrest and syncopy that often ended in unconsciousness. An indefatigable promoter of both Dublin medicine and public health, Stokes treated a wide range of patients, loved to teach, and carried out significant research into diseases of the heart and lungs. Besides publishing numerous articles or lectures and four books on medical matters he edited for several years the prestigious 'Journal of Medical and Chemical Science' (also known as the 'Dublin Medical Journal') and in 1838 he co-founded the Pathological Society of Dublin in order to promote the anatomical study of disease. 
After mid-century more honours accrued. In 1861 Stokes was appointed physician-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria in Ireland as well as a fellow of the Royal Society. In the same year Edinburgh University gave him an honorary LLD and in 1865 he received a DCL from Oxford. Two years later he became president of the British Medical Association. In 1874 Stokes published his 'Lectures on Fever', Cambridge awarded him an honorary LLD, the Royal Irish Academy chose him as president (1874-6), and Foley completed his statue for the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland. Unveiled by the duke of Leinster on 16 March 1876 the statue stands today in the entrance hall of the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland, as the King and Queen's College became. 
A passionate advocate of better medical education Stokes promoted the use of modern instruments -- especially the microscope and stethoscope -- and a curriculum that would teach students about both the diversity and interdependency of the sciences. The doctors of the future, he believed, should be as philosophical and humanistic in outlook as they were scientific and professional in their practice. Besides materia medica his ideal curriculum included religion, law, the classics, botany, and natural history. If medicine was an inexact science it was also progressive and connected to 'every branch of knowledge in its progress' (Stokes, 'Stokes', 164). A stickler for the highest standards of medical ethics Stokes also preached compassion for the sick poor. Once while travelling in Donegal he observed several starving peasants. After prescribing some ineffectual pills, he gave each one half a crown and told them to buy some mutton chops -- to be consumed daily. In the realm of preventive medicine he wanted the state to play a more active role, especially where epidemic fevers and unsanitary conditions were concerned. 
Stokes and his wife had nine children. One son, Whitley Stokes (1830-1909), a scholarly Indian civil servant, published numerous essays on both the Anglo-Indian legal code and early Irish culture. Another, William Stokes (1839-1900), attained renown as a surgeon, became president of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, and garnered a knighthood in 1886. Stokes's daughter, Margaret M'Nair Stokes (1832-1900), acquired expertise in early Irish art and archaeology after accompanying her father on expeditions to the west in search of ancient shrines or burial sites. Commitments to medical research and patient care did not stop Stokes from studying cathedrals in Europe and Celtic areas as well as neolithic ruins in the west of Ireland. Two of his boon companions on field trips to Connaught and the Aran Islands were Edwin, third earl of Dunraven and George Petrie, the topographical painter and archaeologist. Stokes paid an extended tribute to the latter in 'The Life and Labours in Art and Archaeology of George Petrie' (1868). Later, Margaret edited two volumes dealing with their joint researches into early Irish culture, 'Notes on Irish Architecture' (1875-7) with a preface by the fourth earl of Dunraven. Besides the Corrigan family, near neighbours in Merrion Square were Sir William Wilde, the noted eye and ear doctor, whom Stokes had taught, and his exotic wife, Speranza, the parents of Oscar. Although a decade younger Wilde shared with Stokes a passion for Celtic antiquities and lively conversation. Stokes's non-medical friends included the painter Frederick Burton and the poets James Clarence Mangan and Samuel Ferguson. Stokes hosted salons for Dublin's illuminati at both 5 Merrion Square and Carrig Breac, his 'beloved retreat' at the tip of Howth Head, where witty talk flowed as abundantly as wine and spirits. However, the premature deaths of a daughter and nephew along with the loss of his wife cast some dark shadows over his later years. 
Stokes was a smooth spoken and urbane man with an aesthetic streak, who felt fully at ease in upper-class houses. Apparently these qualities did not impress Thomas Carlyle, whose visit to Dublin in 1849 included a meeting with this 'clever, energetic, but squinting, rather fierce, sinister-looking man'. Carlyle's disapproval of Stokes was heartily reciprocated. 
In November 1877 Stokes suffered a paralysing stroke and lingered for two months before dying in his town house on 7 January 1878. He was buried next to his wife in the cemetery of St Fintan's Church on the Hill of Howth. As someone who knew both Stokes and Corrigan observed, Stokes represented 'the poetry' and Corrigan 'the prose' of Irish medicine (O'Brien, 63-4). But there was much more to Stokes's career than poesy. In the words of 'The Lancet's' obituarist Stokes's writings 'elevated vital facts far above all merely mechanical and chemical theories' and the 'therapeutic fervour always kept pace with the diagnostic'. In short, he never lost sight of the need to find a cure ('The Lancet', 108). Perhaps the 'British Medical Journal' bestowed on Stokes the finest accolade when it pointed out that he neither coveted nor sought any title: 'He was a prince from birth of the aristocracy of intellect. His name is crowned with the triple coronet of the gratitude of the poor... the confidence of the public... and the love and esteem of his profession, whose honour and interests he unflinchingly upheld. ('BMJ', 64)' According to Eoin O'Brien, three giants -- Stokes, Corrigan, and Graves -- made up the triumvirate known as the Dublin school that raised the standard of medical practice and research in Ireland to new heights (O'Brien, 107). A caring clinician, Stokes found room in his large heart for not only family and friends but also for his profession and his country. 


@@@@@


doc= 26562


Stokes, Sir William (1839-1900), surgeon, was born at 50 York Street, Dublin, on 10 March 1839, the second son of William Stokes (1804-1878), physician, and Mary, second daughter of John Black of Glasgow; Margaret Stokes, the archaeologist, was his sister; Whitley Stokes (1830-1909), the philologist, was his brother. He was educated at the Royal School, Armagh, and Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1859, and MB, MD, and MCh in 1863. He was awarded the gold medal of the Pathological Society of Dublin in 1861, and became its president in 1881. He was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland in 1862, and a fellow in 1874. He spent two years in Paris, Berlin, Vienna, and Prague, where his father's reputation gained him access to the most renowned teachers in those cities. 
In 1864 Stokes settled in practice at 3 Clare Street, Dublin, where he remained until 1878; he then moved to 5 Merrion Square North, which his father had occupied for many years. In 1864 he was elected surgeon to the Meath Hospital, in succession to Josiah Smyly. He resigned this post in 1868, on his appointment as surgeon to the House of Industry Hospitals. Stokes married, in 1869, Jane Elizabeth, daughter of the Revd John Lewis Moore DD, senior fellow and vice-provost of Trinity College, Dublin. They had one son and two daughters. 
Stokes, like so many of his distinguished family, was extremely versatile. A good surgeon and an excellent teacher, he was also an orator and a master of English composition. He was, besides, a cultivated musician, with a lovely tenor voice, which was often heard in private society. He was beginning to take a leading position as a surgeon when in the autumn of 1871 his judgement and skill came under unpleasant scrutiny during the Dublin murder trial of Robert Kelly for the alleged murder of Head Constable Talbot, a police spy. The defence offered was that death was caused by the surgeon's knife rather than by Kelly's pistol. Roger McHugh's play, 'Trial at Green Street Courthouse', staged at the Abbey Theatre in 1941, recreated the drama, and it seems probable that Talbot (who had walked into the hospital) would have survived had Stokes not unwisely persisted in attempting to remove an inaccessible bullet lodged at the base of the skull. Severe bleeding from a severed artery during the operation was followed postoperatively by secondary haemorrhage and sepsis. Accepting the defence counsel's ingenious arguments the jury pronounced Kelly not guilty. Stokes's reputation was not damaged permanently and in 1874 John Knott, a medical student, expressed the following opinion: 'Stokes Jnr is evidently an excellent surgeon as his cases (of amputation, fractures, abscesses, etc.) are almost all progressing favourably. He is also very gentle and tender' (Lyons, 35). His operation for amputation at the knee joint -- a modification of Gritti's procedure -- was known to his contemporaries as 'Stokes's operation'. 
Stokes was for some time lecturer on surgery in the Carmichael school of medicine, and on 24 December 1872 he was elected professor of surgery at the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland. When president of the college in 1886-7 he celebrated the jubilee of Queen Victoria with a magnificent banquet. In 1882 he delivered the address on surgery at the jubilee meeting of the British Medical Association held at Worcester, its birthplace. In 1886 he was knighted by the earl of Aberdeen, then lord lieutenant of Ireland. In 1888 he returned to the Meath Hospital as surgeon, resigning a similar position at the Richmond Hospital, and in 1892 he was appointed surgeon-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria in Ireland. 
Stokes published a life of his father, in the 'Masters of Medicine' series (1898). His 'Selected Papers on Operative and Clinical Surgery' was published posthumously in 1902 and includes articles on hernia, nerve stretching, subdural abscess, and operations on the thyroid gland; the work contained a memoir of the author by Alexander Ogston. Stokes was an advocate of antisepsis. A governor of the Westmorland Lock Hospital, a consulting surgeon to the National Children's Hospital, and a member of the council of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, he also took much interest in the Royal Academy of Medicine and was its secretary for foreign correspondence. He acted at various times as external examiner in surgery at the University of Oxford, and at the Queen's University of Ireland. 
Early in 1900, though his health had never been robust and he had a tendency to bronchitis, Stokes left Ireland for South Africa, to assume the office of consulting surgeon to the British forces which were then engaged in Natal in the South African War. He endured the hardships of work at military hospitals at Frere Camp, Colenso, and Mooi River. While still actively occupied with the duties of office he fell ill and died of pneumonia on 18 August 1900, at the base hospital at Pietermaritzburg. He was buried two days later in the military cemetery at Fort Napier, Natal. 


@@@@@


doc= 26563


Stokesley, John (1475-1539), bishop of London, was born on 8 September 1475 at Collyweston, Northamptonshire, the elder of two sons of Brian Stokesley, gentleman, and Margaret, daughter of Edward Spendlove (or Spendlowe). Stokesley was educated in Oxford, first at Magdalen College School and then at Magdalen College, where he became a fellow about 1495. He graduated MA in 1500, was successively ordained deacon (8 March 1504) and priest (22 March 1505), and proceeded DTh in 1516. His erudition in philosophy and theology was praised by Erasmus, while Polydore Vergil, John Leland, and Robert Wakefield were impressed by his knowledge of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. He held a number of university and college offices, becoming vice-president of Magdalen College in 1506. His opposition to the absentee president, Richard Mayew, bishop of Hereford, led to his being accused of witchcraft, heresy, perjury, theft, and adultery. The charges were investigated by Bishop Richard Fox's commissary, John Dowman, between 28 and 30 January 1507. Stokesley was exonerated, left in sole charge of the college until a new presidential election was held about 1510, and allowed to continue to study Greek in Rome, at the college's expense. 
Stokesley had a successful ecclesiastical career. He was vicar of Willoughby, Warwickshire (from February 1506), rector of Slimbridge, Gloucestershire (1505-6), Brighstone, Isle of Wight (from 1518), and Ivychurch, Kent (from 24 March 1524). Through Fox's patronage he was also prebendary of Wherwell in Wherwell Abbey in 1528-9 and of St Stephen's, Westminster ('c'.1524). He held higher office as archdeacon of Surrey (1522) and of Dorset (1523), and as dean of St George's, Windsor (1524), and was chaplain to Fox between 1515 and 1517, before being instituted as precentor of St Mary's, Southampton, in 1518. He attracted the attention of the king and, in quick succession, was named royal confessor (1517), royal chaplain (1519), royal councillor, and almoner ('c'.1520). As chaplain, he was present with the king in 1520 at the Field of Cloth of Gold and at Henry's subsequent meeting with Charles V at Gravelines. Wolsey, too, made much of Stokesley's abilities, giving him judicial duties for the council and in the court of requests. Edward Hall thought Stokesley exhibited rather 'more learning than discretion' as a judge ('Hall's Chronicle', 2.585), although to Sir Geoffrey Elton he was an 'expert canon lawyer' (Elton, 161). Stokesley was also a receiver of petitions from Gascony in the parliament of 1523, was given additional financial resources for use at his own discretion as almoner, and was named dean of the chapels royal in 1524. 
Stokesley was a leading supporter of Henry VIII's divorce from Katherine of Aragon, and perhaps one of the earliest. He solved the supposed contradiction over divorce between 'Leviticus' and 'Deuteronomy' by interpreting the former as 'divine law' and the latter as 'moral law', and this distinction proved useful to the king. Stokesley became the king's 'principal cause and instrument' according to the imperial ambassador, who also claimed that Stokesley 'heartily repented' his actions when Henry married Anne Boleyn ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 10, no. 752). In September 1529 he went with George Boleyn (later Viscount Rochford), as ambassador to France, to prevent the duke of Albany making alliances between Scotland and either France or the emperor, and also to stop the duke returning to Scotland. Stokesley was also to sound out Francois I on the projected conference on the question of a general council. He had been entrusted as well with the duty of informing Francois of 'the specialities and particularities' of the marriage question, and instructed to 'extende his witt and lernyng to conduce them [French scholars]' to give their support (TNA: PRO, SP 1/56, fols. 103'r'-104'r', 106'rv'). By 2 July 1530 Stokesley and his colleagues had been successful in persuading the Paris faculties of law and divinity to determine in Henry VIII's favour; the universities of Toulouse, Angers, Bourges, and Orleans would follow suit. Stokesley, together with his colleagues, then went on to Italy as ambassador to the emperor and the pope. While there he sought academic support from Italian scholars and 'recovered it [the academic mission] when it had already fallen to the ground from the hands of the legates and was thereafter despaired of and wept over' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/82, fol. 13). He and his agents visited the universities of Bologna, Padua, and Ferrara, gaining several dozen favourable determinations and subscriptions. As a result, with Edward Fox (later bishop of Hereford) and Nicholas de Burgo, he was able to produce a work entitled 'Gravissimae, atque exactissimae illustrissimarum totius Italiae et Galliae academiarum censurae' (1530) which, with several additions and alterations, was translated into English by Thomas Cranmer as 'The Determinations of the Moste Famous and Mooste Excellent Universities of Italy and France' (1531). Stokesley and Fox were probably also responsible for the influential 'Glasse of Truthe' (1532), a treatise favourable to the king's divorce, cast in the form of a dialogue between a lawyer and a divine. 
Stokesley received his reward when he was nominated as bishop of London on 28 March 1530. He was enthroned by proxy (19 July), five days after the temporalities had been restored, and was consecrated on 27 November. As bishop, his involvement with the divorce issue continued. He debated with Thomas More and John Fisher, led the issue through both parliament (March 1531) and convocation (March to April 1533), was present when Cranmer declared the Aragon marriage null and void at Dunstable, harassed opponents at Syon Abbey and the London Charterhouse, and, finally, was the first scholar approached when the king wished to dissolve his marriage to Anne Boleyn. He was also one of the most vocal supporters of the royal supremacy, advocating all the legislation which abolished papal authority, propounding conciliarist theory and the king's own supreme authority. 'No one preached the supremacy more zealously' (Elton, 161). It has often been speculated that Stokesley came to regret the role he had taken in the divorce and royal supremacy: 'Oh! that I had holden still with my brother Fisher, and not left him, when time was!', he is said to have exclaimed (BL, Harleian MS 6382, fol. 88'r'), but this is no doubt apocryphal, recorded as it is by Fisher's own, highly partial, biographer. 
Stokesley's involvement in such issues did sometimes lead him into real difficulties, however. On 31 August 1531, while trying to assess the London benefices for their share in the cost to the English clergy of a royal pardon for a collective charge of 'praemunire', he was faced by a riotous mob, which gathered at the Greyfriars Church and 'made an assault upon the Bishop's palace at [St] Paul's' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 5, no. 387). Its leaders were later tried in Star Chamber. He also took part in the dissolution of a number of monasteries, and called for the dissolution of the larger houses two years before the government decided upon this measure. Hall wrote that the 'great and fatts abbottes' had surrendered the smaller houses in the hopes of assuring the continuity of the larger ones, but that it had been said in the Lords that the smaller houses were 'as thornes, but the great abbottes were putrified olde oaks and they must nedes followe & so will do other in Christendom qt Doctor Stokesley Bishop of London or many yeres be passed' ('Hall's Chronicle', 2.819). It was Stokesley who christened Princess Elizabeth at the Greyfriars Church, Greenwich (10 September 1533), and, with Cuthbert Tunstal, wrote a remonstrance to Reginald Pole (1537) in reply to the latter's 'Pro unitatis ecclesiae defensione', a tract later published as 'Letter to Cardinal Pole' (1575). 
A religious conservative, Stokesley opposed many of the more serious doctrinal changes being proposed in the 1530s. He and Tunstal tried to 'mayntayn as many off the old usags and traditions as they myght' (BL, Cotton MS Cleo. E, v, fols. 308-9). When the so-called 'Bishops' Book' was drawn up through a number of committee and synodal meetings in 1537, debate polarized around the exchanges between Stokesley and Edward Fox. Bishop Gardiner noted 'much stoutness' between them and progress was slow: 'Bishop Stokesley would somewhat relent in the form, as Bishop Foxe did the like. And then, as it were in a mean, each part, by placing words by special marks, with a certain understanding protested, the article went forth; and so to a new article, and so from one to another.' Any contradictions were recognized as such and allowed to stand, 'as if... saved by a proviso' ('Letters', ed. Muller, 351). 
Stokesley was meticulous, moreover, in his pursuit of heretics, acting against such men as John Frith, Hugh Latimer, and William Tyndale. According to John Foxe, Stokesley boasted on his deathbed of having had over thirty heretics executed, while other contemporary accounts place the figure much higher. He also strenuously opposed the production of an English vernacular 'Bible'. A staunch defender of episcopal authority, Stokesley resisted both Cranmer's metropolitan visitation of 1534 and the royal visitation of 1535, complaining of the mishandling of patronage which had left him destitute of learned men 'having no fitting promotion for them' ('LP Henry VIII', 12/2, no. 720). But he is perhaps best remembered as an opponent of Thomas Cromwell's more grandiose reformation schemes. Although historians have exaggerated their enmity, the two men were often at loggerheads. In 1535 Stokesley preached a sermon at Paul's Cross which was much to Cromwell's liking. He asked the bishop to send a verbatim copy to the king for subsequent publication and distribution. Stokesley refused, not trusting Cromwell's integrity. He also disrupted Cromwell's patronage efforts and land exchanges, persecuted his officers, and opposed his negotiations with the German theologians. For his troubles, he was brought before the attorney-general on 29 May 1538, accused of treason and 'praemunire' infringements. He did not contest the charges, but threw himself on the king's mercy, and received a royal pardon before a trial could be convened. 
Stokesley died in London on 8 September 1539 shortly after his greatest triumph, the passing of the doctrinally reactionary 'Act of Six Articles', of which he was considered one of the chief architects. On 14 September he was 'honourably buried' in St Paul's before the altar in the lady chapel, behind the shrine of St Earconwald, under a marble slab inlaid with brass and inscribed with a Latin verse (an English version is printed by Dugdale), after what amounted to a state funeral. There exist two portraits of Stokesley. The original, by Hans Holbein, now part of the Royal Collection at Windsor, shows Stokesley (then vice-president of Magdalen) as a serious and straightforward man, in ecclesiastical robes, apparently interrupted while studying the book he holds in his hand. A copy, presented by the antiquary J. R. Bloxam, hangs in Magdalen College School. 


@@@@@


doc= 26564


Stone, Alfred (1840-1878), choir-trainer and music editor, was born in Denmark Street, Bristol, on 12 February 1840, the son of Thomas Stone, a carpenter, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Harris. He was educated at the Bristol city school (Queen Elizabeth's Hospital) and displayed an aptitude for music early in life; he took organ lessons from John Davies Corfe, organist of Bristol Cathedral. After a short time working at Messrs Thomas' Bristol soap works, he made music his profession. In 1858, when aged only eighteen, he became organist of St Paul's Church, Clifton, and was successively organist of Arley Chapel (1862), Highbury Chapel (1863-9), St Paul's once more (1869-75), Christ Church, Clifton (1875-8), and, by the mayor's appointment, the mayor's chapel, St Mark, Bristol (1873-8). The choirs he trained became highly proficient, most notably at St Paul's. 
In 1863, with Fred Morgan, Stone edited the first edition of 'The Bristol Tune Book', comprising 342 hymn tunes and chants, a few written by himself. The book quickly became popular, chiefly among nonconformists. In a third edition (1891), edited by Morgan and H. Elliot Button, the number of tunes reached 900, and it is said that more than three-quarters of a million copies were sold in England and abroad. No hymnbook apart from 'Hymns Ancient and Modern' has exercised a wider influence on congregational singing. 
In 1863-4 Stone adopted the tonic sol-fa system for teaching, although he did not completely abandon the old notation. His teaching appointments included that of master of singing at Queen Elizabeth's Hospital (1867-76), the Bristol Red Maids School (1867-78), and the Blind Asylum (1876-8). He conducted the Bristol Orpheus Glee Society (founded in 1844) from 1876 until his death, and under his direction the society flourished. In 1872 he organized and trained a male-voice choir to compete at the national music meetings which were inaugurated that year at the Crystal Palace, Sydenham, London. He won the prize ($50) that year, and the following year obtained honourable mention. In 1873 he organized the first Bristol music festival; he served as secretary, chose and trained the festival choir of 300 voices, and conducted the preliminary concerts and intermediate Festival Society concerts until his death. The chorus singing won the highest praise from critics and the choir became a permanent institution. 
Among Stone's other works were, for preparatory singing classes, an edition of 'Progressive Exercises for Elementary and Advanced Mixed Choirs', which remained in use into the twentieth century, and a series of papers, 'Hints for Elementary Teaching', in which he strongly advocated the tonic sol-fa system. His unfinished work on harmony included 'The common sense of the minor scale', which was published in the 'Tonic Sol-Fa Reporter' (August 1878). Several of his arrangements for choir appeared in 'The Choral Handbook' from 1885. He adjudicated at Welsh eisteddfodau and travelled in Germany with J. S. Curwen for the purposes of his work; he also edited the 'German Glee Book', published in Bristol by Smith & Sons. His last public appearance was at a festival concert in November 1877, when he conducted J. L. Rockel's 'Ode in Memory of Titiens'. He died at Fern Hollow, Stoke Bishop, Westbury upon Trym, Gloucestershire, on 3 January 1878, leaving a wife, Mary Jane Stone, and five children. A memorial fund of $2000 was raised on behalf of his family. 
Stone was evidently a stimulating teacher and conductor, and his energy helped to popularize music and improve musical education in the west of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 26565


Stone, Andrew (1703-1773), politician and tutor, eldest son of Andrew Stone (d. 1711), banker and goldsmith of Lombard Street, London, and Anne Holbrooke (died 1725), was born in London and baptized at St Mary Woolnoth in February 1703. George Stone, archbishop of Armagh, was his younger brother. He was educated from 1715 to 1722 on the foundation at Westminster School, where he proved an able scholar and formed a lasting friendship with his fellow pupil William Murray, the future Lord Mansfield. He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, in June 1722 and graduated BA (1726) and MA (1728). His political career began in 1732 when he was introduced by his brother-in-law, William Barnard, to the duke of Newcastle, who was greatly struck by Stone's charm and potential. Within three weeks Stone was appointed private secretary to the duke on a salary of $200 per annum. 
For the next twenty years Stone was the indefatigable aide and constant companion of Newcastle. He became virtually indispensable to the duke: he wrote his speeches, offered advice, mediated and negotiated on his behalf, and carried out political and diplomatic errands. Above all his prudence and discretion made him invaluable as the duke's trusted confidant. He was also highly favoured by George II and accompanied him to Hanover in May 1748 as his private secretary. Newcastle ensured that Stone was well rewarded: in August 1734 he was appointed under-secretary of state, which he remained until 1751, and he received an annual income of over $4000 from his many sinecures. He was MP for the Treasury borough of Hastings from 1741 to 1761. On 7 July 1743 he married at Tooting, Surrey, Hannah (1710-1782), daughter of Stephen Mauvillain and Hannah Gregory. Their only child, Thomas, was born on 6 December 1749 and died at the age of eleven on 7 February 1761. 
Stone's political influence, whether real or imagined, inevitably incited jealousy in others. To his detractors he was an intriguer and self-seeker. Horace Walpole described him as 'a cold mysterious man of little plausibility' (Walpole, 1.193-4) who was concerned primarily with ingratiating himself with those who could promote his career, such as the dowager princess of Wales. Accusations that Stone entertained Jacobite sympathies ran throughout his career and came to a head in a scandal over the prince of Wales's tutors in the winter of 1752-3. In 1751 Stone had been appointed sub-governor to the prince of Wales but the prince's governor, Lord Harcourt, and preceptor, Thomas Hayter, bishop of Norwich, were jealous of his influence and accused him and George Lewis Scott, sub-preceptor, and James Cressett, private secretary to Princess Augusta, of maintaining Jacobite connections and of attempting to instil tory principles in the young prince. George II refused to accept these accusations, and Harcourt and Hayter were obliged to resign. The opposition seized the opportunity to embarrass the Pelhams, and Lord Ravenscroft made public a story that Stone and William Murray had toasted the health of the Pretender (James Stuart) when students at Oxford. A cabinet council investigated the matter and completely vindicated the accused, and the opposition unsuccessfully attempted to prolong their campaign to the Lords. Although the historical significance of the incident was slight its historiographical importance was much greater, for 'the notion that the future George III had been indoctrinated at a tender age by a set of crypto-Jacobites fitted too well with later perceptions of his 'prerogative tendencies' to be dropped' (Langford, 222). 
Stone remained in service to the prince of Wales as sub-governor and, from 1756 to 1760, as secretary. He was appointed treasurer to Queen Charlotte on the formation of her household in 1761 and left parliament that year. When in May 1762 Newcastle was forced out of office, Stone rejected the duke's entreaties to follow him into opposition. Newcastle saw this as an unforgivable desertion and never again spoke or wrote to Stone. Although he attached himself to Lord Bute, Stone did not exercise the political influence he had enjoyed before and it was 'his wish henceforth to live a retired life' (Brooke, 484). He died at his home in the Privy Gardens, Whitehall, London, on 17 December 1773 and was buried in Westminster Abbey on Christmas eve. An apt summary of his career was provided by Joseph Welch when he wrote 'during thirty or forty years no man was more completely behind the scenes of the political stage' (Welch, 279). 


@@@@@


doc= 26566


Stone, Benjamin (fl. 1605-1643), sword maker, the son of John Stone of Arundel, Sussex, yeoman, was apprenticed to William Bell, cutler, for nine years from 2 February 1605. Sworn a freeman of the Cutlers' Company on 2 December 1613, he engaged his first apprentice the following year. Repeated offences against the rules of the company, recorded in its court minute book, suggest that he was an awkward character. From about 1628 Stone was supplying the ordnance office with swords fitted with imported blades. However, in 1630 he negotiated the lease from Lord Berkeley of a water-powered sword mill for the grinding and polishing of blades, recently constructed at East Bedfont, Middlesex, near Baber Bridge for the benefit of immigrant German bladesmiths who had come to England the previous year. Operations commenced in 1632 and the Germans were apparently later joined by English workmen. The mill is shown on Moses Glover's map of 1635, with an adjacent house marked 'Mr. Stone's'. From then on he became the chief entrepreneur of the Hounslow sword-blade industry, and until 1642 supplied new swords and refurbished old ones for the ordnance stores on a lavish scale, at times fulfilling his contract by subcontracting to other cutlers. 
In July 1636 Stone was granted a patent (no. 97) for the making of blades 'by the help of mills', but the exact details are not explained. Later in the same year he was enrolled as a member of the ordnance office in the capacity of his majesty's artificer for the manufacture of sword blades. His arrogance and persistent denigration of the work of his rivals among the London cutlers made him enemies, and in petitions addressed to the king, the privy council, and the council of war soliciting the purchase of the swords he was in a position to supply in large quantities, he asked in addition for protection from molestation, including arrest for debt, and from the hostile influence of Captain William Legge, master of the armoury. His ambition was to secure a monopoly of supplying swords to the ordnance office, in which he was opposed by other cutlers and Legge, although he had some support from Sir John Heydon, lieutenant of the ordnance. A petition from the London Cutlers to the privy council, undated but apparently 'c'.1637, made violent allegations against Stone, attempting to deny the validity of his patent, but later he was able confidently to offer to supply the ordnance stores with 1000 swords a month. On 19 January 1641 a committee was appointed at the Cutlers' court to prosecute Stone for abuses and misdemeanours, but the upshot is not recorded. Nothing is known of Stone's marriage but his son, also Benjamin, took his freedom in the Cutlers' Company on 10 October 1637. 
The serviceable quality of the blades produced at Hounslow is borne out by the well-used condition of surviving examples, some of which were reused in the following century. William Cavendish, duke of Newcastle, in an unpublished manuscript, 'The truth of the sword' (BL, Harl. MS 4206), pays tribute to them. In 1643 the parliamentary commanders Waller and Haslerig, reporting their campaigning, asked to be supplied with two hundred swords 'of Kennet's making at Hounslow'. This would have been Johannes Kinndt, one of the German bladesmiths. At the time, Hounslow blades evidently not being available, appeal was made for contributions by private owners. Stone continued in business at Hounslow until the outbreak of the civil war, but it would appear that with the passing of the area after 1642 into parliamentary hands, he and some at least of the workmen fled to Oxford, where a sword mill was set up at Wolvercote, and he may have been involved in its management. In the journal of receipts of the royal ordnance stores there is an entry, dated 19 May 1643, 'Received from Mr. Stone, blademaker, swords made clean and scabbarded 9'. The date of Stone's death is not known. 
Stone's mill was converted to the production of gunpowder, but during the interregnum the industry was carried on in the area by other hands. After the Restoration, in 1673, an attempt to revive it was made by two survivors of the original German bladesmiths and the Cutlers' Company, but seemingly without effect, and it was not until about 1685 that a new start was made at Shotley Bridge, co. Durham. 


@@@@@


doc= 26567


Stone, Edmund (1695?-1768), mathematician, was the son of a gardener of John Campbell, second duke of Argyll at Inveraray, but his parents' names are unknown. He was self-taught in mathematics, and his scientific contributions were mainly confined to translating and editing. A letter published in the 'Memoires de Trevoux' for 1736, on which all Stone's biographies are based, describes in a colourful way the stereotype encounter between the patron, Campbell, and his mathematically minded young employee. It tells how the duke found Stone reading a copy of Newton's 'Principia' and discovered that the young gardener had taught himself Latin and French in order to have access to mathematical works. It seems that the duke allowed Stone to pursue his studies and sponsored his scientific activity. Stone's knowledge of French enabled him to translate several French books, and later one of his treatises was translated into French. He thus followed the Scottish predilection for contact between French and British science. 
Stone's translations from French include a treatise on mathematical instruments by Nicolas Bion, one on perspective by 'sGravesande, one on the theory and working of ships by Henri Pitot, and the two great treatises by L'Hospital, one on conic sections, the other his 'Analyse des infiniment petits' (Paris, 1696) which was the standard textbook on Leibniz's differential calculus. Stone's translation of the latter appeared in 1730 as the first volume of 'The Method of Fluxions both Direct and Inverse'. It is a methodical treatise which includes only a few problems but considers them at a fairly advanced level. Stone's translation rendered this influential text available to the English-speaking world, and is interesting since, in converting the mathematical terms and symbols from the language of Leibniz's calculus into that of Newton's fluxional method, he also provided a manual of translation between the two systems. 
Since L'Hospital had confined his treatise to the differential calculus, in the second volume Stone provided a treatment of the integral calculus (in Newtonian terms 'the inverse method of fluxions'). While not a masterpiece, it included some tables of integrals ('forms of fluents') taken from Cotes's 'Harmonia mensurarum' (1722). It was superseded by more up-to-date treatises published in the 1730s and 1740s. In 1735 Stone's second volume was translated into French, indicating a growing interest in Newtonian science, and notably in Newton's fluxions, in France during the 1730s. 
Stone's editorial works included a revised translation in 1726 from David Gregory's original, 'Elements of Physical and Geometrical Astronomy' (1702), and a translation from Latin of Isaac Barrow's 'Lectiones geometricae' (1674) of 1735. His 'New Mathematical Dictionary' (1726) was a shorter and less expensive alternative to John Harris's 'Lexicon technicum' (1704-10) and updated a similar work by Joseph Raphson published in 1702. Stone's only original contribution was a paper on cubic curves which was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of 1740. In this paper he claimed to have discovered two cubic curves not considered by Newton and Stirling, but these two curves had already been published by Nicole and Nicolaus Bernoulli. In 1725 Stone was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, but he resigned in 1743, the year in which the duke of Argyll died. It seems that the death of his patron put an end to his scientific career. He spent his last days in poverty, and died in March 1768. 


@@@@@


doc= 26568


Stone, Edward James (1831-1897), astronomer, was born in London on 28 February 1831, the elder son of Edward Stone. A sickly child, he spent his early years living with relatives in Devon and was a dull student until his late teens, when he began to demonstrate an ability for mathematics. His family persuaded him to enrol at King's College, London, from where he secured a scholarship to Queens' College, Cambridge. Although dogged by poor health, he graduated as fifth wrangler in 1859 and proceeded MA in 1862. He held a fellowship at his college from 1859 to 1872 and was readmitted as an honorary fellow in 1875. 
Having been appointed in 1860 chief assistant at the Royal Greenwich Observatory, Stone learned the practical side of observing, but his lack of interest, coupled with his inability to withstand the rigours of night work, caused him to concentrate on theoretical astronomy. During his ten years at Greenwich he greatly improved the fundamental constants of astronomy. He was particularly concerned to find the distance of the earth from the sun, to which end he re-examined many existing measurements. From observations of the opposition of Mars in 1862 he deduced a parallax of 8.94 seconds of arc; from reworking observations made a century earlier during the 1769 transit of Venus, he now calculated the sun's distance as 91,700,000 miles, a value which agreed with that derived from the opposition of Mars. The gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society was awarded to him in 1869 for this latter calculation. He married on 12 September 1866 Grace, the daughter of John Tuckett of Ide, Devon. 
In 1870 Stone succeeded Sir Thomas Maclear as royal astronomer at the Cape of Good Hope. By ten years' hard work he produced the 'Cape Catalogue of 12,441 Stars for the Epoch 1880', for which he was awarded the Lalande prize of the Paris Academy of Sciences in 1881. He witnessed at the Cape the memorable aurora of 4 February 1872, and travelled to Nama Land to observe, with his wife's assistance, the total solar eclipse of 16 April 1874. At the Cape, too, he watched the transit of Venus on 8 December 1874, and, after returning to England on his appointment in 1879 as Radcliffe observer at Oxford, he organized the government expeditions to observe the corresponding event of 1882. In his report, presented in 1887, he carefully examined the baffling phenomena of 'contacts' and concluded for a solar parallax of 8.85 seconds of arc. In the 'Radcliffe Catalogue for 1890', published in 1894, he completed his survey of the southern skies. It gives the places of 6424 stars between the equator and -25 degree of declination. 
Stone was a fellow of the Royal Society, presided over the Royal Astronomical Society during the term 1882-4, and received the degree of doctor of science from the University of Padua in 1892. He made successful spectroscopic observations of the eclipsed sun at Novaya Zemlya on 8 August 1896, and planned an expedition to India for the eclipse of 22 January 1898. But his design was frustrated by his sudden death. He was a keen sportsman with rod and gun, and when resident in England would spend a portion of his holidays at his favourite pursuit of fly-fishing on Scottish or Irish rivers. Only a week before his death he was fishing in north Wales when his boat overturned. He righted it, but in his haste to get to shore he rowed too fast and strained his heart. Pneumonia set in on his return to Oxford, and after a few days, on 9 May 1897, at the Radcliffe Observatory, he died from cardiac failure. He was survived by his wife, a son, and three daughters. 
Despite his considerable services to exact astronomy Stone harboured a misconception regarding mean solar time, which the reiterated arguments of professors Newcomb and John Couch Adams failed to dissipate. He determined the proper motions of 406 southern stars and, approximately, the relative masses of the components of Alpha Centauri. Almost simultaneously with William Huggins, he made in 1869 an attempt to measure stellar heat. He contributed numerous papers to the Royal Astronomical Society, including a painstaking inquiry into the origin of certain errors in the tables of the sun and moon, which was completed a month before his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 26569


Stone, Francis (bap. 1738, d. 1813), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was baptized on 13 July 1738 at the Temple Church, London, the son of Arthur Stone (died 'c'.1740) of the Middle Temple and Fleet Street, London, and his wife, Susanna, second daughter of Francis Fox (1675-1738), vicar of St Mary's, Reading. His father died before Francis's third birthday, and Francis was sent to Charterhouse School, where he became captain. Having been elected scholar, he matriculated from University College, Oxford, aged sixteen, on 15 May 1755, and graduated BA in 1759 and MA in 1766. In 1760 he became curate at Crawley, Hampshire, to his mother's brother-in-law Henry Taylor (1711-1785), who was best known as the author of the 'Apology of Ben Mordecai' (1771-7); he adopted Taylor's Arian theology. In 1762, having married, he became curate of Worth, Sussex, where he formed a close friendship with neighbouring Arian clergymen William Hopkins (1706-1786) and John Bristed, rector of Slaugham. Following the teaching of Gregory Sharpe (1713-1771), Bristed taught Stone -- who had studied Hebrew with Thomas Hunt (1696-1774), regius professor of Hebrew at Oxford -- to discard the vowel-points added to the text of the Hebrew 'Bible' by the early Hebrew grammarians who compiled the 'Masorah'. On 11 May 1765, on presentation by the governors of Charterhouse, he was instituted to the rectory of Cold Norton, Essex. 
Under the pseudonym of Tyro-Theologus, in 1768 Stone published 'A short and seasonable application... in behalf of... a legal redress of... religious grievances', in which he attacked the Athanasian creed and proposed a parliamentary petition to relieve clergymen from obligatory subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. He was particularly concerned with the burden on Anglicans who had adopted the anti-trinitarian belief in the simple humanity of Jesus, as against the Arian position that Christ, though God, was created by and subordinate to the Father. Gathering force from other Anglican adherents of 'rational religion', the movement culminated in the unsuccessful Feathers tavern petition of 1772, for which Stone recruited the large number of signatories among Essex clergymen ['see also 'Feathers tavern petitioners]. 
Having adopted anti-trinitarian beliefs himself, Stone began to advocate extensive alterations in church and state. In 'A New Method of Discharging the National Debt' (1776) he called for appropriation of church property, the payment to all churchmen of a uniform annual stipend of $200, and the removal of bishops from the House of Lords, subject to a life interest for sitting members. He supported the emancipation of slaves and a thoroughgoing reform of the House of Commons. In 'An Examination of... Burke's 'Reflections'' (1792) he stoutly defended Richard Price and the French legislative assembly; his extended attack on Burke himself rose to a climax in his contemptuous (and often funny) dismissal of Burke's vision of Marie Antoinette. 
Stone's fellow clergymen often found him difficult but tolerated his views. On 8 July 1806, however, he passed acceptable limits in a sermon at Danbury during the visitation of William Gretton (1736-1813), archdeacon of Essex. Published as 'Jewish prophecy the sole criterion to distinguish between genuine and spurious Christian scripture', the sermon rejected not only the Trinity but the virgin birth. Stone's offer to devote the profits of publication, amounting to $5, to a fund for the widows of Essex clergy was rejected 'with disdain'. Brought to trial on 13 May 1808 before Sir William Scott (afterwards Lord Stowell) in the consistory court of the bishop of London, Beilby Porteus, he was deprived of his living on 20 May; an appeal to the court of arches failed. In 'A Letter to Dr. Beilby Porteus' (1807) he contended that at his ordination he had sworn only to teach doctrines clearly stated in scripture, thus superseding his earlier subscription to the wider scope of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. 
Thrown into debt by the loss of his living, worth $300 a year, Stone, as a debtor, was confined within the rules of the king's bench prison from Michaelmas 1810. The Unitarian dissenters, who were just emerging as a denomination (on a largely Presbyterian base), had followed his trial in the consistory court with great interest, but disagreed about the morality of his remaining within the established church. Some noted that he had little choice, as he was by then over seventy years of age, had married for a second time, and had eight children, one of whom had been born after 1809. The Unitarians raised a subscription, from which he was paid $100 a year. He died within the rules of the king's bench at 30 Garden Row, London Road, Southwark, on 1 November 1813. 


@@@@@


doc= 26570


Stone, Frank (1800-1859), artist, born at Manchester on 22 August 1800, was the son of a cotton spinner. Having attended school at Manchester and later at Prestbury, Cheshire, he worked in his father's firm until he turned twenty-four. At that time he retired, taking a small share in the business, whose subsequent decline straitened his income all his life. Although he never received a single art lesson, Stone then supported himself for seven years by painting oil portraits of Mancunians. In 1831 he moved to a back parlour and bedroom at 84 Newman Street, Oxford Street, London, intending to study the art of watercolour. To support himself, he provided pencil designs at 5 guineas apiece for Charles Heath's 'Book of Beauty' and other illustrated volumes, and watercolour busts at 10 guineas to art dealers and printers. On 11 February 1833 Stone was elected an associate exhibitor of the Old Watercolour Society. A few years later he moved into larger quarters in Berners Street, where he set up a studio with costumes and props. Between 1833 and 1846 he exhibited from one to three watercolours a year in the society's gallery. In 1837 Stone was represented for the first time at the Royal Academy exhibition by two portraits in oil, to which he turned, it is said, because his dealer for the watercolours was offensively vulgar. Many of these early works depicted women in exotic or sentimental situations taken from Byron, among others; Thackeray labelled them 'rococo rustics' ('Picture gossip', 'Fraser's Magazine', June 1845). More rarely, Stone attempted scenes from Sir Walter Scott and Shakespeare. In 1841 he was awarded a premium of 50 guineas by the British Institution for 'The Heart's Misgivings', and on 13 June 1842 he was elected a member of the Old Watercolour Society. Among his most popular pictures, well known through an engraving, is 'The Last Appeal'. Others with a wide circulation through engravings were the paired pictures 'Impending Mate' and 'Mated'. On 17 June 1846 Stone resigned from the watercolour society, probably because he intended to seek admission to the Royal Academy and pursue oil painting. He was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1851 and exhibited a total of forty-two pictures there, along with twenty-four at the British Institution and ten at the Suffolk Street Gallery. 
Although he had arrived in London friendless and poor, Stone nevertheless made his way into the company of leading writers and artists. By 1835 he was close to William Makepeace Thackeray, Daniel Maclise, and George Cattermole. He became the intimate friend of Dickens, having first made his acquaintance when Dickens attended meetings of the Shakespeare Club (1838-9) of which Stone was a co-founder and secretary. Dickens, Cattermole, and William Macready agreed that Stone could sometimes be a social bore, volubly opinionated on many subjects -- but they also found him a loyal friend, always ready for a walk, a dinner, or a holiday at Broadstairs. At some time married to his mistress, Elizabeth ('c'.1815-1890), with whom he had a number of children both before and after marriage, and earning a good living from his art, Stone moved in 1845 to Tavistock House, Tavistock Square. During the next dozen years he played roles, with increasing effect, in many of Dickens's theatricals, performing in London and on tour. He was, in the words of the tour's inadvertent eyewitness, Mrs Gamp (a nurse Dickens had first created in 'Martin Chuzzlewit'), 'a fine-looking, portly gentleman, with a face like a amiable full moon' (Forster, 2.353). In 1848 Stone provided designs for three illustrations to Dickens's Christmas book 'The Haunted Man': all featured the 'good spirit' of the story, Milly Swidger. Dickens liked Stone's drawings so well he commissioned the artist to design portraits of 'Tilda Price, Kate Nickleby, and Madeline Bray which were engraved by Edward Finden and published 'with the approbation' of the author for insertion as extra plates in the cheap edition of 'Nicholas Nickleby' (1848). In the following year Stone designed the wood-engraved frontispiece for the cheap edition of 'Martin Chuzzlewit'. 
When Stone moved to the adjacent Russell House in 1851, and Dickens leased Stone's former home, the friendship between the two families grew even closer. Old Tone or Pumpion (Pump), as Dickens (the Sparkler) nicknamed Stone, painted a portrait of Dickens's son Sydney in 1849 and later drew portraits of Dickens's daughters Mary and Katherine. Dickens also befriended Stone's children, Ellen ('b'. 1836?), Arthur Paul ('b'. 1838), Lilian Bertha ('b'. 1845), and especially Marcus Clayton Stone (1840-1921), who later served as Dickens's illustrator (for 'Our Mutual Friend') and flourished subsequently as a Royal Academician. During the final years Stone's work acquired more breadth and simplicity and showed less trace of drawing-room sentiment. Among his later productions were 'The Gardener's Daughter' and studies of fisherfolk at Boulogne. 
Stone died suddenly at his home, Russell House, Tavistock Square, London, of heart disease on 18 November 1859 and was buried in Highgate cemetery six days later. At the time of his death he was estranged from his wife, who survived until 2 January 1890. He left her his Royal Academy allowance and her jewellery; the remaining assets were bequeathed to his children. 


@@@@@


doc= 26571


Stone, George (1708-1764), Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh, was born on 7 January 1708 at his father's house, the Grasshopper, 68 Lombard Street, London, and baptized on 11 February at St Mary Woolnoth, the third and youngest son of Andrew Stone (d. 1711), an eminent banker, and his wife, Anne Holbrooke (died 1725). He had three sisters; his elder brother Andrew Stone (1703-1773) was later tutor to the future George III. From 1720 he was educated at Westminster School, where at thirteen he was elected a king's scholar at Whitsuntide 1721. On 2 June 1725 he obtained a Westminster studentship at Christ Church, Oxford. He graduated BA on 7 May 1729, MA on 10 May 1732, and DD (by diploma) on 20 May 1740. It was either the army or the church for Stone, and while at Oxford he took holy orders. 
On the appointment, in June 1730, of the duke of Dorset as lord lieutenant of Ireland, Stone went over to Dublin as one of his chaplains. His rise in the church was remarkably rapid. He was appointed dean of Ferns, by patent dated 22 August 1733. On 11 March 1734 he was promoted to the deanery of Derry and was installed on the following 3 April. On 3 August 1740 he was consecrated bishop of Ferns and Leighlin by the archbishop of Dublin, assisted by the bishops of Meath and Derry, in the parish church of Chapelizod, near Dublin. He took his seat in the House of Lords, for the first time, on 6 October 1741. He was translated to the bishopric of Kildare, by patent dated 19 March 1743, and in the same month was installed dean of Christ Church, Dublin. On 11 May 1745 he was translated to the bishopric of Derry, whereupon he resigned the deanery of Christ Church. He was appointed archbishop of Armagh, by patent dated 13 March 1747, and took his seat on the archbishops' bench in the Irish House of Lords on the following 6 October, but he was not enthroned until 26 September 1752. 
Stone's career within the Church of Ireland did not take precedence over his more controversial political life. He owed his rise to political and not religious figures, like the dukes of Dorset and Newcastle. Nor did he reside much in Armagh, with the exception of irregular visitations, though he was archbishop there for seventeen years. He was not an evangelical prelate but he did preach to the Charter School society three times during the 1740s. His views on Catholics are not easy to read from his correspondence or from the four printed anniversary sermons (1741, 1742, 1751, and 1760). His opposition in 1756 and 1757 to the bills that were proposed for registering Catholic clergy could be a sign of dislike of persecution or of concern about legally recognizing the priests. Similarly, with regard to Irish dissenters Stone has not left convincing evidence of his views. It might be safe to assume that he was a bishop in touch with Erastian whig ideas of the time, much more so than earlier Church of Ireland primates like archbishops William King or Hugh Boulter. Stone's political prelacy was not that unusual for Ireland, and the attacks on this new Wolsey could as easily have been made about King or Boulter. 
Stone was sworn of the Irish privy council on 10 April 1747 and on the same day was appointed a lord justice, for the first of many times, with Robert Jocelyn, Baron Newport, the lord chancellor, and Henry Boyle, speaker of the House of Commons. Though Stone had already on several occasions 'signalised himself by a most determined opposition to the Irish interest' (F. Plowden, 'An Historical Review of the State of Ireland', 1803, 1.304) he was careful not to express openly his political ambitions during the viceroyalty of Lord Harrington. A rivalry, however, soon sprang up between the young primate and Boyle, who had been for a long time one of the most powerful men in Ireland. Stone was cultivating a majority in the Irish parliament, based on the Ponsonby following, government officials, and ambitious MPs, to challenge Boyle's ascendancy. The hope was that the old speaker would quietly retire. On the reappointment of his former patron, the first duke of Dorset, as lord lieutenant in 1751 Stone allied himself with Lord George Sackville, the new chief secretary. This alliance, combined with the influence of his elder brother Andrew Stone at court in London, enabled him more effectually to contest the supremacy of his rivals in Ireland. The contest between Stone and Boyle was not merely for power but soon involved a wider constitutional question about the powers and status of the Irish House of Commons. The issue that focused minds was whether the house had or had not the right to dispose of the surplus revenues of the country. Stone supported the claim of the crown, while Boyle, who had been driven into opposition by Lord George Sackville's attempt to induce him to resign the speakership in favour of John Ponsonby, took the patriot side. In the session of 1749 heads of a bill for the appropriation of the surplus were sent over to England, but while the English ministers insisted that the surplus belonged to the crown they did not force the issue, to avoid embarrassing the viceroy, Lord Harrington. In order to establish the ministerial position Dorset, at the opening of the session in 1751, declared the royal consent to the proposed measure. The house, however, passed the bill without taking any notice of this consent. When the bill was returned from England with an alteration in the preamble signifying that the royal consent had been given the Irish parliament gave way and the bill was passed in its altered form. The struggle was renewed in the session of 1753, and the money bill was returned from England with the same alteration as before. By this time the opposition to Dorset's administration had grown stronger and the bill was rejected by the Irish House of Commons, on account of the alteration, by a majority of 122 votes against 117. Hereupon strong measures were taken by the government; Anthony Malone, Boyle, and other servants of the crown who had voted with the majority were dismissed from their places, and a portion of the surplus was by royal authority applied to the liquidation of the national debt. 
With Boyle's dismissal Stone and his Ponsonby allies took up the reins of power in early 1754. The next twelve months saw perhaps the most savage personal abuse to be aimed at a public figure in Ireland during the Georgian era. Stone became the target of vicious patriot attacks for being a representative of the 'English interest', which the patriots believed was designed to destroy Ireland and its parliament; for his political ambition, which was seen as worse than that of Laud or Wolsey; and for his alleged homosexuality. The last accusation gave the struggle between Dublin Castle and the patriots a distinctly personal edge, which often hid the constitutional and political issues involved. Worse for Stone was that by the spring of 1755 the patriots seemed to be gaining ground, despite their lack of power or government patronage. With the prospect of war with France and the death of Henry Pelham, Dorset's removal became inevitable and he was dismissed in February 1755. His replacement, William Cavendish, soon to become fourth duke of Devonshire, turned the tables on Stone. Boyle was created earl of Shannon, and several members of the opposition received places or pensions, while Stone lost his central role in the Irish government; however, though he was excluded from the regency in May 1756 he was not struck off the list of Irish privy councillors. 
Aiming to regain power Stone now entered into an alliance with John Ponsonby in opposition to the government of the duke of Bedford. The House of Commons was at this time divided into four parties, led respectively by Stone, John Ponsonby, the earl of Shannon, and the earl of Kildare. Despite his wish to favour Kildare, in the session of 1757 Bedford was to find that he could not rule through one party alone. The rump of the patriot opposition was also able to find enough willing allies among the discontented followers of Stone and Ponsonby to embarrass the government. In addition Stone had spent much of early 1757 in London and had become the architect of the Pitt-Newcastle coalition, which created the first stable ministry since 1754. Thus the primate's star was in the ascendant, and in January 1758 Bedford totally reversed his earlier plans and made Stone, Ponsonby, and Shannon his lords justices. By the end of the parliamentary session it was clear that Stone's return to government had ensured a working majority in the Commons. This continued for the next three sessions, with Stone clearly the leading undertaker of Dublin Castle's legislation. Successive viceroys after 1758 had to rely on Stone's advice about proposed legislation. He was also to become the main channel of patronage from the castle, not only in the church but in the army and judiciary as well. The secret of his success after his return to power was his total abandonment of earlier political ideas and tactics. Gone were his complaints that the Irish government was being undermined by a cabal of undertakers and that the 'English interest' needed to be reinforced. Instead Stone was a careful negotiator between Irish expectations (on economic, patronage, and constitutional issues) and what the ministry in London would tolerate. In one case, during a crisis over a money bill in December 1760, he stood on the brink of dismissal before ministers chose to side with him rather than the viceroy, Bedford. In terms of tactics Stone never sought to alienate the other Irish politicians as he had done in 1747-54. After 1758 he co-operated closely with Ponsonby and Shannon and did not even seek to marginalize his old enemy Kildare. Patronage was shared more evenly and Stone's ascendancy was more that of first among equals. 
Stone, who never married, died of gout at his brother's house in Privy Garden (now known as Whitehall Gardens), London, on 19 December 1764, aged fifty-six. After lying in state in the Jerusalem chamber he was buried in Henry VII's chapel in Westminster Abbey on 28 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 26572


Stone, Gilbert (d. 1417), ecclesiastic and letter writer, was born at Stone in Staffordshire, where he later gave the Augustinian priory a beautiful copy of the 'Catholicon' by Johannes Januensis (now BL, Burney MS 323). Probably educated at Oxford, by 1376 he was a notary public, while also being appointed chancellor and registrar first to Robert Wyville, bishop of Salisbury, and then to Ralph Erghum, successively bishop of Salisbury and of Bath and Wells. He was keeper of spiritualities during the episcopal vacancy of 1400-01 at Bath and Wells, where Richard Clifford (died 1421) was an unsuccessful candidate, and accompanied Clifford to Worcester, where he became chancellor and registrar in 1401 and vicar-general in 1402. He briefly opened a school in Oxford in 1401-2, where he probably taught business studies. Before 1389 he held the church of Tydecombe in Salisbury diocese. He held the prebend of Buckland Denham in Wells in 1394 and briefly from early 1400 that of Wedmore Secunda, and lived in a canon's house 'hard by the street known as Terre lane'. By 1400 he also held the prebend of Wilnecote in Tamworth, Staffordshire. In March 1401 he exchanged Wedmore and the deanery of the king's free chapel of Hastings (presented in August 1398) for the prebend of Eigne in Hereford. 
In March 1412 Stone became a canon of St Paul's with the prebend of Portpool, Richard Clifford now being bishop of London. In October 1414 he exchanged Eigne for the wardenship of Imber free chapel, Wiltshire, while in 1415 he was admitted as prebendary of Tytherington and Horningham in Heytesbury, Wiltshire, in exchange for Tamworth. 
Stone was admired and chiefly remembered for his letters, which were preserved as precedents and are typical of the style prized at the time by those who taught 'dictamen' (literary composition) to would-be administrators. A letter-book based on one of his survives (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 859, fols. 1-42). Several of its letters contain interesting information on relations with the Roman curia; letters both from Stone and from Erghum and Clifford, as well as from Richard II, are included. There are also references to Cardinal Adam Easton, who died in 1397 (fols. 18'v'-19, 24-5'v', the last two printed by Perroy, nos. 214A and B). The book later belonged to Edmund Lacy, bishop of Exeter (1420-55); the letters were copies of a collection originally sent to Stone's friend John Langrysh, prior of Witham Charterhouse, some of whose work is included. Other stray letters from Stone are found in BL, Harley MS 431, fols. 25'r'- 'v', 108'r'- 'v', 110'r'- 'v' (to Thomas Polton, as chancellor of Lincoln, who had shared with him service under Erghum), and 111-12. A further letter is in BL, Cotton MS Vitellius E.x, fols. 134-135'v', to an archbishop of Canterbury, containing reflections on relations between church and state. He also wrote a prayer and possibly a legend of St Gwenfrewi (Winifred). Stone had died by 1 June 1417. 


@@@@@


doc= 26573


Henry Stone (bap. 1616, d. 1653), the eldest son, baptized on 18 July 1616, was a painter as well as a sculptor. According to the epitaph on his memorial he became highly proficient in foreign languages and spent most of his life abroad in Holland, France, and Italy. It appears that by 1632 he had gone to Amsterdam and joined the family of his maternal uncle, the painter and architect Thomas de Keyser, perhaps working under him as a pupil or assistant. In April 1638 he met up with his younger brother Nicholas in Paris and accompanied him on his tour of the continent of Europe which lasted at least until July 1642. On his father's death Henry inherited most of his property and he seems to have continued the family business in sculpture with his brother John. The parish register at the time of his death, on 24 August 1653, distinguishes him by the title of 'gentleman' and he was perhaps too genteel to have done much work: little by way of either painting or sculpture can now be assigned to him. There is, however, a fine portrait of Thomas, Lord Leigh, at Stoneleigh Abbey, Warwickshire, which bears an old inscription with his surname, initial, and the date 1649. 


@@@@@


doc= 26574


Stone, Jerome (bap. 1727, d. 1756), scholar and poet, son of William Stons (died 'c'.1730) and Janet Hoggos (died 'c'.1758) of Leven, was baptized on 19 March 1727 in the parish of Scoonie in Fife. He had two brothers and a sister. When he was only three his father, a seafaring man, died abroad leaving his mother in poverty. After a basic education Stone travelled around as a chapman, often passing through St Andrews. He began by carrying small articles such as buckles and garters and progressed to selling books. Without any tutoring he learned how to read and translate both Hebrew and Greek, and assisted by the parish schoolmaster, John Turcan, he mastered Latin. Later Stone was befriended and supported by the Revd Thomas Tullidelph, professor of divinity at St Mary's College, St Andrews, and principal of St Leonard's College, a Scoonie parish heritor. In 1747 Tullidelph set in motion negotiations that led to the amalgamation of St Leonard's and St Salvator's to form a United College in the University of St Andrews. Tullidelph encouraged Stone to study at the university and arranged for him to have free access to lectures. Stone's name appears twice in the registers in the Latinized version of Hieronimus. He enrolled in the Greek class on 24 February 1748 and graduated MA on 11 June 1750. Stone was highly regarded by the professors for his wide-ranging proficiency and by his fellow students for his wit and pleasantry. Before the end of his third session the rector of the school in Dunkeld applied to the university for an assistant and Stone was recommended for the post. Two or three years later the rector transferred to Perth and by the favour of the duke of Atholl, who thought highly of him, Stone was promoted in his place. 
In his limited leisure time Stone devoted himself to further linguistic studies and to writing poetry. When his friend Andrew Angus, a librarian at the university, with whom he had lived for some time, died in 1749 at the age of eighteen, Stone wrote a commemorative poem, and in March of that year his poem on the marriage of another friend was published in the 'Scots Magazine'. Stone's manuscript folio in the University of Edinburgh Library contains a substantial number of his original poems in English as well as translations from the French of Boileau and the Italian of Tasso. In February 1755 a letter from Stone about Samuel Johnson's dictionary appeared in the 'Scots Magazine'. This was followed in June by another containing a paraphrase of a description of a May morning written by Gavin Douglas, bishop of Dunkeld, as a prologue to his translation of the twelfth book of Virgil's 'Aeneid', in which Stone found beauties 'amidst the rubbish of antiquated orthography, and an obsolete dialect' (p. 294). 
Stone's most significant contribution to the 'Scots Magazine', however, was a letter dated 15 November 1755 that appeared in January 1756. He wrote: 'Those who have any tolerable acquaintance with the 'Irish' language, must know, that there are a great number of poetical compositions in it... Several of these performances are to be met with, which for sublimity of sentiment, nervousness of expression, and high-spirited metaphors, are hardly to be equalled among the chief productions of the most cultivated nations. (pp. 15-17)' As an example he translated the Gaelic poem 'Fraoch's Death', which he entitled 'Albin and the Daughter of Mey'. This item thus appeared four years before June 1760 when James Macpherson published his volume of 'Fragments of Ancient Poetry Collected in the Highlands of Scotland and Translated from the Galic or Erse Language'. That book, extracts of which were reprinted in the 'Scots Magazine' in July 1760, led in due course, after James's publication of 'Fingal' (December 1761; dated 1762), 'Temora' (March 1763), and 'The Works of Ossian' (1765), to the controversy about the existence of the poet Ossian. 
Stone's manuscript folio contains extracts of some of his letters to John Turcan, including one subscribed 'Hieronimus Lapis'. There are also copies of a sequence of five letters to Tullidelph, beginning on 8 July 1755, that clearly demonstrate Stone's rightful claim to be among the earliest scholars of ancient Gaelic poetry. In his first letter he confirms an already communicated intention to study 'the Irish language with all the Diligence my Leisure and Disengagements from Studies of a more important concern would admit of'. He is convinced that this will enable him 'to follow the ancient Celts in their numberless Migrations, and rescue from oblivion several of the Heroic Actions of that People'. The folio contains ten lengthy specimens of ancient 'Ossianic' poetry as well as a collection of seven more modern Gaelic songs. There are six chapters of 'An enquiry into the original of the nation and language of the ancient Scots, with conjectures about the primitive state of the Celtic, and other European nations'. Finally, there are eleven pages of an item entitled 'Of the immortality of authors: a vision by Mr Stone'. 
In Stone's last letter to Tullidelph, dated 6 May 1756, he says that his mother, who has lived with him for the past four years, is now 'pretty much worn out with old age' and wants to spend the rest of her days with her friends in Fife. His 'Enquiry', with explanatory notes, quotations, and so on, will, he believes, make two octavo volumes or thereabouts. However, 'At present, to prevent useless Speculations, I keep my Designs a profound Secret from every Body here. Besides you, there is not three Persons in the World, that knows any Thing of it, further than Hints, Surmises, and the like.' Stone died of a fever, at Dunkeld, on 11 June 1756. He never married. His mother survived him, supported by an annual pension from the duchess of Atholl. 


@@@@@


doc= 26575


John Stone (bap. 1620, d. 1667), the youngest son, was baptized on 27 September 1620 and is said to have been 'brought up' at Oxford and destined for a career in the church (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.89). There is good evidence that he spent part of his career as a soldier and he is alleged to have fought on the royalist side in the civil war. By November 1652 he had become involved in the administration of his father's business and on the death of his brother Henry in the following year he appears to have taken it over entirely. In the back of his father's notebook he listed sixteen church monuments which he claimed to have made. At the restoration of the monarchy he was appointed to his father's old office of master mason at Windsor Castle though ill health seems to have prevented him from carrying out his duties. His cousin Charles Stoakes believed him to have been an 'Exelent Architectt' ('Note-book', 138). It is very likely that he designed Chesterton House in Warwickshire for which he is known to have drawn out an ornamental detail and supplied other decorative components ('c'.1655- 'c'.1662; dem. 1802). He died, unmarried, in 1667, and was also buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 11 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 26576


Stone, John Hurford (1763-1818), radical and printer, was born at Taunton, in Somerset. After losing his father in childhood, he was sent to his uncle, William Hurford, coal merchant and common councilman in London, and, with his younger brother William, he appears to have succeeded to his uncle's business. 
A Unitarian and member of Richard Price's congregation in Hackney, Middlesex, Stone became friends with Joseph Priestley and imbibed the radical political ideas associated with both men. A member of the London Revolution Society, on 29 September 1790 he presided over the reception of two delegates from the Nantes Jacobin Club, who were impressed by Stone's grasp of European languages and literature. In February 1792 he offered his services to the French diplomat Charles-Maurice de Talleyrand, who was on a mission in London to secure British neutrality in the impending European conflict. He entertained Talleyrand in his Hackney home, where the French envoy met Priestley, Charles James Fox, and Richard Brinsley Sheridan. Stone also corresponded with Jerome Petion, then mayor of Paris, and secured his support for the establishment of a sal ammoniac factory there. It was primarily for this purpose that he moved to Paris with his wife, Rachel Coope (about whom further details are unknown), arriving on 18 April 1792. He became involved with the British expatriate community and particularly Helen Maria Williams (1759-1827), whom he had probably met in the early 1780s, being a subscriber to her 'Poems' (1786) and a fellow member of metropolitan nonconformist circles. Stone applauded the French republic and, while abhorring the bloodletting of the September massacres, described them as a deterrent for counter-revolutionaries. On 18 November he presided over the British expatriates' celebrations of French military victories. He feuded with the Welsh radical David Williams. In May 1793 Stone testified for General Francisco del Miranda, who was arraigned for treason but acquitted. Meanwhile he established a printing house, the Imprimerie Anglaise, which in July produced Joel Barlow's epic, 'The Vision of Columbus'. 
With the arrest of all British subjects by the decree of 9 October, Stone was imprisoned with his wife, but they were released on 30 October because of his political principles. At liberty for most of the terror, Stone advanced 12,000 francs to secure the escape from prison of Stephanie de Genlis's husband. She later refused to honour this debt and accused Stone of stealing money and manuscripts from her. Stone was denounced as an agent of Pitt, and he and Rachel were rearrested on 24 April 1794, but freed the next day on condition that they left the country. In July he was divorced by his wife and in the same month accompanied Helen Maria Williams and Benjamin Vaughan to Switzerland, where they remained for six months. Critics speculated on the nature of Stone's relationship with Williams, though the latter subsequently maintained that Stone, also a close friend of Williams's wider family, had merely been provided with 'an asylum in his misfortunes, a thing common amidst the storms of revolution' (Kennedy, 126). Throughout this period Stone continued to write to his brother William, discussing business and politics. These letters were to be the foundation of the prosecution's unsuccessful case against William for treason in January 1796, and their incriminating nature meant that Stone could never return to Britain. After the terror he lived in Paris with Williams, who sank 40,000 francs into the printing business. In 1798 William Cobbett published an intercepted letter from Stone to Priestley, prompting the latter to repudiate Stone's desire for a French invasion of Britain. From 1795 Stone's press produced works by Thomas Paine, Thomas Jefferson, and Constantin de Volney, among others. He was ruined in 1812 by the cost of producing the thirty-volume 'Voyage de Humboldt et de Bonpland'. In 1796 Stone published his own 'Letter to Dr Priestley', in which he defended the French Revolution, and, in 1806, a defence of Unitarianism under the pseudonym Photinus. Naturalized a French citizen along with Williams in 1817, Stone died the next year in Paris, and was buried in the city's Pere Lachaise cemetery, where Williams was later interred. 


@@@@@


doc= 26577


Stone, Nicholas (1585x8-1647), sculptor, master mason, and architect, was born in Devon, probably at Woodbury near Exeter, the son of a quarryman -- possibly John Stone (died 1618). By his own account he served for two years as an apprentice and for a further year as a journeyman under the London sculptor Isaac James. It seems likely that in 1607 he met the distinguished Dutch architect and sculptor Hendrick de Keyser who was then visiting London and that de Keyser took him back to Amsterdam and employed him as a workshop assistant. While still there, on 14 May 1613, he married de Keyser's daughter Mayken 
(Mary; 1592-1647)
; in the same year the couple returned to London and settled in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, where Stone is listed as a ratepayer from 1613/14 until the end of his life. 
After he had finished his training, Stone quickly established a successful workshop in London. He received important commissions from 1614 onwards and from 1616 he was intermittently in the royal service. In 1626 he was appointed master mason and architect at Windsor Castle and in 1632 he succeeded William Cure the younger as master mason to the crown. He was much involved in the affairs of the Masons' Company of London of which he was twice warden and twice master. Eleven people were apprenticed to him under the company's auspices. 
Stone's work is chiefly recorded in two documents, both preserved in Sir John Soane's Museum, London. They are his autograph notebook which covers the years 1614-41 and an account book which was kept for his workshop from 1631 to 1642. These reveal not only what he did but when and for whom, a wealth of information which cannot remotely be matched for any other sculptor or master mason working in the England of his day. Because of this factual disparity his importance is easily exaggerated, but it is clear that by the end of the 1620s he had become England's leading sculptor in stone and marble and that by the following decade he had achieved a similar position in the building trade. He retained this pre-eminence until the end of his working life. 
Stone's busy workshop could supply whatever sculpture the market demanded in the materials he used: garden statuary, busts, and full-length figures for the interiors and exteriors of secular buildings, chimneypieces, and, above all, monuments to the dead for churches. Apart from the monuments most of this work has perished. A figure of Elizabeth I which was commissioned for the Royal Exchange in the City of London 'c'.1622 escaped the great fire because it was deemed unsuitable for its purpose and never erected (Guildhall Art Gallery, London). Of the chimneypieces all that is known to survive is an elaborate overmantel supplied to Newburgh Priory, North Riding of Yorkshire, in 1616 with a mythological bas-relief flanked by standing deities. Two ill-preserved statues at Blickling Hall, Norfolk, and a series at Wilton House, Wiltshire, which has fared rather better, testify to Stone's work as a sculptor for gardens. 
Stone's sculpture must, therefore, be judged largely by the memorials he made. These are of great variety and, at their best, of extremely high quality. He conformed to traditional types when nothing more was required of him but he was also capable of giving creative expression to his patrons' personal interests and he was highly responsive to new artistic influences from the continent of Europe. The collections of Graeco-Roman sculpture that were being imported by wealthy courtiers in the early Stuart period find an echo in the figures of the cardinal virtues from the tomb of Henry Howard, ninth earl of Northampton (1615-16; Trinity Hospital, Greenwich), and in the cross-legged, standing effigies of John and Thomas Lyttleton (1635; Magdalen College chapel, Oxford). At Chilham in Kent, Mary, Lady Digges, is commemorated by a column surmounted by an urn with allegorical figures seated at the base, a composition which is of French origin, deriving from the tomb of the heart of Anne de Montmorency by Barthelemy Prieur ('c'.1570-80; Paris, Louvre). Stone's most celebrated and influential memorial is that of John Donne in St Paul's Cathedral, London (1631-2). It shows the famous poet and divine in his graveclothes, rising from an urn at the sound of the last trumpet. This was Donne's own idea and he posed for a painting which served as a model for the effigy. 
In his capacity as a master mason Stone built the Banqueting House at the royal palace of Whitehall to Inigo Jones's designs (1619-21) and Goldsmiths' Hall in the City of London to designs of his own (1635-8). He was also his own architect for a partial rebuilding of Cornbury House, Oxfordshire (1631-3), and probably for three monumental gateways at the botanical gardens in Oxford which were undertaken at the same time for Henry Danvers, first earl of Danby, his patron at Cornbury. He remodelled the north front of Kirby Hall, Northamptonshire, for Sir Christopher (later first Lord) Hatton (1638-40; in ruins) and erected a chapel at Chilham church in Kent to contain the Digges memorial (1631-2; rebuilt). Balls Park, Hertfordshire (1638-40), and Lindsey House, Lincoln's Inn Fields in London ('c'.1640), are convincingly attributed to him. Stylistically his buildings fall midway between the learned classicism of Jones and the uncouth 'Artisan Mannerist' work of his own master mason contemporaries. 
Stone's career came to an end with the outbreak of the English civil war. Though prosperous at the close of his working life he was later 'sequestred, plundered and imprisoned', supposedly on account of his loyalty to the crown (petition submitted by his son John ['see below'] to Charles II in 1660; Stone, 28). He died at Long Acre, London, on 24 August 1647 and was buried at the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields on 28 August. His facial features are recorded in a drawing of his monumental effigy which was formerly in the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields. 
Stone had four children of whom three survived into adult life and became sculptors, although none achieved his father's distinction. 






@@@@@


doc= 26578


Nicholas Stone (bap. 1618, d. 1647), the second son, baptized on 8 September 1618, had a career which began with great promise but then faded out; like his elder brother, he died an early death. It is said, on good authority, that he learned all his father could teach him about carving marble, but that he was dissatisfied with his training 'being an ingenious youth, and desirous to learn some more art in Italy' (letter, Sir Thomas Roe to Samuel Boothouse, 29 March 1638; White, 138). In March 1638 he set off on a European tour in the course of which he was able to draw and model from the Medici art collections in Florence; later, in Rome he met the papal sculptor Gianlorenzo Bernini who discussed his own work with him and advised him on the art of drawing. All this experience appears to have gone entirely to waste, for in the few years that remained to him after he returned to England he seems to have done nothing but trade in stone. Models which he made were said to 'pass for the works of famous Italian artists' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.90). They are not known to survive, though a sketchbook which he used on his travels is extant (Sir John Soane's Museum, London). He died on 17 September 1647 and was buried three days later at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 26579


Stone, Samuel (bap. 1602?, d. 1663), Independent minister in America, was born in Hertford, the son of John Stone, freeholder, and possibly baptized at All Saints', Hertford, on 30 July 1602. Having attended Hale's Grammar School in Hertford he matriculated as a sizar at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 19 April 1620 and graduated BA in 1624. He was ordained at Peterborough in July 1626 and continued his studies under Richard Blackerby, a deprived minister, at Ashen, Essex. In 1627 he proceeded MA and was made a curate at Stisted, also in Essex, becoming part of puritan clerical society in the county. Within the next few years he married. He and his wife, who may have been called Mary, had at least one son, John. 
Having been silenced for nonconformity in 1630, in the same year Stone was recommended for a lectureship in Towcester, Northamptonshire, a preaching post funded by one Dr Wilson. His preaching evidently met with some success for the Laudian Robert Sibthorpe reported to Sir John Lambe that the congregation had 'been infected by Stoner a lecturer' ('Records of the Borough of Northampton', 2.397). Stone was accordingly suspended for nonconformity in 1633. He offered shelter to a friend, Thomas Hooker, a minister in flight from the ecclesiastical authorities, and shortly after both participated in a clerical conference in Ockley, Surrey, where they and John Cotton persuaded some other ministers to stop conforming to ceremonies they found offensive. 
All three were travelling south to board the 'Griffen', in which they set sail for New England in July 1633. After landing at Boston, Massachusetts, on 4 September, Hooker and Stone moved on to Newtown, in the same colony, where Stone was chosen as teacher to Hooker's pastor. In 1636 Hooker and Stone moved south-west with most of the inhabitants to found a new settlement on the Connecticut, named Hartford after Stone's birthplace. This took the colonists into less familiar territory and conflict arose with the Pequot peoples. The following year Stone served as a chaplain to Major John Mason's expedition against the Pequot inhabitants, and he went on to train the Pequot John Minor in his own home as a missionary and interpreter. He also worked with his later foe William Goodwin in a failed attempt to negotiate a compromise over Connecticut's differences with the sachem Sowheag. In 1640 his first wife died. The following year he married his second wife, Elizabeth Allen; the couple had five children, one boy and four girls, who outlived their father. 
Stone's primary role in Hartford was as teacher to the church, and this is reflected in his lesser publication, an unremarkable catechism which was printed twenty years after his death. He also composed a 'Whole body of divinity' which was to be transcribed by other, junior, ministers. The first systematic theology written on North American soil, it was sent to England for publication but it was never printed; one complete manuscript and three partial copies survive. Stone is better known, however, as a contributor to the transatlantic controversy on church government of the 1640s and 1650s in which Hooker had already engaged. One of the texts criticized by Hooker was by the minor English presbyterian Samuel Hudson. Hudson had responded in print, claiming that the congregational churches could not be recognized as individual ecclesiological entities, but since this response appeared after Hooker's death Stone published a painstaking reply, entitled 'A Congregational Church is a Catholike Visible Church' (1652) which defended congregational autonomy. 
Stone cannot, however, be seen as representative of a homogeneous New England way. He made considerable claims for clerical authority, most famously describing congregationalism as 'a speaking Aristocracy in the face of a silent democracy' (Mather, 3.118). This faith in the authority of the clergy was reflected in his unpublished 'Discourse against the binding persons to make a relation of the time and manner of their conversion in order to their admission into the church'. Most New England churches expected candidates to give an account of their conversion as a condition for their acceptance as members of the church. Stone's rejection of this practice extended Thomas Hooker's similar rejection touched upon in his own published work. 
Stone took this theoretical position into his practice. After Hooker's death in 1647, Stone served the Hartford church on his own and his sense of clerical autocracy eventually led to a schism within the congregation. Attempts to secure him an assistant provoked a bitter quarrel with William Goodwin, a lay ruling elder, and led to the notorious Hartford church controversy, a furore lasting from 1653 to 1659 which drew attention across the colonies. Having failed to assert his authority, Stone resigned his office. He was then reinstated but looked to reassert himself by refusing to administer communion. The conflict culminated in a considerable portion of the congregation splitting to form a new church at Hadley, Massachusetts. 
In a rather more controlled, although not trouble-free, environment, Stone participated actively in the New England synods, representing Hartford church in 1637, 1643, 1646-8, and 1657. He was an early advocate of the half-way covenant, the attempt to make the church membership more inclusive which would lessen the attention paid to church 'relations' and in turn lessen Stone's fears of lay expressions of heterodox ideas in church. Stone died at Hartford on 20 July 1663; his wife, Elizabeth, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26580


Stone, William (c.1603-1659), colonial governor, was born in England. Although his parentage is uncertain, his grandfather was Richard Stone of Croston, Lancashire, and an uncle, son of Richard, was Thomas Stone, haberdasher of London and a major figure in the tobacco trade. William arrived on the lower eastern shore of Virginia before 1629, probably to act as his uncle's agent. He established himself quickly, becoming a justice of the Accomack county court (1633-48), sheriff of the county (1634, 1640, 1646), vestryman for the first parish in Accomack in 1635, and burgess for Accomack to the Virginia assembly in 1642. By 1635 he had married Verlinda (died 1675), daughter of Captain Thomas Graves, one of the early developers of Virginia, and a fellow justice and vestryman as well as neighbour. They had six children together: sons Thomas, John, and Matthew, and daughters Elizabeth, Mary, and Catherine. 
In 1648 Cecil Calvert, second Baron Baltimore, the Maryland proprietor, prevailed on Stone to become governor of Maryland. Maryland was still recovering from the ravages of Captain Richard Ingle's raid of early 1645, a ramification of the English civil war. Governor Leonard Calvert had had to flee to Virginia and had not regained control of the colony until the very end of 1646. A few months later he had died, a disastrous event, but one that gave the proprietor an opportunity to obtain a protestant governor, who might be able to stabilize the province. 
Stone had some early success. Lord Baltimore, always seeking new settlers and in need of increased protestant leadership, had been negotiating with dissenting congregations on the lower James River in Virginia for them to move to Maryland. Stone helped persuade about fifty families to leave Virginia in 1649 and 1650. To safeguard liberty of conscience in religion, which from the beginning had been policy but not written into a law that might raise eyebrows in England, Baltimore wrote the 'Act of Religion', commonly referred to as the 'Maryland Act of Toleration'. This, under Stone's guidance, the Maryland assembly passed in 1649, just in time to greet the newcomers from Virginia. 
Stone's troubles began about 1652, when parliamentary commissioners arrived empowered to enforce parliamentary rule in Virginia, which in the English civil wars had supported the king. The commissioners extended their jurisdiction to Maryland, and insisted that Stone and his council rule in the name of 'The Keepers of the Liberties of England'. An outraged Baltimore insisted that at all costs the Maryland government be carried on in his name. 
Matters came to a head in 1654, when the parliamentary commissioners dismissed Stone and his council and gave their governmental powers to leaders of the Virginia emigres, by this time well established in Anne Arundel county. The new government called an assembly from which Catholics were excluded and which denied Catholics the right to hold office. Stone's response was to raise an army, and in March 1655 he and his men appeared at the new centre of government on the Severn River to demand surrender. They suffered an ignominious defeat. The victors executed three of Stone's leaders and he barely escaped the same fate. 
In 1657 Baltimore regained his government through skilful political manoeuvrings in England. He did not reappoint Stone as governor, but retained him on the council, where he was active until 9 October 1659. On 3 December he signed his will, which was recorded on 4 January 1660. His estate in personalty, inventoried but not valued, included thirteen servants and two African slaves, while his lands came to more than 5000 acres -- a large fortune for the time and place. He died, shortly after signing his will, at his home, Poynton Manor, in Charles county, Maryland. 


@@@@@


doc= 26581


Stonehewer, Richard (1727/8-1809), friend of Thomas Gray, was baptized on 12 June 1728 at Houghton-le-Spring, co. Durham, where his father, Richard Stonehewer (1692/3-1769), was rector from 1727 to 1769. After a rudimentary education at the Kepier grammar school in Houghton parish, he was admitted pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 4 November 1745, aged seventeen, and obtained a scholarship on 2 May 1747. He soon became known to Gray, probably through the introduction of Thomas Wharton MD, of Old Park, near Durham, the poet's lifelong friend. Stonehewer graduated BA in 1750, being eighth wrangler in the mathematical tripos, was elected a fellow of Peterhouse on 29 October 1751, and proceeded MA in 1753. While residing on his fellowship in Cambridge he was the tutor of Augustus Henry Fitzroy, third duke of Grafton (1735-1811). When the duke entered politics Stonehewer became his private secretary, and remained a close friend throughout his life. In April 1761 and until June 1763 he was 'interpreter of oriental languages'. On 19 July 1765 Stonehewer was the duke's under-secretary of state for the northern department, and on 28 June 1766 he became under-secretary for the southern department to the duke of Richmond. Through the duke of Grafton he obtained for Gray the professorship of modern history and languages at Cambridge, and was himself made permanent auditor of the excise. 
In 1768 Stonehewer was living at Queen Street, Mayfair, Westminster, where William Mason (1724-1797) paid him a visit, and he afterwards lived at 14 Curzon Street, a house nearly opposite the chapel. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 17 May 1787. Gray called him in 1769 his 'best friend', and left him $500 in his will. William Burke deemed him 'a gentleman of great worth, extreme good understanding, and of the politest manners' ('Calendar of the Home Office', 22 April 1766). He was friendly with Horace Walpole, and in 1773 made a trip to the English lakes with Mason. In May 1782 Stonehewer was 'very ill of the influenza', but he lived to a good old age; he died on 30 January 1809, aged eighty-one. 
The manuscripts which Gray left, together with his library, to Mason, were left by Mason to Stonehewer, who bequeathed to Pembroke College, Cambridge, Gray's commonplace books and holograph copies of most of his poems. The correspondence of Gray and Mason, published by John Mitford in 1853, was left by Mason to Stonehewer, and passed from him to his relative Mr Bright of Skeffington Hall, Leicestershire. So did a part of Gray's library, the subsequent fate of which is described by Austin Dobson in 'Eighteenth-Century Vignettes' (1892, 138). Stonehewer presented a manuscript by Gray on Aristophanes to T. J. Mathias. Letters to him are in Edmund Gosse's edition of Gray's 'Works' (2.277-9, 373-5; 3.46-8, 342, 351). 


@@@@@


doc= 26582


Stonhouse, Sir James, seventh and tenth baronet (1716-1795), physician and cleric, was born on 9 July 1716 at Tubney, near Abingdon, Berkshire, the elder son of Richard Stonhouse (died 'c'.1725), and his wife, Carolina, from whom James inherited an estate worth about $200 per annum. He was admitted to Merchant Taylors' School in 1722 and went on to Winchester College. He matriculated from St John's College, Oxford, on 15 January 1733, and graduated BA in 1736 and MA in 1739. He also paid a large sum to study medicine in London under the anatomist Frank Nicholls. Stonhouse spent two years training at St Thomas's Hospital and spent another two years abroad, in Paris, Lyons, Montpellier, and Marseilles. 
On his return Stonhouse practised as a physician for a year in Coventry, where on 20 May 1742 he married Anne (died 1747), eldest daughter of John Neale of Allesley, MP for Coventry. Oxford awarded him his BM in 1742 and his DM in 1746. Stonhouse moved to Northampton in April 1743 where he initiated the founding of the county infirmary. He compiled the statutes, rules, and orders for its government, modelling them on those of Winchester's hospital, and he acted as an honorary physician-in-ordinary to the infirmary until February 1757 when the pressure of professional engagements obliged him to resign. He continued to act as consulting physician. His success at Northampton was such that Mark Akenside's exertions to establish himself as a physician in the town between June 1744 and the winter of 1745 proved fruitless. Akenside withdrew to Hampstead taking with him an introduction from Stonhouse. 
In his earlier years Stonhouse had been 'extremely licentious both in principles and practice'. A confirmed infidel, he had been hostile to Christianity and had published a pamphlet against it which had passed through two editions; soon after coming to Northampton, however, his close friendship with Philip Doddridge and James Hervey led to his conversion. According to one account the change followed Stonhouse's hearing of a funeral sermon which Doddridge preached on one of Stonhouse's patients. Doddridge's sermons on 'the evidence of the gospel' and the 'rise and progress of religion in the soul' helped to persuade him further in the matter. Stonhouse's wife, Anne, died aged twenty-five at Northampton on 1 December 1747, leaving two sons. Her death was a cause for reflection and letters on her loss suggest that her death completed her husband's conversion. 
Following these events Stonhouse published several small religious tracts. Those written while a practising physician in Northampton were particularly influential. His 'Friendly Letter to a Patient, Just Admitted into an Infirmary' (1748), 'Friendly Advice to a Patient' (1748), and 'Spiritual Directions for the Uninstructed' (1748) give practical and moral advice to the sick poor. These all contain a set of plain and comprehensive prayers and give directions for the daily conduct of a Christian life. Purchased by the governors of the Northampton Infirmary and several other infirmaries for distribution to in- and out-patients on their admission, these tracts went through several editions and were long included in the 'Religious Tracts' of the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge. 
Stonhouse also considered taking orders in the Anglican church, and in October 1748 Doddridge, without his knowledge, wrote to Lord Chancellor Hardwicke asking for some preferment for him should he do so. The chancellor replied politely, but declined to give any pledge. By this time Stonhouse had come to know George Whitefield, but was afraid of being branded as a Methodist. Nevertheless, one account holds that he ultimately took orders as a clergyman on Whitefield's advice (Stanford, 113). Stonhouse continued to practise as a physician in Northampton and married Sarah Ekins (died 1788), to whom Doddridge was guardian, on 18 November 1754. An only child, she was heir of the estate of Thomas Ekins, of Chester on the Water, near Wellingborough, Northamptonshire. In 1758 Stonhouse attended James Hervey in his last illness. His own health being impaired, he resigned his infirmary position in 1763 and moved to Bristol for the sake of the waters. The same year he was ordained deacon by the bishop of Hereford in Hereford Cathedral, and priest by letters demissory to the bishop of Bristol in Bristol Cathedral. 
In May 1764 Stonhouse was appointed by Lord Radnor to the rectory of Little Cheverell, near Devizes, Wiltshire, which he held from December 1779 with the adjoining rectory of Great Cheverell. He also compiled the statutes and rules for the government of the Salisbury Infirmary (1766), of which Lord Radnor was president, and preached a sermon, 'St Paul's Exhortation, and Motive to Support the Weak, or Sick-Poor', before the governors of the Salisbury Infirmary (1771). His exhortations and devotional tracts, 'Admonitions Against Drunkenness, Swearing and Sabbath-Breaking' (1769), 'Prayers for the Use of Private Persons, Families, Children and Servants' (1773), 'The Religious Instruction of Children Recommended' (1774), and 'The most Important Truths and Duties of Christianity' (1778), went through several editions and were also widely disseminated by the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge. He was the author of 'Hints from a Minister to his Curate, for the Management of his Parish' (1774), 'Every Man's Assistant, and the Sick Man's Friend' (1788), and 'Materials for Talking Familiarly with Children of All Ranks, on the Subject of Religion' (1795). Most of Stonhouse's tracts were republished as a collected work by his son, Revd T. Stonhouse-Vigor in 1822. Two volumes of letters from Job Orton and from Stonhouse to Revd Thomas Steadman were published in 1800, and Stonhouse contributed to the life and letters of James Hervey. 
For many years lecturer of All Saints' Church, Bristol, Stonhouse spent most of the year at his house at Hotwells, Bristol. His second wife died of consumption on 10 December 1788 at Hotwells, leaving two sons and a daughter. Stonhouse moved to Hotwells permanently in 1789 and continued until the year of his death to minister occasionally at Bath and Bristol. He was once reproved by Garrick for his indecent haste while ministering in church, but Samuel Curwen praised his 'discourse serious and sensible' (Curwen, 154); 'His eloquence was simple, grand and energetic', and Richard Polwhele admired the 'fine inflexion of a voice distinct and sweet' ('GM', 1st ser., 65, 1795, 1076). A generous benefactor and supporter of many public charities, Stonhouse was also egotistical and fond of flattery. He succeeded a cousin, Sir James Stonhouse, as seventh and tenth baronet on 13 April 1792. He died at his home at Hotwells, Bristol, on 8 December 1795 after a brief illness, and was buried in the Dowry Chapel (later the church of St Andrew-the-Less) in the same grave as Sarah, his second wife. A friend, Hannah More, wrote metrical epitaphs on Stonhouse and his second wife, and a monument was inscribed to his memory in All Saints' Church, Northampton. 


@@@@@


doc= 26583


Stonor, Sir John (c.1281-1354), justice, was the eldest son of Richard Stonor, a prosperous freeholder of Stonor, Oxfordshire. Trained as a lawyer, he was called to the bar of the common bench as a serjeant-at-law in 1311 and his rapid promotion shows his outstanding ability, even though he lived in a time of unprecedented opportunities for lay lawyers as the clerical monopoly relaxed. In 1315 he was made a king's serjeant, one of the first group so appointed on a regular basis, and on 16 October 1320 he was appointed one of the justices of the common pleas. He kept the office until 1329 except for the period from July 1323 to 3 May 1324 when he served as a justice of the king's bench, as part of a determined campaign to assert the rule of law. As a justice he was knighted; his title is first found in 1324. 
In 1329 Stonor was made chief baron of the exchequer on 22 February and chief justice of common pleas on 3 September, but on 2 March 1331 he was removed from the chief justiceship and appointed second justice on 1 April following. This was perhaps part of Edward III's policy of replacing earlier officers once he began his personal rule, though there is no evidence that Stonor was ever involved in politics. On 7 July 1335 he was reappointed chief justice. Stonor was among those removed from office on 30 November 1340 in a purge of the administration, and for a time he was imprisoned in the Tower of London and at Nottingham Castle. But he was restored to office on 9 May 1342 and remained chief justice until 22 February 1354, when he retired owing to weakness, though he remained on the king's council until his death. 
Almost the whole of Stonor's career was at the common bench at Westminster (at York in 1327-9 and 1334-6), but he had many extra commissions, mainly in the south and midlands. These included oyer and terminer, gaol delivery, and special inquiries into such matters as the disturbances at Bury St Edmunds and Abingdon Abbey in 1327 and at Oxford in 1335; the misconduct of officials in 1323 and 1331-4; and the trial of rebels in 1323, 1327, and 1331. A review of the trial of Otto Grandson for misgovernment of the Channel Islands in 1319 and diplomatic missions to France in 1324 and Spain in 1325 were among Stonor's overseas commissions. 
In 1335 the priory of Christ Church, Canterbury, was engaged in litigation and the prior, seeking 'a great man to maintain our right', suggested Stonor as seneschal since he was 'prudent, well known and beloved among the great' (Sheppard, 2.85-7). Stonor declined, though he had been legal adviser to the priory for many years, and suggested another. This incident demonstrates both Stonor's reputation and the widespread practice among landowners of retaining, on a long term, both advocates and judges, which constituted an important source of lawyers' incomes. Among others who retained him were the Black Prince and John Droxford, bishop of Bath and Wells. It is likely that such patrons facilitated Stonor's education and that of his brothers. 
Stonor acquired valuable lands in nine counties, mainly in southern England, and properties in London and Westminster. In 1349 he had licence to endow a college of priests and built a wing adjoining his chapel at Stonor to accommodate them. He was a patron of the convent at Little Marlow, near Stonor, where his two sisters and his daughter were nuns. His wife, whom he had married by 'c'.1314, was Maud or Matilda (most probably Fitzlewis, but possibly Bevill or Lisle). They had six sons and five daughters. Stonor died on 24 or 31 August 1354 (or possibly on 9 September 1354). In the abbey church of Dorchester in Oxfordshire is the effigy of a judge bearing the Stonor arms, almost certainly John Stonor; it may indicate that he was buried there. His eldest son, also John Stonor ['see under 'Stonor family], inherited. At the end of the twentieth century the family still continued at Stonor in the male line. 


@@@@@


doc= 26584


Stopes, Leonard (d. c.1608), Roman Catholic priest, is of unknown parentage. He may have been a member of the Stopes family of Much Hadham, Hertfordshire, and a brother of James Stopes, whose son James was the rector of St Mary Magdalene, Old Fish Street, London, from 1577 to 1624. He is very likely to have had some kind of London connection, since in 1555 he was chosen as one of the original scholars of St John's College, Oxford, which took thirty-seven of its first fifty students from London, drawing heavily from the Merchant Taylors' School. He graduated BA on 23 October 1558 and proceeded MA on 21 March 1559; he was described as a 'priest' in 1559 (Stevenson and Salter, 327). In February 1559 the founder of St John's, Sir Thomas White, presented Stopes to the vicarage of Northmoor, Oxfordshire, but, apparently refusing to conform to the new protestant order, he had resigned from that living, or perhaps been ejected, by 9 July. He escaped to France with another Catholic priest, Ralph Windon, and joined the English College at Douai. Windon and Stopes were later sent back to England as missionaries, but were arrested and imprisoned at Wisbech Castle, Cambridgeshire, where they are recorded as inmates in 1595. Stopes was eventually released and exiled to France. He died there about 1608. 
While at Oxford, Stopes wrote 'Haile Mary, full of grace', a poem of twenty-four verses in praise of Mary I, printed as a broadside in 'An Ave Maria in Commendation of our most Vertuous Queene' by Richard Lant in 1553. Lant was imprisoned in 1559 for printing 'An Epitaph on the Death of Queen Mary', another broadside, which Stopes may also have written. The surviving copies of both broadsides are in the library of the Society of Antiquaries, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 26585


Stopes, Richard (c.1480-1546), abbot of Meaux, was, as a Cistercian monk, ordained subdeacon at York on 4 April 1500 and priest on 23 March 1504. He was subsequently sent to St Bernard's College, Oxford, where he graduated BTh on 7 December 1521 after ten years of study. He was elected abbot of Meaux in Yorkshire in November 1523. He seems to have enjoyed good relations with local lay society, serving on commissions to take depositions of witnesses in Star Chamber cases, and supervising or witnessing several wills from the Beverley area. A member of the Meaux community joined the doctors and learned men, who, in December 1536, assembled at Pontefract during the Pilgrimage of Grace, while after the failure of the Lincolnshire rebellion a monk from the recently suppressed Louth Park Abbey visited Meaux, but Stopes seems to have kept his house from any serious involvement in the rebellion. This, however, brought only a short reprieve and as early as January 1538 Cromwell received a petition to purchase the abbey. The dissolution took place on 11 December 1539, and Stopes gained a pension of $40. He can almost certainly be identified with Richard Stopes, priest, who died at Skerne in the East Riding, in 1546. This cleric asked to be buried in the choir of the parish church leaving for masses for his soul $6 6's'. 8died previously lent to Sir Richard Butler, possibly the former monk of Meaux of that name. Stopes bequeathed $20 and bedding to Sir Robert Stopes, chests and their contents to other relatives, and the residue of his goods to his sister, Janet Tippinge. 


@@@@@


doc= 26586


Stopford, James (c.1697-1759), Church of Ireland bishop of Cloyne, was born in London, the son of Joseph Stopford, army officer. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1710, became a scholar in 1713, and graduated BA in 1715. On 25 March 1717 he was elected a fellow of Trinity, and proceeded MA in the following year. In 1727 he resigned his fellowship on being appointed vicar of Finglas, near Dublin, by Lord Carteret, the lord lieutenant. On 16 December of the same year he married Anne, second daughter of James Stopford of Tara Hill, co. Meath, and sister of James, first earl of Courtown; among the couple's children were three sons, William, James, and Joseph. On 11 July 1730 Stopford was installed provost of Tuam, co. Galway, on 10 July 1736 he was collated archdeacon of Killaloe, and on 8 January 1748 he was instituted dean of Kilmacduagh. He held these preferments until February 1753, when he was appointed bishop of Cloyne. 
Stopford was a close friend of Jonathan Swift, who on one occasion described him as 'the most valuable young man of this kingdom' ('Correspondence', 3.22). Swift assisted in Stopford's promotion within the church and appointed him one of his executors, bequeathing him a Van Dyck portrait of Charles I, which Stopford himself had originally given to Swift. Stopford died on 23 August 1759 and was buried at St Anne's Church, Dublin, where a tablet to his memory was erected on the outside of the church's south wall. 


@@@@@


doc= 26587


Stopford, Joshua (1635/6-1675), Church of England clergyman, came from Lancashire; his parents' names are as yet unknown. He was admitted as a plebeian at Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1654, aged eighteen; he was awarded a Nowell scholarship on 25 November and matriculated on 25 July 1655. He migrated to Magdalen College as clerk the following year. He graduated BA on 23 February 1658, and was created MA in April and BD in May 1670. At some time Stopford married. Nothing is known of his wife other than that she was named Elizabeth. They are known to have had at least nine children, five daughters and four sons, baptized between December 1661 and October 1675, of whom at least three died in early childhood. The eldest known, Katherine, baptized in Manchester in December 1661, died aged sixteen and was buried in York in April 1678. Their last child was baptized a mere fortnight before Stopford's death. 
On 29 June 1658 Stopford was appointed morning lecturer at the parish church in Manchester; three months later, on 23 September, he was ordained by the Manchester classis. However, he conformed at the Restoration and held the prebend of Dunnington in York Minster between November 1660 and late 1663. He appears to have continued preaching in Manchester until September 1662 when he and his wife finally left Manchester. He was presented with the living of Kirkby Stephen in Westmorland in 1663 and at the same time he appears as rector of All Saints' Pavement in York. Some time between 1663 and 1667 he was also appointed vicar of St Martin's, Coney Street, York. 
Stopford published two anti-Catholic treatises: 'The Ways and Methods of Rome's Advancement: Two Sermons Preached on 5 November 1671' (1675), in which he warned against Catholic false doctrine, and 'Pagano-Papismus' (1675), in which he drew parallels between the Catholic church and pre-Christian or pagan practices in religion. Both works contain extensive bibliographies of the works he cited as evidence in support of his theories. 
Stopford died in York on 3 November 1675. He was buried in the chancel of St Martin's Church in Coney Street on 5 November. Nothing further is known of his wife and surviving children. No will appears to have survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 26588


Stopford, Sir Robert (1768-1847), naval officer, third son of James Stopford, second earl of Courtown (died 1810), and his wife, Mary (died 1810), daughter and coheir of Richard Powys of Hintlesham Hall, Suffolk, was born at Richmond, Surrey, on 5 February 1768. After attending Eton College, he entered the navy in May 1780 on board the 'Prince George', the flagship of Vice-Admiral George Darby; he was in her at the relief of Gibraltar in April 1781 and took part in the battle of the Saints on 12 April 1782. In December, Stopford was moved into the 'Aigle', and afterwards into the 'Atalanta' and 'Hermione'. He was promoted lieutenant on 15 July 1785, and, after serving on the Newfoundland station and in the Mediterranean, was made commander on 2 June 1789. On 12 August 1790 he was promoted captain and posted to the 'Fame', from which he was, a few months later, moved to the 'Lowestoft', and from her to the frigate 'Aquilon', in which he remained for three years. At the action of 1 June 1794 he took in tow the 'Marlborough', which was then disabled and in a critical situation. From July 1794 to July 1799 he commanded the 'Phaeton' (38 guns), which played an important part in the retreat of Admiral William Cornwallis on 16 and 17 June 1795. The 'Phaeton' continued in the Bay of Biscay, where she captured many privateers and small vessels of war. In July 1799 Stopford was appointed to the 'Excellent', which formed part of the Grand Fleet under Lord Gardner; in 1802 he was sent to the West Indies under the orders of Rear-Admiral Totty; he remained there, as senior officer, to transfer the French and Dutch settlements in accordance with the peace of Amiens. 
Early in 1803 Stopford was obliged by ill health to return to England. Some months later he was appointed to the 'Spencer', which throughout 1804 was one of the fleet off Brest or detached off Ferrol, and, having joined Nelson in the Mediterranean, he took part in the chase to the West Indies. The 'Spencer' was afterwards one of the fleet with Nelson off Cadiz, but was detached with Rear-Admiral Thomas Louis a few days before the battle of Trafalgar. She then went to the West Indies with Sir John Thomas Duckworth, and took a brilliant part in the battle of San Domingo on 6 February 1806, for which Stopford received the gold medal. Shortly after this he returned to England, and was MP for Ipswich (1806-7). Still in the 'Spencer' in November he went out to the Rio de la Plata with Rear-Admiral Charles Stirling, and on his return to England in July 1807 joined the expedition against Copenhagen under the command of Admiral James Gambier. At this time, with other senior captains, he protested against a junior's being appointed over his head captain of the fleet. On 28 April 1808 he was promoted rear-admiral and appointed to command the blockading squadron off Rochefort, with his flag in the 'Spencer' and afterwards in the 'Caesar'. He engaged the French batteries and frigates, several of which he drove ashore and destroyed. In April 1809 he was joined by the main fleet under Lord Gambier off the Basque Roads, and witnessed Lord Cochrane's attack on the French shipping and the unsatisfactory results of Gambier's failure to provide support. 
On 29 June 1809 Stopford married Mary (died 4 June 1866), daughter of Captain Robert Fanshawe, commissioner of the navy at Portsmouth; they had three sons and five daughters. The marriage tied Stopford into a large tory naval family which included Thomas Byam Martin. 
In the autumn of 1810 Stopford went out as commander-in-chief at the Cape of Good Hope with instructions to capture Mauritius, which, however, had fallen before his arrival. In August 1811, on the news of the death of Vice-Admiral Drury, he left his station to take command of the expedition against Java, where, in co-operation with the army, he gained a complete success. The extraordinary step of leaving his station to take the command in another excited the indignation of the superseded officer, William Robert Broughton, who applied for a court-martial on Stopford; this was refused by the Admiralty, which approved Stopford's conduct. After the conquest of Java, Stopford returned to his own station. On 12 August 1812 he was promoted vice-admiral, and shortly afterwards returned to England. He was nominated a KCB on 2 January 1815, and became admiral on 27 May 1825, a GCB on 6 June 1831, and a GCMG on 10 May 1837. From April 1827 to April 1830 he was commander-in-chief at Portsmouth. In 1834 he was appointed rear-admiral of the United Kingdom. 
In 1837 he went out to the Mediterranean as commander-in-chief, with his flag in the 'Princess Charlotte', filling the fleet with his sons and nephews. He was still there when the British government decided actively to support the sultan against his rebellious subject Mehmet Ali of Egypt. In August 1840 Stopford was instructed to demand, and if necessary to enforce, the restoration of the Turkish ships that had been treacherously delivered to Mehmet Ali by the capitan pasha. 
The situation was complex, with France supporting Mehmet Ali to increase her power in the Mediterranean. Stopford, unaware of the wider political implications, favoured Mehmet Ali. The foreign secretary, Lord Palmerston, wanted to remove Mehemet from Syria by cutting his supply lines before mid-November, when the weather made operations on the coast too hazardous; by moving rapidly he could avert the danger of war with France. Both as a tory and as an elderly and cautious officer, Stopford was unsuited to command in this complicated situation, which was little short of war. Palmerston chose to work through his second in command, Commodore Charles Napier, a personal and political ally. Irritated by Stopford's slow proceedings, Palmerston famously dismissed him as 'a superannuated twaddler' (Minto MSS). Napier captured Sidon, defeated the Egyptian army, and forced it to evacuate Beirut before Stopford received orders to attack Acre, which he did successfully on 3 November. Napier then negotiated a convention with Mehmet Ali, settling the crisis as Palmerston required, but ignoring Stopford. 
Palmerston refused to countenance a peerage, but the thanks of both houses of parliament were voted to Stopford and the fleet and Stopford received also the freedom of the City of London, a sword of honour from the sultan, and honours from Austria, Prussia, and Russia; in addition he was able to promote many of his relatives. On 1 May 1841 he became governor of the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, a post that he held until his death, at Richmond, Surrey, on 25 June 1847. An officer of real ability, Stopford had an outstanding career in the French Revolutionary War and the Napoleonic wars, but by 1840 he was simply too old and politically suspect to be an effective commander-in-chief. 


@@@@@


doc= 26589


Storace, Ann Selina (1765-1817), singer, was born on 27 October 1765 in London, the second and last child of Stefano (Anglicized to Stephen) Storace (died 1783?) and his wife, Elizabeth (1739?-1821), the daughter of John Trusler of Bath and London. Her father was an Italian musician from a village near Naples, who had emigrated to England by 1747, and who worked in Bristol and Dublin before settling in London. There he played the double bass for the Italian Opera at the King's Theatre. For several seasons he also worked at John Trusler's Marylebone Pleasure Gardens during the summers, where he met his wife. Nancy Storace (as Ann was commonly called, though she signed herself Anna) had one brother, Stephen Storace, a composer. Their name was often spelt Storache, for the sake of indicating its pronunciation. 
Instructed in music by her father, Nancy quickly proved a gifted singer, and made her first public appearance in Southampton in 1773. She became a pupil of Antonio Sacchini and Venanzio Rauzzini. In 1777 she sang in Hereford and Brighton, and in London at Covent Garden, and had a benefit concert at the Ancient Music Concert Room in Tottenham Street (later the Scala Theatre) on 27 April 1778. This financed a trip for herself and her parents to Naples, where Stephen was studying. According to the singer Michael Kelly (1764-1826), who became a family friend, she sang in oratorios given during Lent at the San Carlo Theatre. The family then went to Florence, where she and her brother performed at the opera, she singing, he at the harpsichord. Kelly describes the circumstances (probably apocryphal) that brought her fame: 'Bianchi had composed the celebrated cavatina, 'Sembianza amabile del mio bel sole', which Marchesi [a famous castrato] sung with most ravishing taste; in one passage he ran up a voletta of semitone octaves, the last note of which he gave with such exquisite power and strength, that it was ever after called 'La bomba di Marchesi'! Immediately after this song, Storace had to sing one.... She attempted [a bomba of her own], and executed it, to the admiration and astonishment of the audience, but to the dismay of poor Marchesi. (Kelly, 1.97)' When Marchesi issued an ultimatum, Campigli, the manager, had to dismiss his soprano. After staying in Florence from 1779 to 1781, she went on to sing in Lucca, Leghorn (where she first met Kelly), Parma, Milan (La Scala, 1782), and Venice. About 1783 her father died. She and Kelly were engaged as members of Emperor Joseph II's new 'opera buffa' company in Vienna. In her four years as 'prima buffa' she sang roles created for her by Salieri, Paisiello, Martin y Soler, and her brother, and was the original Susanna in Mozart's 'Le nozze di Figaro'. Franz Kazinczy noted in his autobiography of her performance as Susanna: 'Storace, the beautiful singer, enchanted eye, ear and soul!' (quoted in O. E. Deutsch, 'Mozart: a Documentary Biography', 1965, 276). Mozart became a friend and wrote several works for her. She contracted a brief and disastrous marriage with John Abraham Fisher (1744-1806), from whom, after undergoing brutal treatment, she separated in 1784. The emperor ordered Fisher to leave Vienna. 
After returning to London in 1787, Nancy and Stephen joined the Italian opera company at the King's Theatre, making their debuts on 24 March, she as Gelinda in Paisiello's 'Gli schiavi per amore', he as musical director. She sang at the King's Theatre for more than two years, but followed Stephen to Drury Lane after the King's Theatre burnt down in the summer of 1789. She first appeared at Drury Lane on 24 November 1789, playing Adela in 'The Haunted Tower', an English opera by Stephen. For the next six years Nancy was the principal comic singer at Drury Lane. Her brother wrote leading roles for her, including Lilla in 'The Siege of Belgrade' (1791), Fabulina in 'The Pirates' (1792), and Elinor in 'The Cherokee' (1794), and parts in several shorter works, notably Margaretta in the popular 'No Song, No Supper' (1790). She was the highest-paid singer at Drury Lane, averaging 10 guineas a performance. She sang at several of the annual Handel festivals in Westminster Abbey, and also performed in festivals in Salisbury, Oxford, and Hereford. 
After Stephen Storace died in March 1796, Nancy and Michael Kelly completed his last opera, 'Mahmoud', which was staged several times, including at a benefit performance on 25 May 1796, whose receipts were given to Stephen's widow, Mary, and their son. At Drury Lane (or possibly at Bath) the same year Nancy Storace met John Braham (1777?-1856), with whom she sang. They lived as man and wife for almost twenty years, and in 1802 had a son, Spencer. In 1797 Storace and Braham went to Paris, where they gave a series of concerts, and remained there for eight months. They arrived in Italy in 1798 and sang in two operas in Florence before going to Milan and Genoa. Avoiding war-torn Naples, they travelled to Leghorn and Venice, then by Trieste, Vienna, and Hamburg, home to England, where they arrived in the winter of 1801. They both then joined the Covent Garden company, and performed there together until 1805, when they returned to Drury Lane. Nancy remained there until her retirement, singing leading roles in operas by many of the composers and arrangers then active, including Braham and Kelly, and in occasional revivals of works by Stephen Storace and others. She continued to perform in provincial festivals, notably at Salisbury and Oxford. 
On 30 May 1808 Storace took a benefit at which she delivered a 'Farewell Address in Music' to words by George Colman, and appeared as Floretta in 'The Cabinet'. She then retired to Herne Hill Cottage, near Dulwich, her country home since 1805. She and Braham separated acrimoniously in 1816. Storace died on 24 August 1817 and was buried at St Mary's, Lambeth, on 2 September. In her will, dated 10 August 1797, twenty years earlier, she left legacies amounting to about $11,000, including $1000 each to the Old Musical Fund and the New Musical Fund. Several of the personal bequests were out of date by 1817. Her son, Spencer, who was not born when she made her will, was not mentioned, but his father, from whom she was estranged at her death, received $2000. Braham later transferred the money to his son. Other beneficiaries, including her nephew Brinsley and his mother, Mary, had predeceased her. Her estate was probated at under $50,000. 
Storace's voice was sometimes described as harsh, and suited better to big spaces than small. A vivacious stage personality compensated for her lack of physical beauty (she was short and plump). At her best she was a polished singer and an admirable comic actress. 


@@@@@


doc= 26590


Storace, Stephen John Seymour (1762-1796), composer, was born on 4 April 1762 in London, the elder child of Stefano Storace (died 1783?), double bass player, and his wife, Elizabeth (1739?-1821), daughter of John Trusler, the owner of Marylebone Pleasure Gardens, and sister of the clergyman and author John Trusler (1735-1820). Stefano Storace was an Italian violinist from a village near Naples, who arrived in Bristol in 1747, moved to Dublin, and then in the 1750s settled in London, where he played the double bass for the Italian opera company during the regular theatre season and worked for John Trusler at the Marylebone Pleasure Gardens in the summer. He Anglicized his first name soon after he arrived in Britain. He married Trusler's daughter Elizabeth on 16 June 1761 at St James's, Piccadilly. Stephen was born the following year, his sister Ann Selina Storace (better known as Nancy or Anna) in 1765. Both children were taught music by their father and by 1773, when Richard Brinsley Sheridan and his new wife, Elizabeth Linley, stayed with the Storaces, Stephen was already an accomplished violinist. 
In the late 1770s Storace was sent to study violin and composition at the San Onofrio conservatory in Naples, under the care of an uncle who was a local bishop. The painter Thomas Jones portrayed Storace in his diary as 'a giddy, thoughtless young fellow' (Jones, 83) who was more interested in sketching expeditions than his studies. In 1779 Storace left San Onofrio and travelled with his family while Nancy pursued her career as an operatic soprano. He played second harpsichord in Bianchi's opera 'Castore e Polluce' in Florence that year, and seems to have lost interest in the violin. He was however beginning to compose, and the words of a cantata entitled 'Orfeo negli Elisi' by 'Stefano Storace Inglese' were published in Lucca in 1781. 
Stephen and Nancy met the young Irish tenor Michael Kelly in Leghorn. Kelly described them in his memoirs of 1826 as 'the warmest and most attached of all my friends' (Kelly, 1.95). In 1783 Nancy and Kelly became members of the emperor Joseph II's 'opera buffa' company at the Burgtheater in Vienna. Nancy was chaperoned by her mother, her father apparently having died in Italy. Stephen returned to London where he published several songs and chamber works and taught singing and harpsichord. He was soon commissioned to write an 'opera buffa' for the Burgtheater, probably through Nancy's influence with Joseph II. 'Gli sposi malcontenti' was first performed in 1785 and was followed by 'Gli equivoci' in 1786. Storace met both Haydn and Mozart in Vienna, but there is no evidence that he became Mozart's pupil. They remained in contact after Storace finally returned to England. 
On 20 February 1787 Storace was arrested for rowdy behaviour at a dance; he described the events in a letter to a friend from gaol. He was released two days later and on 24 February the Storace family, Michael Kelly, Thomas Attwood, and Lord Barnard set out for England. They visited Mozart's father in Salzburg and arrived in London on 18 March. Stephen immediately began work at the King's Theatre in London where he arranged and directed Italian operas. He also edited 'Storace's Collection of Original Harpsichord Music' (1787-9) and built up his teaching clientele. In 1788 he joined the Royal Society of Musicians, composed an unsuccessful 'opera buffa', and successfully sued the music publishers Longman and Broderip for illegally publishing his aria 'Care Donne'. On 23 August 1788 he married Mary Hall (died 1801x17), daughter of John Hall, historical engraver to the king. They had one surviving child, Brinsley John (1788/9-1807). 
Tired of intrigues at the King's Theatre, Storace moved to the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, at the beginning of the 1788-9 season. He soon became house composer in all but name, composing a total of sixteen English operas with spoken dialogue and acting as music director until his death eight years later. Michael Kelly was already the leading tenor there and Nancy Storace joined them in 1789. 
Storace normally composed two operas each season, often combining original and borrowed material. He worked mainly with two writers, Prince Hoare and James Cobb. His afterpiece operas were conventionally light-hearted; his full-length mainpiece operas became increasingly Italianate in their integration of drama and music. Most were successful and many were revived several times. His first two mainpieces, 'The Haunted Tower' (1789) and 'The Siege of Belgrade' (1791) were immensely popular. Later works such as 'The Pirates' (1792) and 'The Cherokee' (1794) are more exciting musically but suffer from weak dialogue. His most popular afterpieces include 'No Song, No Supper' (1790), 'The Prize' (1793), and 'My Grandmother' (1793). 'No Song, No Supper' is the only English opera by Storace to survive in full score; the others exist only in reduced keyboard arrangements. 
Storace led the life of a reputable London musician. He played in charity performances, entertained Haydn to dinner on 3 June 1792, became friends with John Philip Kemble who was the acting manager at Drury Lane, and acquired Thomas Attwood as his assistant. In 1793 and 1794, while the theatre at Drury Lane was being rebuilt, Storace and Kelly were joint directors of the Italian opera company. His income was probably derived more regularly from his publications than from the theatre, which was often in arrears with his benefit money. By the early 1790s Storace had found a reliable music publisher for his operas in Joseph Dale. 
Few contemporaries commented directly on Storace's character. The amateur musician John Marsh thought him arrogant as a young man when he 'spoke rather sneeringly' of a composition by Marsh ('John Marsh Journals', 330). An obituary in 'The Oracle' described him as a blunt but 'friendly, upright man' whose 'opinion might be relied on for its value and sincerity' and whose 'mind was strong, keen and vigorous -- his habits of living uniformly temperate' ('The Oracle', 17 March 1796). His only known portrait is an engraving in the edition of his last two works, 'The Iron Chest' and 'Mahmoud', published posthumously for his widow in 1797. 
Storace became ill while rehearsals for 'The Iron Chest' (1796) were in progress. A newspaper report described him as dying of 'gout and fever' so bad that he was blinded ('True Briton', 14 March 1796). He died on 15 or 16 March 1796 and was buried in Marylebone church. On 21 March, Kemble, in a rare outburst of emotion, wrote: 'This Day I followed Stephen Storace to his Grave -- I shudder'd to hear the Earth and pebbles rattle on his Coffin! -- I hope never to go into Marybone Church again. I will endeavour to live better -- He was only thirty four! -- One may die tonight. (Kemble, 21 March 1796)' 



@@@@@


doc= 26591


Storer, Anthony Morris (1746-1799), politician and collector, was born on 12 March 1746, the eldest of two sons and two daughters of Thomas S. Storer (1717-1793), West Indies planter, and Helen, daughter of Colonel James Guthrie. He was educated at Eton College (1754 to 1764), the Middle Temple (1762), and Corpus Christi College, Cambridge (1764). His contemporaries at Eton included Charles James Fox, Lord Carlisle, William Eden, and Lord Fitzwilliam. At a time when one in ten Etonians reached the House of Commons, it was within this peer group that Storer pursued his career. He became connected with the macaronis, the fashionable young men of the late 1760s and early 1770s, alongside Fox, Carlisle, and James Hare. 
Storer remained central to the fashionable London beau monde, a renowned dancer and skater who 'led the dancing world at balls and assemblies'. As a socialite he was 'polite in his conversation, elegant in his manner, and amusing in a high degree' ('GM', 69/2). Lord Glenbervie commented he was 'considered to be a successful friend to many of the more fashionable ladies of that day' ('Diaries of Sylvester Douglas', 2.349). 
Unlike many of his fellow Etonians, Storer did not follow Fox politically. As he lacked the advantages of noble birth and political talent, he was dependent on benefactors for advancement. Lord Carlisle became his patron, and found parliamentary seats for him at Carlisle (1774-80) and Morpeth (1780-84). Though privately close to Fox, Storer adopted the position of Carlisle and his confidant George Selwyn as a court follower. He supported North's government from 1774, just as Fox went into opposition. Alongside Eden he assisted Carlisle on his official conciliatory mission to America in 1778. Publicly a devoted acolyte of North and his American measures, Storer appeared increasingly unenthusiastic in private, particularly when these seemed to threaten his West Indian interests. He had some 'compassion' for the American rebels, and after the defeat at Yorktown he said of Fox's speech 'he convinced me... there surely must be some change or alteration in administration' ('Carlisle MSS', 318, 542). 
Much of this impatience with administration no doubt was due to personal frustration. Storer's Jamaican source of income all but dried up with the economic distress caused by a hurricane compounded by government's American policies. Horace Walpole reported 'the Storers are totally undone' and Anthony was forced to call upon Carlisle's influence, and North's favour, to apply for a place at the Board of Trade (Walpole, 'Corr.', 33.266). The ever indolent North took seven months to confer this position on 18 July 1781 and until the end of the year to grant his patent, before which he received no payment. Storer felt 'a spark of anger at his treatment', but he nevertheless voted with his ministry on all the key opposition attacks in 1781-2. Selwyn was surprised at his 'tranquillity' during the parliamentary crisis, even after North's fall ('Carlisle MSS', 477, 546). Indeed, Storer lost his place under Burke's 'Civil List Bill'. 
Storer had some reason to remain sanguine. He appears to have acted as intermediary in discussions between Fox and North during both men's opposition to Shelburne's ministry. When the Fox-North coalition came to power in 1783, Storer was appointed secretary of the embassy at Paris on 21 September, and on 13 December was made minister-plenipotentiary. However, Storer had backed the wrong horse: the coalition fell only days later. Moreover, he had irrevocably offended the ever loyalist Carlisle, as he himself realized; 'this dissolution will certainly set me adrift' ('Journal and Correspondence of... Auckland', 1.76). He was not re-elected for Morpeth in 1784, and never regained a place in parliament. His long-time relationship with Carlisle was at an end -- no more letters passed between them. A reluctant speaker, though 'an excellent attender', he made one major speech for the ministry in November 1775, which gained 'no great commendations... but no abuse' ('Carlisle MSS', 308, 306). He never spoke again. Selwyn despaired:'Why won't he attempt to say something? What signifies knowing what Cicero said, and how he said it, if a man cannot open his mouth to deliver one sentiment of his own?' (ibid., 316). Yet it was this love of classical knowledge and literature which became Storer's consuming passion. Storer was an avid collector of books and prints. Walpole, whose collection of prints and portraits he viewed, was surprised at his 'being turned antiquary; the last patina I should have thought a Macaroni would have taken' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 35.359). Though he gambled -- like most of his contemporaries -- collecting was his major vice. 
For a while Storer's financial position restricted his passion for collecting. In 1781 he reassured Carlisle that he had 'not had a book bound, nor spent a guinea in prints, the whole year', and that 'the lion you dread, and are afraid of awakening is perfectly at rest' ('Carlisle MSS', 488-9). After his father's death in 1793, his fortune was assured, and he could fully indulge his enthusiasm. He was already a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries (1777), and in 1781 he joined the Society of Dilettanti. So noted was he in collecting and dealing circles that he appeared in Sandby's 'Sketches Taken at Print Sales' in 1798. He amassed some 2800 books as well as prints (many by Joshua Reynolds) which he bequeathed to Eton College Library. The collection contains thirty-four incunabula, including three Caxtons and five of the Aldine incunabula. There are numerous first editions of Greek and Latin classics, Italian literature, and early English plays. There are 388 quartos of the last, as well as the first three folios of Shakespeare. A recent keeper at Eton called the collection 'the crowning glory' of the library (Quarrie, 44). 
Storer bought Purley Magnor in Berkshire, worth $5000 annually, with his inheritance. He laid out Purley Park with Humphry Repton, and left $12,000-$15,000 for reconstructing the mansion. He remained unmarried, and died on 28 June 1799 at Hotwells, Bristol, after a 'deep decline' and years of poor health ('DNB'). He left property worth $8000 annually to his nephew Anthony Gilbert, and bequeathed $1000 to James Hare. He was buried on 7 July 1799 at St Mary the Virgin, Purley-on-Thames, Berkshire, commemorated by a monument by Nollekens. Sylvester Douglas, who knew Storer better than most in his final years, described him as 'ugly, active, graceful'. He was 'of no distinction himself by birth, connections, office or any transcendent parts or talents. But, in society, when he chose, he was somewhat above par, and he made himself agreeable by showing his best side to Lord North' ('Diaries of Sylvester Douglas', 2.349). 


@@@@@


doc= 26592


Henry Sargant Storer (1796-1837), born in Clerkenwell on 13 February 1796, was baptized at Spa Fields on 6 March 1796, and educated at High Wycombe (probably at the grammar school). He produced with his father 'The Cathedrals of Great Britain' (1814-19), pronounced by Pugin to be the most accurate views of those buildings in existence, 'Delineations of Fountains Abbey' (1820), a work of great excellence, 'Views in Edinburgh and its Vicinity' (1820), 'The University and City of Oxford Displayed' (1821), 'Delineations of Gloucestershire' (1824), and 'The Portfolio: a Collection of Engravings from Antiquarian, Architectural, and Topographical Subjects' (1823-4). The letterpress of some of these works is believed to have been written by the elder Storer. He and his father also engraved the plates to Thomas Kitson Cromwell's 'History of Clerkenwell' (1828) and 'Walks through Islington' (1835) and other similar publications. They issued several sets of views of the town and university of Cambridge, the latest being 'Collegiorum portae apud Cantabrigiam'. Henry Storer engraved, independently of his father, the plates to Pierce Egan's 'Walks through Bath' (1819) and a view of Christ's College for the 'Cambridge Almanack' (1822). He exhibited drawings at the Royal Academy from 1814 to 1836. He died, unmarried, in London on 8 January 1837 and was buried at St James's Chapel, Pentonville. 


@@@@@


doc= 26593


Storer, James Sargant (1771-1853), draughtsman and engraver, was born in Clerkenwell, London, on 28 December 1771, the second child and eldest son in the family of at least three daughters and six sons (some of whom did not survive infancy) of Robert Storer (1746-1833), who belonged to his family's firm of watch and clock makers in Berkeley Court, Clerkenwell, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Sargant. He devoted himself to the production of works on topography and architecture, the plates in which, drawn and engraved by himself on a small scale, were distinguished for extreme accuracy and beauty of finish. For some years he was associated with John Greig, another topographical artist, in collaboration with whom he published 'Cowper Illustrated by a Series of Views' (1803), 'Views in North Britain Illustrative of the Works of Burns' (1805), 'Views Illustrative of the Works of Robert Bloomfield' (1806), 'Select Views of London and its Environs' (1804-5), 'The Antiquarian and Topographical Cabinet' (1807-11), and 'Ancient Reliques' (1812). He was one of the artists employed to illustrate J. Britton and E. W. Brayley's 'Beauties of England and Wales' (1801-16). From 1814 he worked wholly in conjunction with his eldest son ['see below'], whom he outlived. In religion, James Storer was, like other members of the family, an adherent of Lady Huntingdon's Connexion. On 4 February 1795 he married Mary, 'nee' Coe (1775/6-1824), with whom he had at least eleven children (eight sons and three daughters), all of whom were baptized at the connexion's Spa Fields Chapel in Clerkenwell. He lived with his family for some time in Cambridge but died at his house at Islington, London, on 23 December 1853, and was buried beside his son at St James's Chapel, Pentonville. His wife predeceased him. A watercolour by him of St David's Cathedral is in the National Gallery of Wales. 
Storer's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 26594


Storer, Thomas (c.1571-1604), poet, was the son of John Storer, a citizen of London. He entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1587, graduating BA on 27 March 1591 and MA on 13 May 1604. 
Wood writes that, while at Oxford, Storer 'was held in great renown for his most excellent vein in poesy', and contributed 'verses printed in several books made occasionally by members of the University' (Wood, 'Ath Oxon.', 750-51). Among Storer's occasional poems can be numbered a prefatory poem to William Vaughan's 'Golden Grove' (1600), and some Latin epigrams in the 1603 collection 'Academiae Oxoniensis pietas', devoted, like the rest of the volume, to celebrating the accession of King James. Wood adds that Storer also published some 'Pastoral Aires and Madrigals' (ibid.), which 'were afterwards remitted into a book called ''England's Helicon''' (ibid.), but as Thomas Seccombe noted, this appears to be a mistake ('DNB'). While Storer's work does not appear in 'England's Helicon' (1600), about twenty extracts from his poem 'The Life and Death of Thomas Wolsey' were used by the anthologist Robert Allott in 'England's Parnassus' (1600). 

'The Life and Death of Thomas Wolsey, Cardinall... by Thomas Storer, Student of Christ Church in Oxford' is the work by which Storer is known. It was published in 1599, and consists of three parts all in rhyme royal stanzas, subtitled 'Wolseius aspirans', 'Wolseius triumphans', and 'Wolseius moriens'. Throughout the poem, Wolsey's ghost tells the story of his own rise and fall, in a manner which superficially resembles Thomas Churchyard's poem on the same theme in the 1587 edition of the 'Mirror for Magistrates'. 
Something of Storer's intellectual milieu can be seen from the volume's links with other writers. Among those who wrote commendatory verses for it were Charles Fitzgeffrey, Edward and Thomas Michelborne, and John Sprint, a Christ Church colleague. The volume is dedicated to John Howson, the queen's chaplain. Storer seems to have regarded the earl of Northumberland as either a current or a prospective patron, to judge from the lavish praise of him introduced into the narrative (ll. 905-17). Among those who admired the poem are Storer's colleague Alberic Gentilis ('Laudes academiae Perusinae et Oxoniensis', 1605, 41). 
According to Wood, Storer died in London in November 1604, and was buried in the church of St Michael Bassishaw. This cannot be confirmed from the registers, which rather puzzlingly record the death of a Thomas Storer, son of John, on 4 January 1599 (Clark, 165). Clearly, in the light of Storer's later works, this cannot be the poet. 


@@@@@


doc= 26595


Storks, Sir Henry Knight (1811-1874), army officer, was born in London, the eldest son of Serjeant Henry Storks (1778-1866), a county court judge, and his wife, Mary, daughter and coheir of Thomas Trundle. He was educated at Charterhouse School. He was commissioned ensign in the 61st foot on 10 January 1828, and became lieutenant on 2 March 1832. On 23 March he exchanged into the 14th foot, in which he became captain on 30 October 1835, and from which he exchanged on 30 May 1836 into the 38th foot. He served with the regiment in the Ionian Islands, obtained his majority on 7 August 1840, and went on half pay from the regiment on 23 May 1845. He was employed as assistant adjutant-general at the Cape during the Cape Frontier War of 1846-7, and was assistant military secretary at Mauritius from 1849 to 1854. He was given an unattached lieutenant-colonelcy on 15 September 1848, and became colonel on 28 November 1854. He married, in 1841, the daughter of Cav. Giuseppe Nizzoli of Milan; she died in 1848. 
During the Crimean War, Storks was in charge of the British establishments in Turkey, from the Bosphorus to Smyrna, and received the local rank of major-general on 23 November 1855. He superintended the final British withdrawal from Turkey at the end of the war, and was then employed at the War Office as secretary for military correspondence from 1857 to 1859. He obtained one of the rewards for distinguished service on 25 September 1856, and was made KCB on 2 January 1857. 
In February 1859 Storks became the last high commissioner of the Ionian Islands (taking over from W. E. Gladstone). The British protectorate was resigned by treaty in November 1863, and the islands united with Greece. Shortly before this Storks had made changes in the judicial bench, following complaints against the two Ionian judges. Their two English colleagues took their part, and acrimonious correspondence followed, but Storks's action was upheld by the Colonial Office. He received the GCMG in 1860, and was promoted major-general on 12 November 1862. On 1 July 1864 he received the GCB. 
Storks was made governor of Malta on 15 November 1864, but at the end of 1865 Cardwell, the colonial secretary, sent him to Jamaica to replace the governor, E. J. Eyre, and serve as a member of a royal commission on the recent disturbances in Jamaica and their suppression, which had aroused much controversy in Britain. The other commissioners were two distinguished lawyers, Russell Gurney and J. B. Maule. The commission investigated, then submitted its report in April 1866. A 'masterly and notably impartial document' (Morrell, 418), it stated that the rising had been a real danger and that Eyre had responded effectively to it, but that the punishments had been excessive. 
Storks gave up the governorship of Jamaica on 16 July 1866, and was rewarded with a privy councillorship in November. On 19 December 1867 he was appointed controller-in-chief and under-secretary at the War Office. The control department, of which he was the head, was formed at that time, at the suggestion of Lord Strathnairn's committee, to give unity to the administration of army transport and supply, hitherto dealt with by several separate branches. But the amalgamation of the branches caused resentment: the new department encroached on the field of the quartermaster-general, and the title 'controller' (i.e. of army expenditure) was open to misinterpretation and was unpopular. The department did not last many years. There was disagreement on whether the charge of 'warlike stores' should be committed to the new department. Eventually it was decided, in 1870, that the stores should be entrusted to a sub-department under the director of artillery, who (with the director of supplies and transport) should be subordinate to the surveyor-general of the ordnance -- an old title revived, the functions of which were fixed by order in council of 23 June 1870. Storks exchanged the controllership-in-chief for this new office, which he held until his death. 
One object of the change was to afford more support to the secretary of state for war in parliament. Storks therefore in November 1870 contested, as a government candidate, the Colchester by-election. The campaign for the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', led by Josephine Butler and others, attempted to put pressure on the government by challenging government candidates at by-elections. They targeted Storks, largely because he had implemented a regulation system at Malta, strongly supported the acts, and favoured their extension to soldiers' wives. The repealers' intervention resulted in Liberal abstentions and a Conservative victory. However, Storks became Liberal MP for Ripon in February 1871, and assisted Cardwell in the prolonged debates on the abolition of purchase of commissions. He was one of Cardwell's staunchest supporters in his attempt to reform the War Office. 
Storks became lieutenant-general on 25 October 1871, and lost his seat at the 1874 election. Not a brilliant speaker or writer, he was a competent administrator, tactful and devoted to the public service. He died on 6 September 1874 at 43 Queen's Road, Finchley Road, London, and was buried on 15 September at Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26596


Story, Edward (d. 1503), bishop of Chichester, was a native of the diocese of York. He was admitted to Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he was a fellow by 1446 and treasurer in 1446, 1448, and 1450. MA by 1447 and DTh by 1460, he was elected master of Michaelhouse in 1466, and continued in that office until 1474. He was chancellor of the university in 1468-9 and again from 1471 to 1473. 
Between March and April 1444 Story had advanced through the minor orders at speed, but he was only admitted to his first known benefice, the rectory of All Hallows, London, on 9 February 1460, and had only added a prebend in Crediton collegiate church, Devon, by the time of his episcopal promotion. At the end of 1464, according to Gregory's chronicle, he entered into a controversy raging in London after certain friars had revived emphasis on Christ as beggar. At Paul's Cross, Story 'as moche as he myght, wolde have passefyde the mater, and sayde that hys [was] blasphemy soo to reherse and say by oure Lord Cryste' (Gairdner, 'Historical Collections', 229). This did not cool passions at all. Not long afterwards Story became confessor to Queen Elizabeth Woodville, with an annuity from Easter 1468 of at least $10 p.a. during pleasure. 
Story was promoted by papal provision to the bishopric of Carlisle on 18 July 1468. He received the temporalities on 1 September and was consecrated in St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster, on 2 October. He appears to have taken his diocesan duties seriously, holding synods and conducting visitations, but having to use the prior of the cathedral as his vicar-general, for he was still often absent. These absences were probably at least partly due to his appointment to commissions of the peace in counties far removed from the north-west -- Cambridgeshire, Gloucestershire, Shropshire, and Worcestershire. However, when Edward IV was in York in March 1470, having put the earl of Warwick and duke of Clarence to flight, it was Story who passed on the king's orders to the mayor of Carlisle to seize the castle out of Neville hands. 
Story used his connections with the royal family to the advantage of the city and diocese. He served on the council to govern England while Edward IV conducted his French expedition in 1475 and he remained confessor to Queen Elizabeth Woodville. Perhaps it was partly for greater convenience that on 11 February 1478 he was translated to the slightly more lucrative and certainly more congenial see of Chichester. His attachment to the court meant that he was only occasionally resident in his diocese at first. On 17 April 1483 he helped officiate in the prolonged funeral rites of Edward IV, and evidently remained in and around the capital during the difficult months that followed. However, on 28 July he is to be found in his diocese and there he remained, mainly at Aldingbourne, disenchanted presumably with the usurpation of Richard III, but not known to have been involved in the rebellion in the southern counties that autumn. His patron, the queen, remained in sanctuary. Even after 1485 he does not seem to have returned to any duties that required his extended absence. He arranged the attachment of a prebend to the free school at Chichester, henceforth known as the prebendal school, and erected a market cross in the city. 
By his will Story left a set of vestments of white satin to Pembroke College and 20's'. to Michaelhouse, and requested burial in the tomb he had prepared on the north side of the altar of Chichester Cathedral. He died on 16 March 1503. His register for Chichester is in the West Sussex Record Office, but his Carlisle register is lost. 


