@@@@@


doc= 26597


Story, George Warter (c.1664-1721), historian and dean of Limerick, was born probably in Burgh by Sands, Cumberland, the eldest son of Thomas Story (1630?-1721?), of Justice Town, near Carlisle, and his first wife, Thomasin Constable (died 1674/5). Thomas Story (1670?-1742), the Quaker, was one of his younger brothers. In 1668 George was chaplain to the countess dowager of Carlisle at Castle Howard. He was in London when the army for Ireland was being raised in March and April 1689, and he accompanied Meinhard, duke of Schomberg, in August as chaplain to Sir Thomas Gower's regiment of foot. Gower died early in 1690, and Henry, third earl of Drogheda, succeeded him as commander. Story was an admirer and apologist of Schomberg, who was much criticized for his unwillingness to risk raw troops in a pitched battle and for the number of men lost by disease. 
Story was at the battle of the Boyne and served with Lord Drogheda while the war lasted. A younger brother, who was ensign in the same regiment, was killed near Birr in June 1691. After the surrender of Limerick in November 1691 Story's regiment went to Ulster, 'the poor men enduring a great deal of hunger and hardship in so long a march' (Story, 'A Continuation', 285), and when the war ended they remained in the northern province as part of the standing army. 
In December 1694 Story was appointed dean of Connor, and in 1704 he advanced to the deanery of Limerick. He had retained a living and owned a modest estate in England, both of which obliged him regularly to absent himself from his Irish cures. In 1691 he published a compendious 'Impartial History of the most Material Occurrences in the Kingdom of Ireland', which was completed early in 1693 with a separate 'Continuation', dedicated to William III. These volumes had the merits of an eyewitness to the recent fighting, and contain much valuable detail on the military engagements and the costs -- both human and financial -- of the Williamite war. They use a framework derived from earlier apologists of the English interest in Ireland, such as Spenser and Davies, and never enjoyed the influence of William King's 'State of the Protestants'. Nevertheless, in his awareness of the continuing influx of Scots and of the cupidity of protestant landowners in preferring to set lands to Irish Catholic tenants for higher rents, and in his recognition that the Irish had no realistic alternative to rule by England, Story offered shrewd insights. Prophetic too was his belief that protestant evangelization, not penal laws, would win the indigenous population to the English interest. He returned to these themes when he preached in London to the Irish lord lieutenant and 'the protestant gentlemen of Ireland' on 23 October 1714. He warned of the disaffection of some Irish Catholics and reminded his audience how much Ireland owed to English support. Topically he counselled that party strife be stilled and that all protestants rally to George I. Soon afterwards he returned to Limerick. By June 1716, when he entertained his brother Thomas at his home in Limerick he had married Catherine Warter, daughter and coheir of Edward Warter of Bilboa, near Doon, co. Limerick, whose name he added to his own. The Warter estate had been burned by some of Sarsfield's men, and they estimated that they had lost over $13,000 as a result of the war. Story died on 19 November 1721 and left his family's Justice Town estate to his widow, who sold it to her brother-in-law Thomas Story in 1723. 


@@@@@


doc= 26598


Story, John (1503/4?-1571), civil lawyer and martyr, was probably born in 1503 or 1504, in Salisbury, Wiltshire, the son of Nicholas Story (died in or before 1552), and his wife, Joan (died in or before 1552). He was perhaps connected to the Story family of Northumberland and co. Durham, an association confirmed by his relationship with Richard Norton, who took a namesake into exile after the northern uprising of 1569. His father was wealthy enough to provide him with a good education but the family was not sufficiently established to play a leading role in the affairs of the city. 
Story may have been educated at the cathedral school in Salisbury. He was at Hinksey Hall, Oxford, from about 1530 to 1533, possibly earlier. He graduated BCL in 1531 and DCL in 1538, and was admitted as an advocate to Doctors' Commons the following year. He was a brilliant scholar and was appointed regius lecturer (1535) and professor of civil law ('c'.1541) at Oxford. This was confirmed for life in 1546 as a reward for his assistance to the lord marshal during the Boulogne campaign. His annual salary was $40 by 1541. He was principal of Broadgates Hall, Oxford, which specialized in law, from 1537 to 1539. 
A hostile account associated Story's departure from Oxford with a spell in the university prison, the Bocardo, when he attacked Nicholas Brierton, who was 'utterly without weapon', out of jealousy over a woman, and 'ran him thorowe both sydes, & lefte him for dead' ('Declaration', sig. A3). He certainly had a hot temper but this account is conveniently defamatory and was written shortly after his execution. According to John Ponet the woman in question may have been Margaret Bowyer of Oxford. At all events, by 1549 Story had married Joan Watts (died in or after 1582). The couple had a daughter, Ellen, a son, John, and reportedly three other children. A more obvious reason for his departure from Broadgates Hall was his appointment as commissary-general to Edmund Bonner, bishop of London. He presided over a lower court than that of the bishop's chancellor. Robert Weston, who had been his deputy, replaced him at Broadgates Hall. 
Story was first elected to parliament for the borough of Salisbury in 1545, apparently after pressure from John Capon (Salcot), bishop of Salisbury. In 1547 he was elected for Hindon, Wiltshire, one of the boroughs of Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester. Story's religious conservatism suited Gardiner -- in his will of 1552 Story regretted having taken the oath of supremacy. On 19 November 1548 the privy council confirmed Story as regius professor and ordered his arrears to be paid. Two months later, however, he landed himself in the Tower of London through tactless quotation of Solomon in the debate on the 'Uniformity Bill', 'Woe unto thee England when the king is a child' (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58'), a dangerous action during Edward VI's reign. He was the first MP to be sent to prison on the orders of the House of Commons. He was released on 2 March, but John Zouche was elected to his seat instead. 
Story retired to Louvain in the Netherlands about 1550. In February 1550 he made over to Sir William Herbert, gentleman of the privy chamber, a lease of the prebend of Tottenhall in St Paul's Cathedral. He continued to receive a salary, paid by the court of augmentations, until 29 September 1550. He was excepted from the king's general pardon in 1552, probably because he was a fugitive. Story made his will at Louvain in May 1552, naming as executor Anthony Bonvisi, the great friend of Sir Thomas More, whom Story called his 'second father and fautor of all good Catholic men' ('CSP Venice', '1555-6', 111). Bonvisi controlled Joan Story's funds as additional insurance against her from returning to England with Story's daughter. Anthony Wood claimed that Story became a Franciscan lay brother -- this is unconfirmed, but his will requested burial by the order. 
After Mary I's accession, Story was reappointed to his Oxford chair jointly with William Aubrey and was restored as commissary-general to Bonner. This second appointment led to his resignation as professor by early 1557. He was elected MP for East Grinstead, Sussex, in October 1553 and for Bramber, in the same county, in April 1554. He probably owed his election to the crown because of the control over these seats exercised through the duchy of Lancaster. His return for Bath in November 1554 and for Ludgershall, Wiltshire, in 1555 was probably due to the influence of Gilbert Bourne, bishop of Bath and Wells, and the earl of Pembroke respectively. Story sat on various committees, including the one in 1553 that decided the protestant Alexander Nowell could not be a member of both convocation and parliament, but in November 1555 he was reported to Mary for opposing the admission of papal licences to England. With Edmund Plowden, the common lawyer, he acted as counsel to John Feckenham, abbot of Westminster, against a bill of February 1558 to restrict the right of sanctuary, and succeeded in causing the bill to fall by the wayside. 
Story was appointed chancellor of the dioceses of London and Oxford and JP and of the quorum for Middlesex in 1554. This put him at the forefront of the legal enforcement of the Marian religious reaction. Thomas Martin and he acted as queen's proctors for the trial of Thomas Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, at Oxford in September 1555. Cranmer floundered against 'two brilliant inquisitors' (Heinze, 267-9) and Story turned against him his former statements on the royal supremacy. 
Story lived in the former house of the grey friars in London. He also bought the lease of the parsonage of Chalfont St Giles, Buckinghamshire, as a family residence. He wrote in June 1555 to Edward Courtenay, earl of Devon, that in London, 'the spectacle of this realm', 'the sharpness of the sword, and other corrections, hath begun to bring forth that the word in stony hearts could not do, so that by discreet severity we have good hope of universal unity in religion' ('CSP Venice', '1555-6', 111). John Foxe wrote of 'this bloody Nimrod' ('Acts and Monuments', 8.745). This image may have been rather exaggerated -- and Foxe had to retract an allegation that Story had burnt a relative -- but it was of decisive importance for Story's future. Story was alleged to have claimed to John Philpot 'that there hath been yet never a one burnt but I have spoken with him, and have been a cause of his despatch'. Philpot retorted 'You have the more to answer for, master doctor, as you shall find in another world, how much so ever you do now triumph of your proceedings' (ibid., 7.628). Foxe concluded from this that Story was 'by hys co[n]fession, the chefest cause and doer, in pursuyng most of the martyrs to death'; 'In su[m]ma: Story worsse then Boner' (BL, Lansdowne MS 109, fol. 52'r'). 
According to Foxe, Story even bragged of devising a heatable iron cage on the Phalaris model to torture heretics to death. He insisted that even 'yff the world shuld alter' and if he were 'sycke in his bedd', 'yett would he sett up to gyve sentence agaynst an hereti[c], and though he knew yt would turne the next day after' ('Acts and Monuments', 7.608). His wife held similar views, according to Thomas Green, a protestant printer, examined by Story at home: 'Mistress Story flew into a rage, and sware a great oath, that it were a good deed to put a hundred or two of these heretic knaves in a house, 'and I myself', said she, 'would set it on fire'. (ibid., 8.522)' Catholic bishops were not immune to Story's criticism. In late 1555 he became impatient with Bonner's protracted reasoning with Philpot. When John Christopherson, bishop of Chichester, examined Richard Woodman, Story turned up late and barracked him, saying 'Why hear you him?... My lord, I will tell you how you shall tell a heretic by his words, because I have been more used to them than you have been' (ibid., 8.340-41). 
Story, according to Foxe, ensured prisoners were mistreated. Bonner's coalhouse, with 'monstrous and huge stocks' ('Declaration', sig. B2'v'), seemed to become a standard recourse. When some youths found with bibles were sent to Bridewell prison to be whipped, Story was the man to see that this was not 'lightly handled' ('Acts and Monuments', 8.724-5). Perhaps the most famous example is that of the faggot cast in the face of John Denley, while he was being burnt at the stake at Uxbridge, Middlesex, to silence his psalms, an action Story allegedly 'impudently' defended in the commons in 1559 (ibid., 8.694). He kept prisoners in his house, but stated that he treated them well and persuaded all but one of twenty-seven or twenty-eight to recant and receive pardons by October 1556. He recognized that it was futile to continue the persecutions and welcomed a halt to the Smithfield burnings in June 1558, 'for I saw well that it would not prevail' ('Declaration', sig. D1'r'). However, he denied having much control over the general policy of persecution. 
Story was returned as MP for Downton, Wiltshire, a borough controlled by John White, bishop of Winchester, in 1559 and was reprimanded for advising his patron in the House of Lords. In February 1559 there were rumours current that he would be proceeded against for supporting Catholicism. Among Catholics, according to Nicholas Sander, he was praised for defending papal supremacy. This meant presumably his notorious remarks that Mary's persecutors had wasted time 'choping at twiggs, but I wished to have chopped at the root, which if they had done, this gere [the Supremacy Bill] had not now come in question' ('Declaration', sig. B1'r'). William Fleetwood later noted in 1572 that Story appeared to enjoy more freedom than he had in 1548, not, this time, being immediately imprisoned. But the speech rankled enough to be periodically recalled even after more active treasons were manifest. 
Only in May 1560 was Story taken to the Fleet prison, along with Bonner and John Feckenham, 'for having obstinately refused attendance on public worship, and everywhere declaiming and railing against that religion which we now profess' (Robinson, 1.77). Two years later, however, he had apparently escaped, only to be arrested again in the west country. Once the 'Act for the Assurance of the Queen's Royal Power' (5 Eliz. I c. 1) had made repeated refusal of the oath of supremacy a capital offence, Story was one of the first four Catholics to whom it was proposed to administer it in April 1563. The Spanish ambassador, Alvaro de la Quadra, bishop of Aquila, feared 'the great danger the Catholic religion will suffer from the death of these men and still more if from faintheartedness some of them were to take the Oath'. Elizabeth I delayed signing the commission and Story escaped in May, making his way to de Quadra's house. The ambassador denied any foreknowledge of the plan but helped Story to get to the Netherlands ('CSP Spain', '1558-67', 322-3). 
Story later claimed to have 'departed this realme freelye licensed therunto by the queene, who accompted mee an abject and castawaye' ('Declaration', sig. B4'r'). Elizabeth certainly had not hurried to sign the commission that threatened to condemn him. While in the early months of 1563 the privy council had subjected the Spanish embassy to several raids as a result both of mass-gadders visiting the chapel and of a shooting incident, Story's visit there passed off with surprisingly little fuss. 
Story reportedly regretted having lost the opportunity of martyrdom; Sander professed to having, among others, dissuaded him from returning. He lived 'adjoining the Charterhouse at Louvain'; allegedly he would have joined the order but, being a married man, needed his wife to follow suit and she 'resolutely refused', so 'leading the life rather of a monk than of a man of the world, he frequented the Charterhouse more than his own house' (Sander, 712-13). This unworldliness was unfortunately undermined by financial pressures, which impelled him to take his fatal position as searcher of ships, primarily for heretical literature. 
In July 1571 Fernando Alvarez de Toledo, duke of Alba, said that Story had 'taken an official oath of fealty seven years ago' ('Epistolario', 2.642). As he was discussing the customs, this might date Story's duties in this field that early; but it also fits Story's matriculation at Louvain on 20 April 1564. A message from Alba to the English government claimed an interest in Story as Philip's 'minister or servant... and equally as a sworn doctor of the University of Louvain' (Lettenhove, 6.111). At his trial, Story seemingly alleged Spanish naturalization by the Louvain matriculation oath and by the grant of a crown office worth $100 p.a., presumably as searcher ('Declaration', sigs. B4'r', C3'v'). 
English propaganda insisted that Story had been concerned with enforcing Alba's 1569 embargo on English merchandise and hinted that he had enriched himself out of confiscations. Even the early martyrologies admitted the implication. Alba thought the same thing but praised Story as formerly 'principal minister of the inquisition in England', who 'behaved with great zeal, not only concerning our holy faith but your majesty's service' while in the Netherlands, undertaking 'to discover the deceits committed in passing through goods prohibited by the [embargo] decrees' ('Epistolario', 2.642). Story's activities made it easy to capture him. John Lee, merchant and intelligencer at Antwerp, recruited Robert Ramsden, Martin Bragge, and Simon Jewkes to acquire a ship, and -- critically -- William Parker, a Catholic exile employed as searcher under Story, who decided he wanted to go home. Their 'practise had beene attempted at Andwarpe and there... utterly frustrate' (HMS, 'Longleat', 5.225); finally, Parker persuaded Story to go to the quieter port of Bergen op Zoom to search the ship in question. When they boarded, it raised anchor and carried them to Yarmouth on 14 August 1570. Story's obnoxiousness had been such that the shipowners claimed to have acted spontaneously in kidnapping him and presenting him to the surprised English government. 
By the end of August 1570 Story was being kept at the house of Thomas Watts, archdeacon of Middlesex. Watts found that Story 'playnlie saieth that what he did in Quene Marye's tyme he did it lawfullye... and if the law were agayn, he might do the like' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/73/53). The government made an ironic point by refurbishing for him the Lollards' Tower, whose 'lockes & boltes... were broken of at the death of Q. Mary' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/73/30). Story was taken to the Tower of London in December; he inscribed 'Jhon Store Dr' in the Beauchamp Tower ('GM', 3rd ser., 2, 1857, 199). His presence in the Tower was used to elicit confessions from Catholic conspirators. In April 1571 a courier concerned in the Ridolfi plot, Charles Bailly, was sent there and he was persuaded to recount his role in the conspiracy by somebody impersonating Story, possibly William Herle, although the versatile Parker is more likely. Story was tried on 26 May at Westminster Hall. He denied the court's jurisdication on the grounds that he was a Spanish subject. Despite this a plea of 'nihil dicit' was entered and conviction rapidly followed (Dyer, fol. 300'v'). Story expressed a rather anachronistic principle that 'every man is free borne, and he hath the whole face of the earth before him to dwell & abyde in wherein he liketh best, and if he cannot lyve here, he may go elswhere' ('Copie of a Letter', sigs. D2'v'-3'r'). Roman law might indeed have influenced Story towards unconsciously contractarian theory, but Tudor convention was shocked by: 'howe horrible, traytorous, and monstruous a meanyng he had... by refusyng his naturall allegeaunce to the queene's majestie and this crowne, from which no lawe in the worlde coulde separate hym... a thyng of itselfe worthy of some monstruous death, accordyng to the monstruousnes of the thyng. (ibid., sigs. C2'v'-3'r')' New legislation of 1571 (13 Eliz. I c. 1) confirmed the treasonable nature of stirring foreigners to invade the queen's dominions and of compassing war against her abroad. The judges believed Story was guilty of 'constructive' treason. His indictment stressed his association with traitors, including Norton and John Prestall. Prestall had a complex and ambivalent relationship with the English government. It is difficult to tell now to what extent accounts of any of Story's conversations with him are true because most were works of populist propaganda written after the former's death. Prestall supposedly told Story 'that he had an art to poyson any body afarre of, beying not present with them, and that none coulde do it but he' ('Copie of a Letter', sigs. A3-A4). Both men spent more time talking about how to kill James VI than planning an invasion of England but they did discuss using violence or (allegedly) the supernatural against Elizabeth if she would not convert to Catholicism. The Spanish were keen to avoid a renewed trade war, having found to their cost that the embargo hurt their interest more than it hurt the English. The Spanish ambassador, Guerau de Spes, complained about Story's abduction but did not push it. The French ambassador, Bertrand de Salignac de la Mothe-Fenelon, ascribed to Elizabeth a grim jest that she was willing to return Story's head but would keep the rest. 
During the night before his execution Story was allowed the services of a Catholic priest, his old collaborator and current fellow prisoner, Feckenham. His execution at Tyburn on 1 June 1571 attracted leading peers, courtiers, and privy councillors, including Francis Russell, earl of Bedford, and Henry Carey, Baron Hunsdon, who barracked him on the subject of allegiance. To common spectators were ascribed the inevitable remarks recalling the fate of protestant martyrs. Edmund Campion was said to have attended Story's trial and to have been splashed with his blood at the execution but the latter is a tale told of other martyrs. Story was hanged, drawn, and quartered, and his head was set on London Bridge while his quarters were set on four of the city gates. Understandably, this ordeal was even worse for a man in his late sixties and Story 'did not only roare and cry like a helhound, but also strake the executioner doing his office, and resisted as long as strength did serve him, beinge kept downe by three or foure men, until he was deade' (W. Fulke, 'A Retentive, to Stay Good Christians, Against the Motives of R. Bristowe', 1580, 59). 
Joan Story received small pensions from Philip and Alba. She went to the English seminary college at Rheims, where her son John was studying for the priesthood, but Cardinal William Allen described her in 1582 as 'a woman most poisonous in her tongue, and most unsuited to this place' ('The Letters and Memorials of William Cardinal Allen', ed. T. F. Knox, 1882, 168). Though Story died more for maintaining allegiance to Philip than to the pope, it was assumed he would become a saint. Robert Horne, bishop of Winchester, and Richard Bristow believed that this would be the case. Story's status as martyr was propagated by his acquaintance with Sander, who wrote about him in his 'De visibili monarchia ecclesiae' (1571). The 1592 edition of this work inspired Gregorio Pollini's 'L'historia ecclesiastica della rivoluzion d'Inghilterra' (1594) and Diego de Yepes's 'Historia particular de la persecucion de Inglaterra' (1599), and helped matters by claiming that Story had denied allegiance to Elizabeth because of her excommunication. 
Story's pretensions to change his nationality as a refugee may now seem less 'monstrous'. The more lurid plots ascribed to him are of little plausibility and are dwelt on only in the immediate pamphleteering effort, though his reception of the rebel Norton would have probably sealed his fate in any Tudor court. Arguably, 'whether or not Dr Story had a hand in murder plots is... beside the point. He was removed because he was suspected of it, and because he was able, and dangerous' (Ramsay, 161). He made a useful example to others, a feasible one as he was the exile most likely to board a strange ship. It was an ostentatious demonstration of 'amazing lengths... to destroy a relatively inconsequential enemy' (C. C. Breight, 'Surveillance, Militarism, and Drama in the Elizabethan Era', 1996, 197), and a warning to more important traitors in exile, like Charles Neville, sixth earl of Westmorland. Thirty years on, Catholic exiles such as Sir Robert Basset and Hugh Owen still feared abduction. The trouble taken to apprehend Story testifies to a peculiar obnoxiousness in the eyes of the new regime. Bonner having inconveniently died before the crisis for Elizabethan protestantism which began in 1569 with the northern uprising, Story's execution served as a partial act of exorcism of the past. His notoriety among protestants passed, but he was remembered by the Roman Catholic church. Leo XIII on 29 December 1886 authorized his veneration as a blessed martyr on the grounds of an existing cult. He thereby approved the idea that Story's death arose not from Anglo-Spanish but from religious conflict. Story's beatification was confirmed in 1929 but he was not included among the canonized English martyrs in 1970 because of his zealous persecution of protestants, because he was apprehended by force, and because he tried to defend himself by saying he was a Spanish subject rather than embrace martyrdom. 


@@@@@


doc= 26599


Story, Robert (1790-1859), Church of Scotland minister, was born on 3 March 1790 at Yetholm, Roxburghshire, where his father, George Story, was parish schoolmaster. His mother, Margaret Herbert, came from a Northumbrian family. After receiving elementary education at home he entered Edinburgh University in 1805, where he associated with the poet Thomas Pringle (1789-1834), the son of a neighbouring farmer; with Pringle he published a poetic satire of the Edinburgh Philomathic Society, 'The Institute', in 1811. Story was a good student, earning distinction in the debating societies as well as in his studies. From July 1811 to the beginning of 1815 he was tutor in several families, preparing at the same time for ordination in the Church of Scotland. One of his tutorial posts was in the family of Lord Dalhousie, his youngest pupil being James Andrew Broun Ramsay (1812-1860), later governor-general of India, whose friendship he enjoyed through life. Licensed as a preacher in July 1815, Story was appointed assistant at Rosneath, Dunbartonshire, in December. In 1817 Thomas Carlyle, on a walking tour with a mutual friend, stayed with him for several days; Carlyle recalled the visit vividly in his 'Reminiscences' (1881). Ordained minister of the parish of Rosneath on 26 March 1818, Story was introduced to his congregation by Thomas Chalmers. On 15 September 1828 he married Helen Boyle (died 1882), daughter of Mr Dunlop of Keppoch, Dunbartonshire. They had four children. 
Story devoted himself mainly to his professional work and the improvement of a somewhat demoralized parish. In 1831 he stoutly defended his friend and neighbour, John McLeod Campbell of Row, who was deposed by the general assembly of the Church of Scotland for his views on the atonement. Story escaped deposition himself because he did not agree with Campbell's formulation of 'universal pardon'. Story was involved in another religious controversy in the early 1830s which led to the foundation of the Catholic Apostolic church. In 1829 he had published a moving memoir of a parishioner, Isabella Campbell (died 1827), entitled 'Peace in Believing'. In 1830 her sister, Mary Campbell, professed to have received the gift of tongues, and, though Story soon came to view her as deluded, she found disciples in London. The authenticity of her gift was accepted by Edward Irving, who was soon afterwards expelled from his own church for his advocacy of spiritual gifts. 
Story remained in the Church of Scotland after the Disruption of 1843, and in 1853 saw a new parish church erected and a supplementary church built on the southern border of his parish -- the expenses largely defrayed through his own exertions -- to meet the needs of a young community when Lochlongside was granted out in fee. After a period of ill health Story died on 22 November 1859 at Rosneath, and was buried in the churchyard there. A monument to his memory, from a design by the sculptor William Brodie, was placed on the wall of the chancel in the parish church. Story was survived by his wife and two of their children. Robert Herbert Story succeeded his father as minister of Rosneath and later became principal of Glasgow University. 


@@@@@


doc= 26600


Story, Robert (1795-1860), poet, was born at Wark, Northumberland, on 17 October 1795, the son of Robin Story (died 1809), a Northumbrian peasant, and his wife, Mary Hooliston, a native of Lauder, Scotland. He was educated at Wark School under Mr Kinton, with whom he made rapid progress, and then at Crookham, where he played truant and used to visit a lame fiddler. About 1807 he commenced work as a gardener, but found more congenial service as a shepherd, an occupation commemorated in one of his lyrics, 'Pours the spring on Howdsden yet'. In the summer of 1810 he began to teach reading, writing, and arithmetic in a school at Humbleton. He subsequently served in various schools, where his unrefined accent and grammar often excited derision. He still desired to be a ploughman like Burns, but after some intermittent field labour, in the intervals of which he corrected the proofs of his poem 'The Harvest' (1816), he returned to teaching. 
In 1820 Story eventually started a successful school on his own account at Gargrave in Yorkshire, his home for over twenty years. There, on 17 May 1823, after a few sentimental episodes which he celebrated in his early poems, he married Ellen Ellison, with whom he had a large family. About 1825 he made the acquaintance of John Nicholson, the Airedale poet, in emulation of whom he issued a small volume of verse entitled 'Craven Blossoms' (1826). He augmented his income by acting as parish clerk and by contributions to the Newcastle papers. But about 1830 his prosperity was rudely interrupted. Story argued forcefully against parliamentary reform and found himself opposed by the parents of most of his pupils who were withdrawn from the school. Story was further persecuted in numerous ways and his imprudent attempts at resistance involved him in debt. He met with some success in selling a volume of verse entitled the 'Magic Fountain', written in 1829, and his hopes were excited by the support he received for his poetic rallying cry to the Conservative Party, entitled 'The Isles are Awake' (1834). For two years he depended mainly upon the help of his friends and the sale among them of his new volume entitled 'The Outlaw' (1839), a historical drama taking place in the reign of Henry VIII. In 1842 he issued a literary autobiography called 'Love and Literature', which also was rather successful, mainly in the West Riding and in Northumberland, where he had found a warm friend in William Gourley, a self-taught mathematician. 
In 1843 the Conservative members of parliament for the West Riding obtained from Sir Robert Peel a small post for Story in the Audit Office, and he consequently moved to London. There he had a struggle to make ends meet, and suffered greatly from the loss of four of his children; but his literary productiveness went on. In 1845 appeared a volume, 'Songs and Lyrical Poems' (3rd edn, 1849), and in 1852 a versified tale of the heptarchy, 'Guthrum the Dane', in the style of Scott's medieval romances. In 1854 he visited Paris and was presented to Napoleon III as a successor of Burns, and in 1857 the duke of Northumberland issued at his own expense a sumptuous edition of his 'Poetical Works'. The beauty of the volume and of its contents seems to have impressed the critics of the time; and even Carlyle, in November 1857, said he detected in it 'a certain rustic vigour of life, breezy freshness, as of the Cheviot Hills' (T. Carlyle to R. Story, quoted in James, lxix). This is notably the case in a few of the lyrics, intimately inspired by the localities and the incidents of the poet's youth, such as 'The wild thyme still blossoms in green Homil-heugh', but the poems' merits are less obvious than Story's doggedness in trying to sell them to ease his burden of debt. He died at his home, 12 Harley Street, Battersea, on 7 July 1860, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 26601


Story, Thomas (1670?-1742), Quaker minister and journal writer, was born at Justice Town, Kirklinton, near Carlisle, Cumberland, the son of Thomas Story (1630?-1721?) of Justice Town and Thomasin Constable (died 1674/5). Thomas's siblings included a brother, George Warter Story, dean of Limerick, and a sister, Ann Elliot. Story became proficient in music and fencing, and studied at Carlisle grammar school. He continued to work with the nonconformist minister Richard Gilpin, who trained him in law. As Story reached adulthood he began to question Anglican beliefs and practices. Already disappointed with corrupt churchmen, his near-death and visionary episodes made Story give up his sword and musical instruments and seek out dissenters in search of religious truth. Finding little comfort with Presbyterians, Story attended a Broughton Quaker meeting in 1691, where he felt immersed in the presence of God. Story made his conversion public when he refused to take an oath on behalf of a Friend. Story thus disqualified himself from practising law in England's courts and upset his father, who worried that Story could not make a decent living. 
In 1692 Story began his life as an itinerant preacher by quietly accompanying noted ministers such as Andrew Taylor, John Bowstead, and Thomas Rudd as they travelled across England and then in Scotland, where particularly rowdy crowds taunted the Quakers. When they returned to England, Story overcame his trepidation to preach in public, and by 1695 Story was certain public ministry was his primary calling. He informed his father that he would leave home permanently and refused his offer to manage the family's lands. Story headed for London, where William Penn took him under his wing and recommended him as a clerk and record keeper for the London quarterly meeting. In 1696 Story once again travelled through England and Scotland, using his legal training and knowledge of logic to construct strong defences of Quaker doctrines. He explained to the countess of Carlisle why women should be allowed to preach, and argued with an episcopalian over the practice of baptism. Back in London, Story met Peter the Great and presented him with a copy of Robert Barclay's 'Apology'. The Russian tsar asked Story about Quaker principles, particularly the Quaker refusal to bear arms; Peter was so intrigued by the religious dissenters that he attended several Quaker meetings. 
As the century drew to a close, Story began to minister even further afield. In 1698 he accompanied Penn to Ireland, where they met with government officials, held religious meetings, and spoke up against Roman Catholicism. Soon after returning to London, Story left with Roger Gill for America and reached the Chesapeake in 1699. For more than fifteen years Story ministered widely in America, attending meetings from New England to North Carolina. During his peregrinations he addressed many colonial issues. Story preached to Africans and argued that it was wrong to enslave any Christian. Although Story described Native Americans as 'enemies', he also believed they could be enlightened, and compared them favourably to many Europeans. When Story travelled along war zones he refused to seek protection in forts; he also argued that Quakers should not have to serve as soldiers, and worked towards the release of imprisoned Quakers. But most of all Story sought to maintain Quaker discipline in the colonies. He condemned 'ranters' who disturbed meetings with 'ridiculous noises' and 'wet Quakers' who 'remained carnally minded' ('Journal of the Life of Thomas Story', 121). He took on the Quaker schismatic George Keith, as well as Congregationalists and Baptists, often using his knowledge of Greek and the 'Bible' to stump his opponents. Story weathered a Philadelphia epidemic that killed 'six, seven, sometimes eight a day for several weeks together', but his companion Gill did not survive the 1699 scourge. 
In 1701 Penn asked Story to represent his interests in America while he returned to England to defend his colony against an anti-proprietary bill. Penn assigned Story to the council, made him the 'keeper of the Great Seal, Master of the Rolls for recording patents, and for the enrolling of deeds', and appointed him treasurer of the Pennsylvania Land Company. Story agreed to serve in Pennsylvania's troubled government because 'the affairs of [Pennsylvania] were greatly embarrassed' largely due to the work of anti-proprietary factions ('Journal of the Life of Thomas Story', 134). On 10 July 1706 Story married Ann Shippen (died 1710), the daughter of noted Philadelphia merchant and politician Edward Shippen. Although Story planted roots in Pennsylvania, he continued to travel in the ministry and undertook a voyage to the Caribbean between 1709 and 1710. After visiting Barbados and Jamaica, which Story described as a place 'baptized in hell', his ship was captured by French privateers. In Martinique he disputed with Jesuits and discussed political principles with the governor. By 1710 Story was back in Philadelphia attending the Quaker yearly meeting. Thirty letters between Story and Ann detail his ministerial travels and her home life during this period. Childless, Ann died soon after Story returned, on 19 August 1710. 
In 1714 Story journeyed again to the Caribbean and then returned to England. In the following year he travelled abroad with the historian William Sewel to the Netherlands and Germany, where some cities closed their doors to strangers to prevent the spread of plague. In 1716 he then went to Ireland, where the bishop of Ossory ordered a brief arrest. And in 1720 he served time in the Fleet prison in London for not taking an oath of affirmation. After his release Story was accused of unfair land dealings in Pennsylvania, but an arbitration court in London exonerated him. In 1726 fellow traveller and minister Ann Gooch charged Story with attempted seduction. In its investigation the London yearly meeting acquitted him due to lack of evidence. Later in life, he lobbied government leaders and church officials for Quaker interests, he tended to business on the family's Justice Town estate, purchased from his brother's widow, and he built an experimental nursery to replenish England's dwindling forests. Story continued to travel widely throughout England and Scotland. His worst reception was at Oxford University, where the scholars 'were the rudest, most giddy and unruly rabble' ('Journal of the Life of Thomas Story', 323). But whether at Oxford or in Scotland the crowds became more sober towards the end of his career. Several of Story's sermons, which often focused on the 'kingdom of Christ in this world', were recorded, published (contrary to Quaker practice), and approved by him. Story died in 1742, possibly on 23 June, after suffering from a 'paralytic disorder' (ibid., 361). He was buried at the Quaker burial-ground on Fisher Street in Carlisle. He left a substantial estate in England and America, the residue of which was to be used to print his journal (unusually for a major eighteenth-century Quaker journal, in Newcastle upon Tyne, not London). His primary benefactors were his sister, his nieces, and the Shippens in Pennsylvania. He also made charitable contributions to Carlisle's meeting and to educate Quaker children in Clerkenwell. 


@@@@@


doc= 26602


Stothard, Charles Alfred (1786-1821), antiquarian draughtsman, was born in London on 5 July 1786, the second son of Thomas Stothard (1755-1834) and his wife, Rebecca Watkins (1760/61-1824). He was educated in Latin by the renowned teacher and Baptist minister Robert Burnside and early showed talent for drawing. In January 1807 he was admitted a student of the Royal Academy, and in 1811 he exhibited there 'The Assassination of Richard II', in which the costumes were depicted with considerable historical accuracy. In the same year he published the first number of the 'Monumental Effigies of Great Britain', a work designed to portray the changes in English costume from the twelfth century to the reign of Henry VIII. The work was issued in twelve parts, each consisting of twelve separate plates, of which the first ten were prepared by Stothard himself; the last two, issued after his death, were the work of other artists. The letterpress was supplied by his friend and brother-in-law, the antiquary Alfred John Kempe, and the last number appeared in 1832. The 'Effigies' became an important sourcebook for Victorian historical genre painters in their search for accurate details of historical costumes. It was, for instance, almost certainly the source for the figures of Edward III and the Black Prince in Ford Madox Brown's 'Chaucer at the Court of Edward III' (1856-68, Tate collection). Its continuing usefulness was evident when a new edition, with considerable additions, edited by John Hewitt, was published in 1876. 
In 1815 Stothard was employed by Daniel Lysons to make drawings for 'Magna Britannia', and for this purpose he journeyed through northern England as far as Hadrian's Wall. During his absence Lysons procured him the appointment of historical draughtsman to the Society of Antiquaries. In 1816 he was commissioned by the society to make drawings of the Bayeux tapestry, and during his stay in Normandy he discovered in a cellar at the abbey of Fontevrault effigies of several of the Plantagenet sovereigns. Stothard's was the first detailed record of the tapestry since Abbe Montfaucon's drawings of 1730, postdating the damage done at the French Revolution and predating the first recorded major restoration of 1842. Stothard's drawings were both detailed and accurate; he even counted the stitch holes where threads were missing and recorded any traces of colour he found there. The evidence supplied by these drawings assisted in subsequent restorations of the tapestry itself. The drawings took two years to complete and were later engraved by J. Basire; they were published between 1821 and 1823 in the society's 'Vetusta monumenta' (vol. 6, plates 1-17). In 1819 Stothard presented a valuable paper on the date of the tapestry to the Society of Antiquaries ('Archaeologia', 19.184). In this essay Stothard for the first time pointed out that the tapestry might be contemporary with the events it depicted without being the work of Matilda, queen of William of Normandy, with whom it was traditionally associated, and conclusively proved, from the accuracy of the costumes, that it could not be a work of twelfth-century date, as had been contended by the Abbe de la Rue. On 2 July of the same year he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. 
In February 1818 Stothard married the writer Anna Eliza Kempe, later Anna Eliza Bray (1790-1883), the daughter of John Kempe, 'porteur d'or' at the Royal Mint, and the sister of his friend. He illustrated his wife's first publication, 'Letters Written during a Tour through Normandy, Brittany, and other Parts of France in 1818' (1820). The following year he copied the thirteenth-century murals in the painted chamber of the Palace of Westminster. On 28 May 1821 he was engaged in tracing a stained-glass window in the church at Beer Ferris in Devon when the step of his ladder gave way and he fell, hitting his head on a monument below, and was killed instantly. His wife gave birth to their daughter, Blanch, on 29 June, but the child died in February the following year. Anna Eliza later married Edward Atkyns Bray and wrote a memoir of her first husband, 'Memoirs, Including Original Journals, Letters, Papers, and Antiquarian Tracts of the Late Charles Alfred Stothard', published in 1823. 


@@@@@


doc= 26603


Stothard, Thomas (1755-1834), painter and book illustrator, was born on 17 August 1755 at the Black Horse inn in Long Acre, London, and baptized on 7 September at St Martin-in-the-Fields. His father, also Thomas Stothard (died 1770), was a publican, originally from Stutton near Tadcaster, Yorkshire; his mother, Mary, 'nee' Reynolds, (1711/12-1799) was from Shrewsbury; they were married in London on 25 November 1751 at the church of St Botolph without Bishopsgate. Stothard's reputation as one of the foremost history painters of his day has not endured, although he is remembered as probably the most prolific book illustrator of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. 
Thomas, an only child, was sent at the age of five to school in Yorkshire. He was later recorded as saying that it was while he was at school in Acomb, near York, that he first saw book illustrations by Jacobus Houbraken, which he gazed on 'till a love of art grew within me' (Bray, 3). After a spell at boarding-school in Ilford, Essex, he moved back to London in 1770, where he lived with his mother in Stepney Green. His father died that same year and left Stothard $1200, which gave him some security to pursue his chosen profession. That year he took up an apprenticeship with John Vansommer, a Huguenot silk weaver in Spital Square, with whom he served his first four years. After the death of his master in 1774, he completed the final three years of his apprenticeship with Vansommer's wife, Ann. In 1777 he exhibited his first works at the Society of Artists, two views of Caernarfon (probably drawn on a trip to north Wales that year) and a scene from Homer. 
On 30 December 1777 Stothard entered the Royal Academy Schools in Maiden Lane, beginning what was to prove a lifelong relationship with the Royal Academy's teaching and administration. Here he established long-term friendships with John Flaxman and William Blake, and exhibited at the Royal Academy for the first time in 1778. Most significantly, however, Stothard began producing illustrations for books, which was to prove a constant and lucrative source of income for the artist. Between 1778 and 1786 he produced forty-two illustrations for John Bell's 'Poets of Great Britain', 244 illustrations for John Harrison's 'Novelist's Magazine', ninety illustrations for G. Robinson's 'Ladies' Magazine', and numerous other smaller commissions. Stothard showed some of his original designs for these publications at Royal Academy exhibitions between 1780 and 1782 and in 1785. In addition he designed shop-cards, pocket books, and patterns for Wedgwood jasperware. This was to be the pattern of Stothard's work throughout his career, taking advantage of the opportunities afforded by publishing and the industrial arts, while maintaining a reputation in the more respectable reaches of high art. 
In 1783 Stothard completed his studies at the Royal Academy, and on 17 August 1784, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, he married Rebecca Watkins (1760/61-1824), a 23-year-old Anabaptist, and moved into Henrietta Street, Covent Garden. His prolific commercial output over the following years may be partly explained by the fact that the Stothards subsequently had eleven children, six of whom survived infancy. His style at this time was relatively flat and decorative, probably derived from his training as a silk pattern designer, but also showing the influence of Hubert Francois Gravelot's graceful illustrations. His single illustration for George Raymond's 'New, Universal and Impartial History of England' ('c'.1786), 'Boadicea Queen of the Iceni Burning the City of London', stands out from Samuel Wale's more sculpted and domestic scenes for the same work, in its flowing composition and striking pattern of flames. Stothard's illustrations of British history graced several editions of David Hume's 'History of England' in the 1790s -- notably in his headpiece depicting the murdered princes in the Tower for Thomas Cadell's 1789 edition, a subject which Stothard painted in oil on a grander scale for Bowyer's 'Historic Gallery' (1790-1806), a sketch for which is in the Tate's Oppe collection. 
The exhibition of works for Bowyer, alongside other oil paintings such as 'Jacob's Dream' for Macklin's 'Bible' in 1791 (ex Christies, 11 October 1946) and 'The Dryads Finding Narcissus' (exh. RA, 1793; Tate collection) began to establish Stothard's reputation as a history painter, in one case attracting comparisons with Correggio and Parmigianino (Bennett, 22). He was elected ARA in 1791 and RA in 1794. Sufficiently respected to command prices of about 30 guineas for an easel work, and $1 for a drawing, Stothard felt secure enough in 1793 to spend his inheritance on a house at 28 Newman Street, London, where he lived for the rest of his life. Despite his growing reputation as a painter, book illustration seems still to have been his steadiest form of income. Many of his illustrations were for reissues, as in his celebrated illustrations for John Stockdale's edition of Defoe's 'Robinson Crusoe' in 1790 (a sketch for 'Robinson Crusoe Building his Canoe' is in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford) and it is clear that Stothard's images were an important factor in their popularity. 
Stothard's exposure in the 1790s was enough to win him influential patrons. Samuel Rogers, the poet, employed him to illustrate his 'Pleasures of Memory' in 1794 and later his poem 'Italy', and on decorations for his house at 22 St James's Place. Between 1799 and 1803 Henry Cecil, first marquess of Exeter, paid Stothard approximately $1300 for three decorative history paintings for the grand staircase at Burleigh House, such as 'Intemperance', an allegorical rendering of Cleopatra dissolving a pearl in a glass of wine. 
Perhaps Stothard's most famous commission, however, was in 1806 from the engraver Robert Cromek, who paid $60 for a painting from Chaucer, 'The Pilgrimage to Canterbury', which Stothard painted in a flat frieze-like form. The apparent attention to period detail and the historicity of the style convinced contemporaries of an authenticity in Stothard's portrayal. Cromek exhibited the work in several locations across England and Scotland, and subsequently sold the original for $300 (Tate collection). Stothard produced three copies in oil for his patrons Samuel Rogers, Samuel Boddington (ex Christies, 25 April 1975), and J. Benson of Doncaster, and several watercolour versions. The engraving after the work, begun by Louis Schiavonetti and finally completed by James Heath in 1817, was one of the most successful prints of the century. The print caused a well-documented spat, however, with William Blake, who claimed that he, not Stothard, had originally received the commission and Stothard had simply developed his design. 
Another significant patron was Colonel Thomas Johnes, who employed Stothard to teach his daughter, Mariamne, at Hafod House, Cardigan, about 1805. Johnes's last edition of his translation of Monstrelet's chronicle appeared in 1810, and he employed Stothard to paint eight grisaille panels from this text for his library at Hafod (removed after 1833). When Mariamne died in July 1811 Stothard is thought to have produced a sketch for her monument, executed by Francis Chantrey; further, he is later thought to have supplied a version of his 'Murdered Princes' design for Chantrey's 'Sleeping Children' (1817; Lichfield Cathedral). This is an area of some ambiguity, however, and some Chantrey scholars doubt Stothard's involvement. It would not be surprising, however, if Stothard were involved for he had little difficulty adapting his designs to different media. In 1809-10 he produced transparencies for the fiftieth jubilee of George III (des., oil sketch, Oppe collection, Tate), and in 1814 produced a design for a silver-gilt dish depicting Bacchus and Ariadne (Royal Collection), for the silversmithing firm of Philip Rundle and John Bridge. The same year he successfully undercut the other competitors for the commission to design a silver shield to be presented to the duke of Wellington by the merchants and bankers of London (Wellington Museum, Apsley House, London). Stothard made the clay model for the shield after the silversmiths' (Green, Ward, and Green) modeller died. Afraid that his ideas would be stolen, Stothard also produced etchings of the design, later published by McQueen & Co. in 1820 (Apsley House, London). In 1816 he produced designs for a giant pair of silver Wellington candelabra, and in 1820 designed the Royal Academy's new medal to mark George IV's accession. 
This willingness to design for any medium may have been precipitated by the post-war slump in the book market, causing Stothard to look beyond book illustration for his basic income. The end of the war in 1815, however, gave Stothard the chance to visit Paris with Chantrey, where at the Louvre he studied Raphael's 'Transfiguration' (sketches, BM and AM Oxf.). He also appears to have taken Watteau as his model for his history paintings, returning to exhibit subjects such as 'Sans souci' (exh. RA, 1817; Tate collection) and 'Fete champetre' (exh. RA, 1818), which suited contemporary taste. 
After 1820 Stothard's book illustration work revived, and kept him in constant employment for the rest of his life. The commission to illustrate George Thomson's 'Select Collection of Original Scottish Airs' ('c'.1818-1825; sketches in the Huntington Library, California) supplied Stothard with another regular, if exacting, patron, and added to his portfolio of Scots poetry. Stothard had visited Scotland in the summer of 1809 to research his twelve illustrations for Cadell and Davies's edition of Robert Burns's 'Poetical Works' (1814), and further illustrations appeared in Joseph Ritson's 'Caledonian Muse' (1821). By this time Stothard was charging up to $5 simply for a vignette design. Twenty-six of Stothard's illustrations adorned William Pickering's edition of Shakespeare's 'Plays' (1823-5), and Pickering employed Stothard to produce ten Watteauesque illustrations for Boccaccio's 'Decamerone' in 1825 (exh. RA, 1819). Perhaps the climax of Stothard's illustration was the twenty works for Rogers's 'Italy' in 1830. Stothard was employed to illustrate figure scenes, while J. M. W. Turner executed landscapes. Stothard's scenes (such as 'Jorasse', engraved by Finden) are more delicate than Turner's, but the fact that the works were to be engraved in steel demanded a more intricate technique than Stothard had formerly employed. Rogers reputedly spent $2016 on the embellishments to his work, although he soon recouped this through extensive sales. William Wordsworth said of the work that 'the plates made it sell, for in the poetry there's nothing -- absolutely nothing' (Bennett, 26). 
Stothard was by now a respectable part of the Royal Academy establishment. He had been made deputy librarian in December 1810 and librarian in 1812, a post that he held until his death and which gave him the opportunity to amass research for his unpublished 'Dictionary of the lives of painters'. In the 1820s he was employed to paint a Gothic altarpiece for William Beckford at Fonthill Abbey (dismantled 1822). In 1822 he was paid over $300 to paint a Raphael-inspired frieze, 'Apollo and the Muses', for the dome of the Faculty of Advocates library in Edinburgh. Between 1828 and 1830 he was commissioned to produce decorative designs for the interior of Buckingham Palace, the sketches for which are in the British Museum. 
Stothard's family life was tinged with some tragedy, the first instance of which was the death of his eldest son, Thomas, in a shooting accident in 1801. In 1821 another son, Charles Alfred Stothard, a noted antiquary, died suddenly, and in 1822 his third son, Henry, suffered a paralytic stroke. The deaths of his wife, Rebecca, and his friend Flaxman in 1824 seem to have led him to withdraw from the world, although he continued to work almost to the end. In the autumn of 1833 he was hit by a carriage and incapacitated, and on 27 April 1834 he died in London, aged seventy-nine. He was buried in Bunhill Fields. 
In his will Stothard left $5080, along with his house, furniture, paintings, designs, and collection of prints (all valued at $2482) to his remaining children, Emma, Henry, Robert, and Alfred. This large sum, commented upon in the news of the day, was testimony to Stothard's industry and high contemporary reputation. More than one hundred oil paintings by him were sold at Christies shortly after his death (June 1834), and estimates of his surviving designs vary between 4000 and 10,000. Dobson later wrote that 'the story of Stothard's life has little memorable but the work that filled and satisfied it' (Dobson, 258). Apart from some possible radical political affiliations in his youth, biographers have found little to contradict the picture of Stothard as a placid, assiduous artist, responsive to the instructions of patrons, loyal to his family and friends and to the Royal Academy. 
Stothard's posthumous reputation has been uneven. Anna Eliza Bray, in keeping with the eulogistic tone of her work, acclaimed her father-in-law in 1851 as 'the greatest historical painter this country ever produced' (Bray, 11). Her comparisons with Raphael were not out of keeping with the high opinions expressed by Stothard's contemporaries (Turner likened him to Giotto). Numerous contemporary patrons and artists possessed large collections of Stothard's work, such as Robert Balmanno's collection of over 2000 works (acquired by the British Museum in 1849). By 1906, however, Coxhead could claim that a 'ball-ticket of his handwork is often a more valuable possession than many of his ambitious historical paintings' (Coxhead, 'Monograph', 7), and devoted his account to Stothard's illustrative work. As Strong noted, however, Stothard's British history subjects, with their antiquarian detail, deserve recognition alongside Benjamin West's as key works in the development of the reconstructive Victorian historical genre. Most recently Bennett has focused on the artist's whole prolific and fluid career as a means to illuminate the changing mechanisms of artistic patronage in the early industrial period. 


@@@@@


doc= 26604


Stotherd, Richard Hugh (1828-1895), army officer and surveyor, son of General Richard J. Stotherd (1796-1879), colonel-commandant Royal Engineers, and his first wife, Elizabeth Sydney (died 1853), daughter of Hugh Boyle, of Dungiven, co. Londonderry, was born at Angler Castle, co. Tyrone, on 25 November 1828. His father, who came of a Lincolnshire family, was long employed on the Ordnance Survey of Ireland. 
Educated at University College School, London, and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, Stotherd was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 2 May 1847, and first lieutenant on 28 October. He trained at Chatham, and then served at Woolwich and Gibraltar, and on his return home was posted to the Ordnance Survey and sent to Dumfries. He was promoted second captain on 21 May 1855, and first captain on 17 May 1860. In 1861 he left the survey and on 11 June that year married at St George's, Hanover Square, London, Caroline Frances Wood (died 17 Feb 1872), with whom he had several children. After the seizure by US forces of the 'Trent' in November 1861 Stotherd went to North America, where he acted as brigade major and assistant to the commanding royal engineer in preparing for a possible American attack on Canada. He was commended for his services during the four years he served in Canada and New Brunswick. 
On his return to England on 13 February 1866 Stotherd was appointed instructor at Chatham, teaching electricity, chemistry, signalling, and photography. He investigated the application of electricity to mining and to submarine mining (then in its infancy), and also organized the first field telegraph. In 1867 he was sent to the Paris Exhibition to report on military telegraph apparatus and engineering exhibits. He was greatly interested in signalling and was instrumental in introducing Morse code in the army. He was promoted brevet major on 22 November 1870, regimental major on 5 July 1872, and regimental lieutenant-colonel on 3 August 1872. In 1871 he went with Colonel C. C. Chesney to report on the Franco-Prussian War and the siege of Paris by Marshal MacMahon during the commune. In April 1873 he was appointed to the War Office in London, to advise on submarine mines and military telegraphs, and from 1873 to 1876 he was president of the first War Office torpedo committee. On 29 September 1875, at Edinburgh, Stotherd married Elizabeth Janet Melville. From 1876 to 1881 Stotherd was commanding royal engineer of the Belfast military district. He was promoted brevet colonel on 3 August 1877, and regimental colonel on 26 April 1882. In September 1881 he was put in charge of the Ordnance Survey in Ireland, living at Mountjoy barracks, Phoenix Park, Dublin, and after the assassination of Lord Frederick Cavendish, in 1882, he was also military justice of the peace for Dublin. 
On 1 April 1883 Stotherd was appointed director-general of the Ordnance Survey and went to its headquarters at Southampton, where he found a staff, recently doubled in number, working to meet the recommendation of the parliamentary select committee of 1878 that, in order to make more efficient the transfer of title to land, the 1:2500 cadastral surveys should be completed in 1890, instead of 1900 as originally planned. Stotherd argued for the retention of a large military staff at the survey during peacetime and for military superintendence of the civil staff. His views held sway, but failed to address the fundamental problems of civilians within the survey. He also successfully argued for systematic revision of survey maps on which work began in 1886. Unfortunately his advice that 1:2500 maps could not be satisfactorily produced by replotting from 6 inch field books without considerable resurveying was ignored, and the revision exercise proved one of the survey's worst errors. During Stotherd's tenure, but against his advice, Stanford's were made sole agents for survey maps in England and Wales. In 1884 under Stotherd's direction half a million maps were prepared in very short time for the Parliamentary Boundary Commission to effect Gladstone's Redistribution of Seats Bill of 1885. Stotherd was made a CB in recognition of this service. In his last year at the survey he introduced powerful electric light to aid photographic reproduction of maps; new steam printing presses also helped reproduction. On 25 November 1886 he was compelled by the age rule to retire, receiving the honorary rank of major-general. He died suddenly, from heart disease, on 1 May 1895 at Heathcote, Camberley, Surrey; he was survived by his wife. 
Stotherd contributed articles to the 'Professional Papers of the Corps of Royal Engineers' (vols. 17 and 18) and his 'Notes on Defence by Submarine Mines' (2nd edn, 1873) was the first English textbook on the subject. He was an unremarkable director-general of the survey: he was not a distinguished scientist and his short tenure of the post gave little scope for the exercise of organizational skills. His early forced retirement increased instability in the survey. 


@@@@@


doc= 26605


Stoughton, Israel (bap. 1603, d. 1644), colonist in America, baptized at Great Coggeshall, Essex, on 18 February 1603, was the third son of Thomas Stoughton ('c'.1557- 'c'.1622), clergyman, and his wife, Katherine ('c'.1560- 'c'.1603). His father was deprived of his living for nonconformity in 1606 and moved to Great Totham, Essex. Israel Stoughton's marriage on 27 March 1627 at Rotherhithe, Surrey, to Elizabeth Knight ('c'.1605-1681) linked him with later emigrants to New England, Thomas Clarke and David Yale, while his elder brother John Stoughton's marriage and first cure of Aller, Somerset, connected him with west country emigrants. Following his eldest brother, Thomas, he emigrated to Dorchester, Massachusetts, in 1632. He was admitted freeman in 1633 and became the leader of protests against arbitrary and secretive magisterial authority, demanding constitutional curbs on the discretionary powers of the governor and assistants. In 1634 he was chosen an auditor of Governor Winthrop's accounts, while at the general court 'some of the assistants were questioned by the freemen for some errors in their government.' A resolution was taken in May 1634 to include elected representatives in the Massachusetts general court and Stoughton was one of the first deputies. In turn, Governor Winthrop was replaced in office, for the first time, by Thomas Dudley. Stoughton also opposed a magisterial veto in court proceedings. In a 1635 reaction in favour of order, Stoughton, attacked by Winthrop as 'a troubler in Israel, a worm, an underminer of the state', was induced to propose the burning of his 'Twelve Objections to the Negative Voice... for peace's sake' ('Letter of Israel Stoughton', 446-58). He was declared incapable of holding office for three years, but this was remitted in 1636. The following year he was elected an assistant, and was re-elected until 1643. In alliance with Richard Bellingham and Richard Saltonstall he continued to resist magisterial pretensions. He represented Massachusetts in boundary negotiations with Plymouth in 1639. As captain of the Dorchester militia in the 1637 Pequot War, he was responsible for mopping up, executing, or enslaving defeated American Indians; he was promoted colony sergeant-major-general in 1641. He returned to England in 1643, became lieutenant-colonel of Colonel Thomas Rainsborough's regiment in the parliamentarian forces, but died the next year at Lincoln. He was survived by six children, including his second son, William Stoughton (1631-1701), who as lieutenant-governor presided over the Salem witchcraft trials in 1692. Israel Stoughton was a key figure in the first-generation conflict between 'the divine right of magistrates' and representative government, as a commercial company charter was adapted into a political constitution. 


@@@@@


doc= 26606


Stoughton, John (1807-1897), Congregational minister, son of Thomas Stoughton (died 1812/13) and his wife, Sarah Bullard, daughter of the master of the Norwich Lunatic Asylum (Bethel Hospital), was born in the parish of St Michael-at-Plea, Norwich, on 18 November 1807. His father, son of an admiral in the navy, was a strict churchman. He died when Stoughton was only five years old, and the boy's education was somewhat neglected. His mother, brought up as a Friend but an Anglican from her marriage, taught him to read, and sent him to the Norwich grammar school. While there he saw something of the intellectual coterie which then gave Norwich an exceptional position among provincial cities. His sense of being 'called' led him to investigate the various church systems. Placed in the office of a Roman Catholic lawyer, Stoughton turned with zest from the constitutional authorities, William Blackstone and Jean Louis Delolme, to the study of John Milner's 'The End of Religious Controversy' (1818) and convinced himself that the independent churches most nearly corresponded to the primitive type. To this view he adhered throughout his life. Abandoning the law, Stoughton in 1828 entered Highbury College, where the society of his contemporary Henry Rogers formed a potent intellectual stimulus. 
On his ordination in May 1833 Stoughton was called to the co-pastorate of the Congregational church at Windsor. On 12 May 1855 he married Mary Vyse, the daughter of George Cooper of Windsor, and they had eleven children. She died in 1879. He resigned his charge in Windsor in 1844 to succeed to that of Hornton Street Church, Kensington. He remained at Hornton Street for more than thirty years. Though he never took rank among the masters of pulpit eloquence, his sermons attracted the more cultivated middle class. His leisure he devoted to organizations for evangelical propaganda and to literary work, chiefly historical, which gained him wide recognition; he was proposed by Matthew Arnold for the Athenaeum. In 1856 he delivered the Congregational lecture, taking as his subject 'The ages of Christendom before the Reformation', and was elected chairman of the Congregational Union. 
After an early study of puritanism in 1848, there appeared in 1862 Stoughton's first important work, 'Church and State Two Hundred Years Ago: a History of Ecclesiastical Affairs in England from 1660 to 1663'. There followed his elaborate 'Ecclesiastical History of England' (4 vols., 1867-70), covering civil wars, Commonwealth, and Restoration; though unduly diffuse in style, it showed careful study of original sources and freedom from pedantry and prejudice. With its sequels -- 'Religion in England under Queen Anne and the Georges' (2 vols., 1878) and 'Religion in England from 1800 to 1880' (2 vols., 1884) -- it forms an important contribution to the religious history of England. 
At the instance of Lord Ebury, Stoughton compiled an account of nonconformist modes of communicating, which was appended to the fourth report of the ritual commission in 1870 ('Parl. papers', 1870, 19). Having accepted in 1872 the chair of historical theology in New College, St John's Wood, he resigned on 11 April 1874 the Kensington charge. With his professorial and literary work he combined for many years occasional duty as a preacher. His friendship with prominent members of the Church of England -- deans Alford and Hook, archbishops Tait and Magee, and especially Dean A. P. Stanley -- was close and distinctive. In the summer of 1876 he arranged a conference between churchmen and dissenters, which met on 4 July in a room in the House of Lords under the presidency of Archbishop Tait, and discussed, without immediate result, the means to co-operation in Christian effort. In 1877 he delivered in Westminster Abbey a lecture on missions, part of a series of discourses by eminent nonconformists instituted by Dean Stanley by way of protest against ecclesiastical exclusiveness. He was one of the pallbearers at the funeral of Dean Stanley on 25 July 1881. He attended the conferences held under the auspices of the Evangelical Alliance at New York in October 1873, at Basel in September 1879, and at Edinburgh in October 1885. 
Stoughton's culture was liberal, and was improved by much travel not only in France and Germany but also in Italy -- Rome he visited three times -- Spain, and Palestine. His travels furnished him with materials for three popular books of some merit: 'Homes and Haunts of Luther' (1875; new edn 1883), 'Footprints of Italian Reformers' (1881), and 'The Spanish Reformers, their Memories and Dwelling Places' (1883). 
Stoughton was no systematic theologian, and, after having his say on the Oxford Movement in 'Lectures on Tractarian Theology' (1843), eschewed controversy. His only contribution to apologetics was a lecture, 'The nature and value of the miraculous testimony to Christianity', printed in 'Modern Scepticism', edited by C. J. Ellicott (1881). He also published a number of minor works, mostly historical and biblical, but including lives of William Wilberforce (1880) and William Penn (1882). 
Stoughton was a handsome man with a robust physique. On 27 June 1884 he resigned his chair and retired to Ealing. In retirement he often visited Tunbridge Wells. He died at his home, Oberlin House, St Leonard's Road, Ealing, on 24 October 1897 and was buried in Ealing cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26607


Stoughton, William (1631-1701), colonial official and preacher, was born on 30 September 1631, probably in England, the second son, and one of at least six children, of Israel Stoughton (bap. 1603, d. 1644), and Elizabeth Knight ('c'.1605-1681). The Stoughton family migrated to Massachusetts Bay in 1632 and in the following year Israel was admitted as a freeman of the colony. Though disciplined for his controversial religious and political views during the antinomian controversy, Israel Stoughton became a magistrate, captain of the artillery company, and a substantial landowner in Dorchester, Massachusetts. He returned to England at the outbreak of the civil war and served as lieutenant-colonel in Thomas Rainsborow's regiment until his death at Lincoln in 1644. 
William Stoughton graduated BA from Harvard College in 1650 and proceeded MA from New College, Oxford, in 1653. He was elected fellow of New College, Oxford, and was appointed minister at Rumboldswycke in Sussex in 1659, but lost both positions with the restoration of the Stuart monarchy in 1660. Stoughton returned to Massachusetts in 1662 and became a respected preacher in Dorchester. His election sermon of 1668, containing the phrase 'God sifted a whole Nation that he might send choice Grain over into this wilderness', marks him as one of the second-generation architects of the New England 'errand'. Stoughton recalled to his audience the high moral standard that God had set for his elect nation, which he envisioned as under siege by Satan and his agents: 'The Lord will never cease working, afflicting, sifting, purging... although there be but a 'Remnant' that will endure and hold out thereunto' (Stoughton, 'New England's True Interest', 17, 19). 
Stoughton rejected calls to accept a permanent ministerial position as pastor or teacher of a congregation, was never married, and had no children. His life focused on politics, farming, and land speculation. He became a freeman of the colony in 1665, and like his father was an assistant in the general court of Massachusetts from 1671 to 1686. He was commissioner of the united colonies from 1674 to 1676, and again from 1680 to 1686. Stoughton was in England from 1677 to 1679 with Peter Bulkeley as a colonial agent for Massachusetts, countering the rival claims of Mason and Gorges to parts of the northern Massachusetts frontier, and diffusing the accusations of Randall Holden and John Greene against the militant encroachment of Massachusetts on Narragansett lands. As colonial agent, too, he penned a strong response to Edward Randolph's public charges against Massachusetts for non-compliance with the navigation laws and non-conformity to the Church of England. 
Having completed his tenure as colonial agent, Stoughton returned to Massachusetts, where he established a reputation as a political moderate. With the revocation of the Massachusetts charter in October 1684, he was appointed deputy president of the dominion of New England for the interim preceding the arrival of the royal governor Edmund Andros in 1686. He was a member of Andros's governing council and was appointed judge assistant under Chief Justice Joseph Dudley. Stoughton's moderate views alienated him from the popular colonial faction, but he was never on good terms with Andros. In April 1689 he was one of the 'inhabitants of New England' who issued a proclamation ordering Andros to 'surrender the Government and fortifications' ('CSP col.', 13.261), although he took no direct part in the uprising upon news of the revolution in England. He was also one of the five authors who celebrated the overthrow of the Andros regime in 'The Revolution in New England Justified' (1691) and was appointed lieutenant-governor under Sir William Phips with the new charter of 1691. 
Most notably, Stoughton was chief justice of the 1692 court of oyer and terminer that was convened for the purpose of trying the witchcraft cases generated by the outbreak of accusations in Salem village and surrounding communities. Unlike the majority of his ministerial colleagues, who believed that God permitted Satan to appear in the shapes of innocent persons, Stoughton maintained that divine justice would not permit the devil to belie the reputations of true believers. He thus took the spectral evidence offered by tormented accusers at face value, and with infamous irony presided over the conviction and execution of nineteen persons for witchcraft in the summer of 1692. Phips dissolved the court of oyer and terminer in October, but appointed Stoughton as chief justice of the newly chartered supreme court of judiciary. When the new court resumed witchcraft trials in the winter of 1693, Phips released most of the accused and reprieved five condemned persons in May 1693, whereupon Stoughton was 'filled with passionate anger' and refused to come to court ('CSP col.', 14.112). Believing that witches were still at large in New England, he never repented of his role in the witchcraft trials. Some years later, when his judicial colleague and fellow councillor Samuel Sewall publicly apologized for his own role in the trials, Stoughton snubbed him by neglecting to invite Sewall to an official dinner, although he later named Sewall as executor of his will. 
When Stoughton supplied evidence that led to Phips's recall to England in 1694 on charges of misgovernment, he was appointed acting governor of Massachusetts in place of the unpopular Phips. During his tenure as governor he continued to serve as chief justice in the superior court. In 1698 he donated Stoughton Hall to Harvard College, which was completed in 1699 and was featured in his portrait ('c'.1700). With the governorship Stoughton inherited the ongoing challenge of defending New England's frontiers against the French and their native allies. Writing to the Board of Trade in 1701, Edward Randolph characterized Stoughton as 'a person learned and conversant in books, but wholly unacquainted with military discipline' ('Randolf', 6.254). Despite his deteriorating health in the spring of 1701, Stoughton continued to write letters to England requesting military supplies. In June the lieutenant-governor of New York recommended that he attend the treaty negotiations between the Iroquois, English, and French at Albany that were planned for the coming July. Stoughton, however, died at his home in Dorchester on 7 July 1701. He was interred in Dorchester burial-ground on 15 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 26608


Stovin, Sir Frederick (1783-1865), army officer, was born at Whitgift, near Howden, Yorkshire, the son of James Stovin of Whitgift. He was commissioned ensign in the 52nd foot on 22 March 1800, served with it in Pulteney's expedition to Ferrol, where he was one of the few officers actually engaged, and became lieutenant on 7 January 1801. He obtained a company in the 62nd foot on 24 June 1802, and (after a few months on half pay) in the 28th foot on 9 July 1803. He served with the 28th in Ireland (where he was employed as brigade major), in Lord Cathcart's expedition to Bremen in 1805, and in the siege and capture of Copenhagen in 1807. In 1808 he served under Moore in Sweden, and afterwards in Spain in the Corunna campaign. He was aide-de-camp to General Alexander Mackenzie Fraser in the Walcheren expedition in 1809, and was present at the capture of Flushing. In January 1810 he went with the 28th to Gibraltar, and in April to Tarifa, where he distinguished himself in a sortie, driving the French out of an old convent which was dangerously close to the walls. He was brigade major at Gibraltar for a few months, but had to return to England in September on account of ill health. 
Stovin returned to the Peninsula in July 1811, and, as aide-de-camp to Picton, was present at the capture of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz. He was then appointed assistant adjutant-general to the 3rd (Picton's) division, and served with it in this capacity until the end of the war, receiving the gold cross with two clasps. He was made brevet major on 27 April 1812, and brevet lieutenant-colonel on 26 August 1813. In 1814 Stovin was appointed deputy adjutant-general to the expeditionary force against the coasts of the United States; he took part in the unsuccessful attack on New Orleans, and was wounded there. 
In 1815 Stovin married Anne Elizabeth, second daughter of Sir Sitwell Sitwell, bt; she died at Brighton on 3 April 1856, aged sixty-three. On 2 January 1815 he was made KCB. He was promoted major in the 28th on 9 May 1816, and obtained the lieutenant-colonelcy of the 92nd on 2 September 1819. He commanded the 92nd in Jamaica from October 1820 to the middle of 1821, when he exchanged (9 August) into the 90th light infantry. He commanded the 90th in the Ionian Islands and suppressed a rebellion. On 23 April 1829 he was placed on half pay. He was made KCMG for his services there, the order being then confined to Malta and the Ionian Islands. He became colonel in the army on 22 July 1830 and major-general on 23 November 1841. He was groom-in-waiting to the queen from 1837 to 1860, when he was made an extra groom. He was given the colonelcy of the 83rd foot on 1 September 1848. He became lieutenant-general on 11 November 1851 and general on 14 August 1859, and received the GCB on 18 May 1860. He died in Ambassador's Court, St James's Palace, on 16 August 1865. 


@@@@@


doc= 26609


Stow, David (1793-1864), school founder and educationist, was born in Paisley on 17 May 1793, the son of William Stow and his wife, Agnes Smith. William Stow was a prosperous Paisley merchant and magistrate but the family was partly of English descent; David Stow's grandfather had been a landed proprietor in co. Durham. Stow's mother was a woman of great piety whose household routine revolved around family prayers and scripture reading. He attended the Paisley grammar school, where he was a good but not outstanding pupil. His biographer describes him in his schooldays as a handsome, fair boy, naturally high-spirited but too gentle-natured to take much interest in the rougher games. 
In 1811, at the age of eighteen, Stow was sent to Glasgow to work for a silk merchant. Avoiding the society of the city's worldly social clubs, Stow spent his leisure in study and conversation with other devout young men and quickly became interested in the spiritual reclamation of the urban poor. Industrial growth had doubled the population of Glasgow in a very short time, creating an ill-housed, under-nourished, and hopeless proletariat that seemed bereft of any spiritual authority. On his daily walk from his home south of the River Clyde to his place of business, he had to pass through the Saltmarket, an area of appalling squalor. He began his charitable work by distributing money to impoverished old men, but soon learned that they were too settled in their ways for easy reformation. 
Recognizing that much human behaviour is the product of habit and example, Stow turned his attention to the reclamation of the very young. In the recent past, education of the poor had been viewed with suspicion by the authorities, and indeed Stow's own father had been ordered to give details of a Sabbath school founded in Paisley to the sheriff of Renfrewshire, who feared sedition. Although this attitude had relaxed considerably by the time David Stow opened his first Sabbath school, it may explain his constant eagerness to demonstrate the moral benefits of education and his comparative lack of interest in its intellectual dimension. Stow was not the only one to try to offer Sabbath schooling to the children of the Glasgow poor, but he was the boldest in entering backstreets and alleys, searching for the poorest families, an activity he called 'deep-sea fishing' (Fraser, 25). He started his first small school with children drawn from about seventy families living in two lanes in the Saltmarket district. By concentrating on one small neighbourhood he ensured that he could get to know each family and gain the co-operation of the parents. Stow's efforts attracted the interest and support of Dr Chalmers, minister of the Tron Church (1815) and founder of the Tron Parish Sabbath School Society (1816). Stow was an elder in Chalmers's Tron parish and in 1821 became an elder of St John's parish, where Chalmers was minister. 
Stow proved to be an extraordinarily gifted teacher, with an instinctive knowledge of what would gain children's interest and help them remember information, and an appreciation of the value of play in social and moral development. In 1820 Stow visited Samuel Wilderspin's recently opened infant school in Spitalfields, which was to provide him with a model for a programme of infant education along Christian lines. Scots at the time were aware of the work of Robert Owen, but distrusted his atheism. In his capacity as secretary of the newly formed Glasgow Infant School Society, he invited Wilderspin to Glasgow to advise on infant education. Wilderspin helped him to launch the Drygate model school in April 1828 and went on to deliver a series of lectures on infant education all over Scotland. This tour established Wilderspin's reputation as an 'educational entrepreneur', and taught Stow much about the current trends in infant education. Several of Stow's most famous ideas, such as 'sympathy of numbers' (good behaviour reinforced by the opinion of one's peers) and 'picturing out' (fixing lessons in the mind by means of vivid word-pictures), came from Wilderspin. One history has described the difference between the two men thus: 'Stow's ideal pupil [was] an infant saint with some knowledge, and Wilderspin's an infant prodigy with some religion' (Salmon and Hindshaw, 73). 
As a result of his overwhelming concern with children's moral development, Stow rejected Bell's and Lancaster's system of sketchily trained young monitors in favour of more mature trained teachers, both male and female. From its inception the Drygate school trained some teachers, although initially the course of training was very short. Stow believed in the importance of co-education, feeling that it stimulated intellectual effort among the girls and good behaviour among the boys. His emphasis upon the formation of good habits early in life, and his doubt that these could be sustained in the backstreets of Glasgow, led him to admit children as young as two years of age to his school at a time when formal education usually commenced at age seven. 
The Drygate model school (and, after 1837, its affiliated training college) offered a very different environment for learning from the traditional parish school. The Drygate school opened in a cottage adapted to include a gallery with tiered seats so that all of the children could see the teacher. The building was spacious, light, and clean. Pupils themselves were expected to be as clean and tidy as possible. Perhaps because the children he undertook to teach were very young Stow seldom used books, and taught scripture by means of vivid storytelling, followed by questions. This encouraged the children not only to remember but to understand what they had heard. Coloured beads were used for teaching counting and mnemonic rhymes helped teach the multiplication tables. Natural history lessons included tours of the playground to observe the plants growing there. 
Stow had learned a great deal from watching Wilderspin's frantic efforts to keep order in the early weeks of his Spitalfields school. Out of the realization that small children need a great deal of physical activity came Stow's emphasis on the important role of play. The playground, which he called the 'uncovered school', became more than an outlet for excess energy, however, as Stow became convinced that it was there that children learned such important social skills as good manners, co-operation, and the ability to share. Stow's Drygate school included a large playground and he insisted that all schools must have a play area, even if it had to be made by fencing in an area of the roof. Inside the classroom children were seldom required to sit still for more than fifteen minutes at a time. Marching, singing, and clapping games punctuated lessons, giving children the chance to move about. Masters took part in games, which gave them the opportunity not only to observe acts of kindness or cruelty for later class discussion but also to learn a great deal about the character of individuals -- to identify the natural leaders, followers, and loners, for instance. Stow had never used corporal punishment in his schools; he elaborated a system of peer criticism in which actions observed in the playground were put before the class (anonymously) for judgement. On the other hand, Stow avoided giving prizes or assigning class rankings, believing they led to jealousy and unwholesome competition. One modern writer on Stow comments that the novelty of substituting kindness and reason for corporal punishment can hardly be overstated in a society which used the expression 'Fa fuppit the laddie?' (Who whipped the boy?) to mean 'Who was his teacher?' (Cruikshank, 213). 
Stow published a series of articles explaining his training system to a popular audience. Presumably to appeal to the working-class parent or to emphasize the essential Scottishness of the enterprise, these took the form of a dialogue in Scottish dialect between Granny and her daughter-in-law, Leezy. Granny is represented as the voice of tradition (asking, for instance, why the master joins in play or why the traditional shorter catechism is not used). Leezy, the hard-pressed but dutiful mother, represents the parent who is not quite sure about the school and its modern philosophy but is pleased by the effect it has upon her children. Through Granny's persistent questioning and the master's patient replies, Stow enunciates the principles of his educational system for the general reader. 
Although Stow was neither the first to offer infant education nor the first to train teachers in Scotland (James Buchanan, a disciple of Owen who recruited Wilderspin to teaching, had trained teachers on a small scale), he can justly claim to have founded the first teacher training college in the British Isles and to have most systematically promoted the use of trained adults as teachers. 
Until 1835 Stow had funded most of his schools' work. As they grew this became impossible and in that year they passed to the control of the Glasgow Educational Society, of which he was the joint secretary. Like Chalmers he believed the established church should control education, supported by the state, and he was a strong opponent of the voluntaries (who attacked government-aided church schooling). The Glasgow society, which also produced George Lewis's famous critique 'Scotland, a Half-Educated Nation' to discredit the voluntaries, promoted Stow's ideas for teacher training and called for increased state financial assistance to schools. Under the society's direction Stow's schools were re-formed as the Normal Seminary, which opened in November 1837 at Dundas Vale, Glasgow. The Normal Seminary received its first government grant in 1841, conditional upon its being transferred to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. In this period Dr Kay (later Kay-Shuttleworth), who was an admirer of Stow's work, tried to recruit him as one of the first inspectors of schools for Scotland. He declined on the grounds of an aversion to receiving pay for his work coupled with ill health, brought on by overwork. 
In 1843, when the Disruption shattered the Church of Scotland, Stow, together with his mentor, Dr Chalmers, and most of the Normal College staff joined the Free Church. At first Stow hoped that they might be able to stay at their posts but the general assembly decreed that all staff must be adherents to the Church of Scotland. In May 1845, in a dramatic gesture of repudiation, Stow and his fellow directors, teachers, fifty students, and 700 pupils assembled in the Normal College. With Stow slightly flushed with emotion, others in tears, the company left the building in a procession, joined by the old janitor and his wife, who locked the door behind them. They walked through crowded streets to their new premises, where they carried on as usual, conducting classes in tents until new buildings could be erected. Thereafter the Free Church Normal College and the Glasgow Normal Seminary trained teachers side by side. Later they formed the nucleus of Glasgow's Jordanhill Training College. 
Stow continued to guide the college for the remainder of his life, but developments in educational policy depressed him. He felt that the instructors trained under the system of pupil teachers created by the minutes of 1864 could have little status as moral leaders, and he disliked the emphasis placed on secular learning over moral training both by the schools and the training colleges. As the Scottish intellectual tradition reasserted itself, the demand for formally trained teachers ensured the success of the normal colleges, but the emphasis on very young children's emotional and developmental needs was lost, only to be rediscovered in the twentieth century. Stow continued to command respect as an authority on education in his lifetime, and in 1862 a selection of his writing was awarded a medal for merit at the London exhibition. After about 1860 ill health prevented him from taking an active part in the life of the college. 
Stow's family life was pious and happy, but it brought him a series of bereavements which threatened to overwhelm him. On 12 March 1822 he married Marion Freebairn. It was a happy marriage and they had three sons and a daughter. When she fell ill and died on 30 July 1831 Stow was so devastated that he was unable to carry on with his work for a year afterwards. In 1841 he married Elizabeth MacArthur, again a happy marriage that was cut short by her death on 24 May 1847. Both his two eldest sons died in 1852; the eldest was a clergyman and the second had entered his father's business. Stow died at his home at Bridge of Allan, Stirlingshire, on 6 November 1864. 
Stow is remembered as a humane and practical teacher, and a skilled adapter of other men's theories rather than an original thinker such as Rousseau or Pestalozzi. He is remembered as the spiritual founder of the Jordanhill Training College, whose oldest building bears his name. In his own time he was inclined to underemphasize the influence of other educationists, especially Wilderspin, upon his thought. He was apt to present as original insights very fundamental instruments of human learning, such as picturing out and sympathy of numbers. Many of his methods are obsolete -- he employed more verbal questioning and his class sizes were much larger than is fashionable today. Nevertheless, his outstanding contributions to the education of the very young include the avoidance of corporal punishment, and the idea that education should be a happy experience and the relationship between teacher and pupil a friendly one. Stow promoted these and other essentially modern innovations, such as the recognition of the importance of play and the necessity of a clean, pleasant environment for learning. He introduced the most systematic training for teachers in the British Isles in his time and offered thoughtful and considerate support to some of the poorest citizens of Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 26610


Stow, James (b. c.1770, d. in or after 1823), engraver, was born near Maidstone, the son of a labourer. At the age of thirteen he is said to have engraved a plate after a painting by Bartolome Esteban Murillo (1618-1682) of 'St John and the Lamb', which showed such precocious talent that a group of the local gentry sponsored his move to London and his apprenticeship to William Woollett, one of the foremost engravers of the day. After Woollett's death in 1785 he completed his apprenticeship with William Sharp. 
Stow worked in London, producing illustrations for many of the fine publications of the day, including an important series of prints illustrating the plays of Shakespeare after paintings by British artists for the print publisher John Boydell. Among his engravings of scenes from Shakespeare are illustrations to 'Coriolanus', act I, scene ii, after Sir R. K. Porter, and to 'Romeo and Juliet', act III, scene v, after John Francis Rigaud. He also produced engravings as illustrations for other publications, notably Robert Bowyer's edition of David Hume's 'History of England' (1806), Thomas Maklin's 'Illustrated Bible' (1791-1800), F. J. du Roveray's edition of Alexander Pope's translation of 'The Odyssey of Homer', and George Perfect Harding's series of portraits of the deans of Westminster, published in 1822. Among his numerous engraved portraits, some of which he issued himself, was the fine portrait of the naval hero Sir John Borlase Warren (1754-1822), a stipple engraving after Samuel Drummond, which he issued from Hammersmith and 117 Oxford Street, London, in 1799. By 1808 his business address was listed in directories as 6 Stafford Place, Pimlico. His latest employment was upon the illustrations to Wilkinson's 'Londina illustrata' (1811-23). Stow is said to have fallen into intemperate habits, and he died in obscurity and poverty. 


@@@@@


doc= 26611


Stow, John (1524/5-1605), historian, was born in the parish of St Michael Cornhill, London, the eldest of the seven children of Thomas Stow (died 1559), tallow-chandler, and his wife, Elizabeth Archer (died 1568?). John Strype described the Stows as a family of 'good substance and credit' (Strype, 'Survey', 1.i-iv) drawn from the ranks of the solid citizenry of the city. His grandfather, also named Thomas and a tallow-chandler, died in 1527 leaving household goods worth $20 and plate valued at over $6. 
Stow (who also spelt his own name Stowe) had three brothers, Thomas, William ('b'. 1547), and John the younger, as well as three sisters, Joan (Rolfe or Frowyke), Margaret, and Alice (Farmer). Family life was marred by a protracted feud with his brother Thomas over their inheritance, a conflict that involved not only the two brothers but also their mother and Thomas's wife. Thomas claimed a larger share of his mother's estate because he provided her with care during her last years. John's argument was based on his status as the eldest son and his brother's manipulation and intimidation of their mother. Elizabeth Stow's will was proved on 13 October 1568, and it appears that John never received what he regarded as his fair share of her estate. Frequent references to this unhappy quarrel in Stow's chronicles suggest that he never forgave his brother and bore a grudge against him for many years. 
Stow married his wife, Elizabeth (her surname is unknown), after 1549. Following his marriage he lived near the well in Aldgate, between Leadenhall Street and Fenchurch Street; later he resided in Lime Street ward where he remained until his death. By about 1569 he had three marriageable daughters, of whom two, Joan and Julyan (died 1611), survived him. 
Although intimately associated with London throughout his long life, Stow cannot be connected with any city school; neither did he study at a university or the inns of court. Nevertheless, he wrote English with fluency and clarity, had a good command of Latin, and possessed an extraordinary knowledge of English history and literature. His education was acquired perhaps at a school without an established reputation or through self-study. He always held formal education in high esteem and spoke with respect when writing of those who enjoyed its benefits. Although he remained outside the circle of university-educated Renaissance humanist scholars, he became acquainted with many such, including John Dee, William Camden, Archbishop Matthew Parker of Canterbury, and Henry Savile. When he joined the Society of Antiquaries some time after its foundation in 1586, he was the only member who was not a gentleman. 
Stow conformed to the Church of England as established during the reign of Elizabeth despite unsubstantiated accusations of Roman Catholic sympathies that derived from his collection of books and manuscripts. Early in 1569 he was examined by the lord mayor for illegally copying and circulating a manifesto against Elizabeth which had been published by the Spanish ambassador on behalf of the duke of Alva, the governor of the Netherlands. Stow admitted that he had been lent two copies of the document and had made a copy for himself. He also read it to some neighbours but denied making other copies of it. The mayor took no further action, but Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, ordered that Stow's house be searched for illegal books. On 24 February Grindal wrote to Sir William Cecil enclosing a list of thirty-nine objectionable titles including 'An Exposition of the Creed, Ten Commandments, Pater noster, Ave Maria, &c.' by Edmund Bonner, 'A Great Old Book, Containing the Manner of the List of Saints', 'A Plain and Godly Treatise Concerning the Mass and Blessed Sacrament of the Altar', as well as numerous historical works (Strype, 'Grindal', 516-19). The possession of these works led Grindal to the conclusion that Stow was a great favourer of Catholicism. 
Although the privy council did not respond to Grindal's charges, this episode has been used to support allegations of Catholicism. Stow's known behaviour lends no support to the charges. Neither his manuscript nor published writings point to either Roman Catholic sympathies or a serious interest in the theological or liturgical aspects of the Reformation. Rather he identified himself with the Elizabethan protestant establishment, not least through his association with some of its leading figures, men such as Archbishop Parker, John Whitgift (to whom as archbishop he dedicated his 'Annales'), and Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. Throughout his long life Stow detached himself from religious controversy and had a generally tolerant attitude for the age in which he lived. He recorded the execution of Elizabethan Catholic martyrs with compassion but was also well informed about Elizabethan religious radicals including familists, separatists, and Arians. His strongest prejudices were not religious but were directed against the Irish, whom he portrayed as an obstacle to English domination of the British Isles. 
Stow was admitted to the freedom of the Merchant Taylors' Company in 1547 but remained for nearly thirty years a member of the subordinate Bachelors' or Yeoman Company, and was never admitted to the livery or to any important office. In the 1570s he produced documents that were needed to resolve a dispute over ward boundaries, and in 1584-5 he was apparently employed as a surveyor of ale houses. In the latter year he was also appointed one of two collectors of the assessment in Lime Street ward for a muster of 4000 men. Towards the end of his life Stow devoted the bulk of his time to collecting historical records and to writing. Although his patrons included Leicester, archbishops Parker and Whitgift, and several mayors of London, Stow complained latterly of lack of money, a complaint endorsed by a number of contemporaries. Edmund Howes wrote that Stow never rode but travelled on foot as he visited old buildings and searched for historical records, while Ben Jonson remarked that when he and Stow were walking together, they met two lame beggars whom Stow asked whether they would take him into their order. 
From 1579 the Merchant Taylors' Company provided Stow with a pension of $4 per annum, and in 1590 he petitioned the aldermen of London for admission to the freedom of the city in order to reduce his expenses. Letters patent issued in 1604 authorized him to collect voluntary contributions and gratuities. His financial problems resulted from his difficulties in earning an adequate living from book sales and from his failure to attract a sufficiently generous patron. None the less Stow's will, which he signed on 30 August 1603, included bequests of $10 apiece to his daughters, Julyan Towers and Joan Foster; the rest of his 'goodes, household stuf, and appareyle', as well as the lease of his house with 'the Residue of the yeares to come', was left to his wife (Stow, ed. Kingsford, 1.xlv). That Stow was not rich is beyond question, but his pleas of poverty were exaggerated. 
Stow died in London aged eighty on 5 April 1605 and was buried in the parish church of St Andrew Undershaft. In his memory Stow's wife erected near the grave a mural monument of Derbyshire marble and alabaster; still extant, it represents him writing in a book on a desk with other books about him. Above it is the motto 'Aut scribenda agere, aut legenda scribere' ('Either to perform deeds to be written about, or to write things to be read'). The inscription, which is in good Renaissance Latin -- appropriate to the self-taught scholar who published so many of his writings in that tongue -- provides a succinct and stylish resume of Stow's achievements as a historian: '[Memoriae Sacrum] Resurrectionem in Christo pie expectat Joannes Stowe, civis Londiniensis. Qui in antiquis monumentis eruendis, accuratissima diligentia usus Angliae Annales, & civitatis Londini Synopsin bene de sua, bene de postera aetate meritus, luculenter scripsit: Vitaeque stadio pie decurso, obit Aetatis anno 80, die 5 Aprilis 1605. Elizabetha coniux ut perpetuum sui amoris testimonium dolens. ('Sacred to the memory. John Stow, London citizen, piously awaits resurrection in Christ. Who having employed most careful diligence in bringing to light records of antiquity, deserved well both of his own time and of posterity in writing with distinction the annals of England and the survey of the city of London. Having devoutly run the course of his life, he died in his eightieth year, on 5 April 1605. His wife Elizabeth [erected this monument] lamenting as perpetual witness of her love.')' An engraving depicting Stow as an elderly man of seventy-seven was prepared for the 1603 edition of 'A Survey of London', but most surviving copies lack the portrait. The engraving was later reproduced in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1, 1837, 48) as well as in other modern works. John Manningham recalled a conversation with Stow in 1602 in which he mentioned this picture: 'I was with Stowe the Antiquary. He told me that a model of his picture was found in the Recorder Fleetwood's study, with this inscription: 'Johannes Stowe'', Antiquarius' 'Angliae', which is now cut in brass and prefixed in print to his 'Survey of London'. He sayeth of it as Pilate sayeth, 'What I have written I have written.' and thinks himself worthy of that title for his pains, for hath no gains by his travail. ('Diary of John Manningham', 154-5)' 

Stow was a prolific manuscript collector whose interests included chronicles, charters, ecclesiastical and municipal records, wills, literary works, and learned treatises. The Harley collection at the British Library contains the largest group of his manuscripts, but many items are incompletely or inaccurately catalogued. Other manuscripts are included in the collections of the Bodleian Library at Oxford, Lambeth Palace Library, the Folger Shakespeare Library, and elsewhere. It is likely that Stow was the most knowledgeable record collector of the sixteenth century. In 1562 he acquired a manuscript of 'The Tree of Commonwealth' by Edmund Dudley and presented a copy to the author's grandson, the earl of Leicester, who encouraged Stow to pursue historical research. Medieval works of which he possessed manuscripts include the 'Chronica majora' of Matthew Paris, the 'Gesta regum' of William of Malmesbury, and Gerald of Wales's 'Itinerary through Wales'. He copied the long English version of the 'Historie of the Arrivall of Edward IV in England' (the work that constituted the first volume of the Camden Society's publications in 1838), and thereby preserved it for posterity. Among sixteenth-century manuscripts preserved by Stow are William Lambarde's 'Perambulation of Kent', which influenced 'A Survey of London', and a narrative describing the murder of Thomas Arden of Faversham, Kent, in 1551. Stow was also an avid collector of printed books, but a complete inventory has not survived. After his death the collection was dispersed. 
C. L. Kingsford stressed Stow's importance as an indefatigable searcher of historical records who offered 'something of a new departure in the art of historical inquiry', and argued that Stow was 'the first English historian to make systematic use of public records for the purpose of his work' (Kingsford, 266-7). His writings reveal an extensive knowledge of close rolls, patent rolls, and inquisitions post mortem, along with charters, records of the city of London, and judicial sources. He was apparently the only English authority to record the attempted rescue of the sons of Edward IV from the Tower of London in 1483, in an account whose phrasing (in the 'Annales of England') suggests that he had seen official indictments that no longer exist. Kingsford concluded with justice that through the use of public records Stow did more to advance the study of fifteenth-century England than any other writer of his time. 
Stow's first publication, 'The workes of Geffrey Chaucer, newly printed, with divers addicions whiche were never in printe before', appeared in 1561. Appended to this edition was John Lydgate's 'Siege of Thebes'. Earlier Stow worked on William Thynne's Chaucer edition of 1532 and in his own work corrected and enlarged it along lines severely criticized by later authorities. Later he supplied his notes to Thomas Speght who incorporated them in his edition of 1598. Stow edited a collection of thirty-three works of John Skelton, 'Pithy Pleasaunt and Profitable Workes of Maister Skelton', which was printed by Thomas Marshe in 1568. Stow pursued literary interests until late in life when he published 'Certaine worthy manuscript poems of great antiquity preserved long in the studie of a Northfolke gentleman' (1597). The book was dedicated to Edmund Spenser and included the 'Statelie Tragedy of Guistard and Sismond', 'The Northern Mother's Blessing', and 'The Way to Thrift'. 
The most prolific historical writer of the sixteenth century, during his lifetime Stow produced a total of twenty-one editions and issues of chronicles together with his 'Survey of London'. His longer chronicles -- the 'Chronicles of England' (1580) and the 'Annales of England', first published in 1592, which were printed in quarto -- provide detailed accounts of English history from the earliest times which are continued down to the accession of James I in Stow's own last edition. His smaller summaries and abridgements offered a cheaper, simplified guide to the English past. His first chronicle, the 'Summarie of Englyshe Chronicles', was published in 1565 and subsequently extended and enlarged. For the period before 1547 Stow depended primarily on earlier writers, but for the later period he was writing about his own times. His accounts of the reigns of Edward VI, Mary, and Elizabeth were based on his own records, on those provided by his friends and correspondents, and on his own personal experience. Over the years he not only extended but made significant revisions to the chronicles with the result that his assessment of a particular individual or event cannot be determined without consulting and comparing different editions. 
Stow's commitment to historical accuracy led him into a protracted controversy with Richard Grafton, who in 1563 published a chronicle based on the work of Thomas Lanquet to compete with earlier editions produced by Robert Crowley and Thomas Cooper. Controversy between Crowley and Cooper created an opportunity for Stow to publish the first edition of his own 'Summarie' in 1565, a venture that led to a conflict with Grafton that ended only with the latter's death in 1573. To secure his place in the market for chronicles Stow had to overcome Grafton's standing with the protestant establishment in London. This he did with passion as he denounced Grafton as a plagiarist who was incapable of making accurate copies of the works from which he borrowed. Grafton replied in kind, creating a learned conflict that generated more heat than light. He criticized Stow's work as the 'memories of superstitious foundations, fables, and lies foolishly stowed together', while Stow retorted that Grafton's chronicles contained 'the thunderous noise of empty tonnes and unfruitful grafts' (Devereux, 33). Grafton's scholarship presented an easy target, but Stow exaggerated his adversary's failings and projected an unappealing image of his own self-righteousness and complete commitment to the truth. 
Stow's most famous work, 'A Survey of London', first published in 1598, appeared in an expanded second edition in 1603, and has remained continuously in print. Over the centuries it has been widely praised and cited in countless works. In his invaluable edition, C. L. Kingsford describes 'A Survey' as 'the book of a life; on it the author's peculiar title to fame now rests' (Stow, ed. Kingsford, 1.xxviii). The book is a topographical survey of the city and its suburbs developed along the lines of earlier works by John Leland, William Lambarde, and William Camden. In its composition Stow drew on a wide range of classical and medieval historical literature, public and civic records, as well as upon his own intimate personal knowledge of the city where he spent his life. The reader of 'A Survey' travels with Stow through each of the city's wards and the adjoining city of Westminster, learns about the wall, bridges, gates, and parish churches of London, and peruses lists of mayors and sheriffs. May McKisack notes that the 'material is under control, subordinated to the demands of the author's plan, and allowing full scope for the exercise of his skill and the display of his qualities as historian' (McKisack, 132). 

'A Survey of London' reveals dramatically the pageantry of the sixteenth-century city. Thus Stow gives details of an elaborate feast for serjeants-at-law at Ely Place in 1531 that lasted five days. Attended by the king and queen and foreign ambassadors, the celebration offered an abundance of food that rivalled a coronation feast. Stow also notes the great buildings of London that symbolize its substantial wealth. For him the most beautiful houses in the city, or even in England, are in Goldsmiths' Row, where 'ten fair dwelling-houses and fourteen shops, all in one frame uniformly built four stories high, beautified toward the street with the Goldsmiths' arms... cast in lead, richly painted over and gilt' (Stow, ed. Kingsford, 1.345). But he also records the negative aspects of urban growth, in the shape of unsightly sprawl, filth, the destruction of ancient monuments, and above all poverty. His book approaches the thoroughness of an encyclopaedia, but there are also striking omissions, with nothing, for instance, to suggest that the author took an interest in the theatre, or in the plays of Shakespeare. In compiling 'A Survey', Stow recognized a sense of patriotic duty to what he called his 'native mother and Countrey' (Stow, ed. Kingsford, 1.xcviii). It is noteworthy that while Camden's 'Britannia' was written in Latin for the educated elite, Stow's 'Survey' was composed in the language of his fellow countrymen. 
Stow made significant contributions to the famous second edition of Holinshed's 'Chronicles' published in 1587. He regularly laid claim to this work, in the 'Annales of England' calling it his larger chronicle, and incorporated many of his manuscript notes into it, but Abraham Fleming is now regarded as the actual compiler. About 1590 Stow also began referring to larger works that he was writing. One, described as an account 'not only of this famous city of London, but also of this whole island, princes of the same, and the accidents of their times', was nearly completed when he died but was never published. Stow complained that London printers wanted only shorter histories and would not accept his book. A second work, referred to as a book of foundations, was probably never completed, but parts of it may have been incorporated into William Dugdale's 'Monasticon Anglicanum'. 
Stow's influence extended well into the seventeenth century as a result of reprints and enlargements of his work. Edmund Howes published expanded editions of the chronicles in 1607, 1611, 1615, 1618, and 1631, while Anthony Munday with the personal encouragement of Stow and some of his 'best collections' corrected and extended 'A Survey of London' in 1618 and 1633 (Stow, ed. Munday, 'Epistle dedicatorie'). The most important later editions of the latter are John Strype's folio edition published in 1720 and C. L. Kingsford's comprehensively annotated edition of 1908. A serviceable edition of the 'Survey' by H. B. Wheatley was published in 'Everyman's Library' in 1912. 
Stow is traditionally viewed -- often with more than a hint of condescension -- as an earnest, hard-working antiquarian, who produced highly accurate but old-fashioned works that were superseded by the humanistic scholarship of university-educated intellectuals. 'A Survey of London' is usually acknowledged to be his most enduring work because it offers a classic descriptive account of the capital during the Tudor period. The chronicles came to be regarded as less significant than the second edition of Holinshed because of the latter's connection with Shakespeare's history plays. In reality Stow was the most productive historical writer of the sixteenth century. His chronicles were more widely read than those of any other historian of his era and, unlike Holinshed, covered the whole sixteenth century. As an eyewitness to events from the death of Henry VIII to the accession of James I he provides important insights into the political and cultural life of his age from the perspective of a London citizen who never styled himself as a gentleman. 


@@@@@


doc= 26612


Stowe, William Henry (1825-1855), journalist, eldest son of William Stowe, surgeon at Buckingham, and his wife, Mary, was born at Buckingham on 1 January 1825. After attending a school at Iffley, near Oxford, he spent six months at King Edward's School, Birmingham, which he left at Easter 1840. He studied medicine for three years at Buckingham, but, finding this uncongenial, entered Wadham College, Oxford, in January 1844, and was Hody (Greek) exhibitioner from 1845 to 1850. His health had previously been considered delicate, so he began his studies at a significant disadvantage. 
At Oxford, Stowe was intimately associated with G. G. Bradley (afterwards dean of Westminster), John Conington, and others of the Rugby School set. In 1848 he was placed in the first class in 'literae humaniores' with Edward Parry (afterwards bishop-suffragan of Dover) and William Stubbs (afterwards bishop of Oxford); he graduated BA in 1848 and MA in 1853. After two years as a private tutor at Oxford, he began in 1851 a connection with 'The Times' by contributing literary articles, among them a comparison of the characteristics of Thackeray and Dickens. In March 1852 he obtained an open fellowship at Oriel College, and the following month was admitted as a student at Lincoln's Inn. 
In May 1852 John Walter, the proprietor, gave Stowe a permanent post on 'The Times'. His work for the paper was mainly on literary subjects, though he wrote many leading articles on miscellaneous topics. His reviews of Kaye's 'Afghanistan' and of 'David Copperfield' were reprinted in 'Essays from The Times' (2nd ser., 1854). Defying popular enthusiasm, Stowe with 'academic fastidiousness' gave 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' its first unfavourable review in an English paper. His obituary article on Lord Brougham appeared in 'The Times' of 11 May 1868, thirteen years after Stowe's own death. 
In 1855 'The Times' organized a 'sick and wounded fund', which reached $25,000, for the relief of the British army in the Crimea, and Stowe was selected, probably by Walter, to go to the scene as the fund's almoner. He reached Constantinople before the end of February and was instructed in his duties by Thomas Chenery. He was soon at Scutari, whence he moved to Balaklava. There he visited the hospitals and camp, reported on the defects of the sanitary situation, and distributed supplies provided by the 'Times' fund. As a 'Times' representative he was regarded by some as a 'dangerous person', but welcomed by others. Frances Taylor, a 'lady volunteer' nurse, in her 'Eastern Hospitals and English Nurses' (1857) wrote that while others talked, Mr Stowe acted; she praised his concern, thoroughness, insight into the hospitals' needs, and 'kind and friendly manner' (Taylor, 92). 
On 16 March, Stowe's first letter from the Crimea appeared in 'The Times', and described the Balaklava hospitals and the health of the army. Many further dispatches on like subjects followed. In the temporary absences of William Howard Russell, Stowe also reported military operations: two of his letters (nos. 80 and 81) described the third bombardment of Sevastopol and were included in Russell's 'The War' (1855). Stowe was deserted by his servant, and, unable to resist the fatigue and unhealthy climate, he fell ill. Although as 'Times' fund almoner he had much assisted the military hospitals, as a civilian he was refused admission. He was carried down to the church at Balaklava used to accommodate the sick, and there he died of 'camp fever' (presumably cholera or typhus) on 22 June 1855, at the age of thirty. He was buried in the British cemetery at Balaklava, and in 1857 a memorial was placed in Oriel chapel. In a leading article in 'The Times' of 6 July 1855, John Walter described Stowe's experiences in the Crimea, and praised his dispatches as 'an astonishing effort of intellectual and descriptive talent'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26613


Stowel, John (1762-1799), poet, born at Douglas, Isle of Man, on 28 March 1762, was one of fifteen sons (each of whom, as his father remarked, 'had a sister') of Thomas Stowel and his wife, Ann Brown. Little is known of Stowel's education or early life other than the fact that, like several of his brothers, he was conspicuous for his strongly developed physical talents and literary ambition. He was an accomplished scholar. On 5 July 1792 he was appointed master of the Classical Free School (also known as the Latin school) at Peel, a job he performed conscientiously, but for which he seemingly never showed much enthusiasm or ambition. Stowel was more interested in poetry, though in May 1793 he did advertise his services as a tutor of English to private students on the island. 
In 1790 Stowel's small book of poems, 'A Sallad for the Young Ladies and Gentlemen of Douglas, Raised by Tom the Gardner', was published by Robert Callister, formerly of the Isle of Man but then resident in Liverpool. In the same year Stowel published 'The Retrospect, or, A Review of the Memorable Events of Mona', a satire on the Manx House of Keys and on the town of Douglas. Both works, lacking literary merit, attracted considerable local ridicule. One influential voice, the editor of the 'Manx Mercury', wrote that: 'Verses signed Tom the Gardener are as much like the production of the gentleman who has hitherto been distinguished by that signature as Mr Callister's Songs are like Homer's Iliad. Their author ought to have his ears 'cropt' for his presumption.' In 1791 'The Literary Quixote', a satire on the 'Journal of Richard Townley', a book on the Isle of Man, was published privately by Stowel and the following year he produced an elegy in verse on Mrs Callow and Miss Bacon. In 1793 'An Elegiac Invocation of the Muses' appeared and on 27 April 1796 his last work, an address in verse to the duchess of Atholl, the wife of the governor-in-chief of the Isle of Man, was published. 
Although Stowel sought entry into the world of words he achieved little; as a person, however, it appears that he was held in high regard. He died, unmarried, at Peel, Isle of Man, on 21 July 1799 and was buried at Patrick parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 26614


Stowell, Hugh (1799-1865), Church of England clergyman, was born at Douglas, Isle of Man, on 3 December 1799, the elder son of Hugh Stowell (1768-1836), later successively vicar of Kirk Lonan and rector of Ballaugh, and biographer of Bishop Thomas Wilson, and his wife, Amelia (1779-1816), daughter of William Callow, a merchant in Douglas. The family had been long settled on the island, and Stowell's boyhood was spent in his father's rural Manx parishes. He was educated at home and imbibed his parents' deep piety, which blended the high-church legacy of Bishop Wilson with the growing influence of the evangelical movement. He matriculated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, in April 1819, but before taking up residence at the university, spent a period of preparation with John Cawood, incumbent of Bewdley, Worcestershire. He took his BA in 1822 and his MA in 1826. Meanwhile, he was ordained in December 1823 by Bishop Ryder of Gloucester. His first curacy was the chapelry of Shepscombe in the parish of Painswick. 
In 1824 Stowell moved to Trinity Church, Huddersfield, where he began the energetic urban ministry that was to characterize his career. By 1828 he had already established a reputation as a vigorous and inspiring preacher, and when he moved in that year to become curate in charge of St Stephen's, Salford, Bishop Blomfield of Chester initially hesitated to license a man who had been described to him as an 'extemporaneous firebrand'. Stowell, however, overcame such obstacles and settled in Salford, where he married, also in 1828, Anne Susannah, eldest daughter of Richard Ashworth, of Strawberry Hill, Pendleton, Lancashire. They were to have three sons and six daughters. 
Stowell's backers shortly built for him the new church of Christ Church, Acton Square, Salford, which was consecrated in November 1831, and where he was to remain for the rest of his life, refusing further preferment apart from an honorary canonry of Chester, to which he was appointed in 1845. He was remarkable for his powerful extemporary preaching, distinguished more by fervency than by intellectual depth, and for his energy in developing structures for education, visitation, and pastoral care. His admirers claimed that he had enormous influence with the working classes. 
Stowell assumed a prominent position in religious politics. He was a familiar speaker at the meetings of numerous evangelical societies both in London and in the provinces, and a leader of successful resistance to the suppression of the see of Sodor and Man, and to secular schemes of education. Above all he was an untiring opponent of Roman Catholicism. His fame on this score was first established by his prominent role in the Protestant Association in the later 1830s, and was confirmed in 1840, when he was the defendant in a celebrated libel action brought by a Roman Catholic priest, Father Hearne. Stowell initially lost the case but the verdict was reversed on appeal. He perceived protestantism as a pastoral and political matter as well as a religious one, and he accordingly campaigned vigorously at elections for the return of anti-Catholic candidates. 
Stowell was a heavily built man whose combative public image belied his genuine spirituality and his gentleness in private life. He published sermons, pamphlets, and polemical works, and was also a writer and compiler of hymns. His health declined from 1862, and he died at his home, Barr Hill, Pendleton, on 8 October 1865. His wife survived him. He was buried beneath the church where he had ministered for so long on 13 October, following a large-scale funeral that was impressive testimony to the central position that he had attained in the religious and political life of early Victorian Lancashire. 


@@@@@


doc= 26615


Stowell, William Hendry (1800-1858), Congregational minister and college head, born at Douglas, Isle of Man, on 19 June 1800, was the son of William Stowell and his wife, Susan Hilton. The evangelical clergyman Hugh Stowell was his cousin. He was one of the first students at Blackburn Independent Academy, opened in 1816 to train candidates for the ministry. In July 1821, shortly after taking up his first ministerial charge, at St Andrew's Chapel, North Shields, he married Sarah Hilton. 
In 1834 Stowell was appointed head of Rotherham Independent college and pastor of Masborough Congregational Church. In 1848 he was pioneer of the 'missions to working men', and he took a prominent part in the success of the concert-hall lectures established by Nathaniel Caine at Liverpool in 1850. He left Rotherham in October 1850 when he was appointed president of Cheshunt College, but he was forced to resign in 1856 having antagonized the students by his approach to discipline. 
Stowell was the author of several theological works, in recognition of which the University of Glasgow conferred the degree of DD on him in 1849. Among these works were 'The Ten Commandments Illustrated' (1824), 'The Miraculous Gifts Considered' (1834), and a 'History of the Puritans' (1847). He also edited the works of the puritan divine Thomas Adams, and was joint editor of the fifth series of the 'Eclectic Review' and a contributor to the 'British Quarterly Review'. He also wrote several volumes for the monthly series of the Religious Tract Society, including lives of Muhammad, Julius Caesar, and Isaac Newton. 
Stowell died at his residence, 10 Roman Road, Barnsbury, London, on 2 January 1858. His eldest son, William, published a volume of his sermons with a memoir in the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 26616


Stouford, Sir John (d. 1359), justice, took his name from Stowford, in the parish of West Down, Devon. Nothing is known of his parentage or early legal career, until in April 1329 he was nominated as attorney for Hugh Audley. In the following Michaelmas term he was created a serjeant and began to plead in the bench. In October 1330 he was first appointed to a commission of oyer and terminer, and thereafter is increasingly frequently recorded as both pleader and commissioner, in the latter capacity being most often employed in the south and south-west, particularly Devon, where he was a keeper of the peace in 1332. In Easter term 1339 he was appointed a king's serjeant, and in the same year received the first of many summonses to parliament among the king's justices. In 1340 he was appointed to oversee the defences of the coasts of Devon against a threatened French invasion, two months later to investigate the value of that year's ninth in Surrey. But more often he is recorded as acting in a judicial capacity. In 1341 he became a justice of assize for the western circuit of counties; in 1344 a man was pardoned for his part in a violent commotion 'at Somerton in the hall of pleas before John de Stouford and his fellows, justices of assize in that county' ('CPR', '1343-5', 270). 
The incident did Stouford's career no harm. Although his appointment as a justice of common pleas on 23 April 1342 did not take effect, on 20 May 1345 he received a similar appointment and was knighted, the usual fee being supplemented by a grant of $40 per annum. Later that year, on 10 November, he was made chief baron of the exchequer, but this appointment, too, did not take effect, and he remained a puisne justice for the rest of his life. In October 1348 he was one of the justices appointed for an abortive eyre in Kent. He acted regularly as a justice of assize and gaol delivery, and as a commissioner of the peace, in counties that included Oxfordshire; it was presumably in consequence of some professional contact that by 1354 Stouford had become a benefactor of Queen's College, Oxford. He continued to receive numerous commissions, including several to investigate alleged infringements of the rights of the king and Edward, the Black Prince, in Cornwall, along with regular summonses to parliaments and council meetings until December 1357. On 28 February 1359 he was appointed to a commission in Dorset, but he was dead by 8 August following. 
There is no evidence that Stouford married, and no blood relations are known, though it may be surmised that he was kin to the Fitzwarins of Brightley, to whom in 1344 he granted the reversion of his lands and manors in Devon, and two of whom in succession he presented to Wootton church in Somerset (he had acquired the advowson in 1343, allegedly through a false deed forged by the prior of Stogursey). As a justice he showed some independence of mind; in 1353, for instance, it was reported that he had earlier stood out against his colleagues who declared that the thief who attacked a man with felonious intent was guilty of robbery, even if he took nothing. He also appears to have been a devout man. In 1336 he endowed a chantry in West Down church, and between 1337 and 1354 he made a number of benefactions to St John's Hospital in Wells, while on 30 November 1354 he was licensed to found either a small college or a large chantry at Stokeinteignhead, Devon, where a warden and chaplains would celebrate masses for the king, queen, and Black Prince, and also for John Stouford, in addition to distributing alms. All Stouford's estates appear to have been in Devon and Somerset. He was not a tenant-in-chief, and does not seem to have become particularly wealthy. He was buried in Stowford church, where a wooden effigy (repainted in 1873) represents him in the robes of a serjeant-at-law. 


@@@@@


doc= 26617


Strachan, Archibald (d. 1652), army officer, was born at Musselburgh, Edinburghshire, the son of a craftsman. His parents' names are as yet unknown, and his relative social obscurity as an officer from outside the Scottish landed class, as much as a political and religious radicalism more often found in the English New Model Army, was to mark him out as a rare figure in the Scottish army. He is first mentioned as an officer in Sir William Waller's parliamentarian army: on 1 February 1643 he held the rank of captain of dragoons. From 15 February 1643 to 25 April 1644 he served as Waller's quartermaster-general. After the battle of Lansdown (5 July 1643) he was promoted major. For his leadership in the attack on Basing House he gained Waller's praise as gallant and brave. He commanded Waller's regiment of dragoons in September 1643. He completed his assignment with Waller in April 1644, when he became a captain and later major of horse in the Plymouth garrison. In early October he attended the committee of both kingdoms as a major. On 11 November, Waller noted Strachan was at Chichester in command of a regiment of horse. Following the exclusion of Scots from the parliamentarian armies on account of the self-denying ordinance he joined the army of the solemn league and covenant. By May 1645 he had become major of Sir John Brown's horse. He fought with the regiment at Annan Moor where Brown destroyed the royalist Northern horse. He apparently continued in Scottish service until early February 1647. 
Strachan's radical political and religious tendencies came to light in 1648. According to Robert Baillie, his early years had been reprobate, but he had reformed and taken up protestant sectarian ideas. He served as a major under Cromwell in the Preston campaign, perhaps the only Scot to oppose the engager army in England. He assisted with the negotiations between the western whiggamores and Cromwell in September 1648. He brought the news of Charles's execution to Edinburgh. His opposition to the engagement helped gain him a command in the army of the covenants. On 28 February 1649 the estates made him lieutenant-colonel of Gilbert Ker's horse regiment, and provided him with a troop of horse. On 1 March he and his men helped to suppress the mutiny of the Stirling Castle garrison. A more serious threat to the kirk party regime came when Sir Thomas Mackenzie of Pluscarden raised 1200 northern clansmen and occupied Balvenie, Banffshire. Ker, Strachan, and Robert Hackett with 120 horse dispersed the royalists, establishing the idea that a Gideonite cadre could defeat the hosts of the unrighteous. Although Lieutenant-General David Leslie wanted him removed as a 'sectary' the Revd Mungo Law persuaded him to retain Strachan (Wishart, 302). Strachan desired a purging of the army of malignants (former engagers and royalists). As to any threat of a revival of royalist fortunes under Montrose, the lieutenant-colonel said, 'If James Grahame land neir this quarters [Inverness], he will suddenly be de -- ed. And ther shalbe no need of the levy of knavis to the work tho they should be willing' (Gardiner, 1.213). 
After Montrose's landing in Caithness in April 1650, Strachan fulfilled his promise. Following Lieutenant-General Leslie's orders he moved north from Tain with two troops of horse. He was joined by three more troops (for a total of 230 cavalry from Gilbert Ker's and Sir James Hackett's horse), 36 musketeers from Lawers's foot, and 400 Ross and Munro clansmen. On 27 April he headed west on the south bank of the Kyle of Sutherland, near Montrose's camp at Carbisdale. On the eve of battle Strachan exhorted his troops: 'Gentlemen, yonder are your enemies, and they are not only your enemies, they are the enemies of our Lord Jesus Christ; I have been dealing this last night with Almighty God, to know the event of this affair, and I have gotten it: as sure as God is in heaven, they are delivered into our hands and there not a man of us fall to the ground. (Nicoll, 9)' The royalists mustered 1200 infantry (of which 450 were Danes or Germans) and forty horse. Following the advice of Andrew Munro, Strachan advanced only a troop of horse in the open, hiding the remainder of his force. As Montrose had heard of only one troop of horse in Ross-shire, he ordered his men to marshal on the open ground south of the Culrain Burn, instead of taking a position in the wooded heights behind. At 5 p.m. Strachan hit the royalists with two troops, ably seconded by his other men. Surprised, Montrose's men routed; two-thirds of them were killed, drowned, or captured. The marquess just escaped. After thanking God for the victory, Strachan headed south. He and Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Hackett each received $1000 sterling and a gold chain from the Scottish parliament. Although hit by a bullet in the battle, his belt buckle and buff coat prevented a wound. 
The commission of the general assembly favoured Strachan so much that on 3 July 1650 it ordered all ministers to provide money (100,000 merks Scots) for raising a new regiment of 550 horse under his command. On 30-31 July the ministers' horse under Strachan served at the battle of Musselburgh. During the summer Strachan pushed for further purging of the army. He probably signed the radical West Kirk declaration on 15 August. In any case he, Archibald Johnston of Wariston, and Colonel Gilbert Ker held secret talks with the English. On the evening of 2 September, Strachan and Ker urged Leslie to move off Doon Hill to fight the English. On the 3rd Strachan's regiment was on the Scottish right flank. Thanks to having their front rank armed with lances, his men initially repulsed Lambert. Strachan, to his credit, fought desperately, but the regiment eventually fled and rode to Stirling. 
Strachan now entered the final stage of his military career -- one that reflected ill on his patriotism. He resigned rather than continue service under Leslie. On 5 September the committee of estates commissioned Strachan and Ker to take their regiments into the western association (south-west Scotland) and raise new levies. Following English examples, the kirk party had created the western association in 1648, but it had failed to become an active force in military or fiscal affairs. The lairds and ministers of the south-west (western association) were more radical than the committee of estates politically, socially, and theologically. Now, almost immediately in 1650 it saw itself as the instrument of the godly unpolluted by malignancy. Hence its refusal to send its levies to the national army and the establishment of its own military force. The two officers in conjunction with the association raised a new army; one that placed the Scottish government and English invaders on the same level of disdain. Eventually, Strachan's horse consisted of 400 well-mounted and well-armed men, including many Dutch and Germans. Although the committee of the western association's civilian leaders disliked both Cromwell and the royalists, Strachan found the former preferable and corresponded with him. On 17 October the committee promulgated the western remonstrance in Dumfries, which called for 'revolution in one country', in other words it abandoned calls for presbyterianism in England and Ireland and broke the union of crowns, but called instead for a covenanted king in Scotland. Strachan refused the document, insisting the king be arrested or exiled, which would force Cromwell to leave as Scotland would have abandoned the Stuart monarchy. Although ordered from his regiment, Strachan disobeyed. In addition he and his associates (Major Govan and Scoutmaster Dundas) wrote to Cromwell. Not wishing to antagonize Ker, the committee took no action against Strachan, who eventually left his unit but remained in the area. On 2 December, after the debacle at Hamilton, he persuaded 200-300 survivors of the army in the Kyle district of Ayrshire to disband (having failed to enlist them for the English). Strachan and another officer eventually led thirty men into the English camp. 
Strachan's treason did not pass unnoticed in Scottish circles. On 14 December the commission of the general assembly cited him for refusing to fight, corresponding, and speaking with the English. On 3 January 1651 the commission initiated proceedings of excommunication against him for desertion of his charge (which was for the defence of religion and the kingdom), and for fraternization with the enemy. On the 12th the commission formally excommunicated him. The committee of estates cited him for treason on 31 March. Naturally, he failed to appear, and was sentenced in absentia. He died in November 1652, reputedly in despair over his excommunication. Between 1648 and 1650 Strachan had been of great service to the kirk party. His actions after the battle of Hamilton earned him the hatred of all but the minute republican element in Scottish politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 26618


Strachan, Sir John, third baronet (d. 1777), naval officer, was the son of Sir Patrick Strachan, second baronet (died 1765), physician at Greenwich Hospital, Kent, and his wife, the daughter of a naval captain named Gregory. His father was descended from the younger branch of the Strachan family of Thornton, Kincardineshire. Patrick's elder brother, Thomas Strachan, had been created a baronet by James II in May 1685 after a distinguished military career in the army of Emperor Leopold I. On his death the baronetcy passed to John's father and then in 1765 to John. 
Having entered the navy over two decades earlier, Strachan was promoted lieutenant in January 1747. In 1755 he was appointed second lieutenant of the 'St George', then Lord Hawke's flagship, and a year later he went out to Gibraltar in the 'Antelope' with Hawke and his fellow officers to relieve John Byng. There he was appointed to command the sloop 'Fortune' and on 9 September 1756 was posted into the 'Experiment' (20 guns, 160 men). In her, off Alicante on 8 July 1757, he captured the French privateer 'Telemaque' (20 guns, 460 men) with the loss of 235 French and forty-eight British sailors. During the encounter Strachan was ably assisted by William Locker who successfully entered the 'Telemaque' and secured its surrender. Strachan took the prize to Gibraltar before being moved, with Locker, to the 'Sapphire' (32 guns). In her he was sent to England and in 1759 was attached to the Grand Fleet under Sir Edward Hawke and was with Commodore Robert Duff in the light squadron in Quiberon Bay. 
Strachan remained in the 'Sapphire' until 1762 and eight years later was appointed to the 'Orford', one of the squadron which went with Rear-Admiral Robert Harland to the East Indies. Ill health forced his return to England two years later and thereafter he had no active service. His marriage to Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Lovelace of Battersea, produced no children and, following his death at Bath on 26 December 1777, the baronetcy passed to his nephew, Richard John Strachan (1760-1828), who also achieved celebrity as a naval officer. 


@@@@@


doc= 26619


Strachan, John (1778-1867), schoolmaster and bishop of Toronto, was born on 12 April 1778 in Aberdeen, one of the six children of John Strachan, overseer at a granite quarry, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Findlayson. His mother, ambitious that one of her sons should become a minister, decided that John, her favourite, must be made 'a gentleman'. He was accordingly placed at Aberdeen grammar school and obtained a bursary to enter King's College, Aberdeen, in 1793. Unfortunately, the sudden death of his father left the young student penniless, and he was forced to teach to support his university studies; having returned to Aberdeen in autumn 1796 he graduated AM in 1797. 
Between 1797 and 1799 Strachan was a parish schoolmaster at Dunino and Kettle, Fife, while pursuing divinity studies at St Andrews University, where he befriended Thomas Chalmers and Dr James Brown. Despairing of rising above the station of schoolmaster, in 1799 he accepted an offer from Brown to emigrate to Kingston, Upper Canada, initially as the tutor to the family of Richard Cartwright, a prominent merchant and member of the legislative council, with the promise of a professorship of mathematics at a proposed academy. 
Upon arrival at Kingston, Strachan found that there was little prospect of establishing the academy, and he sought the post of minister at St Gabriel's Street Presbyterian Church, Montreal. Disappointed in these efforts he then sought a situation in the Church of England, and he was ordained priest in June 1804. Although later derided as 'the Aberdonian adventurer' (Archives of Ontario, William Proudfoot MSS, MS 54, reel 1, 'Extract of letter from the Rev. Wm. Barrie', 29 April 1844, 'The Secession Missionary Record', July 1844) for choosing personal preferment over the Church of Scotland, there were ample reasons for this decision. Strachan's father was a nonjuror who frequented the Episcopal church in Aberdeen, but more influential was his close friendship with the Revd John Stuart, the rector of Kingston and a former Presbyterian. From 1804 to 1811 Strachan served as rector of Cornwall, in Upper Canada, where he also opened a successful academy which catered to the sons of leading figures in government, business, and the professions. In 1807 Strachan married Ann Wood McGill, a wealthy widow; they had six children. 
Although Strachan hoped to secure the rectorship of Kingston on the death of the Revd John Stuart in 1811, he was appointed rector of York, capital of Upper Canada, which the additional offer of the two chaplaincies of the garrison and of the legislative council persuaded him to accept. It was during these early years at York that he launched the 'Christian Recorder', the first religious periodical in Upper Canada, and continued his educational endeavours by serving as principal of the Home District grammar school. As a reward for his service in ministering to the sick, wounded, and homeless during the Anglo-American War of 1812-14, and for his presidency of the Loyal and Patriotic Society of Upper Canada, Strachan was appointed to the executive council of Upper Canada (honorary member, 1815-17; regular member, 1817-36) and to the legislative council of Upper Canada (1820-41); he became archdeacon of York in 1827. 
It was during the 1820s, however, that Strachan emerged as the most eloquent and powerful Upper Canadian exponent of an anti-republican social order based upon the tory principles of hierarchy and subordination in both church and state. Conceiving of the church as an instrument of allegiance, and as the principal institution ensuring public order, Strachan feared the rapid spread of religious dissent among the majority of the colonial population. His sermons during this period frequently lambasted Methodism as the enemy of orderly religion and the British connection, and they articulated cardinal high-church tenets and assigned a messianic role to the Church of England as preserving the tie between the colony and the mother country. It was upon these doctrines that Strachan based his uncompromising claim to exclusive Anglican control of the clergy reserves and of the provincial university of King's College, issues which stood at the centre of his celebrated 1827 pamphlet controversy with the Methodist leader Egerton Ryerson. 
Despite his social and political conservatism, however, Strachan was an active promoter of popular education and was an important voice in designing both the 'Common School Act' of 1816 and the 'Grammar School Act' of 1819. He was equally aware that the Church of England would have to modernize its institutions to compete for popular support. To this end, throughout the 1830s he urged the division of the diocese of Quebec and the careful training and selection of clergy willing to be missionaries in remote parishes. Although he was removed from the executive council in 1836 in an attempt by the British government to conciliate political reformers, Strachan's efforts finally won recognition with his appointment as bishop of Toronto in 1839. 
The next two decades marked the defeat of Strachan's tory design in Upper Canada. Although he was successful in 1842 in founding the Diocesan Theological Institution at Cobourg, and in the same year established the Church Society to co-ordinate the efforts of clergy and laity (efforts which culminated in the establishment of an independent Canadian synod in 1857), Strachan found himself between 1849 and 1854 increasingly mounting a rearguard defence of Church of England claims to the clergy reserves and to King's College against a rising tide of Canadian opinion which sought to sever all connection between church and state. Strachan was no more successful in maintaining the internal harmony of the Church of England. In 1846 he wrote to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts that 'there is not to my knowledge a Clergyman in this Diocese, who deserves the imputation of being a Tractarian' (National Archives of Canada, SPG, 'C' MSS, Canada, Dio.Toronto, Box v/44, Strachan to Sec. SPG, 19 Jan 1846). Nevertheless, his own high-church sympathies increasingly alienated clergy and laity drawn from the ranks of Irish immigrants of more low-church persuasion. These tensions, as well as Toronto's geographical size and increasing population, forced the division of Strachan's diocese in 1857 and again in 1861. 
Strachan, who had lost his wife in 1865, died in Toronto on 1 November 1867. He was a formidable champion of a high-church tory social vision based upon monarchy and the established church anchoring an enduring relationship between the Canadian colonies and Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 26620


Strachan, Sir Richard John, fourth baronet (1760-1828), naval officer, eldest son of Lieutenant Patrick Strachan RN and a daughter of Captain Pitman RN, and nephew of Sir John Strachan, third baronet, was born in Devon on 27 October 1760. He entered the navy in 1772 on the 'Intrepid', in which he went to the East Indies, where he was moved to the 'Orford', commanded by his uncle. He was afterwards on the North American station in the 'Preston' with Commodore William Hotham; in the 'Eagle', flagship of Lord Howe; and in the 'Actaeon' off the coast of Africa and in the West Indies. On the death of his uncle on 26 December 1777 he succeeded to the baronetcy. He was made lieutenant on 5 April 1779. Early in 1781 he was appointed to the 'Hero' with Captain James Hawker, one of Commodore George Johnstone's squadron, which fought the abortive action against Suffren in Porto Praya. The 'Hero' went on to the East Indies, where Strachan moved first to the 'Magnanime' and then the 'Superb', in which he was present in the first four of the actions between Suffren and Sir Edward Hughes, who in January 1783 promoted him to the command of the cutter 'Lizard' and on 26 April 1783 to be captain of the frigate 'Naiad'. 
In 1787 Strachan was appointed to the 'Vestal', which in the spring of 1788 sailed for China, carrying as ambassador the Hon. Charles Alan Cathcart. Cathcart died in the Strait of Banca and the 'Vestal' returned to England. The following year she was again sent to the East Indies, to join the squadron under Commodore William Cornwallis. Strachan was moved to the 'Phoenix' and in November 1791 was ordered to visit and search the French frigate 'Resolue', which, with a convoy of merchant vessels, was understood to be carrying military stores for the support of Tipu. The 'Resolue' resisted, and a sharp action ensued before she struck her colours. As the French captain insisted on considering his ship a prize to the British, Cornwallis ordered Strachan to tow her round to Mahe, where the French commodore then was. 
In 1793 Strachan returned to England and was appointed to the frigate 'Concorde', which in the spring of 1794 was one of the squadron off Brest under Sir John Borlase Warren. On 23 April 1794 Warren's squadron engaged a squadron of four French frigates, three of which were captured, one, 'L'Engageante', striking to the 'Concorde'. In July 1794 Strachan was appointed to the 'Melampus' (42 guns), attached during the summer to the Grand Fleet; and in the spring of 1795 he was sent in command of a squadron of five frigates, which cruised successfully off the coast of Normandy and Brittany, capturing or destroying a very large number of enemy coasting craft, many laden with military stores and convoyed by armed vessels. 
In 1796 Strachan was moved into the 'Diamond' after her captain, Sir Sidney Smith was captured, and remained on the same service until 1799, when he was appointed to the 'Captain' (74 guns) and employed off the west coast of France, either alone or in command of a detached squadron. In 1802 he was appointed to the 'Donegal', in which during 1803-4 he was senior officer at Gibraltar, charged with the watch on Cadiz under the orders of Nelson. On 23 April 1804 he was made a colonel of marines. In March 1805 he returned to England in the 'Renown' but was almost immediately appointed to the 'Caesar', in which he commanded a detached squadron including three other line-of-battle ships and four frigates in the Bay of Biscay. On 2 November 1805, off Cape Finisterre, he encountered the four French ships of the line that had escaped from Trafalgar under the command of Rear-Admiral Dumanoir. On the 4th he succeeded in bringing them to action, and after a short engagement captured all of them, rounding off the destruction of the French fleet. By the promotion of 9 November 1805 Strachan became a rear-admiral. On 28 January 1806, when the thanks of both houses of parliament were voted to Collingwood and those engaged at Trafalgar, Strachan and his command were specially included, and a pension of $1000 a year was settled on him. On 29 January he was nominated KCB; the City of London also voted him its freedom and a sword of honour. 
Early in 1806 Strachan was dispatched in search of a French squadron reported to have sailed for America. Not finding it, he returned to watch Rochefort until January 1808 when, in thick weather, the French succeeded in escaping to the Mediterranean. Strachan followed, and joined Collingwood; but, on the enemy's retiring into Toulon, Strachan was ordered home, where he was placed in command of a squadron watching the Dutch coast. On 9 June 1809 he was appointed naval commander of the immense expedition (264 warships of all sizes and 352 transports carrying 44,000 troops) against the island of Walcheren, and for the destruction of the French arsenals in the Scheldt. Strachan was ill qualified either by experience or temperament for the joint command of such a large and complex combined operation. Attentive to the delays to his own service from bad weather, intricate channels, and a shortage of pilots, he was insufficiently appreciative of the problems of the army, and long before the expedition was abandoned his relations with the army commander, Chatham, had degenerated into acrimony ['see 'Pitt, John, second earl of Chatham]. Nothing was achieved beyond the capture of Flushing, and the force's return home was the signal for an outbreak of angry recriminations. In a narrative presented to the king at the beginning of 1810 the earl of Chatham by implication blamed Strachan for the failure. Strachan replied, arguing with apparent justice that the ships had done all that they had been asked to do, all that from the nature of things they could do. Strachan became a scapegoat for the failure of the expedition and had no further employment; he became a vice-admiral on 31 July 1810, admiral on 19 July 1821, and died at his house in Bryanston Square, London, on 3 February 1828. He married in 1812 Louisa Dillon; they had at least one daughter but no son, and the baronetcy became extinct. 
Strachan's ungovernable temper and violent cursing earned him the nickname of 'Mad Dick' among his men, but he remained a popular and sought-after commander. Captain Graham Moore, naval brother of Sir John Moore, described him on the eve of Walcheren as 'one of those in our service whom I estimate the highest. I do not believe he has his fellow among the Admirals, unless it be Pellew, for ability, and it is not possible to have more zeal and gallantry' (Maxwell, 1.95), and even after the failure of that expedition became apparent he declared that: 'It is my wish to serve with Strachan, as I know him to be extremely brave and full of zeal and ardour, at the same time that he is an excellent seaman, and, tho' an irregular, impetuous fellow, possessing very quick parts and an uncommon share of sagacity and strong sense. (ibid.)' 



@@@@@


doc= 26621


Strachey, Sir Henry, first baronet (1736-1810), politician, born in Edinburgh on 23 May 1736, was the eldest surviving son of Henry Strachey (1706-1765) of Sutton Court, Somerset, and his first wife, Helen Clerk, daughter of Robert Clerk, physician, of Listonfield, Edinburghshire, and Edinburgh. His grandfather was the geologist John Strachey (1671-1743). He was educated at Westminster School (1750) and probably worked as a clerk in the war office before he was appointed private secretary to Lord Clive during Clive's last visit to India in 1764. He became a close friend and indispensable colleague to Clive who, in a Commons speech on 30 March 1772, paid tribute to Strachey's 'abilities and indefatigable industry' (Drummond, 488). Strachey had benefited from Clive's financial gains in India and, on his return in July 1767, he benefited from his political patronage as well. Although he failed at the general election in 1768 at Pontefract, where Clive's friend John Walsh held a major interest, he was returned on petition in December and took his seat on the opposition benches with Clive. By 1774 he had followed his patron into voting for the administration and he was returned MP on 10 October 1774 for one of Clive's own boroughs, Bishop's Castle, Shropshire. Strachey married Jane Latham (died 1824), widow of Captain Thomas Latham RN, daughter of John Kelsall of Greenwich, and a cousin of Lady Clive, on 23 May 1770. They had three sons, including Edward Strachey ['see under 'Strachey, Sir Edward, third baronet (1812-1901)], and two daughters. 
In May 1776 Strachey was appointed secretary to Lord Howe, who headed the commission for negotiating peace with America. After returning from America in 1778 Strachey was made clerk of deliveries of the ordnance and was elected MP for the government borough of Saltash, but in 1780 he was re-elected for Bishop's Castle. In spite of his support for Lord North, he held office in the Rockingham administration as joint secretary to the Treasury from March to July 1782, and in Shelburne's government as under-secretary in the Home Office from July 1782 to April 1783. In the latter capacity he assisted in the peace negotiations at Paris. The Fox-North coalition restored him to his old office in the Ordnance but he was turned out when Pitt came to power in December 1783. Strachey followed the lead of the Portland whigs and remained in opposition until 1794; his new-found support for Pitt's government was marked by his appointment as master of the king's household, which he held until his death. He was also rewarded with a baronetcy on 15 June 1801. The prospect of a contest at Bishop's Castle in 1802 led Strachey to look for another seat and he purchased his return at East Grinstead on the duchess of Dorset's interest. 
Strachey retired from parliament in 1807 and died on 1 or 2 January 1810 at Hill Street, Berkeley Square, London. His wife survived him, dying on 12 February 1824, and all three of their sons served in India as civil servants. 


@@@@@


doc= 26622


Strachey, John (1671-1743), topographer and geologist, was born on 10 May 1671 at Sutton Court, near Chew Magna, Somerset, the only son of John Strachey (1634-1675), barrister at Gray's Inn, London, and his wife, Jane (1643-1727), daughter of George Hodges. Following the early death of his father, he inherited the family seat at Sutton Court. Nothing is known of his early education, but at the age of sixteen he had 'grown tall and very like his father in person and humour' and was 'at Trinity College in Oxford' (Rand, 228). He had matriculated at Trinity in 1686 but his stay there was short. The following year he became a law student at the Middle Temple, London, and in 1688 he was admitted a member there. On 10 May 1692 he married Elizabeth (died 1722), daughter of William Elletson. The couple subsequently had eighteen children; Henry, the thirteenth, inherited the family estate. 
In 1708 Strachey began work on a survey of Somerset, with a view to preparing a county map. His field notebooks, although largely undated, record his progress over the following twenty-five years. A trigonometrical survey, based around thirty-one main stations, was 'much in advance of contemporary practice' (Harley, 3), but his topographical work appears to have been verging on the careless. Based on little more than a series of road traverses, with no angular measurements, it relies on travelling time as a device for measuring distance, despite the fact that he was familiar with more exact techniques. It has been suggested that the topographical work may have been a later phase in the map making, and that the ageing Strachey was in a hurry to finish the project. (Indeed, in the winter of 1735, Strachey was in London and relying on correspondence to fill the remaining gaps in the topographical work.) Published in 1736 the map had only fifty-two subscribers, perhaps a result of the 7's'. 6died asking price. It contained several major errors and a revised edition (achieved largely through correspondence) was issued in 1738. 
It was probably Strachey's survey of his native county that awakened other scientific interests, especially in geology. In 1719 he granted his brother-in-law licence to 'Search for open dig or Sink any pitt or pitts for Coal' on the Sutton Court estate. He wrote an account of coalmining in the district, illustrating it with a sectional sketch explaining how the various strata lay with respect to one another underground. This paper was communicated to the Royal Society by Robert Welsted in 1719; later in the same year Strachey was elected a fellow. After travelling to Scotland in 1721 he wrote further on coal and the order of strata, presenting his findings in a 1725 paper to the Royal Society. In 1727 he issued a booklet, 'Observations on the Different Strata of Earths and Minerals'. He also began writing on soils, strata, and topography, probably with a view to a natural history of the whole country which was unfinished at his death. 
Strachey also published a number of antiquarian works, including 'An Alphabetical List of the Religious Houses in Somersetshire' (1731) and 'An Index to the Records' (1739). He had the usual responsibilities of a county landowner, serving as the squire, a justice of the peace, and a deputy lieutenant. Although never called to the bar he had chambers in London and maintained a practice as an attorney. 
Following the death of his first wife, Strachey married, on 12 January 1725, Christina, daughter of Richard Stavely. They later had one child. Strachey was considered to be 'of a very painstaking, as well as of a very dry character' (J. S. L. Strachey, 7). He died at Greenwich on 11 June 1743. 


@@@@@


doc= 26623


Strachey, William (1572-1621), historian of Virginia, was born on 4 April 1572 in Saffron Walden, Essex, the son of William Strachey (died 1598) and his wife, Mary ('nee' Cooke) (died 1587). Nothing is known about Strachey's childhood and early education, but at the age of sixteen he was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge. By 1605 he was a member of Gray's Inn in London, but there is no evidence that he practised law. Instead, he seems to have supported himself from the proceeds of his father's estate, which he inherited in 1602 following a legal wrangle with his stepmother, Elizabeth Brockett. 
Strachey's keen interest in literature and the theatre brought him into close contact with several of the leading literary lights of his day, including Ben Jonson, Thomas Campion, and William Shakespeare. The latter would later make use of Strachey's accounts of Virginia when writing 'The Tempest'. Strachey's earliest writings were poems, two of which were published in 1604 and 1605 in works prepared by Francis Mitchell and Ben Jonson. By 1605 Strachey was experiencing serious financial problems. He seems to have earned no income from his literary activities and quickly ran through the money he had inherited from his father. In 1606 he took paid employment as the secretary to Thomas Glover, the English ambassador to Constantinople. He was dismissed from that post in March 1607 and returned to London in the hope of being able to find a similar position in another Mediterranean country. His efforts proved fruitless, and in 1609, almost in desperation, he bought two shares in the Virginia Company of London. His intention was to seek his fortune in the as yet still fragile colony founded by the English two years earlier on the banks of the James River. 
Strachey set sail for Virginia in June 1609 in the fleet commanded by Sir George Somer. He was a passenger on the 'Sea Venture', captained by Christopher Newport, which ran aground in the Bermudas following a hurricane. Newport and his group were trapped on the island for almost a year. During that time they managed to construct two small boats, in which they eventually made their way to Virginia. Strachey's report of this episode, together with his account of the precarious state of the settlement at Jamestown, which he wrote in 1610, was suppressed by the Virginia Company. It was first published in 1625, after the company's collapse, by Samuel Purchas in his 'Pilgrims'. 
Strachey had set out for Virginia without holding any official position, but in 1609 he replaced Matthew Scrivener, who had died by drowning, as the Virginia Company's secretary to the colony. A year later the company asked him to write an account of the colony and its future prospects. He returned to London in 1611, and it was there that he commenced writing 'The Historie of Travell into Virginia Britania'. Although Strachey provided an eyewitness account of life in early Virginia, his manuscript borrowed heavily from the work of earlier authors, including Richard Willes, James Rosier, and John Smith. He completed the first version of his work, which was dedicated to the earl of Northumberland, in 1612, and during the next six years produced two more versions of his 'Historie'. Strachey's 'Historie' was as critical of Virginia as the report he wrote in 1610, and for that reason the Virginia Company refused to publish it. The work was first published in 1849 by the Hakluyt Society. 
Strachey's career and family life following his return to England are shrouded in mystery, although he probably lived and worked in London. He had married his first wife, Frances Forster, on 9 June 1595. Their two children, William and Edmund, were born in 1596 and 1604, respectively. Following Frances's death, at some time before 1615, he remarried. All that is known about his second wife is that she was a widow named Dorothy. There is no record of any children being born to them. William Strachey died of unknown causes in June 1621 and was buried in St Giles, Camberwell, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 26624


Stradling, Sir Edward (c.1529-1609), antiquary, was the son of Sir Thomas Stradling (c.1498-1571) and his wife, Katherine, daughter of Sir Thomas Gamage of Coety, Glamorgan. He seems to have attended Oxford University before being admitted to the Inner Temple in February 1552. While travelling in Europe in 1548-9, he met in Rome Sir Thomas Hoby, later the English translator of Castiglione's 'Il cortegiano'. His father's connection with the earl of Arundel enabled Edward to become MP for Steyning in 1554 and Arundel in 1558, and his family's Sussex connection was maintained when Edward married Agnes (died 1624), daughter of the Catholic gentleman Sir Edward Gage of Firle, in November 1566. Although he never acquired position at court -- probably because of the Catholic sympathies of his father and younger brother David -- his cultivated interests forged good relations with people in high places. He was careful to allay suspicions about his loyalty after his father died in 1571: a letter in Welsh sent to him by the master of the English College at Rome was intercepted in Paris in March 1578, and two months later Stradling reported to the council his receipt of an anonymous letter exhorting him to declare his Catholic loyalties. Rather, he preferred to concentrate on Glamorgan and his prominent role in south Wales. 
Stradling's position in Glamorgan society brought him into close contact with the Herbert earls of Pembroke, with whom relations were as tense as under Edward's father. He was sheriff of Glamorgan in 1573-4, 1582-3, and 1595-6, and he was deputy lieutenant of Glamorgan by 1590. Stradling also served on many commissions in Glamorgan, from the earliest in 1555 until his death. In October 1573 he was knighted. The sources of tension with the earls of Pembroke were several. Like other landowners, Stradling resented the privileges of Cardiff's townsfolk, especially when it was suspected (as in 1586-7) that they were trafficking with pirates. There was also controversy over who should pay for the repair of Cardiff Bridge. Even before his father died, he had composed a reply to Pembroke's argument about the relationship between his lordship of Cardiff and the sub-lordships of Glamorgan, including Stradling's own. The most spectacular conflict arose in 1584 over the marriage of Barbara Gamage, an heiress in the custody of her uncle Edward Stradling, for whose hand there was influential competition, including from the Herberts. Edward also disputed possession of the manor of Pen-llin with Pembroke in 1585. Even the queen's secretary, Francis Walsingham, was moved in November 1587 to advise Stradling to be reconciled with Pembroke. These rivalries did not prevent Stradling from serving as the earl's steward in his manor of Llantwit, or as steward of the St John's lordship of Fonmon and Pen-marc from 1575; nor did it discourage Stradling from sending Pembroke gifts of venison from the Stradling park. 
Edward Stradling is most famous as a scholar and patron of the arts. Much of the surviving correspondence received by him reflects his intellectual links with John, Lord Lumley, and Thomas Sackville, Lord Buckhurst, the antiquaries Rice Merrick and William Camden, the Welsh lexicographer Thomas Wiliems, and Lewis Dwnn the herald. He was interested in history, antiquities, literature, numismatics, building, and education. The castle at St Donats was extended by Stradling in Renaissance style, to include a long gallery, terraced gardens, and a vineyard. The Welsh poet Tomas Lleision praised his home and gardens in Latin verse. In 1573 he transferred the remains of his ancestors to the Stradling chapel built by his father on the north side of St Donats church, commissioning paintings of some of them in 1590. He planned to establish a grammar school at Cowbridge, though it was his heir who carried it into effect. His books and manuscripts at St Donats became a lending library for his acquaintances, who lent chronicles and other books in return. Stradling acquired former monastic records, including the register of Neath which several antiquaries borrowed for their own work. His famous essay on 'The winning of the lordship of Glamorgan out of the Welshmen's hands', which he sent to William Cecil in the 1560s, was published by the historian David Powel in 1584. Reputedly master of seven languages, he financed in 1592 the publication of 1250 copies of Sion Dafydd Rhys's Welsh grammar in Latin, 'Cambrobrytannicae... linguae institutiones'; the Glamorgan poet Meurug Dafydd complimented both Stradling and Rhys on their achievement. He died at St Donats Castle on 15 May 1609. His last will records his collections of arms and armour and ancient coins, as well as the books and manuscripts of a notable scholar. His commissioned portrait was hung near the effigy that his great-nephew and heir, Sir John Stradling, placed on Sir Edward's tomb in the mausoleum in St Donats church. 


@@@@@


doc= 26625


Stradling, Sir Edward, second baronet (bap. 1600, d. 1644), speculator and royalist army officer, was baptized at St Donat's Church, St Donats, Glamorgan, on 9 November 1600, the eldest son of Sir John Stradling, first baronet (1563-1637) of St Donats and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1640), daughter and heir of Edward Gage of Firle, Sussex. His younger brothers included the Church of England clergyman George Stradling and the royalist naval and army officer Sir Henry Stradling. 
Edward Stradling was born into one of the most powerful families in Glamorgan and followed his father into Brasenose College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 16 June 1615. About 1620 he married Mary (died 1671), daughter of Sir Thomas Mansell of Margam, one of the leading squires in the county, and this alliance helped consolidate his local position. He assumed his place on the county bench in 1622 and was a deputy lieutenant by 1631. He also acted as a commissioner for both the forced loan and knighthood composition fines. Himself knighted by 1622, he inherited his father's baronetcy in 1637. 
Stradling was involved in several business enterprises. He was one of those empowered by letters patent of February 1631 to bring water to London by an aqueduct from springs near Hoddesdon in Hertfordshire. Doubts were expressed on whether the project was feasible but Stradling and his associates defended it, and large sums of money raised by a lottery were directed towards the scheme. The aqueduct was not completed, however, and in May 1642 the House of Commons ordered that Stradling was to help repay the money given towards the project. 
Stradling was a shareholder in the controversial monopoly for the manufacture of soap, granted under letters patent of 17 December 1631. The project received the consistent backing of the king and privy council throughout the 1630s; the Long Parliament, however, determined to redress such grievances, and Sir Edward was declared a delinquent on 17 August 1641 for his participation in the monopoly, and was summoned by the Commons on 30 October. 
Stradling was also involved, along with the courtier Sir Lewis Dyve, in illegally exporting gold and silver. The men were called before the Star Chamber for this offence in June 1637 and must have been found guilty, given that Charles I subsequently issued a pardon for them. 
Probably on account of his local military experience Stradling was made captain of a company of foot in the first bishops' war. He was subsequently elected to the Short Parliament as member for Glamorgan, and although appointed to the important committee of privileges, he made little impression in the house. He does not appear to have stood for election in November 1640, and there were reports of his being commanded out of the country 'on his Majesty's service' in October 1640 ('CSP dom.', '1640-41', 219). Stradling was experiencing considerable financial difficulties at this time, and in January 1641 his wife's relations were helping to cover debts amounting to nearly $2000. His wife had to negotiate with one creditor in an effort to stop a petition being submitted to parliament to recover outstanding money. Stradling was also saved from arrest for debts to Captain John Roper through the intercession of William, Lord Paget and Sir Lewis Dyve, his associate in the affair of exporting gold and silver. 
Parliament had done little to further Stradling's interests, and at the outbreak of civil war he was one of those most forward in supporting the king. Appointed a commissioner of array in Glamorgan, he quickly raised a regiment of foot numbering over 1000. In October 1642 Stradling instructed his wife to thank her relations at Margam for the donation of ten muskets, but even now discussion turned to how he hoped to discharge his debts 'as soon as these troublesome times are passed over' (Penrice and Margam MS L.68). 
Appointed colonel, Stradling led his men into battle at Edgehill in October 1642. The Welsh recruits performed poorly, however, and Stradling was captured and imprisoned in Warwick Castle. He languished in confinement until May 1644, when Charles I secured his release through an exchange of prisoners. Stradling then made his way to Oxford, but fell ill there and died of fever on 20 June 1644. He was buried in the chapel of Jesus College the following day. 


@@@@@


doc= 26626


Stradling, George (1620/21-1688), dean of Chichester, was born at St Donats Castle, Glamorgan, the son of Sir John Stradling, baronet (1563-1637), and his wife, Elizabeth Gage, daughter of Edward Gage and his wife, Margaret, of Firle, Sussex. His early travels in France and Italy before entering Jesus College, Oxford, at the age of seventeen in 1638 made him into a competent linguist. At Oxford he 'much addicted himself to the study of musick' (Harrington) and, recognized generally as 'a rare lutinist' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.237), he much impressed John Wilson, later professor of music. After graduating BA in 1640, in 1641 he became a fellow of All Souls, where Gilbert Sheldon was warden, and proceeded MA in 1647 and DD in 1661. In the civil war he fought for the king 'with courage and resolution' (Harrington) as a cornet of horse in the regiment of his brother Sir Edward Stradling. Sir Henry Stradling was also his brother. 
When hostilities ended Stradling returned to Oxford for study, only to be threatened with ejection by parliamentary visitors in 1648. However, protected by his nephew-in-law, the prestigious Edmund Ludlow, and Michael Oldisworth, he survived. After the Restoration, on 7 November 1660 Robert Skinner, bishop of Oxford, ordained him deacon and priest. Declining the principalship of Jesus, he moved to London as chaplain to Sheldon, now bishop. Through Sheldon's patronage preferments followed apace, and Stradling was soon a substantial pluralist. He became sinecure rector of Fulham (1660-88), incumbent of Hanwell, Middlesex (1662-4), Cliffe-at-Hoo, Kent (1663-81), Sutton-at-Hone, Kent (1665-70), and of the ruined St Bride's, Fleet Street, London (1672-3). Stradling was also canon of St Paul's (1660-88) and of Westminster (1663-88). On 22 July 1671 he was installed as precentor, and on 21 December 1672 dean, of Chichester; he held these positions too until his death in 1688. As the deanery buildings had been destroyed in the civil war, joint holding of the deanery and precentorship after 1660 was commonplace. 
Though a pluralist Stradling presided at least once a year, often more, at Chichester chapter meetings, and was responsible for beautifying and repairing the cathedral. A moderate man, respected by 'men of different humour, party and temper' (Harrington), he was nevertheless at odds with the irascible tory bishop, Guy Carleton, who misinterpreted his moderation as 'lukewarmness' and 'indifference' (ibid.). That, with Stradling's pluralism, may have created the dissension, as Harrington intimated. But it was doubtless exacerbated by the rapturous welcome his cathedral colleagues, particularly Henry Edes, and the people of Chichester gave Monmouth during his barnstorming visit in February 1680 and on later occasions during the exclusion crisis. Records show Stradling not to have been present at least on that first visit, and there is no evidence that he was an exclusionist at all. In fact, Harrington wrote that 'a great minister of state' assured him in a letter that the king 'was satisfied that he was both able and willing to promote the king's service, with as much zeal as his accuser [Carleton], and with much more sincerity, discretion and success' (ibid.). 
In 1666 Stradling married Margaret, daughter of Sir William Salter, of Iver, Buckinghamshire. She died in 1681; he died seven years later at Westminster on 19 April 1688, and was buried in the abbey. He was survived by two sons, Gilbert and George, and one daughter, Anne. Despite his reputation as a scholar, Stradling was not 'desirous of applause' (Harrington), and modestly published nothing, except one sermon. Fourteen other sermons were published after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 26627


Stradling, Sir Henry (d. 1649?), naval officer, was the son of Sir John Stradling, first baronet (1563-1637), of St Donats, Glamorgan, MP and poet, and his wife, Elizabeth Gage, daughter of Edward Gage of Firle, Sussex. Sir Edward Stradling, second baronet, and George Stradling were his brothers. In 1628 he sailed to the Mediterranean as captain of the 'George and Elizabeth' in Sir Kenelm Digby's privateering expedition. In 1631 he was appointed captain of the 'First Whelp', a sixth rate, and in the following year held command of the 'Tenth Whelp'. He was one of a new breed of gentlemen commanders trained up in royal service, and shared their dislike of merchant captains, of whom he once remarked 'They hate all gentlemen, especially such as serve his Majesty at sea' ('CSP dom.', '1631-3', 413). He continued commanding whelps until the setting out of the first ship money fleet in 1635 in which he commanded the third-rate 'Swallow'. In 1636 Sir John Penington praised him as a captain 'who cannot be bettered in a ship of that rank' ('CSP dom.', '1635-6', 277). When war threatened with Spain in 1637 he was given the second-rate 'Dreadnought' in Northumberland's fleet and in late 1637 was selected to bring the duchess of Chevreuse to England, despite his limited knowledge of French. As the likelihood of war with Spain receded he reverted to command of the third-rate 'Bonaventure' in 1638. The main functions of the ship money fleets of the 1630s, in which he served, were to protect commerce from Turkish pirates and Dunkirk privateers and to force other nations to acknowledge England's sovereignty over the seas by striking their flags. In 1639 Stradling temporarily left the sea, serving in an army company during the first bishops' war, but in the following year he was back at sea in command of the 'Antelope'. During the second bishops' war he cruised off the east coast of Scotland picking up many prizes. In the summer fleet of 1641 he commanded the 'Lion'. 
When the Irish rising broke out in 1641 Stradling was appointed to the 'Bonaventure', one of four ships under Captain Thomas Kettleby to be sent to help suppress it. He reached Kinsale on 6 March 1642; in June he was cruising off the Shannon and in early August he was assisting the defence of Duncannon. Stradling was a convinced royalist. His appointment to the 'Bonaventure' had been confirmed by the Commons by only the narrow margin of eighty-six to seventy-seven. When active fighting began in England both he, who had been knighted in 1642, and Kettleby obeyed the king's instruction to abandon their station and proceed to Newcastle. Exactly when Stradling left Ireland is not clear but it is unlikely that a later modification ordering him to report to the queen in the United Provinces reached him in time. Both he and Kettleby reached the Tyne successfully but when a squadron of six parliamentary ships appeared under the vice-admiral, William Batten, the crews of the 'Bonaventure' and the 'Swallow' rebelled and Stradling was forced to flee in the ship's longboat. 
Though Stradling was said to have gone to Ireland, later events suggest that he served in Newcastle's army during 1643 under Sir Thomas Glemham, and that he was among the garrison of York that marched out with him a fortnight after Marston Moor. This would account for his reappearance at Carlisle in July 1644 where Glemham had become governor. The town endured a long siege and did not surrender until 26 June 1645. Glemham and Stradling, with about 200 foot, were allowed to march out. They joined the king at Cardiff a month later and, converted into dragoons, fought in the defeat at Rowton Heath on 24 September where Stradling was taken prisoner. He was later released and made his way to Oxford, where he was forced to surrender again when the city finally capitulated on 24 June 1646. On 10 December 1646 he begged to be allowed to compound for his delinquency, but no order was made. In June 1647 Stradling, his brother Thomas, and his nephew John, the major-general, took part in an abortive rising among the Glamorgan gentry, and they also joined Poyer's revolt in south Wales in 1648. Henry and Thomas were with Poyer in Pembroke Castle when it was taken by Cromwell on 11 July 1648. 
The articles of surrender forced the Stradling brothers to quit the kingdom within six weeks. Henry went to the United Provinces and when Prince Rupert took over the royalist fleet in November 1648 he was given command of the 'Roebuck'. In February 1649 Rupert sailed from Goree and for most of the summer was based at Kinsale. Stradling does not appear to have gone with Rupert to Portugal and may never have left Ireland. He is said to have died at Cork in 1649 and to have been buried there in Trinity Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 26628


Stradling, Sir John, first baronet (1563-1637), scholar and politician, was the son of Francis and Elizabeth Stradling of St George's, near Bristol. He was later adopted by Sir Edward Stradling (with whom he shared a great-grandfather), the childless possessor of large estates in Glamorgan. Stradling was educated at Bristol by Edward Green, a canon of the cathedral, and then at Oxford. He matriculated at Brasenose College on 18 July 1580 and graduated BA from Magdalen Hall on 7 February 1584. During his studies at Oxford he was regarded as 'a miracle for his forwardness in learning and pregnancy of parts' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', new edn, 2.396). As an undergraduate he was a member of the Michelbournes' group of Latin epigrammists, which included Campion and Fitzgeffrey; he is said to have been a fellow of All Souls. He studied for a time at one of the inns of court (possibly Middle Temple) and then travelled abroad. In London he was well regarded by William Camden, John Harington, Thomas Leyshon, and other scholars. On his return he lived with his uncle at St Donats, Glamorgan, mixing estate administration with his continuing studies. 
Stradling was particularly drawn to the work of the neo-Stoic and greatest Senecan scholar of the age, Justus Lipsius. The first Lipsius translation he published was 'A Direction for Travailers' in 1592; it was dedicated to the young earl of Bedford, the son-in-law of Stradling's friend John Harington. Shortly afterwards he translated Lipsius's 'Politicorum' but the appearance of William Jones's edition in 1594 put paid to any plans to publish. In the same year he made a birthday present of his translation of 'De constantia' to Sir Edward, who arranged for its publication; perhaps in an attempt to stress his prodigality he stated that it was the product of only five weeks' work. 'De constantia' explained Stoic philosophy for Christian readers and professed to present a synthesis of the best of both traditions. Stradling's first original work was 'De vita et morte contemnenda', published in Frankfurt in 1597. Modelled on 'De constantia' it takes the shape of a dialogue between Stradling and John David Rhys. The argument leans much more heavily towards Christianity than Lipsius's work. Stradling followed this with a volume of Latin epigrams in 1607. 
On 2 October 1599 Stradling married Elizabeth, daughter of Edward Gage of Firle, Sussex. She was the niece of his adoptive mother; they had four daughters and nine sons, including the royalist naval officer Sir Henry Stradling. The Stradlings were staunchly royalist, although his granddaughter Elizabeth (daughter to his eldest daughter, Jane) was the wife of the regicide Edmund Ludlow. Stradling's involvement in the administration of the family estates is evidenced in a composition first written in 1598, revised in 1601, and dated 'From my studie in your [Sir Edward's] castle of St Donats'. 'The Storie of the Lower Borowes of Merthymawr' describes Sir Edward's successful assertion of a claim to the Lower Burrows and narrates the tortuous course of the legal dispute. It lay in manuscript and was not published until the 1930s. 
Stradling was knighted in 1608 and his uncle's death the following year saw his succession to one of the largest gentry estates in Wales. He oversaw the completion of the foundation of Cowbridge grammar school. He was created a baronet in 1611 and stood fifth on the first list of them. As might be expected he was heavily involved in county politics; he was sheriff of Glamorgan in 1607, 1609, and 1620 and is known to have been deputy lieutenant in 1626, although he probably had held that office for many years previously. As a client of the third earl of Pembroke he was MP for St German's, Cornwall, in 1624-5 and for Old Sarum in 1625, before being elected for Glamorgan in 1625-6. He was a very active member, being on over fifty minor committees and deputations during the time he sat for Glamorgan. Particularly interesting, given his strong support for James I's peace policies, is his involvement in committees concerned with the prosecution of the war. His shifting view of war can be seen in the difference between his volume of English verse 'Beati pacifici' of 1623 and the manuscript 'A political discourse or dialogue between a knight of the Commons-house of parliament and a gentleman, his friend, being a moderate Roman Catholic' of 1625. By the time of the latter he cautiously asserts that Spain's intransigence had made peace impossible. He published a further volume in English, 'Divine Poemes', in 1625. 
By the early 1630s Stradling seems to have given way to his heir in politics and administration. He died in 1637 and his burial took place at St Donats on 4 September. According to Sir John Harington: 'whether it proceeded from the greatness of his parts, the agreeableness of his temper, or the generality of his studies; we shall hardly find any gentleman whatsoever, that among all the eminent scholars of that age, men of very different professions, and very disagreeable studies, appears by his writings to have gained so universal respect and esteem. (J. Harington, 'Preface' to 'Sermons of Revd George Stradling' [Stradling's son])' 



@@@@@


doc= 26629


Stradling, Sir Thomas (c.1498-1571), landowner, was the eldest son of Sir Edward Stradling (died 1535) of St Donats, Glamorgan, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1513), daughter of Sir Thomas Arundell of Lanherne in Cornwall. Elizabeth's kinsman Sir Thomas Arundell (died 1552) was attached to Cardinal Wolsey and related to the earl of Arundel. His parents' connections explain Thomas Stradling's marriage in 1516 to Katherine, daughter of Sir Thomas Gamage of Coety, Glamorgan, and his appointment as a sewer of the chamber in Henry VIII's household; after his father's death his attachment to Glamorgan and the family seat of St Donats was strong. He had already secured for life the revenues and offices of the lordships of Meisgyn, Glynrhondda, and Senghennydd in September 1525, and after 1535 his responsibilities multiplied, notably on commissions in Glamorgan (from 1536), and in Somerset (1538-44) and Dorset (1538-40), where he also held land. In October 1542 he purchased Neath Abbey's manor of Nash. Relations with the main landowners in Glamorgan, especially the Herberts, were not easy, and tensions often led to violence. It was reported of the Stradlings in the early 1530s that 'there are twelve brothers, most of them bastards, and they have no living but by extortion and pilling of the King's subjects' ('LP Henry VIII', 5, no. 298). 
The Arundel connection accounts for Stradling's part in political crises under Edward VI. Knighted in 1547 and sheriff of Glamorgan in 1547-8, he had interests that spread to Sussex, where the earl of Arundel's influence was great. In 1550 Stradling acquired the Sussex manor of Binderton, formerly held by Tarrant Priory in Dorset. Family marriage alliances in Sussex cemented the relationship. However, at the time of the duke of Somerset's second downfall in October 1551, Stradling was arrested with Arundel and remained a prisoner in the Tower of London for over a year. He had been released by May 1553. 
During Mary's reign Stradling received further favours. The Arundel connection explains his election to the parliament of October 1553 for the duchy of Lancaster borough of East Grinstead, Sussex, where Arundel was steward, and for Arundel borough in April 1554. He served on the commission of the peace in 1554 in the counties of Gloucester, Hereford, Shropshire, and Worcester, and in November was described as a servant of Queen Mary and her consort, Philip of Spain. His attachment to the court and his conservative religious sympathies led to his appointment in February 1557 as muster-master of the queen's army, and to investigate heresies and the distribution of seditious books. In July 1558 he was granted the reversion of the Herbert manor of Sully, Glamorgan, and lands in Bedfordshire. He was emboldened to take action against the earl of Pembroke in Star Chamber in 1557 for harsh measures in raising men in Glamorgan for the French war. 
Stradling could expect little from Elizabeth I; three of his children -- his younger son David, and two daughters -- appear to have retired abroad presumably because they shared his Catholic religious views. But several of his brothers secured a general pardon in January 1559. Two months later, on 20 March, the government's suspicion was reflected in its reaction to the 'miracle of St Donats'. The figure of a cross which appeared to Stradling in the stump of an ash tree left standing after a storm was later recorded in four paintings commissioned by him; the story was reported to the pope and appeared in English and Welsh writings subsequently published abroad. Pilgrims visited St Donats, and in spring 1561 Stradling was among the circle of Sir Edward Waldegrave, his neighbour in Somerset, who were sent to the Tower of London. The tree was cut down and transported to the council in London. Stradling was released in October 1563; but following the northern uprising of 1569 he refused to subscribe to the 'Act of Uniformity', and a commission was appointed in December to investigate his conduct. It found him bedridden, properly attending church when he could, and even supplying wine for the sacrament in local churches. When he died at St Donats Castle on 27 January 1571, his will made bequests to over twenty Glamorgan churches. He added the north porch and lady chapel to St Donats church, where he was buried close to his parents. He was succeeded by his son Sir Edward Stradling (d. 1609). 


@@@@@


doc= 26630


George Strahan (1744-1824), the middle son, was born at Wine Office Court on 29 March 1744. He was apprenticed to his father and then read divinity at University College, Oxford. In 1768 he was awarded a fellowship at University College, and on 17 April 1771 his MA. He became DD in 1807. In 1772 his father presented him with the living of St Mary's, Islington, London. On 25 June 1778 George married Margaret Robertson (died 1831). He is known for having been spiritual counsellor to Samuel Johnson, who entrusted him with the papers that became 'Prayers and Meditations' (1785). George Strahan died at St Mary's vicarage on 18 May 1824. He was buried at St Mary's. 


@@@@@


doc= 26631


Strahan, William (1715-1785), printer, was born on 24 March 1715 in Edinburgh, the elder of two children of George Strachan (died in or before 1742), solicitor and later clerk of customs at Leith, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Smeiton (died 1759). Educated at the Royal High School, young William served his apprenticeship, 'c'.1729-1736, to Mossman and Brown, king's printers in Scotland. Moving to London, he worked as a journeyman compositor for William Bowyer the elder between May 1736 and 25 February 1738. 
Strahan started in business swiftly and decisively. Between July and December 1738 he was admitted by redemption to the freedom of the Stationers' Company, became a freeman of the City of London, and, on 20 July married Margaret Penelope Elphinston (1719-1785), daughter of an episcopal clergyman in Edinburgh and sister of James Elphinston. He immediately opened his business with the usual one or two presses, hiring his best friend and fellow apprentice, David Hall. By 15 November he had printed George Costard's 'A Critical Dissertation', a minor work for the bookseller James Crockatt. It was advertised on sale in the December 'London Magazine'. This private business, as he called it, followed the traditional printer's role of working for booksellers (equivalent to modern publishers), for 'gentlemen', and for institutions and merchants needing jobbing printing such as circulars. Among early bookseller customers were Andrew Millar, Thomas Longman, and Charles Hitch. Among early gentlemen customers were the new religious writers Charles Wesley and George Whitefield. 
Strahan's few ledger entries in 1738-9 give way on 1 August 1739 to the meticulously kept records which make him historically important. Seventeen ledgers and seven travel diaries are extant from his lifetime, even if a number of other ledgers are missing. After Strahan's death the company records continue to 1861, a total of 121 manuscript volumes, housed today in the British Library. 
By March 1740 Strahan was in Wine Office Court, St Bride's parish, London. He was able to start a long-lived wholesale trade in books to Philadelphia because James Read, an American, visited this shop. Through Read, Strahan also obtained a position for David Hall, who decided to migrate to America, where he became manager for Benjamin Franklin's fourth printing company. In 1742 Strahan was admitted to the livery of the Stationers' Company. His printing business flourished, while eight children were born (only three would survive him). In 1748 he moved to larger permanent quarters at the corner of Little New Street and Printer Street, also in St Bride's parish and holding seven presses. 
To survive and prosper in the book trade Strahan had known he had to do more than printing. As early as 1738 he had started to buy copyrights from authors, or shares in copyrights from their booksellers. This branch of business remained secondary until Strahan began to attend the London trades sales consistently, notably those after the deaths of Jacob Tonson (1767) and Andrew Millar (1768). Between 1751 and 1780 he completed at least 330 transactions for sets of copyright shares in 411 books. He had the influence of a major bookseller, especially when he combined with Thomas Cadell, Millar's successor. But printing was the main concern, so Strahan had built another building to hold four more presses in 1754. 
Strahan also expanded into 'public' businesses. Strahan and Henry Woodfall II each purchased half of the law patent, housed at Craven House, Clare Street, Clare Market, off the Strand in London. They took over in 1762 with four presses. After Woodfall's death in 1769 Strahan assumed sole management, with Woodfall's heirs retaining their share of the profits. His next step was to obtain the highest position he could in public printing: the patent as king's printer. During negotiations to purchase one-third from Charles Eyre, he built a new king's printing house with nine presses, next to the multiple buildings of his private business. This ensured that Strahan would also be appointed manager of the king's printing house when the patent began in January 1770. In the meantime, in 1764 he had added another building in Gunpowder Alley to the private printing business. In 1770, with the new public branches, Strahan operated and owned, or owned part of, three separate printing businesses housed in at least six different buildings in two areas of London and running at least twenty-five presses and possibly more. The private business alone was one of the largest printing firms in London, if not the largest in the kingdom. 
Part of Strahan's plan for success had been to apprentice his three sons to different book trades: William to printing, George ['see below'] to bookselling, and Andrew ['see below'] to the stationers' trade in paper. But the forceful, competitive man had equally strong children. William set up for himself in 1769 (but Strahan gave him $2000 to start a business on Snow Hill), and George was called to the church (Strahan paid for his undergraduate study). Andrew stayed, becoming overseer when his eldest brother left. 
In contrast to this attempt to control his sons, Strahan was a warm and caring friend. His close friendships with David Hume, Benjamin Franklin, and Samuel Johnson are well known through letters. Strahan's business friends included such diverse persons as Tobias Smollett, Adam Smith, Edward Gibbon, Henry Fielding, Oliver Goldsmith, and William Robertson. His correspondence with these literary figures is another reason for his historical importance. Strahan's skill in letter writing was respected in England and America; for example, the political portions of his monthly letters to David Hall were often published in the 'Pennsylvania Gazette' until Hall's death in 1772. 
While Strahan was master of the Stationers' Company in 1774, Lord North's ministry suggested he stand for parliament to support the government. Having purchased two seats, he was returned for Malmesbury (1774-80) and for Wootton Bassett (1780-84). Although he had been interested in law, politics, and debate all his life, he was completely undistinguished in office. Strahan appeared unconcerned when, in 1784, the government changed and he was out of parliament. His vigorous, healthy life slowed: in 1783 he had turned most of the business over to his son Andrew. In 1784 he also resigned from the Essex Head Club. He quietly declined and died at New Street on 9 July 1785. He died at the top of the trade, leaving a fortune. His estate, valued at $95,000, included private printing, copyright holdings, the law patent, and king's patent. His wife died on 7 August that same year. 






@@@@@


doc= 26632


Strang, John (1583/4-1654), Church of Scotland minister and university principal, was born at Irvine, Ayrshire, the son of William Strang (1545/6-1588), the minister there, and his wife, Agnes, sister of Alexander Borthwick of Nether Lenagher, Edinburghshire. Upon his father's death his mother married Robert Wilkie (died 1601), minister of Kilmarnock, and Strang was educated at the local grammar school. About 1596 Strang was sent to the University of St Andrews, under the guidance of principal Wilkie, a relation of his stepfather. He graduated MA in 1600. Subsequently he became a regent of St Leonard's College, St Andrews. Following ordination, he was admitted as minister of Erroll, in the presbytery of Perth, on 10 April 1614, on the recommendation of the professors at St Andrews and of Arthur Henderson, then minister of Leuchars, one of his tasks being to counter the Catholicism of Francis Hay, ninth earl of Erroll. On 29 July 1616 he received a DD from St Andrews. In 1617 he took part in the disputations before James VI during the king's visit to Scotland. In the Perth assembly of 1618 he voted against the five articles, but this did not prevent his nomination in 1619 to the high commission appointed to ensure their implementation. However, Strang did not attend the commission's meetings. In 1620 he refused the offer of a church in Edinburgh. While at Erroll, Strang married Janet (1589?-1627), daughter of William Hay of Barra and widow of James Smyth, minister of Erroll; they had two daughters. 
Before his death, James VI offered Strang the post of principal of Glasgow University and professor of divinity. Strang wished to secure the support of the former principal, Robert Boyd, who was intriguing to get his place back, but even without that he accepted and was admitted on 21 February 1626. The new position suited him better than the ministry, for he was reputed to be a poor preacher. In Glasgow, possibly on 9 September 1627, he married Agnes Fleming. They had one son (who died in 1651, aged twenty-two) and two daughters. At Glasgow, Strang became a promoter of new buildings, including the inner court of the college in the High Street. 
In July 1637 Strang was a notable opponent of Charles I's liturgical innovations. Robert Baillie, who in 1656 married Strang's daughter Helen (died 1679), later wrote that Strang's 'first concurrence did a great deal of good to further that universal refusal of the [Prayer] Book which followed' (Baillie, 1.28-9). However, Strang was reluctant to subscribe the covenant in February 1638 without qualifying it 'so far as that confession was not prejudicial to the king's authority, the office of episcopal government itself, and that power which is given bishops by lawful assemblies and parliaments, and in so far as we are bound to withstand all innovations in the worship of God, contrary to his written word, and the Confession of Faith of the Church of Scotland. (ibid., 1.66-9)' In the event, in July 1638 Archibald Johnston of Wariston persuaded Strang to take the covenant as it stood. 
When Charles I withdrew the liturgy and canons, Strang supported the king's commissioner, James Hamilton, marquess of Hamilton, even sending him arguments opposing Johnston's protestation of 22 September 1638. In it he argued that the king's concessions were sufficient and that the king's covenant should be signed, although his desire for anonymity prevented its publication. Strang's views were valued, as he was perceived by Walter Balcangell as the 'learnedest Covenanter in Scotland' (Baillie, 1.476), and he supported peace in the church rather than theological purity. At the Glasgow assembly in November 1638 Strang was persuaded to disown his own protestation, against lay elders sitting in the assembly or voting in presbyteries, much to Hamilton's chagrin. However, when Hamilton departed from the assembly, so did Strang, and he then faced demands that he be summoned back. These were defeated and Strang continued to represent the university at general assemblies. 
Strang's second wife died in January 1641 and he married Ann Stewart (died 1649) in Glasgow, possibly on 9 December 1641. In 1643 Baillie recounted Strang's busy lifestyle, which included his university work and 'a charge beside would kill an ox' (Baillie, 2.71). The discovery after the battle of Naseby of Strang's correspondence with Archbishop William Laud and his unpublished treatise of 1638 placed him on the defensive. In 1646 the general assembly appointed commissioners to examine his views, particularly the charge that he inclined to the teachings of the Dutch theologian Moise Amyraut. The commissioners found him orthodox after Strang had signed a paper assenting to the decisions of the Synod of Dort. This was duly reported back to the general assembly in August 1647. Almost at the same date, Baillie was describing him as 'among the best scholars of the Reformed Church' (ibid., 3.5-6). 
Strang's third wife died in June 1649. He was eventually forced to retire from Glasgow, after a visitation from the estates of the kingdom, and the general assembly accepted his supplication to retire on 19 April 1650. He was awarded a pension of 1000 merks, together with a testimonial of his orthodoxy, and lived in retirement in the college until 1653. He died while on a visit to Edinburgh on 20 June 1654, aged seventy, and was buried on 22 June at Greyfriars. He was survived by four daughters. Two of his works appeared posthumously, 'De voluntate et actionibus Dei circa peccatum' (Amsterdam, 1657) and 'De interpretatione et perfectione scripturae, una cum opusculis de sabbato' (Rotterdam, 1663), treating respectively sin and the sabbath. 


@@@@@


doc= 26633


Strang, John (1795-1863), author and statistician, was born on 10 February 1795 in Charlotte Street, Dowanhill, just beyond the then western boundary of Glasgow, the son of John Strang (died 1809/10), a wine merchant in the city. His mother's maiden name was McGilp, but nothing else is known about her. He received a liberal education at Dr Boyd's school and at Glasgow grammar school, and became proficient in both French and German; he learned Italian later in life. His father died when he was fourteen, and he subsequently inherited the business of John Strang & Co. and lived above the shop in Stockwell Street. Strang appears to have had little enthusiasm for the wine trade and gave up the shop before he moved to live in Woodside Place, probably in 1834. As a man of independent means, he was able to devote his energies to literature and the arts. In December 1842 he married Elizabeth, daughter of William Anderson, a distinguished Glasgow physician. There were no children from the marriage. 
In 1817 Strang visited France and Germany, and he retained a love for foreign travel throughout his life. He began to translate stories and poems from the French and the German for British periodicals, and published a life of Theodore Karl Koerner and (under the pseudonym Richard Holcruff) a book of translations of the works of other German writers. In 1831 he returned to the continent and wrote 'Germany in 1831' (1836), a well-received two-volume work in which he set out to investigate the Teutonic character. He became a regular contributor to the 'Scots Times' (1826-31) and a literary critic for 'The Scotsman' (1832-3). In 1832 he became the editor of 'The Day', a short-lived daily literary paper published in Glasgow, to which he contributed articles and poems. 
Strang was an accomplished artist, and took a keen interest in local architecture. It is said that it was while sketching features of Glasgow that he became interested in the creation of an imposing 'garden cemetery' to adorn the city. In 1831 he wrote a pamphlet, 'Necropolis Glasguensis', advocating the scheme and publicized his idea in letters to newspapers and through his social contacts. The Merchants House undertook the task of laying out the necropolis, modelled on the graveyard of Pere Lachaise in Paris, in the Fir Park (which it owned) near Glasgow Cathedral. It opened in 1833 and it has remained one of the city's best-known landmarks. 
After the demise of 'The Day' Strang embarked on a career in civic affairs. In 1834 he was appointed Glasgow's city chamberlain, and served in that office for twenty-nine years. He won great respect for his sound management of the municipal finances, and was praised as a writer on social and economic affairs. His annual reports on the social and economic statistics of Glasgow, and a series of articles on statistics relating to the city's industries, public health, and living conditions published in 'The Journal of the Statistical Society of London' were considered to be highly advanced for the day. Many of the articles were subsequently published in 'The Economic and Social Statistics of Glasgow and the West of Scotland' (1851-61). 
Strang's most popular book was 'Glasgow and its Clubs' (1855), an entertaining history of the city, its people, and social life, which appeared in two subsequent editions (1857 and 1864) and has been mined for anecdote and fact by generations of journalists and historians of the city. In 1843 the University of Glasgow conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD, in recognition of his public service and of his literary work. On his retirement as city chamberlain in 1863 the citizens of Glasgow presented him with a cheque for $4600 as a token of their gratitude for his services. 
Strang died on 8 December 1863 at Woodside Place, Glasgow. He was buried in the necropolis which was inspired by his vision on 14 December. He was survived by his wife. He was one of Glasgow's greatest public servants, and his painstaking work in compiling social and economic statistics for the city provided valuable data for social reformers and advocates of municipal improvement schemes. He was also one of Glasgow's leading men of letters, with 'Glasgow and its Clubs' as his most popular and enduring work. 


@@@@@


doc= 26634


Strange, Alexander (1818-1876), army officer and scientist, the fifth son and youngest of twelve children born to Thomas Andrew Lumisden Strange (1756-1841) and his second wife, Louisa (1788-1862), daughter of Sir William Burroughs, baronet, was born in London on 27 April 1818. He entered Harrow School in September 1831, but left in 1834, aged sixteen, for India, on receiving a commission in the 7th Madras light cavalry (22 June 1834). He was promoted lieutenant on 10 May 1837. In India his flair for mechanics and invention was noted and, after studying at the Simla observatory, he was appointed on the recommendation of Andrew Waugh, in 1847, second assistant to the great trigonometrical survey of India. He was employed on the Karachi longitudinal series, extending from the Sironj base in central India to Karachi, and crossing the Thar Desert north of the Rann of Cutch. He began work in 1850 as first assistant to Captain Renny Tailyour, but after the first season Tailyour withdrew and Strange took chief command of a task which proved onerous because of the absence of building materials and the need to provision 200 men in the desert. The triangulation of the section was completed on 22 April 1853. The series was 668 miles long, consisted of 173 principal triangles, and covered an area of 20,323 square miles: Strange performed the task with great skill and rapidity. After this work was ended, Strange, as astronomical assistant, joined the surveyor-general, Sir Andrew Waugh, at Attock to help measure a verificatory base-line. In 1855 he joined the surveyor-general's headquarters office, and in 1856 was placed in charge of the triangulation southwards from Calcutta to Madras, along the east coast. In 1859 he was promoted major, and, in accordance with the regulations, retired from the survey. He received the special thanks of the government of India. 
Strange returned to England in January 1861 and retired from the army in December of that year with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In England he persuaded the government to establish a central department for the inspection of scientific instruments for use in India, and was appointed to organize it, gaining the office of inspector in 1862. Hitherto the government's system for the construction of scientific instruments for official use had been to keep a stock of patterns, invite tenders for copying them, and accept the lowest, thus preventing any chance of improvement in the instruments, and affording no guarantee of their quality. Strange abolished the patterns, encouraged invention, ensured competition as to price by employing at least two makers for each class of instrument, and enforced strict supervision. A marked improvement in design and workmanship was soon evident, and his first decennial report showed that the cost of the new system was only about 0.028 per cent of the outlay on the works where the instruments were employed. For the trigonometrical survey he himself designed and superintended the construction by Troughton and Simms of a great theodolite, two zenith-sectors designed to give the maximum power for the minimum weight, and two 5 foot transit instruments for the determination of longitude. The instruments were tested in an observatory which he designed at the Indian store depot at Lambeth. His design and testing procedures proved so effective that the speed and accuracy of Indian survey work increased markedly. 
Strange was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical and Royal Astronomical societies in 1861, and of the Royal Society on 2 June 1864. He took an active part in their proceedings. He served on the council of the Royal Astronomical Society from 1863 to 1867, and as foreign secretary from 1868 to 1873. He contributed several papers to the society's journals. He was on the council of the Royal Society from 1867 to 1869. He used his influence in scientific circles to argue for government support for scientific research and his advocacy was instrumental in the appointment in 1870 of the royal commission on this question. 
Strange was a good public speaker, a capable artist, and a good violinist. He died at 97 Onslow Square, London, on 9 March 1876 of 'Indian fever' and a feeble heart. His wife, Adelaide, daughter of the Revd William Davies, probably predeceased him. They had three daughters, including Julia Fanny, his sole executor, and a son, Alexander Burroughs, a civil engineer in Madras. 
Strange was a perceptive scientist, one of the few, for example, to recognize the importance of Babbage's calculating machines and the extent to which intellectual advance depended on the manufacture of precision equipment. His experience in the army led him to believe that science could achieve most if pursued collaboratively in well-organized departments with government support. He urged on government the duty of devising a coherent scientific policy, shaped by scientists. Dismissing the idea that local initiatives, individual enterprise, or the Royal Society (a private body) should or could undertake such strategic planning, he argued that a great scientific council, a standing commission modelled on the Council of India, should be appointed to advise government, under a minister for science. The state should support basic scientific research by well-paid, full-time researchers in government laboratories. Applied science should be fostered in industrial centres. A science museum should be set up to encourage good instrument design. Strange was not the first or the only scientist to urge a consistent government policy for science, but he was at the time its most forceful advocate. He was opposed by those who feared that increased government involvement would hamper individual scientists' freedom, that a council of science would leave the Royal Society without a purpose, and that the concentration of science in government institutes would undermine the universities. Others, like Richard Strachey, a friend of Strange's who shared his Indian background, supported his ideas. The royal commission of 1870 adopted most of Strange's ideas, but its fundamental recommendations were not implemented in his lifetime, or in the subsequent century. 


@@@@@


doc= 26635


Strange, Sir John (bap. 1696, d. 1754), judge, was baptized at St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, on 8 September 1696, the eldest son of John Strange of Fleet Street, London, and his second wife, Mary Plaistowe. He was admitted a student at the Middle Temple on 11 July 1712, and later commenced pupillage in the busy practice of Charles Salkeld, a solicitor of Brook Street, Holborn, where Thomas Parker (later chief baron of the exchequer), Philip Yorke (later Lord Chancellor Hardwicke), and Robert Jocelyn (later lord chancellor of Ireland) had all trained. One of his tasks was to carry his master's papers to Westminster Hall, and in 1717 he witnessed Sir Joseph Jekyll's first appearance as master of the rolls, hardly suspecting that twenty years later he himself would be invited to succeed Jekyll in the office. 
At this early stage in his career Strange was already beginning to compile notes and transcripts of various cases in the Westminster courts which were to form the basis of his posthumously published 'Reports'. On 27 October 1718 he was called to the bar, and by 1722 was appearing as junior counsel for the crown. At St Bride's on 14 May 1722 he married Susan (1700/01-1747), daughter and coheir of Edward Strong of Greenwich, and a large family of two sons and nine daughters (two daughters dying young) followed. His second son was the natural philosopher John Strange. In 1725 he was employed as defence counsel in the impeachment of Lord Chancellor Macclesfield, but though he maintained a commendable reputation at the bar it was not until 9 February 1736 that he became a king's counsel and thus marked out for future advancement. In the same year the Middle Temple elected him a bencher. 
On 28 January 1737 Strange was appointed to Sir Robert Walpole's ministry as solicitor-general, and less than a fortnight later was brought into parliament for West Looe, Cornwall. As one of the crown's chief law officers in the Commons he was soon drawn into important work in assisting the government's bill against the provost and city of Edinburgh following the murder of Captain Porteous the previous year, and on 9 June he gave a lengthy summary to the house of the evidence against the provost. On the death of the master of the rolls, Sir Joseph Jekyll, on 19 August 1738, he was immediately invited to succeed by his old friend from student days Philip Yorke, now Lord Chancellor Hardwicke. Strange reluctantly declined, protesting his lack of experience in chancery jurisdiction but also expressing concern that the profits might be insufficient to support his large family. In November 1739 he was elected recorder of London by the court of aldermen, and on 12 May 1740 was knighted at Whitehall with his senior colleague Dudley Ryder, the attorney-general. He stood down at West Looe in the election of May 1741, but in January 1742 was returned at a by-election for Totnes, Devon, and continued to sit for the borough until his death. At the end of March 1742 he was one of the small handful of old corps whig supporters elected to the secret committee to inquire into Walpole's conduct, but in spite of having supported the former minister on all previous occasions Strange's attitudes subsequently fell in line with those of the inquiry, and in May he voted in the Commons in favour of an (unsuccessful) opposition bill indemnifying such witnesses as chose to give evidence against Walpole. 
It may have been later embarrassment for this act that caused Strange suddenly to resign all his legal appointments in November. A piece of satirical verse on his resignation entitled 'The Causidicade' which appeared a few months later in 1743 insinuated darker reasons, speculating that Strange had resigned 'foreseeing approaching disgrace', but Strange himself, in his 'Reports', explained that he had done so 'having received a considerable addition to my fortune and some degree of ease and retirement being judged proper for my health' (Strange, 1176). His recent display of anti-Walpolian sentiment was not held against him, for on 27 November 1742 George II granted him precedence after the attorney-general for life. Strange continued to practise as a barrister but confined himself to morning sittings of the court of king's bench. His most important case work in these years came in the aftermath of the Jacobite rising; in 1746 he was one of the counsel for the crown at the trials of the rebels Francis Townley and Lord Balmerino, and in March 1747 acted as a manager of the impeachment of Lord Lovat, summing up the evidence against the peer in an hour-long speech. 
In March 1750, after more than thirty years at the bar, Strange was prevailed upon by Hardwicke to accept judicial office as master of the rolls, and on 17 March, a week after his appointment took effect, he was sworn of the privy council. At the general election in the spring of 1754 he expressed indifference to retaining a parliamentary seat, but his mind was changed on hearing from the duke of Newcastle, the incoming first lord of the Treasury, the king's observation that it was essential the master of the rolls should have a seat in parliament. He died, however, on 18 May, a month after being re-elected at Totnes, and was buried next to his wife in the churchyard at Leyton, Essex, near the manor house which for many years had been his country residence. Newcastle extolled 'his many excellent public qualities and most amiable private ones' (Foss, 'Judges', 169). 
Before his death Strange had been preparing his collection of reports for publication. Because of his willingness to lend his notes to judges there had been many opportunities for copies of this material, unscrupulously obtained, to pass into the hands of legal hacks. It included summaries and arguments of cases where no judgment had been made. It was Strange's chief concern, therefore, to have ready a definitive compilation of reports of adjudged cases that could be published in the event of any pirating of his work. Accordingly, when some of Strange's case notes did indeed appear shortly after his death under the title of 'A Collection of Select Cases Relating to Evidence, by a Late Barrister-at-Law', his executors acted swiftly to suppress it, and in 1755 his eldest son published the reports as authentically selected, dedicating them to Lord Hardwicke. Reprinted in second and third editions in 1782 and 1795, Strange's reports endured in their usefulness for the rest of the century and after. 


@@@@@


doc= 26636


Strange, John (1732-1799), natural philosopher and diplomat, was born in Barnet, Middlesex, and baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 10 March 1732, the second son of Sir John Strange (bap. 1696, d. 1754), master of the rolls, and his wife, Susan Strong (1700/01-1747), the eldest daughter of Edward Strong of Greenwich. He was educated privately and at Clare College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1753 and proceeded MA in 1755. Following his father's death in 1754 he supervised the publishing of his 'Reports of Adjudged Cases' (1755). On inheriting considerable wealth, he travelled extensively in the south of France, the Tyrol, and Italy. He lived near Pisa for much of the time between 1757 and 1764 and entered the circle of Tuscan antiquaries and men of science. His relationship with the physician and natural historian Tozzetti in particular 'certainly had a role in deepening and strengthening his interest in geology and palaeontology' (Ciancio, 125). Botany was a prime area of interest, strongly supplemented by the natural history of the earth, especially conchology, palaeontology, and physical geography, with particular emphasis on method in geology, linking observation, examination, and description with theory. He also stressed the invaluable use of maps and illustrations. He became a member of several learned institutions such as the Bologna Academy of Sciences, the Botanical Society of Florence, the Royal Academy of Montpellier, and the Academia Leopoldina Curiosorum Naturae of Leipzig. About 1760 Strange married Mary Ann Gould (died 1783), daughter of Davidge Gould of Sharpham Park, near Street in Somerset, and Honora Hockman of Buckland Baron, Devon. Her brother was Sir Henry Gould (1710-1794). She died in Venice on 3 May 1783. They seemingly had no children. 
For his contributions to geology Strange was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in April 1766; soon thereafter he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries for his contributions to archaeology. After spending the summer of 1768 in south Wales, he contributed 'An account of Roman remains in and near the city of Brecknock' to the first number of 'Archaeologia' (1770). In 1771 he made an archaeological tour in northern Italy. As a result of meeting Abbe Fortis in Padua, he made several communications to the Society of Antiquaries on the Roman inscriptions and antiquities of Dalmatia and Istria, a region then little known in western Europe. In addition to further communications to 'Archaeologia', he contributed several papers to the 'Philosophical Transactions' of the Royal Society, including accounts of 'The origin of natural paper found near Cortona in Tuscany' (59, 1769), 'Some specimens of sponges from Italy' (60, 1770), which included plates made from his own drawings, 'A curious Giant's causeway... newly discovered in the Euganean hills, near Padua' (65, 1775), and 'The tides in the Adriatic' (67, 1777). Such papers earned him an international reputation among scientists and antiquarians. The first-cited 'was also valuable for the accurate observations on microscopy it contained. Favourable reactions appeared in many learned journals stressing the erudition and skills of its author' (Ciancio, 124). Strange was playing a key role in the promotion of intellectual relations between Britain and the continent, particularly Italy, and corresponded with notable men of science such as Arduino, Bonnet, Caldani, and von Haller. His surviving correspondence reveals him as an important intermediary, especially regarding natural history, and as someone who was additionally thereby breaking down barriers between social ranks. A number of his papers were also published in Italy (in 'Opuscoli scelti sulle scienze') and in Switzerland (in Weber's 'Mineralogische Beschreibungen'). He also contributed to the formation of private antiquarian collections which had significance for Britain. In England between 1765 and 1771 he had also had the opportunity to meet famous foreign visitors to London; he participated in public lectures on conchology by Emanuel Mendes da Costa; and he made notable geological observations as he travelled through numerous counties. 
In Italy from the spring of 1771 Strange spent a year in the Veneto studying extinct volcanoes. He undertook geological studies in Switzerland in spring 1772 and France in spring 1773. In November 1773, thanks largely to Lord Bute, for whom he had lately acted as an unofficial collector of Italian drawings and rare books, he was appointed British resident minister in Venice. In post from autumn 1774, his official duties left him with far less time to pursue his antiquarian interests. He therefore supervised local naturalists, who surveyed notable areas of the region, and he paid Abbe Fortis and Girolamo Festari to carry out research in geology in particular but also in other disciplines. And from 1779 Strange kept Sir Joseph Banks, president of the Royal Society, informed of new developments in Italian science -- one letter in particular, of March 1783, gave fulsome details of learned periodicals edited in Italy since the start of the century. Through the 1780s Strange ensured that the best of Italian scientific literature reached London. In addition to patronizing local studies, and hosting weekly 'conversazioni' at the residency, Strange also reported regularly to London on the difficult and ever changing local political scene. 
Strange ceased to act as resident in August 1786, and left Venice, with a 'leave of absence' from the king, in October. He settled at Ridge, near South Mimms in Hertfordshire. He did not officially resign his post until August 1789. About 1788 he was elected a member of the council of the Royal Society, but poor health prevented his regular participation in weekly evening meetings at Banks's house. He possibly returned to Italy to arrange the transportation of the valuable collections he had formed there -- of books, manuscripts and antiquities, and of pictures, especially by Venetian masters. He had also commissioned engravings of many pictures in his collection. In London he was apparently unable to raise much interest or money when he sought to sell some pictures, possibly to defray the costs of his expensive years in Venice. 
In July 1793 Strange was made an honorary DCL at Oxford. He died at Ridge on 19 March 1799. By his will he directed that all his collections should be sold. The pictures were sold by private contract, the natural history cabinets by King, and the prints, drawings, busts, coins, medals, bronzes, and antiquities by Christies. There was published in 1800 'Fossils, remains of animals and vegetables, minerals, recent shells, &c. catalogue of the... museum of... J. Strange'. The library, the catalogue of which ('Bibliotheca Strangeiana') was compiled by Samuel Paterson and published in 1801, was sold by Leigh and Sotheby over a period of twenty-nine days in March-April of that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 26637


Strange, Richard (c.1611-1682), Jesuit, born in Northumberland, attended the English College at St Omer, and entered the Society of Jesus in 1631. He subsequently attended the college at Liege, where he was ordained priest about 1640. After teaching classics in the college at St Omer he was sent to the Durham district in 1644, and about 1651 was removed to the London mission, where he worked for many years. In 1671 he was appointed rector of the house of the English Jesuits at Ghent. It was while he was there that his principal work, 'The life and gests of S. Thomas Cantilupe, bishop of Hereford and sometime lord chancellor of England' (Ghent, 1674), was published, as was 'Of Adoration in Spirit and Truth' (1673), his translation of a work by John Nieremberg. In 1674 he was declared provincial superior of the English Jesuits and held that office for three years. His name figured in Titus Oates's list of Jesuits accused of plotting against the king, and also in Peter Hamerton's account of the adventures of priests and others hunted as the result of Oates's accusations. Having escaped to the continent in 1679 Strange became an adviser to John Warner, the provincial superior from 1679 to 1683. He died at the college in St Omer on 7 April 1682 and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 26638


Strange, Sir Robert (1721-1792), line-engraver, was born on 14 July 1721, the eldest son of David Strange, of Kirkwall in the Orkneys, and his second wife, Jane, 'nee' Scollay. In 1736, after a brief flirtation with the law, he was apprenticed to the engraver Richard Cooper in Edinburgh. Strange completed his apprenticeship in 1742, having worked on anatomical plates of bones for the folio edition of Bernard Albinus's 'Tables of the Skeleton and Muscles of the Human Body', projected by Cooper and the surgeon Alexander Monro, and engraved plates to illustrate Monro's articles in 'Medical Essays'. No signed plates survive, but as an apprentice Strange's work would normally have passed as Cooper's. In the early 1740s he fell in love with Isabella Lumisden (1719-1806), whose brother became private secretary to James Francis Edward Stuart. During the Jacobite rising of 1745 Strange joined Prince Charles Edward's lifeguard at her desire, designed Jacobite currency, and was with the prince at Culloden. His engraving of a portrait of the prince, by Allan Ramsay, became an important image in Jacobite propaganda in 1745-6. He married Isabella Lumisden clandestinely in 1747. A daughter, Mary Bruce, was baptized in March 1748. After the 'Act of Grace', Strange went briefly to Rouen, a centre for exiled Jacobites, where he won a prize for drawing. He then went to work for Jacques Philippe Le Bas in Paris, dining with him for the first time on 19 June 1749. 
In 1750 the historian George Vertue noted that Strange was about to move from Paris to London and then that he was about to publish a print after Carl Vanloo. Strange took lodgings with a pewterer in Parliament Street, Westminster, where he was joined by Isabella and Mary, and from where he began to publish and to deal in prints. One of his first advertised works was a specimen plate for William Hunter's projected 'Anatomy of the pregnant uterus'. He imported prints from Rome through his brother-in-law Andrew Lumisden and Piranesi, and from Paris through Le Bas and others. In 1753 James III stood godfather to his eldest son, James Charles Stuart Strange. But Strange had also begun to make his peace with the Hanoverian regime: his third publication, 'Cleopatra' (1753), after Guido Reni, was dedicated to the widowed princess of Wales. Three more prints from paintings from the Royal Collection ('The Three Children of Charles I', after Van Dyck, 'St Agnes', after Domenchino, and 'Views Attired by the Graces', after Guido) were published in 1758 and 1760. Lumisden wrote: 'I know your prudence will make the best use of what has happened without giving anyone just reason to say that a change of fortune has produced in you a change of sentiment' (Dennistoun, 1.246). In 1754 Strange moved to Henrietta Street, Covent Garden. 
That same year Strange visited Paris, unearthed Dorigny's famous copperplates of Raphael's 'Transfiguration' and its companion, and, back in London, printed a new edition. With Lumisden's help he began to lay plans to travel to Italy to make drawings of fine paintings for publication and to buy paintings for profit. His itinerary had been mapped and his targets identified when, in 1758, Allan Ramsay asked Strange to engrave his portraits of the prince of Wales and of Lord Bute. Strange was embarrassed. Not wishing to offend either his Jacobite or his Hanoverian patrons, he tried to refuse politely, citing his plans to travel and to base a career on historical engravings rather than portraiture. The prince's miserly offer, conveyed by Sir William Chambers, of 100 guineas for work that would occupy at least two years failed to alter Strange's determination. But he was unnerved when Ramsay told him that the prince had taken his refusal very badly and that Lord Bute had said, 'it is a thing we are determined never to forgive' (Dennistoun, 1.274). The courtiers let it be known that they were convinced that Strange had refused for political reasons. Strange tried to justify himself to Bute but was denied access, and, he later wrote, 'reports were spread greatly to my disadvantage' (Strange, 'Inquiry', 13), doing immediate damage to his current subscription. Now departure for the continent was expedient, and, after exhibiting twelve prints and ten drawings in May 1760, Strange left for Paris 'en route' for Rome, using a passport through France (then at war with Britain) organized by Lumisden. During his absence his wife managed his business and marketed his prints from their house. 
At Paris in August Strange visited an old acquaintance, the famous German engraver Johann Georg Wille, who gave him letters of recommendation to Johann Joachim Winckelmann and Anton Raphael Mengs. Horace Walpole had recommended Strange to Horace Mann in Florence as 'a very first-rate artist, and by far our best... tho you will not approve of his politics' (Dennistoun, 1.277). He was warmly welcomed in Rome, and was made a member of the academies of Florence and Naples. Strange's first seventeen plates had won him an international reputation as an engraver of the first rank. Indeed, an article published in the leading German-language review journal in 1762 considered him 'indisputably the greatest master that Britain has ever produced' ('Bibliothek der schonen Wissenschaften und der freyen Kunste', 7, 1762, 369). From Naples, Strange went on in 1763 to Parma, where he dined with the first minister, du Tillot, and was made a professor of the academy. He continued to Bologna, where Winckelmann admired his drawings, but there he found that George III's librarian, Richard Dalton, had hired a promising Italian, Francesco Bartolozzi, to make drawings of the paintings that Strange intended to publish. Strange obtained revenge by buying for Sir Lawrence Dundas a painting that Dalton had drawn for approval and potential purchase by the king. But he perceived a new threat in his talented rival. He determined to engrave the painting to invite direct comparison with Bartolozzi. 'You may be sure I wish in every shape for an opportunity to appear in the same subjects with Bartolozzi', he wrote to Lumisden, 'his plates being intended for England and, [I] have reason to believe, himself also' (Dennistoun, 2.10). Strange then presented himself for acceptance by the Academy of St Luke in Rome and by the Royal Academy at Paris as a painter, on the strength of his drawings. Thus fortified with marks of continental respect he returned to London in time for the 1765 exhibition, having just been made a fellow of the newly incorporated Society of Artists. He set up a new home at 14 Castle Street, Leicester Fields. 
Now Strange found further evidence that the clique of artists in favour with Lord Bute and the king were still determined to obstruct his smooth passage to celebrity and prosperity. He exhibited and published two prints after Raphael's 'Justice' and 'Meekness' in the Vatican. For some time he had been nervous about 'that ugly creature the ostridge' in 'Justice', which, he worried, 'will make a ridiculous appearance, and may be an object of derision to those who are fond of cavilling, though it may bear the name of Raphael' (Dennistoun, 2.25). His fears proved well founded. A few days after publication there appeared in the 'Public Advertiser' 'a long and elaborate performance taking to pieces these prints, in order to depreciate them in the esteem of the public' (ibid., 2.29). Criticism centred on the ostrich. Strange was in no doubt that the vituperative remarks came from Chambers or Dalton or one of their associates among the courtier directors of the Society of Artists. He then tried to exhibit the Italian drawings that Winckelmann had considered 'the most beautiful that I have ever seen in my life' ('Bibliothek der schonen Wissenschaften und der freyen Kunste', 11, 1764, 369), only to find them rejected by the same directors. He helped to oust the offending directors in 1768, but discovered that they had already laid plans to found a royal academy. Strange himself was a director from 1768 to 1773. The new academy excluded engravers from membership and, to add insult to injury, accepted Bartolozzi as a painter on the strength of his drawings. Strange, with a degree of vanity perhaps, judged these measures to be aimed at him personally. 
Ironically, Strange's own instincts were of an academic kind. 'It is only by studying and meditating upon the works of the Italian masters that we can reasonably expect to form a true taste, and to defend ourselves against the destructive and capricious sorcery of fashion', he wrote in 'A Descriptive Catalogue of a Collection of Pictures' (pp. ii-iii). This was published in 1769 to accompany his exhibition of paintings that he had bought and drawings that he had made in Italy. These imports that he exhibited and sold included some fine and valuable paintings, such as the 'Landscape with a Snake' by Poussin, bought by Sir William Watkins Wynne in 1773. Strange's knowledge of the Italian schools made him a valued expert adviser to a circle of collectors, including Sir Lawrence Dundas and William Hunter. 
Meanwhile Strange exhibited with the Society of Artists from 1768 until its financial crisis in 1775. With Stubbs, Mortimer, Paine, Pine, and Woollett, he wrote 'The conduct of the Royal Academicians, while members of the Incorporated Society of Artists of Great Britain' (1771) and followed this up with a more personal account, 'An Inquiry into the Rise and Establishment of the Royal Academy of Arts' (1775). After the society collapsed Strange moved to the rue d'Enfer, Paris, and spent the next five years in France. 
Strange returned to London in 1780 and bought a house at 52 Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields; he insured the contents for the substantial sum of $2800, a figure raised to $3400 a year later. Soon after his return, Benjamin West effected a rapprochement with the king. Strange engraved a portrait of Charles I from the French royal collection, and in 1784 he was presented to the king and queen of France. As a companion he was allowed to engrave a portrait of Charles's queen, Henrietta Maria, from the British Royal Collection, and, from the same source, West's 'Apotheosis of Prince Alfred and Prince Octavius'. He took the painting to Paris to work on it and was knighted in 1787 when he presented the result to George III. After an illness in 1788 Strange decided to destroy his plates to prevent their exploitation, but was persuaded not to as their continued existence -- they were then valued at $10,000 -- provided insurance for his family. Strange died in London on 5 July 1792. 
Strange engraved with unusual clarity and delicacy and produced some beautiful prints, especially those after Titian, Correggio, and Van Dyck. His self-righteousness and his flair for self-publicity invited hostile attention, but not all of the criticism directed at him was fair. He was, for instance, accused of employing French journeymen on the mechanical parts of his plates, which was true, but all engravers used assistants. Strange's only crime was that his were French. If his work had a flaw, it was that he was not particularly good at conveying the distinctive styles of different masters that he translated. He was survived by two daughters, Mary and Katherine, and three sons, all of whom had careers in India. James went out with a writership in the East India Company to Madras, but subsequently became a banker in London; Thomas went to Canada as a lawyer, was also knighted by George III, and became the first professional recorder of Madras; Robert was an officer first in the Indian navy, then in the army. Sir Robert's vivacious widow, Isabella, retired to East Acton and died on 28 February 1806. 


@@@@@


doc= 26639


Lestrange, Roger, Lord Lestrange (d. 1311), soldier and administrator, was a younger son of John (III) Lestrange (c.1194-1269), lord of Knockin in Shropshire, and his wife, Lucia, daughter of Robert of Tregoz. Roger benefited from the grant of rebel lands in that and the following year and in 1267 he received his first royal commission, to inquire into the trespasses committed against the king by the men of the rebellious earl of Derby in southern Lancashire. In May 1270 he was appointed sheriff of Yorkshire, an office he continued to hold until October 1274. Although he had interests in many counties, Lestrange was especially active in Cheshire, Shropshire, and Staffordshire, and his prominence in the Welsh marches led to his being much involved in Edward I's conquest of Wales. In 1276 he was sent on a special mission to the marches, and he fought against the Welsh in 1277, when he was empowered to receive the submissions of individual Welshmen, and was given the custody of Oswestry Castle, which he held until 1279. He played a particularly important part in the war of 1282-3. On 30 October 1282 he succeeded Roger (III) Mortimer of Wigmore as commander of the English forces in the region of Whitchurch, Oswestry, and Montgomery, and was closely, if sometimes obscurely, involved in the manoeuvres which culminated in the defeat and death of Prince Llywelyn near Builth on 11 December. Lestrange himself wrote to the king to report his success -- 'Llywelyn ap Gruffudd is dead, his army defeated, and all the flower of his army dead' (Edwards, 84-5). He also led the campaign against the Welsh rebellion of Rhys ap Mareddud in 1287, while in 1294-5 he took part in the suppression of the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn. He also served on the continent in 1295 and 1297. 
At the parliament at Acton Burnell on 21 October 1283 Lestrange was appointed chief justice of the forest south of the Trent. He held the office until 12 February 1297, and the forest seems to have occupied much of his attention during that period. He held some forest eyres, and some of his forest eyre rolls have survived. In 1291-2, however, he served as a royal envoy on a mission to the papal court, and he was summoned by name to several parliaments and royal councils, and is consequently regarded as having been Lord Lestrange from 1295. His contribution to the English conquest of Wales received no territorial reward, though Lestrange himself hoped to be granted the lordship of Maelor Saesneg. But throughout his career he received many lesser marks of favour from King Edward, whom he served for many years as a household knight, but seems to have remained in debt to him. In 1306, in consideration of his long service and great expenses in his service, the king granted that Lestrange's executors should not be impeded by reason of his debts to the king from having sufficient of his goods to bury him and provide for his obsequies in a fitting manner. In the last years of his life, after giving up the forest justiceship, he was apparently largely inactive, and is recorded in 1298, 1302, and 1310 as being in poor health, though in 1301 he was involved in assessing the king's wastes in his forests north of the Trent and he also sealed the barons' letter to the pope. 
Lestrange died on 31 July 1311. His first wife was Maud, former wife of Roger (II) de Mowbray. She had died by 1275, when he received her lands in dower, at a rent of 200 marks, during the minority of the heir, which lasted until late 1278; his second wife, named Eleanor, was dead by 1280; a third wife, also Maud or Matilda, is mentioned in 1307. Also in 1275 he received a life grant of Ellesmere hundred and castle in Shropshire, and some manors there, which he had received as a gift from his brother Hamo and had surrendered to the king; it remained his principal lordship. Lands in Buckinghamshire and Bedfordshire, including the site of Bedford Castle, part of his third of the barony of Beauchamp of Bedford, which he held by the courtesy of England in right of his first wife, descended to her heir John (I) Mowbray. 


@@@@@


doc= 26640


Strange, Sir Thomas Andrew Lumisden (1756-1841), judge in India and writer, was born on 30 November 1756 at Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, the fourth of the nine children of Sir Robert Strange (1725-1792), engraver, of Kirkwall in the Orkneys, and Isabella (1721/2-1808), daughter of William Lumisden, of Cushnie, Aberdeenshire. His mother's family were staunch Jacobites: his maternal uncle Andrew Lumisden was private secretary to Charles Edward Stuart in Rome. After developing a friendship with Lumisden while they were both in Rome, Strange's father enrolled in the Jacobite life guards during the rising of 1745. Andrew Strange's colonial career depended heavily on his family's Scottish connections. 
Strange was admitted to Westminster School on 3 March 1769, and was awarded a king's scholarship in the following year. He was elected to Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 1 June 1774, graduating BA (1778) and MA (1782). Strange entered Lincoln's Inn in 1776, where he came under the patronage of the lord chief justice Lord Mansfield, a friend of his mother's. He was called to the bar in November 1787, and was appointed chief justice of Halifax, Nova Scotia, two years later, a position he obtained through Mansfield. He remained there for seven years, during which time he gained a reputation for conciliation in the debate between Nova Scotia's house of assembly and the council. Gradually Strange became weary of the conduct of Governor John Wentworth, and he left for England in July 1796. 
In this year Strange's elder brother James sought leave of absence for the young judge, intending that Strange should enter parliament. But on his return he preferred to continue his imperial legal career. He was offered the position of recorder and president of the mayor's court in Madras by Sir Lawrence Dundas. While at Ramsgate in the summer of 1797, Andrew Lumisden introduced Strange to Jane Cecilia Anstruther (died 1799), whose brother was a barrister in Madras. Jane and Thomas were married on 1 September 1797. Immediately before leaving, on 14 March 1798, Strange was knighted. 
Under the charter enacted in Madras on 26 December 1800, the Madras mayor's court was re-created as the supreme court of Madras, with a chief justice and two puisne judges. Strange was immediately appointed chief justice of the court, a position he occupied until 1816. While in Madras Strange pursued an interest in the antiquities and architecture of ancient India, collecting drawings of south Indian temples. In 1801, at the height of British fear that the French would invade India via Egypt, two volunteer militias were organized in Madras. One was headed by the governor, Lord Clive; the other was commanded by Strange. 
In 1799 Strange's wife, Jane, died in childbirth. Four years later he took leave to return to England. While in Nova Scotia he had intended to make a tour of the United States of America, but had been prevented from doing so by the war with France. In 1803 he revived his interest in travel to the United States, and departed Madras on an American ship bound for New York via St Helena. His aims were once again frustrated by war. News of the renewal of hostilities between France and Britain reached St Helena soon after Strange's arrival there in June 1803. Believing the passage to America too dangerous, and after waiting four months on the island for a convoy large enough to return to Britain, Strange sailed on a vessel bound for London. Soon after his return to Madras on 27 August 1806 Strange met his second wife, Louisa Burroughs (1788-1862), daughter of the Calcutta judge Sir William Burroughs. Within days they were engaged, and married at the chapel of Fort St George on 11 October 1806. 
In his professional life Strange was concerned with what he believed was the 'uncertainty' of Indian law. Having jurisdiction only within the city of Madras's boundaries, both the mayor's court and its successor, the supreme court, applied English law to most civil and criminal causes. However, for disputes between Indian litigants that concerned inheritance, succession, and contract the judges based their decrees on the verdict of Indian legal officials employed to produce opinions according to Hindu and Muslim law. Strange's concern was that the opinions of the court's Hindu pandits in particular were vague and contradictory. Pre-colonial property disputes had been arbitrated by various authorities, who usually attempted to find an accommodation between the parties. Hindu or Muslim law texts offered moral and political guidance to the ruler; they did not lay down definite rules or procedures with which to try disputes. However, like most of his contemporaries, Strange believed that a common Hindu law had existed in pre-colonial India. Accordingly, he believed that the contradictory, inconsistent character of the legal opinions which his Indian officers gave him were a sign of the degenerate state of Hindu law. Such uncertainty, he argued, militated against the security of property in the province. 
On retiring from the bench in 1816, Strange published a selection of translated Hindu legal opinions which he had compiled while a judge. The three-volume 'Notes of Cases, in the Court of the Recorder and Supreme Court of Judiciary at Madras' was intended as a manual for those adjudicating causes which did not turn on 'local circumstances' or English law. The text was intended to meet the perceived problem of south Indian legal uncertainty. However, in his second publication -- 'Elements of Hindu Law', published from London in 1826 -- Strange went further in attempting to reconstruct the supposed 'principles' of Hindu law from the opinions of pandits and the translations of ancient Sanskrit texts available at the time. In doing so, he was one of the first British officials to offer a coherent and systematic account of supposedly 'ancient' Hindu jurisprudence. Until the 1860s 'Elements of Hindu Law' was regarded by most judicial officials as the only authoritative account of Hindu jurisprudence. The editor of the third edition of the text suggested that 'The Indian Courts are still governed as authoritatively by Sir Thomas Strange, as the old Philosophers were by Plato and Aristotle' (J. D. Mayne, introduction, T. Strange, 'Hindu Law', 3rd edn, 1864, xxv). Strange's work played an important part in the colonial transformation of Indian jurisprudence. His 'Elements of Hindu Law' played a key role in the process in which the flexible idioms of pre-colonial judicial practice were replaced by textualized, prescriptive sanctions that had the same status as the enactments of a legislature. 
On his return from Madras, Strange travelled widely around Britain and on the continent. His son (Thomas) Lumisden Strange described him as 'grave and studious' (Strange, 41) in contrast to his more vivacious brother James. Strange and his second wife, Louisa, had twelve children, three of whom (Thomas Lumisden, Alexander Strange, and William Robert Strange) also had careers in the East India Company's service. Strange spent the last years of his life living in Harley Street, London, but died after a protracted illness at St Leonards in Sussex on 16 July 1841. He was survived by his wife, who died on 2 January 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 26641


Strange, (Thomas) Lumisden (1808-1884), judge and theological writer, was born at Landon's Gardens, Poonamallee Road, Madras, on 4 January 1808, the eldest son of Sir Thomas Andrew Lumisden Strange (1756-1841), first chief justice of Madras, and his second wife, Louisa (1788-1862), youngest daughter of Sir William Burroughs, bt, judge of the supreme court of Calcutta, of Castle Bagshaw, co. Cavan. Alexander Strange was his younger brother. Sent to England aged four, Strange (known to his family as Lumisden), was educated at Dr Pearson's school (1814?-18) at East Sheen, Surrey, Westminster School (1818-22), and the Revd G. K. Rusden's school at Leith Hill, near Dorking (1822-4). From 1824 to 1826 he attended the East India Company's college at Haileybury, his father having procured for him a writership in the Madras civil service. He arrived in Madras in June 1827. 
Strange's Indian career was to consist entirely of judicial work. His first substantial appointment was as assistant judge of Tellicherry, Malabar, in June 1831. In 1834, worn down by fever, he obtained eighteen months' furlough and spent it travelling in Persia and across the Caspian Sea, often in oriental disguise. Increasingly fluent in Persian, he questioned Muslims and Jews he met about their religious rituals and the seriousness with which they observed them. His account of these travels in his unpublished autobiography, 'The Incidents of a Life', of 1870 suggests that it was this contact with people of other religions that set him thinking about the rituals and proofs of his own faith. 
Strange returned to his duties at Tellicherry early in 1836, but his health had not fully mended, and in March 1839 he sailed for England. On board ship he met Mary Rose 
(Minnie; 1815-1847)
, widow of Captain William Hodgson of the Bengal artillery, whom he married at Iver, Buckinghamshire, on 1 January 1840. She was the daughter of Captain Samuel Tickell of the 8th Bengal native infantry, and a direct descendant of the poet Thomas Tickell (1685-1740). 
In 1845 Strange was appointed civil and sessions judge of Bellary. In the following year Minnie sickened, and on 4 January 1847, Strange's birthday, she died. Despairing at her loss, Strange sent their three children to England and then himself lapsed back into ill health. This time, however, he obtained relief by homoeopathic remedies, and thereafter he ran an unofficial homoeopathic dispensary for anyone who sought his assistance. In 1851 his experience in Malabar was acknowledged when he was sent to investigate the unrest among the Moplahs, Muslim cultivators and fishermen of Arab descent who periodically chafed at the financial and cultural ascendancy assumed by their Hindu landlords. 
In 1852 Strange was appointed puisne judge of the 'sadr diwani' and 'sadr faujdari adalat', whereupon he moved to Madras. There on 4 April 1856 he married Emily Burn ('b'. 1837), eldest daughter of Major-General Peter James Begbie of the Madras army; they had four children. In 1859 Strange was appointed a commissioner for inquiring into Madras's system of judicature, and in 1862 he became a judge of the new high court of Madras. In 1863 he retired and arrived back in England in May. In the course of his career he had published a short 'Manual of Hindoo Law' (1856; 2nd edn, 1863), taking his father's work as a basis, and 'A Letter to the Governor of Fort St George on Judicial Reform' (1860). 
Strange's other publications were numerous. India had sparked his interest in religious subjects, and in 1852 he had published 'The Light of Prophecy' and 'Observations on Mr. Elliott's Horae Apocalypticae'. Subsequently he was so impressed by observing a supposed convert at the gallows proclaim his faith to be in the Hindu god Rama, and not Christ, that, on his examining Christian evidence, his own faith in Christianity broke down. He remained, however, an ardent theist. He explained his position in 'How I Became and Ceased to be a Christian' and other pamphlets for the series published between 1872 and 1875 by Thomas Scott (1808-1878); these were afterwards collected and issued as 'Contributions to a Series of Controversial Writings' (1881). Larger works by Strange were: 'The Bible: is it the Word of God?' (1871); 'The Legends of the Old Testament Traced to their Apparent Primitive Sources' (1874); 'The Sources and Development of Christianity' (1875); and 'What is Christianity?' (1880). His 'Development of Creation on the Earth' (1874) shows him to have been a keen researcher in botany and geology. He was a conscientious student and wrote in an eloquent, if not brilliant, style. He continued, after the loss of his Christian faith, to advocate good conduct and practical piety, and at the close of his autobiography -- written at the request of his wife Emmy -- he thanked a gracious God for having blessed his life. 
Strange died at 22 Farquhar Road, Upper Norwood, Surrey, on 3 September 1884. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 26642


Strangways, Sir James (c.1410-1480), administrator and speaker of the House of Commons, was the son of James Strangways (died 1443) of West Harlsey in the North Riding of Yorkshire, a lawyer who became a puisne justice of common pleas, and his wife, Joan Orell. The younger Strangways had by 1431 made an advantageous marriage to Elizabeth (1417- 'c'.1460), daughter of Philip Darcy and his wife, Eleanor, daughter of Henry Fitzhugh, third Baron Fitzhugh; she was the granddaughter of John, Lord Darcy of Knaith, and was connected with a number of the leading families of north-east England. As well as lands in several counties she brought her husband antiquated financial claims upon the crown, which her husband would devote much time to attempting to realize. It is unlikely that the younger James was the Strangways who entered Lincoln's Inn in 1444. Instead he appears to have depended for advancement upon the patronage of Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury (died 1460), by whom he was retained and whom he served as an executor. Following a number of local posts Strangways became sheriff of Yorkshire in 1445-6; by now he had been knighted. In 1449 he was elected to parliament as a knight of the shire for Yorkshire. Through his marriage he acquired substantial properties in Northumberland, which doubtless explains why later in the same year he was among the commissioners appointed to treat for a truce with Scotland, and was then made a conservator of that truce -- many similar commissions were to follow. 
His being at Westminster enabled Strangways to pursue the Darcy claims against the crown in the exchequer, though with little success. Although he retained close links with the Nevilles, he was also employed by the crown. In the early 1450s he served on a number of commissions, national and local, to assess or receive taxes and loans, while in November 1451 he became a JP for the North Riding. In 1452 he became sheriff of Yorkshire for a second time. In 1454, during the duke of York's first protectorate, Strangways was appointed to a commission to act against disorder in the North Riding. In the following year, despite his Neville affiliations, he probably avoided involvement in the first battle of St Albans. But although he escaped attainder by the Coventry parliament of November 1459, he was suspect enough to Queen Margaret's regime to be removed as a JP in June 1460. 
After the Yorkist victory at Northampton on 10 July 1460 Strangways was quickly reappointed to the commission of the peace for the North Riding, and was also elected to parliament. After surviving active involvement in the battle of Wakefield (30 December) he seems to have participated in Edward IV's Towton campaign of March 1461. Returned to parliament later that year Strangways was elected speaker, though his allegiance remained Neville rather than Yorkist. He made a lengthy speech advocating Henry VI's deposition and Edward IV's coronation, and was rewarded with a grant of 200 marks. Though possibly returned to the parliament of 1463 he also took part between 1462 and 1464 in operations directed by John Neville, Lord Montagu (died 1471), against rebels in the north. Edward IV still trusted Strangways sufficiently for him to become sheriff of Yorkshire again in November 1468. The following twelve months saw growing disorder and finally outright rebellion in that county. Strangways managed to avoid giving offence to either the Nevilles or the king, and in spite of his connections with the former he prudently left involvement in their revolts of 1469 to his younger son, Robert. Indeed, he was dismissed from the county bench by the readeption government of 1470-71, and reappointed in 1472 by Edward IV, who also added a special exemption in Strangways's favour to the 'Act of Resumption' of 1473. In 1474 he took part for the last time in negotiations for a truce with Scotland. 
Strangways died shortly before 20 August 1480. His first wife had died about 1460, and between 1463 and 1468 he had married Elizabeth Bulmer, 'nee' Eure, who died in March 1482. His eldest son and heir, Sir Richard Strangways, who died in 1488, married Elizabeth, daughter of William Neville, earl of Kent (died 1463); their son James Strangways, who was sheriff of Yorkshire in 1492-3 and 1508-9, has sometimes been confused with his grandfather. 


@@@@@


doc= 26643


Lechmere, Edmund (c.1586-1640), Roman Catholic priest, was the eldest son of Thomas Lechmere (died 1605) and Anne Lechmere, of Fownhope, Herefordshire. He was educated at Brasenose College, Oxford, graduating BA in 1603. He became a Roman Catholic and crossed to the English College, Douai, obtaining degrees at the university there. In 1617 Matthew Kellison established all classes within the English College itself and Lechmere was appointed teacher of philosophy. Subsequently he studied at the Sorbonne in Paris under Gamache, and graduated BD there before returning to Douai, where he became vice-president to Kellison, and was ordained priest on 18 December 1622. He wrote a number of works of which 'A Disputation of the Church wherein the Old Religion is Maintained' was published at Douai in 1629 and went through a number of editions. He also published 'The Conference Mentioned by Doctour Featley... with some Notes' (1632) and 'A Reflection of Certain Authors that are Pretended to Disown the Church's Infallibility' (1635). He was created DD at Rheims on 25 October 1633 and died at the English College, Douai, 'in the prime of his years', in September 1640. 


@@@@@


doc= 26644


Stratford, Edward Augustus, second earl of Aldborough (1733/4-1801), politician, was the eldest son of the fourteen children of John Stratford (1697-1777), MP for Baltinglass, and his wife, Martha (1706-1796), daughter and coheir of Benjamin O'Neale, archdeacon of Leighlin, co. Carlow. His father was the grandson of Robert Stratford, who came to Ireland before 1660, and is said to have sprung from a younger branch of the Stratfords of Warwickshire. John Stratford was created baron of Baltinglass on 21 May 1763, Viscount Aldborough on 22 July 1776, and Viscount Amiens and earl of Aldborough on 19 February 1777, shortly before his death on 29 June 1777. Edward was educated at Dr Thompson's school in Leixlip before entering Trinity College, Dublin, in December 1751, aged seventeen. 
Stratford was widely known for his ability and eccentricity, which caused him to be termed the 'Irish Stanhope'. He was elected MP for the family borough of Baltinglass in the Irish House of Commons at a by-election in 1759 and represented the seat until 1768, when he travelled to England. He was an ardent whig, and was elected member for Taunton to the British parliament in 1774, but was unseated with his colleague Nathaniel Webb, on petition, on 16 March 1775, for bribery and corrupt practices. He was returned for Baltinglass again in 1775 and held the seat until his father's death. On 29 May 1777, while still Viscount Amiens, he was elected a member of the Royal Society. On 3 July 1777 the University of Oxford conferred on him the honorary degree of DCL. He built Stratford Place in London and Aldborough House in Dublin, and in Ireland he founded the town of Stratford upon Slaney and greatly improved the borough of Baltinglass. On 29 July 1765 he married Barbara Herbert (1742-1785), only daughter and heir of Nicholas Herbert (died 1775) of Great Glemham, Suffolk, and his wife, Anne North, and granddaughter of Thomas Herbert, eighth earl of Pembroke. Following her death on 11 April 1785 he married on 24 May 1787 Anne Elizabeth Henniker (died 1802), only daughter of Sir John Henniker (1724-1803) and his wife, Anne (died 1792). She brought him a fortune of $50,000 and considerable expectations, which enabled him to free his estates from encumbrances. There were no children from either marriage. 
Aldborough had a consciousness of his recently acquired rank and of what he believed was due to it. The family was probably Cromwellian in origin but he tried to claim an earlier lineage: the Amiens title was supposed to reflect his unsubstantiated descent from one of William the Conqueror's barons. On 15 October 1778 he wrote to Lord Lieutenant Buckinghamshire, who did not personally reply to his letter, that 'noblemen will not like being classed with the canaile' ('Lothian MSS', 338), and he appears to have regarded the governorship of the county of Wicklow as a personal fiefdom, saying that he understood that his brother was only his locum tenens. He demanded that the government appoint him immediately as he understood from the secretary's office that there were blank commissions ready to be filled up 'as soon as your Lordship pleased to give the orders' (ibid., 340). He even considered proceeding against his brother in the court of king's bench for disturbing instead of preserving the peace and good order of the county. The government bent to his wishes and appointed him governor of co. Wicklow in December 1778. He was an enthusiastic volunteer and in 1784 was one of the volunteer generals. He was the author of 'An Essay on the True Interests of the Empire', published in Dublin in 1783, and he voted in favour of the union with England in 1800. 
Aldborough quarrelled with his brothers 'inter alia' over the representation of the family borough of Baltinglass, but he died before the commissioners on 3 July 1801 made their determination over the compensation for the disfranchisement of the borough. One of his brothers, the Revd Francis Paul Stratford, was still unsuccessfully petitioning the commissioners as late as 1 October 1801. A result of these quarrels was his alienation from his immediate heirs of such property as previous settlements permitted. As a parliamentary speaker he was considered by a contemporary to be 'tolerable but his manner is pompous' and 'both in public and private life, [he] has been uniformly conspicuous' ('Public Characters of 1798-1799'). Perhaps his most conspicuous action was to conduct an ongoing vendetta against Lord Chancellor Fitzgibbon, which started with his criticism of Fitzgibbon's prosecution of the brutal and reckless George Robert Fitzgerald, and came to a climax when he published an inflammatory pamphlet, in consequence of which Fitzgibbon, now Lord Clare, successfully prosecuted him for libel. Aldborough was fined and briefly imprisoned in Newgate but he was released on 29 March 1798 after a display of contrition and an apology. 
Aldborough died on 2 January 1801 at Belan in co. Kildare, and was buried that month in the vault of St Thomas's Church, Dublin. After his death his widow married George Powell in December 1801 and died on 14 July 1802. As Lord Aldborough died without children, his title and estates descended to his brother, John Stratford. 


@@@@@


doc= 26645


Stratford, John (c.1275-1348), administrator and archbishop of Canterbury, was probably born at Stratford upon Avon into a prosperous burgher family. 
The name of John's father was Robert, as was that of his brother Robert Stratford (c.1292-1362), a future bishop of Chichester. His mother was called Isabel. Robert senior has been identified as 'Master' Robert, co-founder and first master of the hospital of St Cross within the town, but in view of the title 'magister' and the celibate status required, this appears unlikely. The family was related to the Hattons, important men in the town, Ralph Hatton 'of Stratford', the future bishop of London (died 1354), being John's nephew. Nothing definite is known of Stratford's schooling. He studied at Oxford, though not, as Anthony Wood claims, at Merton. By 1312 he was entitled doctor of civil law. He entered the service of Worcester Priory, but initially his beneficial progress was slow. However, by 1317 he was rector of Holy Trinity, Stratford, and acting as official of Bishop John Dalderby of Lincoln (died 1320), whose executor he became. From Lincoln he migrated to Canterbury, and the service of Archbishop Walter Reynolds (died 1327). He was dean of the court of arches in the early 1320s, by which time he held a useful portfolio of benefices, including canonries at Lichfield, Lincoln, and York, as well as the archdeaconry of Lincoln. 
Stratford first attended a royal council in 1317 at Clarendon. With other clerks trained in law, he was summoned to the parliaments that met at York in 1318, 1319, and 1320 -- assemblies concerned with the implementation of the treaty of Leake, with Thomas of Lancaster's claim to the stewardship of the royal household, and with the ordinances. In 1320 he accompanied Edward II and Queen Isabella to Amiens, for the performance of homage for Aquitaine, and at the end of 1321 he travelled to Avignon, on an abortive mission to secure the see of Coventry and Lichfield for Robert Baldock (died 1327). Following a brief appearance at York he returned to the curia, where he remained for about a year engaged on a variety of business: the relaxation of oaths (perhaps those committing the government to the ordinances?), the foundation of the Dominican priory at Kings Langley, where Piers Gaveston was buried, and the diversion of a papal tenth to the king. 
Fortuitously Stratford was still abroad in April 1323 when the wealthy bishopric of Winchester fell vacant, through Rigaud d'Assier's death at the curia. Edward II sent letters in favour of Baldock, which Stratford delivered, but the nominee was 'persona non grata' with Pope John XXII ('r'. 1316-34), who by bulls dated 20 June 1323 provided the king's envoy instead. He was consecrated six days later by Bertrand, cardinal-bishop of Tusculum. The king was furious at this outcome and on Stratford's return he was interrogated by Chief Justice Geoffrey Scrope (died 1340) and Master Robert Ayleston, keeper of the privy seal, who forced him to answer to an indenture of nine articles concerning his conduct of royal business. But eventually, after he had renounced any prejudicial articles in his provisory bull and consented to receive the Winchester temporalities as an act of Edward's special grace, Stratford was permitted to take the oath of fealty. At the same time he was forced to enter into a recognizance of $10,000, an obligation that was not cancelled until after Edward's abdication. 
By mid-July 1324 the king's irritation had abated -- he needed his erstwhile envoy to secure the support of the pope with respect to Aquitaine and Scotland. Pope John for his part was eager to act as 'impartial mediator' between the English and French kings, and to divert their martial energy to a crusade. Stratford became a member of an important embassy dispatched in 1324 to the French court, the first of four continental missions in which he played a major role. Unfortunately the so-called war of St Sardos precipitated a further crisis and in March 1325 Isabella herself was sent to France in an attempt to come to terms with her brother Charles IV. Stratford was one of those who advocated the move and he visited her at Poissy towards the end of the month. Later in the year he was nominated a guardian of the king's son, Edward, earl of Chester, whom he accompanied to France to perform homage at the Bois de Vincennes for the duchy of Aquitaine, which his allegedly ailing father had transferred to him. Towards the end of October Stratford embarked on his final mission of the reign in an attempt to persuade the queen to rejoin her husband. Following his return via Dover on 18 November he probably reported on his lack of success at the Westminster parliament then in session -- despite a note in his register claiming that matters were 'successfully performed'. 
The lull in diplomatic employment enabled Stratford to carry out the primary visitation of his diocese, which began with an examination of the cathedral priory on 3 February 1326. He was at Southwark when Queen Isabella's force landed in September, and he joined other bishops at St Mary Overie and at Lambeth to decide on a common course of action. He volunteered to act as an emissary to the queen if Bishop Hamo Hethe (died 1352) would accompany him. Shortly thereafter he joined Isabella, and was with the insurgents at Bristol on 26 October when the young Edward was recognized as 'custos' of the realm. On 6 November he was appointed deputy treasurer and is said to have celebrated Christmas at Wallingford with the queen. He was a member of the delegation sent to Kenilworth to persuade Edward II to abdicate -- an occasion reported by his 'nephew' Thomas Laurence de la More (Moore), who was in his entourage. He appeared at the London Guildhall to make a contribution to the rebuilding of the chapel. Stratford resigned the office of deputy treasurer on 28 January 1327 and assisted at Edward III's coronation on 1 February. 
Following the cancellation of his recognizances he resumed his diplomatic career, travelling from Dover to Wissant on 10 March and on the last day of the month sealing a treaty with France at Paris. A member of the adolescent Edward III's council, he soon became estranged from the 'court party' of Isabella and Mortimer, and acted as Henry of Lancaster's mouthpiece at the Salisbury parliament of 1328, subsequently being forced to defend himself from a charge of contempt for leaving the assembly without licence. Allegedly he barely escaped with his life. He continued to be associated with the Lancastrian 'party' until Mortimer's fall in 1330, but was careful to dissociate himself from the former king's companions and the supposed plot of the earl of Kent. 
With Edward III's personal rule Stratford came into his own, being appointed chancellor on 28 November 1330, an office he retained until September 1334, though during that time, when he was frequently engaged in royal affairs in various parts of the kingdom or abroad, his brother Robert, in conjunction with others, was regularly placed in charge of the seal. In April 1331 Stratford joined Edward's small flotilla, which sailed for France to enable the king to meet the French monarch and to confirm his act of homage -- a policy that was later to be criticized and imputed to Stratford. Towards the end of May he was engaged -- in the king's presence -- in resolving the dispute between the monks and townsmen of Bury St Edmunds. While in the area he also endeavoured to settle the grievances of the citizens of Great Yarmouth. 
Stratford opened the Westminster parliaments of September 1331 and March 1332, and in December of 1331 and in April and May of the following year was again involved in negotiations with the French king. By December 1332 he had fallen ill and was obliged to appoint proctors for the parliament at York. On account of the Scottish situation the centre of political activity moved during 1333 to York. In consequence Stratford was in the north until 23 September. On 3 November, following the death of Simon Mepham, he was postulated as archbishop of Canterbury. This coincided with Edward's wishes, but Stratford judiciously awaited the issue of papal bulls of provision. These were issued on 26 November, after which he was enthroned at Canterbury on 9 December. 
Stratford departed almost immediately on a mission to Paris, but on his return in January he set about the visitation of his diocese. Early in February he examined the monks of Canterbury Cathedral priory, but shortly afterwards he again left for the north, where on 6 June 1335 he was reappointed chancellor in the house of the Minorites at York. This time he retained the office until 24 March 1337 when it passed first to his brother Robert, and then to Richard Bintworth, bishop of London. He remained either at York or on the Scottish borders until February 1336. In mid-March he held a convocation at St Paul's and attended the Westminster parliament. 
Following the mysterious death in September 1336 of the king's younger brother, John of Eltham, Stratford returned to London from Bothwell and celebrated a requiem mass at Westminster Abbey, where the young warrior was buried. He was preoccupied with national affairs at home until 1338, when he embarked with the mediating cardinals and Bishop Richard Bury of Durham (died 1345) for further talks in France. Meanwhile Edward, intent on establishing continental alliances against France, travelled to meet the emperor at Koblenz. During January and February 1339 Stratford was in the Low Countries, gleaning information about French plans. In May, at Antwerp, he acted as a guarantor of the king's debts and of his agreement with the Bardi. At Marcoing he was named principal councillor of Edward, the young duke of Cornwall -- the future Black Prince. 
On Bintworth's death the great seal was handed to Stratford at Lambeth on 8 December 1339. Edward was determined to sail to the continent from Orwell Haven where Stratford sought to dissuade him from what he considered a rash enterprise. He surrendered the great seal on 28 April 1340, but this merely passed to his brother Robert. In the event Edward was initially victorious in the sea battle of Sluys (24 June 1340), but lack of resources forced him to conclude the truce of Esplechin (25 September) and on the night of 29-30 November he landed secretly at Tower Steps. Extremely angry, he felt himself betrayed by the 'false ministers' in charge of government at home, chief among them Stratford. They had failed to provide him with the sinews of war. A protracted crisis ensued. 
Nicholas, Lord Cantilupe (died 1355) was dispatched to Canterbury where he claimed that the archbishop was responsible for the payment of merchants in Louvain and directed him to go there, but meanwhile to appear before the king. Stratford demurred, fearing for his safety. His response was pointedly delivered in his cathedral on the feast of the passion of St Thomas (29 December 1340). In an emotional address he lamented his involvement in temporal affairs and requested his hearers to forgive him. There were, he claimed, men at the king's side who hated him, and who had been responsible for the arrest of chancery clerks, justices, and knights in defiance of 'Magna Carta', and had even defamed him as a traitor. He solemnly pronounced the sentences of excommunication incurred 'ipso facto' by all guilty parties by reason of the canons of the councils of Oxford (1222), Reading (1279), and Lambeth (1281). This was followed up on 31 December by his letter 'Sacrosancta ecclesia', a spirited defence of ecclesiastical liberty which was circulated to the comprovincial bishops by Ralph Stratford (Hatton), dean of the province. He also wrote a pastoral letter to the king, citing the example of Rehoboam, who had abandoned the council of older and wiser men, and reminding Edward of his coronation oath. 
Unimpressed, Edward sent Ralph Stafford (died 1372), steward of his household, who cited the archbishop to appear in London to answer for his conduct of the nation's affairs. Stratford pointed out that he brought no safe conduct and on 28 January complained to the new chancellor, Robert Bourchier (died 1349), that the levy of 1340 of every ninth lamb, sheaf, and fleece, was being unlawfully demanded from the clergy, who in the same year had promised the king a tenth, on condition of their being exempted from any tax granted by parliament. Two other letters were sent to the bishops of the province, one of them reiterating the argument expressed to Bourchier, the other deploring the exactions from the clergy and the abandonment of the rule of law. The king's response was to issue in February 1341 the 'Libellus famosus', a wide-ranging and uninhibited attack on the archbishop. Its authorship is unknown, although -- without evidence -- it has been attributed to Adam Orleton, bishop of Winchester (died 1345). Stratford's riposte, his 'Excusaciones', issued in March, constitutes a model of dispassionate reasoning, prefaced by a traditional statement of political philosophy. The tone throughout is that of an elder statesman addressing a wayward young monarch misled by evil counsellors, men responsible for the ill-considered, inaccurate, and disgraceful 'Libellus'. In a strong defence of the integrity of his administration he provides a factual point by point rebuttal. He had, he claimed, received scant reward for his efforts and provided no favours. In short, he claimed, the 'Libellus' was a sad reflection on the malicious persons who had concocted it. He was willing to defend his conduct in the appropriate place -- parliament. This prompted a brief riposte, 'Cicatrix cordium superbia', which was the final salvo in the pamphlet war. 
At that point the archbishop emerged from his self-imposed seclusion to attend the parliament summoned to Westminster for 23 April 1341. On reaching the great hall of the palace of Westminster, Stratford's way was barred by Ralph Stafford and John Darcy, the king's chamberlain. He was diverted to the exchequer to answer the demands upon him there -- the alleged non-payment of wool for the ninth. The case was to be adjourned from session to session without result. He then joined the other bishops in the Painted Chamber, but when he attempted to enter parliament he was prevented, together with his relatives, the bishops of London and Chichester. His fearlessness in the face of threats suggests that he courted martyrdom, but the king's agents were not so foolish as to provide the occasion. Despite the attempts of William Kilsby (died 1346) -- the keeper of the privy seal and Stratford's most consistent opponent -- and of Darcy to foment popular antagonism, more moderate counsels prevailed. Twelve peers, including four bishops, were deputed to investigate the charges against the archbishop and on 2 May he offered once again to purge himself. On the following day after a strong delegation of bishops, earls, and others had interceded with the king, he was readmitted to favour. 
A more formal reconciliation is said to have taken place on 23 October in Westminster Hall, when Stratford responded to the most damaging of the articles alleged against him. In 1343 Edward ordered the annulment of Stratford's 'arraignment' as contrary to reason, and as late as 1346 letters patent declared him blameless of the articles from which he had been 'deservedly excused'. His political career was now largely over, but between 1342 and his death he continued to exert influence as an elder statesman, even being dubbed 'dux regis' by Dene (Haines, 'John Stratford', 359). In June 1348 he fell ill at Maidstone. He died on 23 August at his manor of Mayfield, according to 'Birchington' in an aura of sanctity, and was buried in his cathedral on 9 September where his alabaster effigy, somewhat damaged, lies on a fine canopied tomb, in a prominent position on the south side of the choir next to Prior Eastry's screen -- as he had requested in his will. 
Stratford's Canterbury register has not survived, but a large number of his 'acta' can be gleaned from other sources. He was a notable legislator, drawing up detailed ordinances for the conduct of the court of Canterbury in 1342, while three sets of provincial constitutions, issued between 1341 and 1343, are attributed to him. The first set was clearly a draft, the second is particularly concerned with ecclesiastical administration and discipline, while the third was designed to preserve church liberties and deals with areas of friction between laymen and ecclesiastics. He was a notable benefactor to the hospital of St Thomas the Martyr at Canterbury, known as Eastbridge Hospital, but his efforts were principally directed towards his native Stratford, where he founded a chantry college with the same dedication. The initial foundation (1331) was for a warden, sub-warden, and three priests, but in 1336 an augmentation allowed for a further eight priests, though whether the full complement was ever achieved is uncertain. He secured the appropriation of the parish church to the foundation and a papal bull of confirmation was issued in 1345. 
Opinion is divided as to Stratford's character, intentions, and stature -- he has been compared unfavourably with his predecessors John Pecham (died 1292) and Robert Winchelsey (died 1313). But it was partly due to his moderation and legal training that the change of monarch was accomplished so smoothly in 1326-7. He certainly had a concern for what have been called 'Lancastrian' principles, in particular the importance of parliament. During the regime of Isabella and Mortimer he hazarded his career, perhaps his life, to maintain them. Without question he was a staunch defender of the liberties of the English church. The fourth of the statutes of 1340, conceded by Edward III under constraint of circumstances, he circulated triumphantly as a 'charter of liberties'. His clerical petitions of May 1341 were incorporated in modified form into statutes of that date, which were summarily revoked by the king a few months later as contrary to English law and his own prerogative. That he was ambitious is self-evident, but it would be indefensible to argue that he had no underlying convictions. Although he had laboured long in the cause of peace, by 1337 he was forced to accept the inevitability of war with France, though not at the price of oppression at home. Even then he was not prepared to organize opposition to Edward III, doubtless because he had no desire to renew the civil strife of the previous reign. He may have been guilty of pride ('superbia'), as the frustrated king alleged, but he was not a foolish man. His reasoned defence in 1340-41 taught Edward a lesson he had the good sense never to forget. 


@@@@@


doc= 26646


Stratford, Nicholas (bap. 1633, d. 1707), bishop of Chester, was baptized on 8 September 1633 in Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, the son of Nicholas Stratford, variously described as a draper or shoemaker, and Anne, his wife. He matriculated as a commoner at Trinity College, Oxford, on 29 July 1651, becoming a scholar on 17 June 1652. He graduated BA on 25 January 1654, proceeded MA on 20 June 1656, and became a probationer fellow of his college on 4 June 1656 and fellow on 20 June 1657. On 29 November 1664 he proceeded BD and on 9 July 1673 was created DD. He was incorporated at Cambridge in 1663. 
In August 1667 Stratford was appointed by the crown as warden of the collegiate and parish church of Manchester by the interest of John Dolben, bishop of Rochester. By about this time he had married the daughter and coheir of Stephen Luddington, archdeacon of Stow and Dolben's nephew. They had two sons and two daughters. Stratford accumulated several other preferments: prebendary of Lincoln (1670); rector of Llansanffraid-ym-Mechain, Montgomeryshire (1672); chaplain-in-ordinary to the king (1673); dean of St Asaph (1674), and later rector of Llanrwst, Denbighshire. 
As warden Stratford lived close to his church and began vigorously to restore church practices abandoned during the interregnum. Communion was to be received kneeling at the altar rails; the chaplains were to wear surplices for baptisms, churchings, weddings, and funerals; antiphonal singing and chanting in the choir were restored. Incumbents in the parish were to attend strictly to their cures, keep the church registers, render account of fees, and observe prayer book rubrics. The college fellows were encouraged to reside, chaplains' stipends improved, and the college's affairs were carefully administered. Stratford gave much to the poor and encouraged charitable giving by others. 
Stratford upheld the divine right of kings and implemented observance of the political occasional services in the prayer book, including a sermon on Charles the martyr on 30 January. Despite his apparently severe political and religious opinions, however, Stratford had the reputation of being conciliatory and forbearing towards dissenters, probably in hopes of reconciling them to the Church of England. The leading Manchester presbyterian minister, Henry Newcome, thought Stratford on his appointment as warden 'likely to be a mercy to this place. A good man, of a sweet temper, brave scholar... and one that... seems to resolve to settle in the place and to reside. This was thought then, and then it was so' ('Autobiography', 1.167). Although Newcome's subsequent comments on Stratford were frequently equivocal, the warden appears to have helped Newcome's clergyman son to obtain a Cheshire living. Stratford's relatively conciliatory attitude to dissent and his disquiet at Roman Catholic influence at court is alleged by local historians to have exposed him to attack from extremists and precipitated his departure from Manchester. In 1683 he was nominated vicar of St Mary Aldermanbury, London, by its parishioners. Richard Wroe, lobbying the bishop of Chester for the succession to the wardenship, wrote in June that Stratford had left Manchester 'and in such manner as the people think he will not return again' ('Palatine Note-Book', 2.3-4). On 2 April 1684 Wroe was presented to the wardenship following Stratford's resignation. In the dedicatory epistle addressed to 'my worthy and beloved friends, the inhabitants of Manchester and Salford', prefaced to his 'Dissuasive from Revenge' (1684) it is perhaps significant that Stratford pleaded for a spirit of charity, while upholding the duty of obedience to rulers. He nevertheless claimed that he had not left Manchester 'for any unkindness to me on your part, nor out of any low or mercenary respect on mine'. 
Stratford remained at Aldermanbury until the revolution of 1688. Alienated by James II's favouring of Roman Catholics, Stratford supported the accession of William and Mary and was appointed bishop of Chester on 15 September 1689 along with the rich living of Wigan, Chester being a notoriously impoverished see. His upholding of Anglican order together with conciliation of dissent was shown by his membership of the committee for the abortive scheme to revise the prayer book with a view to comprehension of Presbyterians within the established church. 
As bishop of Chester, Stratford once again demonstrated his administrative and pastoral abilities. Of his immediate predecessors as bishop John Pearson had been increasingly incapacitated by illness from the late 1670s, while Pearson's successor, Thomas Cartwright, caused scandal by his outspoken advocacy of James II's political and ecclesiastical policies and fled with his master. A zealous pastor, constantly in residence, Stratford was well fitted to deal with a difficult diocese containing large parishes, numerous more or less independent chapelries, nonjuring clergy, and dissenters. He complained of poor parish conditions due to inadequate curates and the lack of visitations for thirteen years. He was keen to improve the quality of the clergy with regular visitations from 1691 and his 'Charge' that year showed what he expected: study, catechizing, regular communions, public baptisms, preparation for confirmation, reduction of clandestine marriages. He was an active administrator, presiding regularly in the diocesan court and gathering round him a body of high-church tory officials, including his chancellor and archdeacons. Under his immediate successors the Cheshire clergy became notorious for their real or alleged Jacobitism especially when George I's ministers opposed promotion for tory clergy. Stratford's son William (1671-1729), archdeacon of Richmond and canon of Christ Church, Oxford, was a more extreme man than his father. Stratford did not rely simply on formal discipline to improve the church's performance. He was a member of the SPCK, founded in 1699 to improve piety and education as the best means for strengthening the church and combating dissent. Assisted by Dean Fogg of Chester, Stratford supported the societies for the reformation of manners (suspect to many high-churchmen for their co-operation between churchmen and dissenters) and monthly lectures to promote morality. 
Stratford's publications included pamphlets (notably against Roman Catholicism), sermons, and visitation charges. In character he was described by a Manchester colleague as 'very laborious and extraordinary charitable, affable and humble in his place and generally beloved', as well as practical in business (Raines, 143). Surviving portraits of him in his sixties give him a benevolent and intelligent appearance. Stratford died of a stroke in Westminster on 12 February 1707 and was buried in Chester Cathedral on 20 February. He died intestate but on his son's recommendation part of his money went to support a blue coat school for thirty-five poor boys in Chester. The school buildings have survived but the school was closed in 1949. 


@@@@@


doc= 26647


Stratford, Ralph (c.1300-1354), bishop of London, was perhaps the son of Thomas Hatton -- so called from a place near Stratford upon Avon -- and of a sister of bishops John Stratford and Robert Stratford. John's will describes him as 'cognatus', but the 'Historia Roffensis' states that the archbishop was his uncle. He was regent MA at Oxford in 1329, and was delegate of the university for the confirmation of the chancellor's election in 1332, when he is termed BCL. In that year he was at Bologna, maintained, in accordance with the papal bull 'Cum ex eo' under which he was licensed to pursue his studies, from the rectory of Mapledurham, Hampshire, to which John Stratford had collated him in 1329. By 1340 he was doctor of canon and civil law, perhaps of Bologna. 
Academic qualifications, status as a king's clerk (so described in 1332), and the prominence of his uncles ensured Ralph Stratford's promotion to a succession of benefices. In 1332 he had papal provision to a canonry of York, while in 1333 he secured Erchesfont prebend in St Mary's Abbey, Winchester, exchanging it two years later for that of Blewbury in Salisbury Cathedral, which he resigned on his provision as treasurer (1336). He was to present a silver-gilt image of Our Lady to that cathedral. There followed royal presentation to a canonry and prebend at St Paul's, where the chapter elected him bishop on 26 January 1340. The king signified his assent three days later. The temporalities were restored on 13 February and consecration followed on 12 March at Canterbury. John Stratford, archbishop of Canterbury since 1333 and clearly influential in this promotion, officiated as consecrator. 
Ralph Stratford and his uncle Robert gave loyal support to Archbishop Stratford in his conflict with Edward III in 1340-41. As dean of the province of Canterbury, Ralph became responsible for circulating his uncle's letter 'Sacrosancta ecclesia' in defence of ecclesiastical liberties. When the archbishop was refused entry to parliament in April 1341, Ralph and Robert accompanied him to the Painted Chamber in the palace of Westminster, while on 3 May the two kinsmen were named members of one of the committees that four days later presented proposals, subsequently embodied in a statute, for constitutional reform and the preservation of ecclesiastical liberties. 
Despite his part in the crisis of 1340-41 Ralph Stratford was not long out of royal favour. In 1342 he was empowered to treat with the king's continental allies and also with the French king. In 1345 he was a member of Lionel of Antwerp's council of regency during Edward III's absence in Flanders in July, and in November of that year he was appointed to treat with the papal envoy about relations with France. But after the archbishop's death in 1348 he took little part in public affairs, although, according to the chronicler Baker, in 1350 the king nominated him, together with Bishop William Bateman of Norwich (died 1355), for the cardinalate. 
Apart from joint political action there are other signs that Ralph Stratford was on good terms with his uncle John Stratford, who in his will left him Guido de Baysio's 'Rosarium', a copy of the 'Speculum judiciale' purchased in Bologna, and an enamelled cup -- a present from Ralph. He fell ill in October 1348, and was relieved of the onus of administering his uncle's will. Four years later he arranged for the construction of suitable premises to house the chaplains of the late archbishop's college of St Thomas the Martyr at Stratford, buildings that were still standing in Leland's time. Ralph Stratford's episcopal register has not survived. According to Stow's 'Survey', in 1348, during the black death, he bought a croft named No Man's Land as a burial-ground -- later Pardon churchyard -- and built a chapel there, the adjoining land becoming the site of the London Charterhouse. But this has been questioned by the historian of the Charterhouse for lack of supporting evidence. Stratford died at Stepney, on 7 or 17 April 1354, and on the 28th his uncle Robert, bishop of Chichester, granted forty days' indulgence to those who prayed for his soul. He was buried in St Paul's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 26648


Stratford, Robert (c.1292-1362), administrator and bishop of Chichester, was the son of Robert and Isabel Stratford, the younger brother of Archbishop John Stratford (d. 1348), and the uncle of Bishop Ralph Stratford (d. 1354). Their family took its name from Stratford upon Avon, Warwickshire. Robert was probably born in the 1290s, since he was ordained deacon in 1318, granted letters dimissory for the priesthood in the same year, and assumed his first benefice, Overbury rectory, Worcester diocese, in October 1317. He studied at Oxford where he was MA by 1330 -- when he was licensed to have an oratory in his lodgings -- and scholar in theology by May 1335, when his election as chancellor of the university was confirmed by the diocesan, Bishop Henry Burghersh (died 1340). Despite non-residence and promotion as royal chancellor he retained his university office, the first example of a practice common in the following century, but he had vacated it by November 1338. He successfully suppressed the rival university established at Stamford in 1333-4, and in 1336 secured royal confirmation of university privileges. In March 1345 he was commissioned to inquire into student obstruction of royal justices investigating disorders in Oxford. 
Inevitably Stratford's career was intertwined with that of his brother. Thus he was granted leave of absence from his rectory of Stratford upon Avon -- for which he had exchanged Overbury -- to attend John Stratford when the latter was archdeacon of Lincoln. He was abroad with him in 1320 and acted as his steward and vicar-general (appointed on 2 December 1324) on his promotion to the see of Winchester. He was made a papal chaplain on 7 February 1332. Fraternal influence, papal provision, and royal presentation helped Robert Stratford to secure a succession of canonries, though not without opposition. A canon of Wells and prebendary of Yatton in 1328, his position was still in dispute six years later when he was provided to the deanery there. This too was subject to litigation in the curia and he probably withdrew his claim following papal reservation to him, at the king's instance, of the archdeaconry of Canterbury (1334). Meanwhile by royal grant he had succeeded his brother as canon of Salisbury and prebendary of Charminster and Bere. As bishop of Winchester his brother was instrumental in securing for him prebends in Wherwell and Romsey abbeys. In 1330 he became prebendary of Aylesbury in Lincoln Cathedral, and also received canonries at St Paul's, London, and at Chichester, where he was elected bishop in mid-August 1337. The temporalities were restored on 21 September and he was consecrated on 30 November at Canterbury, bishops Orleton of Winchester (perhaps his consecrator), Wyville of Salisbury, and Hethe of Rochester being present. Shortly afterwards he was among those who escorted cardinals Gomez and Montfavez to London. During the archbishop's absence abroad in 1338-9 he acted as his vicar-general and convened convocation. 
Stratford's episcopal register is not extant, but scattered 'acta' have survived. He visited his chapter in 1337 and 1345 and in an attempt to solve a jurisdictional conflict between himself as bishop and the dean and chapter of Chichester he asked for his brother's arbitration. Both parties agreed to abide by the award, which was eventually delivered in 1340. However, its terms were resented by the dean and chapter, and a bull of 1355, known only from a later copy of an exemplification of 1478, purports to render it void. 
Keeper of the great seal on his brother's behalf in 1331, 1332, and 1335, Robert Stratford was appointed chancellor of the exchequer on 16 October 1331, and held the office until 1334. He was chancellor of England between 24 March and 6 July 1338 and between 20 June and 1 December 1340, when the king abruptly dismissed both him and treasurer Roger Northburgh (died 1358). According to a version of 'The Brut' chronicle Edward threatened to detain them in the Tower of London, but they were released after Robert had expounded the canonical dangers of such procedure. He supported his brother against the king's charge that the archbishop had failed to provide the sinews of war, and with him and their nephew, the bishop of London, was temporarily excluded from the parliament of April 1341. Robert and Ralph Stratford were both members of the committees whose proposals for reform, subsequently enacted in a statute, ended the political crisis of that year. In May 1343 Robert Stratford was engaged in negotiations at Avignon and in 1345 was a member of the council of Lionel of Antwerp, guardian of the realm during the king's absence. 
Stratford co-operated in the foundation of his brother's chantry college of St Thomas at Stratford upon Avon, secured grants of toll for paving the town during the 1330s, and assisted the Guild of the Holy Cross there. On the archbishop's death in 1348 he became his sole executor and was involved with his burial arrangements. He made his will and died at his manor of Aldingbourne in Sussex on 9 April 1362. Probate was granted on the 26th. His recumbent effigy lies in the south choir aisle of Chichester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 26649


Stratford, William Samuel (1790-1853), naval officer and astronomer, was born in London on 31 May 1790, the eldest son of William Stratford (1753-1818) of Well Hall, Eltham, Kent, and New Broad Street, London, and his wife, Fanny, 'nee' Mitchell. He was educated at Hanwell Heath Academy, Middlesex, and Mr Oard's school, London. He entered the navy in February 1806 on the 'Pompee', flagship first of Sir William Sidney Smith and afterwards of Vice-Admiral Stanhope, and was in her at the defence of Gaeta, the reduction of Capri, the passage of the Dardanelles, the destruction of a Turkish squadron off Point Pesquies, and the bombardment of Copenhagen in September 1807. In March 1808 he was again with Smith in the 'Foudroyant', and sailed for the coast of Brazil. From 1809 to 1815 he served in the North Sea, as master's mate in the 'Theseus', and on 14 March 1815 was promoted lieutenant. At the peace he was placed on half pay and had no further service afloat. 
Thereafter Stratford devoted himself to the study of astronomy. He was elected to the Astronomical Society in 1825 and served as its secretary from February 1826 until February 1831; he was elected vice-president of the newly named Royal Astronomical Society in 1834, 1835, and 1849. On 11 April 1827 he received the silver medal of the society for his co-operation with Francis Baily in the compilation of a catalogue of 2881 fixed stars, printed as an appendix to volume 2 of the 'Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society' (1826). 
In 1830 the Admiralty sought the society's opinion on proposed changes in the 'Nautical Almanac' and Stratford was one of the committee of the society to whom it was referred. On 22 April 1831 he was appointed superintendent of the 'Nautical Almanac', a post he held until his death, introducing many improvements and supervising the production of issues from that for 1834 to that for 1856. On 7 June 1832 he was elected FRS. He was the author of 'An Index to the Stars in the Catalogue of the Royal Astronomical Society' (1831). In 1845, following the death of Francis Baily, Stratford completed the printing and notes of a catalogue of stars for the British Association for the Advancement of Science. He published ephemerides of comets Halley (1835), Encke (1838-9), and Faye (1851) and many shorter papers. 
Stratford married, on 21 September 1814, Martha, daughter of William Barker Daniel, private chaplain to the king and heir to Sir William Barker, baronet. They had two sons and a daughter. His wife survived him by barely a month, dying on 22 April 1853. Stratford died at his home, 6 Notting Hill Square, London, on 29 March 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 26650


Strathearn, Malise, sixth earl of Strathearn (b. c.1261, d. in or before 1317), magnate, was descended from a native Celtic family of considerable antiquity, whose members began to be styled earls of Strathearn in the early twelfth century. The best known of the early earls was Gilbert ('fl'. 1171-1223) who, together with his wife, Matilda d'Aubigny, in 1198 founded a priory of Austin canons at Inchaffray; it became an abbey in 1220 or 1221. 
The sixth earl of Strathearn was born 'c'.1261, the son of Malise, the fifth earl, and the latter's wife, Matilda, daughter of Gilbert, earl of Orkney and Caithness. He became an important figure on the political stage during the wars of independence, and ultimately lost his title and lands as a consequence of the turmoil of that period. In 1284 he was one of thirty-nine magnates who accepted Alexander III's granddaughter, Margaret, the Maid of Norway, as heir-presumptive to the throne of Scotland. In 1290 he attended the parliament at Birgham which made arrangements for the marriage of the Maid to the prince of Wales, and he attested the treaty of Salisbury which confirmed those marriage plans some months later. In June 1291 he was one of the auditors for John de Balliol in the competition for the Scottish crown, and a month later he swore fealty to Edward I as lord superior of Scotland. He was also present in Berwick in the autumn of 1292, throughout the final stages of the proceedings of the Great Cause, and thereafter he threw in his lot with the Scots in their opposition to Edward I. In July 1295 he was present in the parliament held at Stirling which wrested the exercise of power from the hands of King John, subsequently acting as one of a council of twelve who assumed governance of Scotland in place of the deposed king, setting his seal to the confirmation of the Scoto-French treaty negotiated as one of the first acts of the new council. In the spring of 1296 he took part in an expedition to Carlisle. 
Strathearn submitted to the English king after the conquest of Scotland in 1296. He was restored to his possessions, but was compelled to send two of his sons to the Tower as hostages for his good behaviour. Reverting temporarily to the Scottish cause in the years 1297-1303, he was once again in the allegiance of Edward I in 1303, and for the next three years served the English king, though not very energetically. Earl Malise's political troubles began in earnest in the summer of 1306 when he was taken prisoner by the English, probably soon after the battle of Methven in June, and sent to confinement in Rochester Castle. The following summer he was permitted to present a memorial to the English council explaining his alleged support of the rebel Robert Bruce. He claimed that in March 1306 he had been captured and compelled under pain of death to perform homage to Bruce, but in spite of his protestations of loyalty the earl remained in custody. He was sent to York Castle in November 1307 and his son and heir was detained as a hostage. The earl was not finally released until November 1308, and forbidden until 1310 to return to Scotland, subsequently receiving a pension and gifts from the English king. Strathearn demonstrated his ultimate loyalty by joining the English garrison in Perth in 1312, where he helped to defend the town against assault by King Robert in 1313. Ironically, his heir fought on the side of the Scots at this siege, and the old earl was taken captive there by his son. Although his life was spared by Bruce, he was compelled to resign his earldom in favour of his son. 
Strathearn married Agnes, possibly a member of the Comyn family, and probably the same countess of Strathearn who, according to Fordun, was accused in the parliament of 1320 of having taken part in the conspiracy to assassinate King Robert. They had four children. The sixth earl was dead by 1317 (when his eldest son, and successor, Malise, was noted as having been 'in the king's peace') and he was buried in Inchaffray Abbey. 


The accounts of previous historians of Strathearn have hopelessly confused the later history of the native earldom. It was the eighth earl who fought on the Scottish side at the battle of Halidon Hill in 1333, but later resigned his earldom into the hands of Edward Balliol. In June 1344 he was tried before David II in a parliament held at Scone and, although acquitted of treasonable intent, was never restored to the earldom of Strathearn. That title had been granted in 1343 to Maurice Murray of Drumsagard, with whom it remained until 1346. 


@@@@@


doc= 26651


Malise Strathearn, seventh earl of Strathearn (1275x80-1328x30), succeeded his father as earl soon after the siege of Perth of 1313. Unlike his father he remained firmly committed to the Scottish patriotic cause. In 1320 he was one of eight earls and over thirty barons whose seals were appended to the declaration of Arbroath, a petition addressed to the pope in which the independence of Scotland was vigorously asserted. He was not implicated in the conspiracy of that year to assassinate Robert Bruce, though his mother, Agnes, was condemned and convicted. Little is known of his career. The last certain mention of him occurs in a royal charter of 28 July 1328, and he was dead by 1329 or 1330, when his son and heir, another Malise, succeeded to the title of earl of Orkney and Caithness (through his great-grandmother Matilda), as well as of Strathearn. The seventh earl married twice. The identity of his first wife is unknown, but she was the mother of his two children, Malise, the eighth earl, and Maria. His second wife was Joanna, daughter of Sir John Menteith, who survived her husband by many years, and eventually became countess of Strathearn again, by marriage to a subsequent earl, Maurice Murray of Drumsagard. 


@@@@@


doc= 26652


Stratton, Adam of (d. 1292x4), administrator and moneylender, was the son of Thomas de Argoges (or Arwillis) of Stratton St Margaret, Wiltshire. Of his early life, nothing is known. The first firm evidence of Adam occurs in 1256, by when he was already a royal clerk attached to the exchequer. Stratton St Margaret was a dependency of Sevenhampton, a manor held by the Redvers earls of Devon as hereditary chamberlains of the exchequer. It seems likely, therefore, that it was to the influence of the Redvers family that Stratton owed his early career at the exchequer. After 1257, when the seventh earl came of age following a long minority, Stratton's association with the Redvers family was almost continuous. Between 1260 and 1262 he acted as the earl's attorney at the royal court, and in the latter year as an executor of his will. Soon afterwards he entered the service of Isabella de Forz, countess of Aumale and sister to the seventh earl of Devon, whom he served in various capacities until 1286. 
Throughout his career Stratton's primary sphere of activity lay at the exchequer. In 1262 he became the weigher of the receipt, an office he acquired from its hereditary holder, John of Windsor, and which in 1265 he granted, for life, to his brother William of Stratton, who held it until 1290. In 1266 he also secured grants of 6died a day for life from the king for his two other brothers, Henry and Thomas, who were clerics. By the mid-1260s Stratton himself had become the chamberlain of the receipt, and thus the deputy of Isabella de Forz, now the hereditary chamberlain of the exchequer in succession to her brother. In 1276, however, Isabella granted him, in fee, her own chamberlainship of the exchequer, along with its appurtenant manor of Sevenhampton, which he held until his fall in 1290. In addition he also acquired possession, in fee, of half the ushership of the receipt, which he also held until 1290. 
In addition to his duties at the exchequer Stratton was involved, from the late 1250s, with the supervision of the king's works at Westminster Abbey and Palace. Between 1264 and 1272 he was officially keeper of the Westminster works, though he may have been acting as keeper for some time before this. More than his work at the exchequer, it was probably his association with Westminster that brought him into contact with Henry III, and produced for him the continuing stream of royal gifts and grants of ecclesiastical livings that he enjoyed during the last years of the old king's reign. These gifts continued under Edward I. By 1290 his ecclesiastical income alone was reckoned by Bartholomew Cotton to amount to $1000 per annum. 
Stratton's enormous wealth was certainly due in part to his clerical offices, but primarily it was the product of his moneylending, and of his related trafficking in Jewish debts and in the mortgaged estates which guaranteed them. His position and privileges as an exchequer clerk were of considerable advantage to him in this business, which earned him an unsavoury reputation for sharp practice and dishonesty. It is not possible to determine exactly when he began his career as a moneylender, but he was already well established in it by 1260. It was probably as a result of his moneylending, indeed, that Stratton acquired his position as the weigher of the receipt in 1262. By 1271 he had also begun to lend money in partnership with the Riccardi of Lucca, Italian moneylenders and wool merchants with whom he would thereafter be closely involved. 
Typical of Stratton's methods as a moneylender were the loans he made to Bermondsey Priory, which eventually brought about his downfall. The priory's debts to him began in the 1260s, but they mounted dramatically after 1271, when the prior granted him an annuity of $40 to settle the house's existing debts, and agreed to a penalty charge of $1 a day for late payment of the annuity. Further loans soon followed, some involving penalty and interest charges of 900 per cent per annum. By 1288, when Bermondsey presented its complaints against him to the king, Stratton held five of the priory's manors, all of its advowsons, and yet was still owed debts of $6000. 
Stratton's direct involvement with the management of the countess of Aumale's estates appears to have begun in 1274; it was probably as a reward for reorganizing her financial administration that in 1276 Isabella gave him her chamberlainship of the exchequer in fee. Between 1277 and 1286 Stratton was clearly Isabella's chief financial official, receiving, disbursing, and transferring the revenues of her estates from his London base with the help of the Riccardi. In 1279, while acting in Isabella's service, he was accused before parliament by the abbot of Quarr (Isle of Wight) of fraudulently removing the seal from an abbey charter. More allegations of dishonest conduct emerged when the king suspended him from his offices at the exchequer, and appointed special justices to hear all additional complaints against him. But despite overwhelming evidence of his guilt, Stratton was declared innocent of all charges and restored to his offices at the exchequer. In return he paid a 4000 mark bribe to the king through the Riccardi. 
In 1289 Stratton did not escape so lightly. Bermondsey's complaints reached the king in Gascony in 1288. When Edward returned to England in late 1289, Stratton was deprived of his exchequer offices and put on trial for felony. Lurid tales of sorcery circulated about him, but the charges of which he was actually convicted in 1290 are not known. His secular property was confiscated, including cash found in his house to the value of $12,666 17's'. 7died, but he retained his ecclesiastical revenues, and his friends were able to purchase the king's pardon for him by a fine of 500 marks. In early 1291, however, Stratton was again on trial for felony, this time accused of forging charters, and was once again committed to the Tower of London. Convicted near the end of 1292, he was dead by 14 August 1294, whether by execution or natural causes is nowhere recorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 26653


Stratton, John Proudfoot (1830-1895), surgeon and civil servant, son of David Stratton, a solicitor in Perth, was born in the parish of Caputh, near Dunkeld, Perthshire, on 2 July 1830. He was educated in his native town and afterwards at North Shields, where he became an apprentice to Dr Ingham in 1840. He was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1851, and graduated BM and MD at the University of Aberdeen in 1852 and 1855, respectively. At Aberdeen he gained either a medal or a first class in every subject of study. In May 1852 he was awarded a bursary from the East India Company. 
After holding various posts in the Indian Medical Service (IMS) (Bombay) from 1852 onwards, Stratton was appointed in December 1854 residency surgeon in Baroda, where he took an active part in founding the Maharaja Gaikwar's hospital and in vaccinating the local population. In May 1857 he was, in addition to his medical post, appointed to act as assistant resident. He performed his duties with ability during the uprising, and received the thanks of the resident, Sir Richmond Campbell Shakespear. After Shakespear's departure for England, Stratton acted as resident until the arrival of Colonel Wallace. In 1859 he was selected to take political charge of Bundelkhand, a district embracing several minor states which were experiencing unrest. Stratton's services were again acknowledged by the government, while the East India Company marked its appreciation by awarding him extra pay. Stratton married Georgina Anne Anderson on 12 April 1859. They had six children. 
In 1862 Stratton was appointed commissioner and sessions judge for Bundelkhand and Baghelkhand, and he was promoted in June 1864 from political assistant to political agent; from May to July 1876 he was officiating resident. On 4 March 1881 he was appointed officiating resident in Mewar, and in July he was posted to the western states of Rajputana; on 27 January 1882 he moved to Jaipur in the eastern states. In 1885 he retired from the service, being under fifty-five years of age and following the rule, with the rank of brigade surgeon. 
Stratton served Britain well in his capacity of political agent. He obtained from the local rulers free remission of transit duties and he established the Bundelkhand Rajkumar College for their sons. He also organized the building of hill roads and instituted vaccination in central India. 
Stratton died on 8 August 1895 at his home, 51 Nevern Square, South Kensington, London, and was buried in Brookwood cemetery. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26654


Strauss, Gustave Louis Maurice (c.1807-1887), writer, was born at Trois Rivieres in Lower Canada. Although a British subject, he asserted that he had 'a strange mixture of Italian, French, German, and Sarmatian blood' in his veins. In 1812 his father moved to Europe, and about 1816 settled at Linden, near Hanover. Gustave was educated at the Klosterschule in Magdeburg, at the University of Berlin (where he took the degree of doctor of philosophy), and at the Montpellier school of medicine. 
In 1832 Strauss visited Great Britain in the company of Legros, a wealthy Marseillais, who wished to inspect the industrial establishments of the country. He returned to Germany in 1833 to share in the liberal demonstrations against the government. Afterwards he succeeded in escaping to France, although the Prussian government sequestrated his property, which was not returned to him until 1840. 
In 1833 Strauss went to Algiers as assistant surgeon to the French army. At first he was attached to the Foreign Legion, but in 1834 his connection with it was severed. After some years' service his health broke down, and he returned to France, only to be banished in 1839 for supposed complicity in a revolutionary plot. He then went to London, where he turned his hand to a variety of callings, including those of chemist, politician, cook, journalist, tutor, playwright, surgeon, author, and linguist. At this time he produced a 'German Reader' (1852), a 'German Grammar' (1852), and a 'French Grammar' (1853). He also published some works on Islam, including 'Moslem and Frank' (1854) and 'Mahometism: an Historical Sketch' (2nd edn, 1857). He was also the first editor of 'The Grocer' (1862), a weekly trade circular. Strauss was well known in London as the Old Bohemian, and was one of the founders of the Savage Club in 1857. 
In 1865 Strauss published 'The Old Ledger: a Novel', which was described by 'The Athenaeum' as 'vulgar, profane, and indelicate'. In consequence he brought an action against that journal, which was settled by mutual consent. 'The Athenaeum', however, repeated the original criticism on 7 April 1866, and Strauss brought a second action. In this his plea for free literary expression was met by a demand for equal latitude in criticism; the jury returned a verdict in favour of 'The Athenaeum'. 
In later life Strauss's circumstances became straitened, and through Gladstone's intervention he received a bounty from the civil list. In 1879 he was admitted into the Charterhouse as a poor brother, but after a short residence he applied for an outdoor pension, which was granted by the governors. His memoir, 'Reminiscences of an Old Bohemian' (1882), 'liberally mingled' fact and fiction ('Life and Adventures of George Augustus Sala', 124); it was followed by the perhaps more aptly titled 'Stories of an Old Bohemian' (1883). Strauss also contributed to a wide range of periodicals, including 'The Lancet' and the 'Morning Advertiser'. Strauss died unmarried, on 2 September 1887, at Teddington. 


@@@@@


doc= 26655


Streat, William (1599/1600-1666x9), Church of England clergyman, was the son of John Streete, merchant, of Dartmouth, Devon. Having entered Exeter College, Oxford, early in 1617, he matriculated on 8 May 1621 aged twenty-one, graduated BA on 31 January 1622, and proceeded MA on 10 June 1624. He was ordained and became rector first, in 1630, of St Edmund on the Bridge, Exeter, and then, in 1632, of South Pool, Devon. 
According to Anthony Wood, after 1641 Streat sided with the presbyterians, and 'preached very bitterly' against Charles I and the royalists, 'blasting them with the name of Bloody papists'. Later he 'became a desperate enemy to, and continually preached against' the exiled Charles II, spreading from his pulpit satirical propaganda from parliamentarian newspapers and pamphlets (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.728). Yet his only publication, 'The dividing of the hooff, or, Seeming-contradictions throughout sacred scriptures, distinguish'd, resolv'd and apply'd' (1654), while it acknowledges the power of 'his Highness' (Cromwell), placed by God as a steward, and looks forward to the thousand-year rule of the saints, regrets the storms and madness among God's people, 'our spirituall divisions in points of religion'. A substantial 496-page work, it attempts to reconcile 295 ostensibly contradictory texts from the 'Old' and 'New' testaments. Appealing to the conciliatory tradition of John Jewel and William Perkins, it seeks to 'cast out that evill spirit of contradiction among professors of the Gospel' and 'to bring a poor creature into Gods chamber of presence' (Streat, dedications). 
Streat remained at South Pool, and conformed in 1662. At an unknown date he had married Amy, and in his will, drawn up on 14 June 1666, he named four of their sons, Robert, Joseph, William, and John, and a daughter Sarah, and mentioned five other children, dividing among them property in Dartmouth and a lease in South Allington. He died some time before 7 December 1669, when probate was granted to his executors William and John Streete. 


@@@@@


doc= 26656


Streater, John (c.1620-1677), soldier, printer, and political pamphleteer, was born in Lewes, Sussex, the son of William Streater, tailor. He had at least two brothers: Aaron, who called himself a divine and a physician; and Thomas, who in 1644 signed on with John as a stationer's apprentice. At an unknown date he married Susan (died in or after 1677), and had at least one son, Joseph. 
Streater began an apprenticeship with the London stationer Robert Hoskins in 1635. He did not have time to complete his service before the outbreak of the civil war. He joined the parliamentary army early, and fought at Newbury and Edgehill. Wounded, he returned to the capital to become a printer in his own right, gaining his freedom in June 1644. But he was soon back in the army again. He was probably at St Albans during the regicide. Subsequently he was sent to Ireland as a fortifications engineer and later quartermaster-general, where he remained for three years. It is likely that the distinctive political ideas that he published in the 1650s found their inspiration in debates during this time. 
Streater returned to London in 1653, just before Cromwell forcibly dissolved the Rump Parliament. He thought this a disastrous act, aimed at elevating an army interest and eventually at making Cromwell himself 'absolute Lord of his Country'. In response Streater circulated doubts among his fellow officers, proposing a six-month parliament elected by the citizenry according to their 'inalienable Rights' (Streater, 'Secret Reasons'). From then on he became a prolific pamphleteer, returning to his trade to circulate strikingly sophisticated arguments for a republic. The first of these tracts was 'A Glympse of that Jewel, Judicial, Just Preserving Libertie'. Apparently written while he was still in Ireland, it advocated a classical republicanism in which the commonwealth would be composed of heroic citizens duty-bound to understand the laws and liberties of their nation, which must be circulated in the vernacular and in print. Parliaments would be short-term affairs, with office-holders limited to terms of a year. His idea was that, with such limits in place, officials would serve the public rather than any private interest. When 'reasons of state' were open to and judged by all, harmony would prevail. The result would be a nation whose prowess rivalled that of the ancient Roman republic. 
During the whole of Cromwell's ascendancy Streater remained a consistent irritant. He was cashiered for 'A Glympse', and soon found himself in gaol for issuing a periodical, 'The Grand Politick Informer' (no copies of this are now known). He remained interned until the collapse of Barebone's Parliament, despite an energetic and articulate campaign to be released. As soon as he was at large again he resumed his innovative use of publishing in parts as a way of avoiding suppression. His idea was to create newsbooks that, when bound together, added up to political treatises. The two principal examples were 'Observations... upon Aristotles First Book of Political Government' and 'A Politick Commentary on the Life of Caius Julius Caesar' (both 1654). Each provided grounds for opposing (and, Streater unsubtly hinted, assassinating) a military 'tyrant'. Like his other works, they espoused a republican commonwealth, but in more sustained terms. 'Observations' in particular added up to an impressive argument for a form of government 'according to nature', in which all citizens would participate. Drawing on a wide range of authorities, Streater argued that states were akin to organisms, in that they must either grow or wither, and depended on circulations in order to flourish. On this basis he built a complex republican system notable for its thoroughgoing portrait not just of political structures, but of republican virtues in action, especially those arising from public knowledge. He clearly shared convictions not only with the Milton of 'Areopagitica' but with James Harrington, whose 'Oceana' Streater printed clandestinely in 1656. And the same concerns were also evident in other books he printed, which shared a conviction of the importance of knowledge and its circulation akin to that of Samuel Hartlib. Streater even seems to have embarked at one point with Giles Calvert on a scheme to publish all of Jakob Boehme's works in English. 
Streater returned to military service in 1659 with the revival of the Rump. During this climactic year he continued to publish republican arguments (especially in 'Government Described'). And he made his endorsement of Harringtonian ideas plain, arguing that 'that a Commonwealth may be Governed as Mr. Harrington describeth, is certain; nay, England it self' ('A Shield', 17-18). But the leader he hoped would institute such a polity, Charles Fleetwood, did not think likewise, and Streater found himself watching once more in dismay as the military dismissed the Rump. But this time he resolved on defiance. He hatched a plot to seize the Tower of London and declare for parliament. The plan was betrayed, but Streater then joined the similarly disgruntled Admiral John Lawson, who sailed his fleet up the Thames while Streater handled the printing of a manifesto. With Monck approaching from the north and Lawson from the east, the army command decided to yield, and the Rump returned once more, with Streater reinstated as its official printer. Subsequently, as the revived assembly edged towards a restoration of the monarchy, Streater reluctantly acquiesced. In the spring of 1660 he and his men faced down the last hope of the military republicans, John Lambert, at the evocative field of Edgehill, thus ending the final challenge to Restoration. 
From 1660 onwards Streater remained a printer. He built up probably the largest private printing house in the country, at one stage having five presses. Overall he seems to have accommodated himself to the new dispensation surprisingly readily. Indeed, he now presented his printing for parliament during the transition as service to the king, and was rewarded for this service, remarkably, with a blanket exemption from the new 'Press Act'. Yet at the same time he was embarking on his most ambitious enterprise of all. 
Throughout his confrontations with Cromwell, Streater had sought to publish law books. Besides being profitable, the practice coincided with his republican ideals. Now he forged an alliance with Richard Atkyns, an ex-cavalier seeking a patent on such works. For a decade and a half they mounted a campaign to secure the patent -- a campaign that called into doubt the entire customary basis of the London book trade, and pioneered structures of collective publishing that would survive to become basic to the eighteenth-century trade. 
Atkyns and Streater argued that the Stationers' Company laid claim to an unjustified autonomy from royal oversight. The result was a trade dedicated to books that were trivial, poorly produced, and even seditious. In particular, the company's register system for copyrights implicitly denied the crown's ability to grant patents. So they proposed replacing this system with one dominated by gentlemen patentees, who would adhere to higher standards. In short, Streater and Atkyns sought to make the everyday world of the book trade into an extension of the Restoration state. Their case found a ready audience among a political class convinced of the role of print in fomenting the civil war, and but for the revolution of 1688 would have succeeded. Yet Streater did not live to see its outcome. Financially exhausted, he was imprisoned again, this time for debt. For once he could not extricate himself, and he died in gaol in London in 1677. He was survived by his wife and their son, Joseph, who together carried on his printing business after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 26657


Streater, Robert (1621-1679), painter, was born in London -- in Covent Garden according to Vertue, but more probably in Cripplegate -- and was baptized on 16 December 1621. He was the third and youngest son of Robert Streeter, painter, of St Giles, Cripplegate, and his second wife. By 1640 the family had moved to Long Acre, near Covent Garden, where the younger Robert lived throughout his adult life. He allegedly trained abroad with one Du Moulin but was in England by 1658, where he specialized in large-scale architectural and decorative paintings. In early 1662 Streater, describing himself as the 'King's Painter', petitioned Charles II for permission to build a house in Long Acre. Appointed sergeant-painter by the king in the following year, he worked from 1664 to 1672 on the decoration of royal carriages and of the queen's barges. 
Streater excelled in the use of perspective and foreshortening. George Vertue called him: 'a compleat Master therein, as also in other Arts of Etching, Graving, and his works of Architecture and Perspective, not a line but is true to the Rules of Art and Symmetry (and in all kind of Paintings -- see Streeters most exact & rare Landskips in Oyl. (Vertue, 'Note books', 4.31)' In 1660 William Russell, seventh earl of Bedford, bought a Streater landscape for his bedroom. The artist's only known topographical landscape is his 'View of Boscobel, with the Royal Oak' ('c'.1660?; Royal Collection), attributed to Streater, along with six other works, four of them landscapes, in 'A Catalogue of the Collection of Pictures, etc. Belonging to King James the Second' (1758). 
Streater was noted for his illusionistic painted 'perspectives' (decorations). In 1664 Evelyn described one, painted in the court of Mr Povey's house in Lincoln's Inn Fields, as 'indeede excellent, with the Vasas [vases] in Imitation of 'Porphyrie'; & fountaine' (Evelyn, 3.375, 1 July 1664). On 1 February 1669 Samuel Pepys visited 'Mr. Streater, the famous history-painter', finding the architect Christopher Wren and 'other virtuosos looking upon the paintings he is making of the new theatre at Oxford' (Pepys, 9.434). This was Streater's ceiling painting for Wren's Sheldonian Theatre, Oxford, a spectacular allegory painted in oil on canvas. Streater depicted a red awning (like those thought to have been used in the ancient Roman theatres that inspired Wren's architecture) being rolled back to reveal 'Truth Descending on the Arts and Sciences' and 'Envy, Rapine and Ignorance Overcome by Minerva, Hercules and Mercury'. The ceiling's allegorical figures were listed by Robert Whitehall in his poem 'Urania, or, A description of the painting of the top of the theater at Oxford as the artist laid his design' (1669); they include Mosaical Law, the Gospel, History, Divine Poesy, Mathematics, Astronomy, Geography, Architecture, Rhetoric, Law, Justice, Physic, Logic, Printing, and Truth, and the poem concludes: '
That future ages must confess they owe 

to Streeter more than Michael Angelo. 

' Streater also painted a 'Last Judgment', in the chapel at All Souls College, Oxford, in 1661-5 (repainted by Sir James Thornhill but recorded in Ackermann's 'History of Oxford', 1814). He worked for Wren on thirteen City churches in London but little remains of his work apart from the Sheldonian ceiling, an altarpiece for the church of St Benet Fink, panels of Moses and of Aaron, and a ceiling at St Michael Cornhill, London (reused at the Old Rectory, Great Waldingfield, Sudbury, in Gloucestershire). His ceilings for Whitehall Palace, London, and scenery for Dryden's 'Conquest of Granada' at the Whitehall Theatre were destroyed by fire. In 1672 Evelyn recorded Sir Robert Clayton's dining-room decorations (later removed to Marden, near Godstone, Surrey): 'the history of the Gyants War, incomparably done by Mr. Streeter, but the figures are too near the eye' (Evelyn, 4.625). Evelyn saw fine works by Streater in 1679 at Mr Boone's (or Bohun's) house, Lee Place, Blackheath (pulled down in 1825). 
Streater also painted portraits, including 'Sir Francis Prujean, M.D.' (1662; Royal College of Physicians, London). He was commissioned by the second earl of Chesterfield to paint 'Mucius Scaevola' and 'Rinaldo', and according to Vertue painted a small 'Jupiter upon the Rock'. His works, sold cheaply at auction following the death of his son on 13 December 1711, included a portrait of the actor Lacy, paintings of animals, still lifes, 'Isaac and Rebecca', 'Abraham Sacrificing Isaac', 'The Nativity', 'The Vision of Jacob', 'St. Mary Magdalen', and an architectural subject (for a fuller list see Vertue, 'Note books', 2.70). 
A gifted engraver, Streater engraved a self-portrait for Horace Walpole's 'Anecdotes of Painting', etched 'View of the Battle of Naseby', and designed a frontispiece and plates for Sir Robert Stapylton's 'Satires of Juvenal' (1660), etched by Wenceslaus Hollar. His art collection included a sketch by Rubens of two children, for the Whitehall ceiling; an oil sketch by Sir Peter Lely for a 'Holy Family'; H. van Steenwyck's 'St Peter in Prison'; a large 'St Sebastian' by Van Dyck; a 'Hercules and Dejanira' by Benedetto Gennari; a 'limning' by Lankrinck; and almost thirty still-life subjects by 'Vanzoon' -- perhaps the Flemish flower-painter Jan Frans van Son (1658- 'c'.1718), husband of Streater's cousin. 
Streater died in April 1679, following an operation for 'the stone' by a surgeon summoned from Paris by Charles II. He was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 23 April. In his will, dated 28 March and proved on 12 May by his wife, Ruth, he left $100 and land to his son Robert (died 13 December 1711), who succeeded him as sergeant-painter; $80 to his second son, Thomas (along with $20 for Thomas's wife, the daughter of the Flemish artist Remigius van Leemput), and $50 to his third son, Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 26658


Streatfeild, Thomas (1777-1848), topographer and antiquary, was born on 5 January 1777. He was the eldest son of Sandeforth Streatfeild ('bap'. 1750, died 1809) of Long Ditton, Surrey (descended from the Streatfeilds of Chiddingstone, Kent), who was a partner, first in the house of Brandram & Co., and then in that of Sir Samuel Fludyer & Co. His mother was Frances, daughter of Thomas Hussey, of Ashford, Kent. He matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, on 19 May 1795 and graduated BA in 1799. 
Christmases at Long Ditton at that time were enlivened by some two-act comedies of manners which Streatfeild wrote and which were performed by friends and relatives in the laundry, temporarily converted to use as a theatre. At least two survive from those days, 'Ton and Antiquity' (1798) and 'The Road to Ridicule' (1799), as well as a slim volume of 'Prologues and Epilogues' (1799). 
In early life Streatfeild was curate at Long Ditton to the Revd William Pennicott (died 1811), and his talents received early encouragement from his father, whose funeral sermon he preached and later had published. He was at that time also chaplain to the duke of Kent, and became subsequently curate of Tatsfield, in Surrey, retaining the post until, in 1842, ill health compelled him to retire. On 8 October 1800 Streatfeild married Harriet, daughter and coheir of Alexander Champion, of Wandsworth, who brought with her a considerable fortune. They had five sons and three daughters, before she died on 10 November 1814. In 1822 he established his family on an estate of 40 acres at Chart's Edge, Westerham, where he had a house built to his own design, and on 30 September 1823 he married again. His second wife was Clare, widow of Henry Woodgate, of Spring Grove, and daughter of the Revd Thomas Harvey, rector of Cowden; they had three sons and two daughters. 
Streatfeild was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 4 June 1812, and was for many years employed in forming collections, chiefly genealogical and biographical, in illustration of the history of Kent. A number of drawings (many by himself) and engravings for this projected work were also made, but Streatfeild was able to publish no more of it than 'Excerpta Cantiana' (1836), a 23-page prospectus for the work, which it was proposed to bring out in ten parts. Streatfeild appears to have taken a strenuous part in the general election of 1837, and shortly afterwards to have suffered a stroke. After his death his fifty-two volumes of notes and manuscript materials for the proposed history were left to his collaborator, the Revd Lambert Blackwell Larking, in the hope that the latter would be able to bring the project to fruition. In the event only one instalment of the work was to be published, in 1886, under the editorship of H. H. Drake, with the title 'Hasted's History of Kent: Corrected, Enlarged, and Continued to the Present Time, from the Manuscripts of the Late Rev T. Streatfeild, and the Late Rev L. B. Larking, Part 1: The Hundred of Blackheath'. The Streatfeild manuscript collections are now in the British Library. 
Otherwise Streatfeild published little. Of several verse tragedies which he wrote later in life only 'The Bridal of Armagnac' (1823) was published. 'Lympsfield and its Environs', a short series of drawings made in the vicinity of this Surrey village, was given in manuscript to a bazaar, and subsequently published by a local printer in 1838. Streatfeild died at Chart's Edge on 17 May 1848, and was buried at Chiddingstone. 


@@@@@


doc= 26659


Street, George Edmund (1824-1881), architect and architectural theorist, was born on 20 June 1824 at Woodford, Essex, the third son of Thomas Henry Street (died 1840), solicitor, and his second wife, Mary Anne Millington (died 1851). A principal shaper of the architectural style later called 'High Victorian', he was also one of the most thoughtful architectural writers of his day. 
Street attended schools in Mitcham and Camberwell until the age of fifteen, when his father retired and moved the family to Devon. There he took painting lessons and explored the local architectural antiquities with his brother Thomas, but despite his artistic and antiquarian leanings he found his first employment back in the family law office in London. After this brief professional detour and his father's death, Street was articled to Owen Carter of Winchester, an enthusiastic antiquarian and a competent but unremarkable architect who produced both classical and Gothic designs. Street was Carter's pupil for two years and his assistant for a third, before moving to London in 1844, when he found a place in the office of George Gilbert Scott. 
Street was a craggily handsome man with a powerful intellect, and a brilliant draughtsman, whose special forte was the fluid pen-and-ink perspective. In Scott's office in the late 1840s these talents were fully appreciated, as work went ahead simultaneously on numerous large projects. Street's fellow assistants were George Frederick Bodley and William White, destined to share with him the artistic leadership of their generation; for them the purist Gothic revival, championed by Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin and the Ecclesiological Society, was rapidly falling into disfavour. Together they worked on the great Nicholaikirche for Hamburg, where Scott dared to use German precedents, and on stark, big-boned churches for Alderney and St John's, Newfoundland, which turned their backs on the soft forms of English Decorated Gothic which were still preferred by Gothic revival purists. It was in Scott's office that the more confident eclecticism and the powerful visual language of High Victorian architecture were born. 
Street played an important role in this swift reshaping of architectural taste. Some of his first independent work, executed in Cornwall while he was still employed by Scott, was conservatively Puginian. For example, the little church of St Peter at Treverbyn, Cornwall, of 1848-50, is gentle and picturesque in composition and faithful to the precedents of English Decorated Gothic. But another early work in Cornwall, St Mary at Biscovey of 1847-8, is Early English in detail and already forthright -- almost primitive -- in spirit, with details borrowed from heretofore neglected Cornish exemplars. Its freedom and vigour herald High Victorianism. 
In 1849 Street established his own practice, first in London and then in Wallingford Street, Wantage, Berkshire, as his early Cornish connections were supplanted by more important ties to the diocese of Oxford. He served as Oxford diocesan architect from 1850 until his death, enjoying the patronage and friendship of Bishop Samuel Wilberforce. On 17 June 1852 Street married Mariquita (Marique) Proctor (died 1874), and that year moved to Beaumont Street, Oxford; then, having begun to establish a national reputation, he returned to London, renting a house at 33 Montague Place, in 1856. (He maintained his principal residence in London for the rest of his life, moving to 51 Russell Square in 1862 and to a great house at 14 Cavendish Place in 1870.) 
Street's designs and writing of the first dozen years of his practice, in Oxford and London, defined the character of High Victorian architecture. In responding to mid-Victorian needs, his work became increasingly secular and urban, and although church-building remained the mainstay of his practice and his own high-church beliefs were unwavering, the religious symbolism that had so fully invested the work of earlier Gothic revivalists now diminished. Moreover, Street rejected the narrow historical and geographical confines within which Pugin and the Ecclesiological Society had bound the Gothic revival. He embraced eclecticism, and he viewed architectural history as an always dynamic system in which elements from different places and periods were transformed by a process of perpetual modernization that he and his contemporaries called 'development', a term he apparently borrowed from contemporary theology. 
Street was a strenuous logician who, more effectively than any other architect of his generation, explained the rationale and 'modus operandi' of eclectic design. He first laid out his philosophical position in three seminal articles in 'The Ecclesiologist' in 1850-53. Later publications reiterated the same themes while supplying a wealth of information about Gothic architecture on the continent, thereby providing the material with which eclecticism could be put into practice. Street travelled widely, traversing France, Germany, and the Low Countries and following the footsteps of John Ruskin to northern Italy -- all in the early 1850s. He reported on these travels with lectures and publications. Numerous articles on France and Germany appeared in 'The Ecclesiologist' in 1854-9, and his influential book on northern Italian Gothic, which reiterated his position on architectural eclecticism and widened the appreciation of Ruskin's views, came out in 1855. A second book, on Spanish Gothic, was published in 1865. Both books were revised for second editions. 
Street put his ideas to work in creating scores of quintessentially High Victorian buildings whose vigour and monumentality responded to the visual challenges of the mid-nineteenth-century environment. In his early works in Oxfordshire, such as the Wantage vicarage (1849-50) and the theological college in Cuddesdon (1852-4), the growing energy of his style seems to emerge almost unbidden from the local vernacular. But in later designs and especially after his move to London in 1856, foreign precedents are tellingly employed, including Italian polychromy, muscular French stonework, the Baltic's adroit use of brick. The church and accompanying school, vicarage, and houses of All Saints, Boyne Hill, Berkshire (1854-65), blaze with quasi-Italian colour, and his best-known early work, St James-the-Less, Westminster (1859-61), is a powerful urban church which combines a French apsidal plan and plate tracery, a campanile and polychromy of Italian origin, and a north German sensitivity to the monumental potential of brickwork and the making of space for worship. 
In his early use of polychromy Street was only a half step behind William Butterfield, whose church of All Saints, Margaret Street, in London (1849-59), was the first large embodiment of the fashion. But by virtue of his publications and more outgoing personality, Street overshadowed Butterfield and his accomplishments. Moreover, Street's use of colour soon declined, and the power of most of his mature works came from a fondness for the simple and muscular forms of early French Gothic, a taste which he shared with the rather eccentric William Burges, whom, like Butterfield, Street tended to outshine. Street's 'Early French' appears in his design for the Lille Cathedral competition of 1855-6 (where it is combined with polychromatic brick). He was placed second in that contest, and he fared similarly in the competition for the Crimean Memorial Church (Constantinople, 1856), in which he entered another Early French proposal. The executed Constantinople church of 1863-8, for which Street ultimately received the commission, is an exceedingly powerful variation on the same theme. Perhaps his masterpiece in this vein is the church of Sts Philip and James, Oxford (1858-65), whose mighty ashlar forms are only barely constrained by the equal might of Street's intelligent eye. Other notable exemplars are the churches of St John the Evangelist, Whitwell on the Hill (North Riding, Yorkshire, 1858-60), St John the Evangelist, Howsham (East Riding, Yorkshire, 1859-60), and All Saints, Denstone (Staffordshire, 1860-62). 
In addition to pioneering the bold and characteristic -- but ultimately exhausting -- vocabulary of High Victorian architecture, Street was also one of the first to test alternatives. All Saints' Church in Brightwalton, Berkshire (1862-3), turns the clock back to the gentle picturesque of the English Middle Pointed, and Street's precociousness in reverting to such forms is underscored by the fact that between 1852 and 1862 he trained or employed three of the leading designers of the new 'Queen Anne' generation: Philip Webb, William Morris, and Richard Norman Shaw. The filiation is nowhere more visible than in Shaw's bravura sketching style. Perfectly suited to rendering the gentle picturesque character of his buildings -- and coincidentally readily reproduced by the new photolithographic process used by the architectural magazines -- Shaw's technique descended directly from Street's. 
Street's greatest commission, the Royal Courts of Justice in London, was designed during the time when High Victorian tastes were waning. The competition design of 1866-7 is a last, brilliant effort at High Victorian stylistic synthesis, Early French in its power, but specifically intended to unite -- through skilful 'development' -- the irregular vigour of Gothic with the quasi-classical symmetry and monumentality appropriate for a public building. (Street's contemporary neo-Byzantine entry in the competition for an extension to the National Gallery took the quest for Gothic-classical synthesis even further.) The long series of revised schemes for the law courts increasingly displayed the unabashed picturesque that Shaw and his contemporaries had begun to make fashionable. The final design (1870-82) is a curious mixture of strong, High Victorian detail and irregular, almost relaxed, composition. It was approved in the teeth of Liberal opposition only because Street had won the support of William Ewart Gladstone, the prime minister, himself a high-churchman and Gothic enthusiast. 
Other later works reflect more explicitly the desiderata of late Victorian architecture. The High Victorian conviction that art was served by transnational and transtemporal interbreeding had waned, and Street's own home, Holmdale, at Holmbury St Mary (Surrey, 1873-6), is a relatively pure Old English half-timbered manor, with obvious debts to Shaw. Foreign precedents were now treated more circumspectly and usually restricted to special circumstances, notably the very Italian design for St Paul's American Church, Rome (1872-6). 
Large projects of great prestige joined the law courts in keeping Street's office fully occupied through the last years of his life. These included the nave and towered west facade for Bristol Cathedral (1867-88) and an almost total reconstruction of Christ Church, Dublin (1868-78). 
The vastness of these projects did not deter Street from maintaining an unusually high degree of artistic control over all of them, unlike some of his contemporaries. His astonishing rapidity of drawing and his unmatched combination of artistic originality and historical knowledge enabled him to keep ahead of his assistants. Seemingly tireless, Street continued to travel abroad every year, but his morale was sapped by the bureaucratic wranglings necessitated by his larger commissions, especially the Royal Courts of Justice. He was also cruelly injured by the death in 1874 of Marique, his wife of twenty-two years, and his eight-week second marriage, to Jessie Holland (a friend of his first wife), whom he married on 11 January 1876, ended tragically in her death from an illness contracted during their wedding trip to Italy in March that year. 
Street received all the honours of his profession. He was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1866 and a full member in 1871. In 1874 he was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), which he loyally accepted after Ruskin turned it down to chastise architects for their restoration practices, and in 1881, the year of his death, he served both as president of RIBA and as professor of architecture at the Royal Academy. As president of RIBA he stood up for the artists in the dispute that was growing between those who viewed architecture as an art and those who judged it to be a profession, and his Royal Academy lectures were the last to essay the arduous High Victorian task of reconciling the architecture of the middle ages and life of the nineteenth century. 
Street died at his home, 14 Cavendish Place, London, on 18 December 1881, after suffering two strokes. His death at the age of fifty-seven was surely hastened by the physical and emotional strain of work, and his greatest commission, the law courts, was opened a year after his death. Street was buried on 29 December in Westminster Abbey, near his old friend and former employer Sir Gilbert Scott, and beneath a brass designed by George Frederick Bodley, with whom he had worked in Scott's office. His only son, Arthur Edmund Street (died 1938), oversaw the completion of many of his works. 


@@@@@


doc= 26660


Street, Sir Thomas (bap. 1625, d. 1696), judge, was baptized on 13 October 1625 at St Andrew's, Worcester, the son of George Street (died 1643) of Worcester, brewer, and Elizabeth (died 1644), daughter of Thomas Andrews of Barnshall, Upton upon Severn, Worcestershire. He was one of sixteen children, though only he and three others survived. He entered Lincoln College, Oxford, on 22 April 1642, but returned to Worcester without a degree early in 1645 after the death of his father, a former Worcester mayor and ship money collector. He was briefly imprisoned by parliamentarian forces at this time. 
Street entered the Inner Temple on 22 November 1646, and lived intermittently with his brother John at his family's Worcester home, The Friary, until 1650. During this period he married Maria (died 1668), daughter of John Wightwick, serjeant-at-law, of Tamworth; they had three sons, all of whom studied at Oxford, and two daughters. 
Street was called to the bar on 24 November 1653, and began a law practice that kept him closely engaged with the city of his birth. In January 1659 Worcester sent him to parliament for the first time, but a petition from some of the inhabitants soon followed him there, condemning Street as 'a person who had been in arms, and a common swearer, [and who] was chosen by the profane rabble and cavaliers' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 3.70). The Commons investigated the charges, which Street answered by denying that he had fought for the king, though he admitted that he had worn a sword while in the company of royalist soldiers in 1645. Little more came of the accusations and Street was again chosen at Worcester to sit in the convention in 1660 and for the parliament seated in 1661. In the Commons Street's greatest efforts were reserved for Worcestershire interests: he served on committees or spoke for bills concerned with the county's salt and cloth industries, with Severn fishing, and with uniting parishes in Droitwich, whose recorder Street had become by 1664. 
By then Street's legal career was on the rise, beginning with his work for the cathedral chapter in Worcester, for which he handled various issues ranging from estate management to a defence of the cathedral in respect of fee farm rents owed to the queen mother since the 1640s. Street should not be confused with a younger cousin of the same name who served as Worcester's mayor in 1667-8 and as justice of the peace the following year; it was probably this cousin who acted briefly as Worcester's town clerk in 1668. In November 1669 Street became a bencher of the Inner Temple, and on 2 October 1672 Worcester corporation unanimously made him the city's recorder. 
Throughout the 1660s and 1670s Street was outspoken in parliament against protestant dissenters, and he was increasingly seen as a supporter of court policies. In December 1667 he defended Chief Justice Sir John Kelyng from charges in the Commons that he mistreated jurors. By now Street himself was a judge in Wales; in 1677 he became chief justice for south Wales and a serjeant-at-law, and in October 1678 a king's serjeant. 
Worcester returned Street to both parliaments in 1679 together with Sir Francis Winnington, who now moved against court interests as surely as Street supported them. Street's loyalty was rewarded on 21 April 1681 when he was sworn a baron of the court of exchequer; the king knighted him in June. His loyalty and his concern with the politics of his home city converged in late 1681 when, probably owing to his influence, the first 'quo warranto' was brought against one of England's urban corporations. This was a direct attack on twenty-six of his foes in Worcester, all of them notable for supporting Winnington, who became their most ardent defender in court. In 1683 the court's judgment ousted and fined all twenty-six, marking an important legal and political triumph for Street. In May 1683 he resigned as recorder of Worcester, probably because he was so heavily committed in London; in July the reconstituted city corporation voted him its thanks for his help in the 'quo warranto' proceedings. 
In 1683 Street sat in judgment in the Old Bailey with Sir Francis Pemberton in the trial of the Rye House conspirators, though in the following year some noted how lenient he was toward Quakers at the Northampton assizes. On 29 October 1684 he became a justice of common pleas but in June 1686, in the crucial case of 'Godden v. Hales', he was the only judge to declare against the royal dispensing power -- a sign of judicial independence that incorrectly convinced some that he would be turned off the bench. Later authors charged that Street gave his decision in collusion with the crown in order to give an appearance of judicial integrity to proceedings in the case. No contemporary evidence exists to support this claim, and Street's memorial in Worcester Cathedral includes this decision among his signal accomplishments. On 16 September 1686 Street married Penelope (died 1696), the daughter of Sir Rowland Berkeley of Cotheridge, Worcestershire. 
After the revolution of 1688 William of Orange refused to see Street, and he lost his place on the bench. He retired to Cotheridge and Worcester. He died at one of those two places on 8 March 1696 and was buried in the south cloister of Worcester Cathedral, having left a modest estate to his grandchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 26661


Scrots, Guillim (fl. 1537-1553), portrait painter, described as a 'Dutchman' (BL, Add. MS 30198, fol. 22'v'), was probably a native of the southern Netherlands; his name is spelt Stretes in some sources. Nothing is known of his early life, training, or parentage. The first part of his career appears to have been spent at the Habsburg court in Bruges, where he was appointed painter to Mary of Hungary, regent of the Netherlands, on 1 September 1537, at a salary of 6 sous per day. During his employment with her he is documented as having produced portraits of the Habsburg emperor Charles V and the empress Isabella. These are not known to survive. Surviving portraits of the young archdukes Maximilian (later Emperor Maximilian II) and Ferdinand (both Kunsthistorisches Museum, Schloss Ambras, Innsbruck) are convincingly attributed to Scrots on the basis of stylistic comparison with his English work, and may have been painted at the diet of Speyer in 1544. They are three-quarter length oil portraits on panel, with a typically Netherlandish attention to surface detail and pattern, and the illusionistic rendition of texture, a sympathetic if not penetrating approach to the characterization of his sitters, and a striking colour scheme: both boys are shown in black and gold costumes against a bright green background. Scrots is last recorded in the Low Countries as a witness to a deposition on 24 October 1544, in which all the other witnesses are citizens of Antwerp, and so it is assumed that he was in Antwerp at that time. 
Scrots went to England to take up a position as a painter at the court of Henry VIII probably in the second half of 1545. Here he was paid the very substantial annual salary of $62 10's'. from at least Michaelmas that year, making him the highest paid artist at the English court at the time. He was presumably regarded as the successor to Hans Holbein the younger, who had died in 1543, but who had been paid a much lower salary of $30 in his position as king's painter. It is likely that Scrots's previous court employment enabled him to command this high salary, whereas Holbein had not worked at a court before going to England. 
Various portraits produced in England after Holbein's death, of greatly varying quality and style, have been attributed in the past to Scrots, but there is little secure evidence linking him to specific paintings. The only documentary evidence of his work in England is a payment from the king and council in March 1551 for three full-length portraits, two of Edward VI for Sir Philip Hoby and Sir John Mason and one of Henry Howard, earl of Surrey (1517?-1547). Sir Philip Hoby and Sir John Mason were both ambassadors, Hoby having been appointed ambassador to the court of Charles V in April 1548 and Mason to the court of Henry II of France in 1550. Both men were involved in negotiations for a marriage between Edward VI and Princess Elizabeth of France, which came to a head in May 1551, and it seems most likely that the portraits of the young king painted for these men were produced in connection with these negotiations. A group of surviving portraits of Edward VI, in oil on panel, is probably correctly associated with Scrots and his studio on the basis of this payment. Five of these are full lengths, the most accomplished being those now at Hampton Court Palace and the Musee du Louvre, Paris. The approach to the modelling of the young king's face in the Louvre portrait is particularly close to that of Archduke Ferdinand in the portrait at Schloss Ambras. 
The portrait of the earl of Surrey, who had been charged with treason and executed in January 1547, has proved more elusive. It is described in the 1551 payment as 'a picture of the late earle of Surrey attainted and by the counsailes comanndement fetched from the said Gwillms howse' (Royal MS, 18, 124, fol. 69'v', BL). It has been suggested that it may correspond to a large full-length portrait on canvas that was in the collection of Surrey's descendants, the dukes of Norfolk (now belonging to the National Portrait Gallery, but still at Arundel Castle). However the latter painting is perhaps more likely to have been produced by an Italian artist working in the style of Giovanni Battista Moroni. A portrait on panel, showing the head only, but probably a fragment of a larger painting (NPG), may be a better candidate for all that remains of Scrots's portrait of Surrey; Netherlandish in style, like the portraits at Schloss Ambras it has a plain bright green background and the modelling of the face is sophisticated and sensitive. 
Perhaps the most remarkable work attributed to Scrots is a portrait in distorted perspective of Edward VI (NPG). This type of 'anamorphic' portrait was popular in the Habsburg courts in the early sixteenth century; designed to amaze the viewer and display the artist's skills, the distorted image appears unintelligible at first glance, but viewed from the correct angle, or using a special viewing device, the perspective is corrected and the portrait resolves itself into legibility. The antiquarian George Vertue recorded in the early eighteenth century seeing the signature 'Guihelmus pingebat' on the original frame (Vertue, 'Note Books', 1.54) and the conjunction of the name, date, royal sitter and Habsburg court associations suggests strongly that Scrots should be identified as the artist. 
As far as can be judged by his small surviving 'oeuvre', Scrots's contribution to English art was to bring the glamorous Habsburg court style briefly to the court of Henry VIII, and then to that of Edward VI, forming a link between the sophisticated portraiture of Hans Holbein and the flatter, more abstracted Anglo-Netherlandish style that characterized the painting of the Elizabethan court. He adopted the pose of Hans Holbein's full-length mural portrait of Henry VIII at Whitehall Palace for his paintings of the young Edward VI, but Scrots's strong lighting and simple but striking colour schemes give his portraits a flatter appearance, emphasizing their decorative surfaces. His work in turn influenced that of Hans Eworth, the Netherlandish artist who was most dominant in England immediately after Scrots; in its approach to modelling the face, for example, Eworth's portrait of Lord Darnley (1555; Scot. NPG) is particularly comparable to Scrots's portrait of Edward VI in the Louvre. 
It is not known why Scrots disappears from the court records after 1553; his last salary payment in England was made for a period ending in June of that year. The termination of his court employment may of course be connected with the succession of Mary I to the throne, but there is currently no evidence as to whether he left the country for good, or remained until his death at some later date. No paintings postdating the reign of Edward VI have been convincingly attributed to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26662


Stretton, Robert (d. 1385), bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, came from Leicestershire. Usually surnamed Stretton, from his presumed birthplace at Stretton Magna, Leicestershire, his family name was apparently Eyrik. However, suggestions of links with the later Eyricks of Houghton are unsubstantiated. He possibly inherited lands at Stretton, as he held the manor in the 1370s. In 1378 he named his parents as Robert (son of John) and Joan, and also identified two brothers (Sir William, a knight, and John, a cleric) and a sister (Atheline), who were all dead. Although these too are named Stretton, John is also called John Eyrik, and the dissolution certificate for his chantry calls the bishop 'Robert Heyrick'. 
Of Stretton's education and upbringing nothing is known. He is occasionally called master, but no specific degree is identified (the tradition that he was a doctor of laws and an auditor of the 'Rota Romana' is mistaken). He began his ecclesiastical career as a dependent of Edward, the Black Prince (died 1376), for whom he was successively clerk, almoner (by March 1347), and confessor (by May 1349). He already held the rectory of Wigston, Leicestershire, when he was granted an expectative to a Chichester canonry in 1343. As a result of petitions to the pope and his connections with the Black Prince, he later acquired canonries and prebends at Lincoln, Gnosall, London, and Salisbury, and in St Asaph and Llandaff, and the rectory of Llanbadarn Fawr in the diocese of St David's. (A papal bull in 1360 said that he was a canon of Lichfield when elected bishop, but this seems to be incorrect.) 
Stretton appears in secular employment as a king's clerk from 1350. In 1347 he was nominated as an envoy in abortive negotiations for a marriage between the prince of Wales and a daughter of the king of Portugal, and in 1355 was among those mandated by the pope to avert hostilities between the Black Prince and the count of Ponthieu. In 1350 he obtained a mortmain licence to found a chantry at Stretton, but this was not immediately implemented. 
Following Bishop Roger Northburgh's death in November 1358 Stretton was elected bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, presumably with royal and princely support. Royal assent was granted on 21 January 1359, but the appointment then stalled, for two years. According to the fourteenth-century 'Vitae archiepiscoporum Cantuariensium' (variously embroidered by later historians) Stretton was summoned to Avignon to have his literacy assessed, and was rejected. Following pressure from the prince of Wales the pope commissioned the archbishop of Canterbury and the bishop of Rochester to hold a further examination. This tale cannot be adequately corroborated. The final papal bull of 22 April 1360 states that Stretton was elected in ignorance of a papal reservation of the see, and had gone to Avignon to argue his case. The cardinals had judged him a fit candidate and there was no outstanding provision, so the decision on confirmation and provision was left to Canterbury and Rochester, unless Archbishop Simon Islip (died 1366) deputed the bishop of London to act for him. Because of pressure of business Islip did just that. There is no sign of reluctance or opposition. In any event, Stretton was consecrated on 27 September 1360. His profession of obedience to Canterbury was read for him, for unstated reasons, although he did subscribe personally. Given his career and qualifications, illiteracy seems inconceivable, but it is possible that he was already afflicted by the deterioration of his eyesight which was later to deprive him of all vision, and which may also explain, at least in part, the quiet course of his later career. 
Stretton's governance of his see was relatively straightforward and efficient. There are occasional hints of discord between himself and the Lichfield Cathedral chapter; but in general relations were amicable. In 1369 his anniversary was established within the cathedral, at the altar of St Andrew. The pope presumably thought that he retained influence with Edward III, as in 1371 he was asked to intercede to secure the admission of cardinals Simon Langham (died 1376) and Jean de Dormans to England. In 1378 he arranged for the shrine of St Ceadda (Chad) to be moved to a new location. His pontificate had occasional dramatic incidents. When he visited Repton Priory in 1364, the townspeople invaded the priory compound, and blockaded the bishop and his household in the buildings. They were released only with assistance. Unsurprisingly Stretton fulminated excommunication and interdict against the perpetrators. From 1376 (if not earlier) he was consistently absent from parliament, possibly because of declining health. In September 1378 he finally established the chantry at Stretton Magna originally envisaged in 1350. (The tradition that he augmented another chantry at Stretton-on-Dunsmore, Staffordshire, is based on a misunderstanding.) He had become totally blind by 7 September 1381, and the prior and convent of Canterbury ('sede vacante') ordered him to appoint a coadjutor for the see. He died at Haywood in Staffordshire, one of his episcopal residences, on 28 March 1385, and was buried in St Andrew's Chapel in Lichfield Cathedral. His relatively uninformative will, with few specific bequests, was drawn up on 19 March and probated on 10 April. What was probably his tomb was described and depicted by later antiquaries, but no longer survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 26663


Strickland, Agnes (1796-1874), historian, was born on 19 August 1796, in north-west Kent, near London, the second eldest of the six surviving daughters and two sons of Thomas Strickland (1758-1818), a shipping agent and dock manager, and his second wife, Elizabeth Homer (1772-1864). Her sisters were 
With her elder sister, Elizabeth, who was born on 17 November 1794, also in north-west Kent, Agnes Strickland was educated by her father; he believed that girls should be educated 'upon the same plan as boys because... it strengthened the female mind' (Pope-Hennessy, 5). He taught them Latin and mathematics, and made them write abstracts of the books they had read; Agnes's reading included Shakespeare, Pope, Thoyras-Rapin's 'History of England', and Plutarch's 'Lives'. The family was brought up in London and East Anglia, but by 1808 Thomas Strickland had made enough money to buy Reydon Hall, an Elizabethan mansion near Southwold in Suffolk. In the summer, the girls hunted for wild flowers in the surrounding countryside, and shells on the local beach; in winter, they took to writing stories. Part of the year was spent in Norwich, where they used the free library and joined the cultivated circle surrounding the Taylor family. 
'Extravagantly fond of poetry' (Pope-Hennessy, 6), Agnes Strickland wrote a good deal of juvenile verse imitative of Walter Scott, while Elizabeth preferred to express herself in historical essays. Agnes's 'Monody' on the death of Princess Charlotte appeared in the 'Norwich Mercury'; rather ominously for her career as a poet, she read her 'Worcester Field, or, The Cavalier', a poem in four cantos, to her father two days before his death. This event obliged the family, now settled entirely at Reydon, to earn livings: five of the girls took to writing children's stories. Agnes Strickland's efforts included 'The Use of Sight' (1824) and 'The Rival Crusoes' (1826). 
The two eldest sisters, despite shared interests, differed in appearance and character. Agnes, with a plump, rosy face and silky black hair, was the more sociable and talkative: one of her sisters later recalled that 'possessed of an excellent temper, great flow of eloquence, and playful repartee, her descriptive powers never seemed to flag' ('Susanna Moodie', 313). By contrast, Elizabeth, slim and pale-faced with aquiline features, was reserved, intensely studious, and independent, 'possessing the governing powers in no ordinary degree' and with a temper 'warm to faultiness' (Strickland, 384). They began to spend some of the year in London attempting to establish careers as professional writers. In the drawing-room of one cousin, who was the wife of the architect Thomas Leverton, they made important literary contacts, meeting the poet Thomas Campbell, Robert Southey, Charles Lamb, and William Jerdan, editor of the 'Literary Gazette'. Most significant among these contacts were women of letters: these included Louisa Costello, Barbara Hofland, and the Porter sisters (who became close friends of the Stricklands). Such women offered encouragement, role models, and potential access to work on the keepsakes and annuals which were a major outlet for minor litterateurs in the early to mid-nineteenth century (Agnes was a contributor to and sometime editor of 'Fisher's Juvenile Scrapbook'). A friendship with the poet Letitia Landon, however, did not advance Agnes's career; the disappointed aspirate printed by subscription 'Worcester Field' (1826) and 'The Seven Ages of Woman' (1827). Despite their lack of originality they served as publicity for future work. An imitation of Byron, her poem 'Demetrius: a Tale of Modern Greece' appeared in 1833: inspired by the struggle of the Greeks against the Turks, it was her last poetical fling. She had now begun to write a historical romance entitled 'The Pilgrims of Walsingham' (1835), a sixteenth-century version of the 'Canterbury Tales' in which a party of pilgrims including Henry VII, Charles V, and Wolsey each narrate a tale as they travel to the shrine. It was a mediocre production, despite favourable reviews, and seems to have convinced Agnes that fiction was not her forte. Meanwhile Elizabeth Strickland had considerably advanced her career: a contact with Lady Morgan had led to employment by the publisher Henry Colburn, founder and financier of several periodicals including the 'New Monthly Magazine' and 'The Athenaeum'. By 1830 she had become editor of the 'Court Journal', which covered court and society news, fashion, cultural events, racing, and other similar events. 
In the early 1830s the Strickland family was largely dispersed: both Strickland brothers were already living abroad, one in Canada, one in the West Indies; in 1832 Catharine Parr Traill and Susanna Moodie emigrated to Canada with their new husbands; the domestically minded Sarah had married Robert Childs, partner in the dissenting publishing firm of that name, while Jane stayed at home with her mother, a labour for which Agnes piously opined she would not 'lose [her] heavenly reward' (Strickland, 300). The two eldest sisters were moving towards a new field of authorship, popular history: they had decided to collaborate on a series of biographies of the queens of England. By the early 1830s Agnes and Elizabeth Strickland were devoting part of the morning to reading historical manuscripts in the British Museum Library, with instruction in palaeography from the staff. Agnes was in contact with antiquaries and scholars, including Harris Nicolas, Cuthbert Sharp, Joseph Hunter, and the French historian and government minister Guizot. Though firmly protestant herself, she also formed links with prominent Catholic families in her endeavour to understand the pre-Reformation world. The 'Lives of the Queens of England' (1840-48) owed much to the Catholic priest John Lingard's 'History of England' (1819-30), one of the few full national histories available in the 1830s, and Henry and Philip Howard of Corby Castle both lent her manuscripts. 
'Facts not opinions' was the motto adopted by the sisters, and their manuscript research was both pioneering and intensive. As the sisters began work on the Tudor queens for the fourth volume, it became necessary to gain access to the state paper office: initially refused permission by the home secretary, Lord John Russell, they finally gained permits from Lord Normanby with the help of Henry Howard and Sir George Strickland; later they obtained permits for the rolls office from Sir Francis Palgrave. While Elizabeth wrote twelve of the pre-1485 biographies and Agnes only seven, an agreement between the two sisters obliged Agnes to conduct all correspondence, both scholarly and business, and her name alone appeared on the title-pages of all their publications. While Elizabeth lived in relative seclusion in Bayswater, Agnes attended the parties, salons, and country houses to which the 'Lives' gained them entree. Agnes, however, did not prove an effective woman of business: when she was ill and the publisher Colburn was pressing for the third volume of the 'Lives', Elizabeth intervened and secured a new and better agreement for $150 per volume. 
Agnes Strickland's enthusiasm for female royalty was not limited to deceased queens. She had earlier persuaded a Catholic friend, Lady Bedingfeld, to approach Queen Adelaide with an almanac of her verses, which was dedicated to the queen. In 1836 she viewed Princess Victoria returning from a drawing-room; in 1837 she somehow obtained an invitation to the coronation. When the queen became engaged in 1840, Colburn commissioned her to write an account of Victoria's life from her birth to her wedding, offering to provide press cuttings and other materials himself. Agnes accepted, and both she and Colburn networked vigorously to obtain a ticket for her to the queen's wedding, which was gained only the evening before the ceremony. Shortly afterwards, the two-volume 'Victoria from Birth to Bridal' appeared. The book presented Victoria in a very favourable light, but the queen herself was critical, disputing many matters of fact with an emphatic 'not true' in the margin. Allegedly, most of the edition, although already on sale, was subsequently pulped; copies of the work are certainly very rare. 
As the sisters prepared the fourth volume of the 'Lives' in 1840, Agnes took advantage of her increasing celebrity to tour country houses in the north and west of England that had links with the Tudor queens. She was accompanied by Elizabeth; their tour started with a visit to Middle Hall in Gloucestershire, the home of the bibliophile Sir Thomas Phillipps, who often helped her in her research. They then proceeded to Sizergh Castle, where Agnes excitedly explored the rooms in which she imagined Katherine Parr to have resided and found documents relating to the exiled court of James II and Mary of Modena, where the Stricklands had featured. They toured the surrounding Lake District, before proceeding to Corby Castle, the home of the Howards. During the succeeding winter Agnes took a break from the 'Lives' to polish up an old story for publication as 'Alda: the British Captive': it was reviewed dismissively in 'The Athenaeum' but the 'Gentleman's Magazine' was more generous. The fifth volume of the 'Lives' -- containing the biographies of Katherine Parr by Agnes and of Mary Tudor by Elizabeth -- attracted more critical attention: there, back to back, were a highly laudatory portrait of the proto-protestant last wife of Henry VIII (by Agnes) and a radical and sympathetic reinterpretation of the Catholic queen Mary Tudor (by Elizabeth). Accused of papistry (by dint of her sole authorial credit), Agnes increased her attendance at church and made greater efforts with Sunday school teaching in Reydon to dispel the rumours. 
From before the publication of the 'Lives', Agnes and Elizabeth Strickland had been translating and collating the letters of Mary, queen of Scots. With the publication of Prince Lobanov's selection of her letters from Russian archives came the impetus to publish their own translations. Agnes's friend Jane Porter was then staying with her brother, Sir Robert Ker Porter, in St Petersburg, and she offered to obtain transcripts of all of the Scottish queen's letters in the imperial library there. Initially issued in a supplementary volume to the first edition of 1842, they subsequently appeared in chronological order in later editions. Agnes Strickland spent most of 1842 and part of 1843 writing the life of Elizabeth I; the first volume of this biography was well received. In summer 1843 Agnes with her widowed sister Sarah Childs undertook a tour of the Lake District; here Sarah met her second husband, a local clergyman, and Agnes explored the historical sights and visited Wordsworth at Rydal Mount. After a few days at Corby Castle, they travelled on to Scotland to visit Edinburgh and the Crauford family at Craufordland Castle. They returned in mid-November to Reydon, where Agnes proof-read the second section of Elizabeth I's life, which was to appear in the same volume with Elizabeth Strickland's life of Anne of Denmark. 
In April 1844 the elder Strickland sisters set off for a visit to France to conduct research into the lives of Henrietta of France and Mary of Modena. The sisters embarked from Southampton for Le Havre, and a boat down the Seine. They stayed at Rouen where they visited the cathedral of Notre-Dame for an evening service and stayed to view the tombs. The vicar of the cathedral, who showed them some fine illuminated manuscripts, took them on to the church of St Ouen. During their stay they also visited the cathedral library and the church of St Maclou. On Easter Saturday they took the train to Paris and attended Easter morning mass at Notre-Dame. On Easter Monday the Strickland sisters travelled to St Germain-en-Laye, to research the Stuarts in exile. After a short illness on Agnes's part, the sisters paid a visit to Guizot, then premier of France, who provided them with a general letter of introduction to the officials in charge of the Paris archives. The sisters at once began work in the well-catalogued Archives du Royaume and the Archives du Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres. A visit to Jules Michelet was more than just pleasure, as he produced documents relating to Queen Henrietta for Elizabeth and three bundles of letters from Mary of Modena for Agnes. The sisters visited the Scots College, where they inspected many Jacobite relics, and the nearby Augustinian convent of English ladies, where the abbess proved to be a fount of Stuart trivia. Agnes Strickland also attended many social events, including the British embassy ball and the salon of Lady Elgin, widow of the collector of the marbles. Both sisters saw the famous actress Rachel act in 'Cinna', as Elizabeth preferred to confine herself to public entertainments and seances -- she had a lifelong though sceptical interest in spiritualism. The sisters visited Dieppe and Eu before sailing back to Southampton after three months abroad. 
Agnes Strickland's increasing celebrity was also reflected in her London life. Staying with the Mackinnon family at 4 Hyde Park Place in summer 1844 (Elizabeth went to Reydon), Agnes spent her evenings attending the social functions of a London season, while working at the British Museum in the mornings and resting in the afternoons. At such events she met the duke of Wellington and the exiled kings of Portugal and Spain; she also made a series of close friendships with aristocratic men and women, friendships of both sentimental and practical value, as many of these new acquaintances opened their country houses, archives, and picture galleries to her. Despite these enjoyments, the eighth volume of the 'Lives' was published in autumn 1844; the ninth volume, containing the first part of Agnes's biography of Mary of Modena, followed in 1845, as too the over-lengthy second instalment of Mary's life in the tenth volume. In this biography the keenly Jacobite Agnes produced the first English account of the life of James II's queen, and she was unable to resist including many details from the original documentation discovered in France. 
In 1846 the flattering portrait of Agnes by John Hayes was exhibited at the Royal Academy, and the 'Lives' was an inspiration for artists of historical genre in the 1840s and 1850s. But other attributes of celebrity were less pleasing: begging letters and plagiarism by other writers afflicted the Stricklands. Agnes exacted a polite apology from Lord Campbell, whom she held to have plagiarized her life of Eleanor of Provence in his 'Lives of the Lord Chancellors' (1845-7). In July 1847 the 'Edinburgh Review' published a lengthy article attacking the Stuart volumes of the 'Lives'. The writer was C. M. S. Phillipps. He berated Agnes rather for her treatment of Stuart kings than Stuart queens, condemning both her tory and monarchist views and her moral judgments as falling short of the 'masculine gravity and impartiality' which the historian ought to exercise. Attacks came too from both evangelicals and Roman Catholics. 
Undeterred by these controversies, Agnes Strickland now suggested a comprehensive series of lives of the Scottish queens, which would allow her to write a biography of her beloved Mary, queen of Scots. Fearing that most of the research in medieval records would fall upon her, now that Agnes's social life was so full, Elizabeth opposed this suggestion. The sisters finally agreed to open the new series with the life of Margaret Tudor, wife of James IV, by Elizabeth. She was also to undertake the biographies of Elizabeth, queen of Bohemia, and Sophia, electress of Hanover, while Agnes was to write the lives of the two wives of James V and her heroine, Mary Stewart. Accordingly, Agnes spent summer 1847 at Chatsworth, Hardwick Hall, and Bolsover Castle, all properties belonging to the helpful duke of Devonshire; in spring 1848 she was busy working in the British Museum and the state paper office. Other projects were also under way: Colburn called for a revised edition of the 'Lives', with illustrations, and Elizabeth undertook most of the work for this. Meanwhile Agnes prepared her magazine poetry for publication under the title 'Historic Scenes and Poetic Fancies' (1850), for which Colburn paid her $100: it also offered her the chance to take Macaulay to task for accusing Mary of Modena of selling prisoners from the Monmouth campaign into slavery in the West Indies. 
While Agnes toured Scotland in 1850 (she visited Edinburgh and the surrounding area every year until 1855), her high-ranking friends assiduously drew her attention to portraits of Mary, queen of Scots, and showed her watches, rosaries, gloves, and other items which had belonged to the Scottish queen. She attended a young friend's wedding, at which she learnt to reel dance, and met Lord Ashley, later Lord Shaftesbury, the philanthropist, with whom she had little in common; nevertheless, she wrote him a set of verses, 'The Factory Child', to be sold on behalf of children in factories. Archibald Alison, the historian and diehard tory politician, was a more congenial acquaintance: he attentively listened to her enthusiastic conversation on her work, reviewed 'The Queens of Scotland' favourably in 'Blackwood's Magazine', and described her with affectionate mockery in his 'Autobiography'. 
In spring 1850 Agnes Strickland opened negotiations with Colburn, with the first volume of 'The Queens of Scotland' prepared for the press. When he refused her terms, she offered the series to William Blackwood, the Edinburgh publisher, who accepted it. Two volumes were published in the same year. Agnes saw them through the press, working meantime in Edinburgh libraries and continuing to visit Scottish friends as she approached 'the crowning labour of my life' (Pope-Hennessy, 213), the biography of Mary, queen of Scots. Later she returned to England, staying with friends and spending Christmas at Reydon, before continuing her work in London in the new year. Here she met Macaulay at a dinner party: the two argued over James II and William III, and Agnes opined that the great historian was 'vulgar, pompous and unprepossessing' (ibid., 223). 
In 1852 Agnes was visited by her brother Samuel, who by this time had been twice widowed and was a farmer and leading citizen of Lakefield, Canada. It was Agnes who persuaded him to write an account of his experiences there, 'Twenty-Seven Years in Canada West' (1853; repr. 1970). While in England, Samuel met Katherine Rackham, who became his third wife in 1855. They returned to Lakefield, where Samuel died on 3 January 1867. 
In 1854 Jane Margaret Strickland, Agnes's devoted sister, had published her school history, 'Rome, Regal and Republican', the proceeds of which allowed her to buy a cottage in Southwold. This was followed in 1856 by 'Adonijah: a Tale of the Jewish Dispersion', the crudely sensationalist story of a Jewish captive who becomes a slave in a Roman family, converts a vestal virgin to Judaism, and finally becomes a Christian: it reflects her broad knowledge of ancient history and her ability to spin a thumping good (if unlikely) yarn. In the same year Elizabeth Strickland was obliged to move out of her Bayswater cottage; she purchased a small villa, Abbot's Lodge, at Tilford, near Farnham, Surrey, where she lived for the rest of her life. Agnes sometimes stayed there but Elizabeth's hot temper could cloud a visit. On one occasion Agnes wrote home that she was 'not in health for her hurricanes' (Pope-Hennessy, 241-2) and had been obliged to leave after a quarrel on the third day of her stay. Other events in Agnes's life at the time included a protest against an incorrect tax assessment for 1856-7 (she regarded herself as something of a national benefactor, and was therefore liable to regard any tax demand as iniquitous), and a refusal to support a petition against the 'Married Women's Property Act': Agnes piously viewed these grievances as 'part and parcel of the penalties entailed by Eve's transgression' (Pope-Hennessy, 243). Other events of the late 1850s included a budding friendship with the recently widowed duchess of Somerset and involvement in the British Association. 
From 1858 to 1860 Agnes Strickland spent much time cultivating her social circle. In 1858 she toured the west of England, before visiting Wales and paying a flying visit to Scotland. Winter was spent writing at Reydon. An Ipswich publisher suggested a volume on the three bachelor kings of England (William Rufus, Edward V, Edward VI); the subject appealed to the two lifelong spinsters. Elizabeth offered to deal with Edward V and to see to the illustrations. In spring 1859 Agnes returned to London; later in the year she stayed with the Howards at Corby and the Broughams at Brougham. After staying with her sister at Ulverston, she moved to Aberdeen to attend a meeting of the British Association. In 1860 she again spent the season in London, before staying at Stanford Hall, Rugby, and Althorp, where she delighted in the magnificent library and collection of portraits. On a visit to the Northamptonshire county lunatic asylum, she met the pastoral poet John Clare, an inmate there. While at Althorp, she also met a more congenial man of letters, Whyte Melville, with whom she shared a passion for Mary Stewart. 
In 1861 'The Bachelor Kings of England' was published, to lukewarm reviews. Agnes sent a presentation copy to the prince of Wales, then at the Curragh in Ireland; in return, she received an invitation to the mayor of Dublin's ball in honour of the heir to the throne. Despite being sixty-five, Agnes attended the ball, and afterwards dined at the vice-regal lodge and visited several Irish country houses. After the London season of 1862 she again went on a round of country house visits, including Sudeley Castle and Rousham; from the latter, she was able to make trips to the Bodleian Library to carry out research for her new book on the senior clerics who refused to swear allegiance to William and Mary, 'The Lives of the Seven Bishops' (1866). Handing over two of the bishops to Elizabeth, she wrote the remaining five herself, warming in particular to William Sancroft, a Suffolk man, and Thomas Ken. She also worked on a school abridgement of the 'Lives'. 
After Mrs Strickland's death in 1864, at ninety-two, the sisters were obliged to sell Reydon. In March 1865 Agnes took up residence in Park Lane Cottage, Southwold, which she leased from Jane; Jane herself was to live in a smaller annexe. In 1864 Agnes published 'Alethea Woodville', a novel written some thirty years before under the more intriguing title 'How Will it End?' In June 1865 she visited Oxford for the commemoration, where the undergraduates greeted her with cheers of 'the queens!' Agnes and Elizabeth visited the Tower of London together that summer before Agnes returned to Southwold to spend time in the company of her Suffolk friends, Sir John and Lady Blois. Agnes was unwell in 1866, but soon recovered when back in the midst of London social life. She attended a drawing-room before visiting the Dillons at Dytchley. 
Agnes Strickland spent most of 1867 at work in the British Museum on a new book, although she did tour Wales, staying with (among others) Lady Llanover. The two sisters were planning 'The Tudor Princesses' (1868): the idea was Elizabeth's, and it was she who undertook Mary Tudor, and Lady Jane Grey and her sisters. Agnes wrote the lives of Lady Eleanor Brandon and Lady Margaret Clifford -- neither of whom interested her much -- and Lady Arabella Stuart. Elizabeth's references to the Archives de France show that the book had long been brewing in her mind: Mary Tudor's Suffolk connections clearly appealed to her. In 1869 Agnes -- who, unlike Elizabeth, was more attached to the Stuarts than to the Tudors -- undertook a historical work by herself, a study of the three daughters of Charles I and the youngest daughter of James II. The Dutch connections of the dynasty presented problems: with introductions and information provided by Archbishop Tait and the Lambeth Palace librarian, Wayland Kershaw, she resolved to visit the Netherlands and examine the libraries of The Hague. Despite initial apprehensions at undertaking a trip abroad alone at seventy-three, she enjoyed the visit: she saw the sights, was presented to the queen of Holland, and was given much assistance by the royal librarian, Mr Campbell. After a brief tour of the Rhine she returned to England and Southwold to complete the work; Jane helped revise the proofs, but Elizabeth refused even this assistance. At seventy-five she preferred the quiet of her Tilford home, where she entertained supporters of Kossuth and attended the occasional seance. 'The Stuart Princesses' (1872) was completed in March 1870; Agnes then settled down to the task of compressing her life of Mary, queen of Scots, into two volumes, which were published by Bell and Daldy in 1872. 
After 1870 Agnes Strickland began to spend more time at home at Southwold: she took an interest in local affairs, writing a life of St Edmund, to whom the local church was dedicated, to raise money for charitable purposes. In this year she also received a civil-list pension of $100 in recognition of her services to literature. In 1871 she attended the Scott commemoration festival in Edinburgh and then stayed with her sister Sarah at Ulverston. While staying at Crouch End in 1872, she fell downstairs and broke her right leg in several places; later she had a stroke. She recovered temporarily, but died in Park Lane Cottage, Southwold, on 13 July 1874; she was buried in the churchyard of St Edmund, Southwold. Elizabeth Strickland died on 30 April 1875 at Abbot's Lodge, Tilford, and was buried in the churchyard at Tilford. Jane wrote a biography of Agnes, published in 1887; she died at Park Lane Cottage on 14 June of the following year and was buried beside the sister to whom she was so devoted. A lifelong spinster, Jane seems to have been a rather lonely figure: in the late 1860s her sister Catharine Parr Traill wrote of her that 'with talents of no mean order, beauty of person, and religious principles', she had 'never obtained the real tender love of any human being' ('Selected Correspondence', 174). Less charitably, Susanna Moodie opined that 'in most families there is one, that always is a trial and who gets their own way by merely insisting upon it' ('Susanna Moodie', 286). 
During her lifetime Agnes Strickland enjoyed considerable celebrity as the historian of the queens and cultivated a circle of aristocratic and literary friends, while her sister Elizabeth chose to remain outside the limelight. The 'Lives of the Queens of England' and -- to a lesser extent -- the 'Lives of the Queens of Scotland' were among the most popular of all Victorian historical publications, and remain important landmarks in the development of the biographical genre. By the beginning of the twentieth century the reputation of Agnes Strickland was much eclipsed, although those who produce biographies of the queens of England -- from the writers of articles for the 'Dictionary of National Biography' to scholars reinterpreting the careers of figures such as Anne Boleyn and Eleanor of Aquitaine in the 1990s -- have found themselves obliged to turn to the Stricklands' seminal accounts. Most major public libraries continue to carry an edition of the 'Lives', among other encyclopaedic works, and the later twentieth century saw a revival of academic interest in the elder Strickland sisters as female historians and historians of women. They were undoubtedly key figures in the development of writing on women's history, playing a role in creating a tradition of female worthies which can be seen as the first step towards fuller scholarly investigation. While a range of contemporary women writers -- including Anna Jameson, Lucy Aikin, Louisa Costello, Hannah Lawrance, Mrs Matthew Hall, and Emily Holt -- were writing the biographies of royal and aristocratic women and court histories, the Stricklands were undoubtedly the most prominent and influential figures in their field of study. Womanist rather than feminist, they interpreted their subjects through the medium of Victorian domestic ideology: the queens are valued as much for their domestic and private virtues as for their public characters, and were intended as exemplars for a predominantly female readership. But this did not prevent challenging reinterpretations -- such as Elizabeth's treatment of Mary I and Agnes's of Mary, queen of Scots -- or the underlying suggestion of dissatisfaction with 'masculine' approaches to history which ignored social, cultural, and domestic issues. 
In their interest in this more 'picturesque' approach to the past -- one which challenged the philosophical tradition of the eighteenth century -- the Stricklands were by no means at odds with their age, which saw the rise of the historical novel under the authorship of Walter Scott. However, unlike some of their rivals they were also influenced by the antiquarian tendency of picturesque history writing: they wrote queenly lives based on full and original documentation, pursuing research in archives in both Britain and France. It was in Mary Anne Everett Green, the author of 'The Lives of the Princesses of England' and a historian equally devoted to record research, that they were to find their most satisfactory disciple. Her employment in the Public Record Office -- an acceptance as a professional historian -- makes her a bridge between the Stricklands and the next generation of women historians -- which included Kate Norgate, Lucy Toulmin Smith, and Alice Stopford Green -- who were themselves precursors of the women social and economic historians in the early twentieth century such as Alice Clark and Eileen Power. 


@@@@@


doc= 26664


Strickland, Hugh Edwin (1811-1853), natural historian and geologist, was born on 2 March 1811 at Reighton in the East Riding of Yorkshire, the second son of Henry Eustatius Strickland (1777-1865) and his wife, Mary, daughter of the inventor Edmund Cartwright. He was the grandson of Sir George Strickland, baronet, of Boynton, Yorkshire. At the time of his birth his father held a large farm in the neighbourhood of Reighton, but the family later moved south, to the Cotswold region. Strickland was educated at home until 1827, when he was sent to Thomas Arnold's school at Laleham, south-west of London. There he was so advanced in mathematics that a special tutor was engaged for him. He matriculated at Oriel College, Oxford, in the spring of 1828, and began his studies early in 1829, taking a third-class degree in classics in 1832. 
While an undergraduate, Strickland attended William Buckland's lectures on geology and John Kidd's lectures on anatomy. He also developed his skills as a naturalist, scrutinizing the geological features of the Vale of Evesham, where his family then lived, and of the Isle of Wight and the region around Paris, which he visited during university vacations. After he left Oxford, natural history became his main pursuit. He began to publish articles in the general areas that would continue to preoccupy him throughout his career: geological description, ornithology, and problems of classification and nomenclature. 
Strickland was encouraged in his geological work, and introduced into the national network of elite amateur naturalists, by Sir Roderick Murchison, with whom he became friendly at this period. Freed by his family's wealth from financial concerns, he expanded his practical experience of the natural world through travel. In 1835-6 he accompanied William John Hamilton on a tour through southern Europe to Asia Minor. Back in Britain, he continued his researches both at home and on a summer journey through Scotland and Orkney in 1837. He travelled with his father, who shared his scientific and intellectual interests. 
As Strickland was emerging as an active and prolific contributor to the community of naturalists, he made his first serious attempt to marry. But when, in 1839, he asked Sir Thomas Phillipps for permission to court his daughter, he was first asked to pay Sir Thomas's debts, as well as a large amount of cash. His father's more conventional offer of a marriage settlement of $40,000 was rejected with anger and threats. It took the family and their solicitor half a year to extricate themselves. In the end, Strickland found his wife, as most of his other satisfactions, through natural history. He met Sir William Jardine, bt, at the British Association for the Advancement of Science meeting at Glasgow in 1840, having previously corresponded with him on ornithological topics. On 23 July 1845 he married Jardine's second daughter, Catherine Dorcas Maule, and they set out on a wedding tour to Sweden, stopping on the way to visit museums and scientists in the Netherlands and Germany. 
The stream of articles that began in the mid-1830s continued into the 1840s. It consisted mostly of solid work in ornithology and geology: descriptions of formations or species. Strickland's most substantial work of this type was a monographic study of 'The Dodo and its Kindred', published in 1848, in which he provided the history and external description, while his co-author, A. G. Melville, analysed the anatomy. In addition, he revised and expanded the Ray Society's edition of Louis Agassiz's 'Bibliographia zoologiae et geologiae', in four volumes (1848-54). At the time of his death he was working on 'Ornithological Synonyms', a compendium of scientific names for bird species. The first volume, on the Accipitres, was posthumously published in 1855, under the editorship of his widow and her father. 
Strickland was a member of a committee appointed at the British Association meeting at Plymouth in 1841 to draft rules that would govern zoological nomenclature. He was largely responsible for its report, which, after a little acrimonious discussion, was adopted at the British Association meeting at Manchester in 1842. The proposed rules were widely praised, but had little immediate effect, either at home or abroad. 
During the 1840s Strickland kept up his scientific ties with Oxford, and in 1850 he became deputy reader in geology at the university, filling the gap left by Buckland's deteriorating mental condition. He offered three courses of twelve to fifteen lectures: one in 1850, one in 1851, and one in 1853. His classes were small, but he took his responsibilities seriously, leading his students on field trips. In 1852 he published a pamphlet entitled 'On Geology in Relation to the Studies of the University of Oxford', a contribution to the then ongoing debate over the role of natural science in the university curriculum. Apparently conceding that physical science was ultimately inferior to moral science, he felt that it nevertheless merited a prominent place in the university curriculum, because of its religious, material, and cultural benefits to students. His educational commitments also extended beyond the scholarly community. He was active in the Natural History Society of Worcester and the Tewkesbury Mechanics' Institute, and he helped to found the Cotteswold Naturalists' Field Club. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1852. 
Strickland's death made him a martyr both to science and to progress, and attracted more attention than any of his quieter accomplishments. He had often examined the geological strata exposed by railway cuttings. On 14 September 1853, after that year's meeting of the British Association at Hull, he went to inspect a new section on the Manchester, Sheffield, and Lincolnshire Railway at Clarborough, near Retford. Because he had not waited to get a pass from the stationmaster, no one knew that he was on the line. He was working on a rock face near a sharp curve, and when he stepped backwards to avoid a coal train, he was instantly killed by a passenger train coming in the other direction. His death was widely reported and much lamented. He was buried at the priory church of St Mary, Deerhurst, Gloucestershire. His widow donated his osteological collection to the Hastings Museum at Worcester, but finding a satisfactory home for his most important collection, the approximately six thousand bird skins that he had accumulated, posed a problem. They were initially given to Oxford, to be stored safely until the new University Museum was completed. But when Mrs Strickland viewed the collection on display in 1861, she was extremely displeased, and after protracted negotiations, the collection was redonated to the University of Cambridge in 1867. 


@@@@@


doc= 26665


Jane Margaret Strickland (1800-1888), born on 18 April 1800, also in north-west Kent, Catharine Parr Traill (1802-1899); and Susanna Moodie (1803-1885). All her female siblings except Sarah Strickland became authors, as did too her brother 


@@@@@


doc= 26666


Strickland, Sir Roger (bap. 1640, d. 1717), naval officer and Jacobite sympathizer, was baptized on 2 February 1640 at Kendal, the second son of Walter Strickland (died 1670x77) of Nateby Hall, Garstang, Lancashire, and his wife, Anne Croft (died 1665x80). Walter Strickland was a member of a junior line of the Stricklands of Sizergh Castle, Westmorland, and fought for the king in the civil wars, compounding for delinquency in 1652. Roger entered the navy after the Restoration, becoming lieutenant of the 'Sapphire' on 27 November 1661 and serving aboard her until the following July. He was then successively lieutenant of the 'Crown' and the 'Providence' prior to the outbreak of the Second Anglo-Dutch War, serving in the same post aboard the 'Rainbow' from April to September 1665. He fought in her in the admiral's division of the White squadron (commanded by Prince Rupert) at the battle of Lowestoft on 3 June 1665. Strickland was lieutenant of the hired ship 'Hamburg Merchant' late in 1665 before gaining his first command, the former Spanish prize 'Santa Maria', on 16 March 1666. Although his ship missed the Four Days' Battle in June, Strickland commanded her at the St James's day fight on 25 July, forming part of the Blue squadron, and remained aboard her until 5 December. He held no command in 1667, but commanded the 'Success' in 1668-9, the 'Kent' in 1670-71, and the 'Antelope' briefly in January and February 1672. He took command of the 'Plymouth', of 58 guns, on 11 March 1672. At the battle of Sole Bay on 28 May, Strickland's ship formed part of the rear-admiral of the blue's division, and gained distinction by retaking the second-rate 'Henry', which had been captured by the Dutch; because of the death in the battle of the 'Henry''s captain, Francis Digby, Strickland was moved into her on 8 June. Later in the year Strickland was knighted for his gallantry at Sole Bay. He took command of the 'Mary' on 19 September 1672 and continued in her until March 1674. He fought in all three battles of the 1673 campaign, being singled out by Rupert for his conduct at the first battle of Schooneveld (28 May) and the Texel (11 August). Following the end of the war, he went to the Mediterranean to join the campaigns under Sir John Narbrough against the north African corsairs, commanding successively the 'Dragon' (September 1674 to November 1677), the 'Centurion' (November to December 1677), the 'Mary' again (December 1677 to January 1679), and the 'Bristol' (January to September 1679). Strickland took part in a number of actions against the corsairs, notably the capture of a 40-gun Algerine vessel on 1 April 1678. He was appointed rear-admiral of the Mediterranean Fleet on 19 February 1678, but after his return to England in 1679 he retired from the service -- albeit reluctantly, as he regularly but unsuccessfully solicited for plum commands during the years 1680-84. 
Strickland bought an estate at Thornton Bridge, Yorkshire, from his cousin Sir Thomas Strickland MP in 1680, and in the following year inherited an estate at Catterick from his aunt Mary, widow of Richard Brathwaite. In 1681 he was also appointed deputy governor of Southsea Castle, thereby continuing his parallel career in the army which had begun when he became a captain in Prince Rupert's regiment in 1672, subsequently joining Lord Widdrington's regiment in 1673. In 1682 Strickland took over Sir Thomas's farm of the salt duties, and in 1684 leased the estates of a number of Lancashire recusants. This action was at best ironic, at worst distinctly suspicious, as Strickland's own religious beliefs had already been called into question during the Popish Plot, and many of his close relations remained openly Catholic. His brother was a member of the household of James, duke of York, becoming vice-chamberlain to Queen Mary of Modena when James became king, and James himself had been active in promoting Strickland's interests during the early 1680s. Within four days of his accession, James recalled Sir Roger to the navy, giving him command of the 'Bristol' to convey the new ambassador to Constantinople -- duty which precluded his active attendance in parliament, to which he was elected as MP for Aldborough in March 1685. Although Strickland's career was also being promoted at this time by his friend George Legge, Lord Dartmouth, it owed little to one of Dartmouth's other close associates, the Admiralty secretary Samuel Pepys, who clashed often and bitterly with Strickland during 1685-6, most notably over the latter's insistence on flying a special flag of distinction at all times and on other points of precedence, which Sir Roger always guarded jealously. Strickland's public conversion to Catholicism in the winter of 1686-7 greatly strengthened his position: he became vice-admiral of the fleet going to the Mediterranean in July 1687, rising to the prestigious post of rear-admiral of England on 30 December. He used his new position to advance the careers of his co-religionists in the navy, and in the summer of 1688 was appointed to command the fleet guarding against Dutch naval preparations. His tactless introduction of Catholic priests onto the ships inspired a mutiny which James II had to quell in person, and when the fleet was expanded in September, Strickland was effectively demoted to rear-admiral, albeit under his friend Dartmouth. The fleet's failure to prevent William of Orange's invasion effectively ended Strickland's career. He resigned his commission on 13 December 1688, writing shortly afterwards that 'his heart and eyes are... full of grief and tears' ('Dartmouth MSS', 1.238). Strickland soon followed James to France, serving in the Irish campaign of 1689 and aboard the French fleet in 1690; his name was included in a bill of attainder in 1689, but was struck out through lack of evidence, although his estates were subsequently confiscated in any case. He lived in exile at St Germain, where he died on 8 August 1717, having never married. He was buried in St Germain church the following day. The sequestration of his estates almost thirty years before, and the disputed legality of that action, led to prolonged litigation between and among his heirs and those who claimed various reversions on his lands. 


@@@@@


doc= 26667


Samuel Strickland (1805-1867). The Stricklands were descended from Yorkshire farmers, but a more romantic family tradition connected them to the Stricklands of Sizergh Castle. 


@@@@@


doc= 26668


Strickland, Thomas John Francis (c.1682-1740), Roman Catholic bishop of Namur and diplomatist, was the fourth son of Sir Thomas Strickland (1621-1694) of Sizergh, Westmorland, and his wife, Winifred Strickland, nee Trentham (1645-1725). He spent his early years at the family seat of Sizergh Castle, where he was educated by Thomas Shepherd, who served as his personal tutor. However, following the collapse of King James II's regime his parents fled to France, and it was not until April 1689 that the necessary passes were obtained that enabled him to follow them into exile. On 18 April 1689 Strickland was stopped by the authorities at Dover, together with another of his siblings and his tutor, on the suspicion of Jacobitism. Fortunately, they were allowed to take ship after producing their letters of safe conduct and arrived at the court of St Germain without further incident or mishap. 
After being raised in the household of the fallen Stuarts, Strickland was admitted into St Gregory's College, Paris, at his own expense, on 9 January 1703 to study for the priesthood. Thereafter, his educational career would seem to have been both lengthy and chequered. He appears to have studied at St Sulpice in Paris from April 1704 onwards before returning to St Gregory's in October 1711. He took the degree of doctor of divinity at the Sorbonne in 1712, and left St Gregory's following his ordination as a priest on 2 April 1712. He tended a side chapel in the church of St Sulpice for some months before returning to England -- and Sizergh -- in 1713. It is probable that he used his time to travel through the northern counties, taking soundings -- and gathering intelligence -- from the leading recusant families, and his resulting notes formed the basis of his 'Memoir on the State of the English Mission'. This work, written in French in 1714, was submitted by him to the papal internuncio in Flanders, and was subsequently forwarded to the office of the propaganda in Rome. 
Having thus come to the notice of the hierarchy of the church, Strickland was noted as being 'ardently ambitious of the episcopal dignity for himself' (Brady, 3.154), and in 1716 he lobbied hard for his own appointment as co-adjutor to Bishop Bonaventure Giffard of the London district, who was then seventy-four years of age. In this he was supported by John Talbot Stonor, a friend from St Gregory's who had become bishop of Thespiae and vicar apostolic of the midland district that year. It is clear that Strickland had already broken, decisively, with the Jacobite movement that had nurtured him, and it would seem highly likely that it was primarily political considerations that motivated the storm of criticism and complaint that greeted his candidature for the post. Bishop Giffard provided evidence of his own continuing health and competency, while his ally Bishop George Witham appealed to Rome against: 'Strickland... [who] was possessed of less capacity than any of the persons who had been... proposed for the office of Vicar Apostolic in England, especially as he was very young and had but recently been introduced into England' (Hornyold, 151). Stonor himself said that he thought Strickland vain and lacking in judgement, and that he could 'neither keep his own counsel nor anybody's else' (Duffy, 351). In the face of such strong feeling and bitter censure Strickland's candidature collapsed. 
Strickland had, however, gained a powerful patron in the form of Thomas Howard, eighth duke of Norfolk. Norfolk began negotiations with the papacy in 1716 in order to obtain the pope's support for an oath that would allow English Catholics to swear allegiance to George I, and thereby prepare the ground for the removal of some at least of their civil disabilities. Strickland put pressure on the papal nuncio at Brussels, and succeeded in obtaining a preliminary agreement by which English Catholics would be able to swear allegiance to George I, provided the oath made no mention of the papal dispensing and disposing powers. Strickland also visited Hanover, where he gained the support of George I for the proposed oath. Norfolk sent Strickland on a mission to Rome, where he arrived by Easter 1717, in order to secure papal approval for the scheme. Strickland proved himself to be an intelligent, highly articulate, and socially adept envoy. He won verbal agreement for the desired change in church policy, but his actions also brought him the undying enmity of the Jacobites. Unfortunately, even though the church authorities had committed themselves verbally to the agreement, Strickland's appeals that the decision should be set down in writing and published as a decree were rejected by the church, which did not want to alienate the Jacobites. Consequently, on his arrival in Flanders to inform the nuncio of the pontiff's tacit recognition of the protestant succession, he found his credibility substantially weakened. 
Strickland's efforts were still supported by Norfolk, Stonor, and other leading English Catholics, and in spring 1718 he travelled to Paris. There, he contacted John Dalrymple, second earl of Stair, British minister to France, and presented a short memorial to him outlining the plight of English Catholics and arguing that, in return for toleration, they might be persuaded formally to renounce their support for the beleaguered Jacobite cause and be usefully employed within the British governmental structure. Such an offer proved extremely attractive, and Lord Stair was quick to recommend Strickland as 'a sensible, good-natured man, who seems concerned for the good and quiet of his country and for the good of the Roman Catholics themselves' (Hornyold, 152). 
In order to drive a wedge more firmly between English Catholics and the exiled Jacobites, Strickland returned to England in July 1718 and composed and published an anonymous pamphlet purporting to be 'A letter from a gentleman at R'[ome]' dated September 15, 1718, to a friend at L'[ondon]''. In it he presented an unflattering portrait of James Francis Edward, the Pretender, as a religious bigot and as the unwitting pawn of the 'perfectly Despotic' John Erskine, twenty-third or sixth earl of Mar. The pair were shown presiding over their tattered and threadbare court at Urbino, unable to pay the wages of their followers and ridiculing the attempts of the English Jacobites to win back the throne for them. Only Scotsmen, 'my Lord M[ar]'s Kindred and Creatures', were to be valued, and the first effect of a new restoration was confidently predicted to be the 'Inundation of S[cots] without Merit [into England], greedy of Money... fancying that all our Treasure will be little enough to reward them' (Strickland, 5-6). Following the pamphlet's appearance Strickland received death threats and had his appointment as the vicar-general of Meaux blocked at the behest of Mary of Modena, the Pretender's mother. General Arthur Dillon considered Strickland, as the author of the 'scurrilous, malicious English epistle, which is handed about here... capable of everything base and unworthy' (Hornyold, 153), while the earl of Mar -- predictably -- branded his critic as 'a little, conceited, empty, meddling prig' ('Stuart Papers', 7.493). For his part, the Pretender could only pity Dr Strickland's 'poor mother' (ibid., 7.544-5), who still continued in her devotion to his flagging cause. 
Strickland returned to Paris by September 1718. The British government was keen to protect its ally, and to see that he was properly rewarded for his services and promoted to high office within the Catholic church. Consequently, vigorous appeals were made to Philippe, duke of Orleans, the regent of France, in order to settle a suitable benefice upon Strickland. The vacant abbey of St Pierre de Preaux in Normandy -- which carried with it a stipend of between 12,000 and 15,000 livres -- was granted to him on 25 August 1718. 
Having been presented to the regent, and thanked him for the gift of the abbey, Strickland travelled to Vienna in January 1719 with a formal diplomatic commission from George I. He was to engineer an alliance between the pope and the emperor, and destroy the influence of Jacobite agents at the imperial court. The emperor would then persuade the pope to give final approval to the proposed oath of allegiance. On 8 February 1719 he was confidently writing to secretary of state James Craggs of his great success with Charles VI. He left Vienna in March, and in June judged it safe to return to England. He took lodgings in London, and formulated a series of proposals -- with the approval of Craggs and the British government -- which aimed to secure Catholic toleration in return for the acknowledgement of the protestant succession, the severing of all communications with the Pretender, and the removal of the office and title of protector of England from the pro-Jacobite Cardinal Gualterio, at the court of Rome. However, resistance to his plans was strong among many leading English Catholics, who found Strickland self-serving and arrogant. Strickland advised Craggs to arrest Bishop Giffard, Gilbert Talbot, thirteenth earl of Shrewsbury (a Jesuit), and other Catholics in order to leave the way clear for negotiations with more moderate and amenable figures. Some arrests were made, and Strickland met Norfolk on 7 July, but an impasse had been reached over the refusal of the government to allow Catholics to take the oath of allegiance alongside an oath to uphold the authority of the pope. In addition, the ministry of which Strickland had become an agent was perceived as weak. It was opposed in the Commons by Robert Walpole, widely expected to return to power, who employed strongly anti-Catholic rhetoric and who could not be expected to maintain any agreement made on the Catholic question. Strickland's reliance on the authority of the emperor also unsettled English Catholics, as it seemed to confirm protestant allegations that they were subjects of a foreign prince. The negotiations broke up without the issue of Jacobitism ever having been adequately addressed by Norfolk, and Strickland's proposals were comprehensively rejected by his co-religionists. Saddened and gravely dismayed, Strickland left England. The British government continued to regard him as the English Catholics' principal negotiator, but further efforts to revive the allegiance proposals proved fruitless. The return of Walpole to power in 1721 and the revelation of the Jacobite plot of Francis Atterbury, bishop of Rochester, ended hopes that the English Catholics would be able to reach an accommodation with the British government. 
Strickland had by then settled at the court of the exiled king of Poland, StanisLaw Leszczynski, at Bar, in Lorraine. He was later to claim that he had obtained a cardinal's hat from StanisLaw, but had chosen to resign it upon a point of conscience. More probably, StanisLaw had nominated Strickland as a cardinal after coming under sustained pressure from the British government, and Strickland had then sold the nomination to the emperor for a lump sum and the promise of his support in securing the bishopric of Namur. With the full backing of Charles VI, Strickland was proposed as the new bishop of Namur in 1725, and was finally consecrated by the archbishop of Malines (Mechelen) on Sunday 28 February 1728. He made his entry into his cathedral at Namur on the eve of Pentecost, and celebrated his first pontifical mass the next day, 16 May 1728. 
Strickland's taste for diplomatic intrigue had not deserted him. He visited Rome and Vienna in 1733 in an attempt to gather intelligence on the Jacobite exiles domiciled there. His desire to become a cardinal looked like finally being realized as the British government championed his appointment with the Austrians and as he won the trust and friendship of the empress. However, in deciding to carry the prospect of a military alliance between Britain and the imperial court back to Whitehall, at the behest of Charles VI, he at last overreached himself. He returned to London in autumn 1734 disguised as a Mr Mosley, where he attempted to promote the alliance and urged a declaration of war with France. He impressed both George II and Queen Caroline during a private interview, and attempted to form a war party about William Stanhope, Baron Harrington, which might have been capable of replacing Sir Robert Walpole's ministry. However, Walpole's spies had 'dogged and traced him to every place he had frequented from his first coming to England, [and] soon found what he drove at' (Hervey, 2.395). Consequently Walpole was able to destroy utterly Strickland's credit with the king and queen by pointing out that the bishop -- 'though now near three-score' -- had been repeatedly observed going out 'late at night on foot, and wrapped up in a red rug riding coat' (ibid.) to an infamous local brothel. At the same time Walpole posted dispatches to the emperor alleging that Strickland was in correspondence with his domestic and foreign foes, while Harrington suddenly withdrew from his advocacy of the bishop's embassy, swayed by information from one of his own clients that Strickland not only aimed to have a cardinal's hat but also aimed: '[as] his principle ambition... to slip himself, by one means or other, into some share of the ministry' (Coxe, 3.177). With his reputation as a diplomat effectively destroyed, Strickland was firmly but 'civilly dismissed' (ibid., 2.444) and returned to France. 
Ensconced at his see of Namur, Strickland proved to be -- even by the admission of his enemies -- a popular, diligent, and wholly competent administrator. He enlarged the cathedral, endowed a seminary, and built a large episcopal palace. However, having distinguished himself as an enthusiastic patron of artists, musicians, and sculptors, he suddenly fell ill towards the end of 1739 and retired to Louvain in a forlorn attempt to regain his failing health. He died at Louvain quickly and peacefully on 14 January 1740 NS, and his body was brought back to lie in state at the episcopal palace at Namur. He was buried in the vaults of his own cathedral on the evening of 16 January 1740, but no stone or inscription was ever raised to honour and perpetuate his memory. 
Reviled as an 'inveterate wire-puller' (Scott, 191), Strickland was said to have been possessed of 'an artful and intriguing... manner' (Hervey, 1.392) and to have 'passed his whole life in gluttony, drunkenness, and the most infamous debauchery' (Coxe, 1.443). Yet he won a reputation for fairness and financial probity while at Namur, and genuinely sought to improve the political condition of the English Catholics by dissociating them from Jacobitism in return for a guarantee of civil and legal rights from the Hanoverian British government. 


@@@@@


doc= 26669


Strickland, Walter, appointed Lord Strickland under the protectorate (1598?-1671), politician and diplomatist, was the second son of Walter Strickland (died 1636) of Boynton, Yorkshire, and Frances (died 1636), daughter of Peter Wentworth of Lillingstone Lovel, Oxfordshire, and niece of Sir Francis Walsingham. Sir William Strickland was his elder brother. Walter Strickland was admitted to Gray's Inn on 10 August 1618, and matriculated at Queens' College, Cambridge, at Easter 1619. He married Anne Morgan (died 1688), daughter of Sir Charles Morgan (died 1595), governor of Bergen-op-Zoom, and widow of Sir Lewis Morgan. Until 1642 merely a Yorkshire JP, his selection as parliamentary ambassador to the United Provinces that October appears to have been primarily due to his wife's Dutch connections. Resident at The Hague on a salary of $400 p.a., he initially protested at Henrietta Maria's attempt to raise funds there and thereafter sought to counter the influence of her Orange relatives on Dutch attitudes to parliament, and reported on royalists hiring Dutch ships. He received a $500 gift from parliament for his efforts in July 1645, and was recruited to the Long Parliament to fill a vacancy at Minehead. 
The king's execution made the Commonwealth a pariah, but the states of Holland commenced commercial negotiations and parliament sent Isaac Dorislaus to assist Strickland. Dorislaus's assassination by royalists on 2 May 1649 emphasized the danger Strickland was in, but he stayed on, though royalist revival in Scotland caused the states general of the United Provinces to delay receiving him. He persuaded the states of Holland to protest at this delay, regarding their goodwill as 'a foundation to cut off for ever the hopes of [England's] greatest enemies'. Even so, he had to act on the council of state's resolution of 21 June 1650 to recall him on account of his having been snubbed while assuring Holland of parliament's continuing goodwill. He reported to parliament on 7 August, receiving their thanks. Hopes of the Dutch revived after William II provoked a confrontation with Holland and then suddenly died in October. To exploit this, parliament sent Strickland back on 23 January with a new colleague, Oliver St John, to press for the closest possible alliance with the resurgent republicans. Harassed by the royalists, their attempt to focus the talks on royalist rebels' activities in the United Provinces met with vague replies. The Dutch would expel only active rebels, and proposed that English shipping be allowed to trade in Dutch areas of the West Indies and America, the fleets to act against pirates, and each to have free access to the other's harbours. The preponderance of the Dutch mercantile marine gave them the advantage, and they rejected attempts to impound Princess Mary's property to reimburse victims of Dutch licensed royalist pirates. Amid continuing deadlock the English left on 18 June; both sides were inflexible but it may be that St John favoured breakdown from the start, in association with those MPs who prompted retaliation to the failed negotiations with the 'Navigation Acts'. 
Strickland had been a commissioner for the assessment in Yorkshire since 1649, and in 1652 he took up the same post in his wife's home county, Glamorgan. A member of the council of state since 13 February 1651, he was now eclipsed by the warmongers in Dutch policy but represented the council's opinion on scandalous ministers to parliament in July. His wife, calling herself Lady Morgan, made an independent visit to Holland in June 1652, no doubt to promote English interests with her relatives. Strickland acquired the manor of Flamborough, Yorkshire, under sequestration from Sir Henry Griffith, in 1650 for $4800, $2000 of it from his wife. In January 1652 he asked parliament to confirm that he could acquire full title by paying off $500 outstanding on the mortgage, which the committee for advance of money arranged. 
Milton considered Strickland a close ally of Cromwell in 1652, and he was one of those he consulted after the expulsion of the Rump in 1653. He continued on councils of state and acquired Whitehall lodgings, and the army selected him to sit for Yorkshire in the Barebones Parliament. As an experienced diplomat he joined their committee for foreign affairs and was one of the council's negotiators with the Dutch over the ending of the First Anglo-Dutch War (1652-4). Cromwell, handling negotiations, insisted on considering federation despite Dutch opposition. Where Strickland believed in alliance with the Dutch republicans against the house of Orange, Cromwell unnecessarily insisted that the latter be formally excluded from power and thus delayed the settlement. Meanwhile Strickland represented the council case against John Lilburne to parliament, and signed the assembly's renunciation of its powers on 12 December 1653 with other moderates. 
The second oldest, but a very active, member of Cromwell's council, Strickland sat in the protectorate parliaments for the East Riding in 1654 and Newark in 1656, and handled some Yorkshire business for the council, as when judges questioned the legality of Cromwell's treason laws during royalists' trials in 1655. In foreign affairs he supported alliance with France, being appointed to negotiate with its ambassadors in April 1654. Conversely, as an opponent of alliance with Sweden he was detailed in January 1656 to join the more sympathetic Whitelocke to negotiate the Swedish treaty. He was firm in insisting that all goods which could be used for military purposes, particularly guns, should be declared contraband for export to possible enemies. He took part in commercial negotiations with the Dutch ambassador Nieupoort in 1656, and assisted the committee to give aid to persecuted Piedmontese and Polish protestants. 
A tolerant pragmatist in religion, Strickland condemned parliamentary eagerness to prosecute the Quaker 'prophet' Nayler in 1656, declaring, 'which sticks with me the most is the nearness of his opinion to that which is a most glorious truth, that the spirit is personally in us'. He preferred Quakers to be prosecuted for 'plainly explained' offences and heresy to be visible and easier to discover, and assisted the readmission of the Jews. He also took a ceremonial role from 1654 as commander of Cromwell's foot guards, and was jeered at by republicans for importing Dutch ceremonial. He was summoned to Cromwell's 'other house' in 1657, taking his seat as Walter, Lord Strickland, on 20 January 1658. 
Strickland moved towards the generals' party in Cromwell's council, and after the latter's death supported them against Richard Cromwell. Consequently he was admitted to the army-dominated committee of safety in October 1659, also retaining a seat in the restored Rump and on local commissions for assessment and the militia. He took no part in resisting the Restoration and was not prosecuted. Retiring to Flamborough, he wrote a 'History of persecution' defending the protestant sects. He died on 1 November 1671 and was buried in Flamborough church where a memorial was later erected. A shrewd and pragmatic politician and foreign affairs expert to both the Long Parliament and Cromwell, he was ultimately overruled by both on his main area of expertise. 


@@@@@


doc= 26670


Strickland, William (d. 1419), bishop of Carlisle, was probably a member of the Westmorland family of Strickland of Sizergh; however, it has also been suggested that he was the son of John Strickland of Great Strickland and his wife, Joan de Vaux. Educated at Oxford University, he was styled clerk by 1362, and 'magister' by 1369. Presumably while still in minor orders he married Alice Warcop, with whom he had a daughter, Margaret, who married first Sir John Derwentwater and second Sir Robert Lowther ['see under 'Lowther family] -- the latter was Strickland's principal executor. Recorded as notary public in 1366, by 1368 he was rector of Stapleton in Cumberland, even though he was not ordained to the priesthood until 1381. In the meantime he had entered the service of Bishop Thomas Appleby of Carlisle, on whose behalf he was a mainpernor in 1374, whose proctor he was in parliament in January 1377, and for whom he collected the issues of a clerical subsidy in 1383. He was rewarded by being presented successively to the valuable livings of Rothbury, Northumberland, in 1380 and Horncastle, Lincolnshire, in 1388. He also had connections with the regionally powerful families of Clifford and Percy, acting as a feoffee in the foundation of a Percy chantry in Cockermouth Castle in 1399. Early in 1396 the canons of Carlisle Cathedral elected Strickland their bishop in succession to Appleby, but the election was quashed by the pope. Strickland had come to have lands and interests in and round Penrith, in the south of Cumberland. In 1395 he founded a chantry in St Andrew's Church in that town, and was also responsible for substantial improvements to the town's water supply. In 1399, following a licence to crenellate of two years earlier, he was reported to be 'making a fortalice at Penrith on the March of Scotland, for fortifying that town and the whole adjacent country' ('CPR', '1396-9', 480). 
Before 8 December 1399, following Thomas Merk's deprivation, Strickland was elected, and on 24 December papally provided, to the see of Carlisle. Henry IV, who had been willing to grant Strickland custody of the temporalities on 18 February, then made difficulties over his installation as a means of putting pressure on the pope to withdraw ecclesiastical immunity from Merk, following the latter's involvement in the conspiracy of January 1400. Nevertheless Strickland was consecrated bishop at Cawood Castle by Archbishop Scrope of York on 15 August 1400, and received full restitution of the temporalities on 15 November. Strickland was occasionally involved in secular affairs. He was appointed a commissioner in 1401 to treat for peace with the Scots, and in 1402 to arrest those declaring Richard II was still alive, while in December 1406 he was one of the bishops who sealed the act entailing the crown on the descendants of Henry IV. He also attended parliament in February 1413. But in spite of the disappearance of his register (extant in 1606 but lost since then), it is clear that he was principally concerned with the administration of his diocese. Much of his activity was conventional in form. But, in a region badly ravaged by war, Strickland attended to the episcopal finances, and reorganized the division of the revenues of St Nicholas's Church, Newcastle, to his own advantage while reducing the vicar's share. No doubt he needed the extra money for building. Tradition ascribed to him the construction of Strickland's Tower at the north-east corner of the inner court of the bishop's palace of Rose Castle, his usual residence, and a major contribution to the rebuilding of Carlisle Cathedral, in progress since a devastating fire in 1292. The tower and north transept, and the canons' stalls in the choir, are attributed to him, an attribution given greater likelihood by the papal indulgence issued in 1410 'for the completion and conservation of the church of Carlisle' ('CEPR letters', 1404-1415, 220). In his will, dated 25 May 1419, Strickland left 100 marks for masses for his soul, and $10 for distribution to the poor at his funeral. He died on 30 August following, and was buried in Carlisle Cathedral, as he had requested in his will. His obit was still being commemorated there over a century later. 


@@@@@


doc= 26671


Strickland, Sir William, first baronet, appointed Lord Strickland under the protectorate (c.1596-1673), politician, was born at Boynton, near Bridlington, Yorkshire, the eldest son of the antiquary Walter Strickland (died 1636) of Boynton and his wife, Frances (died 1636), daughter of Peter Wentworth of Lillingstone Lovell, Oxfordshire, and his second wife, Elizabeth. His grandfathers, William Strickland and Peter Wentworth, were leading Elizabethan exponents of further reformation for the church and he has been described as 'a third generation Puritan' (Cliffe, 'Puritan Gentry', 12). He matriculated at Queens' College, Cambridge, at Easter 1614 and was admitted to Gray's Inn on 21 May 1617. On 18 June 1622 he married his first wife, Margaret ('c'.1604-1629), daughter of Sir Richard Cholmley of Whitby and his first wife, Susanna, daughter of John Legard of Ganton. The couple had four daughters but no sons; she died in 1629 and was buried at Whitby. Strickland was knighted on 24 June 1630 and married again on 3 May 1631. His second wife was Lady Frances Finch (died 1663), eldest daughter of Thomas Finch, first earl of Winchilsea, and Cicely, daughter of John Wentworth of Gosfield, Essex. Strickland served as a JP in the North and East ridings and was MP for Hedon during the Long Parliament of 1640-53. He signed the Yorkshire petition presented to the king on 30 July 1640 and later took the protestation. The king created him baronet, of Boynton, on 30 July 1641, but he nevertheless embraced the parliamentary cause. He was an active committeeman at Westminster and his younger brother Walter Strickland (1598?-1671) was parliament's agent in the Netherlands. On 22 February 1643 a royalist convoy containing Queen Henrietta Maria came ashore at Bridlington and plundered Boynton Hall, as reported to parliament by Sir John Hotham on 9 March: 'Sir William hath lost above 4,000'l'. in his goods and all his evidence seized upon' ('Portland MSS', 1.102). 
In 1644 Strickland served on the key parliamentary committees for demolishing superstitious monuments and for preparing the directory of public worship. Siding with the presbyterians in 1647, he remained in parliament during the speaker's absence. He was not excluded by Pride's Purge on 6 December 1648, but temporarily withdrew to avoid involvement in the regicide. Edmund Ludlow asserted that Strickland carried the news to London of Cromwell's victory at Dunbar on 3 September 1650. Strickland was MP for the East Riding in the protectorate parliaments of 1654-5 and 1656. He spoke out against the 'horrid blasphemy' of the Quaker James Nayler, but was opposed to his execution until after the sentence of imprisonment had been passed. Debating the Quaker problem on 18 December 1656, he orated: 'They are a growing evil and the greatest that ever was... all levellers against magistracy and propriety' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 1.131, 169, 220). He condemned tithe refusers, warning parliament on 24 April 1657: 'Nothing is so like to blast your settlement, as a land tax' (ibid., 2.24). Elevated to Cromwell's House of Lords as William, Lord Strickland, on 10 December 1657, he later served Richard Cromwell as a privy councillor. He sat in the restored Rump Parliament of 1659, but withdrew after the excluded members returned. 
Although Strickland profited substantially from his interregnum offices and his purchase of confiscated royalist estates in the 1650s, at the Restoration he was unmolested and retired from public life. Having inherited nine manors from his father, by the 1670s he was among the ten richest East Riding landowners, holding estates at Boynton, Flamborough, and Hildenley worth up to $2000 a year. He wore visibly puritan attire and remained an important patron of the godly: 'a public professor of religion, and one that openly owned it, and that to the uttermost of his power sheltered and protected the strictest professors thereof' (Morrice MSS, vol. 3). He died at Boynton on 12 September 1673 and was buried there on 16 September. His only son, Thomas (1638-1684), succeeded him as second baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 26672


Strode, Sir George (1583-1663), royalist administrator, was the second son of William Strode, landowner, of Shepton Mallet, Somerset, and Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Geoffrey Upton of Warminster in the same county. William Strode was grandnephew of Richard Whiting, the last abbot of Glastonbury. George Strode came to London and entered trade, and on 11 February 1615 married, at All Hallows Church, Lombard Street, Rebecca, daughter and coheir of Alderman Nicholas Crisp, first cousin to Sir Nicholas Crisp. They had fourteen children. Rebecca (died 1645) was sister-in-law to Sir Abraham Reynardson, lord mayor of London in 1648, and Sir Thomas Cullum, sheriff of London in 1646. 
Strode shared the royalist opinions of his connections, and, like them, suffered in the cause. At the outbreak of hostilities Strode took service in the infantry and was knighted on 30 July 1641. For his role in organizing the infamous 1642 Kentish petition, parliament ordered his arrest. Bail was posted by Sir Nicholas Crisp and Strode's friend, the royalist William Russell. He then joined the king at Oxford and was appointed a commissioner of the ordnance about July. He conducted the artillery train at the battle of Edgehill on 23 October 1642 and was badly wounded, a fact alluded to in his epitaph. Thereafter he remained at Oxford, his activities as ordnance commissioner vital to the royalist war effort. 
By 1636 Strode owned the estate of Squeries in Kent, which he purchased from the Beresfords, and later he had to compound for it with the parliamentary commissioners. In 1646 Marylebone Park, a property of the crown, was granted by letters patent of Charles I, dated Oxford, 6 May, to Strode and fellow ordnance commissioner John Wandesford as security for a debt of $2318 11's'. 9died, for supplying arms and ammunition. These claims were disregarded by the parliamentary party when in power, and the park was sold for the benefit of Colonel Thomas Harrison's dragoons. At the Restoration, Strode and Wandesford were reinstated, and held the park, with the exception of one portion, until their debt was discharged. 
Late in the war, perhaps shortly after Rebecca died in October 1645, Strode went abroad, and there 'in these sad distracted times, when I was inforced to eat my bread in forein parts', as he wrote, he solaced himself by translating a work by Cristofero da Fonseca, which appeared in 1652, under the title 'Theion enotikon: a Discourse of Holy Love, by which the Soul is United unto God', 'done into English with much Variation and some Addition by Sr George Strode, Knight'. Early in 1649 he returned to England and submitted to the committee for compounding, who fined him half his estate. Despite his composition, he remained on the fringes of royalist conspiracy in the early 1650s. He sold Squeries in 1650. 
At the Restoration, he settled once more in London. His will, in which he declared his adherence to that 'orthodox religion, professed in this our Church of England' which has 'flourished here for some years past, to the honour and glory of Almighty God and the Admonition of the neighbouring nations' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/311, sig. 76), was dated 24 August 1661, confirmed on 5 February following, and proved on 3 June 1663. Strode was buried in St James's Church, Clerkenwell, on the previous day; the entry in the registers of the church described him as 'that worthy Benefactour to Church and Poore' (Hovenden, 351). One of his sons, Sir Nicholas Strode, knighted on 27 June 1660, was an examiner in chancery; and another, Colonel John Strode, was in 1661 in personal attendance on Charles II, who appointed him governor of Dover Castle. One of the daughters, Anne, married successively Ellis, eldest son of Sir Nicholas Crisp, and Nicholas, eldest son of Abraham Reynardson. 


@@@@@


doc= 26673


Strode, Ralph (d. 1387), scholastic philosopher and lawyer, is of unknown origins. His name is first found in the records for 1359 and 1360 of Merton College, Oxford (a college predominantly but not entirely of southerners), where he was then fellow. The bursar's roll for 1361 is missing, and he might still have been a fellow then. He had evidently become acquainted with John Wyclif (died 1384) while at Oxford, a fact of which Wyclif reminded him at the time of a theological controversy in which they took opposite sides. This could place Strode there as early as 1355, the earliest date at which Wyclif might have entered Merton, although since Wyclif was master of Balliol from 1360, their later meeting would have been almost inevitable. No more specific details of Strode's life are known before his election as common serjeant or pleader -- effectively public prosecutor -- of the city of London, on 25 November 1373, an office he held until 1382. 
In London, Strode occupied a mansion over Aldersgate from 27 October 1375 to 4 May 1386, when he received an annuity of 4 marks in compensation for his life tenancy. During his period of office he had further dealings with former Merton colleagues. In 1374, jointly with Wyclif, he acted as surety for a former fellow of the college, Master Richard Benger, then rector of Donington, Berkshire. Three years later he likewise acted jointly with the former fellow Master Robert Rygge on behalf of John Bloxham, warden of the college, in a dispute between the king and the college over the ownership of land in Oxford. In 1381, with his neighbour and friend the poet Geoffrey Chaucer (died 1400), he went surety for John Hende, a merchant destined to become mayor of London after Strode's death. 
The pattern of Strode's career has led some to argue that the philosopher and lawyer were two persons of the same name. One argument is that the lawyer was married -- he was survived by a wife, Emma, a son Ralph, and possibly a daughter Margery. If the scholar Strode had quit Merton for London, and was not a religious, marriage was not out of order. The more common argument for two Strodes is that no one man of the time would have had such diverse professional interests, but there are many contemporaries whose lives show this to be simply untrue. As common serjeant he would have needed knowledge normally only procured in the London inns of court, but in view of the large lacuna in his known career it would be foolish to suggest that the schoolman could not have acquired that readily enough. 
About 1385 Chaucer dedicated his 'Troilus and Criseyde' -- where he treats skilfully of the problem of free will and predestination -- to the poet John Gower and the scholar Strode: '
O moral Gower, this book I directe 

To the, and to the, philosophical Strode, 

To vouchen sauf, ther nede is, to correcte, 

Of youre benignites and zeles goode. 
(G. Chaucer, 'Troilus and Criseyde', v. 1857-9)' Chaucer uses the word 'philosophical' of academic philosophy, often natural philosophy. The Merton connections of the lawyer Strode whom Chaucer knew, and the epithet 'philosophical' that here suggests a university man of some standing, in juxtaposition to a reference to another friend as 'moral', all speak for the identity of lawyer and Mertonian. 
It was in connection with Wyclif's 'De civili dominio' that Strode took issue with this increasingly controversial schoolman, the 'flos Oxonie'. Strode's own side of the seemingly amicable debate was set down in a work that a college document calls simply 'Positiones contra Wiclevum', known only through Wyclif's replies, since printed as 'Responsiones ad decem questiones magistri R. Strode' and 'Responsiones ad argumenta Radulphi Strode'. Strode rejected Wyclif's view of predestination, believing that it implied that man cannot act freely, and so cannot have responsibility or indeed hope of salvation. In ecclesiastical matters he took a pragmatic position: harmony and concord in the church was so important as to demand a moderate toleration of abuses. While his own views are known only through the veil of Wyclif's texts, it is clear that Strode experienced many of the ecclesiastical and political uncertainties of the age. 
While Chaucer brought Strode's name to the notice of his fellow countrymen, his own scholastic writings earned him a reputation in Italy. This was largely brought about by the Augustinian friar Paulo da Venezia (died 1429), who spent at least three years in Oxford after 1390, before returning to teach at Padua. Later commentaries on Strode were written by such Paduans as Paolo da Pergola and Gaetano da Thiene, students of Paulo; and when the sixteenth-century writer Matteo Bossi wished to contrast scholasticism with ancient philosophy, he said he seemed to hear not Plato, Aristotle, and Theophrastus but 'your Burleys, Pauls of Venice, or Strodi' (Thorndike, 238). Strode's 'Logica' was written in or not long after 1359. It comprises six parts, which were often copied as independent works. The sections on 'Consequentiae' and 'Obligationes' were required texts in the University of Padua and several other universities in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Both were printed in several editions. The earlier parts were 'De arte logica', 'De principiis logicalibus', and 'De suppositionibus', while 'De insolubilibus' ended the series, if not in Strode's intentions, at least in the sole surviving manuscript of the complete collection. At many points he echoed other Mertonians ['see 'Merton calculators]. He paraphrased Bradwardine's survey (1321-4) of the literature of insolubles, for example, and showed an awareness of the arguments of Swineshead, Heytesbury, Fland, and Billingham. He followed Bradwardine on the question of whether an individual says anything at all in uttering an insoluble like the self-referential paradox 'I am lying'. (Both argued that to say this was not to say nothing, for those words were being spoken.) He did not hide his admiration for Bradwardine, whom he described as the 'prince of the modern philosophers of nature... who was the first to hit upon something worthwhile concerning insolubles' (Ashworth and Spade, 38). On obligations, the rules of disputation that according to Heytesbury must be used to provide a context for insolubles, Strode disagreed on various points with him, and with Swineshead too. In his text on consequences he took the same line as Ockham had done, and treated them as what would now be known as material consequences, that is, not necessarily involving a relationship between the logical forms of antecedent and consequent. He spoke of consequences as inferences, valid or invalid, but was also capable of treating them as true or false, as though they were propositions. 
Although Merton College was a centre of activity in natural philosophy and astronomy, Strode has left no writings on either subject. A fifteenth-century note, added to a manuscript copy of Chaucer's treatise on the astrolabe, claims that he wrote it for his son who was at the time under the tutelage of the most noble philosopher Master N. Strode. Some have chosen to read the initial as an 'R'. The only value of this note is that it might hint very distantly at a tradition that Strode put Chaucer in touch with Oxford astronomy. A marginal note in the 'Catalogus vetus' of Merton College describes Strode (with the Christian name added later as 'Rad.') in these words: 'nobilis poeta fuit et versificavit librum elegiacum vocatum 'Fantasma Radulphi'' ('Pearl', xlvi-xlix). Israel Gollancz took this to be a reference to the poem 'Pearl', an unwarranted claim, although the identity of 'Pearl's' author -- someone who wrote in a west midlands dialect -- is still far from certain. 
Strode died in London in 1387, judging by a record of his will, now lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 26674


Strode, Thomas (d. 1697), mathematician, son of Thomas Strode of Shepton Mallet, Somerset, was probably born about 1626. He matriculated at University College, Oxford, on 1 July 1642. After remaining there about two years, he travelled in France with his tutor, Abraham Woodhead. On his return he taught in London, having been ejected from Oxford. He settled at Maperton, Somerset, and corresponded regularly with James Gregory. 
Strode is best known for his work on dialling, presented in 'A New and Easie Method to the Art of Dyalling' (1688), but he also wrote on arithmetic and conic sections. He died at Maperton in 1697. He should not be confused with another Thomas Strode (1628-1699), also from Shepton Mallet, who was the son of Sir John Strode and his second wife, Anne, daughter of Sir John Wyndham of Orchard. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1657 and became serjeant-at-law in 1677. He died on 4 February 1699 and was buried at Beaminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 26675


Strode, William (bap. 1594, d. 1645), politician, was baptized on 6 November 1594 at Bovey Tracey, Devon, the second son of Sir William Strode (1562-1637), politician, of Newnham in the same county, and his first wife, Mary (died 1619), daughter of Thomas Southcote of Bovey Tracey, Devon. In 1614 Strode was admitted to the Inner Temple and on 9 May 1617 he matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford; he graduated BA on 20 June 1619. 
In the last parliament of James I and in the earliest three parliaments called by Charles I, Strode represented Bere Alston in Devon. An energetic critic of the Caroline regime, in 1625 he favoured proceedings against Richard Montagu and in 1628 supported the petition of right and spoke in the remonstrance debate, linking perceived foreign and domestic threats to the English state. He apparently favoured the war with Spain. A close ally of Sir John Eliot in the Commons in 1629, he was concerned with religion and constitutionally provocative in asserting the position of parliament. On 2 March, when the speaker tried to adjourn the house and refused to put Eliot's resolutions to the vote, Strode played a major part in the disorderly scene which followed. He did not content himself with pointedly reminding the speaker that he was only the servant of the house, but called on all those who desired Eliot's declaration to be read to signify their assent by standing up. He explained: 'I desire the same, that we may not be turned off like scattered sheep, as we were at the end of the last session, and have a scorn put on us in print; but that we may leave something behind us. (Gardiner, 7.69)' The next day Strode was summoned before the privy council. As he declined to come, he was arrested in the country. With Eliot and other imprisoned MPs he was a committed recalcitrant in the major state case of 1629-30 which influenced Charles I's retreat to personal rule. When proceeded against in Star Chamber (proceedings which eventually lapsed) he repudiated the jurisdiction of the court and refused to answer outside parliament for words spoken within it. With five of the other prisoners he sued for 'habeas corpus', seeking bail, on 6 May 1629. 
In a test case for the petition of right, Charles subverted the law in preventing the prisoners from being brought to court to be bailed, lodging them in the Tower. In October, Strode was one of those refusing bail linked to a good behaviour bond designed to rationalize their arbitrary imprisonment. He remained incarcerated in various prisons until January 1640, when released in a conciliatory gesture prior to the meeting of the Short Parliament. The Long Parliament later voted the proceedings against him a breach of privilege, awarding $500 compensation, and in 1667 both houses upheld these resolutions. 
Strode was returned for Bere Alston to the two parliaments elected in 1640, where his militancy was surely related to bitterness at his imprisonment. His sufferings gave him a position in Pym's group which his abilities would not have entitled him to claim, and though one of the most active MPs in the Long Parliament he was a fellow traveller rather than a prime mover among the agitators. His boldness and freedom of speech soon made him notorious. Clarendon terms him 'one of the fiercest men of the party', and 'one of those Ephori who most avowed the curbing and suppressing of majesty' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.86; 4.32). D'Ewes describes him as a 'firebrand', a 'notable profaner of the scriptures', and one with 'too hot a tongue' (J. Forster, 'Arrest of the Five Members by Charles the First', 1860, 220). 
Strode's prominent pursuit of Long Parliament business reflected his 'godly' and anti-episcopal religious views, his assertion of parliamentary authority over prerogative, and his political friendship for the Scots. He was one of the managers of Strafford's impeachment, and was so bitter that he proposed that the earl should not be allowed counsel to speak for him. He spoke against Lord Keeper Finch, recalling his actions as speaker of the house in 1629, and was zealous for the protestation, but arguably his most important constitutional act was the introduction of the bill for annual parliaments -- eventually the 'Triennial Act'. His speech in favour of the Scots was part of the manoeuvring which brought about the end of the projected settlement of early 1641. 
In the second session of the Long Parliament, Strode was again provocative. On 23 October 1641 he seconded the motion against evil counsellors, and demanded that parliament have a negative voice in all ministerial appointments, and on 28 October he moved for revival of the committee for the grand remonstrance. In late November he moved that the kingdom be put in a posture of defence, thus foreshadowing the 'Militia Bill'. 
To his activity rather than his influence Strode's inclusion among the five members impeached by Charles I was due: Clarendon describes both him and Heselrig as 'persons of too low an account and esteem' to be joined with Pym and Hampden (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.192). The articles of impeachment were presented on 3 January 1642, and on the following day the king came to the house in person to arrest the members. A pamphlet printed at the time gives a speech which Strode is said to have delivered in his vindication on 3 January, but there can be little doubt that it is a forgery. According to D'Ewes, it was difficult to persuade him to leave the house even when the king's approach was announced. 'Mr William Strode, the last of the five, being a young man and unmarried, could not be persuaded by his friends for a pretty while to go out; but said that, knowing himself to be innocent, he would stay in the house, though he sealed his innocency with his blood at the door... nay when no persuasions could prevail with the said Mr Strode, Sir Walter Erle, his entire friend, was fain to take him by the cloak and pull him out of his place and so get him out of the House. (Sanford, 464)' After his impeachment Strode was naturally the more embittered against the king, and appears to have been resigned to war in early 1642. When the civil war began he became one of the chief opponents of attempts at accommodation with Charles. He was present at the battle of Edgehill, and was sent up by Essex (with whom he was politically connected) to give a narrative of it to parliament. In the speech which he made to the corporation of London on 27 October 1642 Strode gave a short account of the fight, specially praising the regiments 'that were ignominously reproached by the name of Roundheads', whose courage had restored the fortune of the day (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 11.479). In 1643 his house in Devon was plundered by Sir Ralph Hopton's troops, and the Commons introduced an ordinance for indemnifying him out of Hopton's estate. 
Strode remained prominent among the Commons leadership, being a target of Waller's plot (June 1643), and when Pym was buried in Westminster Abbey, Strode was one of his bearers (13 December 1643). In May 1644 he reintroduced the ordinance to renew the powers of the committee of both kingdoms. He was also active against Archbishop Laud, and on 28 November 1644 was employed by the Commons to press the Lords to agree to the ordinance for the archbishop's execution. He is said to have threatened the peers that the mob of the city would force them to pass it if they delayed. 'Mercurius Aulicus', commenting on the incident, accused Strode of making 'all the bloody motions'. On 31 January 1645 he was added to the assembly of divines. 
Strode died of a fever at Tottenham on 9 September 1645. On 10 September the house ordered that he should have a public funeral and be buried in Westminster Abbey. Whitelocke, who attended the funeral on 22 September, described him as a constant servant to the parliament, just and courteous. Gaspar Hickes, who preached the funeral sermon, dwelt on the disinterestedness of Strode, stated that he spent or lost all he had in the public service, and asserted that his speeches were characterized by a 'solid vehemence and a piercing acuteness' (Hickes). Hickes's estimate of Strode's use of his estate was, however, overly optimistic. His will disposed of significant amounts of cash, valuable plate, horses, a house, and various property rights, manors, and advowsons, the chief beneficiary being his executor, Sir Edward Barkham, baronet. The benefits of the will were to be paid within two years of his death and the end of the wars in England: perhaps a measure to protect his property from further plunder without compensation. At the Restoration, Strode's remains were disinterred by a warrant dated 9 September 1661. 
Strode's historical significance lies chiefly in his being a link between the political crises of the 1620s and 1640s, in the combination of his gentry background with religious and constitutional radicalism, and in the role he played in driving the Long Parliament into conflict and war. His character was marked by energy, honesty, passionate commitment, and lack of compromise. Strode was the uncle of the poet William Strode. He is also sometimes confused with William Strode (1589?-1666) of Barrington, near Ilchester, a colonel in parliament's service and a member of the Long Parliament expelled at Pride's Purge. 


@@@@@


doc= 26676


Strode, William (1601?-1645), poet and playwright, was baptized at Shaugh Prior, near Plymouth, Devon, on 11 January 1603, probably aged one (a brother was baptized three months later, a sister in 1599); he was the son of Philip Strode (died 1605), fourth son of Sir William Strode of Newnham, near Plymouth, and Wilmot (died after 1620), daughter of William Houghton of Houghton Towers, Lancashire. Left fatherless at an early age, he owed his education at home, and later as a king's scholar at Westminster School, to relatives who had been impressed by his scholastic aptitude. Although his mother quickly remarried, Strode's middle-aged first cousin at Newnham, another Sir William Strode (father of the poet's namesake, the parliamentarian), probably took responsibility for him. In 1617 Strode entered Christ Church, Oxford, where he soon made his mark as a poet, contributing Latin verses to university publications from 1619 onwards. Having graduated BA in 1621 he remained at Christ Church, and was awarded MA in 1624 and BD in 1631; on 6 July 1638 he proceeded DD. 
Throughout the 1620s Strode's English poems -- lyrics, elegies, and occasional pieces both serious and comic -- circulated widely in the university and beyond. The charming 'I saw faire Cloris walke alone' is his best known piece. Answer-poems, parodies, ballads, and songs form a noticeable part of his corpus; 'A Devonshire Song' uses dialect for comic effect; several elegies were written for memorial monuments. His light-hearted colloquial pieces explain his friendship with Richard Corbett, poet and dean of Christ Church, though other poems, including his best elegies, show him as less boisterous and more devout. 
His ordination as deacon is unrecorded but he was priested in December 1628 and acquired a reputation as a 'most florid' preacher (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', new edn, 1817, 3.151). Of his three extant sermons only 'On Death and the Resurrection' (1644) is now genuinely moving; these topics often inspired Strode's best work. During Corbett's tenure of the see of Oxford (1628-32) Strode became his chaplain. In 1629 he was made proctor; the same year his eloquence earned him the post of public orator, thus bringing him into contact with Laud, then chancellor of the university. Pressure of work or an altered social scene may explain subsequent changes in Strode's writing habits; the output of his English poems decreased and, while many earlier poems appear in manuscript collections (in some considerable numbers) and printed miscellanies, later ones, except 'The Townes New Teacher' (a vigorous attack on Puritan preachers), hardly circulated at all. 
Corbett's translation to Norwich brought Strode no benefits, although they remained friends. Advancement came through the king who, in 1635, perhaps at Laud's instigation, annexed to the post of public orator the next Christ Church canonry to fall vacant. The royal visit to Oxford in 1636 offered further opportunities; not only did Strode deliver the welcoming speech but his 'Floating Island' was one of three plays performed on this occasion. Probably Laud, organizing the visit, commissioned Strode to mould public opinion; the play is political satire, allegorically attacking Burton, Bastwick, and Prynne, whom Laud arraigned in the Star Chamber shortly afterwards. The plot, later seen as prophetic, turned on rebellion and restoration. Unfortunately Strode was no playwright. Music by Henry Lawes and scenery by Inigo Jones could not redeem the piece; one spectator called it fitter for scholars than a court, another thought it the worst he had ever seen except for one at Cambridge; women in the audience found it misogynist. Unsurprisingly no rewards followed, but Henry Burton, fulminating from his London pulpit against Strode's 'scurrilous Enterlude', held it responsible for increasing plague 'and very bad weather withall' (H. Burton, 'For God and the King', 1636, 49-50). 
The Christ Church canonry, however, became Strode's on 1 July 1638. Now free to marry, he chose the daughter of a prebendary of Canterbury connected to two bishops. Mary Simpson (died 1648) was seventeen or eighteen, Strode in his forties, when they married on 17 July 1642. A daughter, Jane, was born fourteen months later. His income augmented by several livings, Strode could have expected a comfortable life, had not public events intervened. 
In February 1641, as subdean, Strode had headed the college's list of subscribers to the protestation; the following July he regretfully acknowledged Laud's resignation of the chancellorship. Soon afterwards his wife's connection Bishop Skinner was imprisoned. Strode himself was summoned before a parliamentary committee to account for the fulsome style of earlier official letters to Laud, but not charged. When war broke out his Devon family, with whom he had maintained good relations, was heavily involved on the parliament side. He himself remained at Oxford, apparently arranging his poems for publication, a project interrupted by his death on 10 March 1645; the fact that he died intestate suggests that the event was sudden and unexpected. He was buried in Christ Church Cathedral on 13 March; his grave is unmarked. His widow died on 6 February 1648. 
A mild, reasonable, humorous man, by inclination charitable and tolerant, Strode found such attitudes increasingly difficult to maintain as the Puritan threat grew. Posthumous publication of 'The Floating Island' (1655) and 'A Sermon at a Visitation' (1660) shows him remembered and valued as a royalist propagandist. In troubled times and without the aid of print he was soon forgotten as a poet, contemporary reputation notwithstanding. Bertram Dobell's edition of his poetical works (1907) received little notice; but Strode's lyric gift is genuine, if minor, and his personality attractive. A fuller edition of his works (based on the holograph in Corpus Christi College, Oxford, MS 325) was produced in 1966 (Forey), and in recent years the growing interest in manuscript verse of the early seventeenth century has led to increased and deserved attention for this rewarding poet. 


@@@@@


doc= 26677


Strong, William (d. 1654), Independent minister, was probably a native of Dorset (and possibly the son of Timothy Strong), although Durham and Abbots Langley, Hertfordshire, have also been given as his birthplace by his modern biographers. He was educated, as of Dorset, at the University of Cambridge. Early in 1631 he graduated BA from St Catharine's College and on 28 February he was elected a fellow; he proceeded MA in 1634. It appears that even at this early age Strong had embraced the puritan stance in his religious beliefs as well as in his attitude towards church polity, for at a hearing in July 1634 he was alleged to have said that Archbishop William Laud had sinned against the Holy Ghost and, perhaps more subversively, that there would soon be no bishops in England. Consequently he was suspended that year from his fellowship at St Catharine's, deprived of his degrees, and banished from the university. 
In 1640 Strong became the rector of Moor Crichel, near Wimborne, Dorset, but he fled to London in 1643 when the royalist forces obtained ascendancy in the county. In London Strong received a warm reception at the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, and soon became a lecturer there. On 13 June 1644 the vestry ordered that the churchwarden 'shall lend Mr Strong $30 to be deducted $6 a quarter from his lecture' (London, Guildhall Library, MS 3016/1, fol. 241), and a year later, on 7 July 1645, the vestry again resolved that 'care might be taken by the vestrymen to provide soe for Mr Strong that they might not lose the benefit of his ministry' (ibid., fol. 263). He had a cordial relationship with the vicar, Andrew Perne, and upon Perne's resignation the House of Commons appointed Strong to be the minister of the parish, on 14 October 1647. 
In the meantime Strong had rapidly become a prominent divine at Westminster as well as in the City. He was to preach frequently before the houses of parliament and the civic leaders of London; some of his sermons were separately published. In 1645 he was appointed one of the seven preachers at Westminster Abbey to have morning exercises in place of the traditional daily service. Later in the year, upon the death of Edward Peale of Dorset, Strong was chosen in his stead as a member of the Westminster assembly of divines. He appeared in the assembly on 13 January 1646 and took the protestation, and on 16 January he took the solemn league and covenant and subscribed. In August 1648 he was appointed a trier of ministers for the twelfth classis in the province of London under the new presbyterian church government. He was likewise a weekday lecturer at St Margaret's, Westminster, in 1649. It appears that as late as 1648, when he was appointed a trier and preached before the lord mayor and aldermen at St Paul's a sermon published as 'The Vengeance of the Temple' (1648), there was no sign that Strong had become an Independent. However, in the middle of 1650, he drafted, according to Thomas Bakewell in his 'A Plea for Mr Strong's Church-Members', eight articles, all of which are clearly the fundamental tenets of Independency or congregationalism, and imposed them upon his parishioners to subscribe; and 'til they do it, he is resolved to debar them from the Lords Table, if not wholly forsake them' (Bakewell). Apparently Strong attempted to turn the parochial church into an Independent congregation. It was probably as a result of this conflict that he left St Dunstan-in-the-West and gathered his Independent church at Westminster Abbey; its members elected him their pastor on 9 December 1650. Subsequently, in the early 1650s, Strong became a leading Independent divine in church affairs. On 2 January 1651, at the desire of Oliver Cromwell, Sir Henry Vane conferred with him concerning his going to Scotland, undoubtedly as chaplain to the English army, and on 29 July 1652 he was one of the Independent ministers called to a meeting at Cromwell's house in the Cockpit about sending godly persons to preach the gospel in Ireland. Earlier in the latter year he had joined other Independent divines in presenting to the Rump Parliament their proposals for the propagation of the gospel, which were, in effect, an Independent design for religious settlement; on 20 March 1654, when the Independent church polity had been finally established, he was appointed one of the commissioners for the approbation of public preachers, commonly known as triers, under the Cromwellian protectorate. 
In spite of the fact that Strong eventually embraced the Independent church polity, he was a moderate and perhaps even a conservative man in his religious thought. Unlike his radical Independent brethren such as John Goodwin, he unequivocally upheld the power and authority of the magistracy not only in civil affairs but also in matters of religion. It was the ordinance of God, Strong would argue, that 'there should be a Magistracie; they are called the 'shields of the earth''; for as 'it is not good there should be an Anarchie', magistrates were necessary 'to restrain men of giddy spirits, who are like the 'children of Belial' without a Yoke' ('XXXI Select Sermons', 1656, 386). He complained that 'it is woful liberty, a liberty of sinning' that some men now 'call all into question' and 'cry down instituted worship' as 'but forms' (ibid., 246, 250); and he maintained that 'a bounding of mens spirits by the word is not bounding of the spirit' (ibid., 629). It is true that like many of his puritan brethren Strong was profoundly affected by Christian eschatology and at times of political crisis spoke in apocalyptic language. He even attempted to determine the time of the coming of Christ's kingdom. However, he was not reluctant to denounce the radical claims of the Fifth Monarchy Men. If 'the Kingdoms of the earth shall become the kingdom of the Lord and his Christ', Strong asked, 'then what need have you to be disquieted because some of your inferiour injudicious mistaken ends be not brought about' (ibid., 679)? In early November 1653, when the Fifth Monarchy Men in and out of the Barebones Parliament attempted to destroy what they called the Antichristian national ministry, Strong told the London magistrates in his 'A Voice from Heaven Calling the People to Perfect Separation' (1653) that 'I do never fear Antichrist more then when he professes to fight under Christ's banner', and he appealed to the citizens of London: ''Let all those that fear God' unite 'against this common adversary'' ('A Voice from Heaven', foreword and p. 26). 
Strong died suddenly in late June 1654 and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 4 July. His funeral sermon was preached by the presbyterian divine Obadiah Sedgwick. He was survived by his wife, Damaris, to whom was granted administration of his estate on 22 August, and some children whose names are not known. A William Strong of Dorset, admitted pensioner at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 3 July 1652, was perhaps his son. After Strong's death his works were published from his notes transcribed by Elizabeth, Lady Carr (afterwards wife of Nathaniel Rich). It was said that Strong had left 'all his notes under a Character of his own devising' and that it was impossible for any one to publish anything 'by his own notes', but his widow protested that Strong had used the characters of the stenographer John Willis, only adding 'here and there some of his own, sufficiently known to, and understood by that person of honour... to whom he committed his notes' (Strong). Following the Restoration his remains were disinterred in 1661 and thrown into a pit in the churchyard of St Margaret's, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 26678


Strother, Edward (1675-1737), physician, born at Alnwick, Northumberland, was the son of Edward Strother, physician, who was admitted extra-licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 1 October 1700, and afterwards practised at Alnwick. On 24 August 1695 the younger Strother was admitted pensioner of Christ's College, Cambridge, but left without a degree. On 8 May 1720 he graduated MD at the University of Utrecht, and on 3 April 1721 he was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians. He probably married Mary Allenton at Durham on 15 January 1697. He died on 13 April 1737 at his house near Soho Square, London. 
He was the author of a number of medical works, in particular making detailed comments on the problems and use of 'Jesuits' bark', cinchona, in fever, and on the treatment of smallpox. 


@@@@@


doc= 26679


Struthers, John (1776-1853), poet and anthologist, was born at Longcalderwood, East Kilbride, Lanarkshire, on 18 July 1776, the second son and fourth child of William Struthers, shoemaker, and his wife, Elizabeth Scott. Joanna Baillie and her family, then resident at Longcalderwood, took an interest in him as a child. After working as cowherd and farm-servant until the age of fifteen, he learned the trade of shoemaking in Glasgow, and settled at Longcalderwood in 1793 to work for Glasgow employers. 
Struthers married on 24 July 1798 despite some opposition from his wife's family. In 1801 they settled in Glasgow, where he worked at his trade until 1819. During this time, he continued to read and write extensively, and through Joanna Baillie, he came to know Walter Scott, who helped Struthers in negotiations with Constable the publisher. 
In 1803 Struthers published 'Anticipation', a successful war ode, prompted by rumours of Napoleon's impending invasion. His most popular poem, 'The Poor Man's Sabbath', appeared in 1804. Although digressive and diffuse, the poem is written in fluent Spenserian stanza, and expresses a passionate love of nature and rural life; 'The Peasant's Death' was published as a companion piece to it in 1806. In 1811 'The Winter Day' appeared, followed in 1814 by 'Poems, Moral and Religious'. In addition to poetry, Struthers published anonymously an 'Essay on the State of the Labouring Poor, with some Hints for its Improvement', in 1816. About the same date he edited, with a biographical preface, 'Selections from the Poems of William Muir'. A pamphlet entitled 'Tekel', sharply criticizing voluntaryism, is another undated product of this period. 
Struthers's wife died of consumption in April 1818, and was followed within two weeks by their youngest daughter, and within a few months by their eldest son. 'The Plough', written in Spenserian stanza, was nevertheless published in that year. His first marriage had been a love match; his second, to Cecilia Morton (1787/8-1847) on 27 September 1819, was entered upon for his family's requirements. He and his second wife were to add six children to this family in their twenty-eight-year marriage. In 1819 Struthers also published 'The Harp of Caledonia', a good collection of Scottish songs in three volumes, with a supplementary essay on Scottish songwriters, compiled with the aid of Scott and Joanna Baillie. A similar anthology called 'The British Minstrel' appeared in two volumes in 1821. 
Having gained a literary reputation, Struthers reluctantly abandoned shoemaking to become editorial reader for Glasgow-based publishers. During this career Struthers produced in two volumes a 'History of Scotland from the Union' (1827), and was engaged on a third volume at his death. In 1833 Struthers was appointed librarian of Stirling's Public Library, Glasgow, a position he held for about fifteen years. In 1836 he published his fine descriptive poem 'Dychmont'. Besides numerous pamphlets, Struthers wrote many of the lives in Chambers's 'Biographical Dictionary of Eminent Scotsmen', and contributed to the 'Christian Instructor'. His collected poems -- in two volumes, with a useful autobiography -- appeared in 1850. Struthers died in Glasgow on 30 July 1853, his second wife having predeceased him on 22 August 1847. Struthers Crescent in East Kilbride is named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 26680


Struthers, Sir John (1823-1899), anatomist and medical reformer, second son of Alexander Struthers, a wealthy flax mill owner, and his wife, Mary Reid, was born at Brucefield, Dunfermline, Fife, on 21 February 1823, and was educated privately. His two brothers qualified in medicine: James (1821-1891) practised in Leith, and Alexander (1830-1855) died at Scutari during the Crimean campaign while serving as an assistant surgeon. John Struthers studied medicine at Edinburgh University, where he was admitted successively a licentiate and a fellow of the College of Surgeons and a doctor of medicine of the university in 1845. On 22 October 1847 the College of Surgeons certified him to teach anatomy in an extramural school; Struthers substituted for Professor John Goodsir during his illness in the winter of 1853-4. 
In 1854 Struthers was appointed one of the assistant surgeons to the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary and was later full surgeon, an office he resigned in 1863 when he was appointed to the chair of anatomy at Aberdeen. The University of Aberdeen had begun a new existence on 15 September 1860 by the fusion of Marischal and King's colleges. Divinity and arts were taught at King's in Old Aberdeen and law and medicine in Simpson's building in Aberdeen itself. The accommodation, however, was meagre, and the students were few when Struthers began his work. Under the provisions of the 'Universities (Scotland) Act' of 1858 the buildings of Aberdeen University were maintained by the board of works. Struthers made good use of this to have extensive new accommodation constructed for his anatomy department. This was at a time when the Royal Infirmary generally was being greatly enlarged and was well known for its clinical teaching. Struthers built up a museum of anatomy and established a university medal and prize in the subject in 1891; by the time he retired to Edinburgh in 1889 the number of students had more than doubled and the museum was almost unequalled. 
Struthers was a skilled anatomist, and one of the earliest advocates in Scotland of the Darwinian hypothesis of natural selection. Aberdeen students were noted for championing Darwinism; even the keeper of the anatomy room was an out-and-out evolutionist. Struthers taught anatomy from a comparative perspective and his lectures were illustrated with his extensive collection of specimens that demonstrated Darwinian evolution. He was a keen dissector and a firm believer in practical work in all aspects of medical education. 
In Edinburgh, Struthers became chairman of the board of directors of Leith Hospital and was elected a manager of the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary. He was a member and president of the Royal Physical Society, and a member of the board of management of the Royal Dispensary, Edinburgh. In 1885 the University of Glasgow conferred upon him the honorary degree of LLD. He was president of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh from 1895 to 1897. He was knighted in 1898. 
On 5 August 1857 Struthers married Christina Margaret, daughter of James Alexander, surgeon, of Wooler, Northumberland. Struthers and his wife were both champions of the cause of admission of women to the Scottish universities. They had five sons and four daughters. Three of his sons qualified in medicine. Two predeceased him; the youngest, John William Struthers (1874-1959), was a general surgeon in Edinburgh and president of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh from 1941 to 1943. Struthers died on 24 February 1899 at his home, 15 George Square, Edinburgh, and was buried on the 27th in Warriston cemetery, Edinburgh. He was survived by his wife. 
Struthers's most valuable scientific works are papers on the supracondyloid process and on the anatomy of whales. Whaling was an important local industry, and from time to time whole carcasses were washed up on the shore of eastern Scotland. Their dissection provided Struthers with the opportunity to elucidate and demonstrate an example of mammalian adaptation to life in the sea. 
Struthers had a long interest in the reform of the medical curriculum. As a member of the General Medical Council from 1883 to 1891 and particularly as chairman of the education committee he sought to introduce measures to increase practical and clinical teaching and to ensure a rational ordering of the subjects of the medical course. This culminated in the extension of the medical course to five years in 1892. At Aberdeen he pressed for a compulsory pathology course and a chair of pathology. In the early 1870s he had encouraged students to nominate T. H. Huxley as university rector knowing that Huxley shared his belief in the need for curricular reform. 


@@@@@


doc= 26681


Strutt, Edward, first Baron Belper (1801-1880), politician, born at his parents' home at St Helen's House, Derby, on 26 October 1801, was the only son of William Strutt (1756-1830) ['see under 'Strutt, Jedediah] and his wife, Barbara (1761-1804), daughter of Thomas Evans, also of Derby. His grandfather was Jedediah Strutt, a cotton spinner and inventor. He was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1823 and proceeded MA in 1826. He was president of the Cambridge Union Society and, after graduating, settled in London in order to study law (he attended the lectures of John Austin). He never took an active part in the affairs of the family firm (W. G. and J. Strutt), of which he was a partner. On 10 May 1823 he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn, and on 13 June 1825 to the Inner Temple, but he was not called to the bar. He married on 28 March 1837 Amelia Harriet, youngest daughter of William Otter, bishop of Chichester. They had four sons and four daughters. 
Strutt shared his father's interest in science, but devoted his leisure, while a law student in London, mainly to a study of social and economic questions. He became close to Jeremy Bentham (a friend of his father) and to James and John Stuart Mill, and under their influence his political views took shape. Strutt was not a doctrinaire philosophical radical, but his Benthamism ensured that he later refused to join the Anti-Corn Law League, owing to its 'sectional interest'. On 31 July 1830 he was returned as a liberal for the borough of Derby but his parliamentary impact as a radical was minimal, although he did become a privy councillor in 1845. He retained his seat until 1847, when his election, with that of his fellow member the Hon. Frederick Leveson-Gower, was declared void on petition on account of bribery practised by their agents ('Hansard 3', 98, 402-14). On 16 July 1851 he was returned for Arundel in Sussex. That seat he exchanged in July 1852 for Nottingham, which he represented until his elevation to the peerage. From 1846 to 1848 he was chief commissioner of railways; in 1850 he became high sheriff for Nottinghamshire; and in December 1852 he became chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster in Aberdeen's coalition government, but resigned in June 1854 in favour of Earl Granville. 
On 29 August 1856 Strutt was created Baron Belper of Belper in Derbyshire, an early instance of a family being elevated to the peerage whose wealth had been made in industry. In 1862 he received the honorary degree of LLD from Cambridge University. In 1864 he was nominated lord lieutenant of Nottinghamshire, and in 1871 he succeeded George Grote as president of University College, London, an office he held until 1879. He was also chairman of quarter sessions for the county of Nottingham for many years, and was highly regarded in that capacity, particularly by the legal profession. 
Belper became a recognized authority on questions of free trade, law reform, and education and earned the respect of many eminent contemporaries, including Macaulay, John Romilly, McCulloch, John and Charles Austen, George Grote, and Charles Buller. In his later life he also developed an interest in science and literature. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 22 March 1860, and to fellowships of the Geological Society and the Zoological Society. From 1879 to his death he was also a vice-president of the Sunday Society. He died on 30 June 1880 at his house, 75 Eaton Square, London. He was succeeded, as second Baron Belper, by his son Henry Strutt (1840-1914). 


@@@@@


doc= 26682


Strutt, Jacob George (1784-1867), landscape painter and etcher, was born in Colchester, Essex, on 4 August 1784, the third son in the family of five sons and three daughters of Benjamin Strutt (1754-1827), a lawyer's clerk and election agent, and his wife, Caroline, 'nee' Pollett. His father, a Colchester antiquarian and literary figure whose friends included Henry Crabb Robinson, was also a talented painter in oils. 
Strutt studied in London, where he married, on 8 November 1813, the writer Elizabeth Byron ['see 'Strutt, Elizabeth]. They had two sons and two daughters. He was a contributor to the Royal Academy, British Institution, and the Society of British Artists, Suffolk Street, between 1819 and 1858. For a few years he practised portrait painting, but from 1824 to 1831 he exhibited studies of forest scenery and was best-known for two sets of etchings published at this time -- ''Sylva Britannica', or, Portraits of Forest Trees Distinguished for their Antiquity' in 1822 (reissued in 1838) and ''Deliciae sylvarum', or, Grand and Romantic Forest Scenery in England and Scotland' in 1828. 
About 1831 Strutt went abroad and, after residing for a time at Lausanne, settled in Rome, where with his second son and pupil Arthur John Strutt (1819-1888), who was also a landscape painter, he had a studio. From there, he sent to the Royal Academy 'The Ancient Forum, Rome' (exh. 1845) and 'Tasso's Oak, Rome' (exh. 1851); in 1851 he returned to England, where he and his wife lived in London. In 1858 he exhibited a view of the Roman campagna, but then his name disappears from exhibition catalogues. He died in 1867. Strutt's portraits of the Revd William Marsh and Philander Chase DD were engraved by J. Young and C. Turner. 


@@@@@


doc= 26683


Strutt, Jedediah (1726-1797), inventor and cotton manufacturer, was born on 26 July 1726, at South Normanton, near Alfreton, Derbyshire, the second of the three sons of William Strutt, a small farmer and maltster, and his wife, Martha, the daughter of Joseph Statham, a yeoman. At the age of fourteen Strutt was apprenticed to Ralph Massey, a wheelwright, at Findern, a village near Derby, and boarded with the Woollats, members of the nonconformist congregation of Ebenezer Latham. Here, if not earlier -- the Strutts might have been members of Alfreton's dissenting community -- he acquired his love of books and a tendency towards reflection, and met his future wife, Elizabeth Woollat ['see 'Strutt, Elizabeth]. Jedediah left his master in 1747 and, working as a journeyman wheelwright, moved to Belgrave, near Leicester, then to Leicester itself. 
In 1754 Strutt inherited an uncle's farm stock and became a farmer wheelwright at Newton, near Blackwell, and on 25 September 1755 he married Elizabeth (1729-1774). About this time he became interested in the hosiery trade. He perfected a device, the 'rude and imperfect idea' of one Roper, 'an indolent fellow', brought to him by his wife's brother William Woollat, which could be attached to the front of the knitting frame to manufacture ribbed stockings. With Woollat and Elizabeth, he commenced a putting-out business around Blackwell. Woollat's and Elizabeth's nonconformist and London links established the necessary business and financial connections. In 1758 Strutt and Woollat entered a partnership with the Derby hosiers and dissenters John Bloodworth and Thomas Stamford -- the two were replaced in 1762 by the wealthy Nottingham hosier and dissenter Samuel Need -- and applied for patents in 1758 and 1759. The Strutts prospered; in 1762 Strutt was made a freeman of Nottingham, and the family moved to St Mary's Gate, Derby. Strutt's elder brother Joseph, with whom he took out a patent for a stove in 1770, lived in London and took no part in the business, but brother William joined the concern. The 'Derby rib machine' brought Strutt acquaintance with the Society of Arts, and, through a successfully countered challenge to his patent in 1765, experience of the London courts of law. Business success and frugality provided the means to consider other ventures. 
In 1769, through Need, Strutt was introduced to Richard Arkwright (1732-1792) and his partners, then newly arrived in Nottingham and requiring finance. For $500 Strutt and Need each took one-fifth of the partnership of Richard Arkwright & Co., set up to exploit Arkwright's patent. Tradition assigns Strutt a part in improving the machine, but his influence was probably more general. The yarn was first used for stockings, and it was Strutt and Need who, manufacturing calicos at Derby, identified the natural vent. Strutt handled the negotiations for the reduction of excise duties on calico in 1774 -- his wife died that May while on a visit to him in London -- and in 1782 he joined Arkwright in defence of the latter's 1769 patent. Though relations with Arkwright could be tense -- in 1774 Strutt's eldest son, William ['see below'], wrote, 'he wants you out' -- Strutt remained in the partnership until 1782, a year after Need's death. He participated in the mill-building programme and enjoyed the fruits of the new industry's rapid growth. The exact terms of the firm's expansion are not known, but perhaps Strutt himself financed the model factory communities at Belper and Milford, for, after the partnership's dissolution, these, and a calico factory at Derby, constituted the core of his own cotton empire. Samuel Slater, an ex-apprentice of Strutt's at Milford, was, in the 1790s, instrumental in introducing the new system of manufacture in the United States. 
Strutt and his wife delighted in the commonplace and the upbringing of their five children. His sons, and for a time his daughters, worked in the business as they came of age. George Benson came to manage the mills and estates, Joseph ['see below'] the commercial side, and William the technical aspects. Jedediah's second marriage in 1781 or 1782 to Anne, the widow of George Daniels, a yeoman of Belper, strained relations with the children, and, increasingly, their education, their originality, and, to Strutt, the extravagance of their social life set them apart. His later life was split between his mansion, Milford House, and Derby; in 1795 he bought Exeter House, Derby, and, after a 'lingering illness', died there, on 7 May 1797, aged seventy. He was buried in the Unitarian chapel at Belper. 
His eldest son, 
Strutt's youngest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 26684


Strutt, Joseph (1749-1802), antiquary and engraver, was born on 27 October 1749 at Springfield Mill, near Chelmsford, Essex, the youngest of five children of Thomas Strutt (died 1751), a wealthy miller, and his wife, Elizabeth (1727-1780), daughter of John Ingold, also a miller, of Woodham Walter, near Maldon. Only one brother, John, survived beyond infancy. Thomas Strutt died of smallpox when Joseph was not yet two. Joseph was educated at King Edward VI School, Chelmsford, and in 1764 was apprenticed to the engraver William Wynne Ryland, and moved to the latter's workshop in London. On 30 January 1769 he entered the newly established Royal Academy Schools, and in the first of the school's annual competitions, held in that year, took a silver medal for a drawing from the antique. Two years later, in December 1771, he won the gold medal for two oil paintings on classical themes. Despite these early successes and the fact that he exhibited work at the Royal Academy during the 1780s Strutt cannot claim any real distinction as a painter, for his real achievements lay in his work as an antiquary. 
Strutt's first employment was with Foote Gower, the Essex antiquary, who commissioned him to complete a series of engravings of Roman antiquities. Through Gower he was introduced to Richard Gough, who was almost certainly responsible for securing him access to the British Museum in 1771. There he became acquainted with the collections of manuscripts and illuminated books, and conceived a series of antiquarian works drawing primarily on these visual sources that was to represent the majority of his subsequent published output. The first, 'The Regal and Ecclesiastical Antiquities of England' (1773), owed its initial inspiration to Montfaucon's 'Monuments de la monarchie francoise', and was the first book of its kind to be published in England. It was essentially a series of engraved portraits, illustrative of the English monarchs, drawn entirely from contemporary sources. Its aim, according to the preface, was to encourage artists to be more accurate in their representation of historic dress. In the same year Louis Dutens published the first of his three volumes on ancient coins, with engravings by Strutt, but by this time Strutt was devoting himself almost entirely to antiquarian subjects. His next work, 'Horda-Angel-Cynnan: the Manners and Customs, Arms and Habits of the Inhabitants of England', published in three volumes between 1774 and 1776, drew on an even wider range of manuscript sources -- from the British Museum, Lambeth Palace Library, the Bodleian Library, and Oxford and Cambridge college libraries. 
Both these early publications were well received in most quarters, which encouraged Strutt to venture upon a third publication, 'The Chronicle of England', a more ambitious work, with fewer engravings, intended as a work of reference rather than a narrative history. Six volumes had been initially projected but only the first two were published (1777-8). Together they covered the history of England from the Roman period to the end of the Saxon heptarchy. Strutt drew heavily on illustrated manuscript sources again, but the 'Chronicle' inevitably contained much material similar to that of his earlier volumes. It also suffered from competition with other historical publications, in particular Robert Henry's 'History of Great Britain' (1771-93), which laid a similar emphasis on manners and customs. Reviewers were also critical of the style in which it was written. 
While engaged on these projects in the early 1770s Strutt resided partly in London and partly in Chelmsford, but following his marriage, on 16 August 1774, to Ann Blower (1754-1778) of Bocking, Essex, he took a house in Duke Street, Portland Place, London. Three children were born to the couple: two sons, Joseph and William Thomas ['see below'], and a daughter, Elizabeth Ann, born on 24 August 1778. Ann Strutt died on 15 September 1778, soon after giving birth to her daughter, who survived her mother by only a few months. The following year Strutt published, anonymously, a short elegiac poem to his wife's memory. 
Following the death of his wife and the disappointing reception to the 'Chronicle' Strutt appears to have abandoned his literary and antiquarian researches to engage in more lucrative work; he exhibited nine paintings at the Royal Academy between 1778 and 1785 and produced several of his best stipple engravings -- using the style introduced into England from the continent by his master, Ryland. After the death of his brother, John, an eminent physician in Westminster, in 1784 Strutt shared his home with his widowed sister-in-law until he retired, to Bacon's farm, Bramfield, Hertfordshire, in 1790. In 1785-6 he published the two volumes of his 'Biographical Dictionary of Engravers', a historical account of the art of engraving and of engravers from the earliest time to his own day that has remained the basis of all later studies of a similar kind. He continued to produce engravings, including thirteen, after designs by Thomas Stothard, for John Bradford's edition of 'The Pilgrim's Progress' (published 1792). He also established a day-school and Sunday school in the nearby village of Tewin, where the local manor house, Queenhoo Hall, served as the inspiration for his posthumously published historical novel of the same name. 
In 1795, with his health and finances slightly improved, Strutt returned to London and resumed his antiquarian researches. From this time onwards he undertook almost no engraving work that was not intended to illustrate his own books. 'A Complete View of the Dresses and Habits of the People of England' was published by subscription in two volumes (1796 and 1799); this was the first detailed, illustrated, and properly sourced history of dress in England. It was followed in 1801 by 'The Sports and Pastimes of the People of England' (1801). Both volumes concentrated chiefly on the medieval period. Strutt's antiquarian learning was considerably more advanced by this time but his emphasis was always on the engravings as the primary source of information in a period that was so notoriously barren of literary sources. 
Strutt next conceived the idea of using his antiquarian knowledge to write a historical novel set in the reign of Henry VI, but did not live to complete it. After his death the unfinished manuscript was acquired by the publisher John Murray, who asked Walter Scott to prepare it for publication. Scott added a final chapter, bringing it to a rather abrupt and inelegant conclusion, and the book was eventually published in 1808. Intended by Strutt as a lively means of conveying information about the past, 'Queen-Hoo Hall: a Romance of Ancient Times' is unsuccessful as a work of fiction; it lacks a coherent plot and the language is deliberately archaic. However, it sheds valuable light on the author's life, as it is substantially autobiographical, and was later acknowledged by Scott to have been influential in inspiring him to complete 'Waverley'. 
Strutt died, of an inflammation of the bowel, on 16 October 1802 at his home in Charles Street, Hatton Garden, London, and was buried on 20 October in the churchyard of St Andrew's, Holborn. When alterations were later made to the Farringdon Street viaduct his remains were disinterred and transferred to the city cemetery in Ilford, Essex. He did not die a rich man. By his own account he managed his financial affairs badly. His antiquarian works were unremunerative in his own lifetime and there seems little doubt that, had he pursued a career in engraving exclusively, he might have enjoyed greater affluence. He suffered from chronic asthma for much of his life and became increasingly corpulent, as is evident from a late portrait of him by Ozias Humphry in the National Portrait Gallery (no. 323). 
Strutt may justifiably be regarded as the first serious historian of dress in England, and his pioneering works of scholarship were heavily drawn upon by nineteenth-century costume historians. Unlike many of his contemporaries, who doubted the reliability of artistic sources as historical evidence, he employed a comparative analysis of the manuscripts, showing that they were reliable indicators of changes not just in matters of dress but also of the 'manners and customs' of the time. He was one of the first to realize the potential value of visual material as a historical source rather than as simply serving an illustrative purpose. He showed an early appreciation of the intrinsic merit of medieval art and was unusual in producing near-facsimile engraved reproductions of the originals. Antiquaries such as Richard Gough were critical of his antiquarian scholarship but appreciated the quality of his engravings. In his own lifetime 'Manners and Customs' was probably the most successful of his antiquarian works (there were two subsequent editions, in 1779 and 1793) but 'Sports and Customs' has enjoyed greater longevity and has been frequently reprinted, one edition appearing in 1973. 
Strutt left two sons. The elder, 
Strutt's younger son, 


@@@@@


doc= 26685


Joseph Strutt (1775-1833), was born on 28 May 1775. He was apprenticed to the printer John Nichols and later became librarian to the duke of Northumberland. He edited some of his father's posthumous works and contributed a biographical memoir of his life to Nichols's 'Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century' (1812). He died on 12 November 1833 at Isleworth, Middlesex, leaving a widow and a large family. 


@@@@@


doc= 26686


Joseph Strutt (1765-1844), cotton manufacturer and philanthropist, was baptized at Friar Gate Presbyterian Chapel, Derby, on 19 September 1765. He was the only member of the family to be educated at the Derby School. On 5 January 1793 he married Isabella (1769-1802), 'sweet minded... lovely, handsome, beautiful', according to Coleridge ('Collected Letters', ed. Griggs, 1.306), the daughter of Archibald Douglas of Swaybrook, Derbyshire; they had two sons and three daughters. He shared his family's politics and Unitarianism -- in 1817 he supported the accused in the Derby treason trials -- and many of his brother's friends, and was similarly public-spirited. With William he established a Lancasterian school in Derby and in 1824-5 a mechanics' institute; in 1835 he was first mayor of the reformed borough. He opened his house, St Peter's, with its paintings and statues, to the public, and in 1840 gave to the people of Derby an 11 acre arboretum planned by J. C. Loudon. He died on 13 January 1844 at Derby, leaving the bulk of his estate to his sole surviving child, Isabella, the wife of John Howard Galton and the mother of Sir Douglas Galton (1822-1899). 


@@@@@


doc= 26687


William Strutt (1756-1830), cotton manufacturer, born on 20 July 1756 at Newton, near Alfreton, Derbyshire, was educated at private schools. Although he entered the business at the age of fourteen, he continued to study and read widely throughout his life. Reconstruction and extension of the mills -- the brothers traded as W. G. and J. Strutt -- enabled William to demonstrate his skills: as an architect of fireproof buildings, and as an engineer of water power and transmission, of textile machinery, and of heating. His 'cockle' warm-air system was believed to be the most efficient for non-steam factories, and his design for the Derby Infirmary's heating and ventilation system was later copied by others. Strutt's original mind and achievements brought his election to the Royal Society in 1817. The Strutt brothers and their sister Elizabeth were sought out by society, and Strutt could count among his friends Erasmus Darwin (whom he helped to establish the Derby Philosophical Society and succeeded as president in 1802), R. L. and Maria Edgeworth (on whose drafts he commented), Coleridge (who described Strutt as 'a man of stern aspect, but strong, very strong abilities'), Tom Moore, the engineer Charles Sylvester, Samuel and Jeremy Bentham, and Robert Owen. Strutt was a major benefactor of Derby and its built and social infrastructure. Even so, his ownership of the manor of Kingston in Nottinghamshire and a house in Leicestershire suggests that, like many of his generation, he found land attractive. On 12 January 1793 he married Barbara (1761-1804), the daughter of Thomas Evans of Darley Dale, a banker, industrialist, and early factory master. They had five daughters and one son, Edward Strutt, first Lord Belper (1801-1880). Strutt died at Derby on 29 December 1830, and was buried in the Unitarian chapel at Friar Gate. In 1813 the fortune of the Strutt brothers had been estimated at $1 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 26688


Strutt, William Goodday (bap. 1762, d. 1848), army officer, was baptized at Springfield, Essex, on 26 February 1762, the third son of John Strutt (1727-1816) MP, of Terling Place, Essex, and his wife, Anne (1732-1814), the daughter of the Revd William Goodday of Maldon, rector of Strelly, Nottinghamshire. He also had an elder sister. After attending Felsted School and Lochee's military academy, Chelsea, he entered the army, joining his regiment, the 61st, at Minorca. In 1799 he was promoted lieutenant, and later was appointed to a company in the 91st, with whom he took part in the defence of St Lucia. In 1782, having exchanged into the 97th, he served at the siege of Gibraltar. He purchased a majority in the 60th regiment in 1783 and, being placed on half pay, visited several German courts to observe their military organization. In 1787 he went with his regiment to the West Indies. He purchased a lieutenant-colonelcy in 1790 and was removed in 1792 to the 54th. In 1793 he saw much hard fighting in Flanders. On his return he was sent to St Vincent, where he was promoted brigadier-general in 1795. In January 1796, with two hundred men, he attacked a force of twelve hundred, was wounded three times, and had to have his right leg amputated above the knee. After returning to England in 1796 he received the governorship of Stirling Castle, a sinecure, on 23 February, but afterwards served on the staff in Ireland. The loss of his leg and attendant poor health obliged him to cease active service, although on 23 June 1798 he was promoted major-general. On 13 May 1800 he was given another sinecure, that of governor of Quebec. He never visited that city, though he held the post until his death. 
In retirement Strutt spent much time at Southend, Essex, and was one of the prime movers in the building of Southend pier, the longest in the world, and of the nearby church of St John the Baptist. He died unmarried at his home, Tofts, Little Baddow, Essex, on 5 February 1848 and was buried in the family vault at Terling. 


@@@@@


doc= 26689


William Thomas Strutt (1777-1850), was born on 7 March 1777. He held a position in the Bank of England but was also a miniature painter of some repute. He died on 22 February 1850, leaving several sons, two of whom, Arthur and William, were also painters. 


@@@@@


doc= 26690


Strype, John (1643-1737), historian and biographer, the youngest son of John Strype or Jan van Strijp (died 1648) and his wife, Hester (died 1665), daughter of Daniel Bonnel, was born in November 1643 at his father's house in Strype's Yard (now Stripe Street), off Petticoat Lane, London. In a letter to Dr Knight of 19 January 1729 Strype explained that his father and his ancestors had been 'great sufferers for religion' in their home town of 's-Hertogenbosch, Brabant, and had found it necessary to 'fly for shelter to England' ('GM', 61/1, 1791, 223). In London the elder Strype had been apprenticed to his uncle Abraham in the Drapers' Company, took his freedom, was naturalized, and set up his own business as a silk throwster, becoming master of the short-lived Silk Throwsters' Company. Hester's grandfather had also fled from Brabant and had settled in Norwich. The Flemish and English branches of the Strype family kept in touch over the years. 
Young John grew up in a family with strong nonconformist links on both sides, and after his father's death he came under the influence of his brother-in-law, the presbyterian minister John Johnson. He went to St Paul's School in 1657. On 29 March 1662 he was admitted as a pensioner to Jesus College, Cambridge, holding a Pauline scholarship of $10 p.a. until 1666. However, when in the autumn of 1662 his tutor Edmund Hough refused to subscribe the 'Act of Uniformity' and was ejected from his fellowship, Strype's family thought it best to remove him. With Johnson's help he migrated to St Catharine's College, from where he graduated BA early in 1666. That autumn, in accordance with his late father's wish, he was ordained in London. He proceeded MA in 1669. 
In 1669, after a brief period as curate of the poor parish of Theydon Bois, he was licensed in November as priest and curate of Low Leyton, Essex, and instituted as vicar in 1674, a position which he held for the rest of his life. In 1678 he moved into a new house erected at vestry expense and in 1681 married Susannah, daughter of Edward Lowe of Oxfordshire. Two of their four daughters survived infancy: Susannah ('b'. 1686), who later married James Crawforth, and Hester (1687-1711). In later years he contributed to and oversaw substantial repairs to the church. 
Strype had welcomed the Restoration, but like many clergymen he found his loyalty to a Roman Catholic monarch tested too far when James II issued his declaration of indulgence in April 1687. After consulting local colleagues Strype disobeyed the instruction to read it in his church. After the revolution of 1688 he was rewarded for his loyalty to the protestant establishment and to the new regime by a lectureship at Hackney, held from 1689 to 1724. His earlier support for Henry Compton, bishop of London, led to his institution as rural dean of Barking, and in 1711 Archbishop Tenison added the sinecure rectory of West Tarring, Sussex, to which Strype journeyed annually to preach. Strype's income derived from rents of the property inherited from his father, from his own writing, and from boarding and educating children. He was instrumental in establishing a free school in Low Leyton using money from a local benefactor; the first students arrived in 1711 and Strype, as one of the trustees, kept a close eye on progress. 
As rural dean Strype was expected to acquaint clergymen with the bishop's orders and to supervise enforcement of his directives. Before parliamentary elections he had to instruct clergymen to exert their influence in favour of the designated candidates for Essex; in this role, and to a lesser extent as minister, he moved among whig churchmen and other influential figures, thus becoming involved in contemporary political and ecclesiastical controversies. 
Strype's principal pursuits were the collection of sixteenth-century family papers and other documents, and the writing of histories. At the start of his 'Life of... Sir John Cheke' he wrote 'my inclinations (I know not how) have carried me now for many years to search more curiously into the Affairs of that Age' (p. 3) but it seems probable that he had been inspired ever since his college years, his first scholarly work being an edition of the works of John Lightfoot (1684), who had been master while he was at St Catharine's, prefaced by a biography derived from papers given to him by Lightfoot's son-in-law. In 1700 he published 'Some Genuine Remains of John Lightfoot'. His other study outside the sixteenth century was a biography of his cousin James Bonnell, accountant-general of Ireland, in 1703. 
Throughout his life at Low Leyton, Strype crossed the River Lea into London each week to meet and converse with his antiquarian friends and to call on his contacts in the book trade. He drew on sources in the state paper office, the pre-fire Cotton Library, the Petyt manuscripts now in the Inner Temple, Lambeth Palace Library, and Archbishop Parker's papers at Corpus Christi, Cambridge. More valuable documents and records came from the descendants of his subjects, others from fellow antiquarians who assisted him by visiting distant libraries and transcribing documents for him. He was generous in return, but declined to share his information with those whose views displeased him. 
Strype's major source was, however, Sir William Hickes of Ruckholt, Essex, great-grandson of Sir Michael Hickes, secretary to William Cecil, Lord Burghley. Sir William had inherited the majority of the family manuscripts and, 'through a combination of circumstance and chicanery' (Zinberg, 126-7) Strype obtained and kept the entire collection. An arrangement was made that Hickes would give part of these manuscripts to Strype and lend the remainder to the publisher Richard Chiswell, to be transcribed and edited by Strype for publication and ultimately returned to Hickes. Strype duly sent his annotated manuscripts to Chiswell, who then decided that the project would be too costly. He cancelled the publication and refused the $50 commission agreed to Strype. But in 1699 Hickes was declared insane and as the Hickes relatives were unaware of the agreement Strype kept everything, seeking later to justify his actions in his will. The papers of the martyrologist John Foxe were lent to Strype in the 1680s by William Willys of Hackney, executor to one of Foxe's descendants, and Strype retained them after the death in 1701 of Foxe's last descendant. They were included when Robert Harley bought some of Strype's collection, paying what he regarded as an exorbitant price. 
Strype was fifty when his first biography, 'Memorials of Thomas Cranmer' (1694), appeared, to be followed by 'The Life of the Learned Sir Thomas Smith' (1698), 'Historical Collections of the Life and Acts of John Aylmer, Lord Bishop of London' (1701), and other narratives and biographies of the Tudor period. His 'Life of the Learned Sir John Cheke' (1705) was a major study, demonstrating a deep appreciation of Cheke's life and his importance, based on a commanding knowledge of a wide range of original sources. 
Strype's 'History of the Life and Acts of Edmund Grindal', published in 1710, achieved excellent sales, having been brought forward to take advantage of the controversary stirred up the previous year by Henry Sacheverell, who had published a sermon fiercely denouncing the prelates of his own day under cover of an attack on Grindal. It was followed by Strype's best-known work, 'The Life and Acts of Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury' (1711). These ecclesiastical biographies were didactic in purpose and intended to defend the reputation of the Church of England against criticism from those who denied that it was a true church and others who objected to its relationship to the state. 
Meanwhile, in the three volumes of his 'Ecclesiastical Memorials' (1721) he covered the reigns of Henry VIII, Edward VI, and Mary Tudor; in the four volumes of 'Annals of the Reformation' (1709-31) the reign of Elizabeth. The 'Memorials' are probably his most important work because subsequent historians have focused their attention on those documents which Strype chose to include. His chronological range is remarkable, and the quality of his transcriptions generally good for its day. Strype also annotated the section on Mary Tudor for White Kennet's 'Complete History of England', and published six of his own sermons delivered between 1689 and 1729. 
Strype was approached by the publishers Richard Chiswell and Thomas Horne to provide yet another revised version of John Stow's much admired 'Survey of London' (1598). An agreement was drawn up whereby Strype would receive 43 guineas, his expenses, and six bound copies of the finished work. The 'Survey' had been repeatedly revised and enlarged in order to keep up with the changing aspect of the post-fire city, now much expanded and altered in its religion and other ways. Strype immediately set about transcribing documents from the London archives and in 1703 Awnsham Churchill joined the agreement as senior partner, and Strype's payment was increased to $103. There was co-operation from the city livery companies and the clergy, urged on by Bishop Henry Compton, and also from the librarians of Lambeth Palace and the Tower. Among the many private individuals who offered help were the Yorkshire antiquary Ralph Thoresby, who had been in correspondence for some years before his first visit to Strype on 22 January 1709, and Humphrey Wanley, librarian to the Harleian collection in which Stow's manuscript now reposed. Although Strype had arranged most of the work by 1707, and the engravings had been prepared, it was set aside after the publication of Edward Hatton's 'New View of London' in 1708, which seemed to cover much the same ground and was considerably smaller and cheaper. Strype forfeited $71 of his fee, and perhaps had no one to blame but himself as he had allowed work on his biographies to take up much of his time. Finally, once the defects of Hatton's book were acknowledged another agreement in November 1716 led to the 'Survey''s publication at the end of 1720. Strype made no changes beyond inserting some current information on titled people, lord mayors, and city charities. 
Unlike its predecessors Strype's 'Survey' did not aim to be a pocket guide, with its listings and tables of figures (although he included the obligatory and now outdated list of carriers), but rather an updated edition of a celebrated Elizabethan text. It filled two folio volumes, embellished with high quality engravings and ward maps, and cost 6 guineas. The print run was probably more than 500 copies; it was reprinted in 1754. Strype included what he believed to have been Stow's entire original text, which had by this time been conflated with the 1618 and 1633 additions of Anthony Munday. His own additions, where he had identified gaps in Stow's narrative and where the passage of time demanded them, were clearly identified as such in the margins. Inevitably his own protestant convictions and his abhorrence of popery led him to be selective and even emphatic in the space allocated to the provision of almshouses and other charitable donations, and in the details of sermons and services held within the city. Political events, such as the defeat of the Armada, the civil war, the Jacobite period, and the return to an assured protestantism all called for judgemental comment. Strype was however one of three editorial voices writing in the first person and the present tense. To quote Merritt, 'By this stage the Survey has a multiple personality, switching with little warning from nostalgic Elizabethan antiquary [Stow] to triumphalist Jacobean pageant-master [Munday] to diligent post-Restoration recorder of events [Strype] and back again' (Merritt, 87). 
In 1720 Wanley was alerted by reports that Strype had suffered a stroke, and he arranged for John Wyat, a bookseller of St Paul's Churchyard, to keep a discreet eye on Strype's health and collections. Wanley's foresight was rewarded with a substantial collection of manuscripts now in the Harleian collection in the British Library; his own correspondence with Strype is in Cambridge University Library. 
In the event Strype outlived his wife and daughters. A visitor to the Low Leyton parsonage in March 1733 found him busy in his study, 'turned ninety, yet very brisk and well, with only a decay of sight and memory' (letter, Samuel Knight to Zacharias Grey, 24 March 1733; Nichols, 'Illustrations', 4.327). He continued to collect and copy materials in the last years of his life, but by 1733 acknowledged that failing eyesight prevented him from bringing his projected lives of Lord Burghley and John Foxe to the press. In his later years Strype lived at Hackney, Middlesex, with his granddaughter Susannah, who was married to Thomas Harris, a surgeon. He died at Hackney on 11 December 1737 and was buried at Leyton, having composed his own Latin epitaph. 
Strype had made money by his writings; he also had an income from his freehold property in and around Strype's Yard, which had come through his late wife's jointure, plus two houses near Well Close, his stock in the Bank of England, and his East India Company bonds. In his will, written in 1732, he left almost everything to Susannah and Thomas Harris, apart from several charitable donations to the poor of those parishes with which he had been connected. He also gave his version of why Sir William Hickes's papers were still in his keeping, explaining that the bookseller Richard Chiswell had passed them over to assess their suitability for printing, but that Chiswell had died before this had been accomplished and without having paid Strype the agreed $50 for his work. He identified bundles of papers that should now be passed to Chiswell's son. 
Writing in 1975 Cargill Thompson remarked that 'even today... the twenty-five volumes of his works in the Clarendon Press reissues of the 1820s are still a standard source for the study of English church history' (p. 237), and his biographies of Cheke, Cranmer, Parker, and Grindal are consulted both for what he has to say about his subjects and for his quotation or transcription of sources. Yet by providing valuable transcriptions of manuscripts now lost or never printed elsewhere Strype has inevitably channelled the interests of historians who in recent times have begun to remark on his neglect of chronology, his want of critical sense, and his transcriptions which were often silently abridged or poorly referenced. Strype followed the contemporary practice of arranging his materials by year, writing in the form of annals. His habit of gathering and including irrelevant material, together with his lack of critical analysis of his sources, were in keeping with the historiographical practice of his time. 
Strype himself believed that his works had made a major contribution to existing historical knowledge, that they were in no way derivative, but filled the gaps in ecclesiastical histories of the sixteenth century. He intended that his readers would learn about the nature of the Reformation, how it had come about and its participating figures, thereby uniting protestants at home and abroad in a better understanding. He regularly protested his own honesty as a sincere lover of truth, preferring, as he often claimed, to go as near the fountainhead as possible to draw his material, and to leave the original wording of his sources, including original documents in his appendices, to convince his readers. But his claim to be unbiased was naive in that he ignored the bias arising by his selection of sources. 


@@@@@


doc= 26691


Strzelecki, Sir Paul Edmund de (1797-1873), explorer in Australia, was born on 20 July 1797 at Gluszyna, near Poznan, in (Prussian) Poland, the son of Francis Strzelecki, of a family of Polish knights which can be traced back to 1391, and his wife, Anna, 'nee' Raczynski. Between 1810 and 1814 he was educated probably at the Piarist Fathers college, Warsaw. He became the plenipotentiary of Prince Francis Sapieha's estates, but following a legal dispute an embittered Strzelecki left his native country, never to return. Being a Polish nobleman or 'szlachcic' he was often referred to as 'the Count', although he did not use the title himself. He was in England from 1831 until 1834 and then travelled extensively through North and South America, where he engaged in geological and mineralogical investigations as well as recording his chemical analyses of soils and of wheat growing. 
In 1838 Strzelecki visited the Marquesas, Hawaii (where he made a scientific appraisal of the crater of Kilauea), Tahiti, and New Zealand before arriving in Sydney on 25 April 1839. It was Strzelecki's aim, and his achievement, to formulate a 'Physical Description of New South Wales and Van Diemen's Land'. His book of that title was published in London in 1845, the result of research throughout the colony over a period of four years in which he walked thousands of miles pursuing his subject. At the same time he produced a giant geological map of the area of his travels. 
Strzelecki's first excursion was westward over the Blue Mountains. During September to November 1839 he visited Mount Hay and its vicinity and the country further west to Bathurst and the Wellington caves. In these travels he discovered the first authenticated specimens of silver and gold. One of his letters records that, when he handed specimens of the gold to Sir George Gipps, the governor of New South Wales -- 'specimens both representing the metal as attached to the rock, and as disintegrated from it' -- the governor considered its discovery more a mineralogical curiosity than an economic asset. He entreated Strzelecki not to say anything about its existence, for fear of creating an 'unnecessary perturbation' in the colony. 
Strzelecki's second excursion was to the area south of the Monaro, still blank on the map. He joined with James McArthur (the son of Hannibal McArthur) to explore it -- both men sharing the expenses. Strzelecki left Sydney on 22 December 1839. On 2 March 1840, from Hannibal McArthur's station Ellerslie, west of Tumut, the combined party set off to the south. A side excursion took Strzelecki and McArthur, on 12 March 1840, to the roof of Australia, and Strzelecki to its highest point. He named it and the massif Mount Kosciusko after the Polish patriot Tadeusz Kosciuszko. The party then journeyed into the area Strzelecki named Gippsland. The portion between the Tambo and Macalister rivers had been probed by Angus McMillan weeks before, but Strzelecki broke new ground through rugged country from the Macalister to Western Port, the last section through the Strzelecki Ranges causing the party considerable distress. 
On reaching Melbourne the results of the exploration were announced and, after recuperating, Strzelecki left for Van Diemen's Land on 10 July 1840. There he was well looked after by Governor Sir John Franklin and his wife, Jane. He spent two years exploring the island to great scientific effect, making three excursions and cruises to adjoining areas before returning to New South Wales in October 1842. Following a further excursion from Port Stephens, he left Sydney on 22 April 1843 to arrive in London on 24 October 1843, after visiting the Orient and Egypt. 
A naturalized British subject from November 1845, Strzelecki received many honours -- the founder's medal of the Royal Geographical Society on 25 May 1846, a CB on 21 November 1848, FRGS in May 1853, FRS in June 1853, the honorary degree of DCL from the University of Oxford on 20 June 1860, and KCMG on 30 June 1869. He was a friend of Florence Nightingale, Lord Sidney Herbert, Antony Panizzi, and W. E. Gladstone. Some of his fame rested on philanthropical work of this later period, including that as central agent of the British Relief Fund formed for the great famine in Ireland in 1846-9. He is honoured too by some dozen geographical names, including the Strzelecki Ranges in Victoria and the Strzelecki Peaks on Flinders Island, off Tasmania. He died of cancer at his home, 23 Savile Row, London, on 6 October 1873 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26692


Stuart, Sir Alexander (1824-1886), merchant and politician in Australia, was born on 21 March 1824 in Edinburgh, one of the nine children of Alexander Stuart, writer to the signet, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' McKnight. Alick, as he was known, was educated at Edinburgh Academy (1832-5) and at the city's university (1837). Having embarked on a commercial career, he went into a merchant's office in Glasgow, then to Belfast as manager of the North of Ireland Linen Mills, and in 1845 joined Carr Tagore & Co. in Calcutta, India. Finding the climate there debilitating, he moved to New Zealand in 1850, visited New South Wales, and spent some time on the Victorian goldfields. He eventually settled in Sydney, where he became assistant secretary to the Bank of New South Wales in December 1852; in 1854 he was made secretary and inspector. On 10 November 1853, at Narellan, he married Christiana Eliza (died 1889), the daughter of John Wood RN. 
Stuart's abilities attracted the notice of the head of the firm of Robert Towns & Co., which he joined in 1855 as a partner (senior partner from 1873), and he soon became prominent in commercial circles. He was a director of the Bank of New South Wales (for seventeen years between 1855 and 1879) and of a number of insurance and mining companies, and a committee member of the Sydney chamber of commerce; he invested heavily in Queensland pastoral stations. 
Although he had been brought up as a member of the Episcopal Church of Scotland, in Sydney Stuart served on the diocesan, provincial, and general synods of the Church of England, sat on the cathedral chapter, and was a trustee of church lands. In the 1870s he championed the retention of state aid to denominational schools and helped to form the Church of England Defence Association. Having been asked by Bishop Frederick Barker to stand for parliament, in December 1874 he entered the legislative assembly for East Sydney. A free-trader, he was slow to action, but dogged, and proved an effective debater. From 8 February 1876 until the ministry fell on 21 March 1877 he was treasurer in the cabinet of Sir John Robertson. He was re-elected for East Sydney, but resigned in March 1879, when he was appointed agent-general for the colony in London. Unable to unravel his own and Towns & Co.'s financial difficulties, he did not take up the post. Having managed to avoid bankruptcy (partly through the Coal Cliff Coal Company), at the general election of 1880 he was returned for Illawarra. In 1882 he became leader of the opposition, defeating the Parkes-Robertson ministry on the 'Land Bill' of 1882. The government lost at the polls, and on 5 January 1883 Stuart became premier. He at once appointed a commission of inquiry into the land laws, and in October brought in a land bill to control the indiscriminate selection and sale of crown land, to give some security of tenure to squatters, and to establish local land boards and courts. This was discussed with heat and acrimony during the record thirteen-month session and eventually passed into law in October 1884. Stuart had established the Aborigines protection board in 1883 and carried an act (1883) to regulate the civil service. He supported the annexation of eastern New Guinea by Queensland in 1884 and presided over the intercolonial convention which established the ineffective federal council of Australasia. 
Unable to delegate and 'imprudently industrious', Stuart had a sudden stroke early in 1885; after holidaying in New Zealand he resumed office in May and was made KCMG in June, but he was so enfeebled that on 6 October 1885 he retired. He was nominated to the legislative council, and later in the year went to London as executive commissioner for the colony for the Indian and Colonial Exhibition of 1886; but he died of typhoid fever on 16 June 1886 at 52 Stanhope Gardens, Kensington, after the opening of the exhibition. His wife, son, and a daughter survived him. He was buried at Christ Church, Roxeth, near Harrow. 


@@@@@


doc= 26693


Stuart, Andrew (1725-1801), lawyer and politician, probably born at Torrance in Lanarkshire, was the second son of Archibald Stuart (died 1767) of Torrance and Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Andrew Myreton of Gogar. Educated at Edinburgh high school, in 1746 he was apprenticed in his father's law practice, and became a writer to the signet in 1759. An urbane member of the Select Society and the Poker Club, he participated in the intellectual life of Enlightenment Edinburgh, counting David Hume and George Dempster as friends. 
Through his Lanarkshire connection Stuart became in 1758 a guardian to the young James, seventh duke of Hamilton, and promoted his claim to the Douglas estates. Having named Hamilton as his heir, the duke of Douglas altered the succession in favour of Archibald Stewart, son of Lady Jane Douglas and her husband, Colonel John Stewart, whom he declared to be his nephew and heir in 1761. Stuart's challenge to this provision failed in the court of session in 1762. Undaunted, he painstakingly gathered evidence in France, the Netherlands, and Germany to prove that Lady Jane Douglas had not given birth to the boy when living in France. During his visits to Paris he impressed the 'philosophes'. His proofs convinced the court to decide the succession in the duke of Hamilton's favour in July 1767. During the subsequent appeal to the House of Lords in January 1769, Stuart and the opposing counsel, Edward Thurlow (later Lord Thurlow) fought a bloodless duel. In February, in a sensational reversal of the court of session's decision in the Douglas cause, Lord Camden, lord chancellor, and Lord Mansfield, lord chief justice, attacked Stuart's integrity as a lawyer. Hume believed he had conducted the contentious case with 'singular Integrity and Ability' ('Letters', 2.199). 
After this debacle Stuart's friends supported him financially, especially by purchasing the office of king's remembrancer in May 1770, which he held jointly from 1771 until his resignation in 1786. Meanwhile he contested the 1768 election in Lanarkshire for the duke of Hamilton's interest, which he bolstered with the votes of the Lanarkshire estates he helped to purchase for Sir George Colebrooke. In return for favouring Colebrooke's nominee in the Linlithgow burghs election in 1771, he was nominated to the East India Company's commission of inquiry in 1772, only for it to be cancelled. Stuart revenged himself on Lord Mansfield with a savage, privately distributed polemic, 'Letters to Lord Mansfield' (1773), which alleged Mansfield's bias towards the Douglas claim. The 'Letters' was widely admired, although Samuel Johnson compared it to 'the wailings of a dog that had been licked' ('Ominous Years', 305). 
Stuart held that the vindication of his honour was worth the price it shortly cost him of a place he desired on the Bengal supreme council. Lord North wished to help, but the king demurred, so Stuart obligingly withdrew from the contest. He was already highly effective in the legal transactions regarding freehold votes and the negotiations which underpinned the political interests of his friends and patrons, undertaking frequent journeys for the purpose. On 28 October 1774 he won the Lanarkshire seat. Stuart became a member of Henry Dundas's 'Scotch ministry' and his close ally, sharing with him the office of keeper of the signet from March 1777. When Dundas was rewarded with the sole keepership in 1779, he insisted that Stuart be compensated with a place on the Board of Trade (6 July 1779), and the promise of the lucrative keepership of the register of sasines, which he gained in 1781. His offices and meticulously managed business made him wealthy, allowing him to spend lavishly, especially on his coaches. Boswell, no admirer, noted his 'awkward, stammering vanity' ('Applause of the Jury', 21). 
In 1775 Stuart secured a place in the East India Company for his brother James Stuart (d. 1793), and after his suspension in 1777 Stuart published several letters to the directors of the company and the secretary at war, eloquently justifying his brother's arrest of Lord Pigot, the governor of Madras. He was a regular and assiduous attendee at the Board of Trade. During 1783 he remained friendly with North after his resignation and joined his friends in the coalition, rather than follow Dundas into opposition. Honourably resisting pleas to return to the Dundas interest at the election in 1784, he stood aside to concentrate on his legal and personal business. Before leaving parliament he assisted his brother-in-law Thomas Cochrane, eighth earl of Dundonald, concerning his salt manufacture patent, but as the earl mostly ignored his advice Stuart despaired of mitigating the financially disastrous effects of his scientific enthusiasms. 
From 1787 Stuart researched the claims of John Stewart, seventh earl of Galloway, to the chiefship of the Stewarts, at Galloway's request. During 1789 he made discoveries in the Vatican archives concerning the marriages of Robert II, and while in Paris he professed to admire the 'ardent spirit of liberty' (Thorne, 5.306). At his friend Sir William Pulteney's invitation, on 19 July 1790 Stuart re-entered parliament for Pulteney's pocket borough of Weymouth and Melcombe Regis. On 9 October 1790 Stuart married Margaret, daughter of Sir William Stirling of Ardoch, who bore three daughters. In 1796 he inherited the estate of Torrance in Lanarkshire from his brother, and in 1797 the estate of Sir John Stuart of Castlemilk. 
Stuart's assiduous research in public and private records in London, Edinburgh, and elsewhere convinced him that the Galloway claim was faulty. In his 'Genealogical History of the Stewarts' (1798) he contended that with the failure of the Stewart royal line, the chiefship of the Stewarts would fall to the Stuarts of Castlemilk, coolly defending his claim in 1799. That year he recommended to Henry Dundas that the government relieve the hardships of Henry Stuart, Cardinal York. Andrew Stuart died at his home in Lower Grosvenor Street, London, on 18 May 1801. 


@@@@@


doc= 26694


Stuart, Berault (1452/3-1508), soldier and diplomat, was the son of John Stewart (d. c.1469), seigneur d'Aubigny (Aubigny-sur-Nere, near Bourges) ['see under 'Stewart, Sir John, of Darnley], and of Beatrice, daughter of Berault, seigneur d'Apchier. His grandfather, John Stewart of Darnley, had disembarked at La Rochelle in October 1419 at the head of a contingent of Scotsmen, in support of Charles, then regent of the kingdom of France: in 1423 Charles, having become king, gave him the 'seigneurie' of Aubigny. John Stewart of Darnley was constable of the Scottish army in France from 1421 to 1429: in the latter year he received from the king the right to quarter his arms with those of France. 
Berault Stuart was a man-at-arms in the regular Scottish company in 1469. In 1483 he received command of a company of 100 lances, and in the same year was appointed castellan of the castle of the Bois de Vincennes. He was sent to Scotland in 1484 to announce the accession of Charles VII (died 1498) to James III (died 1488) and added his signature to the treaty renewing the 'auld alliance'. In 1485 he was placed at the head of the French mercenaries who fought on the side of Henry Tudor at the battle of Bosworth. He acted as 'bailli' of Berry from 1487 to 1498, and became seigneur d'Aubigny on the death of his father. For most of his life he styled himself counsellor and chamberlain of the king of France. In 1491 he was charged with setting free Louis, duke of Orleans (the future Louis XII), until then held prisoner by Charles VIII. The annual pension which he received from the king rose to 3000 livres tournois in the years 1491, 1492, and 1493. Also in 1491 he went to Milan on a diplomatic mission to Lodovico Sforza (died 1510); he was with Ferdinand of Aragon at the taking of Granada in 1492. From that year to 1508 he was captain of Harfleur and of Montivilliers. He became a knight of the order of St Michel in 1492. In the following year he was appointed captain of Charles VIII's Scottish guard, a post he retained until his death. In 1494 he married Anne de Maumont, daughter of Jean d'Alencon, bastard of Jean (II), duke of Alencon: from this marriage was born Anne, who became the wife of Robert Stewart, future marshal of France and seigneur d'Aubigny. In the same year, several months before the beginning of his expedition to Italy, Charles VIII sent Stuart on a mission to Milan, Ferrara, Mantua, Florence, and Rome. He conducted a campaign in the Romagna, then rejoined Charles's army and made his entry into Florence on 15 November 1494. Stuart took part in the conquest of Calabria. Charles made him grand constable of the kingdom of Naples, and in this capacity he found himself entrusted with the defence of Calabria against the Aragonese. With his Swiss troops he defeated King Ferdinand and Gonzalve de Cordoba at Seminara on 21 June 1495, but he was soon on the defensive and was forced to leave the kingdom of Naples with his army and return to France in 1497. In consideration of his distinguished service Charles VIII granted him a reward of 12,000 livres tournois. His pension at this time was 1800 livres tournois. 
Stuart remained in favour with Charles's successor, Louis XII (died 1515), who by 1500 had increased his pension to 4000 livres tournois. He conducted a campaign against Lodovico Sforza in northern Italy in 1499, and in 1500 he was named one of the governors of Milan. In the following year he was entrusted by the king with a new expedition against the kingdom of Naples; he took the city of Capua by assault and entered Naples. Fighting against the Spanish continued in 1502, when he won a victory at Terranova, but the following year he was defeated at Seminara on 21 April. He was taken prisoner on the capitulation of Rocca Angistola and incarcerated in the Castel Nuovo at Naples, but was freed following the suspension of hostilities. He then returned to France, where he evidently retained the sovereign's favour. He took part in the expedition against Genoa in 1507. Having fallen ill at Savona he received a visit from Ferdinand of Aragon, who paid homage to his legendary courage. In 1508 he decided to make a pilgrimage to the sanctuary of St Ninian at Whithorn in Scotland. Louis XII charged him on that occasion with an embassy to the Scottish king, James IV (died 1513), intended principally to renew the 'auld alliance'. Having passed through London in great pomp on 21 March, he reached Scotland. He and the Scottish king, who dubbed him 'father of war', exchanged gifts, notably of horses. To celebrate his arrival William Dunbar (died 1530) wrote a ballad in which he was compared to Achilles, Hector, Hannibal, and Arthur, and lauded as the 'most strong, incomparable knyght, the fame of the armys and the floure of vassalage' (Dunbar, 109). Stuart finally left on his pilgrimage, but he fell ill and died at Corstorphine, near Edinburgh. In his will, dated 8 June, he asked to be buried in the house of the Observant Franciscans in Edinburgh, while his heart was to be sent to St Ninian's. James IV wrote a letter of condolence to Queen Anne of France, while Dunbar composed an elegy on him addressed to Louis XII. 
In the course of his final embassy Stuart dictated to his secretary and household chaplain Etienne le Jeune, a native of Aubigny, a treatise on the art of war that borrowed its essentials from the work of a French captain, Robert de Balsac, composed some years earlier, but Stuart added a number of details on the basis of his military experience in the kingdom of Naples. Philippe de Commines wrote of him: 'Monseigneur d'Aubigny, of the Scottish nation, good and wise and honourable knight' (Commines, 3.136). In fact he was at once both a good diplomat and an experienced war captain, though for the greater part of his life he suffered from gout, which often forced him to interrupt his activities. Of all his merits the chronicler Jean d'Auton praises in particular his reconnaissance of terrain: 'In the matter of war he was the master of all others in spying out the countryside and dealing with ambushes' (Auton, 2.265). His arms were a quartered escutcheon, the first and fourth quarters azure, three fleurs-de-lis or, the second and third a fess checky azure and argent. There is a medal of him by the engraver Nicolo Spinelli. In a manuscript that belonged to him ('Le livre du gouvernement des princes', a French translation of Giles of Rome's 'De regimine principum'; Paris, Bibliotheque de l'Arsenal, MS 6328), a miniature represents him in armour, haughty, mounted on a barded horse, and brandishing in his right hand his baton of command. 


@@@@@


doc= 26695


Stuart, Lord Bernard, styled earl of Lichfield (1622-1645), royalist army officer, was born on 28 December 1622, the youngest of ten children of Esme Stuart, third duke of Lennox (1579?-1624), and his wife, Katherine ('c'.1592-1637), only daughter and heir of Gervase Clifton, Lord Clifton of Leighton Bromswold, Huntingdonshire. After her father's death in 1618 Stuart's mother became Baroness Clifton in her own right. James Stuart, fourth duke of Lennox and first duke of Richmond, was his eldest brother. 
Stuart was brought up under the direction of appointees of the king, with distinct revenue assigned for his maintenance. He was created MA at Cambridge University in 1637. On 30 January 1639 he obtained a licence to travel abroad for three years with his elder brother John. It was probably before they went abroad that Van Dyck painted a double portrait of the brothers, a painting greatly admired by Thomas Gainsborough who came across it in 1785. He produced a full-scale copy of the work and a head-and-shoulders study of Lord Bernard. 
Stuart was knighted at York on 18 April 1642 by his kinsman Charles I. On the outbreak of the civil war he was appointed captain of the King's Own life guards. This troop attracted so many 'persons of honour and quality' and was so dazzlingly equipped that it was known as the 'show troop'. It formed, Clarendon recorded: 'so gallant a body, that upon a very modest computation the estate and revenue of that single troop might justly be valued at least equal to all theirs who then voted in both Houses under the name of the Lords and Commons of Parliament, and so made and maintained that war. (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.348)' Stuart and the king's life guard of cavalry were given permission to serve in the front rank of Prince Rupert's cavalry at the battle of Edgehill on 23 October 1642. Stuart himself left a brief account of the battle (Davies, 38-9), in which his brother George Stuart, Lord D'Aubigny, was killed. Stuart was with Rupert when he retook Lichfield on 20 April 1643. Stuart fought at the battle of Newbury on 19-20 September 1643. On 29 June 1644, at the head of the life guards, he supported Thomas Wentworth, earl of Cleveland, in his charge against Sir William Waller's parliamentarian troops at Cropredy Bridge, Oxfordshire. He was among the last to remain at Charles I's side at the devastating defeat at Naseby on 14 June 1645, while they vainly attempted to 'prevail with those shattered and frightened troops either to give or stand one charge more' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 2.386-7). In July Stuart attended the king at Raglan Castle where the marquess of Worcester ensured that they gained a brief respite from the war. 
Before Naseby the king had designated Stuart as Baron Stuart of Newbury and earl of Lichfield, but the money to pay the necessary fees had been lost in the battle and its aftermath. Sir Edward Nicholas consequently wrote to the king recommending him to command the patent to pass the seals without any fee being paid. Before this could be done, however, Stuart fell in battle. He accompanied the king on his march to relieve Chester, and entered the town with the king on 23 September. While most of the cavalry quartered 3 miles from the city the king's life guard and Lord Gerard's troops remained with Charles. The next day, while Sir Marmaduke Langdale engaged the parliamentarian forces on Rowton Heath, Stuart led a sally out of the city. For a time he was successful, but he was eventually driven back. Although there were few casualties in the rout that followed, Stuart himself was killed, in view of the town and the king, 'who from one of the towers of the wall, saw his troops defeated' ('Diary of Sir Henry Slingsby', 66). 
Stuart's death was 'such a loss', Lord Digby told the marquess of Ormond, 'as a victory would scarce repair' (Carte, 1.92-3). 'He was', Clarendon wrote, 'a very faultless young man, of a most gentle, courteous, and affable nature, and of a spirit and courage invincible; whose loss all men exceedingly lamented, and the King bore it with extraordinary grief' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.115-16). The royalist memorialist claimed that Stuart said of the hazards of war, 'That a small courage might serve a man to engage for that cause; the ruine whereof no courage would serve him to survive' (Lloyd, 329). 
Stuart died unmarried. Richard Johnson, his master of horse, obtained a licence from parliament to bury his lord in October. He was buried with his fallen brothers, George and John (who had been mortally wounded at the battle of Cheriton on 29 March 1644) in Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, where the date is recorded (possibly wrongly) as 11 March 1646. 


@@@@@


doc= 26696


Stuart, Charles, sixth duke of Lennox and third duke of Richmond (1639-1672), courtier and ambassador, was born in London on 7 March 1639, the only son of George Stuart, seigneur d'Aubigny (1618-1642), and Lady Katherine Howard (died 1650) ['see 'Stuart, Katherine], daughter of Theophilus Howard, second earl of Suffolk. His early childhood and youthful development were both defined and seriously marred by the upheavals of the English civil wars. His father was mortally wounded at the battle of Edgehill on 23 October 1642, while his mother was subsequently imprisoned for smuggling royalist correspondence. On 10 December 1645, owing to the death in action of his father's younger brother, Lord Bernard Stuart (1622-1645), he was designated Baron Stuart of Newbury and earl of Lichfield, titles which had been intended for his uncle but were never officially recognized by the Long Parliament, or by the Commonwealth and the protectorate governments. 
By late 1648 Lichfield's mother had married Sir James Livingston, created Viscount Newburgh that September, but following her premature death in exile at The Hague he became the ward of his second cousin, General Charles Fleetwood, who recommended him to John Thurloe, in September 1654, as 'a very hopefull young gentleman' (Cust, 111). However, he appears to have had little love for the republican form of government, and later attempts to incorporate him within the framework of a new Cromwellian, aristocratic elite failed dramatically. Consequently, at the first available opportunity, in January 1658 he sailed for France. Together with his governor and manservant, he took up residence in Paris at the house of his uncle Ludovic Stuart, tenth seigneur d'Aubigny, and was there acknowledged as 'a forward and witty' youth by one of Thurloe's informants operating in the city (Thurloe, 'State papers', 6.782). In August 1659 he took part in Sir George Booth's abortive royalist rising and was punished by the council of state, by the sequestration of his goods and estates. 
The Restoration transformed Lichfield's fortunes and in May 1660 he returned to England with Charles II, attending the king upon his triumphant entry into London. The premature death of his cousin Esme Stuart (1649-1660), on 10 August 1660, further strengthened his position at court, as he inherited the dukedoms of Richmond and Lennox, together with a whole swathe of Scottish offices and titles, which included the posts of hereditary great chamberlain and great admiral of Scotland, and keeper of Dumbarton Castle. His appointments as lord lieutenant of Dorset, in 1660, and as gentleman of the royal bedchamber and knight of the Order of the Garter, in 1661, only served further to underline his growing political importance. By the summer of 1660 he had contracted what was to be a brief first marriage to Elizabeth (1643/4-1661), widow of Charles Cavendish, styled Viscount Mansfield (died 1659), and daughter of Richard Rogers of Bryanston, Dorset, who brought large estates in the county. She died in childbed on 21 April 1661. On 31 March 1662 Richmond married Margaret (died 1666/7), widow of William Lewis of Bletchington, Oxfordshire, and daughter of Lawrence Banaster of Papenham, Buckinghamshire. 
In 1662 Richmond set off to join the administration in Scotland of John Middleton, earl of Middleton, and was sworn of the newly expanded privy council in August, alongside his stepfather, who had been created earl of Newburgh in 1660. However, while he successfully reasserted his customary rights as the lord of Dumbarton Castle, combated encroachments on his jurisdiction of the Admiralty, and -- during the Anglo-Dutch wars -- licensed a significant number of privateers to raid against foreign merchantmen, he showed little interest in the workings of the Scottish privy council and only occasionally attended its meetings. It was the need to destroy the formidable power base of John Maitland, earl of Lauderdale, through a reform in the workings of the Edinburgh parliament and the institution of a secret ballot for its members, which had initially motivated Richmond's entry into Scottish politics. Unfortunately, in pushing for a dozen rival members to be expelled from the parliament, Richmond's party had seriously overreached themselves and he, in particular, earned himself the antipathy and mistrust of his king. 
On his return to London, Richmond fought a duel with Colonel Russell over the honour of a lady of the court. As a result, on 30 March 1665 both gentlemen were arrested and sent to the Tower of London; Richmond was released from custody on 21 April. However, honours, sinecures, and titles continued to come his way, as he was created baron of Cobham on 28 May 1666, took command of a regiment of horse known as the 'select militia' in July 1666, and became 'de jure' Lord Clifton of Leighton Bromswold on 4 July 1667. Following the death of his second wife in late December 1666 or the first few days of January 1667, he embarked upon a relationship with his kinswoman Frances Teresa Stuart (1647-1702), who had until that time been mistress to the king. According to Edmund Ludlow, Richmond was no more than an unwitting dupe in the plans of the lord chancellor, the earl of Clarendon, to prevent Charles II from divorcing the queen and marrying Frances, in order to ensure the succession. However, it would appear that this was a genuine love match and there is little reason to suppose that Richmond either rushed into marriage 'as the most certain way he could take to advance himself' with Clarendon, or as a favour to the king in order to lessen the scandal surrounding the fate of his former mistress ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 3 vols., 1698-9, 2.407; Pepys, 8.120). Indeed, rather than forwarding his career, his marriage to Frances -- which was concluded in a private ceremony, at the end of March 1667 -- threatened to ruin it. Charles II was furious at the couple's elopement to Kent, and forbade them to return to court. This order was rescinded only in August 1668, when Frances, her beauty tarnished by an attack of smallpox, was permitted to return to their home at the Bowling Green, in Whitehall Palace. 
In the meantime, the continuing attrition brought about by the Second Anglo-Dutch War had seen Richmond going down to Dorset, in order to prepare the county to resist invasion. When, amid constant rumours of the sighting of a large Dutch fleet, on 6 July 1667 the alarm was given that forty hostile ships were sailing towards Weymouth, Richmond was quick to lead his troop of horse and the county militia in a reconnaissance mission along the coast. However, though the duke's soldiers 'were soon in posture, with a cheerful heart to engage the enemy, had there been occasion' ('CSP dom.', '1667', 271), it was to prove a false alarm. Arriving in Lyme on 13 July 1667 Richmond was 'handsomely received' by the mayor, who ordered two companies of musketeers to fire a salute in his honour ('CSP dom.', '1667', 291). In May 1668 he was commissioned as lord lieutenant of Kent and in August he reviewed the county militia outside the walls of Canterbury. Nevertheless, the threat of a Dutch invasion continued to trouble Richmond's mind and he took steps to protect his own private property, demanding -- and evidently receiving -- from the Ordnance office: '2 brass three-pounders, with carriages, shot and stones... for defence of his house at Cobham, Kent' (BL, Add. MS 21951, fol. 5; 'CSP dom.', '1670', 634). 
Although his uncle Ludovic Stuart had died on 3 November 1665, it was not until 31 December 1668 that Richmond was finally recognized by the French authorities as the eleventh seigneur d'Aubigny. In order to make good his claim, he visited his lands at Aubigny in spring 1669, and evidently took pleasure in his stay, ordering twenty horses to be shipped across the channel for his personal use. He returned to England in November 1669 and on 11 March 1670 was permitted to do homage to Louis XIV, by proxy, in return for the confirmation of his rights. 
With his position at court effectively compromised, Richmond now began to look for a diplomatic appointment in order to restore his ebbing fortunes and lobbied, unsuccessfully, to be sent as an ambassador to the Italian princes. During his visit to France in 1669 he had left it to his friend Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper to press for him to be sent to Poland as an extraordinary ambassador, in order to monitor the forthcoming elections for king that were to be held there. Even though this appointment was similarly refused, Richmond immediately embarked upon another fruitless campaign to press his candidacy as lord chamberlain, even while the current incumbent, the earl of Manchester, was still sickening. 
Once again scandal was to cling to Richmond's name, as after a formal reception at Lincoln's Inn Hall in late 1671 he headed off into the night with the dukes of Monmouth, Albemarle, and Rochester towards a rough and disreputable area of the city. All had been drinking and made such a clamour that, as they approached Whetstone Park, the parish constables were alerted and sent to quieten them down. Swords were drawn and a scuffle followed in which an unfortunate officer was killed in spite of his anguished pleas for mercy. Facing a trial for murder, Richmond, Monmouth, and Albemarle were saved from the justice of the courts only by the intervention of the king, who was forced to offer a general amnesty for felons in order to remove the capital charges laid against them. 
Increasingly appearing to be a liability at court, in February 1672 Richmond had his desire for a diplomatic posting at last realized with his appointment as ambassador to Denmark. At the same time, he was created lord high admiral of Scotland and continued to issue letters of marque to privateer captains. After setting out for Denmark in late April 1672 aboard the frigate 'Portland', Richmond experienced extremely bad weather. Although the crossing was destined to take almost six weeks, with his ship being forced repeatedly to turn for home, the duke was still able to pursue a Dutch merchantman that had unwittingly strayed into his path. However, he refused to allow the commander of the frigate to take possession of the vessel and instead, at the last minute, invoking his powers as lord high admiral of Scotland, he commandeered an English fishing boat and commissioned its crew, together with his own servants, to act as privateers. Consequently, he ensured that the Dutch vessel and its valuable cargo of salt would be judged as his own prize before the Admiralty court and not as the property of the king of England, as would otherwise have been the case. 
Determined to live in splendour, Richmond ordered furs to keep out the Scandinavian cold, as well as ample provisions and tobacco. However, despite the allowance of $2500 given to him 'for his equipage and transport' and his receipt of a grant of $100 a week 'for his entertainment' as ambassador to Denmark, he still managed to run up debts of over $1500 within a few months of his arrival (BL, Add. MS 21948, fol. 289, Add. MS 21950, fol. 423, Add. MS 21951, fol. 40; 'CSP dom.', '1671-2', 25). Boredom was, no doubt, to blame for this. He constantly grumbled that Copenhagen was a damp city, that the Danes were a dull people, and that their women were singularly unprepossessing. Leaving the day-to-day business of the embassy to his deputy, Thomas Henshaw, he fell to self-pity and lamented that: 'Neaver man was so weary of a place as I am of this, it being I thinke the least diverteing of any that I ever came in' (Hartman, 197). Consequently, the arrival of an English frigate in the sound off the coast of Helsingor (Elsinore) in December 1672 offered him the possibility of both companionship and much needed entertainment. Despite thick snow and freezing temperatures, he left his lodgings on 12 December and rowed out to join the ship's captain on board. After a hearty dinner, during which he drank at least two bottles of wine, he took his leave of his host. However, being 'a little merry' he missed 'a step on the side of the ship... that should have eased him down, fell betwixt the ship and the boat, and sank straight' to the bottom like a stone. It would appear, despite Captain Taylor's later report, that the sailors did manage to locate his body and were able to resuscitate him. Unfortunately, by that time he had contracted a chill due to the icy waters and went into violent convulsions during his coach journey back to his lodgings. He died the same day in his rooms, on the outskirts of Helsingor. 
Richmond's brains and bowels were removed and interred within the precincts of the Dutch church at Helsingor, but there was a long delay in transferring his body back for burial in England. His servants had great difficulty in finding a lead coffin to lay him in, and it soon transpired that King Christian V's offer of a ship to bear the corpse home had been made only as a kindly overture, and one which had never meant to be accepted by Charles II's government. As a result, almost a year passed before a new Danish ship, its sails and hull especially painted black as a sign of respect, was dispatched for this doleful mission. The body was landed at Gravesend in early September 1673 before being transferred by barge up the Thames and finally laid to rest in Henry VII's chapel in Westminster Abbey on 20 September 1673. 
Even the elegists plying their trade in the streets of London failed to find any inspiration in the duke's life and could manage only a lacklustre tribute to 'Richmond's loss'. These doggerel verses are chiefly notable for their failure to make any solid claims for his possession of any virtues or abilities whatsoever. Rather, while 'Britain's Genius' shed icicle tears over his death, he was seen to have 'left... all his Services on score', ultimately: 'Unsum'd, Deny'd by Fate, to make them more' ('An Elegie on his Grace the Illustrious Charles Stuart', 1). Although both Samuel Pepys and Captain Guy of the 'Portland' remarked upon the 'good nature' he showed to his subordinates in the naval establishment, Count Grammont thoroughly castigated him as a brute and a debauchee, who managed to cut only an 'indifferent figure at court' ('CSP dom.', '1671-2', 369; Hamilton, 240; Pepys, 9.302). While Grammont should be considered to be a deeply biased source, Richmond would seem to have been a graceless and often quick-tempered individual, who had no understanding of the value of money and only limited political acumen. Having inherited estates already burdened by the debts of the civil war years, and despite frequent and very considerable grants from the crown, he continued to add to his financial difficulties through his penchant for gambling and horse-racing. His account books reveal not only the substantial costs incurred by his extensive refurbishment of Cobham House, but also that those bills that he did receive were usually left unpaid for a considerable length of time. His first two wives were considerable heiresses, but both died childless and his relations with Margaret were marked by a series of personal, financial, and legal disputes. Frances Teresa Stuart survived Richmond by almost thirty years, dying in relative obscurity on 15 October 1702. 


