@@@@@


doc= 26697


Stuart, Sir Charles (1753-1801), army officer, the fourth son of John Stuart, third earl of Bute (1713-1792), politician, and his wife, Mary (1718-1794), the daughter of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu and Edward Wortley Montagu, was born at Kenwood House, London, in January 1753. His siblings included John Stuart, first marquess of Bute, William Stuart, archbishop of Armagh, and Lady Louisa Stuart. He grew to be a strikingly handsome man, as appears in his portrait by George Romney. After schooling at home and at Dr Graffiani's academy in Kensington, he entered the army in 1768 as an ensign in the 37th foot; he purchased a lieutenancy in the 7th foot in 1770 and a captaincy in the 37th foot in 1773. He served with distinction in the war in America from 1775 to 1779 and was promoted lieutenant-colonel of the 26th foot (Cameronians) in 1777. During his service in America he returned twice to England in 1778. On the first occasion, on 19 April he married Anne Louisa (1757-1841), the second daughter and coheir of Lord Vere Bertie, MP, and his wife, Anne Casey. They had two sons, of whom the elder, Charles Stuart, became Baron Stuart de Rothesay. On the second occasion he was commissioned to inform the ministry of the army's plans. He was deeply critical of the conduct of the war by the army command and by Lord George Germain, the secretary of state, and he left America for good at the end of 1779, convinced that the American theatre of war was one 'where there is no honour to be obtained' ('A Prime Minister and his Son', 162). Despite his criticisms of the high command, he won the confidence of General George Clinton, who offered him the post of adjutant-general and continued to correspond with him until the end of the war. 
Stuart failed to obtain further military employment, probably because his father had become 'persona non grata' with the king, and so he travelled extensively in Europe and sought, though without success, appointment to a diplomatic post abroad. His fierce pride and fiery temper, against which his father continually warned him, scarcely qualified him for the life of a diplomat. He was elected to parliament three times, for Bossiney in 1776, Ayr burghs in 1790, and Poole in 1796, but he took little part in parliamentary life. After his father's death in 1792 and Britain's declaration of war against France in 1793, George III agreed to his re-employment in the army. In April 1794 he was given command of the army in Corsica and with Nelson's help drove the French from Calvi, their last remaining stronghold on the island. His energy and bravery during the siege won him the admiration of Sir John Moore, who served as his second in command. Unfortunately he quarrelled with Admiral Lord Hood, who commanded the Mediterranean Fleet, over the conduct of the siege, and later with Sir Gilbert Elliot, viceroy of Corsica. His unwillingness to take orders from a civilian (albeit a viceroy), his siding with the Corsican patriot General Pasquale Paoli in disputes with Elliot, and his conviction that Corsica could be ruled only by a military man led to his resignation of his command in February 1795. 
In January 1797 Stuart was given command of a force sent to Portugal at the urgent request of the Portuguese government, threatened with invasion by France and Spain. There he succeeded in transforming his army, made up partly of foreign troops who lacked discipline and motivation, into a very effective force. The foreign regiments later fought in Egypt and there 'displayed a steadiness and resolution which spoke volumes for what Charles Stuart's influence had done' (Atkinson, 138). In 1798 he received a commission to capture Minorca from the Spanish with a force of 3000 men drawn mostly from Gibraltar. His appointment received the approval of the British admiral Lord St Vincent, who told the secretary of state that Stuart was 'the best general you have... no man can manage Frenchmen so well and the British will go to hell for him' ('A Prime Minister and his Son', 284). He succeeded in capturing Minorca from a numerically superior enemy in November 1798 without the loss of a single man. In recognition he was created knight of the Bath and governor of Minorca. He radically reformed the island's administration, bringing about changes described by a French historian as 'the most important ever effected in a country which had not been ceded by treaty' (Lameire, 703). 
While in Minorca Stuart responded at once to a plea by Nelson to send troops to Messina to preserve Sicily from a French invasion. Nelson had the highest opinion of Stuart, whom he described as an officer who 'by his abilities would make a bad army into a good one' ('Dispatches and Letters', 3.226). Stuart accompanied two regiments to Messina and then paid a fleeting visit to Malta, where the French still held out in Valletta. He reported to Pitt that, contrary to the views of other senior officers, Valletta could be reduced only by continuing with the naval blockade. Ill health compelled him to return to England, where he was immediately offered command of an army in the Mediterranean, to operate in Italy in conjunction with the Austrians. Disagreements with the duke of York, the commander-in-chief, and with government ministers over the size and composition of this army, and over the ministry's commitment to allow a Russian garrison into Malta when the French garrison eventually surrendered, resulted in his resignation in April 1800. He was then offered the important post of commander-in-chief of the army in Ireland, but before he could accept it he died, on 25 March 1801, at his home, the Thatched House, Richmond Park, Surrey. He was buried in the family vault at Petersham. There is a monument to him by Nollekens in Westminster Abbey. 
Stuart was a brilliant and courageous soldier but a difficult subordinate. Fortescue has described him as a man of rare talent both as administrator and commander, 'the greatest of all the British officers of the period', and to be compared with Wellington (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 4, 2.77). But Stuart was too arrogant, too contemptuous of the views of politicians, and too liable to quarrel with other commanders, whether naval or military, to have done the work that Wellington was later to do in Spain and Portugal. As the duke of York told George III on Stuart's resignation in 1800: 'I can only regret that Sir Charles Stuart's unfortunate jealousy of temper and impatience of controul from any superior authority preclude the possibility of taking advantage of his otherwise excellent talents' ('Correspondence of George III', 3.337). 


@@@@@


doc= 26698


Stuart, Charles, Baron Stuart de Rothesay (1779-1845), diplomatist, was born on 2 January 1779, the elder son of Sir Charles Stuart (1753-1801) and his wife, Anne Louisa (1757-1841), younger daughter of Lord Vere Bertie and his wife, Anne. His father was the fourth and favourite son of the prime minister John Stuart, third earl of Bute. 
Stuart was educated at Eton College (1787-95), Christ Church, Oxford (1797-8), and the University of Glasgow (1798-9); he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 6 November 1797 and may have read for the bar in 1800-01. He entered the diplomatic service in 1801. Appointments as secretary of legation at Vienna (1801-4) and secretary of embassy at St Petersburg (1804-8) were followed by a liaison and intelligence-gathering assignment with the provincial juntas in French-occupied Spain (1808-10). As minister at Lisbon (1810-14) he made himself indispensable to Wellington, and he was made a member of the Portuguese regency council. During the 'hundred days' (1815), he was ambassador at the courts of both the king of the Netherlands and Louis XVIII of France, who was in exile in Ghent. He was rewarded with a knighthood in 1812 and the GCB on 2 January 1815. 
On 6 February 1816 Stuart married Lady Elizabeth Margaret (1789-1867), third daughter of Philip Yorke, third earl of Hardwicke. The marriage was one of convenience -- Sir Charles was reported by Lady Granville to have 'no thoughts of parting with a French actress whom he keeps' (Surtees, 95) -- but seems to have been happy none the less, and produced two remarkable daughters, Charlotte (1817-1861), later Lady Canning ['see 'Canning, Charlotte], and Louisa Anne (1818-1891), later Lady Waterford ['see 'Beresford, Louisa Anne], whose beauty belied their parentage, as both Sir Charles and Lady Stuart were plain. 
In 1815 Stuart became ambassador at Paris, where he remained until 1824. His greatest diplomatic achievement was the treaty by which Brazil became independent of Portugal, negotiated on a joint Anglo-Portuguese special mission in 1825. He was reappointed as ambassador to France in 1828, and was created Baron Stuart de Rothesay of the Isle of Bute on 22 January that year. He was in Paris in 1830, at the time of the July revolution, and was rebuked by his government for not giving them sufficient warning. The foreign secretary, Lord Aberdeen, told him, 'This is a time when a little more exertion may reasonably be expected' (Aberdeen to Stuart, 31 July 1830; BL, Add. MSS). What Aberdeen meant by this was that he should keep them informed, but Stuart plunged into a frenzy of activity, which gravely embarrassed his government. Although instructed to maintain neutrality, he told the duke of Orleans (the future King Louis Philippe) that his claims were unlikely to be accepted by the great powers and became deeply involved in a plot to ensure that the succession passed to Charles X's grandson the duke of Bordeaux. When he learned of it the British prime minister, the duke of Wellington, was furious and pointed out that Britain might be accused of promoting civil war in France. Aberdeen did not, as Wellington wished, recall Stuart but warned him that he might be publicly disavowed. Stuart indignantly replied that he had suppressed all mention of the matter in his official dispatches and he presumed that his private letters were not liable to be 'brought forward' (Stuart to Aberdeen, 23 Aug 1830; BL, Add. MS 43085). The matter did not leak out and no trace remains in the Foreign Office files. 
Paris was an important centre for collectors at this time, and Stuart made extensive purchases, sometimes also acting as agent for George IV. He built Highcliffe Castle at Christchurch, Hampshire, a rare example of the romantic and picturesque style of architecture, and furnished it with his Parisian acquisitions. The whig government removed Stuart from Paris in 1831 and he was not employed again until Sir Robert Peel's government sent him to St Petersburg in 1841. He was already a sick man. In April 1842 the Russian chancellor, Count Nesselrode, called him 'un cadavre ambulant' (W. Hamilton to earl of Aberdeen, 6 April 1842; BL, Add. MS 43142). In July 1843 he had a stroke, which left him unable to conduct business. He evidently suffered from what is now called cerebro-vascular disease. Although he tried to conceal his condition, his resignation was forced in March 1844. Stuart died at Highcliffe on 6 November 1845 from a series of strokes. He was buried a week later in St Mark's Church, Highcliffe, and his title became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 26699


Charles Edward Stuart (1799?-1880), impostors, were brothers who claimed to be the heirs of Charles Edward Stuart, the Young Chevalier. Mystery surrounds the places and dates of their births, and they sought to surround their ancestry with similar obfuscation. Their father was Thomas Gatehouse Allen (died 1839), a lieutenant in the Royal Navy, and their mother was Katherine Matilda, daughter of the clergyman and antiquary Owen Manning, of Godalming, Surrey. Their pretensions were based on the belief that Thomas Gatehouse Allen was not the son of his supposed father, Admiral John Carter Allen, but was in fact the legitimate son of the Young Chevalier and his wife, born in Italy and fostered by the admiral. 


@@@@@


doc= 26700


Stuart, Daniel (1766-1846), newspaper proprietor and journalist, was born on 16 November 1766 in Edinburgh. Both his father and his grandfather were reputed to have been active Jacobites. In 1778 he went to London to join his elder brothers, Peter ['see below'] and Charles, who were already established in the print trade there. The three set up home in Charlotte Street, Portland Place, with their two sisters, Catherine and Elizabeth. 
By 1788 Daniel Stuart was listed as the printer of the 'Morning Post'. In 1795 he bought the paper for the relatively small sum of $600, after its circulation had fallen to about 350 copies per day. Under Stuart's leadership the 'Morning Post' appears to have flourished. He claimed to have increased sales to more than 4500 by 1803. In this year he reportedly sold it owing to ill health for $25,000. Before this temporary interruption to his career Stuart had absorbed another newspaper, 'The Telegraph', into his fledgeling business empire, and attempted to buy the ailing 'Gazetteer' in 1797. 
During the early 1790s Stuart became deputy secretary of the Society of the Friends of the People, a group which campaigned for parliamentary reform. In 1794 his pamphlet 'Peace and Reform, Against War and Corruption' appeared. The work, which was dedicated to the society, attacked Arthur Young's warning against following the example of the French revolutionaries, defended the revolution, and proposed a programme of parliamentary reform in Britain. In 1796 the 'Morning Post' serialized Thomas Paine's 'Decline and Fall of the English System of Finance'. The paper received harsh criticism from the pro-establishment newspaper the 'Anti-Jacobin'. Stuart's brother-in-law was the philosopher Sir James Mackintosh (1765-1832), honorary secretary of the Society of the Friends of the People, whom his sister Catherine had secretly married in 1789. Mackintosh wrote regularly for the 'Morning Post'. Other contributors to the paper included Coleridge, Southey, Godwin, Lamb, and John Thelwall. 
In 1800 or 1801 Stuart purchased 'The Courier' with T. G. Street. Although they held an equal number of shares, Street was described as the sole editor. In 1815 Crabb Robinson claimed that Stuart had long since ceased to have anything to do with the management of the paper, but simply took his share of the profits and looked over the accounts. However, Coleridge appears to have attributed much of the paper's political tone to Stuart. During the Napoleonic wars 'The Courier' was fiercely patriotic, its conservatism providing a sharp contrast to the radical edge which the 'Post' had displayed. Coleridge, in a letter to Stuart which reveals the 'Courier''s importance, asserted that the paper greatly contributed to Napoleon's defeat by ensuring public support for the government's war efforts: 'It is far, very far, from hyperbole to affirm, that you did more against the French scheme of Continental domination, than the Duke of Wellington has done; or rather Wellington could neither have been supplied by the Ministers, nor the Ministers supported by the Nation, but for the tone first given, and then constantly kept up, by the plain, unministerial, anti-opposition, anti-jacobin, anti-gallican, anti-Napoleonic spirit of your writings, aided by the colloquial good style, and evident good sense, in which as acting on an immense mass of knowledge of existing men and existing circumstances, you are superior to any man I ever met with in my life time. (Coleridge, 2.660)' Canning claimed that, unknown to Stuart, Street was given as much as $2000 to support the Perceval ministry in 'The Courier'. Stuart himself maintained that neither he nor the paper had ever taken such bribes. He wrote to J. Benjafield in 1811: 'I often hear of persons, and sometimes meet them, who assert that they can prove I receive a regular salary from the ministry for the support 'The Courier' gives them, though I never received a shilling from any minister, or for any such consideration. (Benjafield, iv)' A letter from Canning to Huskisson in 1809 states that Stuart was still writing for the paper and that Street and Stuart were divided politically, with Stuart opposed to 'The Courier''s attacks on Canning. In 1823 Stuart still owned a third share of 'The Courier' but appears to have fallen out with William Mudford, who became editor in 1817, again over politics. Stuart refused to back Mudford in his denial that he was in the pay of the French government. 
Stuart married Mary Napier in 1813, and they went on to have three sons. The following year he bought a house in Harley Street, having made a large fortune from his newspaper ventures. In 1817 he successfully pursued a case for libel against Daniel Lovell, the proprietor of 'The Statesman', who had accused him of embezzling money from the funds of the Society of the Friends of the People. In the same year Stuart purchased Wykeham Park, a 300 acre estate near Banbury. Here he spent half of each year, becoming an active magistrate, a deputy lieutenant, and in 1823 serving as high sheriff. He died in his London home on 25 August 1846. His demise has been partly attributed to the shock of his eldest son's death in 1842, which brought about a long illness culminating in a fatal bout of dysentery. Although he had been involved in a public argument with the executors of Coleridge's estate concerning his alleged mistreatment of the poet, Charles Lamb said of Stuart that 'He ever appeared to us one of the finest tempered of Editors' (Lamb, 212). 
Daniel's brother 


@@@@@


doc= 26701


Stuart, Lord Dudley Coutts (1803-1854), politician, was born on 11 January 1803 in South Audley Street, London, the only son of John Stuart, first marquess of Bute (1744-1814), and his second wife, Frances (died 1832), daughter of Thomas Coutts, a banker. Although Dudley and his sister Frances (1801-1859) were the only children of this couple, Stuart had no chance of succession to his father's title, as John Stuart had ten children with his first wife, seven sons among them. At least three of Stuart's half-brothers had sat in parliament and that fact -- together with the memory of the career of their grandfather John Stuart, third earl of Bute -- had certainly some influence on the atmosphere in which he was brought up. Among his youthful associates were Dudley Ryder, Lord Sandon, and Lord Holland's son Henry Edward Fox. He was also steered towards public activity by his beloved mother, who superintended his education. His home tutor was the Revd Edmund Mortlock, and they travelled in Italy. Charles Dickens's 'Uncommercial Traveller' paper, 'The Italian Prisoner', is a romanticized account of how Stuart secured the release of a political prisoner about this time. 
In 1820 Stuart became a member of Christ's College, Cambridge. Three years later (1823) he graduated MA. Soon after that, in 1824 and to the consternation of many of his relatives and friends, he married Napoleon's niece Christina Alexandrina Egypta (1798-1847), daughter of Lucien Bonaparte, prince of Canino. They married at Rome, in secret, and according to Roman Catholic rites. On 21 May 1826 they went through an Anglican ceremony in Florence. The reappearance in 1827 of Christina's first husband, a Swede, Count Aasvid de Posse -- who had been reported dead -- was an inconvenience: one that required a papal dispensation for an annulment, which was granted the following year. Despite the birth of a son -- Paul Amadeus Francis (1825-1889) -- the Stuarts' marriage proved a failure. By 1840 Lady Stuart had left their only child with her husband and moved to Rome. She died there on 19 May 1847. 
In the meantime, Stuart was elected to the House of Commons as the Liberal member for Arundel (1830). He was re-elected in 1831, 1832, and 1835. The greatest influence on Stuart's views was his uncle, and first political mentor, Sir Francis Burdett. Drawn by his example, Lord Dudley joined the group of the 'Reform Bill' supporters. His parliamentary maiden speech was made in favour of the bill, on 7 March 1831. 
In 1832 Stuart became acquainted with a few participants of the suppressed Polish uprising of 1830-31, who had emigrated to western Europe. Three of them, Prince Adam Czartoryski, Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz, and Count Wladyslaw Zamoyski, soon became intimate friends. Czartoryski especially, a former minister of Emperor Alexander I and in 1830-31 one of the leaders of the Polish national government, made a deep impression on Stuart. The fascination of the prince's personality, newly discovered family connections with him, and Stuart's approbation of Czartoryski's political opinions, gave a stimulus to his activities on behalf of the Poles. 
There were two main aspects of this activity. As early as 1833 Stuart became the leading organizer of the action to provide help for hundreds of Polish refugees who had arrived in England. He was supported by the members of the London Literary Association of the Friends of Poland (LAFP), established by Thomas Campbell in 1832. In 1833, accepting the post of one of its vice-presidents, Lord Dudley became 'spiritus movens' of the association, far more active than the nominal president, Thomas Wentworth Beaumont. After Beaumont's death in 1848 Stuart took over his function and performed it until 1854. Under his guidance LAFP organized many public subscriptions for the relief of the Poles. In 1834, as a result of Stuart's motion, the House of Commons voted an annual grant for the Polish exiles of $10,000. LAFP distributed the grant -- which was renewed every year at a different amount -- until 1838, when the Treasury took over the task. 
The engagement of Lord Dudley in affording the relief for the Poles was as strong as his support for their political claims. He was convinced that restoration of Poland would not only be an act of justice, but it also would help to eliminate a menace to British interests caused by Russian expansion in the Middle East. Until 1837 he expressed these opinions mostly in parliament, where he was supported by Sir Stratford Canning, Joseph Hume, Robert Cutlar Fergusson, David Urquhart, and several other politicians. Debates initiated by them played a considerable role in stirring up the anti-Russian feelings in England. But theories about the growing danger from Russia and the necessity of supporting Turkey had also their eloquent opponents at that time. One of them was Richard Cobden, who regarded the British Russophobes as false prophets and dangerous warmongers. 
In 1837 Stuart was defeated at Arundel by Lord Fitzalan. For the next decade he could only give some informal inspiration to parliamentary debates on Poland. Pro-Polish agitation was meanwhile led by him at public meetings, in private conversations, and through the press and other publications, which included 'Speech of Lord Dudley Stuart on the policy of Russia delivered in the House of Commons, Friday, February 19, 1836' (1836), 'An appeal of the Literary Association of the Friends of Poland to the inhabitants of Great Britain and Ireland in behalf of the Polish refugees' (1840), and the 'Speech of Lord Dudley Stuart in the House of Commons on the 16th of May, 1848 with official and other documents relating to the insurrection in Posen and the bombardment of Cracow' (1848). He also facilitated the contacts between British officials and the Poles and backed up Czartoryski's political undertakings. 
At the general election of 1847 Stuart returned to Westminster, via the metropolitan borough of Marylebone. He was re-elected in 1852, and kept the seat until his death. In the spring of 1848, with continental Europe in turmoil, Lord Dudley shared the opinion that the restoration of Poland was very close. He tried to gain active support in Whitehall for that idea but with no positive results. Once hopes for Poland had vanished, he started to organize help for Hungarians, who were fighting for independence. After the suppression of the Hungarian uprising (1849) he was among those who insisted on firm British action in defence of several thousand emigrants who took refuge in Turkey and whose extradition was demanded by eastern powers. 
From 1850 Stuart's public activity declined. Yet his contacts with the Poles were not suspended: in 1853 and 1854 he spent a few weeks in Turkey, inducing local authorities to form Polish military units and to use these against Russia. In the autumn of 1854 he went to Sweden where, in conversations with King Oscar I and his advisers, he sought approval of the idea of the restoration of Poland and encouraged the Swedes to take part in the war. All of these activities broke off suddenly. Stuart died in Stockholm on 17 November 1854 of pneumonia, which followed a typhoid fever. His body was returned to England and he was buried in All Saints parish church, Hertford, on 16 December 1854. 'Burke's Peerage' (1857), a publication not easily moved to elegy, recorded that his death was 'deeply lamented'. 


@@@@@


doc= 26702


Stuart, Esme, first duke of Lennox (c.1542-1583), courtier and magnate, was born in France, the only child of John Stewart or Stuart (died 1567), fifth seigneur d'Aubigny, and his wife, Anne de La Queulle (died 1579), fourth daughter and coheir of Francois, seigneur de La Queulle, and his wife, Anne d'Espinay. John Stewart, a Scot, had been adopted at an early age by the marechal d'Aubigny, who had made him his heir, and he had spent his life in France. 
Brought up by his mother at La Verrerie, near Aubigny, Esme Stuart succeeded his father as seigneur d'Aubigny in 1567, and in 1572 married Catherine de Balsac (died 'c'.1631), youngest daughter of Guillaume de Balsac, seigneur d'Entragues. Slim, with a neatly trimmed red beard, mild-mannered and affable, Aubigny was sent by the French in 1576 as an envoy to the Low Countries, and then went to England on a diplomatic mission, where he was reported to be in dispute with representatives of the infant Lady Arabella Stuart (as the name was usually spelt in England) over their competing claims to her dead father's earldom of Lennox. 
Although to all appearance a Frenchman, Aubigny remained conscious of his Scottish origins. Not only was he in line for the Lennox titles and estates, he was also a descendant of James II, king of Scots, and he had been first cousin of James VI's murdered father, Lord Darnley. In the end the Lennox earldom was granted to his elderly uncle, Robert Stewart, bishop of Caithness, and when Robert married for the first time seven months later Aubigny would have been aware that if his uncle now had sons -- an unlikely prospect -- then their claims would supersede his. A sudden message from Scotland inviting him to visit his father's native land therefore arrived at a propitious moment. A journey north would allow him to establish his own position, and in any case the invitation apparently came from the king himself and could not be refused. Moreover, the leaders of the Hamilton family, hereditary enemies of the Lennox Stewarts, had recently been accused of the murder of two earlier regents of Scotland, James Stewart, earl of Moray, and Aubigny's uncle Matthew, fourth earl of Lennox. The downfall of Lord John and Lord Claud Hamilton seemed assured, and Aubigny could hope to benefit, not least because the main issue between the two families was their quarrel as to who had the senior position in the Scottish succession, both being descended from daughters of James II. 
In September 1579 Aubigny therefore took leave of his wife and five young children and set out for Scotland. He was seen off at Dieppe by the French courtiers, led by the duc de Guise, and a few days later he landed at Leith and made his way to Holyroodhouse, where he presented himself to James VI. By 10 October Nicholas Errington, the English envoy, was writing to tell Walsingham that, 'Touching M. d'Aubigny, it appears that the king is much delighted with his company' ('CSP Scot.', '1574-81', 355). The newcomer had been given the fairest and nearest lodging to the royal apartments in Holyroodhouse. It seemed that he would spend the winter in Scotland and there was talk of his wife's coming to join him. 
The young king was entranced with his charming, sophisticated 37-year-old cousin. Starved as he had been of affection throughout his childhood, James revelled in Aubigny's kindly attention. Here at last was a relative of his own, sensitive, cultured, and perceptive, who treated him as an adult, discussing theology and politics and poetry with him, respecting his views, and nurturing his self-confidence. James was overjoyed. Not everyone was so delighted with Aubigny's arrival, however, for it was widely believed that he had come as a Roman Catholic agent of the duc de Guise, to scheme for the overthrow of protestantism and the return of Mary, queen of Scots. James ignored the rumours, however, and after the Hamiltons were forfeited in November 1579 he made Aubigny commendator of Arbroath Abbey, a lucrative position previously occupied by Lord John Hamilton. On 5 March 1580 Aubigny was granted the earldom of Lennox, which his uncle had been persuaded to resign in his favour. By 13 September he was being mentioned as keeper of Dumbarton Castle, and on 11 October he was nominated chamberlain and first gentleman of the royal chamber. 
Sir James Melville of Halhill believed that Lennox was 'of nature upright, just and gentle, but lacked experience in the state of the country' ('Memoirs', 107), commenting that he would have been 'tolerable, if he had happened upon as honest counsellors as he was well inclined himself' (ibid., 27-8). As it was, Lennox turned to James Stewart, later earl of Arran, who had been eagerly cultivating his friendship. Together they outmanoeuvred the increasingly unpopular fourth earl of Morton, formerly regent, and on 31 December 1580, at Lennox's prompting, Stewart accused Morton before the privy council of having participated in the murder of Lord Darnley. Morton was arrested and imprisoned. For the next twenty months, Lennox and Stewart governed Scotland. 
Lennox and the young king now set about trying to silence the alarmist rumours about the earl's supposed intentions. On 28 January 1581 James signed the negative confession, a strongly worded document condemning 'the Roman Antichrist' and all the doctrines of the Catholic church, and Lennox let it be known that he had converted to protestantism. His conversion appears to have been genuine and, if he had ever entertained the ambition of restoring Queen Mary to the throne, his views were modified by his growing loyalty to her son. When the duc de Guise early in 1581 put forward Mary's plan for an 'association', whereby she and James VI would rule Scotland jointly, Lennox's mildly encouraging response nevertheless included the insistence that James should retain his title as king. Any scheme for Mary's release would have to be led by Guise himself, Lennox said. 
Under Lennox's administration parliament set up a commission to improve the stipends of ministers, but this too failed to reassure the ultra-protestants. They noted with alarm the appointment of some of Mary's former supporters to the privy council in the aftermath of Morton's execution on 2 June 1581, but regardless of his subjects' misgivings James continued to shower gifts upon his favourite. On 5 June Lennox was granted the lordship and regality of Dalkeith, Aberdour, and other properties which had belonged to Morton, and on 5 August 1581 at an elaborate ceremony in Holyroodhouse he was created duke of Lennox, earl of Darnley, and lord of Aubigny, Tarboltoun, and Dalkeith, the only duke in Scotland. By now he and Stewart, then earl of Arran, were rivals rather than friends, with Arran protesting volubly against Lennox's right to bear the crown at the meeting of parliament in October. Presumably Arran's jealousy had been intensified by the knowledge that the king intended to have Lennox recognized as his heir during that session of parliament, but ecclesiastical opposition became so vehement that James had to abandon this plan. 
The privy council had split into two separate factions. Arran and his sympathizers met at Holyrood, while Lennox and his supporters held their discussions at Dalkeith. Arran gave people to understand that he and his colleague were at odds because he was trying to prevent Lennox from plotting against protestantism, but their differences in fact had far more to do with their competing desires to control access to the king. To an extent matters were smoothed over on 2 December after Arran agreed to resign his office as captain of the royal guard, leaving Lennox in sole charge of the royal household. However, rumours of Lennox's involvement in Roman Catholic plots were still circulating. The situation was made worse when his administration refused to accept the condemnation of episcopacy by the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, and its arrangement for Robert Montgomerie to be appointed to the vacant see of Glasgow. Furious, the presbytery of Edinburgh excommunicated Montgomerie, but Lennox had the excommunication annulled by royal prerogative. 
Early in 1582 Lennox was secretly visited by two Jesuits, William Crichton and William Holt, who invited him to take command of an army to be raised by Philip II for the invasion of England, with the aim of freeing Queen Mary and placing her on the English throne. Rumours about this scheme were rife and on 12 July the king was forced to issue a proclamation denouncing current allegations that Lennox was a 'deviser' of 'the erecting of papistrie' and reiterating that the duke had 'sworne in the presence of God, approved with the holie action of the Lord's Table' to maintain protestantism and was 'readie to seale the samine with his blood' (Calderwood, 3.783). 
These denials were in vain, and on 22 August 1582, in the Ruthven raid, a group of ultra-protestant notables, including former adherents of Regent Morton, seized the king in protest at Lennox's regime and the extravagant expenditure of the recently enlarged royal household. Led by the earl of Gowrie the Ruthven raiders took the government into their own hands for the next ten months. Arran attempted to ride to the king's rescue, but he was imprisoned, while Lennox was ordered to leave the country. Plunged into despair Lennox rode to Dumbarton where it was said that he was 'so far appalled and cast down as there appeared in him little courage or resolution' (Willson, 45). He knew his enemies were saying that he had been plotting to betray the king, and his greatest fear was that James had believed them and had personally ordered his banishment. Desperately, he wrote him a series of letters, but received no reply, for the king was in no position to respond. 
Eventually Lennox rode back to Dalkeith. On 18 December he sent James another long letter, declaring that 'whatever might happen to me, I shall alwayes be your very faithful servant... in spite of all you will be always my true master, and he alone in this world whom my heart is resolved to serve' ('CSP Scot.', '1581-3', 223). That same day he rode for London, where he had an audience with Elizabeth I. She later told James VI in a letter about her conversation with Lennox, 'whom at the first we did roundly charge with such matters whereof we thought him culpable' (ibid., 251). Lennox next crossed the channel and was reunited with his family. He continued to send urgent letters to James, but early in February he fell seriously ill, in Paris. According to Calderwood he was suffering from 'a dissenterie, or excoriatioun of the inward parts, engendred of melancholie, wherewith was joyned gonorrhea' (Calderwood, 3.715). The attentions of the leading French doctors failed to save him, and as he lay dying he declared again that he was a protestant. He wished to be buried at Aubigny, he said, but he wanted his embalmed heart to be sent to James and commended his young children to the king. He died on 26 May 1583. 
News of Lennox's death became known in Scotland on 4 June, and James could scarcely believe it. His distress was compounded when Aubigny's final letter to him arrived a few days later. That autumn the king wrote a long vernacular poem mourning the loss of his friend. 'Ane Metaphoricall Invention of a Tragedie called Phoenix' tells the moving tale of a beautiful and exotic phoenix, which makes its way from Arabia to Scotland where it is tamed by the king. The other birds, envious, attack it, and, in spite of the monarch's efforts to protect it, it eventually flies away and dies in a foreign land: '
... now begin 

My woes: her death makes lyfe to greif in me. 
(Bergeron, 34)' Whether the duke's embalmed heart ever came to Scotland remains unknown, but in November Lennox's elder son, Ludovick (or Louis) Stuart (or Stewart), arrived at James's invitation, and the king subsequently arranged the betrothal of Lennox's three daughters to Scottish noblemen. Lennox's widow lived until about 1631. 
According to one of James VI's biographers, the duke of Lennox 'possessed such genius for intrigue and deception that contemporaries and posterity alike have been baffled as to his true intentions' (Willson, 32). Nineteenth- and early twentieth-century historians were in no doubt as to Lennox's duplicitous motives in coming to Scotland, accepting that he was intent on subverting the protestant religion and restoring Queen Mary. More recent writers have been inclined to believe that he was prompted rather by self-interest and the desire to establish his claim to the throne. His brief intervention in Scottish affairs lasted for only three years, but his influence on the young James VI was considerable. The nature of their relationship has been the subject of much speculation, and from the start there have been allegations that Lennox introduced James not only to French poetry but also to homosexuality. According to one Scottish chronicler, 'His majesty having conceived an inward affection to the Lord d'Aubigny, entered in great familiarity and quiet purposes with him', while the church ministers accused the duke of setting out 'to draw the king to carnal lust' (ibid., 36). 
'I have such extreme regret that I desire to die rather than to live, fearing that that has been the occasion of your no longer loving me', Lennox had told James in his last letter ('CSP Scot.', '1581-3', 223). However, it would be a mistake to read too much into the often extravagant language of the sixteenth-century courtier. Lennox's evident affection for his lonely young cousin brought him a glittering career, but there is no cause to think that he deliberately exploited the king's adolescent sexuality for his own benefit. Whatever James's later sexual preferences, it is not unusual for a young adolescent to hero-worship a handsome and accomplished older man, and it may be that, closely related by blood as they were, they shared a genuine sense of affinity. It was undeniably a personal tragedy for them both when their mutually rewarding friendship evoked the bitter enmity of the Scottish courtiers and led to their final separation. 


@@@@@


doc= 26703


Stuart, Frances Teresa, duchess of Lennox and Richmond (1647-1702), courtier, was born on 8 July 1647, the eldest daughter of Walter Stewart or Stuart (died in or before 1657), politician, and his wife, Sophia (1610/11?-1702), daughter of Sir George Carew and widow of Richard Nevill of Newton St Loo, Somerset. Her father was the third son of Walter Stewart, first Lord Blantyre, was elected MP for Monmouth Boroughs in 1624 and 1625, and seems to have joined Queen Henrietta Maria's exiled court in Paris after 1649. Her mother, who as maid of honour to Henrietta Maria had been noted for her beauty and skill in dancing, acted as a dresser to the queen in France, an appointment confirmed after the Restoration. Frances was educated as a Catholic in France, while her half-brother, George Nevill, remained in England 'well fixed in the protestant religion' ('Diary of Bulstrode Whitelocke', 466), married in 1657 Mary, daughter of Bulstrode Whitelocke, and was the father of George Nevill, thirteenth Baron Abergavenny. 
The young Frances Stuart was a favourite of Henrietta Maria and also acquired the approbation of the duchess of Orleans, who wrote to her brother Charles II on 4 January 1662 that 'she is the prettiest girl in the world and the most fitted to adorn a court' (Hartmann, 11). With such connections it is unsurprising that she secured an appointment as maid of honour to Charles II's new queen, Catherine of Braganza. Louis XIV 'would fain have had her mother, who is one of the most cunning women in the world, to let her stay in France' (Baillon, 'Henriette-Anne', 80), but contented himself with giving her an expensive farewell present. She arrived in England early in 1662 and made an immediate impression, one observer noting in February 1662, 'beautiful Mrs Stuart is here so admired and so rich in clothes and jewels, she is the only blazing star' ('Various Collections', 8.65). Although little else is known her of during 1662, she was undoubtedly in waiting on Queen Catherine, who arrived in England in May, and her appointment as maid of honour was formalized in June 1663. Early in 1663, when she was still only fifteen years old, the king began to take notice of her. Possibly spotting a dangerous rival in the making, Barbara Villiers, Lady Castlemaine, the king's mistress, befriended Frances, but could do little to distract Charles from pursuing the latest beautiful addition to his court. 
By June 1663 the marquis de Ruvigny was reporting to Louis XIV: 'no one doubts but that Miss Stuart has taken her [Lady Castlemaine's] place. She did not partake of communion at Whitsun, which is an assured mark of their [Frances's and the king's] recent understanding, so the best Catholics inform me. (Hartmann, 38-9)' Frances, however, did not become the king's mistress, nor did she become a pawn in court politics. In the summer and autumn of 1663 various politicians, most notably Sir Henry Bennet (later earl of Arlington), the duke of Buckingham, and the earl of Bristol, tried to use her to influence the king but she was either too 'cunning' (Pepys, 'Diary', 4.366), or too 'infantile' (Grammont in Pepys, 'Diary', 4.37-8n.) -- opinion was divided -- to be of much use as a political operator. Her chosen amusements were blindman's buff, hunt the slipper, and card-building rather than political intrigue. Such was the king's infatuation with what Samuel Pepys called 'her sweet eye, little Roman nose, and excellent taille' (Pepys, 'Diary', 4.230) that there were rumours that the king intended to marry her. The queen, however, recovered from a near fatal illness she had suffered late in 1663, and Charles II consistently refused suggestions that he divorce Catherine. 
Charles continued to pursue Frances, who maintained her position at court. In July 1665 Courtin observed: 'she is the rising sun, and in truth too incomparably more beautiful than the other [Castlemaine]' (Hartmann, 82). By November 1665 it was reported that the duke of York, too, had fallen in love with her. Her fame as one of the most beautiful women of the court increased: in 1667 she was the model for John Roettier's figure of Britannia, seated at the foot of a rock with the legend 'Favente Deo' in the medal entitled 'The peace of Breda', and in a similar guise in the unfinished 'Naval victories' medal, with the legend 'Quatuor maria vindico'. Pepys noted on a visit to his goldsmith on 25 February 1667, 'the king's new medal, where in little there is Mrs Stewards face' (Pepys, 'Diary', 8.83). Edmund Waller and Andrew Marvell both wrote verses referring to the medal and Frances's role as Britannia, though twentieth-century scholarship has questioned the connection. Subsequently the design by Roettier was used on the reverse side of the copper coinage introduced in 1672. 
In March 1667, according to John Evelyn's later account, Frances 'could no longer continue at court without prostituting herself to the king, whom she had long kept off' (Hartmann, 115). An attractive suitor appeared in the guise of Charles Stuart, third duke of Richmond, sixth duke of Lennox, and eleventh seigneur d'Aubigny (1639-1672), courtier, whose second wife had died in January 1667. Richmond was distantly related to the king, who affected to agree to a match as long as Richmond made a suitable settlement on Frances. Perhaps suspecting that the king would not in the end allow her to marry, Frances left London secretly and married Richmond about 30 March 1667. The couple returned to London soon afterwards and lodged with Frances's mother at Somerset House in order to gauge the king's reaction. Charles was furious, the earl of Lauderdale writing that he had never seen Charles 'more offended than he is at the duke and all concerned' (Seaward, 321), a reaction not assuaged when Frances returned his presents of jewellery. In response Frances and her husband retired to Cobham Hall in Kent. The secret marriage and the king's reaction to it have even been used to explain the downfall of the earl of Clarendon, whose supposed fault was to encourage the Richmond match in order to ensure that Charles remained married to his barren queen and thus protected the claims of his own grandchildren, princesses Mary and Anne, to the throne. It seems more likely that at most it was one further instance of Clarendon's alienating the king. 
The duchess of Richmond remained unreconciled to the king until, while again in residence in Somerset House, she contracted smallpox in March 1668. There were fears for her beauty, but as Charles wrote to his sister in May 1668, 'she is not much marked with the smallpox, and I must confess this last affliction made me pardon all that is past' (Hartmann, 154). The only after-effect of her illness appears to have been some residual eye trouble. She duly returned to court, and on 6 July 1668 Pepys reported that the previous week she had been sworn a lady of the bedchamber to the queen. The duke and duchess moved into new Whitehall lodgings in the Bowling Green. Back at court Frances was still favoured by the king, which gave some alarm to his new mistress, Louise de Keroualle, duchess of Portsmouth. Although, according to Baron Dartmouth, the king told her husband in 1671 that Frances had surrendered to him after her marriage, she never sought the position of acknowledged royal mistress. 
The duke of Richmond was appointed ambassador to Denmark in February 1672, and following his departure the duchess was left with power of attorney to receive the money due from his grant of duties on the aulnage and the payments due for his embassy. She also, in contrast to the frivolity of her younger days and indeed her spendthrift husband, applied herself to running the Richmond estates with prudence and good judgement. Richmond did not return from his diplomatic posting, dying near Elsinore in Denmark on 12 December 1672. The Richmonds had no children, and the titles and estates of Lennox and Richmond reverted to the crown, although the king with characteristic generosity allowed the duchess the use of the Lennox estate for her life. The next duke of Richmond was the son of Louise de Keroualle and Charles II, who was created a duke in 1675. In 1677 Frances resigned her claims on the Aubigny estate in France to Charles for a pension of $1000 per annum, and about the same time sold her life interest in Cobham Hall to her sister-in-law Lady Catherine O'Brien, thereby ending the bone of contention between them. 
Frances lived quietly at court attending the queen, and was evidently concerned to maintain her reputation as a respectable widow, in 1678 demanding and obtaining an apology from the rakish young courtier John Grobham Howe after he falsely claimed to have had an affair with her. She continued at court until 1688, although she was not present at the birth of the prince of Wales. Thereafter perhaps prudence and ill health dictated her retirement. Nevertheless, she defended tenaciously her right to collect the aulnage, petitioning parliament in 1692, 1693, and 1700 when legislation threatened to extinguish her rights. However, her pension from the crown fell into arrears in 1690. She attended the coronation of Queen Anne in April 1702. 
Frances died on 15 October 1702 and was buried on 22 October next to her husband in Westminster Abbey. Boyer recorded that 'she was a Roman Catholic and very devout in her way' (Boyer, 1-2.231). Details of her will became public very soon after her death. She left legacies of $500 and $300 per annum to her mother, who died at the end of 1702. She left her sister, the Jacobite Sophia Bulkeley, who was married to the exiled Lord Bulkeley, $1000, and $500 apiece to her sister's six children, including 'La Belle Nanette', wife of the duke of Berwick. However, after being 'advised I cannot safely do the same in respect of their being in France and other circumstances attending them', she gave them seven years to return to England and 'be taken into the favour and protection of the crown and discharged and freed from the offences against the same' in order to claim the money (will). She also made the unusual request, which was honoured, that an effigy be made of her 'as well done in wax as can bee' (ibid.), dressed in her coronation robes and coronet, and set up under glass near the tomb of the second duke and duchess of Richmond in Westminster Abbey. Most of her estate was left in trust to the earl of Rochester, Alexander Stewart, fifth Lord Blantyre (died 1704), Sir William Whitelocke, and James Gray (her gentleman of horse), to be laid out on the purchase of a Scottish estate to be named Lennoxlove, which was to be settled on Walter Stuart, son of Lord Blantyre. 


@@@@@


doc= 26704


Stuart, Gilbert (1743-1786), historian and political writer, was born in the Old College Buildings, Edinburgh, on 9 November 1743, the eldest of six children of George Stuart ('bap'. 1711, died 1793), professor of humanity, and Jean Duncanson ('b'. 1712, died in or before 1793) of Gearsheath in Dunbartonshire. Distinct from much writing of his day, Stuart's works are characterized by their intensity of personal feeling and their oppositional rhetoric. Journalism was his main source of income, but historical writing was his true calling. Excessive drinking shortened his life and brought upon him the opprobrium of critics in his own lifetime and ever since, but alcohol made him a 'boon companion' ('GM', 1786, 716) and warmed a pen that naturally tended towards extremes. 
Stuart grew up among the professors and students at Edinburgh University, where he attended lectures, but did not take a degree. As a young man, he worked in the university library, which his father had been cataloguing since 1747, and about 1766 began a legal apprenticeship. The novelist Henry Mackenzie, a fellow apprentice, recalled that 'Gilbert sat up too late, and drank too much to be often there' ('Anecdotes and Egotisms', 174). Stuart was not inclined towards the law as a profession, seeing in it only the 'sordid prospect of future gain' ('Monthly Review', 47.362). During this time he wrote 'An Historical Dissertation Concerning the Antiquity of the English Constitution'. Published in 1768, the work summarizes the history of English liberty from the time of the first Britons to the Norman invasion. Implicit in this whiggish perspective was a challenge to David Hume, whose 'History of England' had put a relativist historiographical agenda at the forefront of the debate on the nature of British liberty. In this ambitious attempt to synthesize the conjectural method of such writers as Kames and Adam Ferguson with the controversial approach of his relative Thomas Ruddiman, Stuart applied the legal scholarship of Montesquieu and John Dalrymple. 
Stuart's attempt to purchase the chair of public law at Edinburgh University on the strength of his first book and his father's influence proved unsuccessful. All he could obtain was an honorary LLD in November 1768, from which time he was known as 'Dr Stuart' (Edinburgh University, senate minutes). As other employment opportunities in Scotland did not materialize, he set off for London's Grub Street. Thomas Somerville referred to frequent drunken gatherings in London over which Stuart was 'assigned oracular authority' and at which 'contempt was expressed for the most esteemed authors living'. While Somerville condemned Stuart's profligate habits, he also acknowledged his 'transcendent intellectual talents' and his 'facility and quickness in composing -- the more extraordinary because his style has so much the appearance of art and elaboration' (Somerville, 149). 
As a periodical writer Stuart contributed mainly to the 'London Magazine' and the 'Monthly Review'. For Ralph Griffiths's 'Monthly' he wrote reviews and notices for nearly 250 books during his career. In Stuart's best reviews the polite surface of eighteenth-century criticism gives way to a dynamic, sometimes personal, commentary. By employing the vocabulary of controversy as a rhetorical tool, he engaged his reader and charged his text with emotion, making his reviews writing to be read for entertainment as well as a vehicle for judging literature. 
The most important association Stuart formed in London was with the bookseller-publisher John Murray. Stuart read prospective publications and for a six-month period in 1770 edited Murray's 'Repository', a short-lived monthly composed mainly of articles on Junius and John Wilkes. Stuart's talent for translation was also promoted by the publisher. He received nearly $30 for translating a quarter of Millot's 'Elements de l'histoire d'Angleterre', and completed the whole of Delolme's 'Constitution de l'Angleterre'. 
Several other projects engaged Stuart during his first stay in London. After preparing for the press Rolt's short 'History of the Isle of Man' (1772), he began his own comprehensive Manx history and obtained the patronage of the third duke of Atholl, whose family had lost their sovereignty over the island in 1765. When the duke decided against publication in March 1773, Stuart was compensated with just 50 guineas, an event which sorely disappointed him. (The manuscript is preserved in the Manx Museum Library at Douglas.) Another unrealized project was a biography of Tobias Smollett. A cousin of the novelist, James Smollett of Bonhill, had agreed to supply Stuart with original material and to introduce him to the widow and sister, but these relatives proved to be unco-operative and the biography never materialized. Yet another work was a history of Edinburgh which was advertised in the press but never appeared ('Caledonian Mercury', 27 Nov 1773). A final publication initiated by Stuart before returning to Edinburgh in the autumn of 1773 was his introduction and notes to the second edition of Francis Sullivan's 'Lectures on the Constitution and Laws of England' (1776), largely a reworking of the themes in the earlier 'English Constitution'. 
With the printer William Smellie, Stuart established the 'Edinburgh Magazine and Review'. This monthly work -- published from November 1773 to August 1776 -- became a lively forum for the expression of religious, political, and literary opinion. In the history of Scottish literary criticism it stands between the short-lived 'Edinburgh Review' of 1755-6 and the successful journal of the same name founded by Francis Jeffrey and others in 1802. It suffered from the provincialism of the former and anticipated the audacious style of the latter. Pride in Scottish achievement and the boldness to criticize whatever or whomever he found objectionable formed the central elements of Stuart's journalistic method. Among those attacked were the Revd Robert Henry and Lord Monboddo, whose 'Origin and Progress of Language' was so maligned that many readers cancelled their magazine subscriptions. While generally aligned with the moderate party of the Scottish church, the periodical was too often guided by Stuart's personal animosities and provincial concerns to retain either patronage or, ultimately, a wide audience. 
When the 'Edinburgh Magazine and Review' folded, Stuart returned to historical writing. The 'View of Society in Europe' (1778), regarded as his most important historical work, went into several editions and was translated into German in 1779 and French in 1789. The concept of property, as it developed from an object of communal to private interest, formed the framework from which Stuart considered such topics as the roles of the sexes, the place of religion, and the state of manners in medieval European society. In part Stuart wrote the 'View of Society' in opposition to the introductory volume of William Robertson's popular 'History of Charles V'. Where Robertson emphasized the gradual improvement of society, Stuart marked out the gradual corruption of feudal institutions, pessimistically attributing this decline to man's inability to alter his destiny. A more direct challenge to Robertson continued in Stuart's next work, 'Observations Concerning the Public Law and the Constitutional History of Scotland' (1779). Stuart attributed his failure to obtain a university chair in 1778 to Robertson and spared nothing in criticizing his successful 'History of Scotland'. Stuart's opposition to Catholic relief legislation, which Robertson advocated, also fuelled an attack which continued, though less overtly, in Stuart's 'History of the Establishment of the Reformation of Religion in Scotland' (1780). In this work and its sequel, 'The History of Scotland from the Establishment of the Reformation till the Death of Queen Mary' (1782), Stuart altered his style from a conjectural to a more popular narrative model, but one with a difference. Where many contemporary historians emphasized the systematic, the rational, and the pragmatic, Stuart believed that a more sentimental, immediate, and intentional approach could better re-create historical verisimilitude. His compelling portrayal of Mary, queen of Scots, as a victim of both English oppression and self-interested Scottish alliances won him considerable acclaim, particularly south of the border, and the 'History' was soon reprinted and translated. 
Despite this success Stuart received little remuneration from his 'History', or indeed from any of his major works. In 1783 he returned to London once again to take up his pen as a critic and political writer. Initially he returned to the 'Monthly Review' and assisted Murray with his newly established 'English Review'. But in 1785 the leaders of the opposition -- Fox, Burke, and Sheridan -- asked him to edit the 'Political Herald', in which he orchestrated a vehement attack on William Pitt and his Scottish minister Henry Dundas. However, his tenure as a leading political writer was short-lived. By the spring of 1786 illness, aggravated by dissolute habits, prevented Stuart from working. During the summer his condition grew critical: fluid settled on his lungs, and his body swelled painfully. In late July on a ship to Scotland he sat on deck watching some gambolling seals. 'Tell me', he inquired of the captain, 'upon what diet do these creatures feed?' To the answer 'Salmon and saltwater', Stuart replied, 'Very good meat but very bad drink' ('Annual Biography', 2.101). A few weeks later, on 13 August 1786, he died, unmarried, at his parents' home in Fisherrow, Musselburgh. He was buried the following day at the nearby Inveresk churchyard. 
The 'Gentleman's Magazine' concluded its obituary by dismissing Stuart as 'a martyr to intemperance' ('GM', 1786, 716). Nearly 100 years later Allibone called him a 'sot, grumbler, scold and literary Ishmaelite' (Allibone, 'Dict.', 2.2292). Nevertheless a number of Stuart's contemporaries, while acknowledging his personal failings, were more balanced in their judgements: Godwin in the 'Political Herald' remarked: 'If ever any man defended or opposed measures from the genuine sentiments of his heart, it was doctor Stuart' ('Political Herald, and Review', 1786, 3281). Boswell wrote: 'His bluntness did not please me, though his strong mind did' ('Ominous Years', 305). John Murray, who knew him best, concluded: 'He was the greatest enemy to himself. He could not endure to be thought subject to human infirmities' (John Murray to John Millar, 7 Sept 1786, John Murray archive, NL Scot.). 


@@@@@


doc= 26705


Stuart, Gilbert Charles (1755-1828), portrait painter, was born on 3 December 1755 near Saunderstown, Rhode Island, USA, the youngest of the three children of Gilbert Stewart, later Stuart ('c'.1718-1793), inventor and snuff-mill operator, and Elizabeth (died after 1810), daughter of Albro Anthony. The artist's father, the son of a Presbyterian minister from Perth, was supposedly present at the battle of Culloden and it has been suggested that his emigration in the late 1740s was to avoid persecution. Stuart's maternal grandfather, of English descent, was a landowner and disciple of Bishop Berkeley. Stuart spent his youth in Newport as a charity scholar at the parochial school of Trinity Church, founded by Berkeley, where he received a liberal education. His aptitude for drawing caused him in 1769 to be taken on as an assistant and pupil of the Scottish portraitist Cosmo Alexander, then working in Newport, eventually sailing with him to Scotland 'c'.1772. Alexander died shortly after their arrival and accounts differ as to whether Stuart then studied at the University of Glasgow; he was back in Newport by 1774, where he attempted to make a living painting portraits. Those that survive are stiff in manner. At some point after his return from Scotland Stuart saw the work of Copley, and realized that he needed to be in London in order to succeed as an artist. He arrived in London late in 1775 with little money and few prospects. By December 1776 Stuart was living on one meal a day and finally wrote for assistance to Benjamin West, who hired him to finish portraits and as a drapery painter for half a guinea a week. 
Stuart's exposure to West's successful studio and practice caused his work to improve dramatically and he exhibited a portrait (now unidentified) in the Royal Academy exhibition of 1777. His work took on a new sophistication that owed as much to the work of George Romney and Gainsborough as it did to West's. Stuart remained 'wretchedly poor' according to the painter John Trumbull (Evans, 128, n. 19), but he exhibited portraits again at the Royal Academy in 1779. In 1781 he received published reviews for the first time and painted his celebrated portrait of William Grant ice skating (National Gallery of Art, Washington), which was extremely well received, both as a good likeness and as an inventive composition. Despite his success at the Royal Academy in 1782, Stuart exhibited at the Incorporated Society of Artists only in 1783, not at all in 1784, sent three pictures to the Royal Academy in 1785, and never exhibited again in Britain. John Boydell commissioned him to paint fifteen portraits of his associates, which included Reynolds (National Gallery of Art, Washington) and the engraver William Woollett (Tate collection), and which Boydell displayed in his gallery along with John Singleton Copley's 'Death of Major Peirson'. Lord Percy, later second duke of Northumberland, who had served in America during the American War of Independence, commissioned at least three pictures from Stuart in 1783-7 (all priv. coll.). Stuart gained a reputation for exceptional likenesses, in which he was aided by the use of life masks. Stuart moved to fashionable (and expensive) lodgings in New Burlington Street, London, in 1784. On 10 May 1786 he married Charlotte Coates (1767/8-1845), with whom he had twelve children (one of whom published the first accounts of her father's life); they lived prodigally and Thomas Lawrence recalled that Stuart was imprisoned for debt. In 1787 Stuart moved to Dublin, accepting a commission from Charles Manners, fourth duke of Rutland, to paint his portrait as viceroy of Ireland. He returned to London at least twice but, having received several commissions in Ireland and considering his financial troubles in England, settled there. He was again imprisoned for debt in 1789, and in 1793 returned to what had become the United States. 
Stuart worked in New York until early 1795, when he moved to the American capital, Philadelphia. In London he had received commissions from Americans as early as 1784, and on his repatriation he used these connections to obtain an introduction to George Washington, whom he painted for the first time early in 1795 (the 'Vaughan' portrait; National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC). A second sitting about March 1796 produced the unfinished 'Athenaeum' portrait (National Portrait Gallery, Washington, DC, and Museum of Fine Arts, Boston) which, engraved in reverse, is the iconic image of Washington seen on the United States $1 bill. The Athenaeum portrait was the preparatory study for the full-length 'Lansdowne' portrait, commissioned as a gift to William Petty, the first marquess of Lansdowne, and for which Washington sat one further time in April 1796 (National Portrait Gallery, Washington, DC). Stuart kept the Athenaeum portrait (and a similarly unfinished pendant of Mrs Washington) and used it as the model for over 100 autograph replicas. 
Stuart always intended to return to London but his chronic insolvency meant that he could not raise the fare and he remained in the United States for the rest of his life. He followed the seat of government from Philadelphia to the new District of Columbia in 1803, and moved finally, in 1805, to Boston, where he lived at 101 Essex Street. Stuart painted most of the important figures of the early republic including much of Philadelphia and Boston society. His American-period portraits are flashier in execution than the subtle portraits of his London years, are of consistently high quality, and influenced portrait painting in America late into the nineteenth century. Throughout his life Stuart was known for his intelligence; he was well-read, cultured, and had a good sense of humour. However, in addition to gout and asthma, he suffered from fluctuations in mood and extended periods of lethargy and inactivity; a recent biographer suggested he displayed symptoms of manic depression (Evans, 118). The left side of his face and part of his left arm were paralysed in 1825. He died on 9 July 1828 at his home in Boston, and was buried in the central burial-ground on Boston Common. 


@@@@@


doc= 26706


Stuart, Henry Windsor Villiers (1827-1895), politician, born on 13 September 1827, was the only son of Henry Villiers Stuart, first Baron Stuart de Decies (1803-1874). His mother was Theresia Pauline Ott, of Vienna (died 1867), said to have been married to his father in 1826, but the marriage was never legally recognized. On his father's death Stuart claimed the barony and was shocked to find no proof of his parents' marriage was accepted. However, he succeeded to his father's estates. Stuart was educated at University College, Durham, graduating in 1850. He was ordained the same year, and appointed vicar of Bulkington, Warwickshire, in 1854, and of Napton on the Hill, Southam, Warwickshire, in 1855. On 3 August 1865 he married Mary, second daughter of Ambrose Power, archdeacon of Lismore, and his wife, Susan Thacker of Ballymelish; they had five sons and four daughters. 
From 1871 to 1874 Stuart was vice-lieutenant of co. Waterford, and, on his father's death in the latter year, succeeded to the property of Dromana near Cappoquin in that county. In 1873 he surrendered his holy orders and successfully contested co. Waterford for parliament as a Liberal, holding the seat until 1885. At the general election of 1885 he contested East Cork as a Unionist, but was defeated. 
Stuart travelled extensively, and published many accounts of his wanderings, notably 'Adventures amid the Equatorial Forests and Rivers of South America' (1891). He was in South America in 1858, in Jamaica in 1881, and he made several journeys through Egypt, and published various works on ancient and modern Egypt. After the English occupation of Egypt he was attached to Lord Dufferin's mission of reconstruction, and in the spring of 1883 was commissioned to investigate the condition of the country. His work received the special recognition of Lord Dufferin, and his reports were published as a parliamentary blue book ('Parl. papers', 1883, 83, C 3554). He took a keen interest in Egyptian exploration, and was a member of the Society of Biblical Archaeology. He was also a member of the committee of the Royal Literary Fund. 
Stuart was drowned on 12 October 1895 off Villierstown quay on the River Blackwater, near his residence at Dromana, having slipped while entering a boat. 


@@@@@


doc= 26707


Stuart, James, fourth duke of Lennox and first duke of Richmond (1612-1655), nobleman, was born at Blackfriars, London, on 6 April 1612, the eldest son of Esme Stuart, third duke of Lennox (1579?-1624), and Katherine Clifton ('c'.1592-1637). Lord Bernard Stuart was his younger brother. A cousin of James VI and I and of Charles I, he had a claim to the Scottish but not the English throne. King James was a sponsor at his baptism, and became his guardian at his father's death in 1624. Created an MA of the University of Cambridge by royal mandate in 1624, and in receipt of a royal pension of $1400 a year, Lennox became a gentleman of the bedchamber in April 1625. Knighted in June 1630, he was created an English privy councillor on 28 July 1633 and a knight of the Garter the following November; during the summer of that same year he accompanied Charles I to his Scottish coronation. 
Lennox married Lady Mary Villiers ['see 'Villiers, Mary, duchess of Lennox and Richmond], only daughter of George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham, on 3 August 1637, and her $20,000 dowry relieved him of financial worries until the mid-1640s. He was also appointed to several local English offices, notably lord lieutenant of Hampshire in May 1635, keeper of Richmond park in 1638, and lord warden of the Cinque Ports in June 1640. His Scottish lands were small and unprofitable, but he owned extensive estates in England. His country seat was at Cobham Hall in Kent, and he also possessed scattered lands in Norfolk, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Huntingdonshire, Hampshire, Berkshire, Gloucestershire, and Wiltshire. 
Lennox was deeply loyal to the crown: Clarendon later wrote of his 'unspotted fidelity' and 'entire resignation of himself to the King' (Clarendon, 1.76, 2.528). In the autumn of 1637, when Lennox visited Scotland for his mother's funeral, the covenanters hoped that he would represent their case to the king, but Lennox's instinctive response to complaints about Caroline policy was the tactful assurance 'that the King was misinformed' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 1.302). Although he apparently questioned the wisdom of war with the Scots, his loyalty to the crown was unshakeable. He opposed Strafford's attainder during the spring of 1641. That summer he accompanied Charles to Scotland, but was not permitted to sit in the Scottish parliament until he had taken the covenant. On 17 September he was named to the Scottish privy council. He was created duke of Richmond on 8 August 1641, and early the following December was appointed lord steward of the king's household. 
Lennox's position in the Lords was fatally compromised on 26 January 1642, when he 'put the question whether we shall adjourn the Parliament for six months' ('The Private Journals of the Long Parliament', ed. W. H. Coates, A. S. Young, and V. F. Snow, 3 vols., 1982-92, 1.195). This provoked an outcry in both houses and some members of the Commons demanded his impeachment for threatening parliament's sitting. In the event, Lennox was required only to 'make an humble submission and acknowledgement' that he had spoken 'inconsiderately and inadvisedly', although twenty-two peers (including Warwick, Essex, Wharton, Pembroke, and Brooke) protested that this was 'not a sufficient punishment' ('JHL', 4.543). On 2 February Lennox was given leave, and he never attended the Lords again. By April he had joined the king at Hull. 
During the civil wars Lennox regularly acted as one of the king's commissioners in peace talks with the houses. In December 1644 he and the earl of Southampton acted as go-betweens in the negotiations that set up the treaty of Uxbridge. Lennox, together with the earls of Southampton, Hertford, and Lindsey, made a final desperate attempt to reach agreement with the parliamentarian army at Woodstock in April 1646, but this went wrong and led to his brief imprisonment in Warwick Castle. The committee for compounding assessed him at $9810 on 15 December 1646; he compounded and received letters of discharge in May 1647. Lennox remained close to Charles I and he was among a select group of advisers whom the king summoned to attend him during the summer and autumn of 1647. Charles appointed him one of his commissioners at the treaty of Newport between September and December 1648. Lennox attended Charles during his trial and execution and was one of the royalist peers present at the king's funeral. 
According to Sir Edward Walker, 'after the murther of the King, [Lennox] retyred unto his house at Cobham Hall in Kent, seldome ever appearing abroad' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1110, fol. 167'r'). He resolutely refused to get involved in any conspiracies against the republic, despite the approaches of several royalist activists. Although he had declined to assist the royalist campaigns of 1650-51, he was summoned before the committee of examinations in May 1651. His request to be excused from taking the engagement reinforced the council of state's suspicions about his loyalties, and he was bailed on a bond for $10,000, with two sureties for $5000 each. The following October, he was again summoned before the council, but responded by sending a doctor's certificate affirming that he was too ill to attend. A further summons in December 1651 was again declined on grounds of ill health. His final years were dogged by illness, and according to Robert Baillie, by the summer of 1654 the duke was living in Kent as quietly 'as a man buried' ('Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie', 3.249). Lennox died at Cobham Hall on 30 March 1655, and was buried on 18 April in Henry VII's chapel at Westminster Abbey. 
Lennox's widow suffered growing hardship in the later 1650s: the timber at Cobham Hall was plundered for Cromwell's navy, and by 1658 the family had sold off most of its Scottish lands. She seems to have lived very quietly, and in the summer of 1658 moved to Paris where she spent the rest of the interregnum. She lived until November 1685, but their only son and heir, Esme, fifth duke of Lennox and second duke of Richmond, died in Paris in 1660. 


@@@@@


doc= 26708


Stuart, James (1713-1788), painter and architect, was born in Creed Lane, Ludgate Street, London, the eldest son of a Scottish mariner who died when he was a boy, leaving the family with insufficient financial support. 
Stuart found early employment with Lewis Goupy, a well-known fan painter, at the same time as studying mathematics, geometry, and anatomy, and teaching himself Greek and Latin. After his mother's death, with his brother and sister in employment, he was able to fulfil his long-held ambition of continuing his artistic training in Rome. In 1742, aged twenty-nine, he set off on foot to Rome, where he remained for eight years, acquiring a reputation as a connoisseur of art, continuing his study of Greek and Latin at the Collegio di Propaganda Fide, and mastering the art of engraving. As a result, he produced an illustrated account of the Egyptian obelisk found in the Campus Martius, which he published in A. M. Bandini's 'De obelisco Caesaris Augusti' (1750). 
In April 1748 Stuart and Nicholas Revett (1720-1804), the wealthy son of a Suffolk squire, together with the painter and dealer Gavin Hamilton and the architect Robert Brettingham the younger, visited Naples, where they first formed an ambition of measuring the buildings of Athens. Though lip-service had been paid since the Renaissance to Greece as the fountainhead of Western civilization, almost no one had ever bothered to go to Athens to investigate the surviving buildings, though it was, admittedly, very difficult of access. 
In Rome in 1750 Stuart and Revett met Robert Wood, a scholar who had visited Greece in the 1740s, and his colleague James Dawkins, who had inherited a Jamaican fortune in 1744. Wood and Dawkins were about to travel to the Levant, where their investigations led to the publication of their well-organized and popular archaeological study 'The Ruins of Palmyra' (1753). Having received financial support from Dawkins, as well as valuable professional advice from Wood, Stuart and Revett left Rome for Athens in 1750. They were delayed in Venice, where Sir James Gray procured their election to the Society of Dilettanti, whose members subscribed to their proposed publication. From Venice they travelled to Pola in Istria, where they made the first accurate drawings of the two Roman temples, triumphal arch, and amphitheatre, described by Stuart as 'built in the most exquisite taste of the Augustan Age' (Wiebenson, 80). Their reconstruction of the Corinthian temple of Rome and Augustus at Pola was used by Sir James Gray's brother Colonel George Gray as the model for a proposed clubhouse for the Society of Dilettanti in Cavendish Square in 1753. This serves to remind us that neither Stuart and Revett, nor the Society of Dilettanti, was limited to the exclusive study and promotion of Greek architecture. 
Between leaving Pola in November 1750 and departing for Greece in January 1751 Stuart and Revett issued in Venice a manuscript called 'Proposal for publishing a new accurate description of the antiquities, &c. in the province of Attica'. In a later printed version of this, they claimed that 'Artists who aim at perfection, must be more pleased and better instructed, the nearer they approach the Fountain-Head of their art' ('The Antiquities of Athens', 1, 1762, v n.), thus expressing the belief of the eighteenth-century Enlightenment in the return to first principles and in the creative link between the study of archaeology and the practice of art and architecture. 
In March 1751 Stuart and Revett finally arrived in Athens where opportunities for investigating the major monuments of the Acropolis were restricted by the presence of the Turkish garrison on its southern ridge. Everywhere they aroused suspicion and were taken for spies. Stuart was eventually forced to leave Athens in September 1753 during the riots that took place following the death of Osman, chief of the black eunuchs. Stuart was involved in a violent quarrel in which he knocked down a Greek official, and on a similar occasion was nearly murdered by a gang of Turkish cut-throats. He travelled from Athens to Salonica, where he was joined in January 1754 by Revett, with whom he revisited the Aegean Islands, including Delos, but an outbreak of plague prevented them from returning to Athens to continue their studies. They returned in October 1754 to London, where they prepared their drawings for publication, meanwhile living in the house of James Dawkins. 
Europe awaited with interest, but Winckelmann, in particular, expressed signs of impatience because their first volume was not published until 1762. 'The Antiquities of Athens Measured and Delineated by James Stuart, F.R.S. and F.S.A., and Nicholas Revett, Painters and Architects', dedicated to George III, consisted of Revett's measured drawings with a text and attractive topographical views by Stuart, which began as coloured gouaches but were reproduced as black and white engravings. The delay had led to disagreement between the two men, as a result of which Stuart bought out Revett's financial interest before publication, though their joint names appeared on the title-pages of all the volumes. 
The reason for the delay was not only Stuart's laziness, but his decision at the last moment to undertake a substantial revision of the text by correcting the errors in Julien-David Leroy's 'Les ruines des plus beaux monuments de la Grece' (1758), the first scholarly illustrated account of the buildings of fifth-century Athens. This delay also had the unfortunate result of making him forgo his plan to return to Athens to make a detailed study of the buildings on the Acropolis. Stuart's main quarrel with Leroy, whose book had, to his annoyance, deprived him of the distinction of being the first to publish an accurate survey of Greek architecture, was that Leroy had misidentified a portico or stoa in Athens as a fragment of the temple of Olympian Zeus, the Olympeion. We now know that this building was part of the library of Hadrian, and it is significant that, with the exception of the temple on the Ilissus, all but one of the six buildings in the first volume of 'The Antiquities of Athens' were not Greek but comparatively minor monuments of either the Hellenistic or Roman periods. 
Stuart, indeed, seemed to feel that everything in Greece was Greek. He thus explained that the third volume would include: 'buildings erected after the time that Athens became subject to the Romans. For though deprived of its liberty, and greatly fallen from its ancient splendour, it was still a respectable City, to which the principal men of Rome sent their Sons for education; it still produced Artists, and had a taste for magnificence. ('The Antiquities of Athens', 2, 1787, advertisement)' He also attempted to explain the modesty and late date of the buildings in the first volume by claiming that, in the event of there being no demand from the public for further volumes, then at least they 'might find in it something interesting on the different Grecian modes of decorating Buildings' (ibid.). Stuart has sometimes been credited with producing a manifesto for an architectural style based exclusively on that of classical Greece; certainly he became known in his lifetime as Athenian Stuart. However, neither his books nor his buildings really bear this out: his aim was not to replace the Roman orders but to extend them. His eight years in Rome tend to be neglected because of his famous but briefer stay in Athens. The view of Stuart as an architect with an exclusively Greek mission was largely formed at the peak of the nineteenth-century Greek revival, when its promoters, architects such as Robert Smirke and William Wilkins, were anxious to create a respectable ancestry for the movement. 
In 1770 Leroy produced a second edition of his 'Les ruines des plus beaux monuments de la Grece', in which he, in turn, criticized Stuart and Revett's first volume for having as its sole aim the provision of exact measurements, and for the fact that, in Stuart's gouache views, the monuments were obscured by lesser objects. Stuart had certainly opened himself to criticism by his stress on 'the different methods of decorating buildings', which implied that he was concerned with enlarging the existing stock of decorative motifs rather than initiating a radical architectural form. Leroy was, however, somewhat unfair to Stuart, who did promote a serious, culturally contingent interpretation of Greece in which work carried out 'while the Athenians were a free people' ('The Antiquities of Athens', 2, 1787, advertisement), particularly in the time of Pericles, was seen as necessarily superior to that produced when they were subjugated by Rome. 
On his return from Greece, Stuart was showered with commissions from members of the Society of Dilettanti, although he seemed to lack the application to bring them all to a successful conclusion. In 1758 he was appointed surveyor of Greenwich Hospital, a post worth $200 a year for which he was indebted to the recommendation of his future patron Lord Anson. In 1763 he became painter to the Society of Dilettanti, who instructed him in that year to paint portraits of James and Henry Dawkins; having failed to produce them by 1768, he was forced to relinquish his post to Reynolds. In 1764 he succeeded Hogarth as sergeant painter in the office of works, and exhibited for several years at the Free Society of Artists, showing mainly watercolour drawings of Athens. 
An important early monument was the garden temple which Stuart designed in 1758 for George Lyttelton, the first Baron Lyttelton at Hagley Park, Worcestershire, as a miniature echo of the Theseion in Athens. Executed in 1759, it was the first since the ancient world to incorporate the fluted baseless columns of the Greek Doric order. Stressing its role as a picturesque object in the landscape, Lord Lyttelton wrote to the bluestocking Mrs Montagu, 'Stuart is going to embellish one of the Hills with a true attick building, a portico of six pillars, which will make a fine effect to my new house and command a most beautiful view of the country' (Blunt, 2.150). 
This theme recurred at Shugborough, the Staffordshire estate of Thomas Anson, a founder member of the Society of Dilettanti in 1732, who inherited a fortune in 1762 from his elder brother Admiral Lord Anson, the naval hero. With the help, first of Thomas Wright, and then of Stuart from about 1761 to 1771, the Anson brothers turned the park into an Enlightenment vision of world architecture, reflecting the taste of the eighteenth century for the monuments of different cultures, east and west. Gardens such as Shugborough, Hagley, Stowe, and Stourhead became a kind of memory theatre, reflecting intellectual and cultural voyages. With its Greek, Gothic, Roman, and Chinese buildings, Shugborough was, indeed, a visual parallel to the actual circumnavigation of the globe undertaken by Admiral Anson. The buildings included a version of the choragic monument of Lysicrates in Athens, Stuart's favourite building, although it was not of the fifth century BC, but a whimsical ornamental folly of the late fourth century. Its fanciful quality perhaps made it seem appropriate for imitation as a modern garden folly. Stuart also provided versions of two other monuments in Athens, the Tower of the Winds and Hadrian's Arch, the latter erected by Hadrian as a demonstration of his devotion to ancient Athenian culture. 
Nathaniel Curzon, created Baron Scarsdale in 1761, and subscriber to the first volume of 'The Antiquities of Athens', consulted Stuart about 1757 concerning the design of interiors in which to display his collection of paintings and sculpture at Kedleston Hall, Derbyshire. Stuart produced attractive coloured drawings for interiors, including Greek tripods as painted wall decoration, as incense burners on chimney-pieces, as candelabra in front of mirrors, and in friezes above doors. He based these on his restoration of the metal tripod on the choragic monument of Lysicrates. Adam, who saw the drawings in December 1758, described them as 'so excessively & so ridiculously bad, that... they move pity rather than contempt' (Clerk of Penicuik MS 4854, NA Scot.). None the less, when he supplanted Stuart at Kedleston about 1760, he borrowed much from Stuart's designs. 
Viscount Spencer, also a subscriber to 'The Antiquities of Athens', created Earl Spencer in 1765 and elected a member of the Society of Dilettanti in the same year, employed Stuart to provide fashionable new interiors at the family house, Wimbledon Park, Surrey ('c'.1758; dem.), following his marriage in 1756. At the same time, he began to build, from designs by the Palladian architect John Vardy, Spencer House, a magnificent town mansion in Green Park with a decorative programme celebrating themes of love and marriage. Vardy was dismissed in September 1758 on the suggestion of Colonel George Gray, founding member and secretary of the Society of Dilettanti, who had been asked by Spencer to supervise the design for the house. Gray brought in Stuart to make the house more authentically classical. In the Great Room, Stuart designed a chimney-piece incorporating a figured frieze based on that of the choragic monument of Lysicrates with its dancing Bacchantes. More remarkably, in both the Great Room and adjacent Painted Room, he exercised total control, designing the architectural joinery such as dados and door frames, the chimney-pieces, picture frames, seat furniture, pier glasses, and tables, mostly in a version of the contemporary French 'gout grec' manner. 
One of the richest rooms in eighteenth-century England, the Painted Room shows the inadequacy of his description as Athenian Stuart, for during his eight years in Rome he had clearly absorbed the ancient Roman grotesque or arabesque type of decoration which had been revived in Renaissance Italy by Raphael and Vasari. None the less, the jealous Adam said of Stuart's ceilings at Spencer House, 'they may be Greek to the teeth but by God they are not handsome' (J. Fleming, 'Robert Adam and his Circle', 1962, 258). The bay at the south end of the Painted Room is separated by a screen of Corinthian columns inspired by the temple of Antoninus and Faustina in Rome, but carrying a Greek anthemion frieze based on the Erechtheion on the Acropolis. Between the columns stood Stuart's torcheres, nearly 7 feet high and important as some of the earliest furniture decorated with painted panels in a manner later developed by Adam. Painted with Pompeian winged figures of Victory, the stands are surmounted by winged griffins supporting ormolu tripods with candle sconces and a central incense burner, inspired by the tripod on the choragic monument of Lysicrates, but recalling the ancient Roman practice of burning incense during dinner parties. Stuart's sofas, designed to fit into the curve of the apse, are also neo-antique, with winged lions inspired by those on Hellenistic marble thrones. 
Work at Spencer House proceeded with Stuart's characteristic slowness, though partly because of his other commissions, such as Holdernesse House (later Londonderry House; dem.) and Lichfield House. His work from about 1760 to 1765 at Holdernesse House was carried out for the fourth earl of Holdernesse, who belonged to the Society of Dilettanti, the members of which frequently met in it. It contained ceilings inspired by plates in Wood's 'The Ruins of Palmyra', as does Lichfield House, St James's Square, which Stuart built in 1764-6 for Thomas Anson of Shugborough. With the first stone-fronted facade in the square, its composition is purely Palladian, yet it sports immaculate Greek Ionic capitals which are life-size copies of those on the Erechtheion, though Stuart did not include the rich frieze which surmounts them in the original. 
In 1775 Stuart was commissioned by Mrs Montagu to build her a free-standing mansion in Portman Square which, despite its dull facade, attracted so much interest that she arranged for it to be opened to the public by ticket. Excited by Stuart's Athenian reputation, visitors saw what they wanted to see; the poet James 'Hermes' Harris exclaimed, 'I have seen an edifice which for the time made me imagine I was at Athens, in a house of Pericles, built by Phidias' (Blunt, 2.100). However, the interiors were Adamesque, thus showing that Stuart's rivalry with Adam had ended in victory for Adam, for Stuart had failed to produce a style of his own. Mrs Montagu praised the house in 1780 as 'so convenient and cheerful as a place of retirement, so ample for the devoirs of Society, and so calculated for Assemblies that it will suit all one's humours, and adapt itself to all one's purposes' (ibid., 2.103). This is in harmony with the eighteenth-century belief in the creation of appropriate character in architecture, with interior design and furniture expressing the personality of the patron. Stuart responded by providing the house with a unique plan in which a group of five intercommunicating rooms for entertaining opened off the main staircase, with a virtually separate apartment for Mrs Montagu at the south end with her own staircase. Stuart's indolence and drinking habits had made him unreliable by the late 1780s; the interior of the ballroom, recalling that in an Italian palazzo, was executed after his death from designs by Joseph Bonomi in 1789-90. 
In his capacity as surveyor of Greenwich Hospital, Stuart replaced the chapel, built in the 1730s by Thomas Ripley, after its destruction by fire in 1779. His assistant William Newton, author of the first English translation of Vitruvius, claimed that he had designed most of it himself, which seems unlikely, although he completed it in 1788 after Stuart's death. The plasterwork has a rich succulence going beyond fifth-century Athens towards the freedom of Palmyra, with a crispness and stiffness about the details which seem characteristically Stuartian. Although the chapel is prettily coloured, Stuart seems to have been unaware of the importance of polychromy in Greek architecture: he certainly noted a trace of colour on the frieze of the Ionic temple on the River Ilissus in Athens in the first volume of 'The Antiquities of Athens', but drew no conclusions from this. It was only after about 1810 that scholars began to suppose that polychromy may have been integral to the design of Greek architecture. 
Stuart was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and of the Society of Antiquaries, and long remained active in the affairs of the Society of Dilettanti. As well as his architectural practice, limited chiefly to sophisticated interiors and garden buildings, he designed furniture, medals, and numerous monuments. Mostly executed by Peter Scheemakers and his son Thomas, his monuments include those in Westminster Abbey to the third Viscount Howe (died 1758) and to Admiral Charles Watson (died 1775). One of the finest is that of 1766 to the first earl of Hardwicke, at Wimpole church, Cambridgeshire, incorporating a handsome Grecian 'Minerva'. 
The second volume of 'The Antiquities of Athens', dated 1787 but not published until January 1790, was published by Stuart's widow, Elizabeth, with help from William Newton. Stuart had also left materials for the third volume, which appeared in 1795 under the editorship of the architect Willey Reveley, who included in it a lengthy defence of Greek architecture from the sharp criticisms of it by Sir William Chambers. With this volume the series as envisaged by Stuart and Revett may be said to have been concluded. However, in 1816 a fourth volume of miscellaneous drawings, principally of the Roman antiquities at Pola, but including valuable plates of the Parthenon sculpture, was issued by Josiah Taylor, the architectural publisher who had acquired Stuart's papers about 1809. It contained a memoir of Stuart by Joseph Woods (1776-1864), a scholar and minor Greek revival architect. A final supplementary volume appeared in 1830 under the distinguished editorship of C. R. Cockerell (1788-1863) as 'The Antiquities of Athens and other Places of Greece, Sicily etc.'

Stuart was twice married, on the first occasion to someone variously described as his housekeeper and as a 'Grecian lady', and on the second, at the age of sixty-seven, to a woman of twenty named Elizabeth, with whom he had five children, of whom three survived him. He had been 'very infirm for some years preceding his death, [and] left his papers in great confusion and disorder' ('The Antiquities of Athens', 2, 1787, iii). By the 1780s he 'regularly frequented a public-house on the north side of Leicester-fields, of the sign of the feathers', while 'his face declared him to be fond of what is called friendly society' (J. T. Smith, 'Nollekens and his Times', 1929, 27). His rather idle existence was sustained by a private fortune, for, according to a contemporary report, 'Athens Stuart, unexpectedly to most people, has died possessed of much property, chiefly on mortgage on new buildings in Marybone' ('The World', 22 Feb 1788). His death had taken place suddenly on 2 February 1788 at his house on the south side of Leicester Square, London. He was buried in the crypt of St Martin-in-the-Fields. 
Stuart exercised a wide influence on British architects, though they tended to ignore his advice to follow the principles not the details of Greek architecture. James Wyatt produced an inspired version of the Tower of the Winds at Athens at the Radcliffe Observatory, Oxford (1776-94), but early nineteenth-century architects such as Robert Smirke, John Foster, and William and Henry William Inwood incorporated into their buildings replicas of works such as the choragic monument of Lysicrates, based on plates in 'The Antiquities of Athens'. John Soane frequently put the baseless Greek Doric order, whether fluted or unfluted, to powerful effect, while William Wilkins, at Grange Park, Hampshire (1809), provided the most complete templar house ever erected in Britain. 
James Elmes, whose St John's Chapel, Chichester, Sussex (1812-13), was an early use of the Lysicrates model for a church tower, claimed boldly in 1847 that, 'No event that ever occurred in the history of architecture in England, and thence throughout all Europe, produced so sudden, decided, and beneficial effect as did the works of James Stuart' ('Civil Engineers' and Architects' Journal', 10, 1847, 338-9). If this interpretation cannot exactly be sustained today, it is significant for revealing how Stuart was regarded at the time; his reputation has, moreover, remained high. 


@@@@@


doc= 26709


Stuart, James (d. 1793), army officer, was the third and youngest son among the seven children of Archibald Stuart (died 1767) of Torrance, Lanarkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Andrew Myreton, baronet, of Gogar. Andrew Stuart (1725-1801), lawyer, was an elder brother. James Stuart was first in the Dutch service, where he reached the rank of captain. He became lieutenant in the 58th regiment of the British army on 5 May 1756, and first saw active service in 1758 at the siege of Louisbourg in Nova Scotia, under Lord Amherst. On 20 October of the same year he was promoted captain in the 83rd regiment, and major on 7 December 1759. In 1761 he was present with Colonel Morgan's regiment at the reduction of Belle Ile. During the course of that expedition he acted as quartermaster-general, and in consequence obtained the brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel. From Belle Ile Stuart went to the West Indies, where he served in the operations against Martinique and on the death of Colonel Morgan took command of the regiment. After the conquest of Martinique (February 1762) his regiment was ordered to join the expedition against Havana, where Stuart greatly distinguished himself by his conduct in the assault on the castle of Morro, the capture of which determined the success of the expedition. He returned home, and on 20 September 1763 married Lady Margaret, daughter of Hugh Hume, third earl of Marchmont, and his wife, Anne Western. They had no children before her early death on 7 January 1765. 
In 1775 Stuart received permission to enter the service of the East India Company as second in command on the Coromandel coast, with the rank of colonel. On his arrival he found serious differences existing between the council of the Madras presidency and the governor, Lord Pigot. Stuart followed the orders of the council in trying to restore the raja of Tanjore to lands dubiously transferred to the nawab of Arcot, whose debts were the main cause of the trouble. The affair degenerated into confusion, in the course of which Stuart arrested Pigot on 23 August 1776 and allowed the dissident councillors to assume power in Madras. After news of the arrest reached Britain, Pigot was reinstated but immediately recalled, while Stuart was suspended by the company directors from the office of commander-in-chief to which he had succeeded with the rank of brigadier-general in December 1776. Although he repeatedly demanded a trial, he could not, despite peremptory orders from Britain, succeed in obtaining a court martial until December 1780, when he was honourably acquitted and by order of the directors received the arrears of his pay from the time of his suspension. On 11 January 1781 he was restored to the chief command in Madras by order of the governor and council. He returned to Madras in that year and, under Sir Eyre Coote, on 1 July took part in the battle of Porto Novo, in which he distinguished himself by his able handling of the second line of the British force. In the battle of Polillur, on 27 August, he lost a leg to a cannon shot. He was promoted major-general on 19 October, and on the return of Sir Eyre Coote to Bengal in January 1782 took command of the forces in Madras. The governor, Lord Macartney, however, would not allow him the freedom of action which Eyre Coote had enjoyed, and on the death of Haidar Ali on 7 December 1782 urged Stuart immediately to attack the Mysore army. Stuart declared his forces were not ready, and made no active movement for two months. While besieging Cuddalore he was suspended from the command by the Madras government, was placed in strict confinement in Madras, and then sent back to Britain. Resenting 'his Lordship's personal conduct to him', Stuart called out Lord Macartney, and on 8 June 1786 they fought a duel in Hyde Park. Owing to the loss of his leg, Stuart was 'under the necessity from the first of putting his back to a tree' ('GM', 523), but succeeded in severely wounding his opponent. Unsatisfied by the outcome, both participants threatened to resume the duel, until the king indicated his wish that the matter be taken no further. On 8 February 1792 Stuart was appointed colonel of the 31st foot. He died a year later, on 2 February 1793. 


@@@@@


doc= 26710


Stuart, James (1741-1815), army officer, was born on 2 March 1741 at Blairhall, Perthshire, the third son of John Stuart of Blairhall and his wife, Lady Anne (1703-1783), daughter of Francis Stuart, seventh earl of Moray. He was educated at the schools at Culross and Dunfermline, and in 1757 went to Edinburgh to study law. Abandoning the law, he entered the army on 1 October 1761 as ensign in the 64th foot, became lieutenant on 7 December 1764, and captain on 12 January 1770. He served in the American War of Independence, and attained the rank of major in the 78th foot on 18 December 1777. 
In 1782 Stuart arrived with his regiment in India, where he was appointed lieutenant-colonel on 14 February, and to the local rank of colonel on 13 June following. He took part in Sir Eyre Coote's campaign against Haidar Ali of Mysore, and was present at the siege of Cuddalore, when he commanded the attack on the right of the main position in the assault of 13 July 1782. In the campaign of 1790, under General Sir William Medows, against Tipu Sultan of Mysore, he reduced the fortresses of Dindigul and Palghat. He served under Cornwallis through the campaigns of 1791-2, was placed in immediate charge of the siege of Seringapatam, and commanded the centre column in the assault of 6 February 1792. On 8 August he was promoted colonel on his appointment as aide-de-camp to the king, and, after a visit to England, returned to Madras in 1794. On 26 February 1795 he was appointed major-general, and in the same year took command of the expedition which captured the Dutch possessions in Ceylon. These were secured in 1796. Stuart then became commander-in-chief of the forces in Madras. On 2 March 1797 he was appointed colonel of the 82nd regiment of foot, and on 23 October 1798 colonel of the 72nd regiment of foot. In the following year, in the last war against Tipu, he commanded the Bombay army which occupied Coorg and repulsed Tipu at Seedaseer (6 March). On 15 March he joined Major-General George Harris before Seringapatam, and took charge of the operations on the northern side of the city. After its capture Stuart, with several other officers, received the thanks of both houses of parliament. In 1801 he was appointed commander-in-chief of the Madras army; on 29 April 1802 he attained the rank of lieutenant-general, and in the following year took part in the Second Anglo-Maratha War, Major-General Wellesley being under his orders. In 1805 he returned to England in bad health; he was promoted general on 1 January 1812. Stuart died in London at Charles Street, Berkeley Square, on 29 April 1815, and was buried in a vault in St James's Chapel, Hampstead Road, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 26711


Stuart, James (1764-1842), historian and journalist, son of Benjamin Stuart of co. Antrim, was born in Armagh. He was educated at the Royal School, Armagh, and in January 1784 entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he was taught by Dr George Miller. He graduated BA in the spring term of 1789, and enrolled as a student in the Middle Temple in January 1790 but he was never called to the bar. In 1811 he published 'Poems on Various Subjects', some of which are on places near Armagh, some on his friends, none of more than occasional interest. In 1812 he became the first editor of the 'Newry Telegraph', and from 1815 to 1819 also edited the 'Newry Magazine'. Here he wrote 'Historical Memoirs of the City of Armagh for a Period of 1,373 Years', which was published in 1819. The book combines a short history of Ireland with a history of Armagh. Stuart also included a skilful denunciation of Edward Ledwich's view that St Patrick never existed. 
Stuart went to live in Belfast in 1821 and became editor of the 'News Letter'. Some theological letters by him, which first appeared in this journal, were published in 1825 as 'The Protestant Layman'. In 1827 he founded and edited the 'Guardian and Constitutional Advocate', but ill health soon forced him to give it up. He married Mary Ogle; they had no children. Stuart died in September 1842 in Belfast. 


@@@@@


doc= 26712


Stuart, James (1775-1849), landowner, politician, and factory inspector, was the eldest son of Dr Charles Stuart (1745/6-1826), of Dunearn in Fife, and Mary, the daughter of the Revd Dr John Erskine. His father was minister of Cramond, on the Firth of Forth, and later a physician in Edinburgh who, after graduating MD from the University of Edinburgh in 1781, established the Anabaptist community in the city. His son James attended Edinburgh high school from 1785 to 1789 before studying at Edinburgh University from 1790 to 1797. James Stuart was apprenticed to Hugh Robertson, writer to the signet, and became a member of the Society of Writers to the Signet in 1798. On 29 April 1802 he married Eleanor Anna, only daughter of Dr Robert Moubray, of Cockairnie, Fife. They had no children. 
Although Stuart was collector of the widows' fund of the Society of Writers to the Signet from 1818 to 1828, his main interest was in farming his estates in Fife, particularly in breeding large beef cattle. He played an active role in county affairs as deputy lieutenant and justice of the peace; but his outspoken whig sympathies upset the tory gentry. In December 1815, when a new commission of the peace was issued for Fife, the lord lieutenant, the earl of Morton, tried to exclude him. However Stuart's whig supporters petitioned successfully for his reappointment. He was also deeply involved in the very fraught Edinburgh politics of the period, speaking out clearly against the tory-controlled town council. The strength of his opinions and the forcefulness of his onslaughts, often accompanied by threats of physical violence, against tory opponents earned him a certain notoriety throughout Scotland. However, he was a complex man with intellectual interests, particularly in collecting antiquarian books. During the 'radical war' of 1820, he was reprimanded by the earl of Morton for drilling a troop of Fife yeomanry against orders. Stuart took exception and resigned his commission in a fit of pique, but not before engaging Morton in lengthy correspondence which he later published as a political tract. 
In December 1820 some Edinburgh tories, irritated by attacks from the whig press, established a newspaper, 'The Beacon', printed by Duncan Stevenson. The first issue, which appeared in January 1821, contained unwarranted criticisms of the whigs. On 28 July 1821, the Saturday after the coronation of George IV, 'The Beacon' accused Stuart of supporting the queen. Furious, Stuart demanded the name of the author from Stevenson, who, thoroughly scared, went into hiding. Stuart caught and horsewhipped him in Parliament Square on 15 August. Both Stevenson and Stuart published lengthy tracts justifying their behaviour. Subsequently 'The Beacon' libelled Stuart's friend and fellow whig John Gibson of Ingleston. In the ensuing trial it emerged that Stevenson was supported by many leading tories, including the lord advocate, Sir William Rae. On learning this news Stuart challenged Rae to a duel unless he disavowed his connection with the newspaper. When Rae gave way, Gibson challenged Sir Walter Scott, another of Stevenson's backers. In October 1821 the tory-controlled 'Glasgow Sentinel' published a scurrilous poem about the whigs which contained the couplet: '
There's a stot feeder Stuart, 

Kent for the fat-cow art. 

' Stuart took exception to this and other articles in which his name appeared and again demanded to know the name of the author, even apparently going in disguise to Glasgow to negotiate with the erstwhile partner of the publisher, William Murray Borthwick, who had been declared bankrupt. He persuaded him to give him the name of the author. On learning it was Sir Alexander Boswell of Auchinleck, Stuart issued yet another of the challenges to a duel. He and Boswell were arrested in Edinburgh that night and bound over to keep the peace, so the duel was fought in Fife, on 26 March 1822. Boswell was seriously injured and died the next day. Stuart fled to France, but gave himself up to stand trial for murder. Amid intense public interest, he was found not guilty. 
After his acquittal Stuart took less part in politics, continuing to live in Edinburgh and Fife and devoting much of his time to gardening. In 1828 he became bankrupt, describing himself in the proceedings as a 'Writer to the Signet and Banker'. All his effects, including his enormous collection of books, were sold in an auction that extended over fourteen days. He was forced to resign as collector of the widows' fund and went to America. After his return in 1831 he published an account of his travels, 'Three Years in North America' (1833). A best-seller, the book was controversial, supporting the view in the United States about the poor conduct of the British troops during the campaign of 1814-15, particularly of their destruction of the White House and of the congressional library. The British commanders, Sir John Lambert and Major Pringle, reacted angrily in the press and in pamphlets to these accusations. 
In the early 1830s Stuart became editor of the London whig 'Courier' newspaper. He tried to improve circulation by publishing a weekly review supplement. His political sympathies were rewarded in 1833, when he was invited to become a member of the factory commission and to report on the employment of children in factories in Scotland and Ulster -- an office for which he seems to have had no qualifications except an ability to write reports and his friendship with Leonard Horner. When Horner changed his responsibilities in 1836, Stuart succeeded him as factory inspector for the north of England and Scotland, a post he held for the remainder of his life. The job involved extensive travel and correspondence. Judging from his annual reports, Stuart was a conscientious inspector and like Horner went out of his way to help factory owners comply with the regulations. 
In later life Stuart became a devoted disciple of the phrenologist George Combe. He died on 3 November 1849 at his home, 4 Boyne Terrace, Kensington, London and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 26713


Stuart, Sir James, first baronet (1780-1853), lawyer and politician in Canada, was born on 2 March 1780 at Fort Hunter, New York, the third son of John Stuart (1741-1811), Church of England curate there, and his wife, Jane (1747-1821), the daughter of George Okill of Philadelphia. The son of a loyalist, Stuart moved to Canada with his parents as an infant in 1781. A gifted lad, he later received a strong conservative education at King's College, Windsor, Nova Scotia. He was only fourteen when he entered the office of John Reid, the protonotary of the court of king's bench at Montreal, to study for the law; in 1798 he moved to Quebec and became a pupil of Jonathan Sewell, then attorney-general of Lower Canada. Two years later the lieutenant-governor, Sir Robert Shore Milnes, appointed Stuart his personal secretary. Stuart was called to the bar in 1801, and on 1 August 1805 was appointed by Milnes solicitor-general for the province, whereupon he returned to Montreal and quickly built a prosperous private practice. 
In 1808 Stuart entered the house of assembly as a member for Montreal East. After a disagreement with the governor, Sir James Henry Craig, and having been passed over for the post of attorney-general, he joined the nationalist opposition Canadian party, which dominated the assembly. In 1809 he was dismissed by Craig from the solicitor-generalship. He then devoted himself to private practice and to politics. During the administration of Governor Sir George Prevost he constantly opposed the government and became leader of the Canadian party in the assembly. In 1813 he inspired a motion adopted by the assembly to inquire into the conduct of the chief justices Jonathan Sewell and James Monk. He renewed his attacks in 1814, leading to an attempt, ultimately unsuccessful, to impeach them. Stuart's relentless pursuit of this matter, as late as 1817, finally alienated even his best friends in the Canadian party. Frustrated and embittered, he withdrew from the assembly that year. On 14 March 1818 he married Elizabeth (1795-1849), the daughter of Alexander Robertson of Montreal; they had at least three sons and a daughter. 
In December 1822 Stuart was once more brought to the fore, this time at the head of the British party, by a movement for the union of Upper and Lower Canada. He drafted a petition from supporters in Montreal, and was sent to London by the unionists to advocate their cause. There in 1824 he published 'Observations on the proposed union of the provinces of Upper and Lower Canada under one legislature', as well as a critique of a federalist plan proposed by Sewell. He attracted the attention of the colonial secretary, Lord Bathurst, and on 31 January 1825 was appointed attorney-general for Lower Canada. That year he stood for election to the assembly as member for William Henry (Sorel), but only on the insistence of Governor Lord Dalhousie, who assigned him the unenviable task of defending the executive's policies there. After being elected he became the house's constant target of irony from the former allies of the 'patriote' party, led by Louis-Joseph Papineau. For his service Stuart was appointed by Dalhousie to the executive council on 6 July 1827. Following the dissolution of parliament that year he lost to Dr Wolfred Nelson by two votes in new elections, which led to charges of abuse of power on his part, and eventually, in 1831, to a demand by the assembly for his impeachment; this resulted in March in his suspension by Governor Lord Aylmer from the office of attorney-general. Stuart sailed to England that year to defend himself. Lord Goderich, the colonial secretary, absolved Stuart on this and other charges levelled by the assembly, but, in a controversial decision, dismissed him in November 1832 on other grounds. Stuart persuaded Goderich's successor, Lord Stanley, that Goderich had been unfair, but failed to obtain a reversal, and, after bitterly declining the offer of the chief justiceship of Newfoundland, he returned to Canada in 1834 and resumed his practice at Quebec, with a success which was proof of general confidence. 
In the political storm which led up to the rebellions of 1837-8, Stuart took no part; but on 2 April 1838 Governor Sir John Colborne appointed him to the governor's special council. Its members, including Stuart, were all replaced two months later by Lord Durham, who, however, on 22 October 1838 appointed him chief justice of Lower Canada in succession to his former master and rival, Sewell, to compensate for his earlier dismissal as attorney-general. Stuart at once became active politically, encouraged by his reappointment in November 1839 to the special council, over which he presided until shortly before its dissolution in February 1841. He prepared the ordinance establishing register offices in Lower Canada, and was one of Governor Lord Sydenham's chief advisers in framing the 'Act of Union' of 1841. Subsequently he promoted the grant of corporations to Quebec and Montreal, and the institution of municipalities throughout the province. He was created a baronet on 5 May 1841. 
On the union of the Canadas (10 February 1841), Stuart became chief justice of Canada, and for the rest of his career he devoted himself to his judicial duties. He was a talented, practical lawyer, knowledgeable in, but largely antipathetic towards, the colony's French civil law. In politics he was conservative and British-orientated but fundamentally self-serving and opportunistic, as demonstrated by his flirtation with the Canadian party. In personality he was ambitious, unlikeable, arrogant, sensitive, and often bitter and frustrated. He died at Quebec on 14 July 1853, and was buried at Holy Trinity Cathedral in the city on 16 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 26714


Stewart, Sir John, of Darnley (c.1380-1429), soldier, belonged to a middling Scottish baronial family (distant cadets of the main house of Stewart) whose estates lay in Renfrewshire and north Lanarkshire. He succeeded his father, Sir Alexander Stewart, as lord of Darnley in 1404, but had not been knighted by January 1418. In October 1419, however, now a knight, he was one of the leaders, along with John Stewart, earl of Buchan, and Archibald Douglas, earl of Wigtown, of the Scottish expeditionary force that travelled to France to help oppose the advancing process of English conquest there. By August 1420 Stewart was being referred to as constable of the Scottish army in France, and he was prominently involved in the Franco-Scottish victory at Bauge on 22 March 1421 in which the duke of Clarence was killed and the English military advance on the Loire consequently halted. Stewart continued to play a large part in the continental war in the following years, for instance capturing John de la Pole, lieutenant of Normandy, early in 1423. On 31 July of the same year Stewart was himself captured and lost an eye in the heavy Franco-Scottish defeat at Cravant. The Scottish forces serving in France at this time seem generally to have been received locally with some ambivalence, but the reaction to Stewart's activities was apparently particularly favourable. Some of the many honours bestowed by the French crown upon Stewart may have done him little material good, such as the award of the countship of Evreux in 1427, which was then entirely in English hands, or the right to quarter his own arms with the French royal arms. But there is an indication of high esteem in these gestures; and grants to Stewart of the castellany of Concressault in 1421 and of the seigneury of Aubigny in 1422 were honours with a tangible value. A substantial financial contribution and the exchange of a prominent captive, meanwhile, were measures undertaken by the French crown to help meet what was clearly a large ransom incurred by Stewart after Cravant. 
Stewart was also trusted to undertake diplomatic initiatives on behalf of Charles VII of France, and returned to Scotland in 1428 on an embassy in the company of the French chancellor, Reynaud de Chartres, archbishop of Rheims. The embassy resulted in the renewal of the Franco-Scottish alliance and agreement regarding the marriage of Margaret, daughter of James I, with the dauphin Louis, the future Louis XI. The main theme of Stewart's career, though, was to remain his military exploits and the rewards and renown he was able to achieve through them. His military success was reflected in literature, which saw him lauded as a chivalric model as far away as Spain, and in a mystery play concerning the siege of Orleans. Stewart's relationship with the urban community of Orleans was particularly close. He made a collegiate foundation there, and it was while active in the defence of Orleans that he met his death during an encounter with English forces at Rouvray on 12 February 1429. He was accorded the honour of burial within the cathedral church of Orleans. 
Stewart married Elizabeth Stewart (died 1429), younger daughter and coheir of Duncan, eighth earl of Lennox. After Stewart's death the senior branch of the family, represented by his eldest son, Alan, who returned to Scotland, was ultimately to acquire the earldom of Lennox. Stewart's second son, another 


@@@@@


doc= 26715


Stuart, John (1718-1779), colonial official and merchant, was born in Inverness on 25 September 1718, the son of John Stuart, merchant and magistrate of Inverness, and his second wife, Christian MacLeod. After an initial education in the Inverness grammar school, Stuart left at the age of seventeen for London to work in a merchant house, moving between London and San Lucar de Barrameda, Andalusia. When war between Britain and Spain erupted, he joined Commodore George Anson's expedition, which set sail in 1740 to harass Spanish shipping in the Americas. During his brief naval career he served as a clerk and as a ship's purser and rose to the rank of midshipman. 
In 1748 Stuart moved to South Carolina, like many Scots at the time, and established himself in Charles Town as a business partner of Patrick Reid, a fellow Scot whom Stuart had met in England in 1746. Soon after his arrival he married Sarah, with whom he had three daughters and one son. The business did not fare well, and when Reid died in April 1754 he left Stuart with heavy debts, which forced him into bankruptcy and near destitution within a year. During this time and the years that followed -- during which Stuart repaid his creditors -- he established himself in Charles Town society, serving in a number of public offices including St Philip's parish firemaster (1752) and assemblyman for St Helena parish (1754-6), and joined social organizations such as the Charles Town Library Society and the Charles Town grand lodge of free and accepted masons. 
When the French and Indian war erupted, Stuart was commissioned a captain in the South Carolina provincial militia. His first task was to recruit a company to assist in the construction of Fort Loudoun in the neighbouring Overhill Cherokee country (subsequently Tennessee), which was intended to offer protection to Britain's American Indian allies while their warriors were away campaigning. At the fort Stuart built upon the good relations he had developed with the Cherokee as a trader, and ultimately took charge of arranging for the local women to provide provisions for the fort's garrison. Cherokee-British relations rapidly deteriorated after the fort's completion as young warriors on their return from campaigning took to plundering backcountry colonial farms, and white frontiersmen took Cherokee scalps and attempted to pass them as enemy Creek scalps in order to claim the hefty bounties being offered by the colonial governments. In 1759 full-scale war erupted, and in early 1760 Stuart and his company were sent to bolster Fort Loudoun's garrison. Although the British claimed victory, the war was inconclusive. Each summer a combination of British regulars, allied American Indians, and colonial militia would invade the Cherokee territory and destroy as many crops and towns as possible; meanwhile the Cherokee would avoid the advancing troops and instead raid the frontier and cut off supplies to existing forts. At Fort Loudoun the garrison was besieged for nine months in 1760 before starvation forced surrender. The troops were promised safe passage but were massacred within a few miles of the fort. Stuart was one of the few survivors, and owed his life to Attakullakulla (Little Carpenter), a prominent, tea-drinking Cherokee leader who had visited Britain and was a long-standing supporter of a British-Cherokee friendship. 
Following his safe return to Charles Town, Stuart's prominence in handling American Indian relations grew. With the backing of South Carolina governor Thomas Boone and Attakullakulla, Stuart was chosen to replace the generally inactive, and shortly afterwards deceased, Edmund Atkin as the British Indian superintendent for Indian affairs for the southern district. Created in 1756, the two superintendents were part of the British programme to assert a centralized diplomatic and military authority in order to achieve victory in North America. The superintendents and their staffs answered directly to the British commander-in-chief in America and to the secretaries of state, thus bypassing any colonial authorities. After defeating the French and their American Indian allies, the superintendencies, like many elements of the British military establishment, remained in peacetime North America. During the French and Indian wars the British government had been shocked at how well the American Indians fought, disappointed that so many sided with France over Britain, and frustrated with how ineffective the bickering colonial governments had been in remedying the situation. Stuart and his northern counterpart, Sir William Johnson, were charged with the task of maintaining a peaceful frontier and ensuring American Indian grievances were addressed before a war broke out that would disrupt the all-important recovering economies of colonial America. 
The primary American Indian grievances were the invasion of their lands by white settlers and the abuses of white traders who took advantage of American Indian dependence on a number of European goods, particularly firearms and gunpowder. The complaint about encroachment was addressed initially by the royal proclamation of 1763, which was intended to guide expansion away from major American Indian nations in the interior. Stuart's task was to enforce the proclamation by mediating border treaties between the colonial governments and the American Indians and by evicting illegal settlers. The British answer to trade grievances was regulation. Traders were expected to be licensed, and trade was to be conducted only at specified locations where, in theory, the superintendents or a member of their staffs could monitor activities. Stuart went to work immediately, organizing a massive congress in Augusta, Georgia, in November 1763 at which the southern colonial governors met with delegations from the various neighbouring American Indian nations. This was the first of a series of congresses that ultimately led to one of the most peaceful decades on the colonial American frontier and the establishment of a western border. Stuart's favoured tools in these negotiations were gifts. More than mere bribes, abundant gifts bestowed on favourably disposed leaders ensured that these men, who would in turn spread the wealth to their own supporters within their communities, would rise to power. At the Augusta conference alone, Stuart distributed gifts that included 1077 guns, 2300 shirts, 500 brass pans, 576 hatchets, 79 looking glasses, 36,500 gun flints, 190 saddles, 798 bridles, and an abundance of gunpowder (TNA: PRO, CO 5/65, part 2, fol. 74). He sent the bill to the secretary of state. 
Although initially willing to pay handsomely for results, the British government became increasingly apprehensive of such administrative costs in America as its post-war efforts to compel the colonists to share in some of the costs met alarming resistance. By 1768 the superintendents' budgets had been drastically slashed, forcing Stuart to release much of his staff and cease lavish gift-giving. By this point the British government had abandoned any hopes of an imperially regulated American Indian trade. Enforcing the borders was an equally lost cause, as frontier garrisons were redeployed to the riotous colonial cities. By the early 1770s the British had effectively given up, and Stuart was placed on a shoestring budget. 
When the American War of Independence broke out in 1775, the British reaped the rewards of Stuart's work. The vast majority of American Indian leaders in his district either sided with the British or declared their neutrality. Stuart received unprecedented financial resources to secure continued Indian support, but the tide of American patriotism proved too strong. Hampered by British war leaders who were unfamiliar with Indian affairs, an increasingly desperate British government, and American Indian leaders who were wary of remaining allied to a collapsing British authority, Stuart was forced out of the Carolinas and then Georgia. As the interior order he helped to construct collapsed around him, he took refuge in the loyalist-dominated Floridas, dying in Pensacola on 21 March 1779. 


@@@@@


doc= 26716


Stuart, John, third earl of Bute (1713-1792), prime minister, was born at Parliament Square, Edinburgh, on 25 May 1713, the elder son of James, second earl of Bute (1689/90-1723), and his wife, Lady Anne Campbell (1692-1736), only daughter of Archibald, first duke of Argyll. His paternal grandfather, Sir James Stuart (1651-1710), represented Buteshire in the Scottish parliament from 1685 to 1693, when he had to vacate his seat, having failed to take the oath of allegiance to William III. He was re-elected in 1702, and in the same year became a member of Queen Anne's privy council. On 14 April 1703 he was created earl of Bute, viscount of Kingarth, and Lord Mount Stuart, Cumra, and Inchmarnock. He was also named one of the commissioners to consider union with England, but eventually opposed the measure, and absented himself from the stormy parliamentary session of 1706 when the Union was debated and carried. He died at Bath on 4 June 1710. His son, the second earl, was born in 1689 or 1690. He was lord lieutenant of county Bute from 1715 and served as lord of the bedchamber from 1721 until his death, at only thirty-three, on 28 January 1723. John Stuart succeeded to his father's titles and lands in January 1723, under the guardianship of his Campbell uncles, the duke of Argyll and the earl of Ilay, who were both strong supporters of the Hanoverian succession. A great bibliophile, Ilay strongly influenced his nephew in passing on his interest in astronomy, mechanics, and natural history. 
In 1724 Bute was sent to Eton College, where he remained until 1728. He then studied civil law at the University of Leiden, and received his degree in 1732. He returned to Scotland and spent the next four years at Mount Stuart, his ancestral home on the Isle of Bute, where he attended to domestic affairs and the improvement of his estates. On 24 August 1736 he married Mary Wortley Montagu (1718-1794), only daughter of Edward Wortley Montagu of Wortley, Yorkshire, and his wife, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, nee Pierrepont, the eldest daughter of the first duke of Kingston. The marriage ultimately brought the immense Wortley estates into the Bute family, and was by all accounts a happy union. Lady Bute seems to have been a woman of prudence, loyalty, and tact, greatly devoted to her husband and family. The couple had five sons and six daughters, of whom perhaps the most accomplished was the eldest child, John Stuart, first marquess of Bute, politician and diplomatist, who succeeded to the earldom on the death of his father (1792) and was advanced to the marquessate of Bute on 21 March 1796. Two other sons, James Archibald Stuart (1747-1818) and Frederick Stuart (1751-1802), played minor roles in British politics; a fourth, Charles Stuart, pursued a distinguished military and diplomatic career, while their last son, William Stuart, was archbishop of Armagh. All their daughters contracted marriages except the youngest, Louisa Stuart, a poet, who died on 4 August 1851, at the age of ninety-four. 
In August 1737, through the influence of his uncles, Bute was elected a Scottish representative peer, but he appeared only occasionally in the House of Lords and took no part in the debate. In the same year he was appointed one of the commissioners of police for Scotland, and on 10 July 1738 was invested with the Order of the Thistle. Having failed to secure re-election in the parliament of 1741, he retired for five years to the Isle of Bute, where he devoted his time to reading, agriculture, and his lifelong passion, the study of botany. 
Soon after the outbreak of the Jacobite rising Bute moved to London, and in 1747 made the chance acquaintance of Frederick, prince of Wales. It was an encounter that proved to be the major turning point in his life. He became a favourite at Leicester House, the prince's London residence and centre of opposition politics, and on 16 October 1750 was appointed by Frederick one of the lords of his bedchamber. Upon the prince's premature death in 1751 Bute remained the confidant of his widow, Princess Augusta. Their friendship subsequently led to his appointment as tutor and principal adviser to her son, the future George III. In this capacity Bute not only directed the prince's formal education but also gained his respect and confidence, becoming, in George's own words, 'his dearest friend' ('Letters... to Lord Bute', 6). 
This relationship developed rapidly. The impressionable young man's emotional dependence upon his mentor ensured a ready acceptance of Bute's personal ideals and political principles, portrayed in written assignments that combined formal instruction in history, constitutional theory, and finance with ambitious plans for future governmental reform. To instruct George in the principles of the constitution Bute is said to have obtained from William Blackstone a major portion of the manuscript of the 'Commentaries on the Laws of England', the first volume of which was not published until 1765. Elaborated further in daily letters, their ideas comprised a blend of traditional Leicester House themes and 'country' party precepts -- a composite, idealistic political creed advocating an isolationist foreign policy, the abolition of party distinctions, the purging of corruption, and the enhancement of monarchial control over policy and patronage. These ideas, however conventional an opposition ideology, were taken seriously by Bute and his pupil, and emerged as their shared vision of Britain's future, to be implemented whenever George ascended the throne. Their relationship would thus profoundly affect the reconfiguration of politics commonly associated with George III's early reign. 
Bute first became active in the political world following the death of Henry Pelham in 1754. On behalf of Leicester House he enlisted the support of William Pitt in opposition to the Fox-Newcastle connection, and together Bute and Pitt formed an alliance based on a common hostility to George II's pro-Hanoverian policy in the face of impending war with France. This arrangement unravelled during 1757, as Pitt joined forces with Newcastle, acquired the position of secretary of state, and then reversed his stand on the German war and continental subsidies. Pitt's actions, taken without the approval of his former political allies, severely offended Bute and the prince, and created a rift between the Great Commoner and Leicester House that was never repaired. Bute, though without formal political office, had meanwhile emerged as one of the leading public figures in the kingdom. Both the advanced age and uncertain health of George II made the prince and 'ipso facto' Bute principal figures in all future political calculations. Important individuals both within and outside the confines of Leicester House looked to Bute for patronage, asked for his intervention at the highest levels, and sought his advice on their strategies for political advancement. His unquestioned dominance at the prince's court secured him the position of groom of the stole (5 November 1756), and he was widely considered a prime candidate for high office once Prince George became king. 
The long-awaited moment arrived with the death of George II on 25 October 1760. The event wrought an immediate change in Bute's situation: within two days of George III's accession he was sworn of the privy council, and on 25 March 1761 he received the seals as secretary of state for the northern department and a cabinet seat. These appointments were made to the manifest displeasure of Pitt and other senior ministers, who questioned his ability, feared his ambitions, and resented his influence with the king. On 3 April 1761 Lady Bute was created Baroness Mount Stuart of Wortley in the peerage of Great Britain; in May Bute himself was elected a Scottish representative peer and the following month was appointed ranger of Richmond Park. 
From the outset Bute's rapid elevation created confusion, strife, and misunderstandings not warranted by the actual course of events. Despite a new atmosphere at court, existing arrangements continued. Newcastle retained control of Treasury affairs, Pitt's management of the war proceeded unchanged, and the main contours of Britain's overall military/diplomatic strategy remained intact. Moreover, Bute proved to be a competent secretary of state, performing his duties with a diligence and efficiency that surprised many. As events were to show, Bute had a sound understanding of European developments and was quite capable of pursuing coherent policies with intelligence and resolution. He swiftly acquired self-confidence once in office and won both the respect and the loyalty of his subordinates, among them the veteran under-secretary Edward Weston, with whose collaboration he greatly enhanced departmental efficiency. He also made a good impression on the foreign envoys in London as being industrious, perceptive, and capable -- qualities considerably greater than his historical reputation suggests. 
Indeed, during the important Anglo-French peace negotiations in the summer of 1761, it was Bute rather than Pitt who proved the decisive force in devising the proposals submitted to France and maintaining the political unity that made effective negotiations possible. Bute sided with Pitt on most of the key issues but could not sanction his proposal for a pre-emptive strike against Spain, which was then joined to France in alliance. This refusal hastened the cabinet crisis leading to Pitt's resignation on 5 October 1761, the first important turning point of the new reign. 
Pitt's departure from office was not politically coerced: unable to compromise or share power, he defied united cabinet opinion and so made his retention impossible. Nevertheless, popular perception considered him a victim of court intrigue. The result was a highly volatile situation in which the remaining ministers, and Bute especially, came in for bitter press attacks and popular protest ['see 'King's friends]. Bute attempted to calm tensions by continuing Pitt's military policies and by pursuing firm measures against Spain, a policy that resulted in Spain's open defiance and Britain's consequent declaration of war. Simultaneously, in response to growing war weariness, Bute secretly renewed the lapsed negotiations with France and, concerned about the financial implications of conflict with Spain, gradually curtailed Britain's European commitments. This resulted in the progressive dissolution of the Anglo-Prussian wartime alliance, dating from 1757, a breach traditionally considered instrumental in the nation's prolonged post-war diplomatic isolation. 
What ultimately fostered this outcome, more than Anglo-Prussian antagonism, was the emergence of new alliance patterns that seriously diminished Britain's diplomatic options and influence after 1763. International diplomacy in the 1760s no longer revolved around France's diminishing threat to European security but around emerging issues in the eastern half of the continent: the Polish question and Austro-Russian relations with the Turks. These developments undermined the traditional basis of British foreign policy, which was to manipulate European powers into anti-French coalitions by exploiting the dangers of France's unrestrained preponderance. Prussia's primary aim following the war was to secure the alliance of Russia, and once she had achieved this (by 1764) agreement with Britain became both unnecessary and a liability, since it could only involve Prussia in Anglo-French disputes, issues that did not concern her. Hence Frederick the Great's coolness towards Britain after the Seven Years' War owed more to reasons of state -- the desire to avoid needless and costly complications -- than lingering resentment at his dealings with Lord Bute, as his rebuff of even Pitt's overtures in 1766 was to demonstrate. 
From this perspective Bute's diplomacy was effective in difficult circumstances. There has been increasing recognition that on many diplomatic issues Bute merely brought to successful completion those policies previously initiated by the Newcastle-Pitt administration. Even in the military realm Bute's leadership in retaining and supporting the essential elements of Pitt's wartime strategy yielded further triumphs, including the capture of St Lucia, Martinique, and Havana, the key to Spain's West Indian possessions. This suggests that the contrast between Bute's ministry and that of his immediate predecessors was less drastic than has often been assumed, an important conclusion with wide implications for Bute's historical status. 
Nevertheless, Bute's severance of the connection with Prussia, part of his anti-continental orientation, fostered deep divisions within the cabinet over the general direction of government policy and culminated on 26 May 1762 in Newcastle's resignation as first lord of the Treasury. The following day Bute succeeded him and was invested with the Garter, having previously resigned the Order of the Thistle. 
Now the head of government, Bute accelerated the pending negotiations with France. These were tortuous and plagued with endless complications. On three issues -- the future of St Lucia, the possibility of a separate peace without Spain, and the question of compensation for Havana -- he encountered bitter resistance from his cabinet colleagues which required all his authority combined with royal intervention to overcome. Uncertain of the ability of George Grenville, the leader of the Commons, to defend the peace, Bute had him transferred to the Admiralty and replaced with the able but unscrupulous Henry Fox, who could secure the required parliamentary support. He then appointed the duke of Bedford as special ambassador to Paris with instructions to finalize deliberations. The resulting preliminaries were signed at Fontainebleau on 3 November 1762. 
Although the terms of peace were vehemently attacked by Pitt as inadequate, most historians now agree that the treaty, considered by Bute himself to be his major achievement, was an honourable, advantageous settlement: rich compensation for Britain's global victories and a serious blow to French power. George III called it 'a noble peace' and the consensus of political opinion concurred. The preliminaries passed in both the Lords and the Commons by decisive majorities, and received formal ratification on 10 February 1763. What opposition there was to the peace derived primarily from personal antagonism towards Bute by political rivals who fanned public hostility against him and his policies. This steadily gathered momentum until by the spring Bute was the most unpopular man in the country. Maligned, insulted, and manhandled wherever he went, he suffered threats of assassination, incurred the wrath of brilliant polemicists such as John Wilkes and Charles Churchill, and was lampooned in over 400 prints and broadsheets. In addition, Bute's emblem, the 'jackboot', was regularly burned alongside that of his reputed lover, the 'pettycoat', Princess Augusta. 
The uproar was compounded by the unfortunate proposal from Sir Francis Dashwood, Bute's chancellor of the exchequer, for a cider tax, the collection and enforcement of which would have threatened personal liberty through the intrusion of inquisitorial officials into private dwellings. The measure was portrayed by Bute's opponents as part of an odious scheme to introduce a 'general excise' similar to that envisaged by Walpole in 1733. Despite its intense unpopularity, Bute ably defended the bill in the House of Lords and it received royal approval on 1 April 1763. 
Eight days later, physically ill, weary of politics and politicians, and unnerved by the savage attacks against him, Bute resigned from office, and recommended George Grenville as his successor. The king reluctantly accepted the decision but, retaining confidence in his favourite, continued to seek Bute's advice on important political matters over the next few years: the overtures towards Pitt and the Bedford connection in August 1763, the 'Stamp Act', the 'Regency Bill', and probably the negotiation with the opposition in early 1767. Inevitably this gave rise to the notion of 'secret influence', the belief prevalent well into the nineteenth century that even in retirement Bute directed the wheels of government from behind the scenes. As a powerful and persuasive theme the myth of Bute's secret influence provided many with an explanation for the incessant political convulsions of the 1760s, and eventually broadened into an all-encompassing conspiracy theory that defined the ideology and manoeuvres of leading opposition groups well into the age of Lord North. 
Hence successive administrations attributed their misfortunes to Bute's covert machinations and persistently demanded that the king cease to consult his favourite on public affairs; indeed, the Grenvillites made this a condition of their continuation in office. In response to these feelings Bute agreed to leave London in September 1763. He resigned his last post, of keeper of the privy purse, and withdrew to Luton Hoo, the country home in Bedfordshire that he had purchased the year before. There he appears to have kept up a correspondence with the king, though gradually their contacts lessened as the latter acquired more experience and self-confidence. When, in the summer of 1766, George III formed an alliance with Pitt that excluded Bute and most of his friends, the earl wrote a bitter letter of reproach that effectively ended their relationship, and thereby Bute's intervention in matters of state. 
Aside from travelling for three years through Italy (1769-71), Bute spent the remainder of his life at Christchurch, Hampshire, where in 1771 he built a villa, Highcliffe, overlooking the Needles and the Isle of Wight. There, in melancholy grandeur, he conducted his botanical studies, collected prints, books, and scientific instruments, and devoted himself to the patronage of literature, science, and the arts. He was by now one of the richest men in Britain, having acquired immense wealth upon the death of his father-in-law, Edward Wortley Montagu, in 1761. The sole inheritor, Lady Bute, was left a life interest in the Wortley estates in west Yorkshire worth $17,000 per annum, while her personal fortune was estimated at over $1 million. This wealth enabled Bute to play a leading role in promoting the intellectual life of his day. 
Of note is Bute's enlightened patronage of several of Scotland's leading universities and colleges. At Edinburgh he established the chair of rhetoric and 'belles-lettres', appointed John Hope, an accomplished scholar known for his taxonomic studies, to the professorship of botany and materia medica, and secured the new regius chair of natural history for David Skene, a distinguished Aberdeen botanist. He was also active in establishing the Royal Botanical Garden at Edinburgh, and at Glasgow he secured John Miller as the regius professor of civil law and supported William Leechman as professor of ecclesiastical history. In 1786 Bute donated his private scientific library of 1300 volumes to Marischal College, Aberdeen (of which he was chancellor), made additions to the college's museum, and supplied money to improve its observatory together with telescopes and other instruments of the highest quality. These gifts were to be of prime importance in the emergence of Aberdeen as a centre of practical astronomy and medical education. 
Bute was a patron of literary merit; his beneficiaries included Samuel Johnson, Tobias Smollett, Thomas Sheridan, and John Home. The painter Allan Ramsay, the architect Robert Adam, and the historian William Robertson were others who benefited from his generosity. He recruited the likes of John Shebbeare, Philip Francis, Arthur Murphy, and David Mallet to defend the peace negotiations in the press. Contrary to widespread belief at the time, Bute did not show undue partiality to Scots but dispensed his patronage according to proven ability rather than national or personal considerations. 
A gifted scholar himself, deeply interested in floriculture, Bute published -- at the cost of some $12,000 -- a splendid nine-volume work, 'Botanical Tables Containing the Families of British Plants' (1785), which contained 654 hand-coloured plates. Another privately printed work, 'The Tabular Distribution of British Plants', in two parts -- the first containing the genera, the second the species -- is sometimes attributed to him. Two of the groups classified by Linnaeus and Sir William Jones, 'Stewartia' and 'Butea', were named after him, and Albrecht von Haller's valuable 'Bibliotheca botanica' (1771) and John Hill's 'Vegetable System' (1759-75) were inscribed to him. Other authors who dedicated botanical works to him included William Curtis, George Edwards, and Samuel Pullein. His best-known role in botany, however, was in connection with the development of the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew, which were first laid out as a private garden by Frederick, prince of Wales, in 1730, and then after his death were remodelled into a botanical centre by Princess Augusta with Bute's assistance. In 1755 Bute leased a house on Kew Green, expanded to accommodate his botanical library, from where he supervised the garden alterations. Sir William Chambers was commissioned to design new buildings, including the orangery, the pagoda, and numerous temples. In 1759 Bute appointed William Aiton head gardener, and charged him with establishing the herbaceous plant garden on the Linnaean system. Bute closely co-ordinated these operations, as well as procuring trees and plants through his contacts from around the world. In this work he created the foundation on which his successor Sir Joseph Banks would subsequently build. 
Bute's place in the history of science is further consolidated by his enlightened patronage of such noted figures as the anatomist William Hunter, the naturalist John Strange, and the mineralogist Peter Woulfe. There is ample evidence of Bute's active interest in mineralogy, and of a sound acquaintance with current theories of the earth and the experimental arrangement of minerals based on chemical analysis. It was due to the depth, seriousness, and durability of his commitment to virtually all aspects of natural history that, for his contemporaries, Bute stood out among other noble patrons and amateur scholars, and as such should be remembered by posterity. 
Bute died at South Audley Street, London, on 10 March 1792, from complications following a fall at Highcliffe, and was buried on 2 April at Rothesay on the island of Bute. He was survived by his wife, who died at Isleworth, Middlesex, on 6 November 1794, aged seventy-six. 
Traditionally an elusive and misunderstood figure, Bute has gradually received recognition for his contribution to British politics as well as his achievements as a patron of artistic, literary, and academic merit. His reputation now is that of a hard-working, competent statesman with a genuine concern for king and country that commands admiration. 
Bute's importance derived largely from factors beyond his control, namely the interaction of domestic and external developments that would eventually reshape the pattern of British politics and institutions. It was his misfortune that he assumed office amid the crisis conditions of war and following the accession of a new king whose quest for enhanced executive power proved politically destabilizing. It created bitter conflict with a political establishment devoted to the 'status quo' and quick to raise the alarm over an apparent constitutional crisis in which Bute became the central focus. Enjoying power and status through court favour alone, Bute was a disturbing presence for the ruling elite: disliked and distrusted, he fostered ministerial instability as those directing government policy had to confront the threat to their political security he represented. 
Personifying the changing agenda implicit in George III's accession -- that of ending party distinctions and reasserting royal independence -- Bute undermined the whig oligarchy by challenging the premises on which this hegemony was based. As a royal favourite, opposition to whom the king considered a personal affront, Bute embodied an unacceptable form of politics, which in its erosion of the distinction between king and minister was to some reminiscent of tory notions of personal monarchy. Determined to preserve this distinction, the crown's opponents observed constitutional propriety and maintained that it was Bute, not the king, who was responsible for a system of government that disregarded the precepts of political responsibility. In this way, regardless of the facts of the case, Bute became a political scapegoat, held culpable for the conflicts between George III and the country's political leaders. Moreover, his nationality -- Scots then being much disliked in England -- made Bute a prime focus for disparate social and economic grievances, which enabled the opposition to mobilize public hostility against him, and to add popular disapprobation to their own indictment of his political involvement. 
From these conflicts there emerged new political alignments and doctrines, culminating in the evolution of an organized party system and the concomitant legitimization of opposition. The constitutional questions explored in this process -- notably those of ministerial responsibility and the parameters of royal power -- expanded into an evolving public debate, which resulted in important innovations in contemporary political arguments that were of crucial significance for the long-term development of the British constitution. The widespread controversy surrounding Bute's career provided a focus for a variety of social and political discontents, which in turn fostered the growth of extra-parliamentary radicalism dedicated to political change and reform. The importance of Bute to the historian, then, lies partly in the fact that he was a potent if unwilling catalyst of these developments. 
The discordant currents introduced by Bute's appearance on the political scene were further intensified through his initiatives in the sphere of foreign policy and diplomacy. Here the earl's negative reputation stems mainly from the shift, successfully executed during the years 1761 to 1763, away from his predecessor's continental interventionism. Unlike politicians solidly committed to a system in Europe with strong attachments to particular powers, Bute took a more prudent line on the necessity of alliances, the desirability of particular allies, and the expenditures and concessions involved in securing or retaining an alliance. This explains his opposition to anything that might have favoured Hanover, long a contentious issue politically, with the result that after 1760 British diplomacy was far less affected by European commitments than it was before the Seven Years' War. Thus Bute personifies what has been called a tory or country view of international relations -- a view traditionally hostile to continental connections but strongly favouring maritime and colonial objectives. Whatever its ideological roots, this policy was shaped in large measure by Bute's sensitivity to domestic pressures and the need to reconcile diplomatic imperatives with fiscal exigencies and parliamentary requirements. 
The desire to harmonize the conflicting needs of government economy and American security similarly prompted the Bute administration to impose the cost of post-war defence upon the colonists. This was a decision that led to an imperial crisis that ended in revolution but was probably inevitable given the state of British finances in 1763 and the Bourbons' known plans for revenge. Bute's awareness of the transitory nature of peace, and the appreciation that an enlarged empire demanded new fiscal and protective provisions, was a sound response to altered realities, though one much criticized by historians. Such criticism, as with so many aspects of his career, was invariably influenced by the long-standing controversies over the reign of George III, another example of the extent to which partisan dimensions have shaped Bute's historical reputation. 
Ultimately, however, Bute is more than a symbol of the aberrations conventionally associated with George III's early reign. Though brief and turbulent, his tenure as secretary of state and as prime minister was not without success. While his plans for political reform remained unfulfilled, Bute showed himself generally capable of leading a ministry in time of domestic stress and international conflict. For all his limitations, he implemented a coherent political strategy, one that consolidated Britain's imperial achievement and projected a minimalist continental policy at a time of intensifying national concern over the financial consequences of war. Altogether, he was a responsible, cautious minister who maintained his concentration on the most important issues and had a clear sense of political priorities. 
This accomplishment commands all the more respect when one remembers Bute's psychological aversion to governing and the multitude of problems that confronted him from the outset. As with Pitt, his political woes can be ascribed in part to his personality. Although an affectionate friend and devoted family man, in public he appeared invariably cold, distant, and haughty, probably more from shyness than arrogance. Happiest in scholarly seclusion, Bute was ill at ease and insecure on the political stage. His entire ministerial career is the tragic story of a man called into politics in middle age to assume a position he initially feared and eventually came to detest. His limitations, ultimately, were not ones of achievement as of personality and will -- an inability to kindle enthusiasm among his colleagues and the public at large, and failure to convince others that he was an effective minister. 
The lack of support from cabinet colleagues, his personal unpopularity, bitter factionalism within the whig ranks, a hostile press, and an inherently complex political situation might all have unsettled a more experienced minister. That Bute's concern for king and country prompted him to struggle on reveals qualities of courage, dedication, and loyalty not always associated with the trade of politics. 'I follow one uniform system', he wrote to Henry Fox shortly before his resignation, 'and that is founded on the strictest honour, faith and duty' (BL, Add. MS 51379, fol. 160). It is no mean epitaph for any public figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 26717


Stuart, Sir John (1761-1815), army officer, son of Colonel John Stuart (1718-1779) and his wife, Sarah Fenwick of Charles Town, South Carolina, was born in Georgia. His father was superintendent of Indian affairs for the southern department. A prominent loyalist in the American War of Independence, he died at Pensacola, Florida. At the end of the war his property was confiscated by the American government. 
Young Stuart was educated at Westminster School and obtained a commission as ensign in the 3rd foot guards on 7 August 1778. He took part in the War of Independence, serving under Lord Cornwallis in the Carolinas; he was dangerously wounded in the battle of Guilford on 15 March 1781. On 6 November 1782 he was promoted lieutenant in the 3rd foot guards and captain in the army. 
Ten years later, following the outbreak of war with revolutionary France, Stuart went with his regiment to Flanders as part of the force commanded by the duke of York (March 1793). On 25 April he was promoted to be captain in the 3rd foot guards and lieutenant-colonel in the army. His regiment formed part of the guards brigade which distinguished itself at Famars, Valenciennes, and Linselles. It also took part in the siege of Dunkirk, abandoned in October, and shared in the victory of Lannoy, won on 28 October; it then went into winter quarters. When hostilities resumed the following spring Stuart commanded his battalion in the assault on Landrecies and in subsequent battles around Tournai and Tourcoing. After the British army was forced to fall back on the line of the Waal, Stuart's battalion held Nijmegen until forced out on 9 November. He accompanied it in its retreat in the winter of 1794-5 and its evacuation from Bremen on 14 April 1795. 
Stuart was promoted brevet-colonel on 1 May 1796. On 30 November he was appointed to a command, with the rank of brigadier-general, in a force sent to Portugal under command of Sir Charles Stuart. He stayed with it until he joined an expedition to Minorca, again commanded by Sir Charles Stuart, in November 1798, being gazetted brigadier-general on the 10th of that month. When Minorca's garrison surrendered on 15 November it included 1000 ex-Austrian prisoners (mostly Germans and Swiss). They were enlisted into a regiment known as 'the Minorca' (renamed in 1801 'the Queen's Germans') and Stuart was given command of it. 
Stuart accompanied Sir Ralph Abercromby's force to Egypt in 1801, in command of the 5th brigade. This consisted of three foreign regiments, including the Minorca. It distinguished itself in the battle on 21 March fought on the plain of Alexandria. Its repulse of a cavalry charge ensured a British victory and received a commendation in general orders. The campaign over, Stuart was sent on a political mission to Constantinople and then returned to Egypt to command the troops left in Alexandria. He received the order of the Crescent from the sultan of Turkey for his services. He was promoted major-general with effect from 29 April 1802 and returned to England in that year. 
On 17 October 1803 Stuart was appointed to command a brigade in the force stationed on the coast of Kent against a threatened French invasion. He held the command until 24 March 1805 when he accompanied Lieutenant-General Sir James Craig, who had been given command of all British land forces in the Mediterranean. The expedition, 5000 strong, which arrived at Malta on 18 July, was destined to assist the kingdom of Naples, in conjunction with a Russian force, with the aim of driving the French from Italy. Both forces landed in the Bay of Naples on 21 November 1805. Overall command was given to the Russian general Lacy, but Napoleon's victory at Austerlitz caused the tsar to order Lacy to re-embark his troops and return to Corfu. Craig, seeing no point in remaining, obeyed his instructions to safeguard Sicily, where he took his force in January 1806. It disembarked at Messina on 17 February, when the king of Naples allowed it to land, he and his family having fled to Palermo. 
In April 1806 Craig, on grounds of ill health, resigned his command, which passed by seniority to Stuart. Stuart's naval counterpart, Vice-Admiral Sir Sydney Smith, reinforced the Neapolitan garrison at Gaeta, which still held out against the French, and captured the island of Capri, off Naples. Stuart supported the admiral's action by sending a regiment under Colonel Lowe to relieve the naval garrison of Capri. Stuart was allowed by King Ferdinand to raise a corps of Sicilian fencibles, clothed and paid by the British, organize a flotilla of Sicilian gunboats to protect the straits of Messina, and take command of the coastal area stretching from Milazzo to Cape Passaro. 
Learning that the French forces in Lower Calabria that threatened Sicily with invasion were seriously depleted on account of the continuing siege of Gaeta, Stuart decided to strike a surprise blow. His aim was to drive the French from the province, destroying their batteries and magazines. With a force of 5200 men he landed in the Bay of Santa Eufemia on 30 June 1806. General Reynier did not wait to be attacked but unwisely abandoned a strong position below the town of San Pietro di Maida. The battle that ensued was won by the British, though Stuart was scarcely responsible, the victory being entirely due to the action of his subordinates and the skill and bravery of his troops. Yet Stuart got all the credit for it, receiving the thanks of both houses of parliament and a pension of $1000 a year for life. He was made a knight of the Bath, created count of Maida by King Ferdinand, and received from the City of London its freedom and a sword of honour. 
Reynier's army had been shattered, but Stuart was unable to pursue it to destruction. His troops were exhausted by the great heat and he lacked the necessary transport and cavalry. In any case his primary task remained the defence of Sicily and he had embarked on the operation without ministerial authorization. Stuart was a cautious general and, having overseen the capture of Scylla, which commanded the narrowest part of the straits, and placed a garrison in both it and Reggio, he was content to return to Messina. 
Relations between Stuart and Sydney Smith, both vain men and both competing for the favour of Ferdinand's queen, were worsened when Stuart learned that Sydney Smith had been given viceregal powers in Calabria. There the admiral gave every encouragement to the local people to revolt. Stuart had issued a proclamation urging the Calabresi to join him, but once aware of their brutal treatment of prisoners of war, and that their primary interest was to wage class war in pursuit of plunder, he made public his disapproval, and Sydney Smith's viceregal commission was cancelled. 
Stuart returned to Sicily to discover that command of land forces in the Mediterranean had passed to General Henry Fox, who had already arrived at Messina. On learning that Fox's second in command was to be Lieutenant-General Sir John Moore, expected shortly with strong reinforcements, Stuart decided to resign. He had no wish to be subordinate to a man of whom he was bitterly jealous, Moore having won at Alexandria the fame to which Stuart felt himself entitled. 
Nevertheless, on 11 February 1808 Stuart was again sent to the Mediterranean to assume command of the land forces there, Fox having resigned and Moore posted to another assignment. On 25 April Stuart was promoted to the rank of lieutenant-general. On arrival in Sicily he was confronted with the prospect of a serious French invasion attempt now that Joachim Murat was ruling in Naples. When the latter captured Capri in October 1808 morale in Sicily was badly affected. Stuart was partly to blame for the loss, having reinforced the island's garrison with an unreliable foreign regiment which surrendered to the French with little fight. 
In 1809 Stuart was placed in a difficult situation by the British government: told first to send away regiments to Spain, in support of Wellesley's peninsular campaign, and then, when Austria re-entered the war, urged to make a major military diversion aimed at freeing the whole of Italy. In May he embarked a force numbering upwards of 11,000, but delayed sailing until 11 June. This delay caused great discontent among his subordinate officers with whom he was already very unpopular, but was caused by Stuart's extreme caution. He had learned of Austrian defeats in Bavaria and the withdrawal of their forces from northern Italy. When the expedition eventually sailed it was delayed by calm weather and arrived in the Bay of Naples only on 24 June. There it captured, with little resistance, the islands of Ischia and Procida. Stuart's further hesitation about what to do next afforded Murat the opportunity of concentrating his troops round Naples and making an assault on the city unwise. Urged by Admiral Collingwood to land his force on the Roman coast, from which French troops had been withdrawn, Stuart waited until too late. News of Napoleon's victory at Wagram and Collingwood's warning that the British fleet could not ensure the safety of the convoy if a French squadron escaped from Toulon, caused him to abandon the enterprise and withdraw at once to Sicily. This action embittered his relations with Palermo -- ones that were already under great strain. 
Three months later, under pressure from Collingwood, Stuart dispatched a force of 1700 to capture four Ionian islands. Lord Liverpool, the war minister, approved Stuart's action if it protected Sicily better, but insisted that the islands' garrisons be reduced. In March 1810 Stuart was ordered to send four regiments to Gibraltar in exchange for three raw and sickly battalions, but he declined to obey the order. It was clear that Murat was preparing an invasion of Sicily. On remonstrating with London about the dangers Sicily was facing, not least the feared treachery of Ferdinand's queen and the court's refusal to allow him a unified command of British and Sicilians, Stuart was permitted to retain his regiments. He was told, however, that once the danger was past he must obey the original order. 
Murat's abortive attempt at invasion took place on the night of 17 September. Thirty-five hundred French troops landed on the Sicilian coast 7 miles to the south of Messina. They were successfully repulsed by the British troops and Sicilian peasants. The major attack across the straits of Messina never took place as the French commanders, on Napoleon's orders, refused to run the risk of defeat. Though Murat removed the bulk of his forces Stuart felt sure the danger remained. Liverpool was unconvinced and renewed the order to send away troops. Stuart thereupon resigned on 16 October 1810. His resignation was accepted in April 1811. Despite his strained relations with the Sicilian court, the king offered him, on his departure, the order of knighthood of San Germano -- an honour he decided to refuse, in view of the delicacy of his position. 
Having returned to England Stuart was appointed lieutenant-governor of Grenada. On 10 June 1813 he was given command of the western district but resigned on grounds of ill health on 24 June 1814. He was an outspoken critic of flogging in the army. On 3 January 1815 he was made a military knight grand cross in the Order of the Bath. He died at Clifton on 1 April 1815 and was buried in the south aisle of Bristol Cathedral on the 13th. A small marble slab marks the spot. 


@@@@@


doc= 26718


Stuart, John (1743-1821), Gaelic scholar and botanist, was born at the manse, Killin, Perthshire, on 31 July 1743, the son of James Stuart (1700-1789), a minister in the Church of Scotland, and Elizabeth Drummond. Educated at Edinburgh University, he was licensed by the city's presbytery on 27 February 1771, presented to the parish of Arrochar, Dunbartonshire, by Sir James Colquhoun in October 1773, and ordained on 12 May 1774. He was translated to Weem, Perthshire, on 26 May 1776, and to Luss, Dunbartonshire, on 1 July 1777. 
Stuart was one of the leading Gaelic scholars of his time. His father had published a Gaelic translation of the 'New Testament' for the Society in Scotland for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge in 1767 and was engaged with a translation of the 'Old Testament' at the time of his death. Stuart supervised the completion of the first two volumes of his father's work and himself made the translation of the remaining 'Old Testament' books, which were published as volume 3 of the whole in 1801. On 24 July 1792 he married Susan Macintyre (1768-1846), the daughter of Joseph Macintyre, minister of Glenorchy. They had four children, including Joseph, who later became minister at Kingarth, Isle of Bute. In 1795 Stuart was awarded the degree of DD by Glasgow University and in 1796 he published a second, revised, edition of his father's translation of the 'New Testament'. 
Stuart's valuable services earned him the thanks of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland on 28 May 1819, and a gift of $1000 from the lords of the Treasury in the following year. Aside from his interest in the Gaelic language, Stuart was also a devoted student of botany and lichenology, and identified many of Perthshire's rare alpine plants. He died on 24 May 1821 at Luss, where he was also buried. He was survived by his wife, who died on 7 July 1846. 


@@@@@


doc= 26719


Stuart, John (1813-1877), archivist and genealogist, was born in November 1813 at Forgue, Aberdeenshire, where his father had a small farm. He was educated at Aberdeen University, and in 1836 became a member of the Aberdeen Society of Advocates. In 1853 he was appointed one of the official searchers of records in the Register House, Edinburgh, and in 1873 became principal keeper of the register of deeds at $400 p.a. In 1854 he was appointed secretary of the Society of Scottish Antiquaries, and from that time he became the guiding spirit of the association. In 1839, along with Joseph Robertson (1810-1866) and Cosmo Innes, he set on foot the Spalding Club, of which he acted as secretary until the close of its operations in 1870. Of the thirty-eight quarto volumes issued by the club, fourteen were produced under Stuart's editorship. Prominent among these were the two large folios entitled 'The Sculptured Stones of Scotland', published in 1856 and 1867, and important in their day. Another of the Spalding volumes was 'The Book of Deer', published in 1869, a reproduction by Stuart of a manuscript copy of the gospels which belonged to the abbey of Deer -- of great historical and linguistic value, especially with regard to the Celtic history of Scotland. Among the other works which Stuart prepared for publication by the Spalding Club were the three volumes of 'Miscellanies' published in 1841, 1842, and 1849; 'Extracts from the Presbytery Book of Strathbogie, 1631-54', published in 1843; 'Extracts from the Council Register of Aberdeen, 1398-1625', two volumes, issued in 1844-9; 'Memorialls of the Trubles in Scotland and England from 1624 to 1645', printed in 1850-51; and 'Notices of the Spalding Club', prepared in 1871 as a record of its labours. At the final meeting, on 23 December 1870, Stuart was presented by the club with a piece of plate and his portrait, the work of George Reid. 
Stuart contributed largely to the 'Transactions of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland' (of which he was principal secretary), especially on the subject of Scottish crannogs. For the society he edited two volumes of ancient cartularies, entitled 'Records of the Isle of May' (1868) and 'Records of the Monastery of Kinloss' (1872). 
Of Stuart's researches among old family records there remains the 'Registrum de Panmure', in two quarto volumes, printed by the earl of Dalhousie in 1874. At the instance of the historical records commission Stuart examined the charter chests of the Scottish nobility and furnished reports. Among the records at Dunrobin Castle he discovered the original dispensation for the marriage of Bothwell and Lady Jane Gordon. This find gave Stuart the opportunity of discussing, as he did in his volume, 'A Lost Chapter in the History of Mary Queen of Scots' (1874), the law and practice of Scotland relating to marriage dispensations in Roman Catholic times. 
For the Burgh Records Society Stuart edited two volumes of 'Extracts from the Burgh Records of Aberdeen, 1625-1747', and he also edited an edition of 'Archaeological Essays of the Late Sir J. Y. Simpson' (1872). In 1866 the University of Aberdeen conferred on him the degree of LLD. He was elected an honorary member of the Archaeological Institute and of the Society of Antiquaries of Zurich and the Assemblea di Storia Patria in Palermo. 
Stuart was twice married; no details about his first wife are known. He died at Crescent Villa, Ambleside, on 19 July 1877 and was survived by his second wife, Jane Stewart Ogilvie, and two daughters from his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 26720


Stuart, John Ferdinand Smyth (1745-1814), army officer and author, claimed to be descended through both parents from James Scott, the duke of Monmouth. According to his own doubtful statement, his father, Wentworth Smyth, was son of the duke and Lady Henrietta Maria, daughter of Thomas, Lord Wentworth. After Monmouth's execution, Wentworth Smyth is said to have been adopted by Colonel Smyth, Monmouth's aide-de-camp, who made him his heir. Wentworth Smyth took part in the Jacobite risings of 1715 and 1745, and was killed in the highlands at some later date. His reputed wife, Maria Julia Dalziel, who was said to be John Ferdinand's mother, was represented to be the granddaughter of General James Crofts, Monmouth's natural son. 
John Ferdinand Smyth, who in 1793 adopted the name of Stuart, studied medicine at Edinburgh University. He then emigrated to America and settled near Williamsburg, Virginia, where he practised medicine. At the outbreak of the American War of Independence he was among the few loyalists in the area, and on 15 October 1775 he abandoned his home. He served in several loyalist regiments with the rank of captain, distinguishing himself, according to his own account, by his zeal and activity. He was taken prisoner on several occasions, and was once kept in irons for eighteen months. At the close of the war he moved to England with a compensatory pension of $300 p.a. In 1784, on some insinuations secretly made against him to the commissioners for American claims, his income was suspended and never restored. Extreme poverty resulted in his accepting the position of barrack-master. He made strenuous representations to government, and in 1795 demanded justice from William Pitt peremptorily. 
Smyth's 'Tour in the United States of America' appeared in London in 1784. An account of his travels and military service in America, the work was well reviewed despite, or perhaps because of, his harsh critique of rural American society. Forever enchanted by the Jacobite cause, he also wrote 'Destiny and Fortitude: an Heroic Poem on the Misfortunes of the House of Stuart' (1808), to which he attached his own family history. 
In 1795 Smyth was persuaded to accompany Admiral Sir Hugh Cloberry Christian to the West Indies, where he was shipwrecked three times and was present at the capture of St Lucia. He later returned to England and was killed by a carriage at the corner of Southampton Street, London, on 20 December 1814. He was survived by his wife, two sons, and a daughter, details of whom are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 26721


Stuart, John McDouall (1815-1866), land surveyor and explorer in Australia, was born in Rectory Lane, Dysart, Fife, on 7 September 1815, the fourth of the seven (possibly nine) children and third (or fifth) son of William Stuart, a customs officer and retired army captain, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' McDouall. Educated at Edinburgh, first privately and later at the Scottish Naval and Military Academy, he emigrated to South Australia, where he arrived in January 1839. Working first as a government and later as a private surveyor, he quickly acquired considerable skills as a bushman. On 12 August 1844 he joined Charles Sturt's expedition to explore central Australia and, following the death of James Poole, was appointed second in command. From this experience Stuart learned a great deal about travel in arid Australia and the difficulties of large cumbersome expeditions. Between 1846 and 1858 he practised land surveying and as a land agent surveyed runs and discovered new pastures for James Chambers, a horse breeder, pastoralist, and financier, and William Finke, who became the principal backers for all six of Stuart's expeditions into the interior. 
The first of these (14 May - 16 August 1858) was a three-man expedition prospecting for new pasture country to the west of Lake Torrens and south of Lake Eyre, when Stuart found and named Chambers (now Stuart) Creek on the south-western side of Lake Eyre South. Stuart reported finding 40,000 square miles of new territory, of which around one-third was, he claimed, suitable for grazing. His achievements were drawn to the attention of Sir Roderick Murchison, president of the Royal Geographical Society, by the governor of South Australia, Sir Richard MacDonnell. Stuart was rewarded when MacDonnell named the Stuart range after him and gave him a rent-free lease of 1000 square miles around Chambers Creek. 
Stuart next led a four-man expedition (2 April - 3 July 1859) north to discover and name Peake Creek and Neales River, draining into the western shore of northern Lake Eyre. This was followed almost immediately by a third expedition, which left Adelaide on 22 August. With a party of five, which included English-born William Kekwick, his faithful and resourceful second in command, Stuart spent the next five months surveying some 8000 square miles of pastoral prospects as well as looking for gold to the west of Lake Eyre. Sighting the lake's northern shore, he realized that a way was open to solve the mystery of the inland sea, fix the position of the centre of Australia (which Sturt had failed to do), and find a route for the proposed overland telegraph line connecting Australia to London via India. 
With the way open, Stuart, Kekwick, and others left Chambers Creek on 2 March 1860, heading for the centre. They discovered and named the Finke River and the MacDonnell range before arriving on 21 April at the spot which Stuart considered to be the centre. After building a cairn and raising the 'British flag', the party pushed on until, on 26 June, 800 miles beyond Stuart's previous furthest, they were faced with Aboriginal hostility. Nearly starving, Stuart, suffering from scurvy and almost blind, ordered a retreat at Attack Creek, just north of Tennant Creek. 
Stuart reached Adelaide on 7 October 1860 to find the South Australian government hurriedly organizing another attempt to cross the continent to beat the Victorian party led by Burke and Wills. Stuart's party consisted of Kekwick as second in command and ten others. Stuart's fifth expedition started from Chambers Creek on 1 January 1861 and crossed Attack Creek in April. However, by 12 July the party was so short-rationed and worn out that Stuart had again to retreat. On reaching Adelaide on 23 September 1861 he received the Royal Geographical Society's patron's medal, its highest award, for his previous exploits. 
Stuart was almost immediately provided with a widely supported new expedition, with Kekwick as second in command, F. G. Waterhouse as government-appointed botanist, twelve men, and seventy-one horses. Although Stuart, by now a confirmed alcoholic and the second oldest and least fit, had the misfortune to have a horse break his hand, and was held up, the party left Chambers Creek on 8 January 1862, reached the centre on 12 March 1862, and, on 24 July, after bursting through a thick belt of scrub, arrived at the Indian Ocean at the mouth of what Stuart mistakenly thought was the Adelaide River. Consequent doubt as to whether Stuart had in fact crossed the continent remained until his marker was found at the mouth of the nearby Mary River in 1883. 
After immense hardship, the abandonment of all but the bare essentials, and with Stuart suffering from scurvy, the party finally reached Adelaide on 17 December 1862. He was awarded $2000 (later increased by a further $1000), of which he was allowed only the interest, and his party $1500 between them. Stuart later received a watch from the Royal Geographical Society. 
With his health broken by the combined effects of alcohol and the privations of being almost constantly in the field from May 1858 to December 1862, Stuart left for England in April 1864. He died, unmarried, on 5 June 1866 in London at 9 Notting Hill Square. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on the 9th. Stuart was a superb bushman, capable of surviving and to a certain extent living off the land in Australia's arid and near waterless interior. His very considerable exploits are to be compared with those of such other practical surveyor-explorers as Augustus and Frank Gregory and Alec and John Forrest. His track to the north settled the route of the overland telegraph and his perhaps too favourable account of the country to the north did much to encourage the South Australian government in its successful bid for the incorporation of the Northern Territory. His modesty, indomitable spirit, determination, and practical achievements place him among the greatest of Australian explorers. 


@@@@@


doc= 26722


Stuart, John Patrick Crichton-, third marquess of Bute (1847-1900), civic benefactor and patron of architecture, was born at Mount Stuart, Isle of Bute, Scotland, on 12 September 1847. He was the only child of John Crichton-Stuart, second marquess (1793-1848), and his second wife, Sophia Frederica Christina (1809-1859), daughter of Francis Hastings, first marquess of Hastings, and Flora, in her own right countess of Loudoun. His father died in 1848, and he was orphaned in 1859 by the death of his mother; he became a ward in chancery in 1861. He was educated at Harrow School and Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1865. A man of scholarly interests from an early age, his guiding passion was his reverence for ancient institutions. The Presbyterian religion in which he had been brought up was one of the first casualties of his medievalism. At Oxford he studied the forms of eastern and western Christianity, Judaism, Islam, and Buddhism, and shortly after reaching his majority, he was received into the Roman Catholic church at the chapel of the Sisters of Notre Dame, Southwark, on 8 December 1868. His conversion caused a great sensation, and the incident is believed to have inspired the plot of Disraeli's novel 'Lothair'. His Catholicism was reinforced by his marriage on 16 April 1872 to the Hon. Gwendolen Mary Anne (1854-1932), eldest daughter of Edward Howard, first Baron Howard of Glossop ['see 'Howard, Edward George Fitzalan-], from an old Catholic family. They had three sons and a daughter. 
On coming of age Bute acquired control of his Scottish and Welsh estates, and the tremendous wealth which they generated. Under his ownership the Cardiff docks (which his father had begun building) were completed, contributing substantially to the prosperity of that city. He sought to re-establish the political dominance of his family in south Wales, but much authority had been lost during his long minority. His connections with the city were strong: he was twice mayor in the 1890s, and president of University College, Cardiff. He was proud of his Scottish heritage, and maintained a close identification with that country. His conviction of the superiority of ancient institutions led him to advocate home rule for Scotland, although in all other respects his political views were conservative. He wrote extensively on Scottish history and institutions, and became a benefactor of the universities of St Andrews and Glasgow, providing the former with a chair of anatomy, a medical hall, and a students' union building. He was twice elected rector of St Andrews University, serving in that office between 1892 and 1898. His benefaction to Glasgow University enabled the completion, in 1882, of Bute Hall, which was built to the designs of George Gilbert Scott and John Oldrid Scott to accommodate ceremonial occasions, such as graduations, and examinations. 
Bute travelled extensively, particularly in the Middle East, and made a systematic study of the languages of the countries he visited. In 1882 he published a translation of the Coptic morning service, and in 1891 a study of the language of Tenerife. His greatest literary project, begun within two years of his conversion, was an English translation of a pre-Reformation breviary, published in 1879 in two volumes. He went on to translate the services for many of the major festivals, and was closely involved in the preparation of a 'proprium sanctorum' for Scotland. He was greatly interested in all questions relating to liturgy, ritual, and church architecture. In addition to his own work, he was a great patron of scholars working on matters relating to the church, and many important texts, such as Sir William Fraser's edition of 'Registrum monasterii S. Marie de Cambuskenneth, AD' 1147-1535 (1872) and works on Irish saints, the Friars Preachers of Ayr, and the 'Itinerary of Edward I' (1901) edited by Gough, were issued at his expense. 
Above all, Bute was a great patron of architecture. His collaboration with William Burges in the rebuilding of Cardiff Castle and the recreation of Castell Coch provided two of the masterpieces of the Gothic revival. The intensity of the colours, the extent of the decorative detail, and the specially designed furnishings gave these distinctive buildings a lasting interest; the symbolic schemes which guided the decoration were devised by Bute, and put into effect by the architect, 'soul-inspiring Burges'. In the Gothic style Bute's medievalism and Catholicism found aesthetic expression. Mount Stuart on the Isle of Bute was rebuilt in Florentine style, after a disastrous fire in 1877, by Sir Robert Rowand Anderson under Bute's direction. His interest in building extended to archaeology and the restoration of ancient monuments: among other sites, he was responsible for the excavations of the houses of the Greyfriars and Blackfriars in Cardiff, and of Whithorn Priory in Galloway, and for carrying out restoration work at Rothesay and Falkland castles, and St Andrew's Priory, and for beginning the restoration of Caerphilly Castle. 
In the 1890s, Bute developed an interest in spiritualism and the investigation of psychic phenomena; he subsidized an enquiry into second sight in the Scottish highlands conducted by Ada Goodrich-Freer, and, in 1899, with the same lady published a book concerning the alleged haunting of Ballechin House in Perthshire. He purchased the 'Scottish Review', and from 1882 until his death he contributed to it frequently, the range of his articles reflecting the variety of his interests, from 'Ancient Celtic Latin hymns' to 'The Bayreuth festival', from translations of Turgenev to 'Parliament in Scotland'. A natural scholar, Bute took little active part in the political life of the nation. His profound medievalism gave him a feudal outlook, while his sense of the duties of wealth and position was reinforced by his Catholicism. 
In August 1899 Bute had an apoplectic attack, from which he in great measure recovered. The following October, while at his residence Dumfries House, he experienced another seizure, and died the following day, 9 October 1900. He was buried in the chapel at Mount Stuart, and, in accordance with his instructions, his heart was buried on the Mount of Olives at Jerusalem on 13 November 1900. 


@@@@@


doc= 26723


Stuart, John Sobieski Stolberg (1795?-1872), and 
There is no reliable account of the youth and education of the brothers; by their own account, they discovered the 'truth' of their birth in 1811, and promptly offered their services to Napoleon, fighting at Dresden and Leipzig in 1813, and again at Waterloo, where they claimed to have been personally decorated by Napoleon. The date of their first appearance in Scotland is unknown, but they were certainly there with their father in 1822 at the time of George IV's visit to Edinburgh. They threw themselves fervently into the acquisition of Scottish culture, and Scotticized their name first to Allan, then to Hay Allan, and then to Hay, encouraging the belief that they were related to the last Hay earl of Erroll. They gained the patronage of the earl of Moray, and spent much time in Darnaway Forest, where they became expert deer-hunters (the source of their 1848 volume, 'The Lay of the Deer Forest, with Sketches of Olden and Modern Hunting'), and were frequent guests at the homes of many highland chiefs. In 1822 a volume of romantic poetry, 'The Bridal of Caolchairn', was published under the name of John Hay Allen. On 9 October 1822, Charles married Anna (1787-1862), daughter of the Hon. John Beresford, MP for co. Waterford, and widow of Charles Gardiner; they had a son and three daughters. John married, on 29 October 1845, Georgiana (died 1888), eldest daughter of Edward Kendall of Cheltenham. They had no children; and, indeed, there is some doubt as to their ever having resided together. 
In 1829, the brothers' careers entered a new phase, with the revelation to the antiquary and novelist Sir Thomas Dick Lauder of their possession of what purported to be a late fifteenth-century manuscript, entitled the 'Vestiarium Scoticum, or, The Garde-Robe of Scotland', depicting the clan tartans of Scottish families. They refused to show the 'original' of the manuscript (which, had it been genuine, would have lent substance to the claims then current as to the antiquity of the use of clan tartans), and it was dismissed by Sir Walter Scott as fraudulent. The brothers withdrew to Eilean Aigas, a hunting lodge on an island in the Beauly River in Inverness-shire, the grant of which they had obtained from their new patron, Lord Lovat. They declared themselves to be Roman Catholics and adopted the final version of their names, an unambiguous declaration of their belief in their Stuart ancestry and claims. They set up a miniature court on their island: Elizabeth Grant of Rothiemurchus recalled that 'for several years they actually 'reigned' in the north country' (Strachey, 369). 
In 1842, the brothers published their manuscript in a limited edition of fifty, and in 1844 produced another volume, 'The Costume of the Clans', which has been described as 'a monumental work', in which they set out to demonstrate that the Catholic, Celtic Scotland of the middle ages had been part of a sophisticated and rich culture; as Hugh Trevor-Roper has demonstrated, they saw themselves as living embodiments of the revival not just of highland dress, but of an entire, vanished civilization. 'The Costume of the Clans' was a work of immense scholarship, drawing on a wide variety of disciplines and arcane sources; it was, none the less, 'shot through with pure fantasy and bare-faced forgery' (Trevor-Roper, 36). 
The brothers followed this publication with a volume of romantic short stories, 'Tales of the Century, or, Sketches of the Romance of History between the Years 1746 and 1846' (1847), in which they made their most explicit claim to royal blood, through historical fictions which the reader was intended to read as thinly disguised historical facts. Far from having the desired effect, the pretensions of the brothers and their earlier work on the clans of Scotland were subjected to a devastating anonymous attack in the 'Quarterly Review' (in fact written by Professor George Skene of Glasgow), which exposed the weaknesses, flaws, and fantasies of the 'Vestiarium'. Despite the attempts at rebuttal by the brothers, their reputation and scholarship were compromised, and the household at Eilean Aigas finally broke up. The family moved to the continent, where they lived principally at Prague and Pressburg for the next twenty years, and where their pretensions to royal blood continued to be entertained. In 1868, very poor but maintaining their illusions, the Stuarts returned to London, where they were well-known figures in the British Library reading rooms, where a table was reserved for them. Their pens, paper-knives, paperweights, and other paraphernalia were surmounted with miniature gold coronets. 
John Sobieski Stuart, who had assumed the title of Count d'Albanie on the death of his father in 1839, died at 52 Stanley Street, Hanover Square, London, on 13 February 1872. His brother then assumed the Albanie title, and continued to defend the family claims, dying on board the steamer 'Rainbow' at Pauillac, near Bordeaux, on 25 December 1880. Of Charles Stuart's children, the son, Charles Edward Lewis Casimir (1824-1882), served in the Austrian cavalry and married Lady Alice Hay, youngest daughter of the seventeenth earl of Erroll, and died without children. Of the daughters, the eldest, Marie (1823-1873), died unmarried; Louisa Sobieska (1827?-1897) married Edouard von Platt of the Austrian imperial bodyguard and had a son; Clementina (1830?-1894) became a Passionist nun and died at a convent at Bolton, Lancashire. The Stuarts also had a sister, Catherine, who married Count Charles Ferdinand de Lancastro, and whose only son (also Charles Ferdinand), served in Mexico with the Austrian army, but died in London in 1873. The claims to direct male descent from the Young Chevalier thus ended with the death of Charles Edward Lewis Casimir Stuart in 1882. 


@@@@@


doc= 26724


Stuart, Ludovick, second duke of Lennox and duke of Richmond (1574-1624), courtier, was born in France on 29 September 1574, the eldest son of Esme Stuart, sixth seigneur d'Aubigny and first duke of Lennox (c.1542-1583), and his wife, Catherine de Balsac d'Entragues (died 'c'.1631). He spent his early years in France but shortly after the death of his father on 26 May 1583 he was summoned to Scotland by his cousin James VI. Having surrendered his seigneurie of Aubigny to his younger brother Esme Stuart (1579?-1624), he was on 31 July confirmed by the king in his father's titles of duke of Lennox and Earl Darnley and in his offices and estates. As a symbolic gesture, acknowledging Lennox's place in the Scottish succession as heir to the throne (a position disputed by the Hamilton family, especially in the later 1580s), the duke carried the crown to the opening session of the parliament of May 1584; he bore it again at the opening of the 1587 parliament. The duke was placed in the care of John Graham, third earl of Montrose, and the king showed a continued interest in his education by appointing the well-regarded Dr Gilbert Moncrieff as his tutor. 
Lennox continued to receive regular demonstrations of royal favour: in November 1583 he was made a gentleman of the bedchamber and great chamberlain for life; in July 1583 he received the lordships of Dalkeith (formerly belonging to Regent Morton), Methven, and Balquidder along with the teinds of the archbishopric of Glasgow (administered by his great-uncle Robert Stewart, earl of March and, formerly, earl of Lennox (1522/3-1586)); and on 21 August 1586 he was granted the priory of St Andrews 'in commendam'. In 1589 Lennox was considered 'a chyld of age, yet for his yeres wyese and wary, yea wyly' ('CSP Scot.', vol. 10, no. 311). In spite of his youth, the duke began to engage in political affairs -- as a privy councillor, and along with most of the rest of the Scottish nobility, he was granted a commission to pursue Jesuits and Catholics during the height of the Armada crisis in July 1588 and a number of days later he was given specific responsibility for guarding Dumbarton Castle and the Clyde approaches. Lennox was closely allied to the court party of George Gordon, sixth earl of Huntly, throughout the 1580s, but in 1589 he was active in support of the king against the Brig o' Dee rebels. From October of that year, when James VI was absent from Scotland for a period of eight months to get married, Lennox acted as governor of the kingdom and president of the privy council, with the assistance of Francis Stewart, first earl of Bothwell, in Edinburgh and John Hamilton (subsequently marquess of Hamilton) on the border. The period of Lennox's governorship was notably peaceful with little disruption on the border and a conscious governmental effort to settle ongoing feuds between fractious noblemen, such as the northern earls of Moray and Huntly. On 20 April 1591 Lennox married Lady Sophia (died 1592), daughter of William Ruthven, first earl of Gowrie (c.1543-1584), with whom he had been having secret relations for some time: the day before the wedding, Lennox had forcibly removed Sophia from the protective custody of Wemyss Castle where she had been placed by James VI -- to the king's annoyance. The marriage was brief and childless. 
Lennox's relations with his Stewart kin were complicated. He had been a willing part of a corporeal 'Stewart faction' formed during the king's absence in 1590 and had allied with Bothwell and John Stewart, earl of Atholl, in actions against the chancellor, John Maitland of Thirlestane, with whom he was regularly at odds. Above all, however, Lennox was loyal to his monarch and consequently returned to the king's chamber more swiftly than other members of the nobility during disputes. Lennox was credited as having the greatest influence over the king of any of the nobility, to the extent that a number of English agents attempted to discredit him or counteract his influence. 
As chamberlain, Lennox was closely involved in court function and ceremonial and in May 1590 was at the forefront of the celebrations surrounding Queen Anne's arrival in Scotland and her coronation and ceremonial entry into the Scottish capital. In June 1590, less than two months after the king's return to Scotland, Lennox's growing stature was recognized when he replaced Francis, earl of Bothwell, as first gentleman of the bedchamber -- much to the frustration of the older man. Lennox benefited greatly from the disgrace of Bothwell (especially following allegations of the earl's involvement in witchcraft at North Berwick in April 1591), receiving the office of high admiral and large estates on the border and in Lothian. He also secured valuable links within the court after the marriage of two of his sisters to prominent noblemen, Henrietta to George Gordon, sixth earl of Huntly (1588), and Marie to John Erskine, eighteenth or second earl of Mar (1592), although the proposed marriage of his third sister, Gabrielle, to Hugh Montgomerie, fifth earl of Eglinton (1598), did not take place and she retired to a French nunnery at Glatigny. 
Lennox's former associations with the disgraced Bothwell soon led to allegations that the duke was collaborating with his kinsman, and was merely administering the earl's extensive estates on behalf of Francis Stewart's family. Although denied, these allegations resurfaced in the aftermath of the murder of James Stewart, earl of Moray, in February 1592, which Lennox was eager to avenge. Politically, Lennox found it expedient to re-associate himself with the Stewart faction and he was more willing to favour Bothwell openly. He obtained a grant of the ward of the young James Stewart, third earl of Moray (the murdered earl's son), and in June 1593 Bothwell was able to gain access to King James at Holyrood through the duke's stables. Along with the earls of Atholl and Mar and Alexander Lindsay, first Lord Spynie, Lennox interceded with the monarch to effect Bothwell's recovery of favour. Aware of James's unhappiness, however, Lennox again was one of the first to desert the earl and return to his monarch's side. 
Lennox was active at James's side during the armed expedition against the rebel northern lords that followed the battle of Glenlivet in 1594. After the king returned south, Lennox was given a commission of lieutenancy over the north of Scotland to ensure its continuing quiet and was able to persuade Huntly and Erroll to leave Scotland for voluntary exile; he was also largely credited with persuading the king to demonstrate a lenient attitude to Huntly and his companions. The duke was granted the administration of the rebel earl's estates but, as formerly, he permitted the wives of the exiled lords to enjoy the profits of their lands. On 7 July 1598 he was given a lieutenancy over the island of Lewis and on 9 July 1599 this was extended to the whole highlands and islands. The highland west was the focus of Lennox's territorial holdings and this led to heated confrontations with the earls of Argyll and Mar in 1601 over the participation of Scottish troops in Irish warfare. 
In 1598, probably on 3 September, Lennox had married Jean (died 1610), daughter of Sir Mathew Campbell of Loudon and widow of Robert Montgomerie, master of Eglinton. The duke and duchess of Lennox had two children -- a boy (died 1602x7) and a girl, Lady Elizabeth (died 1607x24) -- but were not suited to each other. By 1605 Lennox wished to divorce his wife and in September 1607 she was declared a rebel at the duke's petition for keeping his daughter from him and for mistreating her. 
As an accomplished horseman, Lennox was a regular hunting companion of the king and in 1594, at the baptism celebrations for Prince Henry Frederick, was accomplished enough to win the prize for running at the ring and glove. He was present on a hunt with James when the king heard of the events that culminated in the Gowrie conspiracy of August 1600, and was active in backing his monarch against his former brother-in-law John Ruthven, third earl of Gowrie, who died during the confrontation. On 1 July 1601 he was sent as ambassador to France, ostensibly to renew the auld alliance, which had been in abeyance since 1560. Owing to Henri IV's opposition to this, Lennox was unsuccessful but on his return journey to Scotland he visited the English court, where he was entertained by Elizabeth for three weeks according to his position as the only non-royal duke in either Scotland or England at this time. 
Lennox next returned to England in April 1603, in the company of James VI upon his accession to the English throne. The duke was appointed to the English privy council and was created first gentleman of the king's English bedchamber before James even reached his new capital. Although for the remainder of his life he was based at the English court, he rarely attended the privy council and, increasingly, his offices were more honorific than functional. Shortly after James's entry to London, Lennox returned to Scotland to remove Prince Henry Frederick from the care of the earl of Mar and place him in the care of Queen Anne, prior to their journey south to London. On 18 June 1603 he was naturalized as an English citizen, and on 23 July he was installed with Prince Henry and Mar as a knight of the Garter. 
Lennox continued to accumulate honours in England: on 6 August he was granted the manors of Settrington, Temple-Newsam, and Wensleydale in Yorkshire along with a pension of $600 a year. These lands had been part of the Lennox holdings in England held by Matthew Stewart, earl of Lennox and Lord Darnley (d. 1571), and his countess while in English exile and had been unsuccessfully sought by James from Elizabeth through much of the 1580s and 1590s. In 1604 Lennox was again sent to the French court as ambassador for the king -- on his tomb he was called 'Captain of the Scots Gens d'Arms' in France. On 31 August 1605 he was created MA of Oxford University, following a visit there in attendance upon James VI and I. In September 1605 he was appointed king's aulnager (inspector of woollen cloth) and on 13 August 1606, on the forfeiture of Lord Cobham, he received a grant of the manor of Cobham in Kent. At the funeral of Henry, prince of Wales, in 1612 Lennox was one of the principal supporters of Prince Charles, the chief mourner. In February 1613 he accompanied James's eldest daughter, Elizabeth, on the journey with her husband to the Palatinate and then continued to France as ambassador. Following his return, he was on 6 October created earl of Richmond in the peerage of England and Baron Settrington. In 1614 he was named deputy Earl Marischal, and in November 1616 he became lord high steward of the royal household. In the intervening period, Lennox had been part of the commission of inquiry for the trial of Robert Carr, earl of Somerset, and his wife for the alleged poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury and in October 1616 he had also officiated at the celebration surrounding the creation of Prince Charles as prince of Wales. In 1618 he was made king's aulnager in Ireland, in November 1620 he was appointed lord lieutenant of the county of Kent, and from May to July 1621 he was joint commissioner for the great seal. 
Periodically, Lennox had returned to Scotland, as for example in July 1607, when he had been named high commissioner to the Scottish parliament in James's place. In 1617 he accompanied King James on his one return visit to the kingdom of his birth. Sitting in the Scottish parliament by heritage, in 1621 he voted in favour of the reforms of worship introduced in the unpopular five articles of Perth. Throughout much of his life, Lennox had been accused of lukewarm adherence to protestant doctrine. His close family were all Catholic and he was openly suspected of Catholicism on a number of occasions. Following the marriage of his sister to Huntly, these suspicions had grown in frequency and the duke had been excommunicated by the Church of Scotland; when absolution finally came in 1616 it was from the archbishop of Canterbury. For much of his later life, however, Lennox avoided serious political or religious confrontation as he was more content to play the role of courtier than administrator. 
On 16 June 1621 Lennox married his third wife, Frances (1578-1639) ['see 'Stuart, Frances, duchess of Lennox and Richmond], daughter of Thomas Howard, Viscount Howard of Bindon, and widow successively of Henry Prannell and Edward Seymour, first earl of Hertford (1539?-1621). On 17 August 1623 he was created duke of Richmond and earl of Newcastle upon Tyne in the peerage of England. He died on 16 February 1624, suddenly, in bed at his home in the parish of St Andrew's, Holborn, from 'a fit of apoplexy' (Crawfurd, 335). He left no legitimate heirs but an illegitimate son, Sir John Stewart of Methven, was keeper of Dumbarton Castle in the early 1620s. Parliament, which had been due to open that day, was postponed. On 19 April, with great ceremony, his body was borne from Ely House in Holborn to Westminster Abbey where he was buried, in King Henry VII's chapel, in a magnificent tomb, raised by his wife. His English titles became extinct; his Scottish titles descended to his brother Esme. 


@@@@@


doc= 26725


Peter Stuart (b. c.1760, d. in or after 1812), newspaper proprietor, purchased 'The Oracle' in 1794, reputedly for as little as $80 since the circulation was only 800 a day. He had previously started the 'Morning Star', the first daily evening paper in London. In 1805 'The Oracle' was accused of publishing a libel on the House of Commons, following the publication of an article about Lord Melville. Peter Stuart was forced to appear at the house to apologise. In 1812 he asked the prince of Wales for a sinecure in return for a pamphlet written in his support, entitled 'Thoughts on the State of the Country'. This request was granted, apparently after Stuart threatened the prince with negative publicity. 


@@@@@


doc= 26726


Stuart, Robert (1812-1848), historian, eldest son of William Stuart, was born on 21 January 1812 in Glasgow, where his father was a merchant. When he was about a year old, because of his father's absence abroad on business, he was placed with his maternal grandfather, George Meliss, resident near Perth, and was strongly influenced by his grandmother, a descendant of the Stewarts of Invernahyle. In 1819 he joined his parents at Nice, thereafter accompanying them to Gibraltar. In 1821 he was sent to a boarding-school near Perth, and in 1825 his parents returned to Glasgow, where he settled with them and attended school. 
The business depression of 1826 led Stuart's father to become a bookseller and publisher, with his son as assistant. In 1836 he turned to some new enterprise, and Stuart undertook the business himself and married; his wife's name is not known. He wrote Byronic verses for his father's 'Literary Rambler' and edited his own 'Scottish Monthly Magazine', issued during 1836. In 1841 his friend John Buchanan of Glasgow showed him inscribed altars and other memorials of the Roman occupation of Scotland and expressed surprise that authors should have neglected such a fascinating subject. The result was Stuart's chief work, 'Caledonia Romana: Roman Antiquities in Scotland' (1845), a work well regarded in its day, which ran to a posthumous second edition, with a memoir by David Thomson (1852). In 1848 Stuart published an antiquarian study of Glasgow. He died in Glasgow of cholera on 23 December 1848, and was survived by his wife and family. 


@@@@@


doc= 26727


Stuart, William (1755-1822), Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh, was born on 15 March 1755, the fifth son of John Stuart, third earl of Bute (1713-1792), prime minister, and Mary Wortley Montagu (1718-1794), only daughter of Edward Wortley Montagu and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. His siblings included John Stuart, first marquess of Bute, Sir Charles Stuart (1753-1801), and Lady Louisa Stuart. He was educated at Winchester College and St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated MA in 1774. Shortly after being ordained in 1779 he was appointed vicar of Luton, Bedfordshire. He was made DD in 1789 and in the same year became a canon of Christ Church, Oxford. In 1793 he was appointed bishop of St David's and in December 1800 he became archbishop of Armagh and primate of all Ireland. On 3 May 1796 at St George's, Hanover Square, he married Sophia Margaret Juliana Penn (died 1847), the daughter of Thomas Penn (1702-1775), colonial politician, and Lady Juliana Fermor. 
Stuart's correspondence with his fellow archbishop and confidant Charles Brodrick of Cashel shows him to have been a stern and somewhat intemperate critic of many of his fellow bishops. He wrote that Bishop Stopford of Cork showed a 'total incapacity to attend to the duties of his diocese' (Brodrick MSS, 3 June 1805), that Bishop Knox of Derry was 'the mere echo of the Castle' (ibid., 10 April 1805), and that William Magee, while doing damage in the episcopal college, could do little as a bishop (ibid., 29 March 1813). He maintained that the educational interests of the Church of Ireland were endangered, 'so ignorant are some of their lordships' (ibid., 3 Feb 1808), while the English bishops showed little interest in Irish affairs (ibid., 1 Oct 1805). His strictures against the church's performance in general embraced in particular its neglect of education, for which in large measure he blamed lack of clerical zeal. He criticized the high incidence of non-residence among the clergy, and on unsubstantiated moral grounds objected (unavailingly) to the translation into his province of Bishop George de la Poer Beresford, a member of a family that was highly influential in church and state. Being virtually independent of political patronage, he used his high office to institute reforms, especially through the resources of the board of first fruits. He was a diligent chairman of the Irish board of education inquiry, which issued fourteen important reports between 1809 and 1813. Stuart died of accidental poisoning at his London home at Hill Street, Berkeley Square, on 6 May 1822 and was buried at Luton Park, Bedfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 26728


Wortley, Lady Emmeline Charlotte Elizabeth Stuart- (1806-1855), poet and travel writer, was born on 2 May 1806, the second daughter of John Henry Manners, fifth duke of Rutland (1778-1857), and Lady Elizabeth Howard (died 1825), fifth daughter of Frederick Howard, fifth earl of Carlisle (1748-1825). On 17 February 1831 Lady Emmeline married the Hon. Charles James Stuart-Wortley (1802-1844), second son of James Archibald Stuart-Wortley, first Baron Wharncliffe (1776-1845); they had three children: Archibald Henry Plantagenet (1832-1890), Adelbert William John (died 1844), and Victoria Alexandrina ['see 'Welby, Victoria Alexandrina Maria Louisa], who married Sir William Earle Welby-Gregory on 4 July 1863. 
Lady Emmeline's earliest poems appeared in 'Blackwood's Magazine' and in 'Poems' (1833), and for the next eleven years she published a volume of verse annually. Some poems were written as a result of her travels, for example 'Travelling Sketches in Rhyme' (1835), 'Impressions of Italy, and other Poems' (1837), and 'Sonnets' (1839), written chiefly during a tour through Holland, Germany, Italy, Turkey, and Hungary (1839). In 1837 and 1840 Lady Emmeline edited the popular annual 'The Keepsake', for which she wrote many poems. Among the contributors was Tennyson, who in 'The Keepsake' for 1837 published his poem 'St Agnes' (afterwards republished under the title of 'St Agnes' Eve' in the volume of 1842). Lady Emmeline's associates also included the countess of Blessington, Theodore Hook, Richard Monckton Milnes, Caroline Norton, and Mary Shelley. 
From the time of Lady Emmeline's European wedding journey, she became an avid traveller, at first touring for enjoyment, but with her itineraries becoming 'increasingly punishing' (Robinson, 122) after the death of her husband and youngest son in 1844. In 1849-50 she visited America with her daughter and published 'Travels in the United States' (1851) and 'Sketches of Travel in America' (1853). During this trip, she and the twelve-year-old Victoria did not confine themselves to the eastern United States, but made their way to Mexico, across Panama, and into Peru. Victoria also wrote about these travels: 'A Young Traveller's Journal of a Tour in North and South America During the Year 1850' was published in 1852. Lady Emmeline's last published book of travel, 'A Visit to Portugal and Madeira', appeared in 1854, although an account of a journey to Spain, 'The Sweet South', was printed posthumously for private circulation in 1856. Although Lady Emmeline was a fairly prolific poet and travel writer the quality of her work is not generally of a high standard. 
While riding in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem on 1 May 1855 Lady Emmeline was kicked by a mule and fractured her leg. She was not in good health at the time, yet persisted in journeying without a guide from Beirut to Aleppo, and returned by an unfrequented road across Lebanon. Afflicted with dysentery and sunstroke, she died at Beirut on 30 October 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 26729


James Archibald Stuart-Wortley (1805-1881), was born in St James's Square, London, on 3 July 1805. He graduated BA from Christ Church, Oxford, in 1826, and was soon after elected fellow of Merton. He was called to the bar from the Inner Temple in 1831, and took silk ten years later. In 1844 he became counsel to the Bank of England, and in the following year was appointed solicitor-general to the queen dowager and attorney-general to the duchy of Lancaster. In 1846 he was sworn of the privy council, and was judge-advocate-general during the last months of Peel's second administration. In 1851 he became recorder of London, and was solicitor-general under Lord Palmerston in 1857. From 1835 to 1837 he represented Halifax as a Conservative and from 1842 to 1859 sat for Buteshire (after 1846 as a Peelite). Stuart-Wortley married, in 1846, the Hon. Jane Lawley ['see 'Wortley, Jane Stuart- (1820-1900)], only daughter of Paul Beilby Thompson, first Baron Wenlock. Despite the assistance of various Peelites, including William Ewart Gladstone, she was unable to prevent the onset of severe bouts of depression which effectively ended his public career. He died at Bolton House, Grantham, on 22 August 1881. His second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 26730


John Stuart-Wortley, second Baron Wharncliffe (1801-1855), born at Egham, Surrey, on 23 April 1801, graduated BA from Christ Church, Oxford, in 1822, with a first class in mathematics and a second in classics. He represented Bossiney from 1823 to 1832, Perth burghs in 1830, and the West Riding of Yorkshire from 1841 until his succession to the peerage. He acted with the Huskissonian party until appointed secretary to the Board of Control on 16 February 1830 in the last tory ministry before the 'Reform Bill'. He shared his father's views on the reform question. He was an unsuccessful candidate for Forfarshire in 1835, and twice failed to obtain election for the West Riding of Yorkshire, but in 1841 won a great triumph for his party in that constituency. He was an enlightened agriculturist and a cultivated man. He was elected FRS in 1829. Besides publishing pamphlets on the abolition of the Irish viceroyalty, on the institution of tribunals of commerce, and a letter to Philip Pusey on drainage in the 'Journal of the Agricultural Society', he was author of 'A brief inquiry into the true award of an equitable adjustment between the nation and its creditors' (1833), and translator and editor of Guizot's 'Memoirs of George Monk' (1838). He died of consumption at Wortley Hall, near Sheffield, on 22 October 1855, and was buried at Wortley. With his wife, Georgiana, third daughter of Dudley Ryder, first earl of Harrowby, he had three sons and two daughters. The eldest son, Edward Montagu Granville Stuart-Wortley, born on 15 December 1827, was on 15 January 1876 created earl of Wharncliffe and Viscount Carlton; he died on 13 May 1899. 


@@@@@


doc= 26731


Wortley, James Archibald Stuart-, first Baron Wharncliffe (1776-1845), politician, was born on 6 October 1776, the second but eldest surviving son of James Archibald Stuart (1747-1818), lieutenant-colonel of the 92nd regiment of foot, and Margaret, daughter of Sir David Conyngham, bt, of Milncraig, Ayrshire. John Stuart, third earl of Bute, was his grandfather, and John, first marquess of Bute, his uncle. His father's mother (the countess of Bute) was Mary, only daughter of Edward and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu; she had been created a peeress on 3 April 1761 as Baroness Mountstuart. In 1794 the father succeeded on her death to her Wortley estates in Yorkshire and Cornwall, and took the name of Wortley on 17 January 1795. In 1803 he took the additional name of Mackenzie on succeeding to the Scottish property of his uncle, James Stuart Mackenzie of Rosehaugh. 
The younger James Archibald, who eventually dropped the last surname of Mackenzie, was educated at Charterhouse (1789-90). He entered the army in November 1790 as an ensign in the 48th foot. In the following May he transferred into the 7th Royal Fusiliers, and on 4 May 1793 obtained a company in the 72nd highlanders. He served in Canada from 1792 to 1794 and at the Cape from 1795 to 1797. On 10 May 1796 he became lieutenant-colonel, and on 1 December colonel of the 12th foot. In 1797 he was sent to the Cape with dispatches from George, Lord Macartney, and on 27 December purchased a company in the 1st foot guards. He left the army at the peace of 1801. On 30 March 1799 he married Lady Elizabeth Caroline Mary, daughter of John Creighton, first earl of Erne (1738?-1828), and his second wife, Mary Caroline (died 1842). Lady Granville said of her that 'She has all the charm of intelligence without the tax of 'esprit'' (GEC, 'Peerage'). The marriage associated him with Lord Liverpool and his supporters. 
In 1802 Stuart-Wortley succeeded his father in the House of Commons as MP for the family borough of Bossiney, which he continued to represent until his father's death in 1818. Although he was not a prominent MP, he gained a reputation for independence of view. On 21 May 1812, in the aftermath of Spencer Perceval's assassination, he moved a resolution on his own initiative for an address to the prince regent, calling for 'a stronger and more efficient administration'. The motion, seconded by Lord Milton, was carried against ministers by a majority of four ('Hansard 1', 23, 21 May 1812, 249-84). Next day ministers resigned, and Lord Wellesley was commissioned to form a government. Negotiations with the whigs having come to nothing, and Stuart-Wortley having failed in a secret attempt to bring Liverpool and George Canning together, on 11 June he moved a second motion, deploring the failure and ridiculing the whigs; it was eventually negatived without a division. 
Henceforth Stuart-Wortley acted with the moderate tories as an independent supporter of the Liverpool ministry. He was encouraged to stand for Yorkshire where his estates lay, but after taking soundings did not press his claim. He continued to take a minor part in politics, deprecating harsh treatment of the princess of Wales in 1814, advocating retrenchment in the army in 1816, and voting that year with the opposition against the creation of new governmental offices. 
In 1818 Stuart-Wortley was returned unopposed for Yorkshire. His colleague as MP was Lord Milton (afterwards Earl Fitzwilliam). Stuart-Wortley at once found himself involved in fiscal policy, supporting retrenchment and moderate tariff reform, and presenting merchants' petitions. He played in important role in preventing riots in Yorkshire in 1819, but he opposed parliamentary reform. On the other hand, he proposed a property tax to relieve the poor from the burden of taxation. In May 1820 he declared against further protection to agriculture, holding that the distress of that interest bore no proportion to that of manufactures ('Hansard 2', 1, May 1820, 116, 117). 
In questions of foreign policy Stuart-Wortley shared the views of Canning. On 21 June 1821 he moved for copies of the circular issued by the members of the Holy Alliance at Laibach, stigmatizing their proceedings as dangerous to the liberties of both England and Europe. The motion was negatived by 113 to 59 ('Hansard 2', 5, 21 June 1821, 1254-60). In April 1823 he defended the ministerial policy of neutrality between France and Spain, and moved and carried an amendment to a motion condemning it. He also acted with the liberal sections of both parties in supporting Catholic emancipation, to which he had announced himself a convert as early as 1812, and on 28 May 1823 he seconded Lord Nugent's motion for leave to bring in a bill to assimilate the position of English and Irish Roman Catholics. But his attitude to the question lost him his seat in 1826. 
Stuart-Wortley's position towards economic questions probably also unfavourably affected his relations with some of his constituents. In February 1823 he had supported both by speech and vote Whitmore's bill to amend the corn laws. On 7 July 1823, in opposing the 'Reciprocity of Duties Bill', he gave his opinion that it would be impossible to retain for any considerable time the protection given to agricultural produce ('Hansard 2', 9, 7 July 1823, 1439). 
In 1824 Stuart-Wortley brought in a bill to amend the game laws. Its object was twofold: to abolish the system by which the right to kill game was vested in a class and to make it depend on the ownership of the soil, and to diminish the temptations to poaching by legalizing the sale of game. The bill was often reintroduced in succeeding years, and it was not until 1832 that a measure which embodied its main provisions became law. 
On 12 July 1826, having been defeated in his Yorkshire constituency, Stuart-Wortley was created Baron Wharncliffe of Wortley. In 1829 he introduced a standing order into the House of Lords that required a special meeting of shareholders to be held to approve any application to parliament to vary the powers of the company as originally constituted. The order became known as the Wharncliffe order and the special meetings as Wharncliffe meetings. He abandoned his earlier hostility to parliamentary reform and in 1831, after carrying an amendment raising the voting qualification at Leeds, he took charge of the 'Grampound Disfranchisement Bill', the object of which was to transfer its representation to that town. When the House of Lords proposed instead to give additional members to the county of York, Wharncliffe advised the abandonment of the measure. On 28 March 1831, by moving for statistics of population and representation, he initiated the first general discussion of the reform question in the House of Lords. While making an able and hostile analysis of the government bill, he declared his conviction that no body of men outside parliament would back resistance to a moderate measure ('Hansard 3', 3, 28 March 1831, 983 et seq.). On the rejection of the first 'Reform Bill' in committee of the House of Commons, on 22 April 1831 he moved an address to the king praying him to refrain from using his prerogative of proroguing or dissolving parliament. As Lord Brougham was replying, the king was announced, and, after a scene of great confusion, the prorogation took place. When on 3 October that year the second 'Reform Bill' came up for second reading in the upper house, Wharncliffe moved that it be read a second time six months hence. He objected that the proposed ten-pound franchise was a bogus one, that the measure was designed to delude the landed interest, and he took exception to its populational basis. He refrained, however, from any defence of nomination boroughs. After a brilliant debate the second reading was defeated by 199 to 158. Two days later Wharncliffe presented petitions against the measure from bankers and merchants of London, and maintained that the opinion of the capital was opposed to the bill. But he had lost confidence in the possibility of successful resistance. In an interview with 'Radical Jones' ['see 'Jones, Leslie Grove], he was impressed by his prediction of the dangers which would follow the rejection of the 'Reform Bill'. Within a month of the defeat of the measure Wharncliffe and Harrowby were approached by the whig government through their sons in the Commons (Wharncliffe's son John was MP for Bossiney). After a meeting of the two fathers and sons at Harrowby's house in Staffordshire, a memorandum was drawn up as a basis for negotiation. The memorandum was shown to the cabinet and approved. But many tories declined to accept Wharncliffe's compromise. The City of London refused its adhesion, and Lord Grey broke off the negotiations. Grey sent the king Wharncliffe's memorandum, and William IV expressed regret at the failure of negotiations, but thought what had passed was calculated to be useful. On 11 December a further meeting between Wharncliffe, Harrowby, and Chandos on the one side, and Grey, Brougham, and Althorp on the other, proved equally fruitless. Nevertheless, in January 1832, Wharncliffe advised the tories to support the second reading of the new bill and afterwards modify it in committee. He impressed on Wellington the danger of coming into collision with crown, Commons, and people in a useless struggle. His remonstrance failed to move the duke, and Wharncliffe determined to act independently of him. In two interviews with William IV (on 12 January and in early February), he assured the king that as he and his friends were determined to support the second reading there was no need of a creation of peers. On 27 March Wharncliffe and Harrowby made their first public declaration of their intention to support the bill, Wharncliffe being, according to Greville, 'very short and rather embarrassed'. On 9 April their support secured for the second reading a majority of nine. 
Wharncliffe felt acutely his separation from the tory party, and on 7 May voted for Lyndhurst's amendment postponing the disfranchising clauses, by which the progress of the bill was again delayed. His position was now very difficult ('Croker Papers', 2.174); he had offended both his own party and the whigs. Grey resigned on the carrying of Lyndhurst's amendment, and Wellington, when seeking to form a government, was advised by Lyndhurst not only to offer office to Wharncliffe's son, but to consider well before he decided not to include Wharncliffe himself. The whigs soon resumed office, and the bill was proceeded with. On 24 May Wharncliffe moved an amendment to prevent persons voting for counties in respect of property situated in boroughs, and said he was not reconciled to the bill, which went further than the occasion required. The following day he proposed that the ten-pound qualification should be based on the assessment for poor rate ('Hansard 3', 13, 24 May 1832, 19, 111, et seq.). He abstained from voting on the third reading, but signed the two protests drawn up by Lord Melros (ibid., 377-8). Anxious to regain the favour of his party, Wharncliffe in 1833 sent Wellington a sketch of a proposed policy in the new parliament, with which the duke concurred. 
In February 1834 Greville described Wharncliffe as 'very dismal about the prospects of the country'. On 13 December of the same year Wharncliffe was invited by Peel to join his first ministry, notwithstanding the lukewarmness of his recent opposition to the 'Irish Tithe Bill'. He accepted the office of lord privy seal after receiving an assurance that the policy of the new ministry would be liberal in character. In January 1835 he acted as one of the committee to arrange the 'Church Reform Bill'. In April he retired with his colleagues, and remained in opposition during the next six years. During these years Wharncliffe found time to edit the letters and works of his ancestor, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. His edition appeared in five volumes in 1837, and superseded Dallaway's. It was reissued in 1861 and 1893. 
When Peel returned to office in the autumn of 1841, Wharncliffe became lord president of the council. His return to tory favour was marked by his appointment as lord lieutenant of Yorkshire in 1841. As lord president, he was, according to Greville, fair, liberal, and firm. 'He really, too, does the business himsel.f' On the other hand, he was not so successful as leader in the upper house. He was too liberal in education matters for the high-church party, and did not have sufficient weight in cabinet to enforce the execution of his views. He took part against Peel in the cabinet discussions which preceded his change of policy on the subject of the corn laws, though Peel expected Wharncliffe would ultimately come round. However, on 19 December 1845 he died unexpectedly, of 'gout and apoplexy' (GEC, 'Peerage') at Wharncliffe House, Curzon Street, London. Greville, who knew him well, said no man ever died with fewer enemies. Wharncliffe was an important representative of moderate tory opinion. He offered the party a way out of its difficulties in 1830-32 which brought him enduring hostility from the party, the more staunchly held the more the need for moderate reform became recognized. His role in preventing the need for the creation of peers preserved the powers of the Lords unchanged for the rest of the century; for the tories, at least, this was a priceless service. 
Wharncliffe and his wife had three sons and one daughter, Caroline, who married the Hon. John Chetwynd Talbot. 
The eldest son, 
The first Lord Wharncliffe's youngest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 26732


Stubbs, George (1724-1806), painter, engraver, and anatomist, was born in Liverpool on 25 August 1724 and baptized there at Our Lady and St Nicholas on 31 August, the eldest of six children (not all surviving infancy) of John Stubbs (died 1741), currier, of Dale Street, Liverpool, and his wife, Mary (died 'c'.1756), formerly Mary Laithwait, widow. 
Biographical information about Stubbs is sparse. Almost the only source for his first thirty-five years is the rambling, inexact 'Memoir' ('particulars of the life of Mr. Stubbs'), jotted down by Ozias Humphry RA from conversations with Stubbs between about 1794 and 1797, when Stubbs was over seventy. Quotations here not otherwise identified are from this 'Memoir'. Humphry relates that Stubbs began to draw at the age of five, and that his interest in anatomy began at the age of eight, when Dr Holt, a neighbour, lent him 'bones & prepared subjects'. 
Stubbs worked in his father's currier's shop until he was fifteen or sixteen, when his father agreed that he could learn to paint, if he could find a good master. Hamlet Winstanley, the Lancashire painter and engraver then working for the tenth earl of Derby copying paintings at Knowsley Hall (just outside Liverpool), agreed to take Stubbs on as assistant; but Stubbs quickly rebelled, because he was allowed no choice over which pictures to copy, and disliked the whole idea of copying. He left Winstanley, 'vowing he wou'd for the future look into Nature for himself and consult 'and study her only''. So ended (in 1741?) Stubbs's first and only experience of tuition in painting. 
From about 1741 to 1744 (or until the age of about twenty) Stubbs lived in Liverpool with his mother (widowed in 1741), teaching himself to paint, dissecting small animals, and perhaps helping to settle his father's estate, which may have included several small properties which passed to Stubbs (Farington notes that at Stubbs's death he owned 'two or three small Houses at Liverpool' (Farington, 'Diary', 8.2854). Later he worked in Wigan, Leeds, and York, painting portraits. The earliest work by Stubbs so far known is the double portrait of 'Sir Henry and Lady Nelthorpe', of Barton upon Humber, north Lincolnshire (priv. coll.), painted about 1744-5 (a date inferred from the fact that Sir Henry Nelthorpe died in June 1746). Painted on a fairly large scale, this has a robust quality which prevails over some weaknesses of observation. Stubbs was to retain some connection with the Nelthorpes for nearly fifty years. 
From about 1745 to 1751 Stubbs concentrated on the study of human anatomy at York County Hospital, his principal instructor being the surgeon Charles Atkinson ('fl'. 1740-1783), who procured the first human cadaver for Stubbs to dissect. Stubbs's combined drawing and dissecting skills prompted Dr John Burton (1710-1771) to ask him to design and etch eighteen plates ('Foetus's Wombs infant Children &c &c') for his 'Essay towards a Complete New System of Midwifery'. With no previous experience of printmaking, Stubbs had to teach himself how to etch, using 'a common sewing-needle stuck in a Skewer... and Gravers... borrowed of a clock-maker'. Some of the plates illustrate Stubbs's own dissections of the body of a woman who had died in childbirth, 'brought to York by Stubbs's pupils where it was conceal'd in a Garrett and all the necessary dissections made'. Probably this episode occasioned the 'vile renown' for which Stubbs was remembered in York over thirty years later (Sir Thomas Frankland to Sir Joseph Banks, 12 March 1786, 'The Banks Letters', ed. Warren R. Dawson, 1958, 343-4). Dr Burton's book was published in 1751. Aware of the imperfections of his plates, Stubbs did not sign them, and they appear anonymously. In York, about 1746, Stubbs painted the portrait of 'George Fothergill' (Ferens Art Gallery, Kingston upon Hull). After York, Stubbs spent about two years (1751-3?) 'in Hull', according to Humphry, but perhaps based rather with the Nelthorpes at Barton upon Humber (6 miles by ferry from Hull). 
Probably in the spring of 1754 Stubbs embarked for Italy, perhaps at his own expense, perhaps subsidized by Lady Nelthorpe. He was in Rome by Easter 1754, lodging in the piazza di Spagna. His residence there, noted in the local census or 'Stato delle anime' (Ingamells, 912, n. 1) is, after Stubbs's baptism, the first officially documented fact in Stubbs's career. He was in Rome at the same time as William Chambers, Thomas Jenkins, Matthew Brettingham, Richard Wilson, Hamilton (perhaps Gavin Hamilton), and Simon Vierpyl, but told Humphry that on visits 'to consider the pictures in Rome [he] always found himself differing from them in opinion'. Stubbs later told Humphry that he 'copied nothing' while in Rome (a statement to be considered later). His stay appears to have been short. Recollecting it to Humphry some forty years later, he claimed that his motive for going to Italy was 'to convince himself that nature was & is always superior to art whether Greek or Roman, & having renew'd this conviction he immediately resolved upon returning home'. He may have been back in Liverpool a year or so before Christmas 1755, the date he inscribed on the back of a portrait of 'James Stanley' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool). 
Stubbs's driving ambition in the early 1750s was to study the anatomy of the horse. He had discussed this project with Charles Atkinson and others at York, hoping to enlist their help, but they were unable to join him. In or about 1756 Stubbs returned to Barton upon Humber to paint a portrait of Lady Nelthorpe's young son, 'Sir John Nelthorpe' (priv. coll.). Presumably he discussed his project with Lady Nelthorpe, who may have arranged for him to work in a farmhouse in the village of Horkstow, a few miles from Barton upon Humber. 
Stubbs's work at Horkstow occupied him for about eighteen months. He dissected many horses, working on them one by one, first bleeding them to death by the jugular vein, then injecting the veins and arteries with wax-like substances to preserve their shape. Having fixed iron hooks in the farmhouse ceiling, he rigged up tackle from which (with drawings in mind) he could suspend a horse in a seemingly natural attitude, its hooves resting upon a plank. He then dissected each horse until it was no longer 'fit for use'; each lasted on average six to seven weeks. 
At each stage of dissection Stubbs made drawings, of which forty-two survive. Most are working drawings made directly in front of the cadaver; eighteen are immaculately finished drawings, designed to be engraved for publication. Once in the collection of Sir Edwin Landseer RA, the forty-two drawings were bequeathed by his brother Charles Landseer RA to the Royal Academy, and were used for teaching in the Royal Academy Schools. 
In this arduous work at Horkstow Stubbs's only assistant was Mary Spencer (died 1817), according to Humphry 'the posthumous child of Captain Spencer of the Guinea Trade'. Born like Stubbs in Liverpool (at an unknown date: Fountain suggests 1741), she remained with him throughout his life and was his sole legatee. Almost everything about their relationship is obscure. Humphry first refers to her as Stubbs's 'Female Relation & Friend', then inserts 'his Aunt'; edited transcripts made by William Upcott alter this to 'Niece', then to 'Aunt' and again to 'Niece'. Mary Spencer is now assumed to have been Stubbs's common-law wife. Possibly either Stubbs or Mary Spencer had contracted an early, failed marriage which prevented a marriage of their own. Probably Mary Spencer was the mother of three of Stubbs's children, George (almost certainly the son later known as George Townly Stubbs), whose baptism on 26 February 1748 NS is recorded in the registers of St Helen's Church, York (information traced by David Alexander), Charles Edward, also born in York, and Mary, whose burial in Liverpool on 18 September 1759 is recorded in the registers of St Peter's, Liverpool; for both these children the father's name is entered as 'George Stubbs, Limner', but the mother's name is not recorded. Mary Spencer is named as the mother (and George Stubbs as the father) of Richard Stubbs, born in London on 16 August 1791, named as 'Richard Spencer Stubbs', and as a legatee in the first draft of Stubbs's will (1794), but not baptized until 18 November 1811, five years after his father's death (St Marylebone register of baptisms). A Robert Stubbs, apprenticed to the engraver William Austin in 1761, was described as 'Relat. of the celebrated Horse Painter' when he won a premium from the Society of Arts in 1766; but the nature of his relationship to George Stubbs remains unknown. 
Probably in 1759 (exasperatingly, Humphry writes 'in 1758 1759 176- ', Stubbs moved south to London, hoping to commission a professional engraver to etch his drawings of the anatomy of the horse for publication. Finding nobody willing to undertake such subject matter, he decided to etch the plates himself, although from 1759 he was inundated with commissions for paintings. Working 'early in the Morning & in the Evening and sometimes very late at Night' (Humphry), he achieved austerely elegant plates that combine 'scientific exactitude with a harmonious beauty of placing and balance' (Godfrey, 'Printmaking in Britain', 57). After six years they were ready for publication, with forty-seven pages of detailed letterpress, as a bound book. Its title-page reads: 'The anatomy of the horse. Including a particular description of the bones, cartilages, muscles. fascias, ligaments, nerves, arteries, veins, and glands. In eighteen tables, all done from nature. By George Stubbs, painter. London: Printed by J. Purser, for the author, 1766'. The 'eighteen tables' or plates begin with views of the skeleton of the horse from the side, front, and back, followed by views from similar angles of different stages of dissection; many are accompanied by key plates. 
Stubbs's title-page description of himself as 'George Stubbs, painter' stresses his purpose in undertaking his research. As a painter he wanted fully to understand what lay beneath a horse's skin, and how muscles and veins, schematized by earlier horse painters, actually functioned. When the Dutch anatomist Petrus Camper wrote in 1771 praising the book and hoping that Stubbs would proceed with further investigation into the horse's anatomy, Stubbs replied: 'What you have seen is all I meant to do, it being as much as I thought necessary for the study of Painting... I looked very little into the internal parts of a Horse, my search there being only a matter of curiosity. (letter of 17 Oct 1771, Egerton, 'Stubbs, 1724-1806', 31)' 

In London Stubbs evidently showed his 'Anatomy of the Horse' drawings to various noblemen who were keenly interested in breeding and racing horses. Most of them were quick to recognize that Stubbs's work had an accuracy (or 'truthfulness to nature') lacking in earlier horse painters such as James Seymour and John Wootton. The lead in commissioning Stubbs's work was taken by the third duke of Richmond, who in 1759 invited Stubbs to Goodwood to paint three large scenes: 'The Third Duke of Richmond and the Charlton Hunt', 'Henry Fox and the Earl of Albemarle Shooting at Goodwood', and 'The Duchess of Richmond and Lady Louisa Lennox Watching the Duke's Racehorses at Exercise', perhaps about 1760 (all three paintings remain at Goodwood House, Sussex). 
Commissions rapidly followed from Viscount Spencer, Lord Grosvenor, the marquess of Rockingham, Viscount Bolingbroke, the dukes of Ancaster, Grafton, and Portland, and Viscount Torrington (probably in that order). Collectively their patronage helped to make Stubbs's name and to give him the confidence, in June 1763, to buy a leasehold property in London at 24 Somerset Street (adjoining the later Portman Square), his home for the rest of his life. 
Stubbs's first works for such patrons were portraits of single horses with grooms or jockeys, such as 'A Stallion Called Romulus' (priv. coll.), the first work Stubbs exhibited, in 1761. Other examples include 'Lustre' ('c'.1760-62; Yale U. CBA, Paul Mellon collection), 'Molly Long Legs' (1762; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), and 'Tristram Shandy' (exh. 1762; priv. coll.). Underlying these was the knowledge gained in the near-solitary years of dissecting and drawing the anatomy of the horse; but in painting horses from life Stubbs depicted them in natural settings of almost springlike freshness, in which trees, skies, broad-leaved plants, and flowers all play their part. Between 1762 and 1777 Stubbs devised ten variations on the theme 'Brood Mares and Foals'. These subjects -- brood mares which had perhaps already produced winners, and long-legged foals destined (with luck) for future successes -- particularly appealed to breeders of thoroughbred horses, whether or not they depicted horses from their own stud farms. 
The most eminent (and most discerning) of Stubbs's early patrons was the second marquess of Rockingham. Twice prime minister (in 1765 and 1782), Rockingham found private pleasure in his stud farms and strings of racehorses. Between 1762 and 1766 Stubbs painted about twelve pictures for him, ranging from a picture of his racehorse, 'Bay Malton Ridden ['at Speed'] by John Singleton' (priv. coll.), to a frieze-like portrait, 'Five Staghounds', seen against a hilly background (priv. coll.). Accounts survive for most of them (see Constantine). Three of Stubbs's paintings for Rockingham -- 'Whistlejacket', the magnificent near life-size portrait of a rearing stallion (National Gallery, London), 'Mares and Foals', probably the first of those subjects, paid for in August 1762, and 'Whistlejacket and Two Other Stallions with Simon Cobb the Groom' (also of 1762; the latter two both priv. coll.) -- break with convention in having only plain backgrounds. This was almost certainly Rockingham's decision. A collector of sculpture, he evidently perceived that the finest of Stubbs's paintings of his horses would be seen to best advantage, like his classical statues, against plain backgrounds. 
Stubbs's talents blossomed during the 1760s, a decade described by Taylor as 'in scope and productiveness... the most fecund time of his life' (Taylor, 'Stubbs', 13). His ability to combine landscape, horses, and figures in complex and inventive designs is demonstrated in such works as 'The Grosvenor Hunt', dated 1762 (priv. coll.), with its virtuoso painting of hounds splashing through water, and 'Gimcrack on Newmarket Heath, with a Trainer, Jockey and Stable-Lad' (priv. coll.; version, Jockey Club, Newmarket), in which the squat shape of one of the brick rubbing-down houses at Newmarket confers a permanent sense of place upon the passing event of a win for Lord Bolingbroke's horse; that motif recurs in some of the finest of Stubbs's racehorse and jockey portraits, such as 'Turf' (Yale U. CBA, Paul Mellon collection) and 'Gimcrack' (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge), both dating from about 1756. 'Setting out from Southill' ('c'.1765-8; priv. coll.) depicts hunt servants, fresh-faced in the morning air, riding out from a Bedfordshire village. Stubbs's servants, grooms, and jockeys are invariably drawn from life; he regards them with a sensitive and uncondescending eye. 
From 1761 to 1774 Stubbs exhibited annually at the Society of Artists. Of the thirty-five or so works which he showed there, only about one-third (including five versions of 'Mares and Foals') were portraits of his patrons' well-bred horses. The range of his portraiture of people was demonstrated by the four 'Shooting' paintings (exh. singly, 1767-70; Yale U. CBA, Paul Mellon collection) and by 'A Conversation' (exh. 1770), almost certainly the group portrait now known as 'The Milbanke and Melbourne Families' (National Gallery, London). He also showed a few classical subjects: two versions of 'Phaeton and the Horses of the Sun' (exh. 1762; National Trust collection, Saltram House, Devon, and exh. 1764, untraced), and two episodes from the labours of Hercules, 'Hercules and Achelous' (exh. 1770) and 'The Centaur, Nessus, and Dejanira' (exh. 1772), both seemingly lost. But about half Stubbs's exhibits at the Society of Artists depicted encounters between wild animals. 
From the early 1760s Stubbs was preoccupied with the idea of a wild horse, existing precariously in a state of nature, where it was the prey of a lion (See Taylor, 'George Stubbs: 'The lion and horse theme''). Stubbs returned repeatedly to this theme, developing it into episodes: the horse first frightened at seeing the lion; recoiling in terror at the lion's approach; attacked by the lion springing onto his back; finally forced to the ground to be devoured by the lion. 
Stubbs exhibited his first two paintings on this theme in 1763: 'A Horse and Lion' (described by Horace Walpole as 'The horse rising up, greatly frightened' (Graves, 'Soc. Artists', 249) and 'Its Companion'. If correctly identified as the pair now in the Tate collection (T1192 and T02058), then the second picture, which shows the horse forced to the ground before being devoured by the lion, virtually proves that Stubbs's initial inspiration for the whole theme was the pre-Hellenic sculpture of a lion devouring a horse which he could have seen in the Palazzo dei Conservatori on his visit to Rome in 1754. Conceivably, Stubbs's later insistence to Humphry that he copied nothing while he was in Rome relates only to painted works. Later 'lion and horse' paintings include 'Horse Attacked by a Lion' ('c'.1765; National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne), 'White Horse Frightened by a Lion' (1770; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), and 'White Horse Attacked by a Lion' (1770; Yale U. CBA). He also depicted the subject in enamel and in his own prints. 
Stubbs painted (and exhibited) other imaginary encounters between wild animals; these encounters were usually savage, such as that in the 'Lion and Stag' (several versions, the finest exh. 1766; priv. coll.), but sometimes peaceable, such as that in the 'Lion and Lioness' (one of several versions is in the collection of the Boston Museum of Fine Arts). Such subjects appealed to few of Stubbs's Newmarket-oriented patrons; but the marquess of Rockingham commissioned two vast paintings, 'Horse Attacked by a Lion' (paid for in 1762) and 'Lion Attacking a Stag' ('c'.1764?), which hung in his London house (both now Yale U. CBA, Paul Mellon collection). James Barry, writing about 1764, described Stubbs's wild animal subjects as 'pictures that must rouse and agitate the most inattentive: he is now painting a lion panting and out of breath lying with his paws over a stag he has run down: it is inimitable' ('Works of James Barry', 1.23). Most people would have known these and other subjects in the form of engravings after Stubbs, which were produced in steadily increasing numbers, from fourteen in 1770 to some sixty by 1780 to ninety or so by 1791 (see Lennox-Boyd, Dixon, and Clayton, especially 22-3). 
Stubbs portrayed many specific wild animals. Barry's description of his 'tyger lying in his den large as life, appearing as it were disturbed and listening' ('Works of James Barry', 1.23) is of 'A Tigress' (priv. coll.), a creature presented by Lord Clive, governor of Bengal, to the duke of Marlborough, and painted by Stubbs in the menagerie in Blenheim Park. 'Cheetah with Two Indian Attendants and a Stag' (exh. 1765; City of Manchester Art Galleries) is a superbly painted image of the abortive encounter staged in Windsor Great Park between a cheetah presented to George III and a stag (from which the cheetah fled). 
Because of his accuracy Stubbs was frequently asked to portray newly imported animals. His 'Zebra' depicted the first zebra seen in England; presented to Queen Charlotte in 1762, it was installed in the royal menagerie at Buckingham Gate, where Stubbs took its likeness with an exact eye for conformation and markings (Yale U. CBA, Paul Mellon collection). For Sir Joseph Banks he painted (from a stuffed skin) 'The Kongouro from New Holland, 1770' (priv. coll.), and also the 'Dingo'. He undertook various commissions for William and John Hunter (brothers, surgeons, anatomists, and picture collectors). For William Hunter he painted the 'Nylghau' from India ('c'.1769), the 'Moose' presented to the duke of Richmond by the governor-general of Canada (dated 1770), and the 'Blackbuck' ('c'.1770-78; all Hunterian Art Gallery, University of Glasgow). When lecturing on the nylghau to the Royal Society, William Hunter had Stubbs's painting beside him, remarking that 'Whoever looks at the picture... can never be at a loss to know the nyl-ghau, wherever he may happen to meet with it' ('Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', 61, 1771, 21). For John Hunter Stubbs painted the 'Male Drill and Albino Male Papio Hamadryas' ('c'.1770-75), the 'Yak' (1791), and 'Rhinoceros' ('c'.1790-92; all Royal College of Surgeons, Hunterian Museum, Glasgow; version of 'Yak', priv. coll.). To such acute observations should be added the lithe but almost palpably nervous 'Monkey' (exh. 1775; priv. coll.). Stubbs's interest in animals however small is evident in three meticulous pencil drawings of 'Marmaduke Tunstall's Mouse Lemur' (1773; BM). 
In the Society of Artists, to which he was elected in 1765, Stubbs had served as a director (1765-74), treasurer (1768-72), and president (October 1772 - October 1773); but in 1775 he (like others before him) left the declining society to exhibit with the more prestigious Royal Academy, founded in 1768. He exhibited at the Royal Academy (irregularly) until 1803; but his relationship with the academy soured early. Having been elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1780, on 13 February 1781 he was provisionally elected a Royal Academician, with the usual condition (stipulated in the academy's instrument of foundation) that an RA-elect must deposit a diploma work before receiving the diploma entitling him to the status of Royal Academician. Stubbs refused to deposit a work, alleging that the request for it was a 'new rule' aimed specifically against him. He seems not to have consulted Royal Academicians who had complied with the rule, such as his friend Richard Cosway (RA 1770) or Philippe Jacques de Loutherbourg, voted RA-elect on the same day as himself. Instead, Stubbs formed 'an 'unconquerable resolution'' not to deposit a picture. Given over a year to comply with the rule, he still refused to do so; consequently, his provisional election as a Royal Academician was annulled, and never repeated. 
In the late 1760s Stubbs began to experiment with enamel painting, an art practised by his day only by miniaturists and decorators of small objects. His chief purpose appears to have been to re-create key images in his work in the unchanging, virtually indestructible form of enamel. Preparing enamel paints involves grinding particles of colourless glass with selected metallic oxides; in the heat of a furnace the glass fuses with and gains colour from the oxides. Humphry relates that Stubbs spent 'near two years with great expense' experimenting with chemical compounds 'of the Colour they were required to be when the pictures were fired'. The resulting paints could be brushed onto solid, non-inflammable supports which carried the work through a furnace to be fired. From about 1769 to 1775 Stubbs used copper supports. 
The first enamel Stubbs exhibited was 'Lion Attacking a Horse', on copper, dated 1769 (exh. 1770; Tate collection); technically faultless, it concentrated all the drama of the subject into the small octagonal space of 24.3 x 28.2 cm. Others followed, including 'Horse and Lion', dated 1770 (priv. coll.), exhibited in 1771 with 'Lion and Lioness' (Yale U. CBA). This stage culminated with Stubbs's largest enamel painting in copper, the oval 'Phaeton and the Horses of the Sun' (38.5 x 46 cm), dated 1775 (priv. coll.), with which Stubbs posed for Ozias Humphry's portrait of about 1777 (watercolour, NPG). 
Wanting larger supports for his enamels, Stubbs approached the manufacturers of ceramics. Mrs Coade's Artificial Stone Manufactory could not help, but Josiah Wedgwood, after much experiment, developed a special earthenware body which could sustain a thin, flat shape in firing. By May 1779 Wedgwood was supplying Stubbs with large oval ceramic tablets, about 72.5 x 94.5 cm, later increasing the size to about 77 x 105 cm (see Emmerson). Seventeen paintings by Stubbs on Wedgwood tablets are known, mostly fired in Wedgwood's enamel kiln at Greek Street, Soho, London. They include portraits of 'Josiah Wedgwood' and his wife, 'Sarah Wedgwood' (Wedgwood Museum, Barlaston, Staffordshire), each dated 1780, painted in part payment for Wedgwood's tablets. 
For the first five years after Stubbs's transfer to the Royal Academy, his exhibits had all been oils. In 1781 he exhibited 'Two Horses in Enamel' (now known as 'Horses Fighting'; Yale U. CBA, Paul Mellon collection) on a large oval Wedgwood tablet. In the following year five of his seven exhibits at the Royal Academy were in enamel on similar tablets, including 'Portrait of an Artist' (a self-portrait with brush and palette, NPG), 'Portrait of a young lady [Isabella Saltonstall] in the character of Una, from Spenser's 'Faerie queen'' (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge), and 'The Farmer's Wife and the Raven' (Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight). 
To most Royal Academicians Stubbs's enamels were an unwelcome intrusion into the display of oil paintings, from which they differed in tone, texture, and shape; nor did they resemble the small jewel-like work allowable in the exhibited work of professional enamellists. In the hang of 1782 Stubbs's enamels were skied. Indignant, Stubbs showed nothing whatever at the Royal Academy for the next three years. He continued occasionally to work in enamel, as in 'Self Portrait on a White Hunter' (1782) and 'Equestrian Portrait of Warren Hastings' (1791) (each priv. coll.), and the harvesting scenes of 1794-5 which are among his greatest achievements in enamel (see below). He exhibited again at the Royal Academy from 1786 to 1791 and, after a gap of eight years, from 1799 to 1803; but he sent no more works in enamel to the academy. 
Though absorbing a great deal of his time, Stubbs's enamel paintings constitute only a small part of his output. Most of his work continued to be in oil, but whereas he had formerly applied oil paint to canvas quite thickly and crisply, after 1769 the experience of painting in enamel on smooth, hard supports inclined him often to paint on wooden panels; and when doing so, he continually experimented by mixing his oils with pine resin, beeswax, non-drying oils, and fats, producing a very thin paint film. While many of his panels have survived in good condition, others have suffered from past restorers' incomprehension of Stubbs's experimental and sometimes faulty techniques (see Shepherd, in Egerton, 'Stubbs, 1724-1806', 20-21). 
Few of Stubbs's first noble patrons continued to commission his work, apart from Earl Spencer and Lord Grosvenor, for each of whom he worked in the 1770s. But new patrons appeared, including gentlemen in the shires who wanted portraits of their hunters and hacks. For John Musters of Colwick Hall, Nottinghamshire, Stubbs painted a notable group of subjects in 1776-7, including 'John and Sophia Musters Riding at Colwick Hall' and 'Thomas Smith, Huntsman of the Brocklesby Hounds', depicted with his elderly father, the former huntsman (both priv. coll.). For Thomas Foley, Charles James Fox's racing associate, he painted 'Pumpkin with a Stable-Lad' (1774; Yale U. CBA, Paul Mellon collection), with the same freshness of observation as anything he had painted in the 1760s. Revisiting Lincolnshire in 1776, Stubbs painted 'Sir John Nelthorpe Shooting with his Pointers in Barton Field' (priv. coll.), and for some unknown patron he painted the exquisite 'Phaeton with a Pair of Cream Ponies in Charge of a Stable-Lad' ('c'.1780-85; Yale U. CBA, Paul Mellon collection). 
Single portraits of dogs (and a few hounds) enter Stubbs's repertory in the early 1770s, proving popular enough to inspire many commissions. Two of the four paintings with which Stubbs made his debut at the Royal Academy in 1775 were portraits of dogs: 'A Spanish Dog, Belonging to Mr Cosway' (referring to Richard Cosway RA; priv. coll.), and Earl Spencer's 'Mouton, a 'Pomeranian' Dog' (priv. coll.). Most of his later dog portraits were exhibited merely as 'Portrait of a Dog', making it difficult to know whether some of Stubbs's most endearing dog portraits, such as 'White Poodle in a Punt' (National Gallery of Art, Washington, Paul Mellon Bequest) or 'King Charles Spaniel' (priv. coll.) were exhibited. Stubbs's dog portraits are closely observed, sometimes more light-heartedly than his horse portraits; but what chiefly distinguishes them is Stubbs's sense of design. In almost every case the compact build of the dog (compared with that of long-legged horses) allows the body of the subject to occupy most of the pictorial space. Two portraits of foxhounds painted on a return visit to Lincolnshire in 1792 show Stubbs's powers of design at their finest: these are 'Ringwood, a Brocklesby Foxhound' (priv. coll.) and 'A Couple of Foxhounds' (Tate collection). 
In 1786 Stubbs marked his return to the Royal Academy (after the fracas over his enamel exhibits) by showing 'Haymakers' and 'Reapers' (both Tate collection). In oil on panel, each dated 1785, they are among his most lyrical works. The subject matter is hardly original; their distinction lies rather in the rhythmic designs -- perfected from versions of 1783 (Bearsted collection, Upton House, Bearsted, Warwickshire) -- by which Stubbs graces his subjects without falsifying their naturalism. Stubbs sent 'Haymakers' and 'Reapers' to the 1787 exhibition of the Society for Promoting Painting and Design in Liverpool. His personal vote of confidence in his subjects was to translate them into enamel. In 1794-5 he re-created 'Haymakers' and 'Reapers' in enamel, on the largest of all his Wedgwood tablets. The enamel of 'Reapers', dated 1795, is in the collection of the Yale Center for British Art. 'Haymakers', dated 1795, and a related subject, 'Haymaking', dated 1794, are both in the Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight. 
In printed 'Proposals' issued on 24 September 1788, Stubbs invited subscriptions for engravings of 'Haymakers' and 'Reapers' (duly published in 1791). In small print at the foot of his 'Proposals' he briefly listed fifteen prints which 'may also be had' at his house (evidently they were not for sale in printsellers' shops). The earliest of these are two quite large line engravings, 'A Horse Frightened by a Lion' and 'Leopards at Play', dated 1777 and 1780 respectively. These (and later prints such as 'Labourers' and 'The Farmer's Wife and the Raven') echo the imagery of subjects already painted; yet they are not reproductive engravings, but re-creations of those subjects, in different moods. A group of prints with the publication line 1 May 1788 may well have been made over the previous decade, before Stubbs was ready to launch his engraved work. Three small engravings of single foxhounds, each of which appears as a detail in the large 'Charlton Hunt' painting of 1759, are probably derived from pencil studies preserved in Stubbs's studio. Stubbs continually experimented with engraving techniques; Godfrey observes that 'He gives the impression of an artist stooped over a copper plate with a small battery of tools beside him, the function of each being diverted to original and unexpected use as it came to hand' (Godfrey, 'George Stubbs', 115). Altogether Stubbs made eighteen prints ('The Death of the Doe', published in 1804, may be largely G. T. Stubbs's work). Stubbs is among the greatest and most original printmakers in British art. His prints have an intense, deeply felt quality, particularly telling on the small scale of the 'Foxhound' prints, or the 'Sleeping Leopard', published in 1791. 
George III had shown no interest in Stubbs's work, but the prince of Wales commissioned fifteen works between 1790 and 1793 (one now lost; the others remain in the Royal Collection). Stubbs's portrait of the prince riding in Hyde Park is dated 1791. Outstanding in this group are 'The Prince of Wales's Phaeton', 'Soldiers of the 10th Light Dragoons', and 'William Anderson with Two Saddle-Horses', each dated 1793 and each painted with the same brilliance of invention he had shown in the 1760s. Piecemeal payments were still being made for the group in 1805. 
In 1790 Stubbs became involved with a project to publish a 'Review of the Turf from the Year 1750 to the Completion of the Work'. It was planned that Stubbs would paint at least 145 portraits of racehorses: George Townly Stubbs would engrave them, and the engravings would be published, with letterpress, in forty-five numbers. By January 1794 Stubbs had completed sixteen paintings (some of them replicas of earlier works); these were displayed in the so-called Turf Gallery in Conduit Street, London, where subscriptions for the 'Review' were invited. George Townly Stubbs completed fourteen engravings. Only two numbers of the 'Review' were published before the project failed at the end of 1794. For Stubbs this meant the loss of years of promised income; reputedly, $9000 had been deposited in a bank for him to draw on as he progressed with the work. The initiator of the project requested anonymity, and remains unidentified. 
At the age of seventy-six Stubbs produced two of his greatest and most meditative works. Each is dated 1800, and each was painted for a new patron. Sir Henry Vane-Tempest, second baronet, wanted a portrait of his racehorse Hambletonian to commemorate his recent win at Newmarket. On one of the largest canvases he had ever painted, Stubbs set down a monumental image of the exhausted racehorse. With a rubbing-down house at Newmarket just sufficiently visible to establish a sense of place, Hambletonian is rubbed down by a stable-lad, while an impassive trainer at his head holds his reins. Stubbs had to sue Vane-Tempest (successfully) for payment of 300 guineas for the picture. Exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1800 as 'Hambletonian, Rubbing Down', it is now in the collection of Mount Stewart, co. Down, Northern Ireland. 
Thomas Villiers, second earl of Clarendon, of The Grove, Watford, was the last patron to commission Stubbs's work in quantity (perhaps ten varied subjects, including racehorses, spaniels, and an Indian bull). One painting in this group is mysteriously elevated from the rest by its mood of grave, almost elegiac poetry: set in a darkening wood, it depicts Freeman, the earl of Clarendon's gamekeeper, with a dying doe and a hound. Stubbs exhibited it at the Royal Academy in 1801, with the title 'A Park Scene at The Grove' (Yale U. CBA, Paul Mellon collection). 
Stubbs's last project, begun at the age of seventy-one in 1795, was 'A comparative anatomical exposition of the structure of the human body with that of a tiger and a common fowl'. Humphry observed in July 1796 that 'at 72 Stubbs is forming Plans with as much resolution as might be expected at 40' (Farington, 'Diary', 2.597). A 'common fowl' was easily obtained, and Pidcock's menagerie supplied the body of a tiger; but procuring a human cadaver was more difficult. Here Stubbs may have had help from Henry Cline, one of his occasional visitors and an anatomy lecturer at St Thomas's Hospital, which could legitimately receive the bodies of executed criminals for dissection. 
Stubbs made 125 drawings for his 'Comparative Anatomical Exposition' (Yale U. CBA). Some are highly finished, others mere tracings for working purposes. As with 'The Anatomy of the Horse', Stubbs did not probe deeper than the musculo-skeletal system. Chiefly he was engaged in comparing the structure of his three subjects. He demonstrated this compellingly in finished profile drawings of the man, tiger, and fowl, standing and running, partly dissected and in skeletal form. The value of his work lies chiefly in his ability to draw what he saw, with accuracy and detachment, demonstrating 'a superbly coordinated empirical hand and eye flourishing at the end of a rational era' (Ober, 992). Between 1804 and 1806 Stubbs engraved and published three numbers of the 'Comparative Anatomical Exposition', each with five plates (and a separately issued letterpress). He had hoped to publish six numbers. 
Stubbs had seemed ageless and tireless; but in January 1804 George Dance, who had drawn a profile pencil portrait of him in 1794 (RA), was shocked to observe the change in Stubbs's appearance: 'so aged -- so in-jawed and shrunk in his person' (Farington, 'Diary', 6.2225). Stubbs died on 10 July 1806 at his home, 24 Somerset Street, London. He was buried in St Marylebone on 18 July. Farington heard 'that when Stubbs died there was no money in the house', that 'His House was mortgaged to a Lady a friend of his', and that 'He owed Her money besides' (ibid., 6 June 1807, 3060). The 'Lady', an entirely well-meaning benefactor, was Isabella Saltonstall ('b'. 1765/6), whom Stubbs had portrayed as a child with her parents in a 'Conversation Piece' dated 1769 (priv. coll.), and later as 'Una, from Spenser's 'Faerie Queene'' (mentioned above). Stubbs had made a will in 1794, leaving his property to Mary Spencer, George Townly Stubbs, and Richard Spencer Stubbs. On the day of his death he made a new will, leaving everything to Mary Spencer and appointing Mary Spencer and Isabella Saltonstall joint executors. By then suffering 'violent spasms', he was unable to sign it, but after attestations by witnesses, it was accepted for probate. 
The sale of the contents of Stubbs's studio was conducted by Peter Coxe on 26-7 May 1807. No fully annotated copy of the sale catalogue has been traced; but evidently many lots were bought in by Isabella Saltonstall. As Farington reported, she 'had advanced to Stubbs a considerable Sum of money and Had a Bond of Security which gave Her a claim to His pictures &c. These were sold the last week & the prices were kept up by Her agents & many articles were bought in. It is understood that after Her debt is paid there will be little left. (Farington, 'Diary', 8.3056, 3 June 1807)' The eventual fate of most of the works acquired for Isabella Saltonstall remains a mystery. In particular, many sketchbooks and preliminary drawings which might have offered insights into Stubbs's working methods have disappeared. There are other serious gaps in documentation of Stubbs's work. A methodical man, he is likely to have kept accounts and 'sitters' books' for his varied subjects; and Humphry mentions that he kept memoranda of his experiments with enamels. All these have vanished. But what will survive is the work itself which, in the words of E. K. Waterhouse, embraces not only paintings of horses, but 'man, the whole animal kingdom, and nature' (Waterhouse, 207). 


@@@@@


doc= 26733


Stubbs, George Townly (bap. 1748, d. 1815?), engraver and printseller, was probably the son of George Stubbs (1724-1806), painter. His baptism on 26 February 1748 NS is recorded in the registers of St Helen's Church, York (information traced by David Alexander). His mother may have been Mary Spencer (died 1817), who is now identified as George's common-law wife, although the birth of Richard Spencer Stubbs to George Stubbs and Mary Spencer in 1791 suggests that this is doubtful. More likely, the name Townly (as it appears on his prints) or Townley might have been the surname of his mother. His first mezzotints, 'The Lion and Stag' and 'The Horse & Lion', were published by John Wesson in 1770 and he was probably the 'gentleman' who exhibited 'A Lion Devouring a Stag; Mezzotinto' with the Society of Artists in that year. In 1771 he exhibited a drawing as 'Mr George Stubbs junior'. He scraped a number of mezzotints after George Stubbs's paintings in the 1770s and began to publish on his own account in 1776. 
In the early 1780s George Townly Stubbs collaborated with the drawing-master and engraver Charles White and the gem-engraver and caricaturist James Wickstead on a series of stipple engravings, some of which had humorous subjects. He was bankrupted in 1785. Stylistic evidence suggests that he might have been the engraver of some caricatures about the prince of Wales's romance with Mrs Fitzherbert that were published in 1786. In 1788 he produced two large mezzotints of high quality, 'Horses Fighting' and 'Bulls Fighting', after paintings by George Stubbs and during the next decade he returned to interpreting George Stubbs's work, employing either stipple or sophisticated combinations of tools. During the 1790s he was the manager of the Turf Gallery in Conduit Street, off New Bond Street, and he may have written the text of a 'Review of the Turf'. As originally proposed this ambitious project was to have encompassed 'the history of every horse of note, with various anecdotes on the most remarkable races', and it was to have been 'embellished with upwards of one hundred and twenty prints, engraved in the best manner from original portraits of the most famous racers, painted by Mr. Stubbs at an immense expence and solely for the above work' (Lennox-Boyd and others, 43). The enterprise collapsed in 1796 after only fourteen horses had been engraved by George Townly Stubbs. From the inception of this project he styled himself 'engraver to the prince of Wales' and there was a strong implication that this most unreliable of patrons may have promised to underwrite the enterprise. The prints were published by 'Messrs Stubbs' and it is conceivable that George Townly Stubbs was himself the mysterious Mr Turf upon whose backing they relied. During the 1790s Stubbs also engraved sets of prints after designs by Edward Penny and Anthony van Assen and published some landscapes by Thomas Morris. He maintained a print shop on Marylebone High Street from at least 1793 to 1800. His latest publications were a series of heads expressing passions after Henry Singleton and William Frederick Wells issued in summer 1800. After this date George Townly Stubbs may have lived by painting or dealing in paintings. He is said to have died in 1815 and this notion is supported by the republication by other publishers of some of his prints in that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 26734


Stubbe, Henry (1632-1676), author and physician, was born on 28 February 1632 at Partney, Lincolnshire, the son of Henry Stubbes (1605/6-1678), rector of the parish, and Mary Purefoy. They may not have been married at Henry's birth as, when he died intestate, it was said his estate was confiscated, he 'being a Bastard' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Aubrey 12, fol. 327). Be that as it may, the 'anabaptistically inclined' rector was soon ejected, and thereafter moved his family to Tredagh, Ireland, where -- as a critic of the younger Stubbe quipped years later -- he found employment as 'beadle of the beggars, as being well acquainted with the executive part of power at the carts-tail' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1068). 
Following the outbreak of the Irish rising in 1641 the boy and a sibling were whisked by their mother to safety in England. They settled in London, where Mary's skill in needlework procured her a 'comfortable subsistence', enabling her to enrol Henry at Westminster School in 1642. A most precocious linguist, Stubbe quickly attracted the attention of the headmaster, Richard Busby, who, in turn, recommended the boy to Sir Henry Vane; he, after supporting the youth at Westminster, secured him a scholarship at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1649. There Stubbe quickly distinguished himself, not only for his scholarly attainments -- he habitually performed his exercises in Greek -- but for 'shewing himself too forward, pragmatical and conceited (being well stock'd with impudence at school)'. Indeed, Stubbe's sharp tongue and conceit often caused him to be 'kick'd and beaten' by his fellow students and, on one occasion at least, publicly whipped in the college's refectory (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1068). In later life Stubbe also claimed that it was he who had carried the engagement to Oxford in 1650, and again he who had saved several royalist fellows of Christ Church and Queen's from expulsion. 
While still an undergraduate Stubbe embarked on a literary career with his publication in 1651 of 'Horae subsecivae' and 'Miscellanea epigrammata' -- respectively, Greek paraphrases of two biblical stories and a translation into Greek of poems by, among others, Thomas Randolph and Richard Crashaw. After graduating BA in July 1653 Stubbe served with the parliamentary army in Scotland for two years before returning to Oxford to proceed MA in December 1656. A few weeks later he was appointed deputy keeper of the Bodleian Library thanks to the support of the Independent John Owen, dean of Christ Church, whom Stubbe assisted in polemics against the presbyterians. By early 1656 Stubbe had also befriended Thomas Hobbes, and vigorously championed his campaign against John Wallis, the Savilian professor of geometry, by attacking Wallis's linguistic competency. Stubbe also began preparing a Latin translation of Hobbes's 'Leviathan', but never completed it. At the same time, however, Stubbe was careful to deny, privately as well as publicly, charges of Hobbism. In 1658 Stubbe's crusade against Wallis became more personal, following the latter's contestable election as keeper of the Oxford archives. Stubbe vented his disapprobation by publishing 'The Savilian Professour's Case Stated' but, following John Wilkins's appeal to Cromwell, was forced on 5 May by vice-chancellor John Conant to recant publicly. 
By mid-1659 Stubbe was conscripted by Sir Henry Vane into heavy political and religious pamphleteering. His first effort appeared in May, 'The Common-Wealth of Israel', a short critique of William Prynne's 'The Re-publicans and other Spurious Good Old Cause... Anatomized'. The following month Stubbe published the first edition of 'A Light Shining out of Darkness', an incendiary attack on the presbyterians and the universities, a much augmented version of which appeared in November, and included a defence of the Quakers. In September Stubbe published 'An Essay in Defence of the Good Old Cause', which forcefully promoted Vane's limited vision of republicanism as well as controverted the authority of government over religious matters. To the treatise was appended 'Malice Rebuked', an intemperate assault on Richard Baxter, who had maligned Vane the previous year. (Stubbe had already attacked Baxter a couple of months earlier in 'A Vindication of... Sir Henry Vane, from the Lies and Calumnies of Mr. Richard Baxter'.) In 'An Essay in Defence of the Good Old Cause', Stubbe, like Vane earlier, was quite flattering about Harrington's republican model despite disagreeing on the nature of citizenry in the political nation. Indeed, Stubbe 'was ready to cry out as if ['Oceana'] were the pattern in the mount' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1121). Yet following Harrington's critique of Vane's elitist vision of government Stubbe turned quite censorious. In mid-October he published 'A Letter to an Officer of the Army Concerning a Select Senate' and, within days of the publication in January 1660 of Harrington's 'Rota', Stubbe produced his satirical 'The Rota, or, News from the Common-Wealths-Mens Club'. Stubbe capped his campaign against Harrington two months later with 'The Common-Wealth of Oceana Put into the Ballance, and Found too Light'. 
Thus ended Stubbe's first foray into political pamphleteering. His considerable skills were fully appreciated, even feared, at the time, judging by Thomason's inscribing on his copy of 'A Letter to an Officer of the Army' that the author was 'A dangerous fellow; Sir Henry Vanes Advisor' and the complaint launched in parliament against him in February 1660 that it was Stubbe who had 'palliated in print Sir Henry Vane's wickedness' (Wood, 'Life and Times', 1.303). Quite possibly, however, Stubbe was carried away with his zeal. If one of Baxter's correspondents can be believed, certain of Vane's friends were far from pleased with Stubbe's 'Edge and Bitterness' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 4.93). Certainly his political activity and anti-university writings -- not only 'A Light Shining out of Darkness' but the biting raillery at the expense of the Oxford scientific club and certain members of Christ Church published in June 1659 in 'Sundry Things from Several Hands Concerning the University of Oxford' -- provided ample ammunition to his enemies at Oxford. In late 1659 the presbyterian Edward Reynolds was reinstalled as dean of Christ Church and within four months managed to deprive Stubbe not only of his studentship at Christ Church, but of his sub-librarianship as well. Reynolds's own departure from Oxford shortly thereafter may have enabled Stubbe to remain at Christ Church but the Restoration visitors of the university ejected him in early August on the grounds that he was 'unduely brought in' as a student as well as for the 'many complaints of his carryadge' (Varley, 17). 
Stubbe now turned to practising medicine. Thanks to the recommendation of Sir Alexander Frazier, principal physician to Charles II, he obtained in early 1662 the office of king's physician to Jamaica and was granted $200 for expenses. By then he had made his peace with the restored monarchy and church, having taken the oath of allegiance and having subscribed to the articles of the Church of England several months earlier. Prior to his departure Stubbe also presented the king with 'The Indian Nectar, or, A Discourse Concerning Chocolata', where his conformity was made public. The Caribbean climate did not agree with Stubbe, however, and he returned to England by autumn 1664. Having failed to obtain the position of physician for seamen in Yarmouth and adjacent ports Stubbe took up medical practice in and around Warwick, numbering Edward, Lord Conway, and his family at Ragley Hall among his patients. Such an association brought him in early 1666 to encounter Valentine Greatrakes, 'the Stroker', who demonstrated his highly publicized cures of scrofula at Ragley Hall and elsewhere in England. Stubbe's semi-naturalistic explanation of Greatrakes's powers, which was dedicated to Thomas Willis and addressed to Robert Boyle, was published later that year as 'The Miraculous Conformist'. 
In 1669 Stubbe launched a massive attack on the Royal Society. Already peeved at the underhanded treatment that (he believed) greeted the observations on Jamaica which he had sent the society, Stubbe was provoked by the vehemence with which Thomas Sprat's 'History of the Royal Society' (1667) and, even more, Joseph Glanvill's 'Plus ultra' (1668) advocated the cause of the nascent society. Not only did Stubbe believe that the protagonists' claims regarding the utility of science were vastly exaggerated, but he was convinced that their inflammatory rhetoric seriously threatened the humanist culture of the universities, the erudite foundations upon which protestantism rested, as well as the medical profession. And as he failed to effect privately the society's disavowal of Sprat's and Glanvill's writings Stubbe issued in rapid succession in 1670 four treatises -- 'A Censure upon Certaine Passages Contained in the 'History of the Royall Society''; 'The 'Plus Ultra' Reduced to a Non-Plus'; 'Legends no histories, or, A specimen of some animadversions upon the 'History of the Royal Society''; and 'Campanella Revived, or, An Enquiry into the History of the Royal Society' -- all excoriating the aims and work of the society as well as the learning of its propagandists. Glanvill and other members of the society quickly responded, eliciting further rejoinders from Stubbe, who, in the meantime, had inadvertently become implicated in a controversy between the College of Physicians and the London apothecaries, and was attacked first by the physician Christopher Merrett and then the iatrochemist George Thompson. Stubbe responded in 1671 with 'An Epistolary Discourse Concerning Phlebotomy' and 'The Lord Bacons Relation of the Sweating-Sickness Examined'. 
The controversy became increasingly abusive. Stubbe's passion soon alienated even those members of the Royal Society and the College of Physicians who were initially well disposed toward his campaign, and strong pressure was put on him to desist. Perhaps the impending Third Anglo-Dutch War contributed to such pressure as Stubbe's patron, Secretary of State Arlington, wished to conscript the gifted controversialist to bolster the English cause. Thus began Stubbe's second career of political pamphleteer. In June 1672 he published 'A Justification of the Present War Against the United Netherlands', to which he added early in 1673 'A Further Justification of the Present War Against the United Netherlands'. In addition, 'Rosemary & Bayes, or, Animadversions upon a Treatise called, 'The Rehearsall Trans-Prosed'', published the previous year -- and satirizing both Andrew Marvell's and Samuel Parker's position on ecclesiastical policy -- was another offshoot of his work on behalf of the government. A further contribution to the religious debate, 'An enquiry into the supremacy spiritual of the kings of England, occasioned by a proviso in the late act of parliament against conventicles' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/275/220), appears to have been refused publication. Stubbe was handsomely rewarded for his efforts. He was paid $200 and, on 19 October 1673, was granted the reversion of the office of secretary of Jamaica. Ironically, eleven days later a warrant was issued for Stubbe's arrest, 'for seditious discourses and printing and publishing unlicensed papers' (TNA: PRO, SP 44/40, fol. 127). The reference was to his 'Paris Gazette', a broadside enumerating historical precedents for the annulment of marriages by proxy -- against the background of a portrait of James, duke of York -- which was published shortly after parliament convened on 20 October and hotly debated the marriage of James and Mary of Modena. Stubbe procured his release with another work of propaganda, a translation of Jacques Godefroy's 'The History of the United Provinces of Achaia', in which the ultimate destruction of Achaia was used to foretell the analogous fate of the Dutch. 
Once again Stubbe resumed his medical practice. It was also then that he wrote 'An Account of the Rise and Progress of Mahometanism', which expanded upon Edward Pococke's tolerant and historicized view of Islam to include the prophet Muhammad as well. The work remained unpublished until the twentieth century, though it enjoyed a limited manuscript circulation. Late in the evening on 12 July 1676, while riding from Bath to Bristol to attend a patient, and 'his head being then intoxicated with bibbing, but more with talking, and snuffing of powder' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1082), Stubbe drowned in a shallow river 2 miles from Bath. He was buried two days later in St Peter's and St Paul's Church in Bath, with his old adversary Joseph Glanvill preaching an indifferent funeral sermon. The fate of his papers appears to have concerned the government, for his study was immediately sealed and the bishop of London was expected 'to appoint a person to inspect the papers for dangerous papers state and church' ('CSP dom.', '1676-7', 310-11). Anthony Wood, who knew Stubbe well, best characterized this truly erudite and enigmatic person: 'as he was so admirably well qualified with several sorts of learning and generous spirit, so he was very unhappy in this, that he was extream rash and imprudent, and wanted common discretion to manage his parts... Had he been endowed with common sobriety and discretion, and not have made himself and his learning mercenary and cheap to every ordinary and ignorant fellow, he would have been admired by all, and might have pick'd and chus'd his preferment. But all these things being wanting, he became a ridicule, and undervalued by sober and knowing scholars and others too. (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1071-2)' 



@@@@@


doc= 26735


Stubbes, Henry (1605/6-1678), clergyman and ejected minister, was the son of Henry Stubbes of Bitton, Gloucestershire. He matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 16 April 1624, aged eighteen, graduated BA on 27 January 1628, and proceeded MA in June or July 1630. Within eighteen months he became rector of Partney, Lincolnshire; about this time he married Mary Purefoy, but it is not clear whether this was before or after the birth of their son, Henry Stubbe (1632-1676), at Partney on 28 February 1632. 'Being anabaptistically inclined', according to Anthony Wood, Stubbes was later compelled to leave his rectory; taking his family to Ireland, he found employment as a 'beadle of the beggars' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1067). 
The Irish rising of 1641 induced Mistress Stubbes, and presumably within a short time Stubbes himself, to return to England. His movements over the next few years are unknown, but by July 1647 he was vicar of St Philip and St Jacob, Bristol, and in 1648 he signed the 'Testimony' of the Somerset ministers. He then became vicar of Chew Magna in that county. By September 1652 he was one of the ministers of St Cuthbert, Wells, where in 1654 he assisted the commission of triers and ejectors in the work of regulating the ministry. He lectured at St Philip, Bristol, every month in 1658. 
At the Restoration, Stubbes was still at St Cuthbert, Wells, but he left when the sequestered minister was restored and served as assistant minister to Joseph Woodward at Dursley, Gloucestershire, until August 1662, when he was again ejected. On 20 November the presbyterian but conformist MP John Birch sympathetically promised Stubbes a $5 a year allowance while he remained in need. Over the next decade he appeared throughout London, establishing his reputation as a learned and energetic preacher, but he retained links with the west country: in 1669 he preached in five Wiltshire parishes, including Chippenham, and at Winsham, Somerset. Fellow ministers who later celebrated his life reminded his congregations that 'We have often known him to continue five or six hours together in Preaching, chiefly in prayer on fasting-days', and that he had accomplished this 'without impertinencies, tautologies, tedious repetitions, or any crude, raw, rude, and nauseating expressions' (Vincent and others, 6). Richard Baxter, who recorded meeting him on 13 May 1671, noted his unusually charitable attitude towards other ministers. On 2 April 1672 he was licensed as a presbyterian minister at his house in Jewin Street, London, but in or before 1675 he left the city. His farewell sermon to his congregation, published as 'A Disswasive from Conformity to the World, as also God's Severity Against Impenitent Sinners' (1675), was a call to repentance and holy living in the mode of many contemporary devotional works. 
Stubbes's last charge was in Gloucestershire. John Prichett, who had been consecrated bishop of Gloucester in November 1672, awarded Stubbes the long-vacant vicarage of Horsley, not far from Dursley, at a salary of $8 a year. Here he 'preached for some years... in peace' and 'used part of the Liturgy' (Baxter, 27), despite the criticism of some who thought this an unacceptable compromise. His 'Conscience the Best Friend upon Earth' (1677) bears out his fellow ministers' emphasis on his 'constant secret Devotions, his dayly prayers with his Wife, and in his Family' (Vincent and others, 5) and his careful catechizing, and Baxter's observations on his peaceableness and humility: 'His studies, and parts, and labours lay not in the Critical or Controversial way' and he did not make 'himself of a sect or faction, nor Preacht for this party against that, except for Christ's party against the Devils' (Baxter, 25-6). 
While on a preaching visit to London in the summer of 1678 Stubbes was taken ill with fever and dysentery. He died on 7 July and was buried at Bunhill; two funeral sermons were delivered, one on a Sunday by Thomas Watson, the other on a weekday by Richard Baxter. His will, drawn up on 31 May and proved on 5 September, was sprinkled with biblical references and contained prayers for his kin, congregation, fellow ministers, and country. He left property at Dundry, Somerset, and Uley, Gloucestershire, and money to the poor of several Gloucestershire parishes for books and teaching poor children to read. He was survived by his second wife, Dorothy, three sons (Robert, Samuel, and John), and a daughter (Dorothy); his eldest son and namesake had drowned two years earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 26736


Stubbe, John (c.1541-1590), religious writer, was born possibly in Norfolk, the eldest of three sons and four daughters of John Stubbe ('fl'. 1541-1554), a country gentleman of Buxton, and his wife, Elizabeth ('fl'. 1540-1590). Nothing is known of his education until he matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 12 November 1555. At Cambridge he was tutored by George Blythe, and knew both Vincent Skinner and Michael Hickes; all three men were later to be secretaries to William Cecil, Lord Burghley. Stubbe graduated BA on 31 January 1561 and entered Lincoln's Inn on 7 November 1562, where he was later joined by Skinner and Hickes (admitted 1565), William Lambarde, Ralph Rokeby, and others. His translation 'A discourse... conteyning in briefe the historie of the life and death of Maister Iohn Calvin', from the French of the theologian Theodore Beza, was published two years later. 
Stubbe's time at Lincoln's Inn was formative. With Skinner, Hickes, Rokeby, and others he formed a close-knit group of protestants; some friendships lasted until Stubbe's death. Witnessing the suspensions of a number of London clergymen by Archbishop Parker after the vestarian controversy (1565-6), this group increasingly identified with those, like John Field and Thomas Wilcox, who demanded further reforms to the religious settlement of 1559, particularly the eradication of such practices as the wearing of surplices and kneeling at communion. In 1569 Skinner dedicated his translation of Gonsalvius, 'A discovery and playne declaration of sundry subtill practises of the holye inquisition of Spayne', to Parker in laudatory terms. But, though there is no firm evidence, it is thought that five years later Stubbe, Skinner, and Hickes may have collaborated in a vituperative attack on Parker entitled 'The Life of the 70. Archbishopp off Canterbury. Englished', a translation of the final chapter of 'De antiquitate Britannicae ecclesiae' with polemical and satirical marginal notes. Much of the criticism levelled against the archbishop concerned Parker's hostility to the moderate puritans' concerns and the defence of episcopacy in 'De antiquitate Britannicae ecclesiae'. Though Stubbe was moving among prominent puritans at this time -- his sister Alice married Thomas Cartwright in 1578 -- typographical evidence suggests 'The Life' was produced independently, and was not part of a larger propaganda campaign. It is significant that it was printed in Zurich by Christoph Froschauer, not by Michael Shirat (Heidelberg), who printed a number of important protestant works by Thomas Cartwright and Walter Travers at this time. 
Stubbe was called to the bar on 2 February 1572 (along with Sir Thomas Egerton) and may have practised. He was appointed steward for the reader's dinner at Lincoln's Inn in August 1578 -- a senior post -- though this may have been recognition of long residence: it was alleged that he wrote 'The Discoverie of a Gaping Gulf' at the inn. Some time between 1575 and 1579 Stubbe married Anne, daughter of Aubrey Vere and widow of Christopher Sharnborne of Norfolk. As the wills of Aubrey and Anne show, the couple had no children; though mention is made in Aubrey's to his stepson Francis Sharnborne. Stubbe's brother Francis married Anne, sister of Sir Edward Coke; she corresponded with Cartwright on the issue of separatism in 1590. 
In August 1579 Stubbe wrote 'The Discoverie of a Gaping Gulf', objecting to Elizabeth's proposed marriage with the duke of Anjou. He attacked the marriage on the grounds that it was against God's law for a protestant to marry a Catholic; he also answered in detail all the points the earl of Sussex had made in support of the marriage, both in a letter to Elizabeth in August 1578 and in a later memorandum. It has been argued that Leicester or Walsingham supplied Stubbe with Sussex's arguments to engineer popular opposition to the match; this was certainly what Elizabeth thought. It is difficult to trace close connections between either man and Stubbe, but the book was printed by Hugh Singleton, who also printed the first edition of Edmund Spenser's 'The Shepheardes Calendar'. Spenser was a member of Leicester's household at this time, and his poem, too, was critical of the marriage. 
Elizabeth was incensed by 'A Gaping Gulf': Stubbe had no claim to offer counsel, his criticism of Anjou was vituperative, and he openly questioned her commitment to protestantism. On 27 September 1579 a royal proclamation was issued prohibiting the circulation of the book. On 13 October Stubbe, Singleton, and William Page (secretary to the earl of Bedford and an MP who had attempted to distribute fifty copies to Sir Richard Grenville in the west country) were arrested. Elizabeth wanted to hang them by royal prerogative but agreed to their trial for felony. The jury refused to convict, and they were charged with conspiring to excite sedition under 1 & 2 Philip & Mary c. 3 and retried in queen's bench. The use of this statute was criticized by Robert Monson, a judge of common pleas and member of Lincoln's Inn; he was imprisoned and removed from the bench when he refused to retract. The three men were sentenced to have their right hands cut off and to be imprisoned, though it appears that Singleton was pardoned because of his age: he was about eighty. The sentence was carried out at the market place in Westminster, with surgeons present to prevent them bleeding to death. Camden's eye-witness account, also printed by Harington and circulated in manuscript, recounts Stubbe's speech on the scaffold: he asserted his loyalty and asked the crowd to pray that God would give him strength to endure the punishment. After his hand was chopped off (it took three blows) he managed to cry out 'God save the queen' before he fainted and was carried away. The crowd watched in absolute silence -- either, Camden believed, in horror of the punishment and pity for Stubbe, or out of hatred of the marriage. Stubbe subsequently signed his name 'John Stubbe, scaeva' ('the left-handed'). 
Stubbe remained in the Tower until 1581, the year in which parliament passed the 'Act against Seditious Words and Rumours Uttered against the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty'. Though designed as an anti-Catholic measure, opposition in the Commons appears to have been stimulated by fears that it could be used against protestants, like Stubbe. The following year, Stubbe's 'Christian Meditations upon Eight Psalms' (dedicated to Lady Anne Bacon) was printed at Bacon House by Christopher Barker. In 1585 he became steward of Great Yarmouth and, four years later, its MP. In parliament he sat on four committees (including privileges and the subsidy) and drew up a draft petition against the use of the 'ex officio' oath against puritan ministers. The circumstances surrounding the petition are unclear, but it appears to have been part of an attempt to initiate religious reform at the end of the session after earlier attempts had failed. However, there does not appear to have been time to present either it or another petition to Elizabeth. In 1587 Burghley commissioned him to reply to Cardinal Allen's attack on Burghley's own 'Execution of Justice', a treatise defending the regime's proceedings against Edmund Campion; there is no evidence, however, that Stubbe's work was published. At the same time, Stubbe was appointed an associate of the bench at Lincoln's Inn, an honorary benchership which enabled him to advise on the running of the inn. From 1585 he was also employed as secretary to Lord Willoughby de Eresby, and may have resided at Willoughby's house at the Barbican while Willoughby was abroad. He acted as a channel of communication between Willoughby and Burghley on Dutch affairs, as well as overseeing Willoughby's household and financial affairs. He also accompanied Lady Willoughby to the Low Countries in 1588. 
After the dissolution of parliament in 1589, Stubbe went to France with the English force, where he died in February the following year; his will, written in haste before his departure for France, was proved on 27 June 1590. Stubbe left the wardship of his stepson and most of his property and possessions to his 'faithfull and righte well deserving' wife, who later married Anthony Stapley. Some things (including a gold ring engraved 'Mortall') were left to his mother, and he released his brother, Edmond, from a debt of $60. The promised schedule of legacies to kin and friends does not appear to have been made. He testified that he 'lyved and do dye the true man and most loyall Subjecte of her most excellente majestie', beseeching Elizabeth to show her grace and favour to his widow (PROB 11/75, fols. 313-314). His burial, on the seashore near Havre de Grace, was witnessed by three nephews of his old friend Ralph Rokeby. 


@@@@@


doc= 26737


Stubbes, Philip (b. c.1555, d. in or after 1610), pamphleteer, is likely to have been born in the reign of Mary I. A native of Cheshire, his family may have come from the Congleton area, where the surname was common and where, before 1586, he seems to have owned a tenement. Although he styled himself 'gentleman' in his published works, it is unclear if this was merely literary and social pretension. Suggestions that he was related to John Stubbs, author of 'The Discoverie of a Gaping Gulf' (1579), are probably mistaken (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.646). Stubbes was a pious youth, and 'in his minority' had apparently been employed as a lay reader in his local parish church ('Works of Thomas Nashe', 3.357). According to Anthony Wood, he was educated initially at Cambridge, but 'having a restless and hot head, left that university, rambled thro' several parts of the nation, and settled for a time in Oxon, particularly... in Gloster Hall' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.645). However, his name occurs in the records of neither institution and elsewhere he is said to have been 'nourst up onely at Grammer schoole' (Cuthbert Cunny-catcher, sig. C4v). 
Stubbes's career as a semi-professional author seems to have begun in the 1580s and by the end of that decade Gabriel Harvey and Thomas Nashe reputed him one of the 'common Pamfletters of London' ('Works of Gabriel Harvey', 2.280) and grouped him with William Elderton, Thomas Deloney, and other ballad-mongers who plied their pens to eke out a living. His first publication was a broadside ballad about the divine judgment which had befallen a habitual swearer from Boothby in Lincolnshire; this was reprinted in 1581 with a secondary cautionary tale relating to one Joan Bowser of Donington, Leicestershire ('Two Wunderfull and Rare Examples', 1581). A list of witnesses to the latter incident survives in BL, Lansdowne MS 819, fol. 87'r'. Religious and moralistic in character, Stubbes's other works are equally typical of the output of the hack writers of the capital. They include a metrical jeremiad entitled 'A View of Vanitie, and Allarum to England, or, Retrait from Sinne' (1582, now lost), a jingoistic account of 'The Intended Treason of Doctor Parrie' ([1585]), a fiercely anti-Catholic attack upon 'The Theater of the Popes Monarchie' (1585), and two tiny volumes of meditations and prayers, 'The Rosarie of Christian Praiers and Meditations' (1583, also no longer extant) and 'A Perfect Pathway to Felicitie' (1592). 
Stubbes's best-known book is 'The Anatomie of Abuses' (1583), a colourful diatribe against contemporary fashions, customs, and pastimes which called for a speedy 'reformation of maners and amendement of lyfe' (sig. PP4'v') in order to avert a visitation of providential wrath. This took the form of a highly readable dialogue between Philoponus and Spudeus about the 'verie famous Ilande called Ailgna' (title-page), a device which allowed Stubbes to indulge in a rich, quasi-anthropological description of late sixteenth-century English society. The instant success of this book (four editions of which were published before 1595), induced him to produce a sequel subtitled 'The Display of Corruptions', a taxonomical analysis of the vices of various professions and estates. The uncompromising assault upon dancing, May games, plays, wakes, and other popular recreations which Stubbes launched in the first part of the 'Anatomie' earned him an enduring reputation as a puritan spoilsport and killjoy. Cuthbert Cunny-catcher (perhaps Robert Greene) and Thomas Nashe accused him of being a 'holy brother' and 'privy Martinist' (Cuthbert Cunny-catcher, sig. C4'v'; 'Works of Thomas Nashe', 3.358) but their remarks were made in the context of the scurrilous literary squabbles unleashed by the Marprelate controversy of 1588-9, and cannot be taken at face value. Stubbes was certainly no presbyterian: he staunchly defended the established church and the office of bishop and sharply reproved 'precisians' and separatists. It is difficult to fathom the depth of his piety and it seems likely that he was motivated by a combination of financial necessity, ambition, and religious zeal. 
The dedications to his works suggest that Stubbes moved in a variety of circles: Mr and Mrs William Milward bore 'the whole charges' of printing his 'Perfect Pathway' (sig. PP4'r'), and he acknowledged that he had received 'bountifull remuneration' from the suspected Catholic Philip Howard, earl of Arundel, to whom he presented both parts of his 'Anatomie' ('The Second Part of the Anatomie of Abuses, Conteining The Display of Corruptions', 1583, sig. A4'r'). The Latin verses on the 'Papist Bloodsuckers or Leeches' by Stubbes which prefaced the 1583 edition of John Foxe's 'Actes and Monuments' imply more than a passing acquaintance with the martyrologist. In September of 1586 Stubbes, described as 'Gentleman, of St Mary at Hill, London' (Foster, 1300), was licensed to marry Katherine Emmes of the same parish, with whom he moved to Burton upon Trent, Staffordshire. Her untimely death at the age of nineteen led Stubbes to write a best-selling biography of his godly bride, 'A Christal Glasse for Christian Women' (1591). At least twenty-eight impressions of this pamphlet appeared to 1664 and, an excellent example of the protestant 'ars moriendi', it became one of the most popular chapbooks of the late seventeenth century. 
By 1593 Stubbes was once again living in London, from whence he set out on a three-month tour of England on horseback to acquaint himself with 'the maners and dispositions of the people' and to inspect schools, almshouses, highways, and other monuments erected by private benefactors. This journey, which was undertaken 'partly for my private pleasure and recreation' and 'partly for avoidance of the plague', supplied Stubbes with the material for his 'Motive to Good Workes', published in that same year, a lengthy lament for the passing of an age of charity and hospitality in which he documented the decay of churches and many other public amenities. On 8 November of that year he was 'lodging by Cheape side' (Stubbes, 'Motive to Good Workes', sigs. A3'v', A6'r'). He appears to have been alive in 1610, when a revised version of his 'Perfect Pathway' was republished, incorporating fifteen additional prayers. Thereafter he cannot be traced. 




@@@@@


doc= 26738


Stubbs, Philip (1665-1738), Church of England clergyman and educationist, was born on 2 October 1665 in the parish of St Andrew Undershaft, London, the son of Philip Stubbs, vintner, and his wife, Elizabeth Hillier. Having been a pupil at Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1678 to 1682, he matriculated at Oxford as a commoner of Wadham College on 13 March 1683. He was made a scholar of the college on 26 September 1684, and graduated BA on 20 October 1686, proceeding MA on 15 June 1689 and BD on 3 July 1722. He was elected a fellow on 1 July 1691, moderator 'novae classis' in 1688, and subdean in 1691. He was repetitioner of the Easter sermons in 1691. After ordination in 1688 he became a curate in the united parishes of St Benet Gracechurch and St Leonard, Shoreditch. From 1691 he was successively chaplain to Robert Grove, bishop of Chichester, and George, earl of Huntington. 
In 1694 he became rector of Woolwich; at that time developments associated with the royal dockyard were changing the area from a fishing village to a town. There he married in 1696 Mary (1664-1759), daughter of John Willis, rector of West Horndon, Essex. They had two surviving sons and one daughter. The concern he showed for the sailors probably led to his becoming the first chaplain of Greenwich Hospital for disabled seamen, and he simultaneously held other clerical posts. On leaving Woolwich in 1699 he became rector of St Alphage, London Wall, and in 1705 also of St James Garlickhythe in London. He relinquished these parishes in 1715 when he became archdeacon of St Albans; later he became rector of Launton, Oxfordshire (1719 until his death). He was elected FRS on 30 November 1703 and took an active interest in literature and archaeology. His responsibilities at Greenwich Hospital and the annual visit to his archdeaconry meant that he was absent from Launton for half the year and he employed a curate at the full rate of $40 a year. 
Richard Steele recalled the care he devoted to public worship: 'While being at St James's Garlick-Hill church I heard the service read so distinctly, so emphatically and so fervently that it was next to an impossibility not to be attentive.... The rector of this parish at that time was Mr Philip Stubbs, afterwards archdeacon of St Albans, whose excellent manner of performing the service was long remembered by the parishioners. ('The Spectator', no. 147, 18 Aug 1711)' Stubbs was also renowned as a preacher. He published many individual sermons and addresses, and in 1704 a collected volume. In one published sermon on 'Revelation' 20: 13, the 'Sea-Assize', which had been preached at Greenwich and Woolwich on Advent Sunday, 28 November 1708, in memory of Prince George of Denmark, Stubbs was designated 'Chaplain of HM Navy in Ordinary and of her Royal Hospital for Seamen at Greenwich'; another sermon, 'God's Dominion over the Seas and the Seaman's Duty' (1701), preached at Longreach, Essex, on the 'Royal Sovereign', went to three editions and was translated into French for French seamen who were prisoners of war. He was an early supporter of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (SPG), and compiled its first report in 1703. The society gave him a special vote of thanks and chose him to preach the sermon in St Paul's Cathedral on Trinity Sunday, 1711, the day the queen had appointed for SPG collections to be taken in the city churches. This sermon was afterwards published under the title 'The Divine Mission of Gospel Ministers' (1711). 
As an incumbent Stubbs cared for poor children. He was an early member of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, supporting its encouragement of charity schools. He established such schools in his London parishes, at St Alphage, London Wall, and St James Garlickhythe, and in Bicester, near his Launton parish, and he also paid $2 a year to Bicester grammar school to support two boys from Launton. 
Archdeacon Stubbs died at Greenwich Hospital on 13 September 1738 and was buried in the hospital's old cemetery. His tombstone survives there in the mausoleum. 


@@@@@


doc= 26739


Stubbs, Thomas (fl. 1343-1381), Dominican friar and supposed chronicler, is described by John Bale as the author of the continuation of the chronicle of the archbishops of York known as 'Chronica pontificum ecclesiae Eboracensis'; but there is no contemporary ascription to him, nor is he mentioned in any of the extant manuscripts, and the authorship remains undecided. The continuation in question extends from the time of Henry Murdac (1147-53) to the pontificates of William Zouche (died 1352) and John Thoresby (died 1373), and it is possible, from more detailed comments made in the chronicle on archbishops Melton (1317-40) and Zouche, that the writer had personal knowledge of them, or at least knew members of their entourage. An edition of the chronicle by James Raine was published in the 'Rolls Series' in 1886. 
The available information about Stubbs is very slight. Bale states that he was a Yorkshireman, but so far research has failed to produce any confirmatory evidence. The first detail there is records his ordination to the priesthood in Durham Cathedral on 20 December 1343 by Richard, titular bishop Bisaciensis, acting as the suffragan of the bishop of Durham. There were two Dominican convents in the diocese of Durham, one at Bamburgh, the other at Newcastle, and presumably Stubbs was a member of one of these convents at the time of his ordination. Earlier confusion over a Franciscan friar of the same name is the result of a misreading of the Durham ordination register by the editor of the chronicle continuation. Stubbs was in the Oxford Dominican convent by 1354-5, but a reference to him as being a member of the order's convent in York in the late 1350s is given without any source ('VCH Yorkshire', 3.285) and more recent research on the mendicants in the York diocese has failed to locate him there. The latest reference found to him is in early 1381, when he was appointed one of the nine executors of the will of Thomas Hatfield, bishop of Durham (1345-81), in a list headed by his fellow Dominican John Gilbert, bishop of Hereford (1375-89). In the bishop's will Stubbs is described as 'sacrae paginae professor', showing that he had attained the degree of doctor of theology. Bale, John Leland, and John Pits ascribe to Stubbs the following theological works, in addition to the continuation of the York chronicle: 'Statutum contra impugnantes ecclesiasticas constitutiones'; 'De stipendiis praedicatoribus verbi debitis'; 'De perfectione vitae solitariae'; 'De arte moriendi'; 'Meditationes quaedam pro consolatione contemplativorum'; 'In revelaciones Brigidae'; 'De misericordia Dei'; 'Super cantica canticorum'; 'Sermones de sanctis'; 'Sermones de tempore'; 'Officium completum cum missa de nomine Jesu'; 'Officium de beata Anna'; 'De poenis peregrinationis huius vitae'. None of these can now be identified. 


@@@@@


doc= 26740


Stucley, Sir Lewis (1574/5-1620), local politician, was the son and heir of John Stucley ('c'.1551-1611) of Affeton, Devon, and Frances (died in or before 1597), second daughter of Sir John St Leger of Annery. He had two sisters and one brother and four stepsisters and one stepbrother. He matriculated at Broadgates Hall, Oxford, in 1589 aged fourteen and became a student at the Middle Temple in 1592. In 1596 he married Frances ('b'. 1571), eldest daughter of Anthony Monk of Potheridge; they had five sons and one daughter. Stucley was knighted on 23 July 1603. He did not succeed his father on the bench, possibly because of straitened financial circumstances as he sold his manor of East Worlington in 1614 and that of Thelbridge in 1616. In 1617 he was appointed guardian of Thomas Rolfe, son of Pocahontas and John Rolfe. He purchased the potentially profitable office of vice-admiral of Devon for $600 shortly before Sir Walter Ralegh returned to Plymouth in the 'Destiny' in 1618. This gave him considerable powers over ships entering Devon ports and his deputy had already arrested the 'Destiny' when Stucley received orders, dated 12 June, from the lord admiral, to arrest Ralegh. This was followed by an order from the secretary of the council to bring Ralegh before them, 'in fair Manner, and, as his Health would give Leave, by easy Journies to London' ('Harleian Miscellany', 3.25). It is on his actions in fulfilling this order that his claim to fame, or perhaps more truly infamy, rests. 
The report on Ralegh's demeanour states that he attempted to escape to France before he was under guard and that 'it was not any Train laid for him by Sir Lewis Stukeley,... as was voiced, to move or tempt him to an Escape' ('Harleian Miscellany', 3.25). While Ralegh remained free in Plymouth, Stucley was active selling tobacco from the 'Destiny' and paying off the mariners. This meant that he, Ralegh, and attendants, including Manourie, a French physician, had only got as far as John Drake's house in east Devon by 25 July when Stucley received a council letter rebuking him for his delays and ordering him to bring Sir Walter speedily before them. The party left immediately and reached Salisbury on 27 July. Ralegh admitted, on the scaffold, that he feigned illness at Salisbury. Stucley was taken in by this and sought further medical advice which led to their remaining at Salisbury until 1 August and provided the grounds for Ralegh's being allowed to go to his London house, rather than to the Tower. These delays gave Ralegh the opportunity to prepare his escape. Stucley discovered this intention at Andover and increased the guards on Ralegh, who therefore drew him into his plans for escape. Stucley may have been tempted by financial offers to co-operate but he claimed that he had only done so to unmask Ralegh's intentions, which he betrayed and so caused Ralegh's arrest in the act of escaping and his immediate transfer to the Tower. His duplicity, condemned in Ralegh's speech on the scaffold, turned Sir Lewis into Sir Judas. He received additional obloquy because of his supposed relationship to Ralegh, which depended on his being a nephew of Sir Richard Grenville, who termed Ralegh 'cousin', although there was no blood relationship. 
Stucley remained in London, giving information against Ralegh, writing his 'Apology' and preparing his 'Petition' which was actually written by Leonell Sharpe. He received $965 6's'. 3died for his services and expenses. His greatest use to the king was as an acceptable target for national discontent at Ralegh's execution. Stucley's reputation suffered further damage when he and his son, Hugh, were imprisoned for clipping coin in January 1619. He was pardoned for this, presumably for his services to the king, but continued to be so vilified that he retired to the island of Lundy where he is reputed to have died, raving mad, in 1620. He was buried at South Molton. 


@@@@@


doc= 26741


Stucley, Thomas (c.1520-1578), soldier, was the third of five sons of Sir Hugh Stucley ('c'.1495-1559) of Affeton Castle, West Worlington, Devon, and his wife, Jane, second daughter of Sir Lewis Pollard. His family was important locally (his father served as sheriff of the county) and had connections with the wider world of Tudor politics. There were contemporary reports that Thomas was an illegitimate son of Henry VIII. He probably attended one of the inns of court, before embarking on a military career. In 1545 he was serving as a soldier in Berwick Castle, and from 1547 he was paid as standard-bearer at Boulogne the substantial sum of 6's'. 8died a day. He was a standard-bearer again on the Scottish borders in 1550 and in May of that year he helped escort the marquis de Maine, a French hostage held in England, when he travelled to Scotland. He accompanied Robert Dudley on an embassy to Henri II at Amboise in April 1551. Stucley was associated with the disgraced duke of Somerset, and this placed him under suspicion with the regime of the duke of Northumberland. Thus on 21 November 1551 the privy council ordered Stucley's arrest, and he fled to France; it was also useful for him to be abroad at this time to escape his creditors. 
In France Stucley entered royal service, and probably played a part in the siege of Metz. He returned to England in August 1552, bearing a letter of recommendation addressed to Edward VI from Henri II. As he delivered the letter Stucley claimed that he had been sent by Henri as a spy, to help the French, who planned to attack Calais and then launch an invasion of England. The English government did not know what to make of this, but after consulting the ambassador in France, who mentioned it to the French king, decided it was a fabrication. In any case the government wished to improve relations with France, so Stucley was put in the Tower of London, where he remained until Mary I released him on 6 August 1553. 
Freed from prison Stucley served as a volunteer in the armies of Queen Mary's allies. He was at Brussels in December 1553, and in February 1554 he fought with the emperor's forces at St Omer. He wrote to the queen from St Omer offering her his services and those of his band of soldiers, perhaps to help maintain order at the time of Wyatt's rebellion; he also sent the English government a letter from the French king to his ambassador in England which had been intercepted and might be of value to English security. His military aid not being required in England, Stucley is next found working for Philibert, duke of Savoy, to whom he had been recommended the previous year by Queen Mary. This involved playing a part in the successful military campaigns that Savoy led on behalf of the Habsburgs against the French in Picardy. The duke of Savoy came to England in December 1554, and Stucley accompanied him. He took the precaution of writing to the queen before arriving in England in order to receive a safe conduct to prevent his arrest for debt. 
Stucley probably married during this visit. His wife was an heiress, Anne Curtis, granddaughter of the wealthy pewterer Sir Thomas Curtis who later became lord mayor of London. This was clearly a sensible marriage in the light of Stucley's debts. But it did not prevent him getting into financial trouble: in May 1555 the sheriffs of Devon and Cheshire were ordered by the privy council to arrest him on the charge of coining false money. Stucley fled the country, leaving his bride to deal with the difficulties that ensued, and resumed his work for the duke of Savoy. It was probably as part of the English contingent under Lord Pembroke and Lord Dudley that he fought in the great victory over France at St Quentin on 10 August 1557. For a gentleman soldier of the Tudor age this was a highly significant personal achievement. 
Having returned to England, Stucley began the first of his maritime exploits. He acted, it seems, as a privateer, attacking French shipping, a legitimate enterprise once England was at war with France, and one that his Devon connections made easy for him to pursue. But the line between privateering and piracy was thin; there is a suggestion that he had already engaged in attacks on the French before war was declared. On 30 May 1558 he was summoned before the council on the charge of plundering Spanish ships. The court of admiralty, however, found that there was insufficient evidence for Stucley to answer. It is perhaps significant in this connection that Mary employed Stucley late in 1558 to attend a visiting Spanish admiral, the marques de Saria, when he was at Dartmouth, which suggests that he retained the confidence of the queen, and that the naval dignitaries of her Spanish allies were not averse to him. 
Family matters engaged Stucley's attentions in the succeeding months. In 1558 he seized the house of his niece's deceased husband, Serjeant Prideaux, in order to secure the property of his great-nephew, whose wardship he had been granted, partly as a result of a letter of support from the Spanish admiral to the queen. This led to a reprimand from the privy council. The death of his wife's grandfather in November 1559 provided him with much needed cash, which he was not slow to spend. Stucley accommodated himself to the accession of the protestant Queen Elizabeth with little difficulty, and for the first years of her reign he enjoyed her favour. He was engaged in local militia duties in Berkshire in 1560, at a time when war with France and Scotland seemed imminent, and he received very good reports from his superiors for his hard work. In the following year he was a captain in Berwick. In the winter of 1561-2 he helped to entertain Shane O'Neill, the Irish leader, on a visit to England; O'Neill wrote to the queen strongly commending him. In 1562 reports show Stucley to be a supporter of Lord Robert Dudley, engaged in intrigues on his behalf to thwart the possible marriage between Elizabeth and Erik, prince of Sweden. 
On 23 June 1563, a fortnight after staging a naval pageant on the Thames for the queen, Stucley sailed off with a small fleet financed jointly by the queen and himself, in the company of the French explorer Jean Ribaut. The expedition was said to be bound for Florida, from which Ribaut had recently returned, although this was probably no more than a cover for the real intention which was to prey on French shipping. Before leaving London Stucley paid a mysterious visit to the Spanish ambassador, apologizing in advance for anything he might do on the voyage to the prejudice of the king of Spain: the ambassador did not know whether to trust Stucley or not. He almost certainly never crossed the Atlantic, but for over a year he attacked shipping off the coast of France and Spain, using ports in Ireland and Devon as bases, and taking time off in between to visit London. He did not discriminate very carefully between enemy and neutral shipping, and attacked two French ships while they were in a Galician port, which drew justifiable complaints from Spain. The queen decided to put a stop to Stucley's adventures and to the piracy of others based in Ireland, largely in order to repair relations with France, and at Michaelmas 1564 gave a commission to Sir Peter Carew, a cousin of Stucley's, to fit out two ships in order to apprehend pirates in the Irish seas. A ship crewed by Stucley's men was taken by Carew in Cork Haven in the spring of 1565, by which time Stucley had himself surrendered to the English authorities in Ireland. He was then sent back to England, and held for a while in ward. Although there was a case entered against him in the court of admiralty and a list of offences drawn up, he was discharged for lack of evidence. He visited the Spanish ambassador to apologize. 
In view of O'Neill's friendship with Stucley, Cecil sensibly agreed to send him to assist the lord deputy of Ireland, Sir Henry Sidney, who was preparing to send an embassy to O'Neill. This deputation, which finally departed from Dublin with Stucley early in 1566, was intended to persuade O'Neill to come to meet the lord deputy in the pale to negotiate a peace treaty in person. At the same time Stucley and his companions were to sound out O'Neill's true intentions and feelings. As Sidney reported to Cecil, the embassy failed to persuade O'Neill it was safe to come to Dublin, but Stucley and his companions were made aware of O'Neill's dangerous anti-English ambitions. Sidney was most pleased with Stucley's conduct in this matter and for the next four years tried to support his efforts to recover his credit with Elizabeth and make a career for himself in Ireland. In March 1566, with Sidney's strong support, Stucley wrote asking to be permitted to buy from Sir Nicholas Bagenal for the sum of Ir$3000 the important office of marshal of Ireland, and some valuable estates in northern Ireland close to O'Neill's territory. According to Sidney, Stucley hoped to settle in Ireland and was planning to marry the earl of Worcester's sister, his first wife having died about 1564. This scheme did not succeed, but he did marry a rich Irish widow, Elizabeth Peppard, 'nee' Popley, about 1566. The queen, however, utterly refused to consider his promotion, and reminded Sidney that Stucley was still out of favour and had a case pending against him in the admiralty court, and therefore should not be given any position of trust in Ireland. 
Following this set-back Stucley returned to England, but in 1567 he was back in Ireland, attempting to buy the office of seneschal of Wexford and other positions and lands from Sir Nicholas Heron. He faced the same opposition from Elizabeth in this as he had done before, and she ordered Heron to be reinstated. Heron's death meant that Stucley was able to prevent the complete failure of these schemes for two years, although in 1567 he ceded the barony of Odrone to his old adversary Sir Peter Carew. Despite Sidney's support, Stucley was eventually forced, by the summer of 1569, to relinquish the rest of his claim to Nicholas White, sent from England to take Heron's place. White arrived in Dublin and had Stucley committed to prison, charged with obstructing his rights but also with using coarse language against the queen and supporting Irish rebels. Stucley was in Dublin Castle for eighteen weeks, and then released for lack of evidence. Being ousted a second time seems to have been decisive in shifting Stucley, increasingly ambiguous over the last few years, into a position of open disloyalty to the queen. 
The years 1569-70 were very difficult for the Elizabethan regime, with rebellion in northern England, the publication of the papal bull of excommunication, and hostility from Catholic Spain. These wider opportunities for sedition chimed in with Stucley's personal grudges, a yearning for more adventure, and probably also a long-felt sympathy for the old religion. Released in October 1569 and still enjoying the friendship of Sidney, Stucley began to prepare a vessel for his departure from Ireland, claiming that he would sail for England. While these preparations were proceeding, he sounded out both the Spanish and French ambassadors. He then set out for Spain, arriving at Viviero on 24 April 1570. He was favourably received in Madrid, where Jane, the English-born duchess of Feria, and her husband provided him with influential support. This charming old soldier, with his eight-year-old son, William, was soon very much at home at the Spanish court. He was given a pension and a house in a nearby village, was enrolled as a knight of the order of Calatrava, and was generally addressed as duke of Ireland. But Stucley faced difficulties in persuading Philip II to equip an expedition to Ireland. Throughout most of the 1570s the king was attempting to improve relations with England. In any case, Irish exiles in Europe were dubious about Stucley and had their own schemes which they hoped to sell to the Spanish. Nevertheless Philip's caution and hospitality meant that he would never completely dismiss Stucley. From the perspective of the English government he was a real threat once in exile, and Elizabeth used a number of diplomatic channels to try to remove his Spanish support. There were repeated rumours in London in the 1570s that he was about to launch an attack on Ireland. 
In April 1571, having received no real promises of Spanish support, Stucley left for Rome to enlist aid there and was again very well received. It was typical of Stucley that he should have played a part, while waiting for his Irish plans to mature, as captain of three galleys in the great victory of the Spanish over the Turks at Lepanto in October 1571. He then returned to Spain, and continued to urge Philip II to use his triumphant naval forces to attack England. In early 1572 he was in Paris, then back in Spain, where he made his base, by now something of a hero. In 1575 there were rumours that he was once more in England, but he was certainly in Rome in autumn and winter that year, when the pope granted him the right to sell indulgences commemorating the jubilee to raise cash for his English enterprise. In 1576 he made the pilgrimage to Loreto. By this time Stucley had received promises in Rome and Madrid of support for a limited expedition to Ireland of the sort that he eventually led two years later. In 1577, however, these plans were shelved, and he travelled twice to Flanders from Rome, where the new Spanish governor and his former companion-in-arms, Don John of Austria, was contemplating a major invasion of England, and there seemed a real chance of Spanish support. 
The death of Don John put an end to any real prospect of a Spanish invasion of Ireland or England, and Rome was now Stucley's only hope. The pope was enthusiastic, but had little to offer in terms of major military support. The situation was complicated by divisions among the exiled English Catholics in Rome, many of whom distrusted Stucley, as did Irish Catholic exiles. However, it was at last settled that the scheme first agreed by Stucley and Pope Gregory XIII in 1576 was to be implemented, and Stucley seemed now to have the support of James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, the leading Irish exile. The pope and Philip II provided enough money to equip a force of perhaps 700 English and Irish exiles, Italian bandits, and sundry soldiers, some press-ganged by Stucley himself. He set off from Civita Vecchia in February 1578 in the 'San Juan' of Genoa, a ship of 800 tons, which after a minor mutiny among the crew arrived by easy stages at Lisbon in May. Here King Sebastian, who was desperate, despite all his advisers, to attack the Moors of north Africa, persuaded Stucley to join him in that enterprise, in clear contravention of his papal instructions and despite the strong opposition of the papal nuncio in Lisbon. Stucley had his reasons for being thus diverted from his Irish course: his ship was leaky, and Sebastian had told him that when they had defeated the Moors they would sail together in a Portuguese fleet to Ireland. Stucley had far more military skill than Sebastian, and when they had crossed into Africa and he saw the size of the Moorish forces ranged against them, he advised against immediate fighting. Having been overruled by the foolhardy king he fought bravely at the battle of Alcazar on 4 August 1578. He was killed early in the battle, with both legs shot off by a cannon, and the Portuguese expedition was overwhelmed by the vastly superior Moorish cavalry. 
Stucley's life became a subject for balladeers and dramatists, who saw him as a hero whose martial reputation was enhanced by his notoriety. The duke of Northumberland said of him as early as 1552: 'I dare say there is not in Italy or Christendom a better soldier of his time' ('CSP dom.', '1547-53', 713). He was certainly a brave and intelligent soldier, but he was also devious and he loved the limelight. Burghley accused him of 'the highest degree of vain-glory, prodigality, falsehood, and vile and filthy conversation of life... altogether without faith, conscience, or religion' (Simpson, 136). Yet before he went to Spain his record had not been worse than that of a number of his flamboyant contemporaries. It is a mystery why Elizabeth withdrew her favour so comprehensively in 1566, when Stucley had the support in Ireland of the deputy, and indeed at that stage the support of the future Lord Burghley, and when he was clearly the sort of tough frontiersman required to help subdue the island. But her decision was the turning point in Stucley's career, and its apparent unfairness helps to justify his move into open treason in 1570. Whether Elizabeth's suspicions and Stucley's intemperate response to them really did stem from a belief that he was her half-brother is an interesting and unanswerable question. 


@@@@@


doc= 26742


Studley, John (c.1545-1590?), translator, was born of a Dorset family and was educated at Westminster School, where he was both one of the original queen's scholars elected on the 1560 foundation and, in 1561, the first to be elected to Trinity College, Cambridge. He graduated BA in 1566 and became a minor fellow on 8 September 1567 and a major fellow on 7 April 1570, the year in which he proceeded MA. In college politics Studley adhered firmly to the puritan party, and followed Thomas Cartwright, the Lady Margaret professor of divinity, in opposing the rule of the master, John Whitgift, who was chiefly responsible for new university statutes aimed against puritans. In 1572 Studley's signature appears as one of 164 declaring opposition to these statutes, and on 1 February 1573 he was convened before the heads of colleges on a charge of nonconformity; he vacated his fellowship at the end of that year. As a rebellious fellow Studley probably also shared in the disfavour with which Whitgift regarded the new Westminster foundation scholars. 
Studley's years at Trinity were otherwise occupied by his translation of four of Seneca's tragedies: the 'Agamemnon' and 'Medea', published in 1566 by Thomas Colwell (the former being the earlier work, with prefatory verses asking the reader's indulgence on account of Studley's youth and inexperience); the 'Hippolytus', which was entered in 1567 in the Stationers' register by Henry Denham, although no copy survives; and the 'Hercules Oeteus', first printed in Thomas Newton's 1581 collected edition entitled 'Seneca, his Tenne Tragedies, Translated into Englysh', along with the other three. Studley's translating style was popular and colloquial, the verse heavy if exuberant and tending to obscure the sharp detonations of the original, with no apparent effort to reproduce an epigrammatic style; the restrictively archaic 'fourteener' metre was employed. Studley treated his original text freely, inserting into the 'Medea' a new chorus of his own emphasizing Jason's inconstancy in love, and adding an entire scene to the 'Agamemnon' re-narrating the death of Cassandra, the imprisonment of Electra, and the flight of Orestes. These additions, however imperfect, are an early example of breaking away from the prescribed letter of the text, while the move towards moral order and social reintegration in the translations is, if un-Senecan, an expression of contemporary taste. 
Studley also wrote Latin verses addressed to Sir William Cecil (the dedicatee of his 'Agamemnon') and Latin elegies marking the death of Nicholas Carr, professor of Greek at Cambridge, which were printed with the latter's Latin translation of Demosthenes in 1571. These demonstrate Studley's close involvement with elements of a mid-century Cambridge literary humanism which, through personal contacts, linked many of the classical scholars of the day. In 1574 Studley published a translation 'with sondrye additions' of Bale's 'Acta pontificum Romanorum' as 'The pageant of the popes, conteyning the lyves of all the bishops of Rome from the beginninge of them to the yeare 1555', dedicated to Thomas Radcliffe, earl of Sussex (title-page). This work, not to the taste of later scholarly orthodoxy, was dismissed by Thomas Warton as a misapplication of the time and talents of one 'qualified for better studies' (Warton, 4.272). 
Little is known of Studley's later career. He married Maria Baskervill of Nethwood, Thornbury, Herefordshire, and they had a son and a daughter. He seems to have been a member of Barnard's Inn, London, and is said to have crossed to Flanders where he held a command under Prince Maurice, and died at the siege of Breda (1590), although no contemporary authority places him there. 
Opinion of the literary merit of Studley's translations has differed; C. S. Lewis thought them 'execrable... the metre is a torment to the ear, the language at once artless and unnatural' (Lewis, 256) yet T. S. Eliot found in them 'poetic charm... with occasional flashes of real beauty' (Newton, 1.vi). Perhaps his most lasting literary bequest was unintentional; it was in Studley's translation of 'Tacitae Stygis' as 'Stygian Puddle glum' (ibid., 1.158) that Lewis, despite his revulsion, found the name for one of his most memorable Narnian characters. 


@@@@@


doc= 26743


Stukeley, William (1687-1765), antiquary and natural philosopher, was born on 7 November 1687 in Holbeach, Lincolnshire, the eldest son in the family of four boys and one girl of John Stukeley (died 1705), attorney, and his wife, Frances Bullen (died 1707), daughter of Robert Bullen of Weston, Lincolnshire (whom Stukeley erroneously believed to be of the family of Anne Boleyn). 
Stukeley showed an early interest in and skill for map making and drawing, and was educated from the age of five under Edward Kelsall at the Free School, Holbeach. In 1700 he left school and was apprenticed as a clerk in his father's law firm in Holbeach, occasionally travelling with him to the law courts in London. But he was more interested in books, natural philosophy, and antiquities than the law, and in 1703 he was admitted as a student at Bene't College (the nickname at that time for Corpus Christi College), Cambridge, where he studied medicine. There he showed a keen interest in botany, Newtonian natural philosophy, and astronomy; he designed and built an early form of orrery with his friend Stephen Hales. Although his studies were interrupted by the death of both his father and his uncle in 1705 and subsequent financial difficulties, he left Cambridge in 1708 after graduating as bachelor of medicine, and moved to London, where he lived at his father's former lodgings in Staples Inn. There he studied anatomy in Chancery Lane, and medicine under Dr Richard Mead at St Thomas's Hospital, Southwark. In 1710 he moved to Boston, Lincolnshire, where he practised as a physician, and was made a freeman of the town in 1713. During his time in Boston he joined the Gentlemen's Society of Spalding, and became a close friend of its founder, Maurice Johnson. 
In 1717 Stukeley left Boston and returned to London, where he would live at a house in Ormond Street until 1726. These ten years were intellectually and socially the most interesting in his long life, for his friends included such prominent figures as Richard Mead, Hans Sloane, Edmond Halley, William Whiston, and Martin Folkes, as well as aristocrats such as the earl of Pembroke and the earl of Winchilsea. A major influence, though, was the friendship he made with Sir Isaac Newton, who was by then president of the Royal Society. Stukeley became a fellow of the Royal Society on 20 March 1718, was elected to its council, and stood creditably as a candidate for Halley's successor as secretary in November 1721. On a number of occasions Stukeley visited and conversed alone with Newton, during which time they discussed various subjects, including astronomy, physiology, and chronological history. On one of these visits, as they sat in his garden drinking tea, Newton informed Stukeley that his speculations upon the theory of gravitation had been 'occasion'd by the fall of an apple, as he sat in a contemplative mood. Why sh[oul]d it not go sideways, or upwards? but constantly to the earths center?' (Royal Society of London, Stukeley MS 142 fols. 15-16). This was the earliest record of this now famous anecdote. Stukeley was greatly influenced by Newtonian natural philosophy, and wrote and presented papers at the Royal Society defending the religious orthodoxy of the new science, for instance showing that fossils were evidence of a universal deluge. He also supported and expanded upon Newton's belief that the ancients had recognized the heliocentric nature of the universe and had understood the inverse-square rule of gravity. 
In 1719 Stukeley travelled to Cambridge and took the degree of MD on 7 July, and on 30 September 1720 he was admitted a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, where he gave the Goulstonian lecture in 1722. This was later published as 'Of the Spleen, its Description and History, Uses and Diseases' (1722), and included as an appendix the report of the dissection of an elephant Stukeley had made with Sir Hans Sloane. In 1720 'curiosity led him to be initiated into the mysterys of Masonry, suspecting it to be the remains of the mysterys of the antients' ('Family Memoirs of the Rev. William Stukeley', 1.267), and on 27 December 1721 he was constituted as a grand master. He was also a founder member of the re-established Society of Antiquaries in January 1718, and was appointed as the society's first secretary. His manuscript histories of the society were later used by the antiquary Richard Gough. At this time he made two of his closest lifelong friendships, with the antiquarian brothers Roger and Samuel Gale, who travelled to Avebury in Wiltshire with him in 1719. He also travelled the length of Hadrian's Wall with Roger Gale in 1725 and in November 1757 brought the destruction of the wall by the government's military road builders to the attention of the Society of Antiquaries. He regularly attended meetings of both the Society of Antiquaries and the Royal Society, where he presented papers and 'curious' objects, often antiquarian or philosophical material resulting from the annual perambulations around the English counties that he had been making since 1711. These journeys and observations resulted in his second major publication, 'Itinerarium curiosum, or, An account of the antiquitys and remarkable curiositys in nature or art, observ'd in travels thro' Great Brittan, illustrated with copper prints: centuria 1' (1724). A second volume, 'Centuria II', was published posthumously in London in 1776. 
In July 1722 Stukeley became involved with a group of friends in the foundation of a new antiquarian club, the Society of Roman Knights, devoted to the classical rather than medieval or 'gothic' past that dominated the interests of the Society of Antiquaries. Stukeley declared that its aim was 'to adorn & preserve the truly noble Monuments of the Romans in Britain, & the truley great & stupendous works of our British Ancestors...' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. misc. c.401 fol. 19). The society's proposed members included Lord Pembroke and Lord Winchilsea, Samuel Buck, Martin Folkes, Roger and Samuel Gale, Alexander Gordon, and Maurice Johnson. In a novel development for an eighteenth-century learned society, Stukeley's first wife, Frances, was also later admitted, so becoming the first woman to belong to an English antiquarian society. The members all assumed nicknames for themselves taken from the Roman or Celtic past. Stukeley took the name of Chyndonax, supposedly a Gaulish druid, and his and his friends' use of this pseudonym would out-survive the short-lived society. 
In 1726 Stukeley left London to pursue a medical practice in Grantham, Lincolnshire, a decision seemingly based on his natural affection for the countryside and concern for his health, for he suffered periodically from gout, a new remedy for which affliction he later promoted in his 'Of the Gout' (1735). He had some involvement in local politics, and supported the whig cause, dining on occasion with Robert Walpole. While in Grantham he gathered biographical material on Isaac Newton, who had grown up in the town. Much of this material focused on Newton's childhood, and thus has been of particular interest to Newtonian scholars. In Grantham he met Frances Williamson (1696/7-1737), daughter of Robert Williamson of Allington, Lincolnshire, and they married in 1728. They had three daughters before Frances died in 1737. 
It was Stukeley's desire for a more settled life that allowed him to continue his researches into the history of religion, and this, together with the encouragement of his friend William Wake, archbishop of Canterbury, led to his ordination in the Church of England on 20 July 1729. In 1730 he moved to his living of All Saints', Stamford. The demands of this ecclesiastical position were neither as onerous nor as unpredictable as those of medicine, and he was able to pursue his twin interests of gardening (he landscaped and planted in the gardens of all his homes), and reading and writing on religious antiquities. 
While a brief glance through his bibliography of works shows that Stukeley published variously and extensively over much of his adult life, his principal publishing achievement was two monographs on the ancient stone circles of Stonehenge and Avebury in Wiltshire: 'Stonehenge: a Temple Restor'd to the British Druids' (1740) and 'Abury: a Temple of the British Druids' (1743). These volumes resulted from the extensive fieldwork -- including notes, sketches, drawings, and measurements -- that he had made at both sites during the summers between 1718 and 1724. As early as 1724 he had proposed the publication of four books on the history and religion of the ancient Celts, but it was only these two volumes which ever appeared in print, under the collective title of 'Patriarchal Christianity, or, A chronological history of the origin and progress of true religion, and of idolatry'. The likely cause of the delay in publication was financial as much as scholarly: in terms of sales 'Itinerarium curiosum' had not been a success, for illustrated books were expensive to produce, and Stukeley subsequently held a low opinion of publishers. But his second marriage, in 1739, to Elizabeth Gale (1687-1757), sister of Roger and Samuel and daughter of the antiquary Thomas Gale (1635/6-1702), dean of York, and Barbara Pepys (died 1689), included a sizeable wedding portion ($10,000) and gave him the financial wherewithal to support his publications without worrying about earnings. 
Stukeley's 'Abury' and 'Stonehenge' are both remarkable for the detail of their illustrations, and the new discoveries he made at the sites. At Stonehenge he was the first to discover and name the neighbouring earthwork avenue and cursus, to identify the stones' astronomical alignment, and he coined the word 'trilithon' to describe their unique construction. At Avebury he made important and extensive surveys of the stone circles and avenues at a time when they were being destroyed for building materials, and identified the site as a 'dracontium' or serpent-temple. This imaginative but erroneous interpretation -- based upon Egyptian hieroglyphs of a snake passing through a circle -- was to remain influential through the nineteenth century. It was John Aubrey who had first suggested that the stone circles abundant in the British Isles had been built by the ancient British priests the druids, but it was the publications of Stukeley, and his Cornish correspondent William Borlase, which established the popular association of stone temples with druids in the public imagination. Some of his theories on patriarchal British druids influenced the work of William Blake, especially his 'Jerusalem'. But at a time when other contemporary writers were suggesting Roman, Danish, or even Anglo-Saxon builders for these antiquities, Stukeley's argument was by no means as naive as some later historians have implied. He was well read in contemporary authors on the history of religion, and he intended his work to combat deism and Arianism, both heterodoxies circulating in England in the first half of the century. His writing reveals the influence of writers such as Gerard Vossius, Athanasius Kircher, Ralph Cudworth, and Bishop Edward Stillingfleet, although his own religious beliefs and historical arguments often came close to the natural religion he aimed to counter. An important friendship at this time was with William Warburton, bishop of Gloucester and author of the influential anti-deistic tract 'The Divine Legation of Moses'. Stukeley continued to publish works on British antiquities in his three-volume series 'Palaeographica Britannica' (1743, 1746, 1752), the first volume of which contained his account of the Royston cave, discovered in 1742. 
Stukeley particularly enjoyed the company of those who shared his intellectual interests, and while loathing the bustle and pollution of London, he missed the fraternity of like minds which it offered. In an attempt to overcome this isolation, in the summer of 1736 he founded a literary and antiquarian society in Stamford. In 1334 the town had briefly been the refuge of a group of secessionist scholars from Oxford who brought with them the brass knocker which gave its name to Brasenose College. The original knocker remained in the town until 1890 and Stukeley utilized this piece of local history, naming his new club the Brazen Nose Society. Modelled on the Gentlemen's Society of Spalding, its purpose was to provide 'a weekly conference for the promoting of useful learning sacred & civil, [and] the knowledg of antiquitys & nature' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. misc. e.122). Stukeley set about making the first attempt to interpret Stamford's topographical history, and his society's meetings included a demonstration of 'Philosophical experiments' with an air-pump, a microscope, and a magic lantern by William Whiston, the disgraced former Lucasian professor of mathematics at Cambridge. Although at one point there were up to thirty members, the society soon lapsed, and an attempted revival in 1745 was unsuccessful. In 1738 Stukeley also established a clergyman's book club in the town, 'with [the] intent of making it a Vertuoso Club, but it prov'd absolutely abortive: for they had no taste for anything but wine & tobacco' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. misc. e.128 fol. 4). Despite the 'solitude' he complained of in Stamford, he was able to spend his winters in London, and on 11 December 1741 he participated in Lord Sandwich's foundation of the Egyptian Society at the Lebeck's Head tavern, Chandos Street ('Family Memoirs of the Rev. William Stukeley', 1.470). Unfortunately, this society was also short-lived, but Stukeley made there a close and influential new friend and patron, John Montagu, second duke of Montagu. He became a regular visitor to Montagu's country seat at Boughton, Northamptonshire. 
In November 1747 Montagu offered Stukeley the living of St George the Martyr in Queen Square, Bloomsbury, which, given his frustration with Stamford's provinciality, he accepted. He spent the final years of his life in London, where once more he was able regularly to attend the meetings of the Royal Society and the Society of Antiquaries. It was these final years which did most to cloud Stukeley's reputation, when as an old man he enthused about his patriarchal druids, warranting him his self-appointed nickname the Arch Druid. But he continued to be interested in natural philosophical subjects, and attempted to explain the earthquake that shook London in the spring of 1750 through the medium of electricity. His essay 'The Philosophy of Earthquakes, Natural and Religious' (1750) was based on papers he read at the Royal Society (which were also reprinted in the 'Philosophical Transactions', vol. 46) and a sermon given at his church. In the essay Stukeley noted his debt to Benjamin Franklin's recent experiments with lightning, which had been communicated to the Royal Society. Horace Walpole recorded in his correspondence how 'One Stukeley, a parson, has accounted for it [the earthquake], and I think prettily, by electricity. But that is the fashionable cause, and everything is resolved into electrical appearances' (H. Walpole, 'Correspondence', ed. W. S. Lewis, 20, 1960, 154). 
In 1747 Stukeley received a letter from a young Englishman named Charles Bertram, resident in Copenhagen, informing him of his discovery of a medieval copy of a previously unknown Roman map and itinerary of Britain, allegedly made by a fourteenth-century monk of Westminster. Stuart Piggott has described this episode as 'one of the most audacious and successful literary forgeries of the eighteenth century' (Piggott, 'William Stukeley: an Eighteenth-Century Antiquary', 127). Although Stukeley attempted to purchase the (non-existent) manuscript of 'De situ Britanniae' for the newly opened British Museum, the amicable correspondence between him and Bertram did lead to the publication of Stukeley's 'An Account of Richard of Cirencester, Monk of Westminster, and of his Works' (1757) and Bertram's 'Britannicarum gentium historiae antiquae scriptores tres' (1757, including authentic works by Gildas and Nennius). Bertram's forgery as disseminated in these two books was a great success, and 'De situ' was considered an authentic source for Roman Britain (it was even used in part by Edward Gibbon). The forgery was not fully discredited until 1869. Although Stukeley was an unfortunate dupe in this episode, his nineteenth-century reputation suffered additionally from his defence in 1763 of the Scottish poet James Macpherson. Macpherson had published three collections of poems purporting to be authentic translations of the work of an ancient Gaelic poet, Ossian. Although the poems were hugely popular throughout Europe, Samuel Johnson declared his scepticism and opinion was divided on the extent of their authenticity. 
On 27 February 1765 Stukeley suffered 'a stroke of the palsy' at his rectory in Queen Square, and after lying in a coma for three days he died there on 3 March 1765. He was buried in an unmarked grave in East Ham churchyard, Essex. Stukeley was a warm-hearted and generous man who valued intellectual curiosity and personal piety over the temporal riches which, as a well-connected London physician in the 1720s, could have been his. Often, and probably unfairly, considered an eccentric, he was reluctant to practise the circumspection necessary in the study of prehistory, to temper his imagination, or to take the more cautionary advice of friends. However, his unstinted enthusiasm, dedication, and keen eye merited him his position as the father of British field archaeology. 


@@@@@


doc= 26761


Swaefred (fl. 693/4). Not much is known of these two kings, though Sigeheard was a patron of St Paul's and Swaefred founder of a double monastery at Nazeing, Essex. They became embroiled in serious, but unspecified, conflicts with Ine of Wessex in the early eighth century, which the bishops of the two kingdoms attempted to resolve through mediation. The dispute is the subject of the earliest surviving original letter in Europe, from Waldhere, bishop of the East Saxons, to Berhtwald, archbishop of Canterbury. Also exercising some kind of royal authority during their reign was 


@@@@@


doc= 26795


Robert Sutherland, sixth earl of Sutherland (d. in or before 1427?), who was formerly misnamed William and thought to have died perhaps in 1398, may have been still a minor in 1371, and Alexander Stewart, lord of Badenoch and younger son of Robert II, was administering the earldom of Sutherland as Robert's guardian by October 1372, conducting business from the chief Sutherland stronghold of Dunrobin in 1373-4. However, in 1384 the chronicler Froissart refers to Robert as welcoming a party of French knights to Scotland, and the same writer, despite inaccurately naming him John, credits Sutherland with leading the Scottish force which invaded north-west England in 1388. He first appears in government records on 2 November 1389, when he was present at the condemnation of his erstwhile guardian and then father-in-law, Alexander Stewart, earl of Buchan. On 22 January 1401 Sutherland issued a grant from the castle of Dunrobin to his brother, Kenneth, but the rest of his career is rather obscure. The date of his death has been placed in 1442, but he was probably dead by 1427; the earl of Sutherland sent to England in that year as a hostage for James I's ransom seems less likely to have been Earl Robert than the latter's son John, born of Robert's marriage to Lady Margaret Stewart, daughter of Alexander, earl of Buchan. 



@@@@@


doc= 26796


William Sutherland, third earl of Sutherland (c.1286-1330), was under age when he succeeded his father, as John Ross, younger son of Earl William of Ross, held the young earl of Sutherland in ward, but his tutelage must have been near its end, as William was styled third earl of Sutherland by 16 March 1309 when he appeared at Robert I's first parliament held at St Andrews, having clearly abandoned his father's hostility to Bruce's kingship. He was also present at the parliament held in Arbroath in 1320, appending his seal to the letter to Pope John XXII known as the 'declaration of Arbroath'. He died before December 1330, apparently unmarried, and was succeeded by his brother. 



@@@@@


doc= 26798


William Sutherland, fifth earl of Sutherland (d. 1370/71), who succeeded his father in 1333, is said by the Lanercost chronicle to have joined with the earls of Fife and Dunbar, in laying siege to the castle of Cupar in 1336, held at that time by William Bullock for the English. In 1340 he raided into England with the earl of March; they inflicted considerable damage, but suffered a defeat on their return journey at the hands of Sir Thomas Gray. In 1341 David II returned to Scotland after spending nine years in France, and Sutherland clearly found considerable favour at court, sufficient to receive the king's sister Margaret in marriage, papal dispensation for the match being given at the end of 1342. 
Sutherland's rising influence was such that the earldom of Sutherland was erected into a free regality on 10 October 1345, while on 4 November the barony of Cluny in Aberdeenshire was added to Sutherland's possessions. On 30 March 1346 he and his wife received a grant of the stronghold of Dunnottar in the Mearns, together with a special licence to build a fortalice upon the crag. In 1346 Sutherland joined the king's army which invaded England, but the campaign ended with the defeat of the Scots at the battle of Nevilles Cross, and with the capture of David II and of Sutherland himself. Sutherland is next recorded in June 1351, when he received a safe conduct to go to Newcastle to negotiate David II's ransom. In September his infant son John, born in 1346, was handed over as a hostage; John's important position as his royal uncle's nearest male heir enabled David II to return to Scotland for a few months. In 1357 Sutherland and his son were both handed over as hostages. The earl remained in England for more than ten years, while according to Walter Bower, the young John Sutherland died of plague at Lincoln on 8 September 1361, thus ending any Sutherland hopes of a royal succession. 
David II made a number of grants to Sutherland, including the barony and castle of Urquhart, on 28 February 1359, apparently in exchange for thanages in Kincardineshire, while between 1360 and 1365 he received a number of grants from the exchequer, in addition to $80 paid by David II towards Sutherland's expenses in England. In terms of political influence, however, Sutherland's day was over, possibly because of the machinations of the faction led by Robert Stewart, whose members would have had readier access to the king while Sutherland was languishing in England. It may have been due to Stewart that David II was in no hurry to secure Sutherland's release. Sutherland had returned to Scotland by the time a grant was issued to him on 27 February 1370, but he must have died before June 1371, when the barony of Urquhart was back in royal hands. Following the death of his first wife, Margaret Bruce, possibly in 1346, Sutherland had married Joanna Menteith by November 1347. With his second wife, Earl William had a son who succeeded him. 



@@@@@


doc= 26978


Tassie, William (1777-1860), modeller, born in London, was probably the son of David Tassie ('bap'. 1750), youngest brother of James Tassie (1735-1799), the modeller whom he assisted in the production of portrait medallions and casts of antique jewels. Aged twenty-one he produced a copy of his uncle's medallion of Lord Duncan to exhibit at the Royal Academy. Following his uncle's death in 1799 he took over the business at 20 Leicester Square. The change was advertised in Edinburgh, where Tassie 'respectfully informs the Pupils and Friends of his late uncle' that he has: 'executed Medals of several of the Scotch Kings [of which] he has sent specimens, in paste enamel, to Marshall & Sons, High Street, Edinburgh, where they may be seen; who will receive orders for them and also for portraits modelled by the late Mr Tassie. ('Edinburgh Evening Courant', 27 July 1799)' Later he was assisted by William Hardy Vernon (1795-1880), son of his sister Anne Tassie and James Vernon, who modelled intaglios of Milton and of Byron. Vernon matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1824 and died vicar of Wootton, Bedfordshire. 
Tassie's shop had a counter running its full length, behind which were rows of drawers containing antique gem casts; in the window, covered by a glass dome, stood his uncle's replica of the Portland vase. The studio was a salon for artists and literary men, including Moore and Byron. Tassie was a kindly, cultivated man who loved to feed birds at the back of his house, until developers built over the ground and shot them. Out of kindness he bought a $1 ticket for the Boydell lottery from a struggling artist; on 28 January 1805 he won the chief prize -- the Shakspeare Gallery in Pall Mall, pictures, and estate. Tassie made a present to the artist and sold the whole property by auction in May 1805, when the works of art realized more than $6180. 
Tassie added to his uncle's collection of reproductions of gems and medals; he supplied additional casts to the imperial collection of Russia. His most popular products were seals and gems in composition paste, inscribed with original mottoes and devices, of which he published a descriptive catalogue in 1816 (2nd edn, 1820) and 1830. His collection of intaglio and cameo impressions in enamel, sulphur, or paste finally consisted of more than 20,000 specimens; among them were many originals of contemporary notables, including Napoleon, Nelson, and Lady Hamilton, by artists employed by him. In 1822 Shelley instructed Thomas Love Peacock to procure for him 'two pounds worth of Tassie's gems' ('DNB'). Tassie also modelled portrait medallions in wax and cast them in the white enamel paste used by James Tassie, but his work did not have the ease and precision of his uncle's. He executed a set of twelve medallions of the passions, signed 'W. T.'. 
In 1840 Tassie retired from his prosperous business, which was continued by his partner John Wilson, an artist who had entered his employment about 1827 and exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1824 to 1856. Tassie moved to 8 Upper Phillimore Place, Kensington, where he died, unmarried, on 26 October 1860; he was buried in Brompton cemetery. He left most of his estate to his nephew the Revd William Hardy Vernon and his great-nephew the Revd William Tassie Vernon. In two codicils he left a detailed bequest to the National Galleries of Scotland of portraits of his uncle and aunt by David Allan, a landscape by Nicholas Poussin, and an extensive collection of portrait medallions and casts of gems, giving as complete a collection as possible of the work of his uncle and himself. Those gems that he felt were 'licentious' were omitted, and these he destroyed. A portion of the collection was left to his nephew, and part of this was sold at Wootton in February 1881, the remainder at Christies in April 1882; many of the large Tassie medallions were included in the Shadford Walker sale in 1889. 


@@@@@


doc= 26979


Tate, (Alexander) Norman (1837-1892), analytical chemist and teacher of science, was born on 24 February 1837 at Wells, Somerset, the son of James Tate, an alderman, and his wife, Emma Norman. He was educated at the cathedral grammar school and in 1857, after practising pharmacy for a time, he began studying chemistry in the laboratory of James Sheridan Muspratt's Royal College of Chemistry in Duke Street, Liverpool. In 1860 he was engaged as an analyst by John Hutchinson & Co., alkali manufacturers of Widnes, but in 1863 he and his brother, Frank, established their own analytical and consulting practice in Newstead Road, Windsor South, Liverpool. 
Tate, in several analytical papers (published by the Chemical Society of London), paid particular attention to the study of American petroleum which was then being brought onto the market as an illuminant. Following the publication of his 'Petroleum and its Products' (1863), which was translated into French and German, he temporarily gave up his Liverpool practice in order to erect oil refineries processing coal and shale on the Isle of Man and in Flintshire. In 1869 he married Elizabeth Millicent Faulkes of Claughton, Lancashire; the couple had two daughters. On his marriage Tate rejoined his brother in consultancy, at the same time establishing a School of Technical Chemistry in Old Hall Street, Liverpool. In 1873 the school became the Liverpool College of Science and Technology in new premises in Hackins Hey. Classes were conducted in a basement hall fitted with benches, the students having to provide their own apparatus. Here, besides teaching chemistry, Tate gained a considerable reputation as a specialist in the analysis of oils, fats, and waxes for W. H. Lever and other soap and food manufacturers. 
Tate was an original member of the Society of Chemical Industry on its foundation in 1881, and was at various times president and vice-president of its Liverpool section. He also took a prominent part in furthering scientific education in Liverpool. In partnership with James Samuelson in 1871, and under the aegis of the Department of Science and Art, he founded operatives' evening classes. Tate taught chemistry, botany, physiology, and general biology in these classes and founded both the Liverpool Science Students' Association and the Liverpool Science and Art Teachers' Association. In addition, he was active in local geological and microscopical associations, being particularly interested in the chemical geology of the Merseyside boulder clay. In 1880, at Liverpool town hall, he was awarded a public testimonial for his educational work. In 1888 he founded a monthly magazine, 'Research', which was devoted to the popularization of science, but editing proved too time-consuming and it was discontinued at the close of its second year. A man of tremendous energy and enthusiasm, Tate died from cancer, at his home, Benarth, 27 Shrewsbury Road, Orton, Birkenhead, on 22 July 1892, leaving 'a void in the intellectual life of Liverpool' ('Geological Society Proceedings'). The firm of Norman Tate & Co., consulting chemists, continued. 


@@@@@


doc= 26980


Tate, Christopher Thomas (1811-1841), sculptor, born on 16 August 1811 in Drury Lane, Newcastle upon Tyne, Northumberland, and baptized on 9 September at the nonconformist church of St Nicholas (later the cathedral) in the same city, was the third son of John Tate, hairdresser, of Drury Lane, and Elizabeth, daughter of William Penny, keelman, of North Shields, Northumberland. His name was Christopher Thomas Tate and not Christopher J. A. Tate, as sometimes stated ('Dictionary of British Sculptors', 380). He was first apprenticed to the sculptor R. G. Davies ('fl'. 1820-1857) and afterwards worked for David Dunbar the younger (died 1866). Leaving Dunbar to establish himself as an independent artist, Tate achieved some recognition with a 'Dying Christ' (suitable for Catholic chapels) and a statue of Blind Willie. He then obtained a number of commissions for portrait busts, among them those of the duke of Northumberland, David Urquhart, Sheridan Knowles, Lord Byron, and Miss Elphinstone. The 'Gentleman's Magazine', in his obituary, remarked: 'His busts, for execution, precision, and arrangement, can scarcely be surpassed' (p. 102). He afterwards produced a 'Judgment of Paris' and a 'Musidora', praised in the same obituary for the skill with which so young an artist had tackled 'such difficult subjects' (ibid.), evidencing in such work 'an original and vigorous mind' (ibid.). 
Tate suffered from consumption, and in 1840, while engaged on a statue of the duke of Northumberland for the Master Mariners' Asylum at Tynemouth, he became seriously ill. Although he had evidently finished the most important parts, his former master, Davies, had to complete the work. In an attempt to regain his health, Tate went on a voyage to the Mediterranean. He stayed some weeks in Malta but, realizing that he was close to death, he sailed for home. He got as far as London and died there on 22 March 1841, aged twenty-nine; he was buried in London. 
Tate had made very little money from his work and left a wife and two children unprovided for (although a relief fund was evidently started up soon after his death). There are a large number of tombs by him in the churches and churchyards of Newcastle upon Tyne and the surrounding area, for example his monument to the Revd Robert Wasney (1836) in St Thomas's, Barras Bridge. For his native city he carved the royal coat of arms (1838) for the pediment of the Theatre Royal, considered by both the obituarist in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and a later writer, Rupert Gunnis, to be a particularly fine piece of work. According to his obituarist, 'his store of information was inexhaustible. Whatever the subject under discussion, Mr Tate was always able to take a prominent part' ('GM', 102). 


@@@@@


doc= 26981


Tate, Francis (1560-1616), judge and antiquary, was born at Gayton, the eldest son of Bartholomew Tate (died 1601) of Delapre, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of Francis Tanfield of Gayton. He was raised with two brothers and four sisters at nearby Hardingstone, on monastic lands bought by his father. He matriculated as a commoner to Magdalen College, Oxford, on 20 December 1577, but left without a degree. Admitted to Staple Inn by 1579 he entered the Middle Temple with his brother William on 2 June 1579, and was called to the bar on 30 June 1587. An active member, he was never fined for missing a duty or report, and preferred for admission many young men from east midlands families, several of whom became judges. He was patronized in his legal career by the Tanfield family, his sister's having married Sir Laurence Tanfield, chief baron of the exchequer. 
A noted scholar at Magdalen, Tate became a famous legal antiquary at the Temple, where he was renowned for his knowledge of Anglo-Saxon and medieval laws and customs. He was elected bencher and Lent reader in 1607, and assisted in drafting the inn's new perpetual charter of 13 August 1608. Active in its parliament he sat on many committees including treasury, library, surveyors, discipline, and house rules and orders, becoming treasurer on 24 November 1615. He constructed a three-storey brick building over the cloisters between the Middle and Inner temples in Vine Court in 1612 at his own expense, keeping three chambers for his library and use. As a resident he was active in moots and readings. Numerous copies exist of his notes on lecturers, and his own reading on tithes was erudite in canon, civil, and common law, history and philology. 
Tate was returned to parliament for Northampton in 1601, and served as its legal counsel by 1602. He sat for Shrewsbury 1604-11 even though the borough ordered that it should not elect a non-resident. A scholar of parliamentary history he believed that the three parts of king, Lords, and Commons always had an equal role. He also placed great store in the statutes of the thirteenth century, especially 'Magna Carta'. Providing Sir Edward Coke with a volume of abstracts from the rolls of parliament, his views supported the later arguments of Coke on the 'high court of parliament' (Fussner, 83-4) and its antiquity. An active speaker, he sat on several committees including impositions and grievances. For example, in the debate on scutage on 4 December 1606 he gave a history of the divisions of feudal tenures. He gave similar lengthy lectures on the history of impositions. He had observed that privy councillors took the initiative in guiding and controlling the Commons in Elizabeth's reign, and were most effective when they worked through unconnected MPs, using flattery and friendly persuasion. 
A judicial career paralleled Tate's time as scholar and parliamentarian. He was a JP in the counties of Brecknockshire, Glamorgan, and Radnor, and a justice of assize for Brecon 1604-16. He also practised in the court of wards, and in king's bench 1610-12. An original member of the Society of Antiquaries he was for some time its secretary. He maintained a collection of the society's papers, including a journal of its activities 1590-1601. Tate was an inveterate collector. He spent many hours in London's Guildhall Library copying legal manuscripts, and took many of them, which were not returned and ended up in Sir Robert Cotton's library with some of his notebooks. He also researched state archives such as the exchequer, where he also borrowed original papers. Working with Cotton, William Lambarde, John Stowe, and John Jones of Gallilyfdy, he acquired the largest private collection of legal manuscripts of his time. 
Approximately sixteen original works stemmed from his pen, none of which was printed in his lifetime, although ten were published later by either Thomas Hearne or John Gutch. They dealt with the antiquity and precedents concerning arms, cities and towns, combats, and funerals; with parliament and Star Chamber; with the offices of knights, doctors of civil law, serjeants, high steward, and lord chancellor; with words and names in 'Domesday Book' and Northamptonshire; and with the ancient Britons. None of these was substantial apart from his tract on parliament. He was also the translator and / or editor of fourteen works, only one of which has been published. These were primarily medieval, ranging from household and wardrobe accounts to charters, statutes, and legal treatises. 
Tate's career might never have blossomed had he not recovered from an illness in 1602 and left Northamptonshire that year for Wales, the ancestral homeland of his grandfather John Tate (died 1514), mercer, and sheriff of London in 1495. On giving up his post as recorder of Northampton he made his will, on 22 June 1603. He gave praise to his sister Jane in caring for his 'illness' (PROB 11/129), and to his brother-in-law William, Lord Zouche of Harringworth. He had returned, however, by 1604, when he was elected MP for Shrewsbury. There is a significant omission of his name in the 'Middle Temple Records' from June 1601 to February 1605. Tate died, probably at Middle Temple, on 15 November 1616. He gave most of his books to his nephew Robert Tanfield and many of his manuscripts landed in the Stowe collections, now in the British Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 26982


Tate, George (1746-1821), naval officer in the Russian service, was born on 14 June 1746 near London. He was the third son of George Tate (1700-1794) and his wife, Mary (died 1770). His father had served in the Russian fleet in the era of Peter the Great and later acted as a British Admiralty agent for securing mast timber, first in Russia and then in New England. Tate grew up on the Maine coast and pursued a career at sea. After the tragic accidental death of his mother in 1770 his father helped him gain a commission in the Russian navy. 
In the 'Count Orlov' Tate saw action in the Russo-Turkish War of 1768-74 at the great battle of Chesma in the Mediterranean (1770). He remained in the Black Sea Fleet until the mid-1770s, when he was promoted captain. He then commanded ships based in Kronstadt and Archangel, before returning to the Black Sea for Catherine the Great's Russo-Turkish War of 1787-92. Tate was wounded at the siege of Izmail and returned to the north again to take part in the war against Sweden (1788-90) in the Baltic Sea battles of Aland, Hogland, and Reval. After his capture of an enemy warship at Viborg he was presented with a miniature of the empress set in diamonds. A seasoned combat commander, Tate was promoted rear-admiral in 1793. 
In 1798 he was made vice-admiral in the Baltic fleet and won the order of St Anne. During the War of the Second Coalition, Tate took part in the combined Anglo-Russian fleet operations off the Netherlands; but when Emperor Paul reversed his alliances and broke diplomatic relations with England, Tate, with other officers of British origin, was removed from his post and was obliged to spend the winter of 1800-1 in Moscow. 
In a letter to his brother Robert, Tate wrote that 'the death of the late Emperor put affairs on the old footing' (Holden, 36). Tsar Alexander re-established relations with England and in 1802 rewarded Tate with a promotion to admiral and an order of St George for his participation in eighteen naval campaigns. After the peace treaty of Tilsit in 1807 Tate was kept ashore again for over two years and wrote to his brother Samuel, '... my income is greatly curtailed' (ibid., 36). Despite his advanced age Tate returned to service during the crisis of 1812. In the victory the admiral was accorded an honour seldom bestowed upon foreigners, an appointment to the Russian senate, and he was again showered with decorations, including the orders of Alexander Nevsky and St Vladimir. 
Admiral Tate died in St Petersburg on 17 February 1821. He never married but had kept contact with his relatives in England and New England. Brothers Robert and Samuel, both merchant captains, did not survive him. His estate was divided among his brother William, who had settled in England, his nieces and nephews in Maine, and two godsons in Russia, Edward Simpson and James Booker. 


@@@@@


doc= 26983


Tate, George (1805-1871), topographer and naturalist, born on 21 May 1805 in Alnwick, was the son of Ralph Tate (1781-1827), builder and draper, and brother of Thomas Tate the educationist. He was a freeman of Alnwick by patrimony, and attended the borough and grammar schools there. Subsequently he worked as a linen draper, and in 1848 he was appointed postmaster, an office he held until a fortnight before his death. Tate was active in all public movements in the town, and helped to organize the work of the Alnwick Mechanics' Scientific Institution, of which he acted as secretary for thirty years. This inspired him to study geology. He was clerk of Alnwick council from 1850 to 1858, and used the opportunity to study the borough records. The result was his authoritative 'History of Alnwick', which appeared between 1865 and 1869, and was his chief publication. It included the history of Alnwick Castle and the Percy family, with accounts of old customs, sports, public movements, local nomenclature, the botany, zoology, and geology of the district, and biographies of the notabilities of the town. He was also secretary of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club from 1858 until his death. 
Tate chiefly interested himself in the archaeology and natural history of his town and district and especially distinguished himself by his geological explorations, being the first to record marks of glaciation on rocks in Northumberland. He published in 1865 'Sculptured Rocks of Northumberland and the Eastern Borders'. He examined and wrote papers on other ancient British remains for the proceedings of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club. Of these, the most important were 'The old Celtic town of Greaves Ash' and 'The hut-circles and forts on Yevering Bell'. His account of his journey along the Roman wall, with his examination of its geology, was published as a part of John Collingwood Bruce's 'The Roman Wall' (2nd edn, 1853). His account of the fossil flora of the eastern border was incorporated in George Johnston's 'The Natural History of the Eastern Borders' (1854), and that of the geology of Northumberland in J. G. Baker and Tate's 'New Flora of Northumberland and Durham'. Tate formed a museum which was especially rich in fossils collected in the course of his investigations in the carboniferous and mountain limestone formations, and his name was given by T. Rupert Jones to three species: 'Estheria striata tateana', 'Candona tateana', and 'Beyrichia tatei'. 
Tate married in 1832 Ann Horsley, also of Alnwick, who died on 21 December 1847. Two sons and three daughters survived him. His eldest son, George Ralph Tate MD FLS, was a notable plant collector, whose Chinese specimens are now at Kew. Tate died in Alnwick on 7 June 1871, and was buried on 9 June in Alnwick churchyard, on the south side of the church. 


@@@@@


doc= 26984


Tate, Sir Henry, first baronet (1819-1899), sugar refiner and benefactor, was born at Chorley in Lancashire on 11 March 1819, the eleventh child of the Revd William Tate (1773-1836), and his wife, Agnes, daughter of Nathaniel Booth of Gildestone, Yorkshire. Tate's parents had twelve children in all, four having died before Henry's birth. To eke out a living as a Unitarian minister, William Tate opened a private school for poor children. It was here that Henry received his only formal education. At the age of thirteen he was apprenticed to one of his older brothers, Caleb Ashworth Tate (died 1846), who was a grocer in Liverpool. Seven years later Henry set up on his own, by buying the business of Aaron Wedgwood in Old Haymarket, Liverpool. By the time he was thirty-six, Henry Tate had six shops -- four in Liverpool, one in Birkenhead, and one in Ormskirk. He also expanded into the wholesale trade in 1857. 
Tate began a more significant commercial diversification in 1859, when he went into partnership with John Wright, a cane sugar refiner of Manesty Lane, Liverpool. This proved sufficiently successful for Tate to sell the six shops in 1861, and for the partners to establish their own refinery in the following year. A second refinery was built in 1864. Five years later Wright withdrew, and the company changed its name to Henry Tate & Sons. The subsequent years were difficult for British refiners, as imports of refined beet sugar, supported by state subsidies, entered the market from continental Europe, particularly Germany. Several businesses in Britain went bankrupt. Tate and other cane sugar refiners argued for some form of protection from such subsidized imports, but the chief response of his and other successful companies was to innovate and expand to meet competition. 
In 1870 Tate built a new refinery in Love Lane, Liverpool. Here he incorporated the so-called 'Greenock method' of refining (Greenock then being one of the centres of refining), which included boiling the sugar in a partial vacuum, and at a low temperature, to reduce caramelizing. The refinery began operating in 1872, but before it did so Tate was introduced to another new method, developed in France by Bovin and Loiseau, using lime and carbonic acid to purify the sugar. Tate bought the rights to this, and introduced it to Love Lane. Much of Tate's commercial success was based on his ability to recognize an opportunity, and to his judgement in introducing new technologies from elsewhere. This was illustrated again in 1874-5, when he bought a derelict shipyard on the Thames at Silvertown. It was to be the site of his largest refinery, which began operating in 1878, under the control of his son, Edwin. The construction of a new refinery represented a significant risk for the company; the costs were such that Tate was forced to withdraw his daughter, Isolina, from boarding-school. 
At the time of the move to London, Tate learned of a process for making sugar into small cubes, patented by Eugen Langen of Cologne. Hitherto sugar had been sold in blocks or 'loaves', which needed to be broken or chopped into smaller usable pieces. Tate (jointly with another refiner in Liverpool, David Martineau) bought the rights to the Langen cube-making process in 1875, with an agreement not to pay royalties until his refinery was producing them successfully. In 1892 Tate bought outright, for $12,000, the exclusive British rights to a superior cube-making process, which had been patented by Gustav Adant of Brussels. Tate's refinery began to use this process in 1894. The family firm became a private limited company two years later, when Henry retired and his eldest son, William Henry, was made its first chairman. 
It was said by some contemporaries that Tate was much guided by his first wife, Jane. She was the daughter of John Wignall of Aughton, Lancashire. They married on 1 March 1841 and had seven sons (one of whom died in infancy) and three daughters. Tate outlived his first wife and married for a second time on 8 October 1885; his new wife was Jane Amy Fanny (died 18 October 1919), daughter of Charles Hislop of Brixton Hill. Tate's family life was always private -- indeed, he was a very private man. He was guided by the religious beliefs and values of his Unitarian upbringing, though he was attracted to the Congregational church at the time of his second marriage. His public activities and benefactions were, however, invariably apolitical and non-sectarian. He enjoyed a good reputation as an employer. He never sought public or political office except for serving briefly on Liverpool city council in the 1860s as a Liberal. He was also a JP in Liverpool and Surrey. He fought shy of public acclaim and nearly always avoided public speaking, a task he hated, and at which he was said to be very poor. 
Tate in some respects typified the Victorian nonconformist bourgeois, with a somewhat ascetic lifestyle of modesty and discretion. Yet he took a great interest in art, sought to encourage young artists, and built up an extensive collection of contemporary paintings at his home in Park Hill, Streatham Common, London. He was a close friend of Sir John Everett Millais, director of the Royal Academy. It had been Tate's intention to donate his collection to the National Gallery, but the trustees were prepared to accept only a sample. Thus, after some difficulty in finding a site, he endowed a new gallery at Millbank in London. This became the National Gallery of British Art, but has always been far better known as the Tate Gallery. He donated sixty-five of his own pictures, and three sculptures to the gallery. They included many which reflected his conservative taste, such as Orchardson's 'Her First Dance' and 'The First Cloud'; Waterhouse's 'Lady of Shallot'; Millais' 'Ophelia', 'Vale of Rest', and 'North-West Passage'; and several by Tindeman, Reid, and -- Queen Victoria's own favourite -- Sir Edwin Landseer. 
The building for the new gallery was designed by Sydney R. J. Smith, and opened by the prince of Wales on 21 July 1897. On this occasion Tate broke his self-imposed public silence and made a speech presenting the gallery to the people. The initial cost of the gallery had been $190,000 but later additions brought the total close to half a million pounds. In recognition of this, and other benefactions, Tate was made a baronet in 1898. He had twice declined this honour, but was eventually persuaded to accept by Lord Salisbury, who told him that a refusal would be a snub to the royal family. For twenty years the new gallery was administered by the National Gallery, of which Tate had been made a trustee. 
Tate made many other donations, often anonymously, and always discreetly. They included $42,500 for Liverpool University, $3500 for Bedford College for Women, and $5000 for building a free library in Streatham; additional provisions were made for libraries in Balham, Lambeth, and Brixton. There was $10,000 for the library of Manchester College, Oxford, and, also to Manchester College, $5000 to promote the 'theory and art of preaching'. In addition he gave $20,000 to the (homoeopathic) Hahnemann Hospital in Liverpool in 1885, $8000 to the Liverpool Royal Infirmary, and $5000 to the Queen Victoria Jubilee Institute, which became the Queen's Institute for District Nurses. In 1887 he gave $5000 to the Tate Institute in Silvertown, to serve as a non-sectarian, and apolitical meeting-place for working people. It had a large hall and several meeting rooms, a reading room, billiard room, and nine bathrooms. 
Sir Henry Tate died at his home in Streatham, Park Hill, on 5 December 1899, after a long illness, and was buried at Norwood cemetery. He was survived by his second wife and succeeded in the baronetcy by his eldest son, William Henry. 


@@@@@


doc= 26985


Tate, James (1771-1843), headmaster, was born at Richmond in Yorkshire on 11 June 1771, the only surviving son of Thomas Tate, a working maltster originally from Berwick, and his wife, Dinah Cumstone, who came from a family of small farmers in Swaledale. In May 1779, after attending two private schools, James entered the grammar school at Richmond, where his ability was recognized by the master, the Revd Anthony Temple. On Temple's recommendation, Tate became in 1784 amanuensis to Francis Blackburne, rector of Richmond and latitudinarian controversialist. Enjoying access to Blackburne's library, Tate owed much to the stimulus of this early influence and, with Temple's help, he obtained a sizarship at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1790, graduating BA in 1794 as sixth senior optime and proceeding MA in 1797. He was from 1795 to 1796 a fellow of his college before, on 27 September 1796, he was appointed master of Richmond School, the fulfilment, it was said, of a childhood ambition. Two days later he married, at Kensington parish church in London, Margaret, second daughter of Feilding Wallis, the actor. He was ordained deacon in 1795 and priest in 1800, held the perpetual curacy of Bellerby, Yorkshire, from 1800 to 1808, and was in October 1808 appointed rector of Marske, near Richmond, a living which he held until his death. 
Tate transformed Richmond School (of which he was master until January 1833), into one of the leading classical schools of his day, attracting boys from throughout the country. Between 1812 and 1833 six pupils a year on average proceeded to the universities. Their successes at Cambridge earned them the title of 'Tate's invincibles' (Wenham, 68); thirteen were elected to fellowships at Trinity College. At his instigation the school buildings were considerably enlarged in 1815. Rejecting corporal punishment and refusing to rule by fear, Tate succeeded instead in inspiring his pupils, as one of them recalled, 'with that passion for learning by which he was himself animated' ('GM', 1843), encouraging the most promising boys during walks with them in the Yorkshire dales. Himself trained in mathematics, he applied the same precise methods to classical teaching, instilling habits of rigid accuracy. He was a widely respected classical scholar. Robert Surtees, the Durham antiquary, recalled that on the occasion of their first meeting they spent the night in quoting the 'Iliad' (G. Taylor, 'Memoir of Surtees', 1852, 128), and Sydney Smith, who by chance travelled in the same coach as the master of Richmond, declared to a friend that he had fallen in with 'a man dripping with Greek'. Most of Tate's published works were schoolbooks: they included an edition of James Moor's 'Elementa linguae Gracae' (1824) and 'An Introduction to the Principal Greek Tragic and Comic Metres' (1827; 4th edn, 1834). With George Dunbar, professor of Greek at Edinburgh University, he added to Andrew Dalzell's 'Collectanea Gracea majora' (1805-20). His most important work was 'Horatius restitutus' (1832), an attempt to arrange the books of Horace in chronological order, applying the method of Richard Bentley. Reaching a third edition, it was favourably noticed by H. H. Milman in the 'Quarterly Review' (62, Oct 1838), and later by W. B. Donne in the 'Edinburgh Review' (92, Oct 1850). 
Like his father, Tate was a strong whig, advocating Catholic emancipation in an assize sermon delivered in 1825. During the long period of tory ascendancy, his politics debarred him from the preferment which he sought to relieve the burden of his large family (seven sons and four daughters); he was among the unsuccessful candidates at the time of Thomas Arnold's appointment as headmaster of Rugby School in 1827. His fortunes improved on the return of a whig administration. In January 1833 Lord Grey appointed him canon of St Paul's, and by virtue of his canonry he became incumbent of the parish church of Edmonton in Middlesex. Tate died at Clifton, Bristol, on 2 September 1843 and was buried in St Paul's Cathedral. When, in 1850, Richmond School moved to a new site, the building, paid for by 140 subscribers, was a Tate memorial. His eldest son, James Tate (1801-1863) succeeded him as master of the school. 


@@@@@


doc= 26986


Tate, Nahum (c.1652-1715), poet, playwright, and translator, probably born in Ireland, was the second of the four sons of Faithful Teate ('c'.1627-1665/6), and his wife, Katherine. The couple also had three daughters. Tate's father and grandfather (also called Faithful, (died 1660)) were clergymen of puritan sympathies who had both attended Trinity College, Dublin, and had both held livings in Ireland and England. Tate's grandfather and his family were ill-treated, and his valuable property destroyed, in the Irish Catholic uprising of 1641. Tate's father was the author of seven published works, most notably 'Ter tria' (1658), a long stanzaic poem in the metaphysical manner on the nature of the Trinity. 
Nahum Tate and his brother (another Faithful) registered as students at Trinity College in June 1668. They had received their schooling under Henry Savage of Belfast, a Trinity contemporary of their grandfather. In his last undergraduate year Nahum was elected a scholar of Trinity, and graduated BA in 1672. By 1676 he had moved to London, where he soon established himself in literary circles. He lived there as a professional writer (with perhaps a brief period as a schoolmaster between 1687 and 1692) for the rest of his life. During the early 1680s Tate wrote committedly in support of Charles II, and initially welcomed James II's succession in 1685. But he seems to have become rapidly disenchanted with James's extreme pro-Catholic policies, and at the revolution of 1688-9 transferred his allegiance to William III, whom he hailed as a pious peacemaker and defender of English liberty. After the death of Thomas Shadwell in 1692, on 8 December Tate was appointed to the poet laureateship, a position which he held for life. 
Tate's poetic career began with a set of complimentary verses to the second edition (1676) of the 'Poems' of Thomas Flatman. In 1677 he published his own collection of 'Poems': sixty-nine short pieces, including love lyrics, melancholy Flatmanesque reflections, and one poem ('On the Present Corrupted State of Poetry') which provides early evidence of his pious tendencies. An expanded and revised edition of the collection, with many metrical and stylistic improvements, appeared in 1684. About 1680 Tate had made the acquaintance of two contemporaries who were to influence his career significantly: Charles Sackville, earl of Dorset, who soon became his patron, and who later, as lord chancellor, was to recommend his appointment to the laureateship, and John Dryden, with whom he soon became involved in several poetic projects. Tate wrote three versions from Ovid's 'Heroides' for 'Ovid's Epistles' (1680), a collaborative venture to which Dryden also contributed translations and a critical 'Preface'. In 1682 he published complimentary poems to Henry Dickinson's 'Critical History of the Old Testament' translated from the French of Richard Simon (the occasion for Dryden's 'Religio laici'), to the third edition of Dryden's 'Absalom and Achitophel', and to Dryden's 'The Medall'. In the same year, Tate and Dryden collaborated directly on 'The Second Part of Absalom and Achitophel', with Dryden supplying the portraits of 'Doeg' (Elkanah Settle), 'Og' (Thomas Shadwell), and 'Ben-Jochanan' (Revd Samuel Johnson), and Tate writing most of the remainder, in close imitation of Dryden's original poem. Tate pursued his interest in translation with versions from book 7 of Ovid's 'Metamorphoses' (in the 1684 'Poems') and a rendering of books 4 and 5 of Abraham Cowley's 'Six Books of Plants' (1689). His apparent plans for further Ovidian translations in the early 1690s, which eventually bore fruit in versions of book 4 of the 'Metamorphoses' (1697) and 'The Speeches of Ajax and Ulysses' from book 13 (with Aaron Hill, 1708), seem to have provoked the rivalry of Dryden, who in a letter to his publisher Jacob Tonson of 3 October 1692, wrote of his intention to 'spoyl Tate's undertakings' by speedily bringing out his own translation of 'The first book of Ovid's 'Metamorphoses''. But relations between Tate and Dryden remained sufficiently cordial to allow Tate to contribute versions of satires 2 and 15 to the Dryden-Tonson 'Satires of Juvenal and Persius' (published November 1692; dated 1693), and to write, probably about the same time, the version of Ovid's 'Remedia amoris' eventually included in 'Ovid's Art of Love' (1709). Tate's translation 'Syphilis, or, A Poetical History of the French Disease', (1686), from the Italian of Girolamo Fracastoro, was reprinted in the third Dryden-Tonson miscellany, 'Examen poeticum' (1693). 
As well as satire and translations Tate published a substantial amount of occasional and complimentary verse, including poems on Thomas Creech's 'Lucretius' (1683) and John Oldham's 'Remains' (1684), and celebrations of Sir Godfrey Kneller (1692), Henry Purcell (1698), and the grammarian Lewis Maidwell (1707). The bulk of his output from 1692, however, took the form of official laureate verse, mostly in the form of pindaric odes, often designed for musical setting, which celebrated monarchical achievements and anniversaries, lamented royal deaths, commemorated military victories, and applauded prominent public figures and events. The pressures of royal patronage and public duty were temporarily in abeyance during Tate's composition of 'Panacea' (1700; revised, 1702), a relaxed mock-heroic poem on the origins and virtues of tea-drinking. 
Tate's religious commitment became increasingly evident in his later years. He compiled an anthology, 'Miscellanea sacra, or, Poems on Divine and Moral Subjects' (1696; revised, 1698, 1705), wrote to the bishop of London (6 February 1699) with proposals 'for Regulating of the Stage & Stage-Plays', and published, from 1694, 'A New Version of the Psalms of David, Fitted to the Tunes used in Churches' (first complete edition, 1696; revised version, 1698; supplement, 1700). The last, written in collaboration with Nicholas Brady, was intended to replace the Elizabethan versified psalter by Sternhold and Hopkins (1562), used regularly in Anglican worship as the equivalent of a hymnbook. The 'New Version' was designed to achieve a modernity and elegance of idiom, while remaining compatible with the traditional psalm tunes. The Tate-Brady 'Psalms' were attacked for their inaccuracy and for 'light and airy' modishness by Bishop William Beveridge in 'A Defence of the Book of Psalms' (1710). Their poetical variety and liturgical practicality were immediately and vigorously defended by Tate in 'An Essay for Promoting of Psalmody' (1710). Some of the 'Psalms' and their associated hymns (including the celebrated 'While shepherds watch'd their flocks by night') survive in hymnals to this day. In 1713 Tate acted as co-editor of a short-lived periodical 'The Monitor', 'Intended for the Promoting of Religion and Virtue, and Suppressing of Vice and Immorality'. 
Tate published a substantial quantity of prose throughout his career, including translations from Heliodorus (1686) and Lucian (1711), an edition of Quintus Curtius Rufus's 'Life of Alexander the Great' (1690; with a dedication comparing William III with Alexander), and 'A Present for the Ladies: being an Historical Vindication of the Female Sex' (1692). He was also active, particularly in the earlier part of his career, as a dramatist and librettist. His first play 'Brutus of Alba' (performed in 1677-8; published in 1678), a tragedy in blank verse based on Book 4 of Virgil's 'Aeneid' and heavily influenced by Dryden's 'All for Love', was soon followed by a second tragedy, 'The Loyal General' (published 1680). Tate's tactless decision to mount this adaptation of Shakespeare's 'Richard II' at the politically sensitive moment of the exclusion crisis resulted in performances being twice forbidden (December 1680; January 1681). In 'The Ingratitude of a Commonwealth' (1682), an adaptation of 'Coriolanus', he signalled his royalist commitment in less ambiguous terms. During the mid-1680s Tate wrote the farces 'A Duke and No Duke' (performed in 1684; published in 1685; based on a play by Aston Cokain), and 'The Cuckolds-Haven' (1685; based on the Jonson, Chapman and Marston 'Eastward Ho!'), and an adaptation from Fletcher, 'The Island Princess' (1687). He later adapted Webster's 'The White Devil' as 'Injur'd Love' (1707). Tate's two most famous dramatic works are his adaptation of Shakespeare's 'King Lear' (1681), and his libretto for Henry Purcell's 'Dido and Aeneas'. The former survived as the standard stage version of Shakespeare's play until well into the nineteenth century. The latter was performed at Josias Priest's School for Young Gentlewomen in Chelsea in 1689, but may have previously received a private performance at court (possibly about 1684). 
Tate's later years were marred by ill health and financial difficulties, including imprisonment for debt. He died in the Mint on 30 July 1715 and was buried on 1 August in St George's Church, Southwark. Though it has been assumed that Tate never married (Spencer, 37), a commission granted to his principal creditor Henry Whiteing for the administration of his assets after his death (TNA: PRO, PROB 6/92, fol. 157'v') describes him as a widower. Nothing further, however, seems to be known about his marriage. 
Tate seems to have had an agreeable personality. According to contemporary accounts, he was learned, courteous, modest, and moral, but also, according to the antiquary William Oldys, 'a free, good-natured fuddling companion' (Baker, 1.443). His work, however, has had a consistently bad press. Though admired by some contemporaries, it was soon pilloried by Pope, Parnell, and Swift, and has subsequently been subjected to almost universal contempt. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' gives Tate's occupation, without further qualification, as 'poetaster', and his changes to the plot of 'King Lear' -- which include the introduction of a love interest between Edgar and Cordelia, the omission of the Fool, and the contrivance of a happy ending in which Lear, Gloucester, and Cordelia all survive -- have been regularly regarded as risible examples of Restoration obtuseness and poor taste. However, while much of Tate's large output is now of only historical interest, some of his couplet verse attains genuine distinction; several of his religious poems still retain their currency after three centuries; and his version of 'King Lear' is arguably an intelligent response to features of Shakespeare's original which distinguished critics such as Dr Johnson have found equally perplexing and problematic. 


@@@@@


doc= 26987


Tate, Thomas (1807-1888), scientist and educationist, was born at Alnwick, Northumberland, on 28 February 1807, the son of Ralph Tate, a builder. Along with his elder brother George Tate he attended the borough school in Alnwick, but unlike George he does not appear to have proceeded to the Dukes (Grammar) School. It is likely that he studied in Edinburgh for a short time with an architect, though J. P. Kay-Shuttleworth later referred to him as self-taught. His brother George ascribed his interest in mathematics and science to membership of the Alnwick Scientific and Mechanical Institution (founded 1825). 
Tate's first experiences of teaching came from giving evening classes in Alnwick and Newcastle. In 1835 he was appointed lecturer in chemistry at the recently established York medical school. There, besides providing innovative evening classes on science, he also edited a weekly mathematical problem column in the 'York Courant'. In 1840 he joined the staff of Battersea Teacher Training College and in 1849 he moved to the newly established Kneller Hall Training College in Twickenham as first master, with a salary of $250, under Frederick Temple as principal. In 1851 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society. 
It was as an educator that Tate was most noted. He wrote more than twenty popular texts on various aspects of mathematics and science, including the 'First Principles of Arithmetic, after the Method of Pestalozzi' (1845), which in various editions sold over 100,000 copies; a popular introductory text on the calculus (a topic that he introduced into the curriculum at Battersea); and the first volume of what was intended to be a multi-part 'Mathematics for Working Men' (1856). His textbooks displayed his strong desire to demonstrate the usefulness of mathematical and scientific knowledge. He fought hard to establish teaching as a profession and to acquire status for it. To these ends he founded in 1853 the 'Educational Expositor', a periodical for teachers and all interested in education, and also became president of the newly created United Association of Teachers. His 'Philosophy of Education' (1854) reached a third edition by 1860 and was also published in the USA. This book attempted to provide a balance of theory and practice in education. It shows Tate's debt to Francis Bacon, Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi (1746-1827), and, above all, John Locke, and also his acceptance of the then fashionable faculty psychology, by which the various cognitive faculties could be cultivated by being exercised on appropriate subjects within the curriculum. Its original contributions relate to the debate on 'method' in education, to an understanding of children's cognitive development, and to discussion of the qualifications of schoolteachers in relation to their professional duties. 
Tate also did valuable work as a mathematician and scientist. He collaborated much with the noted engineer Sir William Fairbairn, for example in performing mathematical calculations required in the planning of the Britannia and Conwy bridges. Together they published several joint papers on topics related to engineering problems, and presented these to the Royal Society and the British Association for the Advancement of Science. In addition Tate developed several of his own instruments and mechanisms, including 'Tate's double-piston air pump'. 
In 1855 Frederick Temple resigned his position at Kneller Hall after much criticism and inadequate government support, and the college was closed. In the following year Temple wrote to the committee of council on education to request a pension for Tate, whose health was in a poor state, and told it that: 'as an author and teacher he must be considered to stand quite at the head of his profession... It would be difficult to find any man who in proportion to his opportunities has done so much for education in this country. ('Minutes', 32-3)' Within three weeks Tate was awarded a pension of $120 per annum, and effectively his career as an educator was at an end. 
Tate married twice but the last thirty years of his life are shrouded in obscurity. He died at his home, 51 Catherine Street, Liverpool, at the age of nearly eighty-one, on 18 February 1888, and was buried in Highgate cemetery, Middlesex. He was survived by his second wife, Lavinia, and three children, one of whom, George Tate, was an analytical chemist. 


@@@@@


doc= 26988


Tate, William (1748-1806), portrait painter, was born in Liverpool in September 1748, and was the brother of the Liverpool merchant and amateur painter Richard Tate. He attended a school at Woolton, near Liverpool. The painter Joseph Wright lodged with Richard Tate in 1769 and shortly thereafter William became his pupil. He was in London 'c'.1771-2 and exhibited at the Society of Artists between 1771 and 1791; he was elected a fellow in 1773. Tate was in Manchester in 1773 but had returned to Liverpool by 1774, when he exhibited at the first art exhibition organized by the Society of Artists in Liverpool and where he showed two portraits and two studies in black chalk of Venus. He seems to have remained in Liverpool for the next couple of years, as he exhibited at the Royal Academy from Liverpool in 1776, but in the following year from 1 Red Lion Square, London. 
On 31 March 1777 Tate entered the Royal Academy Schools, where he gave his age as twenty-eight last September. From 1778 until 1782 he gave his address as 11 Craven Street, Wright's London address when exhibiting. However, like Wright, Tate seems to have quarrelled with the academy, for in April 1787 Wright wrote to a mutual acquaintance: 'My ingenious & very worthy friend Tate, whom you know, has not for several years past, owing to some ill treatment he met wth at The Academy exhibited any pictures, by wch omission he finds himself lost to the world and neglected. (Nicolson, 138)' Although Tate exhibited only intermittently at the academy, he showed at both the Society of Artists and at the exhibitions held by the various Liverpool societies in Liverpool in 1784 and 1787. 
Tate was evidently well regarded in Liverpool, to where he seems to have returned, as one of the seven portraits he showed in 1784 was hung in a prestigious position next to a portrait by Reynolds. He received commissions from prominent Liverpool families including Daniel Daulby, a member of a brewing family. Daulby sat to Tate, as did both his first and second wives, Elizabeth Knowles and Margaret, sister of the collector William Roscoe (all Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool). Tate evidently fared better in the north, possibly owing to his brother's connections, as by 1787 Wright was able to say of his friend's situation 'he is now advantagiously fixed at Manchester where he is encouraged & respected equal to his wishes' (Nicolson, 138). Tate's relationship with Wright was both professional and personal. After Wright's death in 1797 Tate completed a number of his portraits that had been left unfinished; he also owned a number of oil paintings and watercolour studies by Wright, which he bequeathed to members of his family. 
Tate moved to the fashionable spa resort of Bath in January 1804, where he died on 2 June 1806, leaving a widow Ann. The Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, has a number of his portraits. 


@@@@@


doc= 26989


Tate, Zouch (1606-1650), politician, was born in March 1606 at Delapre, Northamptonshire, the eldest son of Sir William Tate ('b'. before 1560, died 1617) and his wife, Elizabeth Zouch (died 1617), daughter of Edward, eleventh Baron Zouche of Harringworth, Northamptonshire, president of the council in the marches of Wales, warden of the Cinque Ports, and a director of the Virginia Company. Like his father and uncle, the antiquary Francis Tate, he studied at Oxford, matriculating from Trinity College in 1621, and like them entered the Middle Temple, in 1625; in 1623 he had studied French during a tour of France. Like his father, and his grandfather Bartholomew Tate, he served as justice of the peace in Northamptonshire. In addition to the family estate at Delapre, just south of Northampton, granted to his grandfather in 1590 by Elizabeth I and valued at $1500 per annum, he owned several other properties including two manors in Northamptonshire and one in Warwickshire, and was coheir to three manors in Hampshire. 
Tate was elected MP for Northampton in April 1640 and in November 1640, again emulating his father (MP for the county in 1614, and for Corfe Castle in 1593) and uncle Francis (MP in 1601). With the outbreak of civil war he appears to have been among those parliamentarians more committed to pursuing military victory against the king, and supported the creation of the Anglo-Scottish executive committee of both kingdoms in 1644. In March 1644 he favoured the appointment of the earl of Manchester as lieutenant-general and Lord Robartes as field marshal, and that same year chaired a committee concerned with the composition of parliament's principal field army, under the earl of Essex. By November his committee had been allocated the unenviable task of investigating the charges and counter-charges of misconduct between the earl of Manchester, general of the eastern association, and Oliver Cromwell, his lieutenant-general. As the Commons braced itself to debate the issue on 9 December, however, Tate opened with a speech which sought to avoid laying blame, asserted that the 'chief causes of our division are pride and covetousness' (Kaplan, 87), and urged that quarrels be sunk in a general ban on the wartime holding of offices in parliament's gift by members of either house. Appealing to his colleagues' sense of the righteousness of a cause greater than factional differences, his call was generally welcomed and soon embodied in the self-denying ordinance. The measure coincided with the reorganization of parliament's armies associated with the birth of the New Model Army, and Tate's committee took on the assessment of officers for the new force. 
While serving as a peacemaker for political and military unity, however, Tate held divisive views on religion. A lay member of the Westminster assembly, at some point he joined its grand committee, and was recognized by the Scottish minister Robert Baillie as one of the more inflexible supporters of strict presbyterian settlement for the Church of England. He vigorously opposed an October 1644 proposal by Henry Vane the younger and Oliver St John to extend toleration to Independents and co-operated with Baillie in 1646 in an unsuccessful bid to block the imposition of lay commissioners upon the English church, a move which Baillie and his allies saw as a dilution of plans for a full presbyterian system. In early 1647 he supported efforts to promote conformity to the planned national church, not least within the parliamentary armies, and on 7 April 1647 was appointed to the Derby House committee, effectively a parliamentarian executive, dominated by political presbyterians, and set for collision with the New Model Army. Tate's presbyterian intolerance, combined with his vocal opposition to the army's 'remonstrance' of November 1648 made him an obvious candidate for exclusion from the Long Parliament at Pride's Purge in December 1648. 
Tate had married Catherine ('c'.1607-1700), daughter of Sir Giles Allington of Horseheath, Cambridgeshire, and granddaughter of Thomas Cecil, earl of Exeter, making him a relative by marriage of the MPs Sir Robert Crane and Sir Thomas Fanshawe. The Tates had three sons: William (died 1695), heir to Delapre, who married Mary (died 1699), daughter of James Stedman, MP for Chippenham, in 1656; Sir John Tate (died 1692), who became recorder of London; and Zouch (died 1683), a soldier who died defending Tangier. The Tates' daughters were Elizabeth, and Catherine who married John Carew of Somerset. Zouch Tate died in December 1650 and was buried at Hardingstone church, near Delapre, beside his parents. 


@@@@@


doc= 26990


Tatham, Charles Heathcote (1772-1842), architect and designer, was born on 8 February 1772 in Duke Street, Westminster, the youngest of the five surviving sons of the thirteen children of Ralph Tatham (1732-1779) of Stockton-on-Tees, co. Durham, and Elizabeth Bloxham (1739-1809), daughter of Jabez Bloxham, a wealthy wholesale hosier and property owner in Cateaton Street, Cheapside. On her marriage on 14 March 1761 Elizabeth brought her husband a considerable dowry with which, from 1772, he farmed and bred horses, unsuccessfully, at Havering Park, Havering atte Bower, Essex. He then became private secretary to Captain (later Admiral Lord) Rodney, a family friend, but died suddenly in London, of cholera, aged forty-seven, while on his way to join ship at Portsmouth. 
Tatham was educated at Louth grammar school, Lincolnshire, under Revd John Emeris, where his proficiency in the classics led to persuasion by his uncle the Anglican divine Dr Richard Shepherd to adopt the church as a vocation. Tatham was averse to the idea, and developed instead an interest in the fine arts, particularly drawing. On returning to London in 1788, at the age of sixteen, Tatham was unsettled; he worked briefly in a timber merchant's counting house, learned drawing under John Landseer, made drawings for his mother's uncle Mr Butler, a coach-maker who built the state coach (designed by Sir William Chambers and S. Cipriani in 1760), and learned mathematics near Fleet Street. At the instance of another relation of his mother's, John Linnell, the furniture maker and interior designer, Tatham became a clerk to Samuel Pepys Cockerell (1753-1827), architect and surveyor, in Stratton Street, Piccadilly. Set to menial tasks without wages or proper accommodation, his training comprised copying leases for the Pulteney estate. Although articled initially for three years, Tatham's unbearable situation caused him to escape after one year, his flight precipitated by the humiliation of having to wait at dinner upon Warren Hastings. After returning to his mother's home at Bridge Street, Westminster, he spent a year copying the architectural orders from Sir William Chambers's 'Treatise' (1759; rev. 3rd edn, 1791) and French ornament from Jean Le Pautre's 'Oeuvres d'architecture' (1652). Linnell showed Tatham's drawings to Henry Holland, architect to the prince of Wales, whereupon Holland immediately took Tatham, aged almost nineteen, into his office as a trainee draughtsman. Holland was then engaged on additions and alterations to Carlton House, Pall Mall, for the prince of Wales, and to Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire, for Francis, fifth duke of Bedford. Assisting Holland's draughtsmen, including Dominique Daguerre, Jean Pierre Theodore Trecourt, John Jagger, and David Hartley, Tatham contributed to both these commissions. In 1791-4, for Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Holland rebuilt the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, where Tatham designed and drew at large all the ornamental decorations for the royal boxes and the proscenium, his cartoons being pricked off and painted in fresco by Charles Catton the younger. 
The declaration of war by France on 1 February 1793 made the exchange of ideas and the supply of French furnishings, so admired by the prince of Wales, increasingly difficult to organize. Despite Tatham's growing value in his office, Holland encouraged his resolve to go to Italy, to their mutual benefit. Knowing his master's requirements and to mitigate the indefinite loss of French sources, Tatham agreed to act as Holland's direct agent in Rome by supplying designs, casts of antiquities, and original pieces, simultaneously advancing his architectural studies at the source of neo-classical activity and increasing his own prospects of patronage. Linnell's offer of $100, later withdrawn, was replaced by $100 from John Birch, surgeon-extraordinary to George III and brother to Ann Birch, his mother's closest friend. To this Holland added an allowance of $60 a year for two years. 
Tatham sailed for Leghorn in May 1794, with the architect and painter Joseph Gandy. After travelling via Siena, they arrived in Rome in July. Through the offices of the wealthy dealer and painter in Rome, Thomas Jenkins, Tatham moved into apartments in the via Barberini, which he was to occupy throughout his two-year stay. While sketching at the Villa Borghese, he met Mario Asprucci the younger, architect to Prince Marcantonio Borghese, and Don Isodoro Velasquez, an exhibitioner from the academy at Madrid; all three exchanged drawings and tracings and became firm friends. Tatham's letters of introduction included one from the architect Joseph Bonomi to his brother Giovanni Carlo Bonomi (1743-1801), professor of theology at the college of 'propaganda fide', Rome, who almost succeeded in converting Tatham to Roman Catholicism and for whom Tatham retained a lifelong admiration. At the home near Trinita dei Monti of the historical painter Angelica Kauffmann (aunt of Mrs Joseph Bonomi) and her husband, Antonio Zucchi, Tatham was introduced by the Venetian painter Giuseppe Bossi to the celebrated sculptor Antonio Canova, with whom he also became close friends. 
By his elder brother John, who spent much time in Italy on account of his health, Tatham was introduced to Prince Ernest, duke of Cumberland, and Prince Augustus, duke of Sussex, thereby gaining an entree into the highest social circles and the latest archaeological excavations. In partnership with the Irish painter Robert Fagan and others, Prince Augustus had opened several sites outside Rome, notably at Laurentium, of which Tatham subsequently published details of finds. Visiting museums (particularly the Vatican), villas (notably Hadrian's), baths, gardens, and churches both in the capital and its vicinity, Tatham made drawings, many in the linear style which later characterized his publications. During one of his many visits to Rome, Tatham met the eccentric and wealthy collector Frederick Hervey, fourth earl of Bristol and bishop of Derry (1730-1803), who intended building at his family seat, Ickworth, Suffolk, a neo-classical version of his Irish house, Ballyscullion, co. Londonderry, to house his immense art collections. Late in 1794 he invited Tatham to draw up plans and gave every indication of awarding him the commission. His designs were not accepted, however, and the building was executed by Francis Sandys to a design, unmentioned by Tatham, by Asprucci. Although the project drew attention to his name (and Holland exhorted him continually to make the most of his connections), the experience left Tatham with an ambivalence towards aristocratic patronage and architectural competitions which he was never to lose. 
In his studies of furniture, Tatham considered the Italian bronze manufacturers superior to the French, and supervised the casting of candlesticks and other pieces, many destined for Carlton House, mostly to his own designs. He became an honorary member of the Accademia Clementina at Bologna on 29 March 1795 and a month later presented a design for a sculpture gallery, whose interiors prefigured that at Castle Howard. In 1796 he became a member of the Accademia di San Luca at Rome, where he submitted a design for a hunting-lodge. 
By November 1795 Tatham's projected two-year visit was more than half over. Hoping to visit Athens, he set off for Naples and visited 'en route' Cardinal Borgia's museum, where, as at the Vatican, he was impressed by the unrestored Egyptian antiquities. In Naples he was entertained by the British minister, Sir William Hamilton, who obtained for him a licence to view antiquities, and Lady Hamilton, whose post-prandial performance of her 'Attitudes' sealed Tatham's opinion of her moral character, and he was introduced to the German artist Wilhelm Tischbein, Goethe's companion. Diminishing funds prevented Tatham's continuing to Athens and, having seen the Farnese 'Hercules' and all the museums, including the Portici, and climbed Vesuvius, he returned, in January 1796, to Rome. 
In mid-1796 Tatham learned from Holland of the deaths of Jagger and Linnell, Trecourt's terminal illness, and his master's reduced activity owing to increasing ill health. In the face of the advancing French, potential patrons had returned to Britain and the acquisition of fragments was impossible, and Tatham left Rome on 9 July 1796. He reached Venice by 13 July and then travelled, drawing all the way, via Prague, Dresden, and Berlin and Potsdam, before arriving back in England in September. 
Tatham first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1797, the earliest of fifty-three designs he was to exhibit there up to 1836. Except for a brief encounter in Italy with Frederick Howard, fifth earl of Carlisle, which was to prove fruitful, he had been singularly unsuccessful on his tour in attracting patronage, preferring to await what 'time and convenience may bring about' (V&A, D.1479-1551-1898, fol. 18). Recognizing 'that accurate Drawings upon the spot, might turn to good account in a publication' (ibid.), he spent two years working on the 102 plates showing the best examples from Holland's collection, and published in 1799 'Etchings of ancient ornamental architecture drawn from the originals in Rome and other parts of Italy during the years 1795 and 1796'. Of the 210 subscribers, almost a third were architects and craftsmen. The linear style which in Italy had been an expedient of time now became one of cost to ensure wide availability: his use of 'chaste outline' reflected the simplicity he advocated in providing 'a true picture of the original' (ibid., fol. 8). 
Tatham aimed to make accessible 'an accurate delineation of the best approved specimens' of antique ornament, 'a map to the study of Nature', enabling designers to exercise their genius and imagination, but 'an imagination corrected by judgement' ('Etchings of Ancient Ornamental Architecture', 3, 6). More polemically, he criticized the otherwise 'matchless' Piranesi and, by implication, Robert Adam as undiscriminating classicists for having used decoration in a highly subjective way that showed a dangerous indifference to the integrity of classical sources. A second edition of 'Etchings' also appeared in a German translation in Weimar, Goethe's city, in 1805, and a third in London in 1810. Some remaining pieces were published as 'Fragments of Grecian and Roman Architectural Ornaments' in 1806, by which time the title had significantly been altered, and both works were republished in a single volume in 1826. Tatham's drawings had first informed Holland's work at Southill House, Bedfordshire, remodelled 1796-1800 for Samuel Whitbread (1764-1816), but the published plates soon influenced the work of others, notably the firm in which Tatham's brother Thomas was a partner, Marsh and Tatham (later Marsh, Tatham and Bailey), and the firm of Vuillamy. 
Tatham's first independent commission was for an interior at Stoke Edith, Herefordshire, for the Hon. Edward Foley MP, together with a cottage and park gate. In an unusual exploded drawing dated September 1800 Tatham placed sofas facing each other and at right angles to the fireplace, providing one of the earliest instances of such an informal arrangement in England. For Foley he also made a survey of Great Malvern priory church, Worcestershire, and gave an estimate for repairs in 1802. After Foley's death in 1803 ended hopes of further patronage, Tatham designed a monument to him, executed by Robert Bloor, in Stoke Edith church, Herefordshire. A more significant commission, for the earl of Carlisle at Castle Howard, Yorkshire, was the fitting up in 1800-01 of Sir Thomas Robinson's palladian west wing of 1753-9 as a sculpture gallery and museum. Other galleries were completed in 1811-12. The groined coving, continuous arch mouldings, and rooms, alternately cubes and double cubes, were influential on gallery design, notably on John Soane's Dulwich Picture Gallery, London (1811-14). Tatham published 'The Gallery at Castle Howard' and 'Representations of a Greek Vase' in 1811 and also 'The Mausoleum at Castle Howard' (designed 1729-36 by Nicholas Hawksmoor) in 1812. He also carried out work for the earl at Naworth Castle, Cumberland. 
On 23 October 1801 Tatham married Harriet (1780-1834), daughter of William Williams, a button-maker, of 103 St Martin's Lane, London, at the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields (Harriet's elder sister had died in 1799 after only a year of marriage to Tatham's elder brother Henry). They moved soon afterwards to a house designed by Tatham at 35 Alpha Road, St John's Wood, then still in the country. The house became a focus of artistic activity: visitors included William Blake, Benjamin Robert Haydon, and Samuel Palmer. Charles and Harriet had four sons and six daughters: Caroline (1804-1842); Frederick (1805-1878), who became a painter and sculptor and a close friend of Blake; Arthur (1808-1874), for over forty years rector of Broadoak and Boconoc, Cornwall, and prebendary of Exeter Cathedral; Julia (1811-1881), who married George Richmond, the portrait painter; Edmund ('b'. 1822) and Robert-Bristow (1824-1881), both of whom emigrated to Natal in 1850; Harriet; and Maria, Augusta, and Georgiana, all three of whom married in the 1840s. 
In 1799 Tatham submitted designs to the Treasury for a national monument in commemoration of recent naval victories. Having heard nothing by 1802, he published the designs that year, dedicating them to the earl of Carlisle. In his only known excursions into designing medals Tatham was responsible for the Rumford medal of the Royal Society of 1802 and the board of agriculture medal for Francis, fifth duke of Bedford (1765-1802), struck between 1803 and 1805. In 'Designs for Ornamental Plate' (1806) he decried the prevalence in metalwork of 'light and insignificant forms' devoid of 'good Ornament' and recommended instead 'Massiveness' as 'the principal characteristic of good Plate' ('Designs for Ornamental Plate', preface). From Tatham's drawing of the Barberini candelabrum (the basis of pl. 16 to the 'Designs') William Pitts made an attenuated silver-gilt candelabrum for the second Earl Spencer at Althorp in 1800, which, together with the mahogany candelabrum for Carlton House (Kenwood House, London) and a pair of candelabra cast in bronze (Basildon Park, Berkshire), demonstrate precisely those transpositions of scale, medium, and form advocated by Tatham. 
Tatham's architectural work to 1820, much of which has been either radically altered or destroyed, comprised mainly alterations, both internal and external, and additions, such as cottages, garden buildings, park gates, and entrance lodges, at Cheshunt Nunnery, Hertfordshire ('c'.1802), for William Butt; Wilton Park, Wiltshire (1803-5; dem. 1967), characterized by severe, sharp-edged, almost abstract geometrical blocks, with minimal decoration, for James Dupre, and Dropmore, Buckinghamshire ('c'.1806-9), equally uncompromising for Lady Greville; Balgowan ('c'.1806), for Colonel Thomas Graham (later Lord Lynedoch), and Ochtertyre, Perthshire, including a Gothic mausoleum (1809), for Sir Patrick Murray; Trentham Park, Staffordshire (1807-8), for the second marquess of Stafford; Althorp, Northamptonshire (1809), for Earl Spencer; and Cowsfield Wiltshire (1814; dem.), for Sir Arthur Paget. Houses for which he was entirely responsible seem few: Cowdray Lodge (now Cowdray Park), Sussex ('c'.1800; rebuilt 1876), for W. S. Poyntz; Roche Court ('c'.1805) for Francis T. Egerton and Broxmore House ('c'.1810; dem.), Wiltshire, for R. Bristow; Lynedoch Lodge, Perthshire (1807-9; dem.), for Colonel Thomas Graham; and Hennerton House, Berkshire ('c'.1817; partly dem; later additions), in which elliptical arches are the principal motif, for C. F. Johnson. In London he added to Cleveland House a new, top-lit west picture gallery, the west front to St James's Park, and a tetrastyle Doric portico (1803-6; dem. 1840) for the second marquess of Stafford. For the earl of Carlisle he designed a library ('c'.1805) at 12 Grosvenor Place. He designed a picture gallery (1807) for the first Lord Yarborough at Brocklesby Park, Lincolnshire, and published 'The Gallery at Brocklesby' in 1811. His grim mausoleum (1807-8) at Trentham, combining Egyptian pylon and stepped pyramid from Halicarnassus, remains his most extreme statement of severe primitivism and austere monumentalism. 
In 1819 Tatham was accused of negligence concerning repairs at Castle Howard, and although the arbitrator found in his favour, he incurred great expense. On several other occasions he was involved in litigation, and the consequent desertion by his wealthy and noble patrons and his refusal to work for builders led ultimately to the ruin of his practice. Between 1820 and 1836, when his architectural career ended, Tatham's work comprised interior decorations in a sumptuous neo-classical style for the fourth earl of Albemarle at Quidenham Hall, Norfolk ('c'.1820), and in Hampshire a porticoed house, Rookesbury (1821-5), which was adversely criticized by C. R. Cockerell as severe and idiosyncratic, for the Revd W. Garnier, alterations and additions for William Sloane-Stanley at Paultons (1826-8; dem. 1955), and a rectory at Morestead (1835-6). He also wrote the letterpress for John Coney's 'Ancient Cathedrals' (1829-31). Of his many unexecuted designs one, dated 1827, for the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, and another for 'A Mansion for the Duke of Wellington' demonstrate the extent of Tatham's talent and aspirations. 
On 13 January 1834 Tatham's wife Harriet died, aged fifty-four; she was buried in Brompton cemetery. His house and valuable collection were sold; much of the latter went to Sir John Soane's Museum, where it has since remained. His final submission to the Royal Academy, in 1836, was an earlier design for a picture gallery at Bridgewater House, St James's. The following year the duchess of Sutherland, the Rt Hon. Thomas Grenville, and other friends secured for Tatham, then sixty-five, the post of warden of Trinity Hospital, Greenwich. That year he drew up plans to renovate the hospital's garden and chapel, and made a drawing of what he conjectured to have been the original appearance of the tomb of Henry Howard, first earl of Northampton, the hospital's founder. Visitors were 'much struck by the pleasing tranquillity' which pervaded the hospital under Tatham's wardenship (Mercers' Company, C. H. Tatham MS 1/116, 8). He published two addresses 'given to the aged poor men' of Trinity Hospital in 1837 and 1841. Tatham died there, probably from the dyspepsia from which he suffered all his life, on 10 April 1842, aged seventy-one, having ended his days happily and usefully, and was buried in the hospital chapel. 'To him', wrote Joseph Gwilt in 1853, 'perhaps more than any other person, may be attributed the rise of the Anglo-Greek style which still prevails' (Papworth, 3.104). 


@@@@@


doc= 26991


Tatham, Edward (bap. 1749, d. 1834), college head, was born at Milbeck, Dent, in the parish of Sedbergh, West Riding of Yorkshire, and baptized at Dent on 1 October 1749. When he went up to Oxford in 1769 his father, James Tatham of Sedbergh, was described as a plebeian, but when he dedicated his first theological book to him in 1780 Edward described him as a gentleman and explained he sought not an illustrious name but 'a more humble patron; yet one whom I esteem the highest honour to address' (E. Tatham, 'Twelve Discourses'). He was educated at Sedbergh School by Dr Bateman, whose Greek scholarship he later praised highly. Although admitted to Magdalene College, Cambridge, on 11 May 1767, he did not take up residence and matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 21 June 1769. He graduated BA in 1772, and proceeded MA in 1776, BD in 1783, and DD in 1787. He was made a deacon in 1776 and ordained priest in 1778. 
After a first curacy served at Banbury and an early publication proposing architectural improvements in Oxford, Tatham was elected on 27 December 1781 to one of the Yorkshire fellowships at Lincoln College, Oxford; he became rector of the college on 15 March 1792, and remained so until his death forty-two years later, enjoying during this period the rectory of Twyford, Buckinghamshire, and the right of residence at the rectory house at Combe, Oxfordshire, which went with the job. In 1801 he married Elizabeth Cook (died 1847), the wealthy daughter of a Cheltenham builder, John Cook. Both her financial acumen and her temper matched Tatham's and public arguments between them were common; they had no children. They kept separate bank accounts and, when she died in 1847, Mrs Tatham left a large fortune to her sister. In 1829 Tatham was appointed rector of Whitchurch, Shropshire, but he continued to reside in Oxfordshire. 
In 1789 Tatham gave the Bampton lectures and their publication as 'The Chart and Scale of Truth by which to Find the Cause of Error', (2 vols., 1790) constitutes his major work. This is the great exposition of the philosophy which informed his whole academic life and underlay the position he took in a series of controversies with his academic colleagues. In the lectures he mounted a major critique on Aristotelian logic, denouncing 'the falsehood and absurdity of the Aristotelian Dialectic' ('Chart and Scale of Truth', 1.338). In its place he advocated the modern, inductive logic of Francis Bacon, whom he venerated as 'this great man, who has been justly styled the 'Father of Philosophers'' ('A Letter to the... Dean of Christ Church', 1807, 21). Aristotle he characterized as 'that uncircumcized and unbaptised Philistine of the Schools' (Tatham, 'An Address to the Members of Convocation at Large, on the Proposed Statute on Examination', 1807). When Cyril Jackson, dean of Christ Church, introduced a series of reforms at Oxford leading to a new public examination, Tatham was a fierce critic of the centrality of Aristotelian logic in the scheme and the neglect of modern, scientific studies: 'the youth of this University are still to bow the head and to bend the knee to the Old Pagan Idol of the Schools!!!' ('A Second Address to Convocation', 1807, 4). He accused Oxford of neglecting the study of mathematics and natural science because Bacon and Newton had been Cambridge men, and he dared to suggest that in many respects Cambridge was the superior university. The Oxford syllabus set out in the new statute was ''radically' and 'fundamentally' bad; because the Discipline and Studies which it enjoins are not adapted to the Advancement of sound and useful science in the present age' ('A Fifth Address', 1808, 3). 
Politically Tatham was a keen ally of Burke. His 'Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke on Politics' are dated 2 April 1791 and welcomed Burke's 'Reflections' before it was fashionable to do so. He mounted a staunch defence of the established constitution in church and state and the social hierarchy. He denounced dissenters in general and Joseph Priestley in particular, taking a side-swipe at William Paley as 'that unauthorized compiler' along the way ('Letters to Burke', 47). When invited to join a celebration of the second anniversary of the French Revolution he published his acerbic refusal in a letter 'To the Stewards of the Anniversary of the French Revolution', of 23 June 1791. In the same year in his 'Letters to Dissenters' Tatham defended the 'Church and King' mob who wrecked Priestley's house in Birmingham. In 1810 he explained 'I like the Papists, I confess, better than the Dissenters... because they are friends to kingly government and because I think them less dangerous to the Constitution' ('A New Address to the Free and Independent Members of Convocation', 1810, 25). But, like Burke, though an enemy to revolution, Tatham was not a complete reactionary: 'I am neither a Democrat, nor Aristocrat, but a friend of Monarchy under just restraint: a Representation in Parliament according to the Property of the Nation, and... a new regulation of the Poor Laws... might produce such a salutary change and renovation in the political economy and government of these kingdoms, without the shock of a Revolution' ('An Address to... Lord Grenville', 1811, 34). 
As an advocate of modern studies, Tatham took a keen interest in economics and wrote a number of tracts on war finances, the national debt, currency, and taxation. He strongly advocated the printing of more paper money to help the economy expand and, in 1820, supported Thomas Attwood's ideas on currency reform. He argued that money 'is become the most critical and important engine in every state' and that lack of it had led to the French Revolution ('On the Scarcity of Money', 1819, 46). In 1811 he claimed to have been the inventor of income tax, having advocated such a tax on property in his 'Third Letter to William Pitt' of 9 December 1797. 
The positions which Tatham adopted were firmly based on consistent and clearly argued principles, but there is little doubt that he was a cantankerous man who enjoyed controversy. A Yorkshireman of humble origins who never lost his northern accent, he was disputing with the other fellows of Lincoln long before he was elected rector. As rector he engaged in quarrels with the other heads of houses, the Hebdomadal board and convocation. On a national level he entered fully into economic debates on taxation, currency, and the reform of the poor law. At home he argued with his wife and, after 1815 when he largely withdrew from Oxford to live at the rectory house at Combe as a pig farmer, he became embroiled in disputes with curates and parishioners. As he informed convocation in 1807, 'I am a plain man, blunt in my manner, and abrupt in my expression; incapable of disguising my sentiments, and apt to give them just as they arise upon every subject, whatever they may be' ('Address to the Members of Convocation', 17). 
Tatham died at Combe rectory on 24 April 1834 after suffering a paralytic stroke. He was buried in the vestry of All Saints' Church, Oxford. He had told Timothy Miller, parish clerk of All Saints', head porter of Lincoln, and one of his few friends, that he wished his tomb to be used as the vestry table and bread for the poor to be distributed from it each Sunday. 


@@@@@


doc= 26992


Tatham, John (fl. 1632-1664), playwright, was probably born about 1612, though nothing is known about his place of birth or parentage. His first play, a pastoral drama called 'Love Crowns the End', was published in 1640 in his volume of verse entitled 'The Fancies Theater' (reissued as 'The Mirrour of Fancies' in 1657), but it had been 'acted by the scholars of Bingham, in the county of Nottingham in 1632' ('Dramatic Works', 3). He probably saw military service on the royalist side during the civil war under Lord Carnarvon, and his writings show a staunch devotion to the king's cause. (They also show an immoderate dislike of Scotland and the Scots.) A second play, called 'The Distracted State', was published in 1650 (dated 1651). According to the title-page it was written in 1641, but this may well be a ruse to distract attention from the evident contemporary relevance of its royalist story. The Sicilian King Evander has been deposed in a civil war; a series of usurpers contend for power until the supposedly dead king reappears. It seems that neither 'The Distracted State' nor Tatham's subsequent satirical comedy 'The Scots Figgaries' (1652) was ever performed. But his play 'The Rump, or, The Mirrour of the Late Times' achieved widespread notoriety with its satire of actual republican politicians. 'Acted Many Times with Great Applause, at the Private House in Dorset-Court' (title-page), it was first staged in June 1660, a month after the king's return, and repeated at Oxford in July 1661. Printed in autumn 1660 it was expanded and went through three further editions in 1661. Tatham's political satire was given a new lease of life in the exclusion crisis when 'The Rump' was plagiarized by Aphra Behn in 1681 for her play 'The Roundheads'. Also attributed to Tatham, though doubtfully, is a brief play called 'Knavery in All Trades, or, The Coffee-House' (1664), which was 'Acted in the Christmas Holidays by several Apprentices with great Applause' (title-page). Besides these plays Tatham published a volume principally consisting of love poems, 'Ostella, or, The Faction of Love and Beauty Reconcil'd' (1650). 'Daphnes, a Pastorall' was printed in 1651, but only the title-page survives. 
Tatham found his widest and most appreciative audience with the pageants which he wrote annually from 1657 to 1664 for the lord mayor of London. Staged partly on land and partly on the river most were celebrations of the good government and commercial success of the City: the 1659 pageant staged by the Grocers' Company includes appreciative speeches from a European, an Egyptian, and a Persian, while the 1661 celebration features the allegorical figures of Justice and Mercy. In July 1660 the City welcomed the return of Charles II with Tatham's spectacular pageant called 'Londons Glory Represented by Time, Truth, and Fame'. The disappearance of Tatham from view after 1664 has prompted speculation that he died in the plague of 1665 or in the great fire of 1666. 


@@@@@


doc= 26993


Tatham, William (1752-1819), geographer and engineer, was born on 13 April 1752 at Hutton in the Forest, Cumberland, the eldest son of Sandford Tatham (1721/2-1777), rector of Hutton and vicar of Appleby, and his wife, daughter of Henry Marsden of Gisborne Hall, Yorkshire. He had one sister and three brothers, one of whom, Charlie, was to help him in his schemes in adult life. William was brought up in Lancaster in the house of his maternal grandmother until her death in 1760. His family was wealthy and well connected, being related to the earl of Lonsdale; but Tatham seems to have had a rift with his family, as in 1769 he was sent to America to seek his fortune. He became a clerk with Carter and Trent, merchants on the James River, Virginia. Early in 1776 he moved to the Watauga settlement in the Tennessee country, where he became involved in politics and from 1776 to 1781 fought intermittently in the War of Independence on the American side, further estranging himself from his family. He saw action in several parts of the country, including the south-west frontier where he was involved in several campaigns against the Cherokee and Creek peoples, who were allies of the British in the war. Between campaigns he continued his civilian activities: in 1778 he was trading in Virginia, and in 1780 he and Colonel John Todd of Kentucky prepared a 'History of the western country' of which the manuscript has been lost. 
By 1781 Tatham had returned to civilian life and, after trading as a merchant in Philadelphia and visiting Havana, he began to study law, being called to the bar of Virginia on 24 March 1784. In 1786 he helped establish the settlement of Lamberton, near Fayetteville, North Carolina. In 1787 he was elected to represent Robeson county in the state legislature of North Carolina, which body elected him lieutenant-colonel of militia. In 1788 he visited England, having been reconciled with his family, but returned to Virginia in 1789 where he was employed by the state government to furnish the war office with information about the south-west frontier. He was given accommodation at the public expense and had free access to the archives of state. In 1791 he published 'A Topographical Analysis of the Commonwealth of Virginia' and that year he was authorized by the legislature of Virginia to raise by lottery money to complete his geographical survey of the state, which was to be part of a general topographical survey of the whole of America. In 1792 he returned to the Tennessee country where he practised law, mapped the region, and gathered material for its history. In 1796 he went to Spain as American envoy, hoping to use the geographical information and historic maps which he had collected to settle disputes which had arisen on the frontiers of Florida; but the Spanish authorities ordered him to leave, angered by his interference in the country's internal affairs. 
Tatham arrived in England on 16 August 1796 and shortly afterwards began to publish in periodicals and pamphlets on agriculture, the construction of canals, and other engineering projects. In 1801 he was appointed superintendent of the London docks at Wapping, where he took charge of the office of works, but he left in July that year, 'somewhat mortified by the idea of checking his own ideas in favour of those of others' ('Annual Biography', 157). While in England he had numerous contacts with the Society of Arts, and his relationship with the society epitomizes his character. He joined in 1802 after corresponding earlier with the society on the subject of the growing of hemp in Canada. A self-proclaimed authority on the matter, despite never having been to Canada, he successfully reshaped the system of bounties offered by the society to foster hemp growing. He became very active on committees and had grand schemes for admitting American members; but his enthusiasm and his schemes fizzled out, and by 1804 he had contacted his old friend James Munroe, who happened to be in London, with a view to obtaining a position in the US and returned there in 1805 with a letter of recommendation to James Madison. 
Tatham was appointed commissioner for surveying the coast of North Carolina and his map of the state (1807) survives in the Library of Congress. After this he spent about five years as draughtsman and geographer in the department of state, Washington, and in 1817 Munroe secured him employment as military storekeeper at the New United States Arsenal at Richmond, Virginia. He had amassed an important collection of military models, maps, topographical descriptions, and other documents, which he offered to the United States congress, and in his offers he anticipated the importance of amassing a national library collection. At the time of his first offer in 1806 his collection contained nearly all the surveys known to have been made in America by topographical surveyors of England, France, and Spain, and he continued to collect geographical material as he moved about the country. At Richmond he turned to drink which worsened the poverty to which his restless life, estrangement from his family, and grandiose ambitions had always left him prone. He committed suicide on 22 February 1819 by stepping in front of a cannon as it was fired. He was unmarried. 
Although well enough known in Britain to warrant long death notices, Tatham rapidly fell into almost complete obscurity there, although in the United States he remained better known, not least because of his contacts with political figures of the importance of Jefferson, Madison, and Munroe. He has been hailed as the founder of the US topographical and coast surveys, because of his own maps, charts, and plans, and schemes to extend them throughout the country; of conservation in the US, because of his concern to safeguard the natural resources of the western part of the continent; and of the idea of a Library of Congress for the benefit of the nation, amassing documents and artefacts recording the nation's history. He was short of neither ideas nor energy, but it is as an 'adventurer' (Boyd, 241), rather than a 'versatile' (Herndon, 'William Tatham... American Versatile'), that he is remembered because of his failure to sustain solid achievement in any of his many fields of activity. 


@@@@@


doc= 26994


Tattam, Henry (1788-1868), Church of England clergyman and Coptic scholar, was born on 28 December 1788 at Church Farm, North Marston, Buckinghamshire, the youngest child of John Tattam ('b'. 1740?), a yeoman farmer, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Gurney ('b'. 1743?). He was tutored privately, by the Revd William Pinnock, incumbent of North Marston, who eventually encouraged him to enter the priesthood. After ordination as priest on 27 June 1819 he held curacies at Hinderclay in Suffolk (1819-21) and at Waddesdon, Buckinghamshire, before taking up an appointment as chaplain to the Episcopal church in Amsterdam. Through the influence of his elder brother, an inspector-general of customs, he was presented to the rectory of St Cuthbert's, Bedford, by the lord chancellor on 13 August 1822. He was admitted as a sizar of Christ's College, Cambridge, on 18 March 1823, but never graduated. He married Eliza Ann Platt, 'nee' Nash (1789/90-1855), widow of William Platt, at St Cuthbert's on 18 October 1830; they had no children. 
On 12 August 1831 Tattam was presented to the rectory of Great Woolstone, Buckinghamshire, by his friend and patron the eccentric miser John Camden Neild, about whom he published a memoir in 1852. He held his benefices until 1849, during which time both churches were rebuilt -- Great Woolstone in 1832-3 and St Cuthbert's in 1847 -- and a new parsonage was built at Bedford in 1843. From 1845 to 1866 Tattam was archdeacon of Bedford, but he was non-resident for much of this time as in 1849 he was presented by the crown to the living of Stanford Rivers, Essex, where he spent the rest of his life. From 1853 to 1868 he was also a chaplain-in-ordinary to the queen. In later life he took a greater interest in his studies than in his ecclesiastical duties, and as a non-resident archdeacon he lacked the commitment needed at a time of major change in the church. He also became involved in a public controversy over the dismissal of a curate, the Revd Montagu Sparrow, at Stanford Rivers, in 1858. 
Tattam's circle of friends included Dr John Lee of Hartwell, Joseph Bosworth, and George Lipscomb. He was a founder member of the Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire archaeological societies. His theological and philological interests led to an extensive 'oeuvre' of published works, beginning with his 'Helps for Devotion' (1825, reissued in 1862). He was the author of several works in Coptic and English, Latin, or Arabic, including editions of the gospels (1829), the book of 'Job' (1846), the 'New Testament' (1847), and the apostolic constitutions (1848). His 'Compendious Grammar of the Egyptian Language' was published in three parts in 1830. A second edition appeared in 1863. In 1835 he compiled a Coptic-Latin dictionary. Accompanied by his stepdaughter, Eliza Platt (1816-1877), who wrote a privately printed (2 vols., 1841) account of their tour, Tattam first visited Egypt and the Holy Land in 1838-9; he returned in 1842. On these visits he met the patriarch and secured a number of important Coptic and Syriac manuscripts for the British Library. He also published 'A Defence of the Church of England Against the Attacks of a Roman Catholic Priest' (1843) and left manuscript histories of the parishes of St Cuthbert's, Bedford, and of Biddenham. 
A diffident and modest man who was reluctant to take credit for his works, Tattam was held in high regard both for his pastoral work and preaching and for his scholarly achievements. His academic accomplishments were recognized in later life by numerous honours. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1835, and he received the degree of DD from the archbishop of Canterbury. He was also given the honorary degrees of LLD from Trinity College, Dublin, DD from Gottingen, and DPhil from Leiden. He died on 8 January 1868 at the rectory, Stanford Rivers, and was buried on the 14th in Stanford Rivers, where he is commemorated by a small brass plate in the church chancel. 


@@@@@


doc= 26995


George [ii] Tattersall (1817-1849), artist and architect, better known under the pseudonym Wildrake, was born at Hyde Park Corner on 13 June 1817 and baptized on 9 July at St James's, Westminster. He did not enter the family business, instead achieving moderate fame as an artist, publishing engravings of racehorses and illustrating Nimrod's 'Hunting Reminiscences'. As an architect based at 52 Pall Mall, London, he specialized in stables, kennels, and other sporting buildings, and was responsible for rebuilding the stables at Willesden, Essex, the new location of the Tattersalls stud farm. For a brief period in the mid-1840s he also edited the 'Sporting Magazine' and the 'New Sporting Almanack'. Shortly after a visit to the United States he married, in 1837, Helen Pritchard; they had four children. He died of brain fever at his home in Cadogan Place, London, in 1849. 
Richard Tattersall the younger's marriage was childless and control of the firm fell to his cousin Edmund [iv], son of George [i] Tattersall and Eliza Reeve. Born at his father's farm at Sculthorpe, Norfolk, Edmund was educated at Henley and Guildford grammar schools. He set himself up as an independent horse auctioneer at Newmarket before being offered a partnership in the family firm in 1851. On 3 September 1862 he married Emily Elizabeth Byers; they had at least four sons including Edmund Somerville Tattersall ['see below']. Following attendance at a cold and wet Houghton meeting at Newmarket, Edmund took ill and never again left his home at Coleherne Court, South Kensington, in the eighteen months before his death on 5 March 1898. 



@@@@@


doc= 26996


Richard [i] Tattersall (bap. 1725, d. 1795), founder of the firm, was the second son of Edmund [i] Tattersall (1686-1764), a Lancastrian farmer, and his wife, Ann Varley of Laund. He was born in the hamlet of Hurstwood, near Burnley and baptized at Burnley on 5 June 1725. Between 1730 and 1740 he was educated at Burnley grammar school, before being apprenticed to a wool-stapling friend of his father. In 1745 he opted to go to London, where he became head ostler at Beevor's Repository in St Martin's Lane. From there he moved to become stud-groom, and later possibly master of horse, for Evelyn Pierrepoint, second duke of Kingston. 
By 1766 Richard had accumulated sufficient funds to purchase a ninety-nine-year lease of property at Hyde Park Corner from Lord Grosvenor, where he set up as a horse and hound auctioneer. The business boomed, partly because of his reputation for integrity but also through his cultivation of potential clients with dinners and other hospitality; clients included members of the Jockey Club and the French royal family. In 1780 he added subscription rooms which became the site for the making and settling of bets by the higher echelons of the racing fraternity. He also ventured into thoroughbred horse ownership, most spectacularly in 1779 with the purchase for $2500 from Lord Bolingbroke of the unbeaten Highflyer, whose successful career at stud-he was champion sire twelve times-earned Richard far more than the outlay from both stud fees and commission on the sales of his offspring. Some of this money went towards the purchase and redevelopment of New Barns, a country house near Ely which he renamed Highflyer Hall. There he entertained Charles Fox, William Windham, and the prince of Wales, whose stud Tattersall sold in July 1786. Apart from a loss-making move into proprietorship of the 'Morning Post' between 1783 and 1792, Richard or Old Tatt as he was known in later years, proved to be an astute businessman and took Tattersalls to a commanding position among British bloodstock auctioneers. 
In 1756 Richard married Catherine Somerville, a granddaughter of the twelfth earl of Somerville, who in 1758 gave birth to their only son, Edmund [ii]. By 1784 the firm was advertising itself as Tattersall & son, and two years before his death, at his Hyde Park home on 21 February 1795, Richard had begun the process of transferring the control of the firm to Edmund [ii]. Most of his wealth was left to the younger Edmund, but 200 guineas and an annuity of $50 went to Richard's servant Sarah Povey as well as sums of between $500 and $2000 to her five children. The size of these legacies has led to a suspicion that some of the children, particular the one named Richard [ii] Tattersall, were fathered by Old Tatt himself; Richard [i] was buried in St George's, Hanover Square, London. Far more cultured than his father, thanks to extensive continental tours, Edmund [ii] (1758-1810), a man of good looks and charming manner, was more interested in hunting than auctioneering, though he had a solid grounding in, and understanding of, the family business. Perhaps his wisest decision was to bring his own son, Richard [iii] ['see below'] into partnership in 1806. Although he did not share his father's appetite for money making, the death of Edmund [ii], diagnosed as being from brain fever, on 23 January 1810, left his wife, Elizabeth Wilshin (died 1843), a wealthy widow; she survived him by thirty-three years. 
Of Edmund and Elizabeth's children, little is known of the daughter, Elizabeth; the youngest son, George [i] (1792-1853), managed the firm's stud farm at Dawley, near Uxbridge, after getting into financial difficulties as a farmer in Norfolk. He married Eliza Reeve of Wighton, Norfolk; they had three children, including Edmund [iv] (1816-1898). The second son, Edmund [iii] (1789-1851), a lifelong bachelor, was a partner in the family firm for over forty years but never played a prominent role. The eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 26997


Tattersall, William de Chair (bap. 1751, d. 1829), Church of England clergyman and musician, was baptized on 11 September 1751 at Charing, Kent, the second son of James Tattersall (died 1784), and his first wife, Dorothy, daughter of the Revd William de Chair and sister of the Revd Dr John de Chair, rector of Little Rissington, Gloucestershire, and a chaplain to George II. His father was successively rector of Blatchington, Sussex (1742-6), and of Charing, Kent (1746-55); curate of Egerton, also in Kent (1749-55); and rector of Streatham, Surrey (1755), and of St Paul's, Covent Garden, until his death. 
William Tattersall was admitted to Westminster School as a king's scholar in 1765; there, as an actor, his performance of Phormio in Terence's play of that name is said to have elicited David Garrick's praise. He was elected to Christ Church, Oxford, in June 1770, as head of the list of king's scholars, and having graduated BA in 1774 and MA in 1777 he was presented by his college in 1778 to the rectory of Wotton under Edge, Gloucestershire. About this time his father presented him to the sinecure rectory of Westbourne, Sussex, where he appears to have spent the remainder of his life. On 16 February 1779, at St Paul's, Covent Garden, he married Mary (died 1852), eldest daughter of George Ward of Wandsworth, Surrey. 
Tattersall officiated as chaplain to Sir Francis Buller, and in 1803 was appointed a chaplain to George III. However, his most durable contribution was musical, and consisted of new, more accessible psalm settings, which effectively united music and worship in the lives of the 'lower orders'. This formed part of 'an attempt to reform English parish church music' (Holman), which Tattersall achieved by introducing idioms of a dissenting nature into the Church of England. He adapted the 'refined and 'poetic' version of the psalms' (ibid.) by James Merrick for the use of his own congregation and then published, complete with preface, 'A version or paraphrase of the Psalms by J. Merrick, adapted to the purposes of public or private devotion' (1789), set in three parts to new and existing melodies. Encouraged by George Horne (bishop of Norwich), Richard Beadon (bishop of Gloucester), and others, Tattersall divided the psalms into stanzas and republished the work, which appeared as late as 1822. The next volume, entitled 'Improved Psalmody' (1794), also enjoyed several editions and contained tunes adapted from Handel and the old masters, as well as many new ones contributed by leading composers and organists of the day. Among these were 'his intimate friend' ('GM') Sir William Parsons and Haydn, who produced six masterful settings. Many of the contributors, including Haydn, were members of the Musical Graduates Club. The collection had a very impressive list of subscribers, including royalty; there were, after all, long-standing family connections with the highest echelon of society. A third volume, dedicated to the king, was published in 1802 and 'in deference to the tastes of George III' (Temperley), used settings based solely on Handel's sacred works. These works were a popular and influential, if not lucrative, enterprise. Only three volumes of twenty-five psalms each were issued (rather than all 150 in 6 volumes), though they were conceived with use in the home as well as the church in mind and could incorporate a range of instrumental accompaniment if an organ was not available. 
Tattersall, who was 'of a most hospitable disposition' ('GM'), died at Rectorial House, Westbourne, on 26 March 1829 ('GM'; Temperley gives Wotton under Edge on 26 May). He was survived by his wife, their two sons, James and John, and two daughters, Mary-Anne and Jane. Another son, George, had predeceased his father, leaving a son and a daughter of his own. The eldest son, James, fellow of the Royal College of Physicians and physician to the Surrey dispensary, died on 8 May 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 26998


Tatwine (d. 734), scholar and archbishop of Canterbury, is known almost entirely from Bede, who in his 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 5.23) notes that before his election to Canterbury, Tatwine had been a priest at the monastery of Briudun (Breedon on the Hill, Leicestershire), and that he was 'renowned for his devotion and wisdom and excellently instructed in the Scriptures'. Breedon, which had been founded in the 680s, was one of the great minster-churches of central Mercia, sited in a commanding position in an Iron Age hill fort, and (at a time after Tatwine's death, perhaps 'c'.800) embellished with a spectacular collection of carved friezes; the prestige of the church is reflected in the fact that one of its priests could be elected to the archiepiscopacy. Tatwine was consecrated by four bishops at Canterbury on Sunday 10 June 731. Two years later, having received his pallium from Rome, he himself ordained bishops for Lindsey and Selsey. He died on 30 July 734 and was buried at Canterbury. 
The quality of Tatwine's scholarship is clearly seen in the two works which have survived in his name: a grammar and a collection of forty metrical 'enigmata'. The grammar, properly entitled the 'Ars de partibus orationis', is an example of what has been termed an 'elementary' grammar; that is to say, its structure is modelled on the earlier grammatical treatises ('Ars maior', 'Ars minor') of Donatus in that it treats the parts of speech -- noun, pronoun, verb, adverb, participle, conjunction, preposition, and interjection -- in sequence, illustrating the inflecting parts with series of paradigms, especially of verbs (to which he also devoted an additional appendix). In compiling his grammar Tatwine drew principally on the earlier grammatical treatises of Priscian and Consentius, as well as on the late antique commentators on Donatus, such as Pompeius and Servius; the heavy use of these sources, as well as occasional use of a number of others, implies that Tatwine had at his disposal a well-stocked library. On occasion Tatwine supplemented the examples found in his sources by means of biblical quotations, especially from the psalms. The most striking feature of Tatwine's grammar is its clear exposition of grammatical categories, a feature which made it especially useful for English-speaking beginners for whom Latin was not a native language. 
The surviving manuscripts of Tatwine's 'Ars de partibus orationis' (three complete manuscripts of the late eighth century and a fragmentary one of the late ninth) were all written on the continent; but although no English manuscript of the work survives, there is no doubt that it was studied intensively in Anglo-Saxon schools, because in all four continental manuscripts Tatwine's lists of nouns are frequently accompanied by glosses in Old English, which the Carolingian scribes evidently took over from their (English) exemplars. But whatever its utility for beginners, the fact that no Carolingian grammarian shows any debt to Tatwine's grammar indicates that this utility had been superseded by the ninth century. 
Tatwine's other surviving work is a collection of forty 'enigmata' (literally 'mysteries', a term used by early Anglo-Latin authors to describe metrical riddles). These forty 'enigmata' are framed by a vast acrostic with two legends; the first letter of the first line of each of the forty poems participates in the first acrostic (SVB DENO QVATER HAEC DIVERSE ENIGMATA TORQVENS), and the last letter of each first line participates in the second (STAMINE METRORVM EXSTRVCTOR CONSERTA RETEXIT). The poems themselves, which vary from four to twelve lines in length, are concerned with both the physical aspects of Christian life (many of the 'enigmata' describe objects such as 'parchment', 'pen', 'bell', 'altar', 'paten', 'lectern') and the spiritual ('love', 'evil', 'humility', 'pride'), as well as the ways in which its profound message must be interpreted (the opening sequence of 'enigmata' treats such subjects as 'wisdom', 'faith, hope, and charity', 'the four ways of interpreting scripture', 'literature'). A few of the 'enigmata' reflect Tatwine's occupation as schoolmaster (for example, one 'enigma' treats 'prepositions which take two cases'). The diction of the poems is highly compressed, sometimes to the point of incomprehensibility, and reveals substantial familiarity with classical Latin poets, especially Virgil and Horace, as well as with the techniques of composing quantitative verse (though there are occasional infelicities in the placement of caesurae). 
It is not possible to determine when or where Tatwine composed these two literary works. According to a metrical epitaph which (presumably) adorned his tomb in Canterbury, he was at the time of his death 'worn down with the burden of old age' (Lapidge, 370-71). These words possibly imply that he was in his sixties or seventies when he died (hence that he was born 'c'.670, and was thus contemporary with Bede). It is reasonable to infer that his scholarly production belongs to an earlier phase of his life, certainly to that before his elevation to Canterbury, and may be roughly dated to the years around 700; in other words, that Tatwine's scholarship belongs to the first period of florescence of Anglo-Latin literature in late seventh-century Southumbria. 


@@@@@


doc= 26999


Taubman, Matthew (d. 1690?), poet and satirist, of whose early life nothing is known, worked as laureate for the lord mayor of London's inauguration from 1685 until 1690. His earliest printed texts, 'The Courtier's Health' (1682?) and 'An heroick poem to his royal highness the duke of York on his return from Scotland... with some choice songs and medleyes on the times' (1682), betray a close observation of recent political events. The latter sought to legitimize the royal succession with repeated references to the duke's heritage and achievements: '
You, Sir, are both the heavn's and Oceans care, 

Whose Gods in your protection claim a share; 

Who from devouring Deeps, as him before, 

Did in your life, our lives and hopes restore. 
(ll. 5-8)' Written in the fragile aftermath of the Popish Plot when the stability of social order was threatened by the actions of dissenters and cabals, Taubman's collection of 'Loyal Poems and Satyrs upon the Times, since the Beginning of the Salamanca Plot' (1685) is punctuated by familiar themes of parentage and inheritance. Acting as an editor, he dedicates the verses to the gentlemen of the 'Loyal Club at the Dog in Drury Lane', implying that his earlier works had received an unenthusiastic literary reception (sig. A2'v'). 
Following the death of Thomas Jordan later in the same year, Taubman became responsible for producing a series of annual civic festivities to mark the mayoralities of Sir Robert Jefferys ('London's Annual Triumph', 1685, for which he received a payment of $10 out of a total budget of expenditure of $473), Sir John Peake ('London's Yearly Jubilee', 1686), Sir John Shorter ('London's Triumph, or, The Goldsmiths Jubilee', 1687), Sir John Chapman ('London's Anniversary Festival', 1688), and Sir Thomas Pilkington ('London's Great Jubilee', 1689). J. G. Nichols speculated that Taubman's apprenticeship for this post could be traced back to a broadside dated 1659 and initialled 'M. T.' ('The Cities New Poet's Mock Show', now held in the British Library), which attacked the previous year's pageant conceived in honour of Sir John Ireton (Nichols, 107-8, 115). Heralded by the 'London Gazette' as created 'to express the benefits the city enjoys of peace and plenty under his Majesties happy government', the entertainments represented a sequence of visually stunning ratifications of the capital's wealth, status, and influence, while providing simultaneous opportunities for the validation of sovereignty and for London's governing factions to promote the triumph of popular will. Full textual descriptions, introduced by two panegyrical dedications to the monarch and to the sponsoring company, were printed to perpetuate these effects: 'Nor is the Book the least Addition to the Luster of this Day, which is read by those who see not the Pageantry; and when all the rest is over, remains a lasting and visible Monument to Posterity' (M. Taubman, 'Preface' to 'London's Yearly Jubilee', 1686). Within the pageants themselves, themes of loyalty, peace, harmony, obedience, industry, sanctioned authority, and watchfulness reverberate, culminating in 1689, when Sir Thomas Pilkington, a 'leading Presbyterian' and whig dissenter who had twice been imprisoned for his actions in protecting London's privileges, was installed as lord mayor. Taubman's civic rituals were shot through in this year with strong libertarian, populist references: 'When Arbitrary Force, and the Lawless Usurpation had Unreasonably Imposed upon us New Lords, and New Laws, contrary to the Practice, and known Customs, of this City. Then did You, in Defence of our Just Rights and Liberties, stand in the Gap, and Bravely Oppos'd the Violence of the Impetuous Torrent. (M. Taubman, 'London's Great Jubilee', sig. A2'r')' This pageant was revived on 9 November 1761. It is assumed that Taubman died in 1690. There were no civic festivities that year, and Elkanah Settle inherited his post in 1691. 
Taubman's son 


@@@@@


doc= 27000


Nathaniel Taubman (d. 1716) took orders and became a chaplain in the Royal Navy, accompanying the British squadron in Mediterranean campaigns in 1708-9. His experiences formed the basis of 'Memoirs of the British fleets and squadrons in the Mediteranean, anno 1708 and 1709... to which is annexed, a cursory view of Naples' (1710), which was dedicated to Edward, earl of Orford, and to Sir Edward Whitaker 'for his Generous and Kind Regard to Chaplains serving at Sea in general, and for Favours to the Author in particular' (p. 121). In 1710 he was appointed on a five-year contract as chaplain to the English factory at Leghorn (although the opposition from the Inquisition prevented Taubman from leaving England until October 1711) and on 14 November he obtained the degree of MA from Pembroke College, Oxford. In 1716 he printed 'A funeral sermon [on Ecclesiastes 7: 1] preach'd in the chapel belonging to the British Society of Merchants at Leghorn;... occasion'd by the death of... B. Kennet, D.D., some time their minister', as a delayed tribute to his predecessor. Taubman also produced a volume of verse, 'Virtue in Distress, or, The History of Mindana', 'a faint Imitation of Dryden's Knight's Tale from Chaucer' (sig. [A1'r']) in 1706. Latin and English verses were also appended to 'Memoirs of the British Fleets and Squadrons' (pp. 131, 190-94). He died in 1716. 


@@@@@


doc= 27001


Taunton, John (bap. 1769, d. 1821), surgeon, son of Charles Taunton, a farmer, was born at Pye Mill in Paxford, a hamlet of Blockley in Gloucestershire. He was baptized on 21 May 1769 in the parish church of Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire, and was brought up as a farmer; but a study of anatomy drew him to London. Being a stranger to London he asked at a shop in Holborn for the name of the best surgeon and anatomical instructor, and was advised that it was Andrew Marshal, whose anatomical school was in Thavies Inn, Holborn. Taunton immediately called upon Marshal, but he did not attend his classes, and he eventually became a pupil of Henry Cline at St Thomas's Hospital. 
In 1801 Taunton was appointed demonstrator of anatomy at Guy's Hospital, in temporary charge during the illness of John Cunningham Saunders, and he subsequently became principal lecturer at the London Anatomical Society. He was surgeon to the City Dispensary in 1801, at a time when the charity was almost bankrupt; but under his able guidance it quickly became a flourishing establishment. His position as surgeon to the City Dispensary led him to treat large numbers of poor weavers in Spitalfields who suffered from 'prolapsus ani', hernia, and other diseases common to their occupation. Curing these conditions required expensive medical equipment, and this led to the establishment of the City of London Truss Society in 1807, when Taunton, with the assistance of a young bell-hanger, began to manufacture trusses for distribution among the poor of the neighbourhood. Taunton had also become surgeon to the Finsbury Dispensary some time about 1800, and reformed its whole constitution. 
Taunton took an active part at the Medical Society of London, which he nearly wrecked in 1812 by proposing as secretary, and carrying against all opposition, Thomas Joseph Pettigrew, his former apprentice, then newly admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, instead of Dr Birkbeck, whose position as a senior member of the profession should have won him the contest. Taunton had a very large dispensary practice and visited the sick poor at their own homes, which were distributed over large areas. He performed his duties conscientiously, yet he still found time to carry out innumerable post-mortem examinations and to make many pathological preparations. He also established a private medical school, at which he sought to supplement the poor training given to medical students at the various hospitals in London. Married, with three sons, Taunton died at his house in Hatton Garden, London, on Monday morning, 5 March 1821. 


@@@@@


doc= 27002


Taunton, Sir William Elias (1773-1835), judge, was born at Oxford, the eldest son of Sir William Elias Taunton, town clerk of Oxford and clerk of the peace for the county, and his wife, Frances, daughter of Stephen Grosvenor, subtreasurer of Christ Church, Oxford. He was admitted as king's scholar at Westminster School on 15 January 1785, and was elected to Christ Church, Oxford, matriculating from there on 12 June 1789. He graduated BA in 1793 and MA in 1796. In 1793 he gained the chancellor's prize for the English essay. He was admitted student of Lincoln's Inn in 1794, was called to the bar in Easter term 1799, and joined the Oxford circuit. In 1801 he became a commissioner of bankrupts, and in 1806 succeeded Charles Abbot as recorder of Oxford. On 10 October 1814 Taunton married Maria, youngest daughter of Henry William Atkinson, provost of the Company of Moneyers. He was created king's counsel in 1821 and elected a bencher of his inn in 1822. On 12 November 1830 he was appointed a justice of the king's bench, and was knighted five days later. Taunton soon in his career acquired the reputation of a black-letter lawyer (Foss, 'Judges', 9.96); as an advocate he was a somewhat dull and slow speaker who, however, 'made the monotony of his voice impressive and used his sluggishness as a power' ('Law Magazine', 13, 1835, 168). He died somewhat suddenly in his house in Russell Square on 11 January 1835. He was survived by two sons and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 27003


Tautphoeus, Jemima von, Baroness von Tautphoeus (1807-1893), novelist, was born on 23 October 1807 at Seaview, co. Donegal, Ireland, the daughter of James Montgomery, a local landowner, and his wife, Jemima, daughter of James Glasgow of Aughadenvarn, co. Leitrim. She was the niece of Sir Henry Conyngham Montgomery, first baronet, and a cousin of Maria Edgeworth, whom she labelled 'one of the most interesting people it was possible to know' (Thompson, 115). Educated at home, she was married on 29 January 1838 to Cajetan Josef Friedrich, Baron von Tautphoeus of Marquartstein in the Bavarian nobility (1805-1885), chamberlain to the king of Bavaria; the remainder of her life was principally spent in Bavaria, where she was equally at home in court circles and, as her works demonstrate, with the peasantry and the middle classes. 
Although Jemima von Tautphoeus's novels have now fallen into obscurity, during her lifetime they ran through numerous editions in Britain, the US, and Germany, and were ranked as 'English classics' ('The Critic', 12). Her first novel, 'The Initials' (1850), became immensely popular, despite modest critical attention. A 1901 study claimed that 'not to have read 'The Initials' was... to have left one's self out of the range of intellectual conversation and almost of human sympathy' (Howells, 303). Her four novels are entertaining combinations of romance and travelogue: often set in the Bavarian alps, they drew on her knowledge of English and German manners, customs, and scenery, and their central romances often involve cultural or class conflicts. They are also notable for their lively, intellectually curious heroines like the passionate Hildegarde, of 'The Initials', who speaks four languages at the age of seventeen and prefers reading to housework, or Leonora, in 'Quits' (1857), whose development of the life of the mind protects her from the lures of fashionable (that is, frivolous) society. 'Cyrilla' (1853) is a tragic romance based on a real-life incident, the German murder trial of Assessor Zahn, and this deviation from the happy denouements of her earlier novels resulted in mixed reviews. Her last novel, 'At Odds' (1863), was written during an extended period of ill health and was, in her own opinion, the least successful of her works. 
Baron von Tautphoeus died on 14 November 1885, a few days after his only son, Rudolf Edgeworth Josef (1838-1885), who had become the Bavarian ambassador to Rome. Jemima von Tautphoeus died in Munich on 12 November 1893 and was interred in the family vault at Marquartstein Castle in the Bavarian highlands near Salzburg on 15 November of that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 27004


Taverner, John (c.1490-1545), composer, is of unknown parentage. He was probably a native of Lincolnshire. In 1525/6 2's'. 4died sufficed to hire a man to escort him from Boston to visit his 'country', indicating family settlement in south Lincolnshire within one or two days' ride of Boston. 
It appears likely that Taverner was educated as a chorister of a major church choir. Those of Holy Trinity collegiate church, Tattershall, Lincolnshire, and of Boston parish church (St Botolph's) were close to home and sufficiently illustrious to offer him suitable training and experience; nevertheless, he was not so recorded at either, and it was not uncommon for choirboys of unusual talent to be engaged far from home. The composer cannot be identified with the John Tavernar who in 1514-15 was admitted an associated member ('secularis') of the London guild of parish clerks and professional musicians (the Confraternity of St Nicholas), and indeed nothing is known of him before late 1524 when, as a singing-man of the choir of Tattershall College, he received a substantial gratuity at St Botolph's, Boston, as a guest singer in its choir. His designation as Master Taverner indicates his achievement already of significant eminence in his profession by the mid-1520s. 
The Tattershall College choir, of sixteen men and ten boys, had long enjoyed a vigorous and productive musical tradition; by the time he left in 1526 Taverner was probably some thirty-five years old, and a fair proportion of his surviving music may already have been composed. Pieces attributable to his Tattershall years or even earlier appear likely to include the Marian antiphon 'Ave Dei patris filia' and the mass 'O Michael', which display many features symptomatic of composition by an inexperienced but highly talented and ambitious hand; also likely to be early is the antiphon 'Gaude plurimum'. Meanwhile, suitable for use on Tattershall's patronal festival was the monumental and marvellously accomplished mass 'Gloria tibi trinitas'; if composed at Tattershall, as seems probable, this shows the extent to which Taverner had already achieved maturity as a composer well before his departure for Oxford. 
Taverner was present at Tattershall on 17 May 1525, but by now his celebrity was such that in the autumn of that year he was commissioned to become the inaugural master of the choristers of the choir of Cardinal College, Oxford, newly founded by Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, archbishop of York. Wolsey's agent considered Taverner 'very meet' for the job; he, however, evidently knowing his worth, was loath to co-operate, alleging his satisfaction with both his work and his remuneration at Tattershall, and 'that he is in way of a gud mariage, whiche he shuld loose if he dydd reamove frome thens' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/139, fol. 239'r'). Nevertheless, he was prevailed upon to relent. From 25 March 1526 he was on the college payroll; by May he was using Wolsey's royal commission to recruit singers for his new choir (from Boston, among other places), and his work in Oxford began in earnest with the opening of Cardinal College on 19 October. His stipend was a generous $15 per year. 
The college statutes required the master of the choir to be 'exceptionally skilled in music' ('musices peritissimus') and made correspondingly elaborate provision for the musical refinement of the services. Its membership of twenty-six men and sixteen boys ranked the choir as among the greatest in the land. However, there appears to be no substance in the assertion that the Forrest-Heyther partbooks of 'c'.1528-30 were compiled at Cardinal College or assembled under Taverner's direction or used there by his choir. 
The statutes laid special emphasis on the performance with polyphony of the daily Lady mass, and within the Gyffard partbooks of 'c'.1555-8 one section devoted to music for this observance preserves works by Taverner possibly dating from his Oxford years, including both the 'Leroy 'Kyrie'' and the mass 'Western Wynd'. The 'Kyrie' takes as 'cantus firmus' one of a body of pre-existing abstract melodies known as 'squares', and in the mass Taverner pursued this compositional principle to an unprecedented but logical conclusion. On thirty-six almost unvaried statements of what may well have been a newly composed melody of his own creation he based an entire mass, distinguished by a flow of contrapuntal invention as seemingly inexhaustible as it is melodious and memorable. Taverner's melody was later seen to bear a superficial similarity to a courtly song 'Western wind, when wilt thou blow', which misleadingly led the name 'Western Wynd' to become attached to this mass. Other works for Lady mass composed by this time included a mass for boys' voices (now lost) and 'Kyries' and sequences (fragments survive) sung in 1529 at King's College, Cambridge. 
At Cardinal College the feasts of St Nicholas and St William of York enjoyed an elevated status. Taverner's setting of 'Sospitati dedit aegros' was proper to the first, while for the daily votive antiphon to St William prescribed in Wolsey's statutes he composed a concise and elegant setting of words which probably originally began 'O Wilhelme, pastor bone' and included a prayer for the good estate of Wolsey as founder. Also specified in the college statutes was the daily performance of the antiphons 'Ave Maria' and 'Sancte Deus', for each of which Taverner composed succinct but clearly articulated settings for five-voice choir. 
Probably contemporary is Taverner's five-voice mass deriving some of its music from 'O Wilhelme, pastor bone', possibly composed for the tercentenary of the canonization of St William (21 March 1527). Eschewing floridity of expression, this seems concise and direct, and earned itself the descriptive (and by no means pejorative) nickname 'Small devotion'. Possibly contemporary is the mass 'Mater Christi', derived in a similar manner from Taverner's hybrid Marian-Jesus antiphon 'Mater Christi sanctissima'. The composition of a paired mass and votive antiphon for use together on a great feast was by no means new in England; Taverner was developing a particular mode of pairing, importing into the mass by 'parody' whole sections of pre-existing music first created for the antiphon. 
Taverner's four years at Oxford were not uneventful. Since about 1526 there had developed there a covert cell of religious dissidents, primarily clerics and students, attracted to Lutheranism; its members were serviced by one Thomas Garrard, a clandestine purveyor of heretical books. Between 19 and 29 February 1528 the cell was exposed, and Garrard's associates were rounded up for questioning; among them were John Radley and Thomas Lawney, respectively lay clerk and chaplain of Cardinal College choir, and Taverner himself. Doubtless Lawney and Radley had encountered Garrard at Boston, where until 1526 they had been members of St Botolph's choir and he had been schoolmaster (1524-6). Taverner had recruited Lawney and Radley from Boston to Oxford, unwittingly facilitating thereby Garrard's introduction to his Oxford clientele. Six members of Cardinal College, all clerics, were imprisoned for interrogation. Taverner and Radley, being laymen, and therefore theologically unlearned, were more lightly treated. Radley confessed to being Garrard's clandestine host during his Oxford visits. Taverner was associated more with one of the clerics, John Clerk, a senior canon of Cardinal College, whose suspect books Taverner confessed to having hidden under the floorboards of the choirboys' practice-room, and to a little of whose compromising correspondence with Garrard he was privy. 
Their confessions were reported to Wolsey; to him, however, only clerical Lutheranism appeared at this time to be actually dangerous. He dismissed both Taverner and Radley as 'unlerned and nott to be regarded' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/47, fol. 111'r'), and beyond the frightening experience of arrest, interrogation, and confession neither was imprisoned or otherwise punished. Such leniency was well judged. Although apparently he was led into at least evangelical heterodoxy by superiors and colleagues, Taverner's association with these covert Lutherans cannot be lightly dismissed; no one flirted with heresy merely to oblige his friends. The death in custody of four of the suspects, including Taverner's friend Clerk, seems to have sufficed to remind him of the virtues of orthodoxy, and there is no sign that ever again was he tempted to dabble in any form of heterodox belief. 
In April 1528 Thomas Cromwell reported enthusiastically to Wolsey on the standard of the liturgical service in Cardinal College chapel, 'so devout, solemn and full of harmony that in mine opinion it hath few peers' (Ellis, 'Original Letters', 2nd ser., 2.139), and by July Taverner stood as high as ever in Wolsey's favour, attending upon him at Hampton Court with four of his ablest choirboys. However, soon after Wolsey's dismissal from royal service in November 1529 the choir of Cardinal College began to be run down, and by April 1530 provision for the conduct of the choral service was becoming sufficiently threatened for Taverner to take his departure. 
It appears that Taverner now returned to Boston; certainly it was as 'Taverner of Boston' that he was commonly known to his immediate posterity, including John Foxe, Thomas Whythorne, and John Baldwin. It is likely that he was recruited to the choir maintained in St Botolph's parish church by and at the expense of the Guild of St Mary established therein. Certainly in 1538-9 he was recorded as recently a tenant of one of the guild's domestic properties, the record of whose tenancy shows it to have been reserved for occupation by members of its choral staff. It is not unlikely that Taverner now served the Boston choir as master of the choristers, enjoying employment there (at not less than its established salary of $17 6's'. 8died) from 1530 until probably 1536 or 1537. 
Within this magnificent church the Guild of St Mary maintained a choir of (until about 1536) some eighteen to twenty men and eight to ten boys. To John Leland the church was 'servid so with singging, and that of cunning men, as no paroche is in al England' ('The Itinerary of John Leland, in or about the Years 1535-1543', ed. L. T. Smith, 5 vols., 1906-10, 5.33). Possibly it was for Boston that Taverner wrote his masterpiece, the festal mass 'Corona spinea'. The crown which to the Guild of St Mary was of significance so great that it was displayed as a badge on the livery of its almsmen may very well have been the crown of thorns, so rendering this a piece appropriate for high mass on any of the guild's greatest feasts. The unidentified 'cantus firmus' may be a chant from the use of Lincoln. 
Simultaneously Taverner was also exploring a style increasingly animated by systematic use of imitation, as in the Jesus antiphon 'O splendor gloriae'. Moreover, it was probably at this time that he developed the genre of choral office responsory composed on a monorhythmic 'cantus firmus'. Aurally 'Dum transisset sabbatum' is a work of the greatest refinement; yet within the apparently effortless flow of its polyphony lies embedded and concealed the 'cantus firmus' disposed in severe and unyielding semibreves. This technique permitted participation by choir chaplains unlearned in polyphonic notation, who were unlikely to have been employed at Cardinal College, but very likely -- in the guise of, for example, the six 'choir priests' maintained by the Guild of St George -- to have been encountered at St Botolph's. 
About 1536-7 Taverner's employment by the Guild of St Mary ended. The prodigious spiritual privileges available to subscribing members, including plenary remission of sins and the 'Scala coeli' indulgence for the delivery of souls from purgatory, were of papal origin. Consequently the gathering of membership funds, the source of the guild's enormous income, became illegal on the break with Rome in 1534, and the 'Scala coeli' indulgence was outlawed altogether under the ten articles of 1536. Probably the guild hereupon became unable to continue Taverner's remuneration, and certainly by May 1538 he had chosen to retire altogether from employment in church music. It appears that, either through accumulated personal means or through advantage arising from marriage (or both), by this time he was a wealthy man, able to choose not to seek another job, but to spend the last years of his life as a prosperous and respected burgher, and composer, of his adopted town. Much later, John Foxe, knowing of Taverner's brush with Lutheranism at Oxford and anxious to portray him as an enduring stalwart for evangelical truth, remarked that 'This Taverner repented him very muche that he had made Songes to Popish Ditties in the time of his blindnes' ('Acts and Monuments', 5.50). It seems that Foxe, himself born and partly brought up in Boston, had heard correctly of a final withdrawal by Taverner from an active career in church music, but was merely guessing at, and succeeding only in entirely misrepresenting, Taverner's actual motivation. 
The date of Taverner's marriage to Rose (died 1553; a widow with two daughters, who sprang originally from one of Boston's leading families, the Parrowes) is not known. However, already by May 1538 he had lately been leasing a large family mansion on Wormgate, Boston, at a substantial annual rent of 40's'. By 1541 he was styled 'gentleman' and was beginning to appear as one of the town's leading worthies. In 1537 he was admitted to membership of Boston's select Guild of Corpus Christi, whose objectives were the veneration of the transubstantiated sacrament and the provision of masses for the souls of members deceased. Taverner's commitment to such pillars of Catholic orthodoxy located him in not only the religious but also the social mainstream, and this encouraged him to cultivate the favour of Thomas Cromwell, now the king's principal secretary, with whom it is likely that he had become acquainted when both were employed within Wolsey's circle. On 11 September 1538 Taverner reported that the town had complied with an order from Cromwell for the demolition and incineration of the rood screen and figures from St Botolph's Church. His report included no observation that he had himself been present or had participated in any way. Meanwhile, he endeavoured to capitalize on Cromwell's favour by seeking the opportunity to purchase a local wardship, and on another occasion by petitioning for Cromwell's favourable intervention in a kinsman's lawsuit. 
Evidently Taverner was known locally as a kindly individual, and it was to him that in 1537-8 the friars of Boston came to lament their loss of public support and consequent utter indigence. He assured them of his personal goodwill and generosity, and obliged them by writing to Cromwell urging a speedy determination of the fate of the local friaries. His benevolent intervention paid him good dividends; following the surrender of the houses he and one other Boston businessman were granted the opportunity to purchase the sites from the crown. 
Taverner also took much self-sacrificing trouble as an executor of the will of one Roger Meres. Indeed, another Boston businessman, Anthony Robertson, recollecting how he had undertaken complete repayment to Taverner of a loan of $20 despite the latter's inability to cancel the paperwork through its temporary misplacement, credited him as 'a verye honest man' in whose word and promise he placed 'an especyall trust and confidens' (TNA: PRO, C1/1259, nos. 14, 17). Taverner's stature in Boston appears steadily to have grown in the last years of his life. He served as treasurer of the Corpus Christi guild in 1541, 1542, and 1543, and upon the grant to Boston of its first municipal charter in May 1545 his prominence was sealed by his appointment as one of the twelve aldermen of its inaugural governing council. 
Although no longer employed in church music, Taverner may very well have continued after 1536 to compose for St Botolph's choir, which -- albeit with much reduced forces on much reduced pay -- remained in existence right up until 1548. During these years of hardship it is likely that its boys' section was disbanded (in 1538 Leland had noted the presence only of singing-men), so creating the circumstances satisfied by Taverner's late compositions, all of which are for men's voices alone; they include the 'Magnificat' for four voices, the five-voice 'Te Deum', the fine four-voice arrangement of 'Dum transisset sabbatum', and the 'Meane mass'. These exhibit an increasing concern for directness of expression assimilated into a disposition of imitation now sufficiently systematic to stand beside free invention as the prime melodic generator. 
Early in August 1545 Taverner's health appears suddenly to have collapsed, an associate perceiving that 'the said Taverner did greatly decay' (TNA: PRO, C1/1164, no. 44). Such was his affliction that when on 18 October 1545 he died, probably in Boston, he had made no will. Rose Taverner, who had busily settled his affairs at the beginning of August, was granted the administration of his effects; his property included tenements in Boston and agricultural land in the vicinity. He was buried within St Botolph's Church, beneath the great west tower. He had no children and was survived only by his widow, who died between 1 and 18 May 1553, and by a younger brother, William. 
Taverner's pre-eminence among contemporary English composers was complete, not least for his mastery of stylistic diversity and range of genre, extending even to four secular songs and to the untexted and strangely scored 'Quemadmodum'. Indeed, irrespective of their different stylistic heritages, his work emerges impressively from comparison with that of Adrian Willaert, Nicolas Gombert, or Cristobal de Morales, the most illustrious of his continental contemporaries. During a composing life of only some thirty-five years he took to its culmination the prevailing English style of expansive, virtuosic, and sonically luxuriant polyphony, and exhibited in particular a sure-footed degree of control over the most grandly conceived designs. He also forged a successor style more concise in its expression, terse in its thought, and economical in its deployment of melodic material, animated in part by the working of successive imitative points capable of generating on their own the characteristics of entire musical phrases. This style could either supersede entirely the former melismatic luxuriance (as in the 'Meane mass') or be combined with it (as in the four-voice 'Magnificat'). 
Though similar to features found somewhat earlier in continental Catholic composition, these initiatives seem likely to have arisen simply because like circumstances were giving rise independently to like developments, rather than as a consequence of some putative acquaintance on Taverner's part directly with continental music. Certainly the devotionally very limited substance of the Henrician Reformation up to 1545 was not such as to create on its own account any local stimulus towards modifying the prevailing manner of musical composition for the church services. And irrespective of surface stylistic trends, there remain underlying all Taverner's finest works his abiding 'gift of incisive melodic invention, his capacity to create a sense of coherent discourse by generating extended lines out of small motifs, and his purposeful sense of progress expressed through control of harmonic rhythm and direction' (private information). 
Taverner's influence on his younger colleagues and successors was extensive. Christopher Tye and John Sheppard wrote masses both on Taverner's 'Western Wynd' 'cantus firmus' and in emulation of his 'Meane mass'. The suave elegance of the four-voice 'In nomine [Domini]' passage of the 'Benedictus' of the mass 'Gloria tibi trinitas' proved amenable for performance by viols, and spawned a whole genre of instrumental composition that lasted as far as Henry Purcell. In 1547-9 the enduring value of Taverner's music was recognized in the adaptation of two of his masses to the words of the new vernacular communion service, and later in the fitting of English words to two of his votive antiphons and to the original 'In nomine'. Influences emanating from the 'Meane mass' have been discerned in William Byrd's four-voice mass. 
Taverner's pre-eminence was evident not only to the creators of repertory manuscripts of his own day, but also to the nostalgic anthologizers who in Elizabeth I's reign strove to preserve the treasures of the pre-Reformation past. In their collections are now to be found the majority of Taverner's surviving works. Never entirely unknown to music historians, these were systematically recovered and published in the 1920s, and since the 1960s have been extensively performed and recorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 27005


John Taverner (1584-1638), Church of England clergyman, was the second son of Richard's second son, Peter, who had established himself at Hexton, Hertfordshire. He was educated first at Westminster School and then at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated 'c'.1597, became a scholar in 1599, graduated BA in 1602, and proceeded MA in 1605. He was incorporated at Oxford on 10 March 1606. He was secretary for nine years to John King, bishop of London between 1611 and 1621, and was also professor of music at Gresham College from 1610 to 1638; drafts of some of his lectures survive (as BL, Sloane MS 2329). Ordained deacon in London on 24 December 1620 and priest on 13 March 1625, in 1624 he became vicar of Tillingham, Essex, resigning that benefice in 1629 to become vicar of Hexton and rector of Stoke Newington. Still holding both livings he died between 26 and 29 August 1638 and was buried at Stoke Newington. 


@@@@@


doc= 27006


Taverner, Richard (1505?-1575), translator and evangelical reformer, was probably born at Brisley, Norfolk, the eldest of the four sons of John Taverner (1457?-1545) of North Elmham, Norfolk, and his first wife, Alice, daughter and heir of Robert Sylvester of Brisley. Educated initially at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, Richard transferred to the newly founded Cardinal College, Oxford, where he graduated on 21 June 1527 and was among those accused of heresy in 1529. His move to Oxford may partly reflect the influence of his kinsman the composer John Taverner, who was master of the choristers at Cardinal College and was also charged with heresy. Returning to Cambridge, where he was incorporated BA in 1529, Richard Taverner proceeded MA the following year, but was then persuaded to go abroad to study. But the friend who had been supporting him died, and late in 1530 Taverner wrote to Thomas Cromwell appealing for help from the king. Cromwell persuaded the duke of Norfolk to provide an annuity and Taverner returned to Cambridge, remaining there until 1534, probably as a fellow of Gonville Hall. 
In 1532 Taverner sent Cromwell his translation of Erasmus's 'Encomium matrimoni', presented as an attack on clerical celibacy, which inaugurated his work as 'the most prolific populariser of Erasmus whom England produced' (McConica, 117), as well as anticipating the assault on religious houses. For Taverner, Erasmus was 'the incomparable lerned man' (Wooding, 29). Within the year he was contributing to official apologetic for the royal divorce, and had come to be identified as Cromwell's publicist. In a letter to Cromwell on 2 July 1533, Martin Tyndall, a fellow of King's College, offered a translation of Erasmus's life of Colet: 'Let Master Taverner, last year master of Greek in Cambridge, now your client, oversee it' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 6, no. 751). Taverner also studied law at Strond Inn, one of the inns of chancery, proceeding thence to the Inner Temple, 'where his humour was to quote the law in Greek, when he read any thing thereof' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 1.420). He was at court by 1534, while in 1536 or 1537 Cromwell secured his appointment as one of the clerks of the signet, though he maintained close contact with the minister. In August 1537, when investigating the advowson of Brisley church in Norfolk, he reported that he was preparing to marry. His wife was Margaret, daughter of Walter Lambert of Chertsey, and they had four sons and three daughters. In January 1539 Taverner was granted the lease of Alvingham Priory and two rectories in Lincolnshire, making him financially independent. 
Taverner became Cromwell's principal propagandist for religious reform. As well as putting a protestant face on Erasmus in translation, he produced 'at the commaundement of his Master' English versions of the Augsburg confession with the 'Apologie of Melanchthon' in 1536. Christoff Mont, Cromwell's German specialist, had introduced Henry VIII to Sarcerius's 'Loci communes' (1528), which Taverner translated in 1538, with a prefatory epistle to Henry VIII explaining why it was to be preferred to Melanchthon's 'Loci', itself dedicated to the king: 'this tempreth his penne also to the capacitie of younge students of scripture'. Taverner expressed the moderation in doctrinal controversies of continental protestant humanists, who 'have denied freewyl onely in spirituall mocyons and that also in such persons as be not yet regenerate and renued by the holy ghost' (sig. A5). Nevertheless, his promotion of 'sola scriptura' as the solution to doctrinal conflict was combined with the anti-papal polemic of the supremacy to urge that 'we all togither with one accorde, followynge your highnes as our heed and myghty shepherde maye utterly vomyt out of us all papysticall venym, and hertely at last imbrase the pure and syncere verite of gods moost holy worde' (sigs. A4'r'- 'v'). In 1539 he translated Capito's psalm paraphrases as the 'Summe or Pith of the 150 Psalmes of David'. The conservative 'Act of Six Articles' (1539) prohibited the printing of unorthodox religious books, which may account for the removal of reference to Capito in the second edition of the 'Summe', the 'Epitome of the Psalmes', printed later that year. Between 1538 and 1540 he directed the operations of Richard Bankes's press, which published his works at this time. 
Taverner's activity as a biblical translator stemmed from the need to revise the controversial 1537 'Matthew Bible', itself a revision of Tyndale by John Rogers: 'Rogers's attacks on clerical celibacy, on purgatory, and on fasting were all eliminated, as was the comparison of the Pope to Anti-Christ, with a consequent change in tone from a distinctly Protestant work to a moderate and characteristically Erasmian compromise. (McConica, 165)' The 1539 'Taverner Bible' was itself replaced later that year by the 'Great Bible', a far more thorough revision. Although a Greek scholar, Taverner was no Hebraist, and he employed the Latin 'Vulgate' and the recent Latin translation by Pagninus for his 'Old Testament' revisions. However, his 'New Testament' revisions bring the text closer to the original Greek, anticipating the 'Rheims Bible'. 
Taverner retreated from Lutheran translation after Cromwell's fall in 1540; the act of attainder against the minister included a charge of having circulated heretical works. Having been briefly in Stephen Gardiner's custody, Taverner turned to Erasmus's humanist works as sources for a series of proverb collections, probably unsponsored. He was the first English translator of the 'Apophthegmata', upon which he drew heavily for 'The Garden of Wysdom' (1539), and also included select 'Adagia' in the 'thyrde boke': 'these works form one of the greatest repositories of Erasmian adages and classical wisdom made available to the sixteenth-century English reader' (McConica, 184). Taverner also drew on the 'Opuscula aliquot' for subsequent expansions of his collection, often adding his own glosses in order to support the royal supremacy and the Henrician settlement, blending protestantism and humanism in his comments on contemporary affairs. The 'Epistles and Gospelles' (1540), partly written and overseen by Taverner, was intended to supply the want of 'plentie of sobre modeste and sincere teachers' to feed the Christian flock 'not with rash erronyouse, hereticall or fabulous sermons, but sobre, discret, catholike, and godly instructions'. Substantial sections of these postils for each Sunday mass, which Cranmer edited, were later included verbatim in the Elizabethan 'Book of Homilies'. 
On 2 December 1541 Taverner once more found himself in Gardiner's custody, this time for failing to report the rumour that Anne of Cleves was pregnant by Henry VIII: 'This abominable slander was told to Taverner, of the Signet, by his mother-in-law, wife of Lambert, the goldsmith, and by his own wife, who said they had it of Lilgrave's wife and old ladye Carowe. Taverner kept it secret till Sunday, when he told Dr. Cox, who informed the Lord Privy Seal. ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 16, no. 1414)' The others were also imprisoned, as was a brother of Taverner, who was not released until March 1542. Richard himself was soon released, however. In 1544 he served in the army in France, and in April of that year acquired the manor of Woodeaton, Oxfordshire, along with former monastic lands there, and began building. In 1544 or 1545 the king gave him the site of the dissolved Franciscan priory at Northampton; in the following year he received 'Nun's acres', part of the lands of Stamford Priory, and in 1546 other lands in Horningtoft, Norfolk. 
In 1545 translations of Erasmian works advocating reform began to make a tentative reappearance, among them Taverner's version of 'De amabili ecclesiae concordia', now lost, in support of the king's appeal to parliament for mutual toleration within the English church. Taverner may have been involved in the compilation of the 'King's Primer', published in the same year, which included some of his translations of Capito. Nevertheless his translations of Melanchthon and Sarcerius were burnt at Paul's Cross in 1546. 
In 1547 Taverner was returned to parliament as MP for Liverpool. He probably owed his seat to evangelical patronage, perhaps that of Sir William Paget, who became chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster in the same year. After parliament was dissolved in 1552 he received a licence to preach, even though not ordained. He is said to have preached at court before Edward VI, and in public both during his reign and that of Elizabeth, 'wearing a velvet bonnet or round cap, a damask gown and a chain of gold about his neck' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 1.420). At Mary's accession he lost his position as clerk of the signet, but lived unmolested at Norbiton Hall, Surrey -- his chosen residence while building work proceeded at Woodeaton. In 1558 he addressed a congratulatory Latin epistle to Elizabeth. He declined the offer of a knighthood, but served as a JP for Oxfordshire, and was high sheriff of the county in 1569. 
In January 1562 Margaret Taverner died. Richard subsequently married Mary, daughter of Sir John Harcourt of Stanton Harcourt. They had a son, Harcourt, and a daughter, Penelope; she was the maternal grandmother of the Oxford antiquary Anthony Wood, who preserved valuable family reminiscences of Richard Taverner. The latter died at Woodeaton on 14 July 1575 and was buried beside Margaret in the parish church there on 29 July. In his brief will (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/57, fol. 242'r'- 'v'), drawn up on 15 June, he divided his lands into three parts and bequeathed a third each to his sons Peter and Edmond. The last third, not disposed of in the will, may have been intended for the eldest son, Richard, who, however, was only specifically left a gold chain, and was not made an executor -- perhaps the two men had quarrelled. Two daughters were left sums of money, and a fourth son, John, was to have 'all my Lattin and Greek books'. Along with Peter and Edmund, John was both an executor and a residuary legatee. 
The Taverners were a talented family. The eldest of Richard's younger brothers, 
Another 


@@@@@


doc= 27007


Roger Taverner (d. 1572), surveyor and writer, is said by Wood to have studied at Cambridge, albeit without graduating. But this is not confirmed by university records. Probably in the 1540s he was made a surveyor for the court of augmentations, becoming Sir Francis Jobson's deputy, and was later employed in the same capacity by the exchequer until 1573. A number of his reports on crown woods survive (in BL, Lansdowne MSS 43, 56, 62). It may have been Jobson who secured Taverner's election to parliament in 1555 as a member for Newport iuxta Launceston, Cornwall. He wrote several tracts on economic issues, for instance 'Remedies... of derth of victualles' (Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, MS 376), whose dedication to Queen Elizabeth mentions a similar work sent to her two years previously. More influential, though unprinted, was his 'Arte of surveyinge' of 1565. He made his will on 6 January 1578, but it was not proved until 5 February 1582. With his wife, a member of the Hulcote family, he had three sons, one of whom, John, is reported by Wood to have also become a surveyor. 


@@@@@


doc= 27008


Taverner, William (c.1677-1731), playwright, born in London, was descended from the Taverners of Hexton in Hertfordshire. His father was Jeremiah Taverner ('b'. 1651), a successful portrait painter in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, who was probably the same Jeremiah Taverner who married Elizabeth Needham in April 1676. Little is known of Taverner's early life except that he trained for a legal career in Doctors' Commons, where he became a proctor of the court of arches of Canterbury. Baker records that Taverner inherited his father's 'genius for painting, but never exercised it with a view to profit' (Baker, 1.704). Instead, while continuing to practise as a lawyer, Taverner began to write for the stage. His first work, a masque entitled 'Ixion' (1697), was performed as part of Edward Ravenscroft's 'The Italian Husband' at Lincoln's Inn Fields during the winter of 1697-8. Several years later Taverner produced his first full-length play, 'The Faithful Bride of Granada', which was staged at Drury Lane in the winter of 1703-4. This may have been followed by a comedy entitled 'The Lunatick' (1705), which is sometimes attributed to Taverner on account of its similarity to his later work 'The Female Advocates' (1713). 'The Lunatick' was rejected by the actors at Lincoln's Inn Fields and consequently failed to reach the stage. Taverner's next comedy, 'The Maid the Mistress', met with a half-empty house at Drury Lane in June 1708, a failure which prompted the playwright to promise 'never... to bring again on the Stage any more of my Scribling' (Taverner, 'Maid the Mistress', 1708, sig. A3'r'). 
After a gap of several years Taverner began work on 'The Female Advocates, or, The Frantic Stock-Jobber', recycling a number of incidents from 'The Lunatick'. The finished comedy was staged at Drury Lane on 6 January 1713. In March 1716 Taverner produced a three-act farce entitled 'Every Body Mistaken', based on Shakespeare's 'Comedy of Errors'. To this he affixed a masque, 'Presumptuous Love', set to music by William Turner. A third-night benefit performance of the two pieces at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 13 March 1716 earned Taverner over $75. As a result of this success, John Rich, the theatre manager at Lincoln's Inn Fields, afforded Taverner the luxury of new costumes for his next work, 'The Artful Husband', which premiered on 11 February 1717. The central episode of 'The Artful Husband', in which the heroine disguises herself as a man, then marries her guardian's widow in order to reclaim her stolen inheritance, is taken from 'The Counterfeit Bridegroom' (1677), a comedy sometimes attributed to Thomas Betterton. Further incidents in Taverner's play are lifted from Shirley's 'The Lady of Pleasure' (1635). Despite the extensive borrowing, 'The Artful Husband' was a success. Taverner made over $84 from ticket sales on the third and sixth days of performance, but was denied a third benefit night by Rich. In the preface to the printed edition of 'The Artful Husband' (1717), Taverner praises the actors but rails at what he terms 'a private Injustice from the Master of the House' (Taverner, 'Artful Husband', 1717, sig. A3'v'). On 3 December 1717 Taverner produced a sequel to his comedy, entitled 'The Artful Wife', which ran for three nights. A further comedy, ''Tis Well if it Takes', was staged on 28 February 1719, and ran for five nights. Neither play matched the success of 'The Artful Husband', which was revived during the 1718-19 season, and again in 1721, when Taverner finally received the benefit night owing to him. Long after Taverner's death, 'The Artful Husband' was adapted by the elder George Colman and retitled 'The Female Chevalier' (1778). Taverner's comedy also served as the basis for William Macready's 'The Bank Note' (1795). 
Aside from his work as a dramatist, little is known of Taverner's life. He continued to practise as a lawyer until his death on 8 January 1731 at his house in Doctors' Commons. A short obituary notice in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' describes Taverner as a man 'remarkably honest in his business' ('GM', 33). His widow, Alathea Taverner, whom he had married about 1702, took out letters of administration at the prerogative court of Canterbury on 6 February 1731. Their son, William Taverner, inherited the family talent for painting and subsequently pursued a career as an artist. 


@@@@@


doc= 27009


Taverner, William (1700-1772), lawyer and landscape painter, was born on 25 November 1700 in London, and baptized the same day at St Martin Ludgate, the son of William Taverner (d. 1731), lawyer and dramatist, and his wife, Alathea Taverner, and grandson of Jeremiah Taverner, portrait painter. He followed his father into the specialized profession of ecclesiastical law, becoming a public notary in 1737 and in 1739 proctor of the court of arches, the archbishop of Canterbury's court of appeal for the province of Canterbury. This court was based in Bow church, London, and Taverner appears to have spent the whole of his life in and near the capital. By 1733 he was already well known as a painter and was described by George Vertue as possessing 'a wonderfull genius to drawing of Landskap in an excellent manner adornd with figures in a stile above the common & paints in oil in a very commendable & masterly manner' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.68). 
Since he was not, like most professional landscape painters of the period, obliged to paint country house or estate views in order to earn a living, Taverner seems to have been free to experiment more widely than his contemporaries with subject matter and technique. Martin Hardie considered him to be 'our first regular and systematic painter of free landscape in watercolour' (Hardie, 1.69). It is not known who taught him the rudiments of painting, but the open, airy atmosphere and panoramic composition of some of his watercolours strongly suggest the influence of Peter Tillemans ('c'.1684-1734), who moved to London from Antwerp in 1708. It is also clear that Taverner's choice of landscape subjects (typically sandpits and woodland ponds in the vicinity of London), and their compositional structure, owe much to the Italianate paintings of Gaspard Dughet (1615-1675), whose work was widely collected in England throughout the eighteenth century. Taverner is unusual among early English watercolourists in his frequent introduction to his landscapes of groups of classically inspired figures. An example is the highly accomplished chalk, ink wash, and watercolour drawing 'Diana and her Nymphs by a Woodland Pool' (with Agnews, London, 2003), one of several drawings of this subject, which belonged to the print dealer John Thane (1748-1818); it was engraved in 1780, after Taverner's death, by Thomas Gaugain (1748-1812). Taverner's Diana drawings may have been one source of inspiration for Thomas Gainsborough's notable series of drawings on the theme of Diana and Actaeon executed in the 1780s. In broader terms, Taverner's use of various combinations of chalks, ink, watercolour washes, and bodycolour to produce a generalized but imaginative form of landscape appears to have had an effect on Gainsborough's approach to the depiction of nature. Paul Sandby (1725-1809), who owned a number of drawings by Taverner, also owed a great deal to his example. 
Taverner did not contribute to the public exhibitions organized by the Incorporated Society of Artists and the Society of Arts in the 1760s, or the Royal Academy exhibitions, inaugurated in 1769. He was also peculiarly reluctant to show his work to visitors to his own house. Despite (or perhaps in a perverse way, because of) this diffidence, his work was widely known and admired -- the diarist Joseph Farington noted 'Taverner had much quaking abt. shewing his pictures, which raised their reputation' (Farington, 'Diary', 3.765). 
Taverner the watercolourist is now reasonably well represented in public collections, his 'Italian Composition: the Outskirts of a Town' (Tate collection), 'Landscape with Nymphs Bathing' (Yale Center for British Art, New Haven), and 'Country Road Leading to a Church' (British Museum, prints and drawings), for example, illustrating the range of his style and technique. His oils are rare: a 'Wooded Landscape with Nymphs and Satyrs' (University of Liverpool) is close in style to the work of George Lambert; 'Jonah and the Whale' (Stourhead) is after Gaspard Dughet. Other examples were evidently familiar to Colonel Maurice Grant, who described them as 'dignified canvases relieved from gloom by touches of smart and peculiar colour introduced here and there over the work' (Grant, 191). The sale held after Taverner's death (Langfords, Covent Garden, 21 February 1774) included oil studies of 'histories', heads, dogs, plants, and even 'hares, lions etc', showing him to have been a more diverse artist than the one we now know. The sale catalogue also reveals the breadth of his collection, which included prints after Marco Ricci, Raphael, Poussin, Claude, Domenichino, and Vouet, as well as a large number of engravings after Rubens -- this enthusiasm being reflected in the eight landscape watercolours 'in the style of Rubens' by Taverner himself, which were also included in the sale. He is not known to have married. He left a bequest and all his personal effects to his servant Sarah Davis and died in London on 20 October 1772. 


@@@@@


doc= 27010


Taxster, John of (fl. 1244-c.1270), Benedictine monk and chronicler, took the habit at Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, on the feast of St Edmund (20 November), 1244 -- a fact recorded in the chronicle composed at Bury 'c'.1265. This chronicle, which covers the period from the creation of the world to 1265, survives in two fair copies, BL, Cotton MS Julius AI, written 'c'.1270, and London, College of Arms, Arundel MS 6, written in the last half of the fourteenth century. (Since Arundel 6 almost certainly descends directly from Julius AI, it cannot be regarded as an independent authority.) In the annal for 1244 the Cotton manuscript of the chronicle records 'hoc anno scriptor presentis voluminis habitum suscepit monachicum dictus I. de Taxst' [Tayster in Arundel 6] die sancti Edmundi'. Taxster, therefore, was the scribe of Julius AI, and the fact that he made several marginal additions (that is, of the names of ten of the popes and five passages, one of nearly a hundred words), all of which are in the text of Arundel 6, justifies the common assumption that Taxster, as well as being the scribe of Julius AI, himself composed the chronicle. 
Taxster was a man of some learning. The chronicle includes allusions to, and citations from, a number of late Roman writers (Apuleius's 'De Deo Socratis', Aulus Gellius's 'Noctes Atticae', Justin's epitome of Trogus Pompeius, and Eutropius's 'Historia miscella'), while its early Christian sources include St Jerome's translation of Eusebius's chronicle, St Augustine's 'Confessions' and 'City of God', Orosius's 'Historia' and Boethius's 'De consolatione philosophiae'. For the medieval period Taxster used a wide variety of standard histories and chronicles, most of them of English provenance. However, his main source to 1131 was the chronicle of John of Worcester. He probably used the Bury copy of the latter, now Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 297. It was owing to the influence of John's chronicle that he adopted the practice of giving each annal alternative dates, according to the evangelists and according to Dionysius. Taxster's next main source was Ralph de Diceto, and then, for King John's reign, a chronicle compiled at Bury, the so-called 'Annales sancti Edmundi'. Since the only known copy of the 'Annales' (BL, Harley MS 447) ends incomplete in the annal for 1212, it is impossible to be certain when Taxster stopped using them. 
From 1212 Taxster's chronicle is independent of all known chronicles. Until 1264 the annals are brief and mainly of value for the entries concerning the abbey's history, but the annals for 1264 and 1265 are detailed, and a valuable source for the barons' war. Taxster's sympathies, like those of nearly all chroniclers of the period, are with the baronial opposition to Henry III. For example, he records that after the death of the baronial leader, Simon de Montfort, at the battle of Evesham (1265) his body worked miracles. This notice is in Arundel 6, but has been erased from Julius AI, possibly in response to the dictum of Kenilworth (1266), chapter 8, which prohibited Montfort's cult. Taxster's chronicle has historiographic importance because a revised version formed the starting point for two continuations, to 1296 and 1301 respectively, both valuable sources for Edward I's reign. The revised version of Taxster's chronicle and its continuation to 1296, used to be attributed to John Eversden, and was borrowed from by chroniclers in a number of other monasteries, most of them in East Anglia. It was this revised version and not, as Luard supposed, Taxster's chronicle itself, which was used at Norwich by Bartholomew Cotton (died 1321/2) for the annals 1258-63 in his chronicle. 


@@@@@


doc= 27011


Tayler, Charles Benjamin (1797-1875), Church of England clergyman and writer for the young, son of John Tayler, was born at Leytonstone, Essex. He was educated at Guildford under the Revd William Hodgson Cole, and entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a fellow commoner on 23 October 1815, graduating BA in 1819 and MA in 1822. After taking holy orders he was licensed to a curacy at Hadleigh in Suffolk in 1821, where he adopted strong protestant views and a rooted antipathy to Roman Catholicism. He left Hadleigh in 1826, and successively served, each for a short time, curacies in Kent, Surrey, and Hampshire. From 1831 to 1836 he had the sole charge of the parish of Hodnet in Shropshire. In 1836 John Bird Sumner, bishop of Chester, presented him to the living of St Peter's in Chester, where he was also evening lecturer at St Mary's, a large church in which he usually preached to about 1200 people. While at Chester he published from 1838 a series entitled 'Tracts for the Rich'. In 1846 he was appointed by the earl of Abergavenny rector of Otley in Suffolk, which he resigned shortly before his death. Here he specially laboured among the young. He married, while at Otley, Adine Louisa Lewis, daughter of A. D. Lewis Agassiz of Finsbury Square, London, who survived him. 
Tayler's numerous books and tracts, which were published on both sides on the Atlantic, were either warnings against the errors of the Catholics or relentlessly moralizing manuals of religious instruction for the young. They included 'The Child of the Church of England' (1834; new edn, 1852), 'Facts in a Clergyman's Life' (1849), 'Sermons for All Seasons', (1850), 'Memorials of the English Martyrs' (1853), 'Legends and Records, Chiefly Historical' (1854), 'The Tongue of the Swearer: a Suffolk Story' (1861), 'The Race Course and its Accompaniments' (1867), 'Found at Eventide: the True Story of a Young Village Infidel' (1870), and 'Sacred Records in Verse' (1872). Tayler died at his home, Chapel House, Worthing, Sussex, on 16 October 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 27012


Tayler, (John) Frederick (1806-1889), watercolour painter and etcher, was born on 30 April 1806 at Borehamwood in Hertfordshire, one of seventeen children of Archdale Wilson Tayler, a country landowner until forced to go into the army, having been ruined by his agent; he died when Tayler was still a child. A younger brother, William Tayler, became commissioner of Patna in India, and an uncle, Charles Henry Hall, was dean of Christ Church, Oxford. Intended by his family for the church Tayler was educated at both Eton College and Harrow School. He determined to become an artist, however, and attended Henry Sass's school in Bloomsbury and the Royal Academy Schools. In Paris the animal paintings of Theodore Gericault inspired Tayler to take lessons from the equestrian artist Horace Vernet, and he bought parts of horses from butchers in order to study their anatomy. He also shared a studio with Richard Parkes Bonington, who must have encouraged his preference for watercolour; he sketched on the French coast with John Skinner Prout, and he visited Rome. 
In 1830 Tayler exhibited an oil painting, 'The Band of the 2nd Regiment of Life Guards', at the Royal Academy. In 1831 he was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours, and became a full member three years later. In all he exhibited 500 pictures with the society, including twelve drawn with George Barret. Queen Victoria, who first saw Tayler's work in 1834, became an important patron and purchased work for Windsor Castle. Thereafter aristocratic taste and Tayler's considerable social connections enabled him to sell his work for high prices; 'Return from Hawking', for instance, was purchased for $465 3's'. in 1864. He signed himself F. Tayler. Tayler's work can be divided into three groups: sporting scenes, often in costume and with horses; pastoral scenes, mostly Scottish; and historical illustrations, frequently inspired by the 'Waverley' novels. Henry Walker, in 'Our Living Painters' (1859), commented: 'His paintings have great dash, and evince power of a sketchy kind, albeit they are somewhat washy and blotty in execution, and, at a day when care and finish are becoming almost universal, are works not wholly up to our time. (244-5)' Tayler was a member of the Etching Club and made prints throughout his career, from 'Frederick Tayler's Portfolio', a series of lithotints published in 1844 and 1845, to 'Studies in Animal Painting', in 1884. 
On the death of Copley Fielding, in 1855, Tayler became for eight months acting president of the Society of Painters in Water Colours. During that year a dispute at the Paris Universal Exhibition over the hanging of drawings, particularly those of John Frederick Lewis, made Tayler seriously ill from stress; yet when Lewis resigned as president, in February 1858, Tayler was unanimously elected to replace him. He remained in office until 1870 but was not considered very effective: 'Amiable and generous in his nature, he was not one who loved to thrust himself into the forefront as an advocate' (Roget, 2.215). A less generous critic, William Evans 'of Eton', said that Tayler's 'lukewarmness' was positively harmful (Royal Watercolour Society MSS, J30/18). Art brought Tayler other worldly honours. He received the Legion d'honneur of France, and other awards from Belgium, Bavaria, and Austria; he was also elected a member of the Pennsylvanian and the Royal Cambrian academies, and of the Societe des Aquerellistes of Belgium. 
A photograph of about 1863 portrays Tayler as a rather prim figure; he has a high forehead, side whiskers, a long nose, small, deep-set eyes, and hair which curls at the ears. In 1837 he married Jane Parratt, with whom he had three surviving sons and two daughters. Tayler lived in London for most of his life; the catalogues give various addresses around London, and two for periods, in 1838 and in 1887, when he lived in Brighton. Late in his life he lost heavily through unfortunate investments. Frederick Tayler died at his home, 63 Gascony Avenue, West Hampstead, on 20 June 1889 and was buried in Hampstead cemetery. His remaining works were sold by Christies on 27 January and 17 February 1890. He was a prolific artist; the Victoria and Albert Museum, the British Museum, and many other galleries have drawings by Tayler, but his work has never recovered its once great popularity. A daughter, Kate Tayler ('fl'. 1870-1908), exhibited with the Society of Women Artists and with the Dudley Gallery. Norman Tayler (1843-1915), Tayler's second son, was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1878; his watercolours were primarily of genre scenes. 


@@@@@


doc= 27013


Tayler, John James (1797-1869), Unitarian minister and college head, was born on 15 August 1797 at Church Row, Newington Butts, in Surrey, the elder son of John Tayler (1765-1831), a nonconformist minister, and Elizabeth, the daughter of John Kenning of Walthamstow. When John James Tayler was five years old the family moved from London to Nottingham, where his father took the prestigious post of minister of High Pavement Chapel. In addition to his ministerial work John Tayler started a school in his own home, where his son was a pupil until the age of seventeen. It was here that John James acquired his command of the English language as well as a comprehensive knowledge of Latin and German. 
In 1814 John James Tayler was sent to train for the Unitarian ministry at Manchester College, York, under the principalship of Charles Wellbeloved (1769-1858). A letter written by Tayler at this time records that he was studying Greek, Hebrew, Arabic, and mathematics, all in the same week. His days at Manchester College were happy ones, but at the close of his second year he left York and spent the following two years at the University of Glasgow reading for a BA degree. After gaining the degree in 1819 he returned straight away to Manchester College as a temporary assistant tutor in classics, while his former tutor John Kenrick (1788-1877) was in Germany studying with Schleiermacher. 
The year spent as a tutor changed the course of Tayler's life. He had previously hoped to study medicine and combine the duties of a minister with those of a doctor. However, the financial difficulties of a long medical training, combined with his increasing interest in theology, caused him to abandon the idea. Thus in 1820, at the age of twenty-three, he accepted an invitation to become the minister of Mosley Street Chapel (later Upper Brook Street), Manchester. On 16 January 1825 he married Hannah, the daughter of Timothy Smith of Icknield; none of their children survived him. 
Like his contemporaries, the members of the Oxford Movement, Tayler was also influenced by Romanticism. From his published correspondence, which is a little cameo of Victorian intellectual life, it can be seen that as a student of Glasgow he was avidly reading Scott, and on one of his early visits to the Lake District he joined Wordsworth for tea and the two men went for a long walk together later in the week. Further influence of the Romantic movement on Tayler can be seen by the fact that in 1839 Sir Charles Barry, the architect of the new houses of parliament, was commissioned, amid controversy, but with Tayler's approval, to build the new Upper Brook Street Chapel in a splendid Gothic style. This move away from the rectangular and octagonal chapels which were light, airy, and conducive to rationalism, towards Gothic-style churches with stained-glass windows, choir pews, and high altars which were never used, was a reflection of the moving of Unitarian thought from an excessive reliance upon rationalism, as propounded by Joseph Priestley, towards a more spiritual and romantic religion in which devotion to Christ was central. Tayler achieved this revolution within Unitarianism partly through his joint editorship of the influential 'Prospective Review' and partly through his control of Manchester College, which was the sole institution for the training of Unitarian ministers. 
During the year 1834-5, as D. F. Strauss was publishing his 'Life of Jesus', Tayler, who had suffered from nervous exhaustion, spent a year in Germany to recover, and used the opportunity to study continental theology. Thereafter he remained a keen student of German religious thought and was always an admirer of the German way of life. He was greatly impressed by the works of F. D. E. Schleiermacher and at Gottingen attended, at eight o'clock every morning, the lectures of Professor J. K. L. Gieseler on church history. Gieseler's systematic approach to his subject influenced Tayler's own study of church history. Contact between English and German religious thought in the nineteenth century was wider than is sometimes portrayed, but Tayler was one of the more interesting links in this chain. He spoke German and regularly conducted services in German while he was in London. After visiting Germany for the first time in 1834 he corresponded with several leading German professors. Tayler also formed a close friendship with Baron Christian Bunsen, and studied his works several years before they were made famous by Rowland Williams in 'Essays and Reviews' (1860). 
In 1840 Manchester College moved back to Manchester from York, with an enlarged staff and with a determination to become a small university. Tayler was appointed professor of ecclesiastical history, with James Martineau (1805-1900) as professor of philosophy and Francis Newman (1805-1897) as professor of classics. Tayler continued his ministry at Upper Brook Street, holding the two posts in tandem until 1853, when the college moved to London and he was appointed principal of the new institution, a post he held until his death in 1869. Tayler fought vigorously for church unity within a wider state church, on the grounds that such a unity would not duplicate resources but would encourage a highly trained ministry, strengthen the parochial system, and enable Christians to unite in social action. He strongly advocated this position in his publication 'A Catholic Christian Church, the Want of our Time' (1867). 
In London, Tayler took his place in the intellectual society of the capital. He was a close friend of Henry Crabb Robinson (1775-1867), and was the most regular attender at Crabb Robinson's famous dinner parties. Charles Lyell (1769-1849), the geologist, corresponded with him and called to consult him concerning his own research. Tayler's literary output in this period numbered some fifty major books and papers, including 'A Retrospective of Religious Life of England' (1845) and 'English Nonconformity: its Principle and Justification' (1859), as well as a large number of written sermons and an extensive private correspondence. 
Tayler died at his home, The Limes, Rosslyn, Hampstead, on 28 May 1869. A quiet, thoughtful, and good man, his portraits in the senior common room and the library at Manchester College portray him with a kindly face. In his tribute to Tayler, his old friend James Martineau called him 'the English Schleiermacher' and added, 'No one could look at him and say that the power of Christianity is spent' (Martineau and Beard). 


@@@@@


doc= 27014


Tayler, Joseph Needham (1785-1864), naval officer, born at Devizes, Wiltshire, was the son of Samuel Tayler, five times mayor of Devizes and commandant of local volunteers, and his wife, Sally, daughter of Joseph Needham MD, and niece of Henry Needham, a partner in Child's Bank. An elder brother, Samuel Tayler, a lieutenant in the 13th light dragoons, was killed in the Peninsula; another, Thomas Tayler, major of the 9th Bengal native infantry, died in India. 
Joseph entered the navy in July 1796 in the 'Royal George', flagship of Lord Bridport, and witnessed the Spithead mutiny in April and May 1797. In 1799 he was moved to the 'Anson' with Captain Philip Durham, whom he followed in February 1801 to the 'Endymion'. He was promoted lieutenant on 29 April 1802, and in October 1803 was appointed to the 'Leopard', one of the squadron with Lord Keith in the Downs and off Boulogne. In March 1806 the 'Leopard' was sent to convoy six East Indiamen to the southward of the Cape Verde Islands, off the coast of west Africa; when one of them struck a reef near St Iago and became a total wreck, Tayler succeeded in saving thirty of the crew, though more were lost. In March 1807 he was moved to the 'Maida', one of the ships in the attack on Copenhagen, and landed in command of a party of seamen for one of the batteries. In 1808 he was in the 'Spencer', flagship of Rear-Admiral Robert Stopford, on the coast of France. In 1809 he was in the 'Heroine', and in 1810 in the 'Goldfinch' on the north coast of Spain. On 27 August 1810 he was promoted commander of the 'Sparrow' (16 guns), then in the West Indies, but did not join her until the following February. He then cruised in the Mona passage for several months to suppress piracy. He returned to England with a convoy, and in 1812 was employed on the north coast of Spain, co-operating with the army. He carried home the dispatches after the battle of Vitoria and returned to take part in the siege of San Sebastian, where, on 24 July in the sailors' battery, he was almost torn to pieces by an exploding shell -- his head was cut open, he had a severe wound in the groin, and his left leg was smashed. He was sent home and, on 9 August 1813, to the Haslar Royal Naval Hospital, where he was confined to bed for twenty-eight weeks. It was upwards of two years before his wounds were healed. In November 1814 he was awarded a pension of $200 a year, which in 1815 was increased to $250. He was also made a CB on 8 December 1815 and received $100 from the Patriotic Fund and the freedom of Devizes. 
From July 1838 to August 1841 Tayler was captain of the Ordinary at Plymouth; but, with this exception, the greater part of his life was passed at Devizes, which he devoted his energy and money to improving. He pulled down and rebuilt shops and houses, and stopped only when his funds were exhausted, for the improvements did not seem to have been a paying investment. He made various inventions, including a transporting carriage for ships' guns for field service ashore. In 1838 he took out a patent for 'a certain method of abating or lessening the shock or force of the waves... preventing the injury done to, and increasing the durability of, places exposed to the violent action of the waves', and improvements upon his original plan, which involved the construction of a floating breakwater made up of timber frames chained together and anchored to the seabed, were suggested by him in 1840, 1843, and 1846. In 1840 he published 'Plans for the Formation of Harbours of Refuge', and in 1848 'The Defence of the Coast of Great Britain'. At Brighton in 1845 three 60 foot sections of the floating breakwater were launched as a trial; a model of his breakwater was seen at the Great Exhibition of 1851, but it appears to have had only a modified success in practice. In 1852 he submitted to Trinity House a proposal to erect a 'shipwreck asylum' on the Goodwin Sands off the coast of Kent. Nothing came of this proposal, but a harbour of refuge seems to have been erected at Le Havre in 1855 in accordance with his suggestions. Tayler accepted the rank of rear-admiral on the retired list on 10 October 1846. During his later life he resided at Brixton, Devon, where he died, unmarried, on 18 March 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 27015


Tayler, William (1808-1892), East India Company servant, youngest of the seventeen children of Archdale Wilson Tayler of Boreham Wood, Elstree, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Frances Eliza, sister of Charles Henry Hall, was born at Boreham Wood on 31 March 1808. John Frederick Tayler was his elder brother. William was educated at Charterhouse School and in early 1829 had just spent a term at Christ Church, Oxford, when he was unexpectedly offered a writership in the Bengal civil service. 
Tayler arrived in Bengal in October 1829 and in June 1830 was appointed assistant to the commissioner of Cuttack. On 17 July 1830, in Calcutta, he married Charlotte Brydges, daughter of John Palmer, a merchant. Of their seven children, two daughters died in infancy. Tayler held various posts in Bengal, including that of postmaster-general, before becoming in 1855 commissioner of Patna. He was competent in Hindustani and Persian; like many district officers, he prided himself on knowing the country and her people and, furthermore, knowing them better than his superiors did. He was a keen amateur dramatist and skilful caricaturist, but while his witty portraits of Anglo-Indian notables won him some influential friends in Calcutta, the light-hearted nature of his artistic pursuits earned for him a reputation as a somewhat flighty, unserious officer. Moreover, in spite of his pen's readiness to deflate other people's vanities, he was himself remarkably thin-skinned and saw behind every hitch in his career cabals of intriguers and pompous, incompetent superiors. 
Some months before the uprising of 1857 Tayler warned the Bengal government that there were signs of disaffection among the people of Bihar, in particular the Muslims. In response the lieutenant-governor, Frederick Halliday, suggested that this was partly Tayler's own fault and singled out for criticism his over-enthusiastic collection of 'voluntary' subscriptions from local gentry for an industrial school he wanted to establish. It was a slight Tayler never forgave. In May 1857, when the Indian mutiny did finally break out up-country, Tayler, having long feared such a calamity, was quick to implement defensive measures in his own division, so quick in fact that the authorities in Calcutta worried that he was goading Bihar's still relatively peaceable population into rebellion. On 19 June he invited the leading Indians of Patna to his house, ostensibly for friendly discussions, and then arrested three of them, all prominent Muslim divines, whom he was convinced were plotting against the British. Halliday was appalled at such an act of bad faith. On 25 July the sepoys at Dinapore mutinied and laid siege to the station of Arrah. This was exactly what Tayler had feared most, and on 31 July, giving up Arrah and indeed all of the Bihar countryside as a hopeless case, he ordered the civil officers of his division to abandon their posts and fall back on Dinapore. To the authorities in Calcutta this smacked of panic, and on 4 August Halliday suspended Tayler from the commissionership. 
Tayler's reading of the military situation had been determined by his unshakeable conviction that the Muslims of Bihar had masterminded a province-wide rebellion; he had expected therefore only to be able to hold the city of Patna, if indeed he could hold that. In part, of course, he was unlucky. Had Arrah fallen, as it could so easily have done, his insistence on defending Patna would have been deemed far-sighted. But in a war in which accounts of desperate last stands and acts of derring-do were instantly becoming part of imperial legend, his Cassandra-like defeatism was doomed to be seen as cowardice. 
Tayler was aghast at his suspension and, convinced that he was a victim of Halliday's malice and envy, embarked upon an appeal process which was so vitriolic and intemperate that it inexorably led to his exit from the civil service. In 1858 he was appointed judge of Mymensingh, but in January of the following year was again suspended, on the grounds of his 'insufferably offensive conduct', and resigned the service in March. He appealed for redress to every secretary of state in succession from 1857 to 1888 and in 1888 also managed to have his case heard before the House of Commons. In spite of the fact that he had many influential supporters, among them two prominent historians of the uprising -- J. W. Kaye and Colonel G. B. Malleson -- and Sir Henry Havelock and 'The Times', his appeals were all rejected outright, not least because of his refusal to modify his intensely personal criticism of Halliday. 
For eight years after his resignation Tayler practised successfully as an advocate in Calcutta before returning to London in 1867. In addition to numerous pamphlets connected with his case, he published in 1881-2 a two-volume autobiography, 'Thirty-Eight Years in India', profusely illustrated with his own sketches. He died at his home, 19 Markwick Terrace, St Leonards, Sussex, on 5 March 1892; he was survived by his wife. Both of their sons, Skipwith Henry Churchill and Henry Vansittart, had careers in the Indian Civil Service. 


@@@@@


doc= 27016


Taylor, Abraham (fl. 1726-1740), Independent minister and tutor, was the son of Richard Taylor (died 1717), Independent minister of Little Moorfields, London. He was a classical scholar and trenchant defender of Calvinist orthodoxy. His first (anonymous) publication, 'The Scripture Doctrine of the Trinity Vindicated' (1726; 2nd edn, 1728) was directed at Isaac Watts, and shows his strict adherence to orthodoxy, against Watts's more reconciling spirit. At about the same time (though not published until 1732) he wrote a two-volume defence of the Trinity 'in opposition to the Arian scheme'. In 1730 he published a dismissive 'Letter to the author (Strickland Gough) of an enquiry into the causes of the decay of the dissenting interest'; Gough, a dissenting minister, had taken orders in the Church of England. 
This work brought Taylor to the notice of William Coward, who appointed him one of nine preachers of a weekly lecture in defence of Calvinism at Paved Alley, Lime Street. The lectures, including four by Taylor, were delivered in 1730-31 and published in 1732. While the lectures were proceeding, the King's Head Society (founded 1730) selected Taylor as divinity tutor. After a two-year classical course under Samuel Parsons at Clerkenwell, the students were sent to Taylor for four years at Deptford, where he had been minister since 1728, and had been ordained in 1731. Though he had a harsh temperament, revealed in 1732 in an angry controversy with John Gill, one of the Lime Street lecturers, in point of attainment Taylor was well fitted for the post. Alexander Cruden, commending Taylor to Marischal College, Aberdeen, for the award of DD wrote: 'he exceeds all the Dissenting ministers of my acquaintance for Learning' (P. J. Anderson, 'Fasti academiae Aberdonensis', 1897, 2.82). The doctorate was awarded in 1736. 
Taylor preached and published several exhortations and funeral sermons, most notably that for his close friend and former pastor John Hurrion, minister of Hare-court, Aldersgate (1733). Such was his influence that Philip Doddridge's friends feared the academy which Coward proposed to endow after his death would be put under Taylor rather than Doddridge; and later that the settlement of Coward's will would favour Taylor, and 'Bigotry [be] intailed on the rising Generation' ('Calendar', ed. Nuttall, 85 [no. 467]). These fears proved unfounded, but Coward's trustees, who included Watts, withdrew financial support from the seven of Taylor's students whom Coward had been funding personally until his death in April 1738, and resolved to place no more with him. To what extent these decisions contributed to Taylor's financial difficulties is only conjecture, but in 1740, after enquiry into his circumstances, the King's Head Society dismissed Taylor, who disappears from the public record and is thought to have died in penury. 


@@@@@


doc= 27017


Taylor, Alfred Swaine (1806-1880), medical jurist and toxicologist, born at Northfleet, Kent, on 11 December 1806, was the eldest son of Thomas Taylor, a captain in the East India Company's maritime service, and his first wife, Susan Mary, daughter of Charles Badger, manufacturer of gun flints, a member of an old Kentish family. Taylor was privately educated at Dr Benson's school, Albemarle House, Hounslow, and in June 1822 he was apprenticed to Mr D. Macrae, a medical practitioner at Lenham, near Maidstone, Kent. In October 1823 he was entered as a student at the united hospitals of Guy's and St Thomas's, London where he took a particular interest in chemistry taught by William Allen and Arthur Aikin. He spent the summer of 1825 in Paris, and on his return to London received the anatomical prize at St Thomas's. On the separation of the two hospitals he attached himself to Guy's studying under Sir Astley Cooper and Joseph Henry Green, gaining a reputation for his knowledge of physiology. 
Taylor became a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries of London in 1828 and then embarked upon a tour of the medical schools of Europe. In Paris he attended the lectures of the toxicologist Matthieu Joseph Bonaventura Orfila, the surgeon Guillaume Dupuytren and the chemist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac. Taylor spent time in the Auvergne, where he prepared a note on the geology of the Puy de Dome which was published in the 'London Medical and Physical Journal'. He visited the medical school at Montpellier before boarding a ship for Naples, which he reached after a stormy and perilous voyage. At one stage of his journey Taylor was arrested for having dangerous books in his possession and he was to be arrested again on his homeward journey, this time as a suspected spy, after sketching the fortifications near Brescia. 
Taylor stayed in Naples for nine months and wrote two articles on physiology which were published in the 'Giornale Medico Napolitano'. His account of the Grotta de' Cani, notorious for its suffocating fumes, was later published in the 'London Medical and Physical Journal'. The overland journey home, much of it on foot, began in February 1829. He travelled through Italy, Switzerland, the Tyrol, Germany, and the Low Countries visiting medical schools in Rome, Florence, Bologna, Milan, Heidelberg, Leiden, Amsterdam, and Brussels. He spent the winter of 1829-1830 at Guy's Hospital and became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in March 1830. A third visit to Paris was made in the summer of 1830 at the time of the revolution and Taylor was able to study gunshot wounds and their treatment by the surgeons Jacques Manec and Jacques Lisfranc at La Pitie. 
The visits to Paris had aroused Taylor's interest in forensic medicine at the time when the Society of Apothecaries made the subject a requirement for its licentiate diploma. In 1831 Taylor was appointed to the newly created post of lecturer of medical jurisprudence at Guy's Hospital, and he held the post as professor until 1877. His inaugural course of lectures was attended by some leading members of the bar and some judges. Taylor was particularly interested in the application of chemistry to medicine and in 1832 he was appointed joint lecturer in chemistry at Guy's with Arthur Aikin: from 1851 until his resignation in 1870 he held the chair in chemistry alone. In July 1834 he married Caroline, only daughter of John Cancellor, a London stockbroker; they had one child, a daughter, Edith. 
In 1836 Taylor published the first volume of 'Elements of Medical Jurisprudence', but finding that the scale of the work would require four volumes he rearranged the subject matter to provide a more convenient and practical guide for the medical jurist. The revised work, 'A Manual of Medical Jurisprudence', was published in 1844 and went through ten editions in Taylor's lifetime. In 1848 he published 'Poisons in Relation to Medical Jurisprudence and Medicine' which like the earlier 'Manual' presented codified legal precedents and rulings together with relevant, anatomical, clinical, and chemical data. Taylor's 'Principles and Practice of Medical Jurisprudence' appeared in 1865; a second edition in two volumes followed in 1873. These books became standard works and established Taylor as the major contributor to the professional establishment of medical jurisprudence. He contributed a regular series of articles on medico-legal cases to the 'British Medical Journal' and to the 'London Medical Gazette', acting as editor of the latter between 1844 and 1851. Taylor became FRS (1845), MRCP (1848), and FRCP (1853). In 1852 he received the honorary degree of MD from the University of St Andrews, and in 1859, in recognition of his writings on medical jurisprudence, he was awarded the Swiney prize by the Society of Arts. 
By the mid-1850s Taylor had been consulted on about five hundred medico-legal cases and was recognized as a leading medical jurist. His public reputation was built upon his appearances as an expert witness in a number of highly publicized murder trials. As a toxicologist Taylor's experience was equalled only by Robert Christison, and he appeared as a witness for the prosecution in a number of trials for suspected murder by poisoning, becoming in time adviser to the Treasury in cases of particular difficulty. By combining legal precedent and judicial ruling with chemical and anatomical evidence he established forensic toxicology as a medical specialism. The most notable trial in which he appeared was that of William Palmer, who was accused of murdering John Parsons Cook with strychnine. Taylor's evidence, and the criticism of it by Sergeant Robert Shee for the defence, were widely reported. After Palmer's execution Taylor published an assessment of the evidence in 'On poisoning by strychnia, with comments on the medical evidence at the trial of William Palmer for the murder of John Parsons Cook' (1856). 
The controversial trials of Palmer in 1856 and Dr Thomas Smethurst in 1859 did much to influence Taylor's opinions concerning the nature and use of medical evidence in murder trials. Early in his career Taylor had been aware of problems posed by medical evidence. In the first edition of his 'Manual' he laid down the principle that it was the task of the jury to decide the verdict and that the medical jurist must, in doubtful cases, refrain from devoting his energies to only one side of the question. His subsequent experience in poisoning cases led him to conclude that analytical results, obtained by the imperfect methods of his time, provided only a certain degree of probability and where admitted as evidence should be used only to supplement the medical observations. The uncertainties were such that he opposed the system of engaging medical witnesses for prosecution and defence and he advocated instead a system of assessments by independent medical experts. 
Taylor was also a pioneer of photography and devised improvements in the fixing and printing processes used by William Henry Fox Talbot. He described his methods in his 'On the Art of Photogenic Drawing' (1840). He also had an interest in thermometry and published two works on the subject, 'A thermometric table on the scales of fahrenheit, centigrade and Reaumur, compressing the most remarkable phenomena connected with temperature' (1845) and 'On the Temperature of the Earth and Sea in Reference to the Theory of Central Heat' (1846). He revised and edited 'A New Treatise of the Use of Globes' by Thomas Keith (1848), and in 1853 assisted George Owen Rees in editing the final part of 'The Elements of Materia medica and Therapeutics', which was left incomplete by the death of Jonathan Pereira. In 1863 he and George Brande published 'Chemistry' and in 1876 he published an edited version of 'Elements of Physics' by Neil Arnott. 
Taylor was described as a man of commanding stature who was calm and earnest in his manner. He was an accomplished amateur artist, had a knowledge of Latin and Greek, and was fluent in French, Italian, and German. He was said to be a man of quiet domestic traits and rarely to be seen at medical social events. Taylor lived in almost complete retirement in his last years and died of heart disease on 27 May 1880 at his home, 15 St James's Terrace, Regent's Park, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 27018


Taylor, Ann (1757-1830), writer, was born on 20 June 1757 in London, the daughter of Thomas Martin (1734/5-1764), a disciple of George Whitefield, and his wife, Mary Plaxton (died 1798?), daughter of a clergyman's son (or grandson) from Yorkshire. Her childhood was not happy. Her father, whom she adored despite his being a religious fundamentalist whose beliefs bordered on the deranged, died when she was six; her mother married again twice and Ann was neglected by her stepfather, a Mr Hewitt, and treated contemptuously by her half-siblings. At her day school in London, however, an enquiring mind and a flair for writing quickly marked her out; her 'poetic and often satirical effusions soon gained her a local celebrity' ('Autobiography', 1.15). 
On 18 April 1781 at St Andrew's, Holborn, Ann married Isaac Taylor (1759-1829), a young engraver and committed dissenter whom she had known since childhood. He had initiated his courtship by secreting a poem in a teapot of hers that he had been commissioned to engrave. She responded indignantly in kind and there ensued a 'paper war, which, for a time, made the gossip of the little circle' ('Autobiography', 1.16), but which ended in their engagement. Isaac and Ann were singularly well matched -- in intelligence, in outlook, and in talents -- and remained deeply in love throughout their life together. There were eleven children, six of whom survived to adulthood: three girls (Ann, Jane, and Jemima) and three boys (Isaac, Martin, and Jefferys). Four became writers: Ann Gilbert (1782-1866) ['see under 'Taylor, Jane], Jane Taylor (1783-1824), Isaac Taylor (1787-1865), and Jefferys Taylor (1792-1853). 
Ann Taylor found the early years of her marriage hard; money was short and the responsibilities of motherhood were exacerbated by the frail health of her children. Constitutionally a worrier, she became so weighed down with cares that a friend was moved to warn her to take action to retain her husband's interest and affection. Since she had no other time to spare, her response was to institute a practice of reading aloud to him at mealtimes, thereby keeping her own mind active and providing material for subsequent discussion. This practice continued for over forty years and in due course made an important contribution to her children's education too -- though her daughter Ann believed that it also played havoc with her mother's digestion and hindered the children's acquiring the art of conversation. 
Ann Taylor participated fully in her children's remarkable education, which was carried out almost exclusively at home. Her influence upon the characters and mental habits of her talented children was very considerable and gratefully acknowledged. However, despite her own early predilections she did not encourage her daughters Ann and Jane to write, being wont to declare that female authors 'would have done better to employ themselves in mending the family stockings' (Taylor, 'Memoirs', 1.28). It was a nice irony that she later became the first female member of the family to publish in her own name. 
Ann Taylor's health was never strong and she suffered from deafness from quite an early age. The strain of nursing her husband through a near fatal illness in 1793 further undermined her constitution and she contended with frailty, and perhaps with migraines, for the rest of her life. Her character was not overshadowed by these infirmities. As her youngest child, Jemima, remembered in a letter of 26 January 1869, 'though an anxious temper, [she] had much native sprightliness, which sparkled beautifully sometimes' (Taylor collection, HD 588/6/107). Her daughter Ann annotated a portrait of her mother thus: 'She always wore a turban... The face and features generally give the idea of a larger woman than she was, but they retain the impression of constant pain, almost extreme deafness, and deep retired thought and feeling' ('Ann Taylor Gilbert's Album', 81). 
Ann Taylor was a prolific and lively correspondent, writing regularly to her children whenever they were apart. The texts of many of these letters survive; in them the spirit of the youthful satirist gleams through the pages of sound maternal advice, together with an eye for detail and a striking gift for narrative. About 1811 she composed for Jemima, then thirteen, a manual of instruction -- a blend of spiritual, behavioural, and practical advice. The method was apparently chosen because Ann's increasing deafness made conversation difficult. She had originally no thought of its being published but was later persuaded that it would benefit a wider readership; in 1814 it was published as 'Maternal Solicitude for a Daughter's Best Interests'. It sold extremely well, going into fifteen editions (two of them American) over the next sixteen years. There followed other works in the same vein: 'Practical Hints to Young Females' (1815); 'The Present of a Mistress to a Young Servant' (1816); 'Reciprocal Duties of Parents and Children' (1818); and, in collaboration with her daughter Jane, 'Correspondence between a Mother and her Daughter at School' (1817). Most proved equally popular and influential. Their tone was moral but lacking in sanctimony, and the advice on parenthood and education strikingly permissive for its time. Ann also published two moralistic novellas, or 'tales', for the young -- 'The Family Mansion' (1819) and 'Retrospection: a Tale' (1821) -- and a collection of moral essays, 'The Itinerary of a Traveller in the Wilderness' (1825), a work much preoccupied with death and the afterlife. 
In her own eyes, however, Ann Taylor's true monument was her family, to whom, after God, her life was devoted. An unidentified visitor to the Taylor household in 1824 declared, 'I never met with a person so truly great and yet so affectionately tender as Mrs Taylor' (Armitage, 85). Yet the tenderness was spiced with an acerbic wit. Her husband's death on 12 December 1829 apparently deprived her of the will to live; having survived him by less than six months she died at her home in Ongar on 27 May 1830. She was buried at the Independent burial-ground in Ongar on 4 June; her grave, beside that of her husband, now lies under the vestry floor of the United Reformed church in Ongar. 


@@@@@


doc= 27019


Taylor, Brook (1685-1731), mathematician, was born on 18 August 1685 in Edmonton, Middlesex, the eldest son of John Taylor (1655-1729), merchant, and his wife, Olivia (died 1716), daughter of Sir Nicholas Tempest, baronet, of Durham. John's puritan father, Nathaniel Taylor (died 1684), was a barrister who had been selected by Cromwell in 1653 to represent the county of Bedford in parliament. In 1694 John Taylor purchased the estate of Bifrons within a large park in the parish of Patrixbourne, near Canterbury. Here he ran his household with an autocratic hand, his austere nature succumbing to one domestic pleasure, music. Among its celebrated practitioners, Lully, Couperon, Babel, and Geminiani were invited to perform at his home. In a painting by Closterman of the eight children of John Taylor about 1698 the young Brook is shown seated with recorder in hand while two of his older sisters prepare to crown him with a laurel wreath. 
During his adolescence Taylor became an accomplished musician and artist, talents which would find mathematical expression in later years in his pioneering study of the vibrating string, and in his treatise on linear perspective. A portrait by Goupy depicts the adult Taylor beside his harpsichord, pointing to an open copy of this treatise, with a landscape on the wall behind him, presumably executed by his own hand. After being tutored at home Taylor was admitted as a fellow-commoner to St John's College, Cambridge, on 3 April 1701; he graduated LLB in 1709 and LLD in 1714. He was admitted an advocate in the court of arches in 1714, but no mention of any legal activity on his part has been found. 
During his years at Cambridge, Taylor became proficient in mathematics and physics, and he was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 3 April 1712. Two weeks later he was chosen, along with Abraham De Moivre and Francis Aston, to serve on the Royal Society committee charged with adjudicating the priority controversy between Newton and Leibniz over the invention of the calculus. Although the committee's task was completed one week later, allowing Taylor only limited participation, this was his first public act as a partisan of Newton and paved the way for his subsequent activity as a proponent of Newtonian mechanics and the fluxional calculus. John Keill, Savilian professor of astronomy at Oxford and Newton's most outspoken advocate, became Taylor's mentor and friend. In his correspondence with Keill in 1712 and 1713 Taylor discussed many of his important discoveries, which appeared later in his book 'Methodus incrementorum'. Two results on the centre of oscillation, composed in 1708, and on the vibrating string, were first published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' (1713). 
In response to the Royal Society's interest in experiments that would advance Newtonian physics, Taylor worked on his own and with curators Francis Hauksbee and J. T. Desaguliers to try to determine the laws of capillarity, magnetic force, and thermometry. On 13 January 1715 he was elected secretary of the Royal Society after the death of Richard Waller. His book 'Linear Perspective' appeared later that year, written in formal mathematical style with axioms and theorems. Although the abstruse and concise nature of the text made it inaccessible to most artists, the work influenced later writers on the subject and holds a prominent place in the history of perspective. Not only did it contain contributions to the theory of inverse problems and direct construction, but it was the first to call attention to the importance of vanishing points and lines. Taylor published an expanded version, 'New Principles of Linear Perspective', in 1719. 
During the year in which his first treatise on perspective appeared Taylor also published his chief mathematical work, 'Methodus incrementorum directa et inversa' (1715; 2nd edn, 1717). He felt that his new method of increments, which came to be known as finite differences, would furnish a stronger and more consistent basis for the Newtonian fluxional calculus than Newton himself had given. The first part of the text concerns the fundamental principles of the method and the transformation and solution of finite difference and differential equations. The second part contains applications of both his method and the calculus to problems in mathematics and mechanics. Several of these, including the formulae for the derivatives of the inverse function, the recognition of a singular solution to a differential equation, a comprehensive discussion of the number and type of boundary conditions to be adjoined to finite difference and differential equations, the equation of motion and fundamental period of the vibrating string, and the differential equation for the path of a ray of light in the atmosphere, were first treated by Taylor. Others, like the catenary, isoperimetric problems, and the centres of oscillation and percussion, had been treated by continental mathematicians, especially Huygens, Leibniz, and the brothers Jacob and Johann Bernoulli. 
The celebrated series known as the Taylor series occurs in proposition 7, corollary 2 of 'Methodus incrementorum'. Taylor proved it using finite differences and the Gregory-Newton interpolation formula and invoked a passage to the limit that modern mathematicians would not consider rigorous. There is no discussion of a remainder term or convergence. Although Taylor was not the first to find the form of the series -- he was anticipated by James Gregory, Newton, Leibniz, Johann Bernoulli, and De Moivre -- he can be credited with publishing it first, along with a proof based on his theory of finite increments. Moreover he was the first to appreciate its importance and to demonstrate its applicability as an analytical tool: he employed it to generate series solutions to differential equations of all orders, to obtain series representations for integrals, and to find approximations to the roots of ordinary equations. Although the Taylor series about zero came to be associated with Colin MacLaurin, when MacLaurin published his own derivation using the method of undetermined coefficients, he acknowledged his predecessor: 'This theorem was given by Dr Taylor method. increm.' (C. MacLaurin, 'A Treatise of Fluxions', 2, 1742, 611). 
Despite praiseworthy comments about Taylor's achievements from Euler, Lagrange, and others, his 'Methodus' was not without its detractors. By citing no one but Newton in the text, Taylor incurred the wrath of Leibniz and Johann Bernoulli, both of whom accused him of deliberate obscurity and lack of originality. Bernoulli went further and charged Taylor with plagiarism. Most would agree that Taylor's style is excessively terse and obscure and that he was negligent in failing to acknowledge the work of his continental predecessors, but Taylor's unpublished papers in London (RS, MS 82) and Cambridge (Taylor MSS, St John's College) show the charge of plagiarism to be unfounded. Nevertheless, the controversy between Taylor and Bernoulli escalated, with accusations from each side appearing publicly in the journals and in their private correspondence with others. 
Taylor's most frequent correspondent and confidant was the French probabilist Pierre Remond de Monmort (1678-1719), whom he met on a visit to Paris in 1715. A disciple of Malebranche, Monmort engaged Taylor in an amicable public debate concerning the merits of Newton's gravitational theory over the vortex theory adhered to by many French Cartesians. Realizing later that Taylor could not be swayed, Monmort vowed, 'I shall love you without loving your attractions, and you shall love me without loving our little vortices' (Monmort to Taylor, 5 Nov 1718, St John's College, Taylor MSS). According to Taylor's grandson, in Paris, Taylor 'was eagerly courted by all who had temper to enjoy, or talents to improve, the charms of social intercourse' (Young, 23-4). Among those seeking his society, in addition to the savants of the Academie Royale des Sciences, were the Abbe Conti, the comte de Caylus, Bishop Bossuet, and Lord Bolingbroke, who became his close friend. It was through the Abbe Conti that Leibniz and Bernoulli sent a challenge problem to the English mathematicians, on orthogonal trajectories for families of curves. Newton was in his seventies by then, and it was left to his younger colleague Taylor to salvage the pride of the English. His solution appeared in the 'Philosophical Transactions' (30, 1717). Through Monmort, Taylor sent the Leibnizians two more challenges, on the motion of a projectile in a resisting medium and on the integration of rational fractions. Both problems provoked more bitterness, attacks, and recriminations between Taylor and Bernoulli. Having declared himself neutral in the dispute between Newton and Leibniz, Monmort agreed to play the role of intermediary between Taylor and Bernoulli, but to no avail. The feud ended without resolution after Taylor decided to remain silent in the face of further attacks. 
Other events in Taylor's life came to occupy his attention during this time. On 21 October 1718 he resigned as secretary of the Royal Society, informing his fellow secretary Edmond Halley that personal matters would keep him away from London. His health deteriorated and he was sent to recuperate in the spa of Aix-la-Chapelle. Indeed the last decade of his life was marked by failing health and severe emotional strain. In 1721 he married Sarah Elizabeth Brydges, of Wallington, Surrey. The marriage caused an estrangement with his father, since she was 'of good family, but of small fortune' (Young, 33) and his father's consent had not been obtained. In 1723 she died in childbirth, along with the child, but the tragic event had a positive consequence, namely reconciliation between father and son. With his father's approval in 1725 Taylor married Elizabeth (Sabetta), daughter of John Sawbridge of Olantigh, Kent. In July 1729 on the death of his father, Brook inherited the family estate of Bifrons, which was to remain in the Taylor family for close to a century. In March of the next year he lost his second wife in childbirth. This time the child, Elizabeth, survived. (In Taylor's will a second daughter, Olive, is mentioned, but it is not known whether she survived to adulthood.) Years later Elizabeth's son, Sir William Young, second baronet, at the request of some members of the Academie Francaise, composed a short biography of his grandfather and had it printed, along with some of Taylor's correspondence and an unfinished essay entitled 'Contemplatio philosophica'. After the death of his second wife, burdened by grief and beset by ill health, Taylor died 'of a decline' (Young, 40) on 30 November 1731 in Somerset House, London. He was buried in London on 2 December 1731, near his first wife, in the churchyard of St Anne's, Soho. 


@@@@@


doc= 27020


Sir Brook Taylor (1776-1846), joined the diplomatic service under the patronage of Lord Grenville, and was British minister to Cologne and Hesse-Cassel in 1801-6, to Denmark in 1807, to Wurttemberg in 1814-20 and to Bavaria in 1820-28. He was minister at Berlin in 1828-31, and was created GCH in 1822 and sworn of the privy council in 1828. He died, unmarried, at Eaton Place, London, on 15 October 1846. 


@@@@@


doc= 27021


Taylor, Charles (1756-1823), engraver and biblical scholar, was born on 1 February 1756 near Brentwood, Essex, the eldest of the five children of Isaac Taylor (1730-1807), engraver, and his wife, Sarah Hackshaw Jefferys (1733-1809). Evidence about his schooling is unclear, but he probably spent time at Sir Anthony Browne's school, Brentwood, before briefly attending a school in the City of London. At the age of sixteen he was articled to his father as an engraver and is believed to have studied under Francesco Bartolozzi. On 27 May 1777 he married Mary Forrest ('b'. 1754), daughter of Edward and Mary Forrest of Isleworth, Middlesex, and Carmarthen; they had one son and two daughters. Taylor spent the following twelve months in Paris, still then regarded as the principal school of engraving. The precise nature and scope of his studies in Paris are obscure, but he appears to have frequented the king's library. As a scholar he appears to have been largely self-taught, mastering not only Latin and Greek, but also Hebrew and 'two or three modern languages' (Taylor, 'The family pen', 2-3). 
On his return to London in 1778 Taylor set up home and business at 114 High Holborn, producing engravings after pictures by Robert Smirke and Angelica Kauffmann. Early in 1780 he moved to 8 Dyers Buildings, Holborn, but was briefly forced to flee with his family when Landell's distillery near by was set on fire during the Gordon riots. At this time he was involved, with his brother Isaac Taylor (1759-1829), whom he briefly employed, in the engraving and publishing of illustrations to the plays of Shakespeare ('The Picturesque Beauties of Shakespeare', 1783-7), which attracted favourable notice from John Boydell. In 1785 he moved to 10 Holborn and finally, in 1796, to 108 Hatton Garden. In the late 1780s he began to publish, under the pseudonym Francis Fitzgerald, volumes also containing the work of other engravers, including 'The Cabinet of Genius' (1787) and 'The Elegant Repository and New Print Magazine' (1791-2). 
Although Taylor's income came from engraving and later also from publishing, in both of these fields he was surpassed, respectively, by his brothers Isaac and Josiah (1761-1834). In his brother Isaac's opinion, 'he had some artistic feeling, but no delicacy of touch' (Taylor MSS, HD 588/4/14). Charles Taylor's renown was founded upon a quite different accomplishment. In his seventeenth year he had by chance come upon a copy of Calmet's 'Dictionnaire historique et critique de la Bible' (1734). This massive work of scholarship fired his imagination, and he determined then and there that he would produce a new edition of it, in English, with a commentary of his own. It was a further twenty-six years before, in 1797, he felt ready to begin to publish the results of his labours. There is evidence that he at first sought sponsorship for the project in his own name. The rebuff that he received, at least from the bishop of London, was perhaps what persuaded him to publish anonymously, and thereafter, as further instalments and then further editions appeared, to refuse to acknowledge any connection with the work, beyond those of publisher and engraver. In the judgement of his nephew, Isaac Taylor, the work itself was too important to Charles Taylor to allow him to risk its being discounted by the academic establishment through association with himself -- 'a layman, a Nonconformist, a member of the university' (Taylor, 'The family pen', 9-10). The reception by the learned world of the first sample of his revision and commentary (in the form of dissertations entitled 'Fragments'), illustrated by himself, was enthusiastic, enhanced no doubt by the mystery then surrounding the identity of the author. Even the archbishop of Canterbury enquired diligently who he might be. Taylor's edition of Calmet, which drew upon a wide range of new sources, especially in Jewish and oriental literature, became for many years a model for biblical scholarship. 
Eventually the edition of Calmet was a financial, as well as a scholarly, success. However, in January 1798, shortly after its publication, Taylor was in sufficiently straitened circumstances to be briefly imprisoned for debt at the suit of one Robert Wright, a carpenter. He later inherited the bulk of his father's fortune, including properties in London and Essex, but this seems not at all to have altered his frugal and industrious way of life. Taylor also edited two periodicals, the 'Literary Annual Register' and its successor, the 'Literary Panorama' -- to which he contributed well-received articles on political economy and state policy. For some years he served as honorary librarian to the London Library Society, founded in 1785. Indeed, in 1801 the library itself was moved to his premises at 108 Hatton Garden, where it remained for several years. He wrote several other books and pamphlets on art and on religious topics, including 'Facts and Evidences on the Subject of Baptism' (1815) and 'A Familiar Treatise on Perspective' (1816). 
Charles Taylor was, like his brother Isaac and like his forebears on his mother's side, a dissenter, and a regular worshipper at the Old Meeting-House in Fetter Lane, Holborn. He was, however, by temperament a deeply conservative man and, despite an early flirtation with the ideas of the Arian theologian William Whiston, as orthodox in his theological opinions as he was extraordinary and even eccentric in his intellectual range and habits. He was, in apparent contrast to his father, who had supported Wilkes, a 'thorough-going Tory' (Taylor, 'The family pen', 9). In appearance he was, according to his nephew Isaac: 'a man -- then just past mid-life -- powerful in bony and muscular framework -- singularly hirsute -- well limbed, well filled out, erect in walk, prominent and aquiline in feature -- teeming, as one should say, with repressed energy. (ibid., 4)' His niece, Ann Gilbert's, picture is of a: 'tall figure, slightly bending, or appearing to do so, from the habit of constantly walking with his left arm under his coat behind, his full grey hair turned loosely back, a plain, shrewdly good-natured countenance, with always a welcome, a queer speech or a pun, on his lips. (Gilbert, 153-4)' Charles Taylor's brother Isaac, by no means an envious or ungenerous man, 'never regarded him as learned' (Taylor MSS, HD 588/4/14) and attributed his achievements to a facility for epigraphy, acquired through a natural shrewdness supplemented by practice, and to a quite extraordinary memory, which gave him almost total recall of anything he read even many years afterwards. 
Charles Taylor died of asthma on 13 November 1823, at his home, 108 Hatton Garden, London, and was buried with several of his maternal forebears in the family vault in the Bunhill Fields burial-ground, Finsbury, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 27022


Taylor, Christopher (1614/15-1686), religious writer and schoolmaster, was born in north Yorkshire, near the Westmorland border, possibly near Skipton, and was probably the son of Thomas Taylor, described as of Ravenstonedale, Westmorland. He matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, aged eighteen, on 22 March 1633 and graduated BA on 28 May 1636. According to John Whiting's 'Persecution Exposed', he served as a preaching minister until his conversion to Quakerism in 1652 by George Fox. Another source describes how in 1652 or 1653 William Dewsbury and Christopher's brother Thomas Taylor came to him, 'a Priest of a Chappell, called Chappell in the Bryers, betwixt Brighouse and Hallifax, who was convinced of the Truth, & bore Testimony to it, and was Instrumental in Settleing a Meeting at Bradford' (Penney, 291-2). In 1654 he was injured in an assault on his way to a Quaker meeting and between 1654 and 1656 underwent harsh treatment in Appleby gaol. His 'The Whirl-Wind of the Lord' (1655) was a warning to the north in general and to Westmorland in particular. 'A Warning from the Lord to this Nation' and 'Certain Papers which is the Word of the Lord' are undated. In 1659 he was stabbed by a youth whom he had rebuked for vice. On 11 August 1661 he was imprisoned following his arrest at a Friends' meeting. 
Taylor ran a school for Friends' children in Hertford, and when Fox opened a Quaker school in Waltham Abbey in Essex in 1668 he took over the headship, perhaps assisted by his wife, Frances (died 1685). On 1 July 1670 he appeared at the sessions in Chelmsford, charged with teaching school without a licence; in 1674 he was indicted for absence from parish worship. Taylor published 'A Faithful and True Witness to the Light of Jesus Christ' and 'An Epistle to Friends in the Truth' in 1675. In 1676, when he was enumerated among the Quaker 'First Publishers of Truth' and also listed as of the Quaker meeting at Plaistow in Essex, he issued 'The Counterfeit Convert Discovered', as well as his Latin translation of a primer for Quaker children by George Fox and Ellis Hookes, 'Institutiones pietatis'. In 1678 he was in Bristol. In 1679, the year that he was committed to prison for absence from parish worship, Taylor collaborated in producing a key to Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, 'Compendium trium linguarum', which used passages only from the 'Bible' and not from classical texts, and published an account of a religious ecstasy that had gripped the children of his school, 'A Testimony to the Lord's Power'. He moved with the school a few miles to Edmonton in Middlesex the same year. 'A Testimony for Isaac Pennington and an Epistle of Caution to Friends' both followed in 1681, and 'Something in Answer to Two Late Malitious Libels' in 1682. 
Taylor left England for Pennsylvania in 1682, leaving the school in the charge of George Keith. Taylor represented Bucks county in the province's first assembly, was a member of the council of state until his death, registrar-general of the colony, and apparently a source of criticism of Penn. With his wife, a minister, Taylor became an architect of the structures of American Quakerism. He died and was buried in Philadelphia in 1686 and his 'Testimony concerning Thomas Taylor', his brother, was issued in a compilation in 1697. 


@@@@@


doc= 27023


Taylor, Dan (1738-1816), General Baptist minister and founder of the New Connexion of General Baptists, was born on 21 December 1738 at Sourmilk Hall, Northowram, Yorkshire, the elder son of Azor Taylor and his second wife, Mary Willey; his younger brother was John Taylor (1743-1818), Baptist minister. As Azor was a coalminer, he took his young son underground to work with him before his sixth birthday. Though he received no formal education, Dan Taylor took his books with him down the mine. He walked many miles to listen to the Wesleys and Whitefield and threw in his lot with the Methodists; at the age of twenty-three he preached his first sermon for them at Hipperholme. The local Methodists were so impressed with him that they wanted him to talk to John Wesley about being trained as one of Wesley's preachers. However, Taylor disagreed with certain aspects of Wesley's practices, so did not pursue that end. In fact, during the summer of 1762 he left the Methodists, becoming leader of a group of seceders from the Wadsworth Methodists. 
Taylor's doubts about the validity of infant baptism led him to make a study of W. Wall's 'History of Infant Baptism', which convinced him of the Baptist case. He applied to several Particular Baptist ministers in the West Riding of Yorkshire for baptism, only to be refused because of his Arminian views. Taking John Slater with him he set out for Lincolnshire, where he believed there were Arminian Baptists. One night they found themselves surrounded completely by water, so they slept on a haystack. Next day they discovered that they had passed through Gamston, Nottinghamshire, where there was a General Baptist church. Retracing their steps they found the church and Taylor was baptized by the minister, Joseph Jeffery, in the River Idle, on 16 February 1763. 
On his return to Wadsworth, Taylor baptized Slater and several others, who formed themselves into a Baptist church and joined the Lincolnshire association. That autumn Taylor was ordained by Gilbert Boyce of Coningsby. Soon the meeting-house where they met became too small. A new chapel was built at Birchcliffe, where Taylor ministered for the next nine years. He travelled extensively beyond the association and came into contact with the Leicestershire churches which had been formed as a result of an evangelical revival. He noticed that throughout the country churches were at a very low ebb, morally and theologically, and many had dwindled numerically. 'They degraded Jesus Christ, and he degraded them' (A. C. Underwood, 152), he wrote. To remedy this situation, he proposed a union of the Leicestershire churches with those General Baptist churches elsewhere that remained evangelical in a New Connexion. The New Connexion held its first assembly in Church Lane, Whitechapel, from 6 to 8 June 1770. It was led by Taylor, who was usually in the chair; he presided over its academy from 1798 to 1813 and edited the first issues of the 'General Baptist Magazine' from 1798 to 1800. He did not formally leave the old general assembly, where he represented the Leicestershire association, until 1802. The New Connexion continued until in 1891 it joined the Baptist Union. 
In 1782 a church was formed in Halifax to which Taylor was invited as pastor. The association hit on an experiment: for one of the Birchcliffe members to fill the pulpit for six months, while Taylor ministered at Halifax. He settled as pastor of Halifax in October 1783. Two years later, when he was invited to become the colleague of the venerable John Brittain at Church Lane, Whitechapel, the association voted for him to go to London, where he could do more 'to the glory of God' (Taylor, 'New Connection', 2.207) than if he remained in Yorkshire. He assisted Brittain for some nine years before taking sole charge in 1794. Brittain seldom preached after Taylor's arrival. They disagreed over the practice of laying hands on the newly baptized as a prerequisite of participation in the Lord's supper, although Taylor raised no objection provided that he did not perform the ceremony; after Brittains's death the church left the matter to individual choice. Taylor had long deplored the poor education of the ministry. When the denomination decided to start an academy, it was Taylor whom they appointed as its tutor at Mile End in 1798. There he remained until 1813, when the academy moved to Wisbech. 
Taylor was a phenomenally robust leader of the New Connexion: he travelled 25,000 miles, preached nearly 20,000 sermons, and wrote more than 50 books and pamphlets. He stridently opposed Arian, unitarian, and universalist views, and debated theological differences with Andrew Fuller, a leading Particular Baptist, while retaining his friendship. 
Taylor was four times married. His first wife, Elizabeth Saltonstall, whom he married on 10 November 1764 at Heptonstall, Yorkshire, died on 22 October 1793; on 12 August 1794 he married Elizabeth Newton, who died on 14 October 1809. His third wife was Mary Toplis, a widow whom he married on 24 March 1811 and who died on 18 December 1812. About a month before his death he married, on 21 October 1816 at St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, Mrs Sarah Saunders. He retained his powers of body and mind until he was seventy. Thereafter, he grew gradually weaker, until on 26 November 1816 he collapsed and died in London. He was buried in Bunhill Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 27024


Taylor, Edgar (1793-1839), lawyer and author, the fifth son of Samuel Taylor, and great-grandson of the dissenting divine and Hebrew scholar John Taylor (1694-1761), was born at Banham, Norfolk, on 28 January 1793. He was at school at Palgrave, Suffolk, under the Presbyterian schoolmaster Charles Lloyd (1766-1829) who trained him as classical scholar. In 1809 he was articled to his uncle, Meadows Taylor, solicitor, of Diss, Norfolk. He had mastered Italian and Spanish before going to London in 1814; subsequently he learned German and French. In 1817, in conjunction with Robert Roscoe, a son of William Roscoe, the historian, he inaugurated the firm of Taylor and Roscoe, solicitors, in King's Bench Walk, Temple. He was an original member of the 'Noncon Club', founded in July 1817. His legal career, chiefly in equity practice, was prosperous. He married, in 1823, Ann, daughter of John Christie of Hackney. Between 1824 and 1826 his anonymous translations from the 'Kinder und Haus-Marchen' of J. L. and C. G. Grimm were published under the title 'German Popular Stories', with illustrations by George Cruikshank. A second edition, entitled 'Gammer Grethel', appeared in 1839. In 1827 Taylor became incurably ill and from 1832 he was compelled to relinquish much of his professional work. He found literature a solace amid pain. 
Taylor's interest in the legal recognition of the rights of nonconformists was keen and untiring. As a dissenting deputy he took an active part in the movement for repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts'; in 1837 he was appointed a commissioner (unpaid) for carrying out the 'Dissenters' Marriage Act'. In ecclesiastical politics he co-operated with Robert Aspland. His personal charm and strength of character were described as very great. After long suffering, he died at Bedford Row on 19 August 1839, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. He was survived by his wife and an only daughter. 
Among his publications were works concerning constitutional law, the Norman conquest, a revision of the Authorized Version of the 'New Testament' (edited by William Hincks), and 'The Suffolk Bartholomeans: a Memoir of John Meadows' published in 1840, edited by Emily Taylor ['see below']. He wrote in 'The Jurist', 'Legal Observer', 'Retrospective Review', 'Westminster Review', and 'Morning Chronicle'. Among his contributions to the 'Monthly Repository' were a memoir of John James Wetstein, the biblical critic; and 'Observations on Mahometanism'. 
His sister, 


@@@@@


doc= 27025


Taylor, Edward (1784-1863), lecturer and writer on music, the son of John Taylor (1750-1826), a hymn writer and nonconformist minister, and his wife, Susanna Taylor (1755-1823) ['see under 'Taylor, John (1750-1826)], a literary hostess, was born in Norwich on 22 January 1784. He came from an old Unitarian family, and his great-grandfather was the dissenting divine and Hebrew scholar John Taylor (1694-1761) of Norwich. His brothers included John Taylor (1779-1863), Richard Taylor, and Arthur Taylor ('b'. 1790). Sarah Austin was his sister. 
From 1808 to 1815 Taylor was in business at the corner of Rampant Horse Street, Norwich, and in 1819 he was sheriff of Norwich. His early musical education was somewhat irregular. He took lessons from John Christmas Beckwith, organist of Norwich Cathedral, and on the flute and oboe from William Fish, a well-known local musician. For the first triennial Norwich music festival of 1824 he trained the chorus, fixed the band and singers, and arranged the entire programme. He achieved some success as a singer, thanks to a fine rich bass voice and commanding presence. In 1825 he moved to London and joined his brother Philip Taylor and a cousin, John Martineau, as civil engineers at York Place, City Road. Lack of success in the business led Taylor to enter the music profession in 1827, at the age of forty-three, as a professional singer, teacher, and music journalist. That year he sang at the Norwich festival, and he conducted there in 1839 and 1842. For the festival of 1830 he translated Spohr's 'Die letzen Dinge' as 'The Last Judgement', which was then performed for the first time in England. He was a great personal friend of Spohr, who was his guest at 3 Regent Square, King's Cross, in 1839 and 1847. He also visited Spohr at Kassel in 1840. In addition to 'The Last Judgement', he translated Spohr's 'The Crucifixion, or, Calvary' (1836), 'The Fall of Babylon' (1842), and 'The Christian's Prayer' ('c'.1860), all of which were produced at Norwich festivals. His friendship with Spohr seems to have aroused animosity among other journalists, and Taylor was viewed by some as an enemy of young English composers. 
On 24 October 1837, following the death of Richard John Samuel Stevens, Taylor was appointed professor of music at Gresham College, in the City, a post which he held until his death. In January 1838 he gave his first three lectures, which were published in the same year. He gave frequent lectures with great success in different parts of the country, and one on 'Madrigals' which he delivered at Bristol in 1837 resulted in the formation of the Bristol Madrigal Society. His lectures did much to raise the profile of music among the general public, and he prepared the way for the sight-singing movement of the 1840s. He was the founder of the Purcell Club and Vocal Society, and from 1829 to 1843 he was music critic of 'The Spectator'. In addition to the translations already mentioned, his works included a few songs, words for songs, and adaptations. He translated Friedrich Schneider's 'The Deluge', Mozart's 'Requiem' under the title 'Redemption' (1845), and Haydn's 'The Seasons'. 'The Vocal School of Italy in the Sixteenth Century' (1839, reissued in 1868) consisted of a selection of madrigals and anthems by Italian masters, adapted to English words. 'The cathedral service, its glory, its decline, and its designed extinction' appeared anonymously (in two articles) in the 'British and Foreign Review' for 1844, and was republished (again anonymously) in 1845. In 1843 Taylor edited Purcell's 'King Arthur' for the Musical Antiquarian Society (which he founded with William Chappell and Edward Rimbault) and, in conjunction with James Turle, he edited 'The People's Music Book' (1844) and 'The Singing-Book' (1846). Some manuscripts by him were placed in the library of the Royal College of Music, including several lectures on music 'written and delivered by Edward Taylor at Gresham College and elsewhere', 'Musical Illustrations to Several Courses of Lectures' (24 vols. and separate parts), mostly in Taylor's autograph, and his 'Ode for the Opening of Gresham College' (2 November 1843), in score. 
Taylor died at his house, Gresham Cottage, Cornlands Road, Brentwood, Essex, on 12 March 1863, and was buried in the old dissenting burial-ground, King's Road, Brentwood. He left a son, John Edward Taylor, a printer of Weybridge, Surrey, whose output appears to have included some of his father's works. 


@@@@@


doc= 27026


Emily Taylor (1795-1872), schoolmistress and author, was also born in Banham, Norfolk. Partially deaf as a result of contracting scarlet fever at the age of seven, she had no formal education but was allowed free access to her father's library. When she moved with her father to nearby New Buckenham she established a school there for about thirty boys and girls. Partly thanks to her friendship with Sarah Glover, improver of the tonic sol-fa system of musical notation, the school successfully emphasized the teaching of singing. Many girls from Buckenham School became music teachers in schools and choirs. In 1842 Emily Taylor moved to London to live with a widowed sister. After some years spent superintending Lady Noel Byron's Schools in Ealing and elsewhere, she established a small middle-class school for girls in her neighbourhood of London. Her publications reflect her career as a schoolteacher. She wrote 'England and its People' (1860), a school history, numerous historical tales, and a popular biography of Sir Thomas More. She was also the writer of many hymns. Originally a Unitarian, she joined the Church of England, before middle age, under the influence of Frederick Denison Maurice, though it was said that she was not interested in matters of religious doctrine. She died in London on 11 March 1872. 


