@@@@@


doc= 2683


Blount, Charles, eighth Baron Mountjoy and earl of Devonshire (1563-1606), soldier and administrator, was the second son of James Blount, sixth Baron Mountjoy (1532/3-1581), nobleman ['see under 'Blount, Charles, fifth Baron Mountjoy], and his wife, Catherine (died 1576), daughter of Sir Thomas Leigh of St Oswald's, Yorkshire. He later claimed that he was, from an early age, acutely aware of his venerable family's declining reputation and worsening financial straits. In a childhood portrait he reputedly insisted on being painted holding a trowel with the motto 'Ad reaedificandam antiquam domum', or, 'To restore the family fortunes' (Jones, 21), written beneath the picture. He is said to have studied at Oxford, but failed to attain a degree. Instead he travelled to London to study law and entered Clifford's Inn, transferring to the Middle Temple on 20 June 1579. Blount's elder brother, William, had been living in London for some time and introduced his provincial brother to the ways of the court. On one occasion, about 1583, the handsome Charles caught the attention of Queen Elizabeth, who remarked to him 'faile you not to come to court, and I will bethinke my self, how to doe you good' (Naunton, 132). He availed himself of this rare opportunity for advancement and was instantly catapulted from obscurity to the centre of English social and political life. 
Despite a retiring disposition and a proclivity to immerse himself in study Blount was a success as a courtier, but his rapid rise provoked the jealousy of Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, the queen's favourite. Following Blount's conspicuous display of a gift given to him by the queen, Essex quipped, 'now I perceive every foole must have a favour' (Naunton, 120). Hearing of this affront Blount challenged Essex to a duel, emerging unscathed while the latter suffered a flesh wound. His successful defence of his honour was a rite of passage that won him the respect of other courtiers, including the influential Essex. About this time Blount began his political career, representing St Ives, Cornwall, where his brother owned land, in the 1584 parliament. But parliamentary service proved too mundane a pursuit for Blount, who was eager to distinguish himself through military service. The opportunity came in 1585 when he accompanied Sir John Norris on a campaign in the Low Countries, serving as a captain. Norris had become something of a father figure to Blount, who devoted himself utterly to the respected general. In October 1585 he was wounded in a skirmish after rashly deserting his command to aid Norris. He returned to England, but resumed his command some months later and was present when Sir Philip Sidney received his fatal wound near Zutphen in September 1586. Following this he again returned to England and represented Bere Alston, Cornwall, in parliament in October 1586. But the lure of glory compelled him to return once again to the Low Countries, where he remained for much of 1587. Unhappy with his long absences from court the queen recalled him in October. He was knighted by the earl of Leicester prior to his return to England. 
Not content with the monotony of court life Blount regularly absented himself from the queen's company to pursue his military career. The threat posed by the Armada in summer 1588 allowed him another opportunity to distinguish himself in combat. Like many of the younger nobility he rallied to England's defence and provided financial backing for the construction of ships. According to one historian he was given command of a London man-of-war, the 'Lion', against the invaders, although in another account he served as a volunteer aboard the 'Rainbow'. The queen rewarded him by appointing him keeper of the New Forest in 1588 and one of the queen's gentlemen pensioners in 1589. He was also created MA at Oxford in 1589. His appointments were designed to dissuade him from pursuing his military ambitions but the desire to become a respected soldier and leader of men overrode other considerations. When in 1593 Blount's former company in the Low Countries and Norris were deployed against the Spanish in Brittany, he abandoned the court -- and his duties as MP -- to join them in secret. The queen had explicitly forbidden such behaviour and in a letter to Norris in June 1593 insisted that Blount be sent back to England. The queen, according to Naunton, scolded him upon his return, warning him, 'you shall go when I send you; in the mean time, see that you lodge in the court where you may follow your books, read, and discourse of warre' (Naunton, 59). Though confined to court he was left fully salaried as a captain and in nominal control of nearly a thousand men in Brittany. This punishment, cloaked in royal favour, was a humiliating setback for Blount. Events in 1594, however, allowed him to establish an identity independent of queen and court. 
The death of Henry Ratcliff, earl of Sussex, in December 1593 left the governorship of the town of Portsmouth vacant. The continued threat of an amphibious Spanish landing in southern England made Portsmouth a strategically important position while transforming its governorship into a prestigious appointment. The queen -- sufficiently confident in his abilities -- appointed Blount governor of Portsmouth in January 1594. On 27 June that year Blount's brother William, who had succeeded his father as Baron Mountjoy, died unexpectedly, so allowing Blount to inherit the title as eighth baron. Thus a prominent military appointment and his elevation to the peerage at last afforded Mountjoy a degree of independence from court and allowed him to re-establish his military reputation. At Portsmouth he vigorously put into practice many of the military strategies he had carefully studied: he oversaw the construction and renewal of fortifications and honed his naval skills. At an administrative level he became a parliamentary patron both at Bere Alston and at Portsmouth, where, as high steward, he nominated one of the two members of the 1597 parliament, in which he himself sat as Lord Mountjoy in the House of Lords. Yet Mountjoy's independence was far from complete: he was specifically forbidden to accompany Essex on his expedition to Cadiz in 1596. But in April 1597 he was created a knight of the Garter and, that summer, received the queen's permission to accompany Essex on an expedition to the Azores, where he was made lieutenant of the land forces. Though the Azores voyage ended in fiasco Mountjoy's reputation emerged unblemished. 
Over the course of the expedition Mountjoy's friendship with Robert Cecil, the queen's secretary, had strengthened and, aware of his influence with the queen, he implored Cecil 'to continue his good opinion and not to repent the course he has hitherto held to advance her Majesty's gracious inclination toward him' ('Salisbury MSS', 7.470). In affiliating himself with Cecil, however, Mountjoy risked alienating the opposing court faction led by his former rival, and recent commander, Essex, whose reputation had been dealt a crushing blow following the Azores debacle. For Cecil, Mountjoy doubtless represented a potentially valuable ally: he was the queen's intelligent and capable favourite who lacked the domestic influence and pretensions of Essex. For two years Mountjoy managed to keep safely outside this dangerous rivalry without committing himself openly to either faction. In doing so, however, his rapid ascent faltered: he remained governor of Portsmouth, but without the backing of a court faction he was denied an appointment to the privy council and was thus deprived of any real power. This lull in his career, compounded by the stalemate at court, was ultimately broken by events in Ireland which, by August 1598, demanded immediate attention. 
The rebellion by Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, posed the most serious threat yet faced by the Tudors in Ireland and required the swift dispatch of a strong deputy to crush the rebels and restore order. It was initially thought that Mountjoy would receive the appointment and in November 1598 he was actually nominated by the council; but it was inevitable that Essex -- due as much to his political stature and military experience as his recent military failure and aggressiveness with the queen -- would go to Ireland, where either redemption or ruin awaited. Essex's appointment did not, as expected, push Mountjoy towards the Cecil faction; rather their friendship grew stronger. In a letter written to Essex prior to his departure Mountjoy remarked, 'I fear not, since needs go you must, but that your virtue shall beget as great a necessity for your welcome home' (Jones, 46). He became increasingly involved in Essex's plan to force the queen to acknowledge King James of Scotland as her successor. In summer 1599 he dispatched a secret messenger to Scotland to inform James that Essex supported his succession to the English throne. The queen could not live for ever, and, for Mountjoy, an alliance with Essex and the future king would ensure a prominent position in the new administration. But Mountjoy was not a traitor. His loyalty to Essex and his desire to secure James's succession did not amount to a willingness to topple Elizabeth. Essex, however, had grown increasingly desperate following his manifest failure to defeat Tyrone and by October 1599 he was confined to court. Charles was subsequently offered the Irish deputyship; he accepted the post in November and was scheduled to depart within twenty days. In desperation Essex urged Mountjoy, who looked after his fortunes during his confinement, to employ his newly assembled army against the queen's councillors; but Mountjoy prevaricated and eventually departed for Ireland in February 1600 leaving Essex and his intrigues behind. 
The direction of the campaign against Tyrone had been decided prior to Mountjoy's arrival in Ireland. He was to oversee the reform of a demoralized army and open up new fronts against the rebels through the plantation of strongly defended garrisons deep within rebel territory; vital to this strategy was the plantation of two garrisons supported by sea behind Tyrone at Lough Foyle and Ballyshannon. The nature of Mountjoy's position, moreover, was to be fundamentally different from that of his predecessors: military power, formerly consolidated in the deputy, was immediately decentralized to avoid a scenario where one slow moving, unwieldy English force could be outmanoeuvred or counter-attacked by smaller Irish contingents. The plan's immediate implementation, however, was delayed due to shortages of victuals and money and Mountjoy's wrangling with the Irish council; in March the exasperated lord deputy wrote to Cecil, 'if I were aided by a council of Solomons, I think this Kingdom and this army, as they now are, would afford them matter enough to try their best wits' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/207(2)/28). Mountjoy, however, remained focused on the task at hand and by September his cautious and calculated implementation of his military objectives had taken their toll on Tyrone. His level temperament and careful attention to geographical detail -- coupled with an inherent awareness of the dire consequences that one poorly judged march might bring -- had denied Tyrone any opportunity to exploit the Irish terrain or English military conceit to his advantage. In an effort to undermine Tyrone's economic base Mountjoy ravaged the Irish countryside unsparingly, a tactic which he employed to its greatest limits with cold precision and fixity of purpose that amounted almost to a blind automatism (Jones, 78). Fynes Moryson, Mountjoy's secretary in Ireland, described the deputy as 'courtly, grave, and exceedingly comely'; he was 'of stature tall, and of very comely proportion, his skin faire, with little haire on his body..., and thinne on his head, where he wore it short, except a locke under his left eare, which he nourished the time of this warre', with good table manners, a man who 'tooke Tobacco abundantly', and favoured 'private retirednesse, with good fare, and some few choice friends' (Moryson, 'Itinerary', 2.261-3). 
When word came of Essex's failed rebellion in early 1601 Mountjoy panicked and prepared a ship in which he planned to escape from Ireland to France. But despite his complicity in Essex's early plans to ensure James's accession he had suitably distanced himself from Essex prior to the rebellion and his role in the affair was overlooked. His favourable relationship with the queen was doubtless a factor in the suppression of evidence against him; but ultimately it was his success in Ireland that insulated him from the charges that claimed Essex and his fellow conspirators. Victory in Ireland, however, was far from certain and Mountjoy understood that both his career and reputation had become wholly dependent on a decisive victory over Tyrone. Yet drawing Tyrone into an open confrontation proved difficult; only the arrival of Spanish reinforcements commanded by Don Juan D'Aguila in the coastal town of Kinsale in September 1601 prompted Tyrone to abandon his defensive position in Ulster and make the impossibly long march south to link up with the Spaniards. The long-awaited confrontation was imminent, but the arrival of about 3400 Spaniards was a worrying development for Mountjoy, who raced to dislodge them. He invested Kinsale in October as Tyrone began his southerly descent. But the Spaniards clung on stubbornly and by December Mountjoy's army was suffering from disease and shortages of food. A winter cessation of hostilities seemed likely, but Tyrone, who had assembled a force of some 6500 men, committed himself to open field combat outside Kinsale on 24 December. The Spaniards failed to counter-attack from Kinsale and Mountjoy's troops routed Tyrone's forces. Though he had gained the most spectacular victory of his career, effectively breaking any organized military resistance, he offered the rebels no quarter and doggedly pursued them as they limped back to Ulster. In September 1602 he destroyed the O'Neill inauguration stone at Tullaghoge to symbolize his victory over both Tyrone and the Gaelic order. 
Tyrone submitted unconditionally in December 1602 and was received, in March 1603, at Mellifont, where he made his formal submission, on his knees, to Mountjoy, the queen's representative. The queen, however, had died nearly a week prior to Tyrone's submission; Mountjoy had concealed her death both to prevent Tyrone from holding out for more favourable terms and to safeguard Tyrone's interests from his enemies who might seek to renegotiate the submission under the new king. Mountjoy hoped to rehabilitate Tyrone and employ him as a stabilizing influence in an Ireland devastated from years of war. He acted, in the main, as a voice of reason among the vulture-like English adventurers who descended on Ireland in the wake of Tyrone's defeat, and set about laying the foundations of a new system of government. Following James I's accession, however, Mountjoy sought his immediate recall; he was made lord lieutenant of Ireland and a privy councillor in April 1603, which allowed him to return to England. Before he departed he was faced with serious rioting in Cork which spread to the other major towns. The towns -- which had, crucially, remained staunchly loyal throughout the rebellion -- bore the brunt of the economic collapse following Tyrone's defeat and were forced to maintain garrisons. The preponderantly Catholic townsmen, moreover, hoped that James's accession would herald a return to Catholicism; but in the meantime they produced ancient municipal charters to assert their independence and prevent Mountjoy's intervention in their affairs. Mountjoy, who, Moryson remarked, 'would cut King John's charter in pieces with King James' sword', acted quickly to suppress the potentially dangerous revolt and brought the towns to submission (Moryson, 'History of Ireland', 2.337). He then departed for England where, upon his arrival in June, he presented the 'arch-traitor' Tyrone to James I. 
On 21 July 1603 an appreciative king created Mountjoy earl of Devonshire. To this distinction were added lucrative sinecures and substantial grants of land in both England and Ireland. In May 1604 he was appointed to a commission which negotiated a peace with Spain and in November of the following year a nervous James I nominated him to defend the crown against the insurrection which it was thought might follow the discovery of the Gunpowder Plot. Though an insurrection failed to materialize Devonshire presided over the investigation into the affair. In these later years he maintained an interest in learning and was a regular patron of poets: John Davies published a sonnet to him in his 'Microcosmus' in 1603 and in 1605 Nicholas Breton dedicated to him 'The honour of valour'. Following his triumph in Ireland Devonshire had, it appeared, achieved the financial security, the respect, and the military distinction that he had sought so persistently in his youth. His scandalous involvement with a married woman, however, plagued him to his death and besmirched his otherwise impeccable reputation. 
On 26 December 1605 Devonshire married Lady Penelope Rich (1563-1607). Lady Penelope was the daughter of Walter Devereux, first earl of Essex, and was sister of the late second earl of Essex. She had been Devonshire's lover from at least 1590 despite her marriage to Robert, Lord Rich, in 1581. All parties had overlooked their questionable relationship until Lord Rich obtained a divorce from Penelope in the ecclesiastical courts in November 1605. Devonshire then sought to legitimize their relationship, and their five children, by marrying Penelope, and, although an ecclesiastical divorce did not permit remarriage, he persuaded William Laud, his chaplain, to perform the rite. A scandal ensued. In his defence Devonshire wrote a tract, dedicated to the king, in which he appealed to scripture and to protestant divines to justify his reasons for marrying Penelope, but to no avail. The scandal -- coupled with a falling out with Cecil in early 1606 -- made Devonshire a social pariah whose future was uncertain. In March 1606 he travelled to London to visit Cecil, but became stricken with a respiratory infection -- doubtless aggravated by years of heavy smoking -- and died at Savoy House in the Strand on 3 April 1606. According to Chamberlain he left this life 'soon and early for his years, but late enough for himself: happy had he been if he had gone two or three years since, before the world was weary of him, or that he had left his scandal behind him' ('Memorials of Affairs of State', 2.206). He was buried in St Paul's chapel of Westminster Abbey on 7 May and in his honour John Ford wrote a poem entitled 'Fames memorial, or, The earle of Devonshire deceased' while Samuel Daniel composed 'A funeral poeme upon the death of the late noble earle of Devenshyre'. 
As his marriage was unrecognized Devonshire's children were deemed illegitimate and his titles became extinct at his death. He provided generously for Penelope and his eldest son, Mountjoy Blount, received a substantial inheritance. His other children, St John, Charles, Penelope, and Isabella also received an annual sum out of his vast estate. Devonshire had successfully reversed the financial decline of his noble house and had completed the transformation from a favoured Tudor courtier to a respected general and statesman, but his domestic misery and early death prevented him from becoming a figure of major importance. 


@@@@@


doc= 2684


Blount, Charles (1654-1693), freethinker and author, was born at Upper Holloway, Islington, Middlesex, on 27 April 1654 and baptized at Highgate Chapel, Hornsey, on 10 May 1654, the fourth son of Sir Henry Blount (1602-1682), traveller, of Tittenhanger, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Hester ('c'.1620-1678), daughter of Christopher Wase of Upper Holloway, Middlesex. He was clearly a precocious child 'endowed by nature with a great capacity, and with a strong propensity to learning' (Kippis, 2.380) and his father had him and his elder brother, Thomas Pope Blount, educated at home, being opposed to 'sending youths to the universities' where 'they learnt... to be debaucht' ('Brief Lives', 1.109). On 3 December 1672 at Westminster Abbey he married Eleanor ('c'.1654-1689), fourth daughter of Sir Timothy Tyrrell of Shotover, Oxfordshire, with whom he had three sons and three daughters. About the same time Blount inherited some lands in Islington and was also given the family estate of Blount's Hall, in Staffordshire, where he lived the life of a gentleman and man of letters. 
Blount's first publication was the anonymous 'Mr Dreyden Vindicated' (1673), a defence of John Dryden's play 'The Conquest of Granada' (1672) against the criticisms of both Richard Leigh's 'The Censure of the Rota' (1673) and 'The Friendly Vindication' (1673) attributed to Robert Howard. In 1696 Dryden made a complimentary reference to him in his 'The Life of Lucian' prefixed to the edition of 'The Works of Lucian' (1711) partly translated by Blount himself. On 19 December 1678 Charles became a member of the Green Ribbon Club, a political group of whig activists and propagandists. In the same year he published anonymously the first of his major works, 'Anima mundi', with the false imprint 'Amsterdam, 'Anno Mundi'. 00000', in the writing of which he probably had the assistance of his father, whose libertine ideas he inherited (see Sir Henry Blount's fragment 'De anima' in 'The Oracles of Reason', 1693). Relying mainly upon unorthodox authors such as Montaigne, 'Anima mundi' is an essay on pagan doctrines about the nature of the human soul and its destiny in the afterlife. The author apparently argues in favour of the immortality of the soul on moral and psychological grounds but is purposely ambiguous and unconvincing throughout. The sceptical tone of the book raised a great clamour. The bishop of London ordered only 'the Bare Suppression of it', but 'Advantage was taken' (L'Estrange) and during the bishop's absence from London the book was burnt. Blount sent a copy of it to Hobbes with a letter, dated 1678, in which he expressed his preference for the religion of the Arians and gave a polemical description of the first Christian councils. The same sceptical conclusions on the nature of the soul reappeared in two letters that he sent in February 1680 to his libertine friend the earl of Rochester (printed in 'The Oracles of Reason'). 
In 1679, under the pseudonym Junius Brutus, Blount published a pamphlet of strong whig tendencies, entitled 'An Appeal from the Country to the City', defending the reality of the Popish Plot and describing the fate of London should the duke of York and the papists gain control of the city. Benjamin Harris, the printer of this work, was brought to trial and fined, while the pamphlet was condemned to be burnt by the common hangman. In the same year Blount, under the pseudonym Philopatris, addressed parliament with 'A Just Vindication of Learning' (1679), asking that body to consider his arguments against the renewal of the 'Licensing Act', which was due to expire. Following the arguments of Milton's 'Areopagitica', Blount stressed the importance of freedom of the press for the achievement of liberty and condemned censorship as the greatest affront to learning. Soon after Hobbes's death in 1679 he edited anonymously 'The Last Sayings, or Dying Legacy of Mr Thomas Hobbs' (1680), a broadsheet chiefly consisting of extracts from 'Leviathan' whose ambiguous nature concealed the real intentions of the author. 
The influence of Thomas Hobbes and Edward Herbert, Lord Herbert of Cherbury, is strongly evident in Blount's next two works, published in 1680: 'Great is Diana of the Ephesians', published anonymously with the false imprint 'Cosmopoli', and 'The Two First Books of Philostratus'. The former, mixing the libertine criticism of positive religions with analysis of the origin and decline of the rational creed, is an open attack upon heathen sacrifices concealing a harsh polemic against Christianity. The latter is an English translation of the life of Apollonius Tyaneus by Philostratus with long discursive annotations partly taken from the anonymous manuscript 'Dialogue between a tutor and his pupil'. The text, a biography of the neo-Pythagorean philosopher Apollonius, whose life offered an ironic surrogate for that of Christ, was later condemned in 1693. 
In 1683 Blount published anonymously 'Miracles, No Violations of the Laws of Nature', a set of quotations (without acknowledgement) from Thomas Burnet, Hobbes, and Spinoza proving the groundlessness of any pretended miracles. The text drawn from Spinoza was Blount's translation of the sixth chapter of 'Tractatus theologico-politicus', the first English translation of any of Spinoza's writings. In the same year Blount published 'Religio laici', a deistic tract chiefly taken from Herbert's 'Religio laici' (first published in 1933) and 'Dialogue between a Tutor and His Pupil'. Expressing his adherence to the five Herbertian principles of any natural religion and to the concept of reason as the only foundation of faith, Blount thus answered Dryden's criticism against deists contained in a poem with the same title published in 1682. 
Ten years later, in January 1693, Blount issued anonymously 'King William and Queen Mary Conquerors', a tract which claimed that both sovereigns came to the throne in 1689 by right of conquest and, following Hobbes and Grotius, that subjects should submit to any rulers who could protect them, even if conquerors. The pamphlet was, however, moderate, arguing that only certain circumstances could justify conquest, and that a conqueror could not legitimately claim absolute power. It was licensed by Edmund Bohun, the tory licenser of the press, who agreed with its political theory. It was probably not, as previously thought, deliberately written to discredit Bohun and had only a small role in the demise of the 'Licensing Act', which was renewed in 1693 but expired in 1695. Its argument, however, proved highly controversial. Many whigs agreed with its moderate conquest doctrine but it also found both whig and tory opponents in the House of Commons, which after a heated debate, concluded that it was 'highly injurious to their Majesties; and inconsistent with the Principles on which this Government is founded' ('JHC', 10.788). On 23 January the book was condemned to be burnt by the common hangman, and the following day Bohun was dismissed from office. No action against the author is recorded. Soon after that, a pamphlet was published under the initials J. M. -- 'Reasons Humbly Offered for the Liberty of Unlicens'd Printing' (1693). Another adaptation of 'Areopagitica' against the futility of licensing acts and the inadequacies of Edmund Bohun, this was generally presumed at the time to be by Blount, but in fact it is unlikely that he wrote it. Just before his death Blount published 'The Oracles of Reason' (1693), a collection of miscellaneous tracts and letters written by himself, his friend Charles Gildon, and other freethinkers from 1678 to 1693. The volume questioned or denied the validity of 'many strongly held beliefs, by raising doubts over Genesis, denying revelation, doubting miracles, and even venturing the eternity of a plurality of worlds' (Redwood, 497). 
Blount's wife had died in 1689, and he and his deceased wife's sister fell in love, but both knew that a marriage between persons so connected was illegal. On 8 March 1693 Blount wrote a letter to his friend Gildon 'to Justifie the Marrying of two Sisters, the one after the other' ('Oracles of Reason', 135) and also petitioned the archbishop of Canterbury, but to no avail. Having long laboured in vain to convince her that she might marry him anyway, at last, whether in a deliberate attempt to kill himself or in the hope of touching her heart, Blount attempted suicide. After languishing for about a month he finally died in Catherine Street, London, at the end of August 1693, and was buried in the family vault at Ridge, Tittenhanger. His freethinking is confirmed in his will of 11 February 1693, in which he resigned his 'soul into the universal spirit whereof she ['sic'] is a particle', and submitted himself 'to the allwise and great God's disposall not distrusting his divine providence in the next world who hath been so good and gracious to me in this' (will). He also sent his 'prayers to the great and only supream mind for his blessing upon my poor children' (ibid.). Concerning his books he instructed that if his heirs had 'any vallue for my memory they will never sell or dispose of that study and theire collection which I have with soe much charge and trouble gathered together' (ibid.). He left his estate to his five children and earnestly requested that if his executors carried out only one of his instructions it would be to bury him next to his wife, 'my dearest Nelly the best woman that ever lived' (ibid.). Perhaps because of difficulties over the manner of his death, the will was not proved until 18 June 1697, by his eldest son, Henry. In 1695 Charles Gildon published 'The Miscellaneous Works of Charles Blount' with a preface by himself containing a defence of suicide. Wrongly considered a plagiarist by some, Blount was rather author, compiler, and propagator of important freethinking works, widely circulated and criticized. 


@@@@@


doc= 2685


Blount, Sir Christopher (1555/6-1601), soldier and conspirator, was the second son of Thomas Blount ('b'. before 1523, died 1568) of Kidderminster, Worcestershire. Blount's early life was profoundly shaped by two key influences: devout Catholicism (especially on the part of his mother, Margery, 'nee' Poley, who was listed as a confirmed recusant in 1577); and his family's tradition of service to the Dudley family. Blount's paternal grandfather, Edward (died 1558), had served John Dudley, duke of Northumberland (executed 1553), being a first cousin of the duke's wife. In his turn Blount's father had become comptroller to Northumberland and then a steward to the latter's son, Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. Blount's elder brother, Edward ('c'.1554-1630), continued the tradition and carried a banderole at Leicester's funeral in 1588. Unlike his brother, however, who inherited substantial land around Kidderminster, Christopher needed to make his fortune through service to Leicester. He became gentleman of the horse to Leicester, who was himself master of the horse to the queen, by October 1584. 
Blount's Catholic heritage was reflected in his schooling. As a boy he was tutored by William Allen (later cardinal) at Louvain. He may have been the English student who fell sick there in 1562 and who was tended by Allen until he himself became ill. In 1572 Blount, aged sixteen, and his brother matriculated at Hart Hall, Oxford. He did not take a degree but instead went overseas to the Catholic college at Douai ('c'.1575-1576). At the end of 1576, when the college was forced to leave Douai, Lady Blount sent a servant to bring Christopher home. He and a Mr Throckmorton instead travelled to Paris, where they mixed with supporters of Mary, queen of Scots, including Thomas Morgan. 
By October 1577 the English ambassador, Sir Amias Paulet, was sufficiently alarmed by these contacts to warn Blount against Morgan's company and report them to Leicester and Sir Francis Walsingham. Morgan later claimed that he cultivated Blount's friendship in the hope that his attachment to Leicester might one day benefit Mary's cause. This opportunity seemed to have arrived in early 1585, when Mary was moved to confinement at Tutbury. Aware of Blount's necessary association with the nearby stud for the queen's horses, Morgan asked Blount to assist Mary by arranging some secret means for her to communicate with her supporters abroad. Blount responded by sending Robert Poley (probably a kinsman) to assure Morgan of his loyalty to Mary and the Catholic cause. In fact Poley had been an agent working against Mary for some time. Blount's success in convincing Morgan to trust Poley must be seen as a calculated endeavour by Blount to profit from his Catholic upbringing by betraying his old friends and associates to Leicester and Walsingham. It is unclear whether his motives were entirely materialistic or partly intended to protect his mother, brother, and other relatives from religious persecution. Blount claimed to Walsingham in 1588 that he himself had forsaken Catholicism. Whatever the motivation Blount and Poley ensured that communications with Mary in 1585 were exposed to her enemies, foreshadowing the process by which other agents would monitor Mary's messages after her removal to Chartley and reveal her complicity in the Babington plot during 1586. 
In December 1585, when Leicester led an army to the Netherlands, Blount accompanied his master overseas and became a cavalry officer. At the battle of Zutphen in September 1586 he rescued Sir Francis Vere after the latter's horse had been killed. After serving as lieutenant to Sir Thomas Perrot he assumed the captaincy of Leicester's company of lancers. When the earl handed over command in the Low Countries to Lord Willoughby, Blount remained with the army. In 1588 he was maimed in one hand at Berke. He was later knighted by Willoughby, who described him as 'cousin'. In January 1589 he returned home to recuperate from his wound. In April Blount joined the Portugal expedition as a companion of Leicester's stepson, Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex. 
Blount's participation in this expedition was driven by his sudden marriage to Essex's mother and Leicester's widow, Lettice, 'nee' Knollys ['see 'Dudley, Lettice (1543-1634)]. News of this sensational match had reached Paris by the beginning of May and the wedding itself probably occurred in March or April. The marriage apparently sprang from the countess's need for male support in her struggle over Leicester's heavily indebted estate, though she and Blount had known each other for some years and proved to be a genuinely happy couple. Fifteen or sixteen years his senior, Lady Leicester brought the tall and black-haired Blount undreamed-of wealth, a tangled web of legal problems, and association with Essex, the queen's new favourite. Blount spent the rest of his life seeking to banish Essex's initial uncertainty about this 'unhappy' match (BL, Lansdowne MS 62, fol. 78'r'). Described in private letters as the countess's 'best friend', Blount vowed himself to 'faythfully honor and... ever trewlly serve' Essex 'tyll after I be dead' (Warks. CRO, TD 69/6, Blount to Essex, 26 June 1597). Blount soon plunged into property transactions which sought to settle the countess's huge debts with the crown and other legal liabilities. In doing so he sold most of her jewels and 'choptte and chainged awaye' her jointure (BL, Harley MS 304, fol. 88'r'- 'v'). 
Essex's backing ensured that Blount was elected knight of the shire for Staffordshire in the 1593 and 1597 parliaments and that he acted as a virtual deputy lieutenant for the county. Blount served as colonel of a regiment in Essex's expedition to Spain in 1596 and became camp-master for the army after Sir John Wingfield was killed during the storming of Cadiz. Blount and his troops later acted as Essex's vanguard for the attack on Faeroe. In 1597 Blount helped to train the army being prepared for Essex's new expedition, joining the earl's council of war as second-in-command of the infantry under his distant cousin Lord Mountjoy. When the expedition was converted into a voyage to the Azores he joined with Sir Gelly Meyrick and other partisans of Essex to accuse Sir Walter Ralegh of committing a capital offence by his landing at Fayal. Essex ultimately dismissed these charges, but they underlined the growing divide between the earl's friends and opponents. Blount's factional adherence to Essex resulted in his creation as an MA of Oxford on 10 July 1598 in company with several other friends of the earl. 
Partisan politics also lay behind the unwelcome suggestion in April or May that Blount should be appointed lord deputy of Ireland but, like several others, he refused the post. Blount was full of misgivings when Essex agreed to become lord lieutenant of Ireland later in the year. Ironically Essex's eagerness to appoint him marshal of the army in Ireland made the reluctant Blount an object of contention between the earl and the queen. Elizabeth agreed to his appointment as marshal in March 1599, but refused to let him join the council of Ireland. Blount accompanied Essex on his campaign in the southern counties, before being badly wounded in the legs in King's county. Essex released him from service in late August, though he was paid as marshal until 30 September. Blount's wound was so severe that he feared for his life and turned again to the Church of Rome, encouraged by two Catholic priests in Dublin. Blount later secretly converted Sir John Davies to Catholicism. Before his return to England, Blount was visited by Essex and the earl of Southampton, who were soon to march north against the Irish leader Tyrone. Essex raised the prospect of returning to England with an army. Blount and Southampton opposed the idea, suggesting instead that he take only a few picked officers as a bodyguard. Essex later returned to England in great haste and was arrested. During 1600 Blount unsuccessfully urged Essex to consider escaping from imprisonment and going into exile abroad. 
Blount's influence with the earl now seems to have been overshadowed by that of the more bellicose Southampton, with whom he enjoyed rather strained relations. When he joined Essex and his friends in London in late January 1601 Blount found the two earls already committed to action, but confused in their planning. Called upon to aid his stepson in the forthcoming 'coup', Blount was more earnest than enthusiastic. According to an abortive plan for seizing the court, Blount would have been entrusted with securing the gate. When Essex and his partisans were panicked into action on Saturday 7 February, Blount was clearly unhappy with the decision to enter the City on foot. As a cavalryman, he preferred the use of horses. Nevertheless he played a vigorous role in Essex's insurrection on 8 February, seizing weapons from a London armourer, laying hands upon a messenger from the queen, and leading the attack at Ludgate, where he repeatedly hacked at the defenders' pikes with his sword before being bludgeoned to the ground by blows to the head. 
When Blount fell, Essex's force lost heart and retreated in disorder. Badly wounded, Blount was imprisoned in the nearby house of a London tailor, Richard Newsome. When he was arraigned and condemned at Westminster Hall on 5 March, he had to be carried there on a litter. Although he wrote begging for mercy and reminded the authorities of his service fifteen years earlier, the only mercy Blount received was death by beheading. He was executed on Tower Hill on 18 March 1601, openly professing his Catholicism on the scaffold, and he was probably buried at the Tower on the same day. 


@@@@@


doc= 2686


Blount, Edward (bap. 1562, d. in or before 1632), bookseller and translator, was baptized on 31 January 1562 in the parish of St Laurence Pountney, London, probably the sixth of eight known children of Ralph (Rafe) Blount 
(Blunt or Blonte; died 1571)
, merchant tailor. Ralph, freed of his apprenticeship in 1548, was reasonably prosperous, but never became a member of the Merchant Taylors' Company. Edward's unknown mother must have died when he was quite young; his father remarried in 1566. Edward's stepmother, Margaret Roberdine Blount, was buried on 5 August 1571, followed by his father on 9 September. His father's will, written just four days before, divides his estate equally between his six surviving 'welbelovde children' (Guildhall Library, MS 9171, fol. 77'r'). 
Born into the urban middle class, orphaned at a young age, Edward lived seventy years in London, a tradesman like his father, but unlike most small shopkeepers he had a profound impact on English cultural life. He had an unparalleled gift for recognizing new works that would eventually become classics: he was more consistently successful in anticipating the cultural consensus of the future than Daniel, Sidney, Jonson, or any other early modern critic. This achievement was made possible by his father's most important legacy: a literary education. The son of a merchant tailor, Edward almost certainly attended -- as did his two elder brothers -- the Merchant Taylors' School, founded in 1561. There, with Edmund Spenser and Lancelot Andrewes among others, he would have been taught by the famous schoolmaster, humanist intellectual, and educational theorist Richard Mulcaster. Blount read and wrote Latin and Italian, and an early aptitude and interest in reading may explain why, on 24 June 1578, he began an association with the Stationers' Company that lasted fifty-four years. Having been apprenticed on 24 June 1578 and freed on 25 June 1588, he acquired his own first apprentice in 1595, rose to the company's livery on 10 May 1611, was elected an assistant on 25 October 1625, and served on the court of assistants until December 1630. During most and perhaps all of that time, he lived and worked in St Paul's Churchyard, the centre of the retail book trade, first as an apprentice at the Bishop's Head, later in his own shop at the Black Bear (1609-27). His friends were other booksellers: in 1600 Thomas Thorpe dedicated Marlowe's translation of Lucan to 'his kind and true friend, Edward Blount', and Thorpe and Blount were still drinking partners in the 1620s ('Lucans First Book', sig. A2'r'). Even his wife was the widow of another stationer: Elizabeth Royden married Richard Banckworth in 1595, and was granted administration of his estate on 11 April 1614. Blount married her before 1618. 
Blount had been apprenticed for ten years (not the usual seven) to William Ponsonby, described by McKerrow as 'the most important publisher of the Elizabethan period' (McKerrow, 39). Ponsonby published almost all the work of Edmund Spenser and Sir Philip Sidney; he pioneered commercial exploitation of a developing market for contemporary vernacular literature, and Blount -- the most important publisher of the early seventeenth century -- followed in his master's footsteps. But Blount did not inherit Ponsonby's shop, or his priorities. By contrast with most early modern stationers (including Ponsonby), Blount was a remarkably secular bookseller. For instance, until he formed a business partnership with William Barrett (1609-13), he did not publish a single sermon, although that genre was popular and profitable. 
The first book Blount published did not appear until six years after he was freed of his apprenticeship: Josuah Sylvester's 'The Profit of Imprisonment' (1594), a French poem translated by an English merchant living in the Low Countries. (Sylvester was then unknown; his translations of Du Bartas, in part published by Blount, would eventually make him one of the English writers most admired by his contemporaries.) Blount's second publication was Charles Tessier's 'Le premier livre de chansons' (1597), a book of French and Italian songs; his third was John Florio's Italian-English dictionary, 'A Worlde of Wordes' (1598). The cosmopolitan ambition of these first three books was characteristic of Blount's career: he published European histories and European travel books; dictionaries of Italian, Spanish, and Latin; and works translated out of French, Italian, Spanish, Dutch, Greek, Latin, and neo-Latin. 
Blount also developed relationships with English ambassadors abroad. Between 27 October 1613 and 25 January 1620, the name Ned Blunt appears repeatedly in John Chamberlain's letters to Sir Dudley Carleton, ambassador to Venice (1610-15) and The Hague (1616-25). Three documents, signed by Blount between 15 June 1614 and 23 June 1615, show him involved in Carleton's efforts to deliver Italian works of art for the collection of his new patron, Robert Carr. The Blount-Carleton connection links the book trade with international commercial networks in art objects, currencies, cloth, seeds, and foodstuffs. More interesting as human documents are Blount's five surviving letters, written between 15 June 1621 and 9 May 1623, to William Trumbull, English agent in Brussels. They establish that Blount also sold manuscripts and banned books, and document his 'neerenesse of freindship' with his fellow stationer John Bill (Sir Thomas Bodley's agent in acquiring books printed abroad) and at least two authors whose work he published, the Italophile Sir Robert Dallington and the Hispanophile James Mabbe (BL, Add. MS 72361/116). Another of his authors, Leonard Digges, was sending a package 'to Ned Blounte' in a letter from Oxford written on 30 January 1631 (BL, Lansdowne MS 841, fol. 30'v'). 
Blount was the chief publisher -- listed on the title-page alongside the printer Isaac Jaggard -- of the first folio edition of Shakespeare's 'Comedies, Histories, and Tragedies' (with commendatory verses by his friends Mabbe and Digges). He also published Shakespeare's 'The Phoenix and the Turtle', Marlowe's 'Hero and Leander', and the first essays of Thomas Hobbes; the first (and still most admired) English translations of Montaigne's essays, Cervantes' 'Don Quixote', and Matteo Aleman's picaresque classic 'Guzman de Alfarache', as well as 'Naturall and Morall Historie of the East and West Indies', after the original by Jose de Acosta, 'the most original and influential of all histories of the New World' (Grafton, 207), and 'Of Wisdom', a translation of Pierre Charron's banned 'scandalous book', one of the foundational texts of post-Christian philosophical atheism (Gregory, 87); significant literary texts by George Chapman, John Earle, Joseph Hall, Ben Jonson, and John Lyly; and Samuel Daniel's 'Defence of Rhyme', the most important work of English literary criticism written between Sidney's 'Apology' and Dryden's 'Of Drammatick Poesie'. 
Blount probably translated the works that he published and dedicated as Tomasso Garzoni's 'Hospitall of Incurable Fooles' (1600) and Lorenzo Ducci's 'Ars aulica, or, The Courtier's Arte' (1607). He also signed prefaces to nine other books, including 'Hero and Leander' (1598), in which he called Christopher Marlowe his 'friend' and described himself as 'executor' of Marlowe's 'intellectual will' (sig. A3'r'), and 'Sixe Court Comedies' (1632), which praises the wit and originality of John Lyly -- 'The 'Lyre' he played on, had no borrowed strings' (sig. A3'v'). This last preface acknowledges that Blount himself is 'no executor, yet I presume to distribute the Goods of the Dead' (ibid.). 
Blount's own goods were soon to be so distributed. By October 1632 he was dead, and on 3 October 1636 his widow sold his remaining copyrights to Andrew Crooke. But his real heirs were the two seventeenth-century publishers who, from Blount, took up the task of shaping the English literary canon: Humphrey Moseley and Jacob Tonson. 


@@@@@


doc= 2687


Blount, Sir Henry (1602-1682), traveller, was born at Tittenhanger, Hertfordshire, on 15 December 1602 and baptized at Ridge, Hertfordshire, on 22 December, son of Thomas (later Sir Thomas) Blount (1556-1639) and Frances Pigot ('c'.1564-1619). He went to the free school at St Albans and on 30 June 1615 matriculated as a gentleman commoner from Trinity College, Oxford; he graduated BA on 18 June 1618. In 1620 he was admitted to Gray's Inn. According to John Aubrey 'he was pretty wild when young, especially addicted to common wenches' ('Brief Lives', 25-7). In early 1629 he wrote a commendatory poem to William D'Avenant's 'The Tragedy of Albovine, King of the Lombards', and on 23 September of that year he and William Blount, an Oxfordshire gentleman, were given passes to travel for three years to Spain, France, and Italy. Later he alluded to this first journey in the preface to his account of his 1634 travels in the Levant, 'A Voyage into the Levant' (1636). 
Blount began his account of this journey in Venice, from where he sailed on 7 May 1634 down the Adriatic coast, and then travelled inland into the Balkans. He reached Constantinople and after spending only a few days he crossed to Egypt via Rhodes in the Turkish fleet and docked in Alexandria. He visited the great pyramid in Giza, wandered around the Faiyum, and in November embarked for Palermo, Naples, and finally Venice, having travelled above 6000 miles in eleven months. In the preface Blount declared that his purpose in travelling had been Baconian: to gain knowledge by means of personal -- 'ocular' -- experience without the constraints of national and religious history. He travelled alone to the Middle East because he wanted to describe Islam and the world of the Ottomans in an 'empirical rather than religious frame of reference' (MacLean, 94). He was eager to see and learn from the non-Christian world, and realized that no people were more suitable for study than the 'Turkes, who are the only moderne people, great in action'. Blount praised them for their military discipline and social organization, emphasizing their importance for English trade and marvelling at the diversity of religious communities that lived among them. He established such good rapport that he was invited by the coffee drinking pasha to 'serve under them going against the Polacke'. Blount declined the offer but declared that King Charles I would have encouraged him because the latter had 'a League with the Gran Signior, [and] continually held an Embassadour at his Court, esteeming him the greatest Monarch in the World' (Blount, 15). Blount was fully aware how attractive the Ottoman world must have seemed to potential Christian converts seeking employment and advancement. 'The Voyage' shows a sharp and iconoclastic mind. 'By your eyes', wrote Bishop Henry King in commendation of the accuracy and detail of the book, '
I here have made my full discoveries; 

And all your countries so exactly seen, 

As in the voyage I had sharer been. 

' Soon after his return to England, and the publication of his travels, which won recognition from the king, Blount became a gentleman pensioner to Charles I and was knighted on 21 March 1639. He committed himself to the royalist cause and attended the king at York and took part in the battle of Edgehill. He stayed with the king in Oxford, but then went to London, where after entering Westminster Hall with his sword on his side he was questioned by the House of Commons for his apparent royalism. In 1647 he married Hester ('c'.1620-1678), daughter of Christopher Wase of Upper Holloway, Middlesex, and widow of Sir William Mainwaring of Chester. However, he continued to indulge himself: Henry Neville anonymously published in that year a pamphlet entitled 'The Parliament of Ladies' in which Blount states that it is 'cheaper and safer to lye with common wenches than with ladies of quality'. Aubrey recounts some episodes about Blount's frequenting of bordellos which support that claim while Wood describes him as 'a great banterer' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.54). 
At the beginning of the interregnum Blount changed sides and in January 1652 Cromwell appointed him to serve on the Hales commission for the reformation of the criminal code. He opposed tithes and urged that no minister of the church be paid more than $100 per annum for 'administering the Gospel'. In May 1654 he served as a juror at the trial of the brother of the Portuguese ambassador, Pantaleon Sa, along with three others and an English boy, all of whom were accused of murder in the New Exchange. In November 1655 he was appointed to the trade and navigation committee to 'regulate and improve trade, and receive propositions for the benefit thereof' ('CSP dom.: Commonwealth', 2). Two years later he wrote a foreword to Walter Rumsey's 'Organon salutis', the first detailed account in English of coffee, that 'physick' which the Turks use for preventing 'Consumption' and 'Lethargie', 'Rickets in Children', and 'Stone and Gout'. Judge Rumsey, whose letter to Blount appeared in the dedication, credited Blount with popularizing coffee in the country: 'your discovery in your excellent Book of Travels, hath brought the use of the Turkes Physick, of Cophie in great request in England'. Blount, who was known to drink only water, became an inveterate drinker of coffee, frequenting numerous coffee houses in London. John Evelyn, who met him in 1659, described him as the 'famous traveller and water-drinker'. Blount declaimed against drunkenness, and against the universities, which in his view corrupted the youth. But he also had his humorous side: Aubrey thought him 'a great shammer', telling falsities for the pleasure of it all. He was known not to urge his servants to church, preferring them to attend executions at Tyburn, 'which work more upon them than all the oratory in the sermons'. 
At the Restoration, Blount supported the new king and in 1661 he became sheriff of Hertfordshire. He remained in Tittenhanger, where Nathaniel Vincent served him as chaplain, spending his time in book collecting and writing. In November 1678 his wife died, and in September 1682, while on a visit to London, he became ill; he returned to Tittenhanger, where he died on the morning of 9 October 1682. He was buried two days later. Four of his children survived him: Thomas (later Sir Thomas) Pope Blount (1649-1697), Charles Blount (1654-1693), Frances (1648-1699), and Ulysses (1664-1704). 


@@@@@


doc= 2688


Sir James Blount (d. 1492), soldier, had been an esquire of the body of Richard III and as constable of Hammes was gaoler of the imprisoned Lancastrian John de Vere, earl of Oxford. At the beginning of November 1484 Blount freed his prisoner and went with him to join Henry Tudor in France. He accompanied Tudor's invasion of England in 1485 and was knighted by him at his landing at Milford Haven. He was subsequently rewarded with land forfeited by Richard's allies 'for services rendered at great bodily risk and expense in favouring the king's title' ('CPR', '1485-94', 230). He married Elizabeth, one of the two daughters and coheirs of John Delves, who died with his father on the Lancastrian side at Tewkesbury. The Delves's land was thereby forfeited, although Edward IV granted Blount their manor of Apedale in Staffordshire in June 1475. Blount was later to find himself in dispute with John Delves's brother Ralph over the descent of other family property. Blount made his will on 24 July 1492, naming the earl of Oxford supervisor, and died on 29 July. He willed burial with his father and brothers in the London Greyfriars. 


@@@@@


doc= 2689


Sir John Blount (d. 1418), became a knight of the Garter and fell at the siege of Rouen. His younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 2690


John Blount, third Baron Mountjoy (d. 1485), was knighted at the marriage of Richard, duke of York, in January 1478. He had been lieutenant of Hammes since 6 April 1470, but after being made constable of Guines by Richard III seems to have left Hammes to his younger brother, James, who had been granted the office jointly with him in May 1476. By 14 August 1484 John was seriously ill and Sir Thomas Montgomery (who was later to marry his widow) was authorized to act as his deputy. Blount made his will on 6 October 1485, in which he prayed his sons 'to live rightwisely and never to take the state of baron upon them if they may leave it from them, nor to desire to be great about princes for it is dangerous' (GEC, 'Peerage', 9.338, n. f). He died on 12 October. With his wife, Lora, the daughter of Sir Edward Berkeley of Beverstone, Gloucestershire, he had two sons, William and Rowland, and a daughter, Constantyne, all of whom were under age at his death. In 1488 the wardship of his heir, William Blount, was granted to his brother James, the third son of Walter, Lord Mountjoy. 


@@@@@


doc= 2691


Blount, Martha (1690-1763), Roman Catholic gentlewoman, was born on 15 June 1690 at the family estate of Mapledurham, Berkshire, the third child (but second eldest surviving) of six born to Lister Blount (1654-1710) and his wife, Martha (died 1743), daughter of Anthony Englefield of Whiteknights, near Reading. She was known to family and friends as Patty, and her mother was known as Pax. Her sister 
The sisters had met Pope about 1707 through their grandfather Anthony Englefield. They constituted Pope's most intimate link with the Roman Catholic high society which provided the subject of 'The Rape of the Lock': Martha's godfather, John Caryll, commissioned the poem to smooth over the cutting of Arabella Fermor's hair by his ward, Lord Petre. Lord Petre himself had been commended to the sisters, if only in jest, as an object of matrimonial pursuit; and Arabella, on whose final match with a country gentleman Teresa wrote a caustic commentary, was their cousin. In 1716 Charles Jervas painted them as 'a Couplet', calling them 'Pope's Favorites' and evoking in the balances and contrasts of the image something of the fascination that the sisters held for Pope: Martha, blonde, blue-eyed, and retiring, looks across at her sister, while Teresa, darker and more assertive, boldly confronts the viewer's gaze ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 1.332). 
The vivacious and sharp-tongued Teresa seems at first to have been the more attractive to Pope: she was probably addressed in 'You Know Where' (1710), and was certainly the addressee of 'Epistle to Miss Blount, with the Works of Voiture' (1710) and 'Epistle to Miss Blount, on her Leaving the Town, after the Coronation' (1714). (Martha had missed the coronation because she had smallpox.) 'Verses Sent to Mrs. T. B. with his Works' (1718) suggest that Teresa was increasingly irritated by his attentions; and in the same year she took offence at his settling on her an annuity of $40. Several letters suggest that he was on difficult terms with both sisters: he declared in a letter jointly addressed to both: 'I have some times found myself inclined to be in love with you: and as I have reason to know from your Temper & Conduct how miserably I should be used in that circumstance, it is worth my while to avoid it. ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 1.456)' Another letter, refusing an invitation to visit, suggests that one of the sisters had rebuffed his advances: 'You will please to consider that my Coming or not is a thing Indifferent to both of you. But God knows, it is far otherwise to me, with respect to One of you' (ibid., 1.460). The 'One' may have been Teresa, but she may equally, by this stage, have been Martha; for in listing his complaints against Teresa he accuses her of betraying his confidence by 'telling the party concern'd, it was all butt an Amusement occasiond by my Loss of another Lady' (ibid., 1.468). By the 1720s Pope and Teresa were irreconcilable: Pope claimed that she was having an affair with a married man, slandering him and Martha, and subjecting her mother to physical abuse. 
In 1715 Pope had inscribed 'To a Lady with the Temple of Fame' in Martha's presentation copy of 'The Temple of Fame', and in 1716 he hinted that she had asked him to delete a tribute to her which had originally formed the conclusion of 'Eloisa to Abelard'. Martha enjoyed romances, evinced a 'Romantic' response to landscape, disliked dressing formally, and was very shy: she found it very difficult to assert herself, and tended to confide ill usage to Pope rather than directly confronting those responsible. Increasingly Pope idealized her quieter and more introspective qualities. He encouraged her friendship with Henrietta Howard, countess of Suffolk, the king's mistress (although in later years his friendship for Lady Suffolk cooled, and Martha increasingly cultivated the Roman Catholic widow Elizabeth, Lady Gerard). Martha was often ill, and although Pope blamed this on domestic tension which he attributed to scandalous and violent behaviour on Teresa's part, Martha persistently refused to give in to his entreaties that she would set up house on her own. Martha's weakness (as he saw it) in staying with her family exasperated him, but stemmed from the same virtues of humility and loyalty which qualified her in his eyes as a properly good woman. Unlike the more obviously striking and articulate Teresa, this sensitive, retiring, but intensely loyal woman evoked his lifelong devotion. 
In 1723 his verses on Martha's birthday implicitly offered himself as 'a Friend' ('Twickenham Edition', 6.244-7). She and Pope denied persistent rumours that she had become his mistress, fiancee, or secret bride. In 1729 Caryll seems to have offered Pope a dowry for her, but he declared that 'I have no tie to your God-daughter but a good opinion, which has grown into a friendship with experience that she deserved it' ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 3.74-5). His 'Epistle to a Lady: on the Characters of Women' (1735) contains his most substantial tribute to the qualities he found in her: she, though unnamed, is the 'Friend' to whom Apollo has given 'Sense, Good-humour, and a Poet'. She may also have been the tantalizing beloved of 'The First Ode of the Fourth Book of Horace' (1737). 
In later years some of Pope's newer friends resented Martha's long-established intimacy, and the feeling may have been mutual. A quarrel in 1743 at the home of Ralph Allen, a recent but crucial addition to Pope's circle, pitted Martha against the Allens and Pope's new protege William Warburton, and she wrote to Pope in bitter terms: 'I hope you are well. I am not. My spirits are quite down, tho they should not. for these people deserve so much to be dispised, one should do nothing but Laugh... Mr Warburton takes no notice of me. tis most wonderfull. they have not one of `em named your name, nor drank your health since you went. they talk to one another without putting me at all in the conversation. ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 4.462)' Pope returned an agitated letter commiserating over 'such monstrous Treatment', and ended by declaring 'W. is a sneaking Parson, & I told him he flatterd' ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 4.463-4). Warburton remained her enemy and circulated various anecdotes impugning her integrity, particularly through the materials he provided for Owen Ruffhead's 'The Life of Alexander Pope' (1769). 
In 1743 Pope arranged to buy a twenty-six-year lease on a house in Berkeley Street (or Row) for Martha. His last letter to her is a somewhat awkward attempt to explain his reconciliation with the Allens without making light of her anger. He pleads: 'Would to God you would Quicken your haste to settle, by reflecting what a pleasure it would be to me, just to see it, and to see you at ease; & then I could contentedly leave you to the Providence of God, in this Life, & resign my Self to it in the other! ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 4.511)' He closes by assuring her that 'I love you upon unalterable Principles, which makes me feel my heart the same to you as if I saw you every hour.' He died in May 1744, and in his will, dated 12 December 1743, left her $1000, his goods and chattels, and the income from his estate for life, which enraged his half-sister Magdalen Rackett, who later became another source of derogatory anecdotes about Martha. 
Martha was now comfortably provided for and presided over a household of her own for the first time in her life, although she continued to lend Teresa small sums of money. In 1749 she spoke affectionately about Pope to Joseph Spence, who added a substantial group of her reminiscences to his collection of anecdotes. Horace Walpole, recognizing her in later life in the street on a rainy day 'with her petticoats tucked up like a sempstress' and 'nothing remaining of her immortal charms but her 'blue eyes'', was content to dismiss her as 'red-faced, fat, and by no means pretty' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 33.511). 
Teresa died on 7 October 1759 after a long illness, and was buried in the churchyard of St Pancras in London (that is, Old St Pancras, a customary burial site for Catholics). Her estate was administered by her nephew Michael Blount of Mapledurham. Martha died suddenly at her Berkeley Street home on 12 July 1763 and was buried beside her sister. Apart from a few small legacies she left everything to her nephew Michael, father of her god-daughter Martha ('Little Patty'). 


@@@@@


doc= 2692


Blount, Mountjoy, first earl of Newport (c.1597-1666), courtier and politician, was the eldest of three illegitimate sons of Charles Blount, earl of Devonshire (1563-1606), and Lady Penelope Rich (1563-1607), daughter of Walter Devereux, first earl of Essex; his parents were eventually to marry, contrary to canon law, in 1605. He was the half-brother of Henry Rich, first earl of Holland (bap. 1590, d. 1649), and Robert Rich, second earl of Warwick (1587-1658). When his father died in April 1606, he left him considerable estates at Wanstead, Essex, and elsewhere, worth at that time an estimated total of $3000 to $4000 a year; Clarendon later observed that he possessed 'a very plentiful revenue' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.78). 
Blount quickly established himself as a favourite at court and was created Lord Mountjoy, baron of Mountjoy Fort in the Irish peerage, in January 1618. He went overseas at the end of that year, where his travels took him to, among other places, Turin and Venice. On 8 January 1621 he acted in a masque before King James and the French ambassador at Essex House, and in April the following year he was in Prince Charles's company at a tilt. During 1622 he also travelled with Colonel Edward Cecil to the Low Countries, where it was falsely reported that they had been slain. On 21 February 1623 Mountjoy accompanied the earl of Carlisle on a visit to the French court to request that Prince Charles might pass through Paris in disguise, on his way to Spain, without kissing the king's hand. After this, Mountjoy rode on to Spain, where he caught tertian fever. After his return he attended the Spanish ambassador, Mendoza, in London the following November. In April 1625 he was granted a pass to the United Provinces for himself or his deputy to take 100 men to serve there as horsemen. 
Further evidence of Charles's favour came on 5 June 1627 when he created Mountjoy Baron Mountjoy of Thurveston (Derbyshire) in the English peerage, with a special clause giving him precedence over barons created since 20 May of that year. Following objections from the only two barons affected, Lord Fauconberg and Lord Lovelace, the Lords' committee for privileges ruled in April 1628 that this grant of precedence was illegal. Accordingly, on 27 July 1628 Charles created Mountjoy earl of Newport (in the Isle of Wight) in the English peerage and the following month appointed him to a command in the expedition for the relief of La Rochelle. However, Buckingham's assassination delayed the expedition's departure until October, and Newport was appointed rear-admiral of the fleet. Throughout 1629 and 1630 he petitioned for payment for his services, and a warrant for payment was finally issued on 12 May 1631. He was granted the reversion to the custodianship of Hyde Park in June 1630. 
On 7 February 1627 Newport had married Anne Boteler (died 1669), daughter of Sir John Boteler, bt (later first Baron Boteler), and Elizabeth Villiers. In 1637 Lady Newport created a sensation by converting to Catholicism. Her husband begged Laud's assistance in securing the punishment of those whom he held responsible, including Walter Montagu and Sir Toby Matthew, and the archbishop's attempts to do so led him into a major row with Queen Henrietta Maria, who vigorously defended her co-religionists. The queen successfully frustrated attempts to regulate access to her chapel, and she summoned Lady Newport and a number of other recent converts to attend mass there on Christmas day 1637. It is possible that these events help to explain Newport's subsequent alienation from the court and his association (albeit temporary) with some of the crown's leading critics in the early 1640s. 
On 31 August 1634 Newport had been appointed master of the ordnance for life. Over the next five years he was actively involved with the ordnance office and succeeded in making large profits for himself. He was appointed a privy councillor in September 1638, and was one of the lords of the council at York who took the oath of allegiance to the king in April 1639. He became colonel of a regiment of foot the following month, and later general of the artillery in the king's army in the north. In September 1639 he sold gunpowder to the Spanish ambassador, Cardenas, for the Spanish fleet that was attacking the Dutch in the channel, at an inflated price. Arguing that 'the King of Spain is very rich, and it is of no importance to him how much he gives for the powder of which he is so greatly in need' (S. R. Gardiner, 'History of England from the Accession of James I to the Outbreak of the Civil War, 1603-1642', 10 vols., 1883-4, 9.61), Newport struck a deal whereby Charles received $5000 above the value of the powder, and he himself $1000. The following month he bargained with Cardenas to convey Spanish soldiers from the fleet to Dunkirk at 30's'. a head, contrary to Charles's instruction that England remain strictly neutral in the conflict between Spain and the Dutch. 
In the Short Parliament and the opening months of the Long Parliament, Newport aligned himself with the king's critics in the Lords. On 29 April 1640 he voted with the minority of peers in supporting the Commons' resolution that redress of grievances should precede supply, although he later tried to excuse his conduct to the king by claiming that in the heat of the moment he was so agitated that he had voted the wrong way by mistake. In April 1641 George Goring leaked intelligence of the first army plot to Newport (possibly with royal approval). The earl at once took him to see Bedford and Mandeville, who passed the news on to Pym. In an attempt to conciliate him, Charles promptly appointed Newport constable of the Tower on 6 May; however, any possible benefits to the king that might have come from this gesture were lost amid the revelations of the army plot. After the Lords had passed the bill for Strafford's attainder, and while Charles was hesitating over whether to accept it, Newport gave his assurance that in his new capacity as constable of the Tower he would ensure that Strafford was put to death even if the king refused his assent. In June Charles ordered Newport to proceed to York to safeguard munitions in the north, and on 25 June the Lords petitioned the king to permit him still to be paid as constable of the Tower in the meantime. On 18 August the houses ordered Newport to take up residence in the Tower and to make sure that it was safely guarded. 
During the autumn of 1641 Newport continued to be identified among the more radical members of the Lords. On 9 September he was one of a minority of peers who voted against the Lords' order that 'the divine service be performed as it is appointed by the Acts of Parliament' ('JHL', 4, 1628-42, 395). When the Lords further resolved to publish this order before conferring with the Commons, Newport recorded his protest, together with Bedford, Warwick, Clare, Wharton, and Mandeville. The king's suspicion of him was reinforced by a report that while Charles had been in Scotland in August 1641 Newport had allegedly informed a gathering at Kensington which included Essex, Saye and Sele, Wharton, Nathaniel Fiennes, and John Pym that if it turned out that the king was hatching a plot, then 'here are his wife and children; insinuating the same to signify that the person of Her Majesty and her children should be seized upon'. When Charles later confronted Newport with this story the earl denied it, whereupon the king replied dismissively 'I am sorry for your lordship's memory' ('JHL', 4, 1628-42, 490, 493). 
Charles's growing suspicion of Newport was apparent towards the end of December 1641, when the Commons, disturbed by the king's appointment of Sir Thomas Lunsford as lieutenant of the Tower, repeated their request that Newport take up residence there. Charles's immediate response was to dismiss Newport from the constableship. At about the same time, on 27 December, Newport raised the matter of the Kensington rumours in the Lords, and the next day both houses submitted a joint petition asking the king to name his informant. On 30 December Charles replied, stating that he 'neither did nor do give credit to any such rumour' ('JHL', 4, 1628-42, 498). It is indeed possible that Charles had not entirely lost personal trust in Newport for that same day he gave him the keys of Whitehall Palace. 
The likeliest explanation of Newport's behaviour is that he was trying to retain credit with both the king and his critics within the houses. These attempts led the royalist Sir Philip Warwick to brand Newport 'a very weak and faithless person' (Warwick, 131). During the opening months of 1642 there were clear signs that Newport was attempting to rebuild his bridges with the king. On 5 January he accompanied Charles, together with Essex, Hamilton, and his own half-brother Holland, to the City of London in search of the five members. The following April, he allegedly advised the king to go to Hull, and was with Charles when Sir John Hotham denied him entry to the garrison. On 11 May the Lords ordered Newport to attend the house 'as a delinquent' ('JHL', 5, 1642-3, 59), but apparently he did not comply. On 15 June he was among the king's supporters at York who signed a declaration pledging Charles's commitment to 'the firm and constant settlement of the true Protestant religion, the just privileges of Parliament, the liberty of the subject, [and] the law, peace, and prosperity of this kingdom' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.185-6). By December 1642 he was the earl of Newcastle's lieutenant-general, but his forces arrived too late to assist the royalist assault on Tadcaster, a failure that Newcastle's wife attributed to 'neglect or treachery' ('Life of William Cavendish', 16). Newport was also defeated in an engagement with Sir Hugh Cholmley in north Yorkshire in January 1643, and the following month he quarrelled with Newcastle over the latter's desire to employ Catholics in his army. That same month Newcastle attempted to arrest him at Pontefract following allegations that Newport had plotted to seize the queen on her return from the Netherlands. There is, however, no evidence to support these accusations, and the fact that he immediately afterwards fled back to the king may suggest that they were groundless. 
In the event parliamentarian troops captured Newport before he reached Charles: in mid-March 1643 it was reported that he was 'stayed at Coventry' and the Lords ordered that he be brought to London ('JHL', 5, 1642-3, 649). On 28 March Newport surrendered himself and was committed to the custody of the gentleman usher of the Lords; on 4 April he was granted 'liberty to go abroad, and take the air for his health', provided that the gentleman usher accompanied him (ibid., 692). On 11 June the Commons ordered Newport's saddle and horse-arms, and other property left in the Tower from when he had been constable, to be handed over to Sir Thomas Myddleton. 
Newport was apparently released during the summer of 1643, and he was with the king at Oxford by November. In May 1644 he was one of Prince Rupert's commissioners at Shrewsbury, and the following month he visited Weymouth, where he went aboard the ship of his half-brother Warwick, the parliamentarian admiral. Newport was apparently present at the second battle of Newbury (27 October 1644) and marched with the king to Bath on the night after the battle. By the end of 1645 he was with the king's forces in Devon, and was taken prisoner at the fall of Dartmouth Castle on 23 January 1646. Fairfax sent him in custody to London, where he was again entrusted to the gentleman usher of the Lords. On 11 February Newport petitioned the Lords requesting 'leave to be confined to some private place' where his maintenance would cost him 'a more easier charge' ('JHL', 8, 1645-6, 162). The Lords accepted a recognizance of $2000 from Newport on 17 February, on condition that he would 'be a true prisoner, and not go out of the precincts of the liberties of the parishes of St Martin's-in-the-Fields and the Covent Garden' (ibid., 171). It seems that about this time Newport was also attempting to curry favour with the houses by suborning a lieutenant of the prince of Wales's guard to convey the prince to Westminster (although nothing came of this and the prince departed for the Isles of Scilly on 2 March 1646). On 23 March Newport was granted 'liberty to go abroad, and take the air, within four or five miles from London, for his health's sake'. He entered into a new recognizance, again for $2000, on condition that he would be 'a true prisoner to this House, and shall go no further than five miles from the lines of communication about London' (ibid., 226). He was later 'released from his bail' on 22 July 1646 (ibid., 437). 
On 30 April 1646 Newport begged to compound for his delinquency at the rate of one-tenth, equivalent to the value of two years' income from his estate. His composition fine was initially set at $4579, and shortly afterwards reduced to $4179 following the settlement of a debt. On 4 October 1647 the Lords accepted Newport's request that allowance be made for his loss of the office of master of the ordnance, and recommended to the Commons that his composition fine be further reduced accordingly. However, after a lengthy review his fine was confirmed at $4179 on 11 April 1650. Newport's estate was apparently then discharged in 1652 upon payment of the fine. 
Newport's activities during the interregnum remain relatively obscure. In December 1653 he presented a petition to the council of state. Two months later he and Lord Vaux were summoned before the council, having 'been apprehended on a warrant touching challenge' ('CSP dom.', '1653-4', 404). In February 1655 he was reportedly one of Clarendon's chief correspondents. It is likely that the courier was the countess, who was travelling regularly between England and the Low Countries during the mid-1650s. In June 1655, in the wake of Penruddock's rising, Newport was briefly committed to the Tower on suspicion of treason, and in June 1657 the Cromwellian agent Colonel Bampfield urged that the countess be sent for and examined. In November of that year Newport attended the marriage of his great-nephew Robert Rich, grandson of the earl of Warwick, to Cromwell's daughter Frances, and reportedly 'danced with her Highness' ('Fifth Report', HMC, 177). 
After the Restoration, on 24 June 1660 Newport was formally discharged from the office of master of the ordnance, and appointed instead as a gentleman of the bedchamber. On 10 November 1662 he was granted a pension of $1000 a year from this office, subsequently backdated to 24 June 1660. He died 'of the stone' (GEC, 'Peerage', 9.552) on 12 February 1666 at St Aldate's, Oxford, having gone there from London to avoid the plague. He was buried three days later on 15 February in the south aisle of Christ Church Cathedral. The following year his widow married Thomas Weston, fourth earl of Portland. She died on 26 May 1669, at Newport House in St Martin-in-the-Fields, and was privately buried, as a Catholic, in the chapel at Somerset House. 
The overall impression of Newport's character and career is of someone who failed to live up to his early promise. Royal favour, allied to good fortune and high connections, helped him to achieve prominence at court at a notably young age. However, both before and during the civil wars he seems to have been guided principally by a wish to protect his own interests, and he apparently lacked firm political convictions. In the early 1640s he tried to maintain his links with both the king and leading parliamentarians for as long as possible, with the result that he eventually aroused suspicion on all sides. Increasingly perceived as untrustworthy, and lacking either the ability or the ambition to attain high office, his political influence was gradually eclipsed and he declined into relative obscurity from the later 1640s onwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 2693


Blount, Richard (c.1565-1638), Jesuit, probably the son of William Blount and Frances Blount ('nee' Love or Pope), was the younger brother of Sir Thomas Pope Blount, of Osbaston, Leicestershire, and Tittenhanger, Hertfordshire, and grandson of Walter, son of John Blount, of Blunt's Hall, Staffordshire. Born in Osbaston, Leicestershire, Blount matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, in 1581. Awarded a BA on 29 November 1582, he was ejected shortly thereafter apparently for religious reasons. His aunt Elizabeth, Lady Paulet, granted Blount a fellowship at Trinity College, Oxford, founded by her late husband, Sir Thomas Pope. He held it for a few weeks before leaving England for the continent. He arrived at the English College in Rheims on 22 July 1583; by 15 April 1584 he was at the English College in Rome where he was ordained priest on 1 April 1589. In October he was at the recently founded English College in Valladolid, moving to Seville in early 1591. With eleven others Blount left Seville for England on 1 April 1591. To facilitate their return Robert Persons devised a wonderful masquerade. Appropriately dressed, they were presented as English sailors captured during the earl of Essex's expedition against Spain and now duly released. William, Lord Howard of Effingham, lord admiral, examined Blount upon his arrival: after two or three days of examination he was rewarded and released. He was placed at Scotney Castle, Sussex, home of the Darell family. 
Blount entered the Jesuits in England in September of 1596. He was a Jesuit novice when he made his celebrated escape from government agents at Scotney Castle in either 1597 or 1598. He completed his noviceship on 7 September 1598. Some time after his escape Blount moved to London. In 1609 he ministered to Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel; his mother, Anne (Dacre) Howard, countess of Arundel; Elizabeth (Hastings) Somerset, countess of Worcester, and her family; Anne (Rivett) Windsor, Lady Windsor; and others. Father Morris cited a report that George Abbot, archbishop of Canterbury, knew Blount's residence but refused to disclose it in memory of their time together in Oxford, and because of the archbishop's respect for Blount's hostess (Morris, 192-3). Most likely his London base was a house belonging to the Arundels. In London, perhaps at the same residence, he pronounced his final vows on 1 May 1609. 
On 17 April 1619 Blount succeeded Michael Walpole as superior of Jesuits in England. Three months later, on 6 July 1619, he was named vice-provincial of the recently established Jesuit vice-province of England that included England, Wales, and English Jesuit foundations in the Spanish Netherlands. England was elevated to full provincial status on 21 January 1623 with Blount as provincial, a position he retained until the summer of 1635. 
During his term the province thrived: from 242 members, 138 of whom worked in England and Wales, in 1623, it grew to 359 Jesuits, 188 working in the kingdom, in 1636, with a new mission to Maryland established in 1633 and proposals for new colleges on the continent (Osnabruck). The growth was subsidized by generous benefactions from patrons such as the countess of Arundel; George Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury; Henry Somerset, earl and later marquess of Worcester; William, Lord Petre; and Thomas Sackville, younger son of Thomas Sackville, earl of Dorset, whom Blount reconciled to the Roman church shortly before the earl's death. Blount guided the society through various crises, including a prolonged theological battle with secular clergy over the rights and prerogatives of Richard Smith, bishop of Chalcedon, John Gerard's controversial support for Mary Ward and her revolutionary 'English Ladies', and the dismissal (albeit temporary) from the society of Thomas Poulton because of offensive remarks against Cardinal Richelieu. 
Some time after the completion of his term Blount petitioned Charles I that as a Roman Catholic priest he should be imprisoned, and recommended that he be confined at his brother's house at Tittenhanger. It is uncertain whether his request was granted. On Passion Sunday in 1638 he suffered an apoplectic seizure that left him partially paralysed. He died in London on Pentecost, 13 May 1638, and was buried in Queen Henrietta Maria's Catholic chapel at Somerset House. Robert Catesby once said of him: 'Here comes Father Blount, who is everybody's favourite, and has no favourites himself' (Morris, 204). Of many compliments paid to him, at least one is incontestably true: an unsigned evaluation compiled prior to Blount's final profession sang his praises. Among his many gifts, 'he is fit for government and for all the duties of the Society' (Morris, 205). 


@@@@@


doc= 2694


Blount, Sir Thomas (b. after 1348, d. 1400), knight, was the first son of Sir Thomas Blount ('c'.1321- 'c'.1407), of Compton Valence, Dorset, and Kingston Blount, Oxfordshire. Blount's mother, Joan, was the daughter of Sir Edmund Hakluyt of Longford, Herefordshire, and widow of Reynold Fitzherbert of Midsomer Norton, Somerset. His other principal estate was at Laverstock, Wiltshire. 
Blount was knighted before 1374, probably for service overseas, although he failed in his undertaking to cross the channel in the retinue of John, duke of Brittany. He joined the household of Richard II, who made him a personal gift of 20 marks in May 1383, and paid him 40 marks a year later for escorting a French ambassador from Berkhamsted Castle to Scotland and then via London to Calais. As a knight of the chamber Blount took part in Richard's expedition to Scotland in 1385, following which he was granted a wardship as he 'had scanty means of support'. However, he soon surrendered this in exchange for a life annuity of $40. In March 1386 he received $20 for additional services to the king, and was then employed on the defence of Calais under Sir Thomas Percy (afterwards earl of Worcester). 
In 1387 Blount secured the hand of Isabel, daughter of John, second Lord Botetourt, and widow of Sir Hugh Seagrave, the former treasurer of England, but although this was a prestigious match it did not bring him much in the way of material benefits. Blount was expelled from court by the lords appellant in January 1388, but escaped the harsh judgments meted out by the Merciless Parliament on several of his colleagues, and was reinstated in the chamber as soon as the king regained the political initiative. In 1391 he was sent to Paris as Richard's personal messenger to Charles VI, and in 1394 he took part in the royal expedition to Ireland. Along with the king's councillor, Sir Henry Green, he was returned for Wiltshire to the parliament of September 1397, which brought to fruition Richard's plans for revenge on his enemies. Yet although his election may have been the outcome of a deliberate policy to secure seats in this parliament for the king's supporters, Blount was qualified to represent the county through property brought by his second marriage (which had taken place by October 1394), to Joan ('b'. 'c'.1344), niece and heir of John Tudworth of Laverstock, and widow of Sir Hugh Cheyne of Rolleston, Leicestershire. 
Blount's annuity was confirmed by Henry IV in November 1399, but he never accepted the deposition of Richard II, to whom he remained devoted, and joined the conspirators headed by the earls of Kent, Salisbury, and Huntingdon, who on 17 December at the abbey house in Westminster plotted to seize the new king while he was at Windsor for the feast of Epiphany. The plot miscarried and the traitors were forced to flee to Cirencester. There, after a fight, Blount was arrested. He was taken to Oxford for trial in the marshal's court, and sentenced to execution on 12 January. The most graphic contemporary account of his death, in which, after suffering hanging and evisceration, he responded to the taunts of Sir Thomas Erpingham with a declaration of his willingness to die in the service of his sovereign lord, Richard II, should be discounted as an untrustworthy source. Similarly, the chroniclers' descriptions of him as 'un sage baron' ('a wise lord') or 'un bon chevalier' ('a good knight') perhaps reveal more about their own bias than about Blount himself. His estates were forfeited to the crown, but not for long, for the manor of Blatchington, Sussex, which he had held for life since 1393 soon reverted to the heirs of his half-brother Sir Edmund Fitzherbert, and that of Kingston Blount, which he had leased from his father for $20 p.a., returned to the latter. His widow reclaimed her property in 1401 after her third marriage, to Thomas Linford. Blount died childless; his heir was his brother, Hugh. 


@@@@@


doc= 2695


Sir Thomas Blount (c.1383-1456), who had been intended for the church, in turn assumed the Lancastrian livery, and rose high in royal service to be made treasurer of Normandy. In recognition of two generations of unstinting loyalty, Prince Thomas set aside 1000 marks for the erection of a splendid Blount family chantry at St Mary's. 


@@@@@


doc= 2696


Blount, Thomas (1605/6-1678), landowner and local politician, was the second son of the six sons and two daughters born to Edward Blount (1559-1618), lawyer and landowner, and his second wife, Fortune, daughter of the London merchant Sir William Garway (Garraway). The Blount family held the manor and 280 acres of Wricklemarsh, near Charlton, Kent, and as his elder brother predeceased their father Thomas inherited Wricklemarsh. He matriculated from Brasenose College, Oxford, on 5 December 1623, aged seventeen; the following year he was admitted to Gray's Inn but did not proceed to the bar. By 1629 he was giving legal advice to the vestrymen of Greenwich. From 1636 until 1660 he was an active JP in his corner of north-west Kent and assiduously attended assizes up to the mid-1650s and rather more infrequently thereafter. On 4 February 1629 or 1630 at St Peter-le-Poer, London, he married Sarah, the daughter of Captain Anthony Wood of Rotherhithe, Surrey. They are known to have had four sons -- of whom the eldest was Thomas, ('b'. 1636/7) -- and three daughters. 
Blount was present at the meetings at Maidstone of county gentry, including Sir Edward Dering and Sir Roger Twysden, which resulted in the getting up of the royalist Kentish petition at the assizes of March 1642; he reported the matter at the bar of the House of Commons and was an organizer of the pro-parliamentarian counter-petition. With the coming of war he was appointed colonel of a Kentish regiment, and he was one of two men excepted from the royal pardons offered to Kent in November and December 1642. He became a leading figure on the county committees, an ally of Sir Anthony Weldon in overriding local interests in the cause of parliament. Indeed, he was one of only eight men to sit on the chief committee continuously throughout the period 1643-60 (out of a total of 274 who served on it at some point in those years), as the more established and politically moderate county leaders gave way to minor gentry more ruthless in doing parliament's bidding. Socially Blount -- a man of some substance but from a family only recently settled in the county -- was an intermediate figure between these two groups; politically his inclinations were very much with the latter. Sir Roger Twysden, who was at the receiving end of Blount's duties as a sequestration commissioner, remarked that he was 'a great stickler for the two houses of parliament' ('Sir Roger Twysden's journal', 202n.). In January 1645 Blount shielded the Antinomian John Saltmarsh from a local crowd when he tried to preach at Westerham. In April that year he was active in suppressing a royalist rising in the county, when he 'caused to be beaten an alarm on the top of his own house, and summoned in the country all about' (Everitt, 216). A few months later he engineered a less serious combat: to appease the local population for the loss of their May day games he staged a mock battle on Blackheath, with two infantry regiments acting as cavaliers and roundheads. 
In 1649 Blount was nominated to sit on the high court of justice to try Charles I, but he failed to attend any of its sessions. In 1652 he was a radical presence on the commission for law reform (the so-called Hale commission) set up by the Rump Parliament. The following year he was summoned to sit in Barebone's parliament, having been nominated by the gathered churches of Kent. There he showed 'mildly radical leanings in both... religion... and... politics' (Woolrych, 119). He sat on a dozen committees, including some which reflected his religious preoccupations (those for tithes and for the advancement of learning) and some his legal (for civil marriage, for abolishing the court of chancery, and for suppressing highwaymen). To judge by the divisions for which he served as teller, he shared the radical hostility to tithes and lay patronage. 
In the early 1650s Blount extended his estate by the purchase of crown lands on the Isle of Sheppey and in Lewisham, Kidbrooke, and Charlton. In 1656 he transferred his interest in the Wricklemarsh property to his son Thomas, recently married to Anne Oldfield, although he continued to occupy the main house. In 1657 he provided both men and arms to suppress Thomas Venner's Fifth Monarchist rising and two years later opposed a royalist rising in Kent. At the Restoration he was removed from the bench and became an object of suspicion to the new regime. In 1661 he attended services at St Margaret, Lee, Kent, where the clergymen (both shortly to be ejected for their failure to conform) were more congenial to him than the incumbent who now presided at St Luke, Charlton. His action was reported by spies, and he was arrested, charged with sedition, and imprisoned for conspiracy. However, the testimony of friends and his own exculpatory statements secured his release after two months. He claimed that during the war he had refused a commission which was worded as coming from parliament alone rather than from king and parliament; he had treated kindly the duke of Richmond and other royal servants; and he had given the Greenwich bellringers 20's'. to ring the peal celebrating the Restoration. The following year the former magistrate suffered the indignity of being himself the victim of highway robbery. 
During the 1650s Blount was friendly with Robert Boyle and John Wilkins, two of the circle who later founded the Royal Society, to which Blount was elected in February 1665. His first encounter with John Evelyn was in 1652 when Evelyn had been robbed and tied up while on his way from Tunbridge Wells to London. On freeing himself, Evelyn went to the nearby Wricklemarsh House, from where Blount immediately sent out hue and cry to search for the robbers. They were not found, but the episode led to Evelyn and Blount becoming friends. In 1655 Evelyn was shown Blount's subterranean rabbit warren and drank the wine from his vineyard, which he noted in his diary as 'good for little' (Evelyn, 'Diary', 3.161); in 1656 Boyle and other virtuosi, having dined with Evelyn, called afterwards on Blount to see his new plough and in the following year he saw the odometer which Blount had affixed to his carriage, activated by the turning wheel, so as to count the miles travelled. In 1659 Evelyn met at Wricklemarsh Sir Henry Blount (1602-1682), Blount's kinsman and Levant traveller. 
Samuel Pepys was another acquaintance; on 1 May 1665 he met Lord Brouncker and others going to Blount's for dinner, and was persuaded to join them, finding Blount's house 'a very stately seat for its situation and brave plantations; and among others, a vineyard, the first that ever I did see' (Pepys has forgotten his visit to the Hatfield House vineyard in 1661): 'after dinner to the tryall of some experiments about making of coaches easy. And several we tried, but one did prove mighty easy (not here for me to describe, but the whole body of that coach lays upon one long spring and we all, one after another, rid in it; and it is very fine and likely to take. (Pepys, 6.94)' In September, 'after dinner comes Colonel Blount in his new chariott made with springs, as that was of wicker, wherein a while since we rode at his house'. This held one passenger and the driver sat in a sprung saddle. Pepys tried it for comfort, 'and found it pretty well but not so easy as he pretends' (Pepys, 6.213). The following January Brouncker, Wilkins, Pepys, and Robert Hooke again met at Blount's to discuss coaches. This was one of a series of trials of new chariots, in competition with similar French designs. A report was made to the Royal Society on 14 March. 
In November 1666 Blount presented the Royal Society with two sorts of English wine, new and old, some black salsify, which he said might be propagated in England much as parsnips, a type of pea, said to be extremely fertile, and some spirit of cherry wine, of singular strength. He withdrew from the society in 1668, perhaps offended by the society's declared preference in 1667 for William Croune's chariot, and died ten years later. He was buried at St Luke, Charlton, on 2 December 1678. 


@@@@@


doc= 2697


Blount, Thomas (1618-1679), antiquary and lexicographer, was born at Bordesley Park, Worcestershire, the eldest of the three sons and five daughters of Miles Blount ('c'.1585-1663), gentleman, and his wife, Anne (died 1669), daughter of William Bustard of Adderbury. Both his parents were from strongly Catholic families and his adherence to the religion was to affect his life profoundly. It is not known where he was first educated, but he did not attend a university, and his choice of a legal training -- he entered the Inner Temple in 1639 and was called to the bar in 1648 -- qualified him for a profession which his religion prevented him from practising. The sequestrations of his father's estate in 1646 and 1649 also strained the family income, and it was probably in the hope of financial gain that Blount first turned to writing to supplement his modest income from conveyancing. 
Neither of Blount's first two books -- 'The Art of Making Devises' (1646) and 'The Academie of Eloquence' (1654) -- made an important contribution to scholarship, the former being a translation of a French work, and the latter a book of demonstration letters for young people largely copied from earlier examples; both, however, were popular. His third book was a much greater achievement. 'Glossographia, or, A dictionary interpreting all such hard words, of whatsoever language, now used in our refined English tongue', which appeared in 1656, was only the fourth monolingual English dictionary, and the first attempted on such a scale. It was also the first dictionary to give sources for definitions (albeit only in a minority of cases), and to attempt etymologies. Within a year it was heavily plundered by Edward Phillips for his 'New World of English Words'. 
Meanwhile, at some date between July 1650 and February 1652 Blount had married Anne (1616/17-1697), daughter of Edmund Church of East Maldon, Essex, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Edward Atlsow of Eversholt, Bedfordshire, a family as firmly Catholic as his own, Atlsow and Church both having been imprisoned for recusant activities. In 1658 Blount ventured to publish, under the name of Grass and Hay Withers, 'The Lamps of the Law and Lights of the Gospel', a satirical look at contemporary radical protestant writing. It was not until the Restoration, however, that he felt he could write in favour of his own religion and its recent martyrs. Then -- and for the next four years -- he published nothing which did not further the Catholic cause. First among these works was 'A catalogue of the lords, knights and gentlemen (of the Catholick religion) that were slain in the late warr' (1660), a work demonstrating the loyalty of the Catholics in England, reprinted many times in works by him as well as others. In the same year he published 'Boscobel, or, The history of his sacred majesties most miraculous preservation after the battle of Worcester', in which he again stressed the part played by the Catholics in the defence of the king's person. Far from being mere propaganda, this work was compiled from eyewitness accounts obtained from the individuals involved, and approved by the king, who ordered Blount to continue it, although 'Boscobel, the Second Part, with the Addition of Claustrum regale reseratum' did not appear until 1681. In 1661 he published 'Calendarium Catholicum', the first edition of his Catholic almanac which, under various titles, he produced five times over five years. 
In 1666 Blount tackled a different subject with 'Booker Rebuked', a critique of John Booker's almanac of the previous year; in the later 1660s he returned to the subject of lexicography. In 1667 he published a new edition of 'Les termes de la ley', an alphabetical dictionary of legal terms first published in 1527. In this he attempted to eradicate antiquated expressions, and add new ones; but it was soon made redundant by the appearance in 1670 of his own ''Nomolexikon': a Law-Dictionary'. This work, which has been described as his most important, seems largely to have been based on John Cowell's 'The Interpreter', but it was much more than a mere modernization. Indeed, it was so well received that it was not long before it was, like 'Glossographia', plundered, plagiarized, and published under a different name. Within a matter of months Blount was writing to Anthony Wood that it was 'at the presse surreptitiously, being transcribd and mutilated, and disguisd with som new title, and this by a beggarly halfwitted schollar hird for the purpose' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood F.40, fols. 89-90). The halfwitted scholar in this instance was Thomas Manley, and the new book, ''Nomothetes'', appeared in 1671. The publication in the same year of a new edition of 'The New World of Words', which had been copied from 'Glossographia', caused Blount scrupulously to write 'A World of Errors Discovered in 'The New World of Words'' (1673). Refusing to let the plagiarists deter him, he continued to make notes for a second edition of ''Nomolexikon'', which was published posthumously in 1691. 
Although Blount deserves notice both for his dictionaries and for 'Boscobel', it is primarily as an antiquary that he is remembered today. However, it was only in the last ten years of his life that he turned his attention to this field; his only antiquarian publication before 1670 was his edition (the third, 1661) of Henry Peacham's 'The Compleat Gentleman', to which he added one chapter and a genealogy of his own family. Several factors may have provoked this change: the death of his mother in 1669 and the subsequent benefit of her estates, and his recent friendship with William Dugdale and Anthony Wood were probably the most important, but the catalyst seems to have been the publication in 1670 of the fifth edition of Sir Richard Baker's popular 'Chronicle of the Kings of England', a work to which Blount was probably already highly indisposed after a continuation had been published by Edward Phillips, the plagiarist of 'Glossographia', in the third edition (1660). In 1671 he proposed to Wood that they collaborate on a 'Chronological History of England', and on being turned down, turned for help to his cousin, the Catholic writer John Belson. The work, which was not published, disappeared until parts were rediscovered by Theo Bongaerts among the Barrett-Belson family papers. Blount's 'Animadversions upon Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle' was published, however, in 1672, with Wood's help. The following year Blount composed a similar 'Animadversions on Blome's Britannia', although it seems that this was not published. 
In the mid-1670s, after a brief foray into merchant law with 'A Collection of Statutes Concerning Bankrupts' (1670) and 'The Several Forms of Instruments Relating to the Affairs of Merchants and Traders' (1674), Blount began to write what would prove his most significant book -- a history of Herefordshire. In the months when John Belson was unable to work due to ill health, Blount collected material, making use of printed chronicles as well as manuscripts, in London as well as in Herefordshire. He also visited a large number of churches, and about 1677 compiled the history in two volumes, arranged alphabetically by parish. Although never published, it has been used by every subsequent historian of the county. The first volume, relating to parishes A-K, was unfortunately lost in the mid-eighteenth century, having been lent to Sir Robert Cornewall, but not before William Brome, Richard Walwyn, and James Hill had used it; the second volume was acquired by Hereford City Library in 1956. 
Blount's last work, 'Fragmenta antiquitatis, Antient Tenures of Land, and Jocular Customs of some Manors', was published in 1679. The book, made up of snippets from legal manuscripts found while he had been researching ''Nomolexikon'', was intended both to be amusing and instructive, and indeed shows more than any other publication his sense of humour. As to its instructiveness, Sir William Holdsworth spoke highly in its favour. At the same time as it appeared, however, the wave of anti-Catholic sentiment in the wake of the Popish Plot threatened Blount, and on 28 April 1679 he wrote to Wood that he was sick with 'a spice of the palsey, from what occasion you may conjecture' and that he had 'quitted all books except of devotion' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood F.40, fol. 230). He died at Orleton Manor, Herefordshire, on 26 December of that year, and was buried two days later in the chancel of the parish church. His widow, who erected a memorial to him, still extant, died on 4 March 1697, aged eighty. They had one daughter, Elizabeth ('b'. before 1663, died 1724), who married Richard Griffin of Brickmarsh, Warwickshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 2698


Blount, Sir Thomas Pope, first baronet (1649-1697), politician and writer, was born on 12 September 1649 at Upper Holloway, Middlesex, the eldest son of Sir Henry Blount (1602-1682), traveller, and his wife, Hester ('c'.1620-1678), first daughter and coheir of Christopher Wase of Upper Holloway and widow of Sir William Mainwaring of Chester. The Hertfordshire Blounts have been linked to the distinguished medieval Staffordshire family, but their connection to the county can be taken back no further than the early Tudor period. It was from Sir Thomas Pope (1507?-1559), the founder of Trinity College, Oxford, who had an acquisitive hand in the suppression of the monasteries under Henry VIII, that the family inherited the manor of Tittenhanger, the former residence of the abbots of St Albans. This house Sir Henry entirely rebuilt, probably but not certainly in the final years of the Commonwealth. Blount was educated under his father's supervision, and acquired a reputation as a learned and accomplished young man, but did not go to university. He entered Lincoln's Inn on 1 December 1668. 
On 22 July 1669, at St Olave's, Hart Street, London, Blount married Jane Caesar (1650-1726), only daughter of Sir Henry Caesar, of Benington Place, Hertfordshire, and Elizabeth Angel. They had five sons and nine daughters. In 1678, on his mother's death, and within his father's lifetime, he succeeded to the seat at Tittenhanger, Sir Henry having settled the manor on his wife four years earlier. Blount succeeded to the remainder of the family's estates, in Hertfordshire, Middlesex, and Essex, on his father's death in October 1682. He was created a baronet by letters patent on 27 January 1680. For this dignity he was belatedly compelled to pay; although he disputed the debt, judgment went against him, and on 2 June 1686 he paid the exchequer $1095. 
A loyal whig (like his father and his younger brother Charles Blount he was a member of the Green Ribbon Club), he was returned to the House of Commons as member for St Albans for three parliaments between 1679 and 1681, and subsequently for one of the two Hertfordshire county seats for three further parliaments from 1689 until his death. His political career began quietly. 'Totally inactive in committee in 1679, he spoke only to explain how he had come to deliver to the Speaker a letter from a madman, which seemed designed to interrupt the business of the House' (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90', 1.669-70). He held a number of local offices, however (commissioner for assessment for Hertfordshire, 1673-80, for St Albans, 1679-80, 1689, and for Hertfordshire and Middlesex, 1689-90, deputy lieutenant of Hertfordshire, 1687-97, and justice of the peace for the same county, 1690-96), before being appointed in 1694, and then reappointed until his death, one of the commissioners for public accounts. 
Blount's literary activities appeared in print in the final decade of the century. His first publication was 'Censura celebriorum authorum' (1690), a volume, he explains in the preface, he had originally compiled for his own use and which he published only 'at the request of persons of distinguished learning', and with the hope that it 'might promote letters' ('Biographia Britannica', 2.833, where a translation is provided). The work, a handsomely printed folio, is a biographical and bibliographical dictionary of the most eminent literary and scientific writers, collated from the opinions of fellow writers and reproduced in the several languages of those sources. The entries are arranged chronologically. They begin with Hermes Trismegistus, the writer 'thought to have been coaeval with Moses' ('Biographia Britannica', 2.833), and conclude with contemporaries of Thomas Hobbes, including in well over 500 entries many historians, physicians, philosophers, astronomers and mathematicians, theologians and churchmen, as well as smaller numbers of, for instance, geographers, printers, and antiquaries. Poets are also well represented, but Blount omits most modern English writers (Chaucer is included, Shakespeare is not), as well as later scientists of all lands. Subsequent editions were published in Geneva: a second in 1694, in which, for the sake of a uniform text, all the passages in modern languages were translated by the anonymous editor into Latin, and a third in 1696. Subsequent works adapt this model. 
In 'A Natural History' (1693) Blount collected observations from 'the Best Modern Writers' (title-page) on various phenomena (amber, coral, tea and coffee, silver, diamonds, glow-worms, spiders, volcanoes, and the like), and in 'De re poetica' (1694) he offered a compendium of literary thought 'Extracted out of the Best and Choicest Criticks' (title-page) on poetry in general, on the different genres, and on poetry in Italian, Spanish, and French, to which he appended 'Characters and Censures', a biographical and critical account of sixty-seven writers, ancient and modern, including those English poets (Donne, Jonson, Milton, and Spenser, for example) not included in the 'Censura'. His only original work was a collection of 'Essays on Several Subjects' (1691; 2nd edn, 1692), 'writ in my idle hours, for my own Entertainment' (1691, sig. A2'v'). In seven short pieces, he treats of self-interest; the mischiefs of learning; education and custom; a tempered respect for antiquity; the virtues of modern men; passion; and the uncertainty of human knowledge. An eighth essay, added to a third, expanded edition (1697), concerns religion. In domestic metaphors and plain prose, Blount reveals himself to be sceptical, cynical, cheerfully optimistic, possessed of a dry wit, and warmly anti-Catholic. 'To infer the truth of a Religion, from the Number of its Professors', he comments on a characteristic concern, characteristically expressed, 'is falsely to conclude the fineness of the Cloth from the largeness of the Measure' (1697, 140). 
Blount was well regarded in his lifetime as a cultivated and retiring man. He died of apoplexy at Tittenhanger on 30 June 1697, and was buried in the family vault at Ridge, Hertfordshire, on 8 July 1697. He was forty-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 2699


Blount, Sir Walter (d. 1403), soldier and diplomat, of Barton Blount, Derbyshire, was the third son of Sir John Blount (died 1358) of Sodington, Worcestershire, and of his first wife, Iseult, daughter and heir of Thomas Mountjoy of Gayton, Staffordshire. Immortalized by Shakespeare as one of the three knights who gave their lives by impersonating Henry IV at the battle of Shrewsbury, Sir Walter was indeed a devoted supporter of the house of Lancaster, to which he owed his advancement, wealth, and influence. He was still a young man when, in 1367, he accompanied John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, on the first of six military expeditions overseas. Five years later he joined the ducal household (of which he became chamberlain in 1392), while also assuming a prominent place in the management of his patron's north midland estates, as constable of Tutbury Castle, Staffordshire, and master forester of Needwood Chase in the same county. So highly did Gaunt value his services that his income as a Lancastrian retainer eventually exceeded $176 a year, thereby enabling him to purchase the Bakepus family's extensive Derbyshire and Leicestershire estates. These gave him a strong territorial base, and augmented the relatively modest possessions which, as a younger son, were all he could hope to inherit. 
Blount's marriage, by 1374, to Sancha de Ayala, a daughter of Diego Gomez, principal secretary of the province of Toledo, and his wife, Inez de Ayala, a favourite lady in waiting of Gaunt's second duchess (herself the elder daughter of Pedro the Cruel, king of Castile), cemented the bond between him and the duke. It also gave him a vested interest in Gaunt's claim to the throne of Castile, and made him an obvious choice as diplomatic envoy to the Iberian peninsula. He undertook two long missions to Castile, in 1378 and 1393, evidently acquitting himself well, despite the overwhelming odds against success; and he later served as an ambassador to Portugal and Aragon for Gaunt's son, the newly crowned Henry IV, in 1400. Further evidence of Blount's negotiating skills may be found in his presence, in 1383, as ducal representative at peace talks on the Scottish border. Blount had to draw upon his military and diplomatic experience nearer home, for the gentry of the north midlands resented Gaunt's intervention in local issues. His position as the duke's leading retainer in Derbyshire and Staffordshire, where he also sat on the bench in the 1380s, was fraught with difficulties, but he continued to enjoy every mark of confidence from his patron. Gaunt made him an executor of his will, and left him a personal bequest of 100 marks. His trust was not misplaced: when Henry Bolingbroke landed at Ravenspur, in July 1399, to recover the confiscated duchy of Lancaster from Richard II, Blount welcomed him with one of the largest private retinues then marshalled by his supporters. 
A mainstay of the new regime, Blount represented Derbyshire in the first parliament of Henry's reign. He was entrusted with the care and tutelage of the young Prince Thomas, who, in 1402, became lieutenant of Ireland. In death, as in life, Blount honoured the ties of good lordship, asking in his will of 1401 to be buried at the Lancastrian foundation of St Mary in the Newarke, Leicester. This wish was fulfilled after the battle of Shrewsbury, where he was killed. Sancha Blount survived until 1418 or 1419 as a pensioner of the crown, and was buried beside him. They had five sons, the most celebrated of whom, 


@@@@@


doc= 2700


Blount, Walter, first Baron Mountjoy (d. 1474), administrator, was the eldest son of Sir Thomas Blount (c.1383-1456) ['see under 'Blount, Sir Walter (d. 1403)] and Margaret Gresley, and was probably born at Barton Blount, Derbyshire. Walter and his brother Thomas were in the service of Henry VI in the early 1450s, but by 1454 were associated with Richard, duke of York, and his ally Richard Neville, earl of Warwick. When in May 1454 Nicholas Longford sacked Walter's house at Elvaston as part of a violent feud with the Blounts, the damage included the slashing of a tapestry bearing Blount's arms 'for that the said Walter Blount was gone to serve traitors, therefore his arms shall be thus quartered' (Storey, 154). Blount escaped attainder at the Coventry parliament of November 1459, receiving a pardon for his treasons in December, but his offices were confiscated. During the Yorkist ascendancy after the battle of Northampton he was made treasurer of Calais, where his patron Warwick was captain. In March 1461 he fought on the Yorkist side at Towton. He was made knight of the Bath at Edward IV's coronation, and in June was reappointed treasurer of Calais, a post which he held until November 1464, when he surrendered it to his brother Thomas on being made treasurer of England. On 20 June 1465 he was created Baron Mountjoy. In August 1467 he received two grants of forfeited land in the south-west, perhaps as compensation for yielding the treasurership to the king's father-in-law, Earl Rivers, in the previous year. In September 1468 he indented to lead troops to Brittany for six months to aid the duke of Brittany against Louis XI of France, but the expedition was cancelled, and Blount, who had by then been paid for his retinue, served instead at sea under Anthony, Lord Scales, for rather less than three months and was allowed to pocket the difference, which may have been some compensation for the money he was still owed by the crown for his service at Calais. 
Walter Blount's first wife, whom he married in or before 1442, was Ellen, the daughter of Sir John Byron of Clayton, Lancashire. By November 1467 he had married as his second wife Anne, daughter of Ralph, earl of Westmorland, and widow of Humphrey Stafford, duke of Buckingham (died 1460). Blount died on 1 August 1474 and was buried in the Apostles' Chapel in the Greyfriars Church, London, although he also made major bequests to the church of Elvaston, where his first wife was buried, and to the hospital of St Leonard near Alkmonton, Derbyshire, a family foundation. His eldest son, 






@@@@@


doc= 2701


William Blount (d. 1471), had died at Barnet on 14 April 1471, from wounds received in the battle, after sharing Edward IV's exile. Walter's heir was thus William's son, Edward, whose custody was granted in January 1475 to his stepfather, John Elrington, the treasurer of the king's household, who had married William's widow, Margaret Echingham (died 1481). Edward died on 1 December 1476 and was succeeded by his uncle, Walter's second son, John, who had licence to enter his father's lands on 15 January 1476, back-dated to 2 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 2702


Blount, William, fourth Baron Mountjoy (c.1478-1534), courtier and literary patron, was born in the parish of Barton Blount, Derbyshire. His father, John Blount, third Baron Mountjoy ['see under 'Blount, Walter, first Baron Mountjoy], died in 1485 and William succeeded to the title as a minor. His uncle Sir James Blount was granted the custody of his lands and marriage and he did not enter into his inheritance until 31 January 1500. After his father's death his mother, Lora Berkeley (died 1501), married first Sir Thomas Montgomery (died 1495) and then Thomas Butler, seventh earl of Ormond (died 1515), who was a grandfather of Thomas Boleyn. 
It is unlikely that Mountjoy went to Paris as early as 1496, as tradition relates. In 1497 he was involved in the suppression of the Cornish uprising and about Easter that year he married Elizabeth Say, daughter and coheir of Sir William Say of Essenden, Hertfordshire. She was probably too young to begin living with him and did not go with him to Paris in 1498. He was, however, accompanied by Richard Whitford, a fellow of Queens' College, Cambridge, who would later become his chaplain and to whom he would act as a supporter throughout his life. In Paris he made the acquaintance of Erasmus, who had been acting as tutor to Thomas Grey and sharing accommodation with him. Erasmus became Mountjoy's tutor in turn and when Mountjoy returned to England in 1499 he asked Erasmus to join him. Erasmus, who stated himself willing to follow Mountjoy even to the lower world itself, complied and soon established himself in his patron's household, which was generally perceived as a haven to scholars. Although his father had in his will specifically warned his sons of the dangers of desiring 'to be grete about princes', Mountjoy became a 'socius studiorum' to Prince Henry at this time, perhaps through the influence of his stepfather Ormond, who was chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth of York, and Elizabeth seems to have had the primary responsibility for her son's education. In the dedicatory epistle to Charles Blount of his 1531 edition of Livy, written some thirty years later, Erasmus would recall that the principal subject studied by the young men had been history. Mountjoy arranged for both Erasmus and Thomas More to visit the royal nursery at Eltham in 1499, and in later years Erasmus claimed that the reason Henry's written style was similar to his own was because Mountjoy encouraged Henry to read his works at an early age. With Mountjoy's encouragement Erasmus began compiling his 'Adagia', which was first published after his return to Paris in 1500 and dedicated to his pupil. In 1499 Mountjoy requested Erasmus to produce an expanded form of 'De conscribendis epistolis', which had been written for his pupils in Paris, and the new version was dedicated to him. 
In 1500 Mountjoy was in Calais with Henry VII and in 1501 he was present at Prince Arthur's marriage to Katherine of Aragon. In 1504, through the mediation of their mutual acquaintance John Colet, Erasmus let it be known that he would welcome renewed patronage from Mountjoy. Mountjoy duly invited him back to England and provided him with an annuity of 100 crowns. Although Erasmus's stay in England was brief, from late 1505 until June 1506, his praises for Mountjoy were renewed and he claimed that 'the sun never shone on a truer friend of scholars' (Mynors and others, ep. 186). Before 1507 Mountjoy was a member of Henry VII's council and Henry visited him in 1508. His first wife died before 21 July 1506 and was buried at Essenden. 
At the coronation of Henry VIII on 23 June 1509 Mountjoy was created a knight of the Bath and on 9 July he was made master of the mint. Before the end of July he married Inez de Venegas (sometimes Anglicized as Agnes Vanegas), who had been one of the attendants of Katherine of Aragon as princess of Wales. Henry wrote to Ferdinand II of Aragon supporting her claim to a legacy from Queen Isabella. On 6 October Mountjoy was appointed lieutenant of the castle of Hammes, near Calais, for twenty years and thereafter during pleasure, a position his father had occupied before him. Mountjoy was keenly enthusiastic about the new dispensation under Henry and his most famous letter to Erasmus, dated 27 May 1509 (and probably composed by Andrea Ammonio who was acting as his secretary), is a panegyric to the king: 'Heaven smiles, earth rejoices; all is milk and honey and nectar. Tight-fistedness is well and truly banished. Generosity scatters wealth with unstinting hand' (Mynors and others, ep. 215). Erasmus did in fact return to England soon afterwards as Mountjoy had hoped, but Mountjoy himself was much occupied on the continent during this period. In late 1511 Erasmus wrote to Ammonio and Colet from Cambridge to enquire about Mountjoy's whereabouts, but even after Mountjoy came back to England in November Erasmus avoided his household because of the presence of 'Cerberus', perhaps the French poet Bernard Andre, to whom he owed money. 
By May 1512 Mountjoy had succeeded Ormond as Katherine of Aragon's chamberlain, and in that office received an annuity of $66 13's'. 4died In March of the following year he was at the court of Spain. He was then put in charge of transport for the war against France and in September departed for Calais with a force of 500 men. After the capture of Tournai he was made acting lieutenant, bailiff, and, in January 1515, governor of the city. In that capacity he was responsible for the beginnings of works on a citadel within the town, intended to provide a separate stronghold for the English garrison there. Unfinished when Mountjoy was replaced, it was never fully completed. Erasmus visited Mountjoy in Tournai in the spring of 1515 'en route' for England. Richard Sampson, Wolsey's vicar-general in Tournai, became involved with Mountjoy in an attempt to secure a prebend for Erasmus at this time, although the plan did not succeed. Once he reached London, Erasmus wrote to Cardinal Domenico Grimani complaining that 'the oldest patron of my studies, has been so overwhelmed by the burdens of war that his help fell short of his affection' (Mynors and others, ep. 334). In 1516 Mountjoy informed Wolsey that he would like to be replaced as governor, but this did not occur until January 1517 and he returned to England in that year. 
It is not known when his second wife died, but by February 1515 Mountjoy had married Alice (died 1521), daughter of Henry Keble of St Mary Aldermary, and widow of William Brown; among their children was Charles Blount, courtier and patron of learning. She was with Mountjoy in the entourage of Katherine of Aragon at the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520. In May 1521 he was one of the peers who tried the third duke of Buckingham and in August he was at Bruges for the meeting of Wolsey with the emperor Charles. In 1521 Henry VIII was much involved in the Lutheran controversy and Mountjoy wrote to Erasmus asking him to declare his own position on Luther. Alice died on 8 June 1521 and was buried in the church of the London Greyfriars. The next year Mountjoy was present at Henry's meeting with Charles at Canterbury. 
In 1523 Mountjoy accompanied Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk, on his invasion of France. On 30 January 1523 Erasmus wrote to Johann von Botzheim, noting that his panegyric on marriage much impressed Mountjoy as a young man -- 'He has been married three times, and is now a widower; but perhaps he will marry a fourth time -- so easy is it to push the wagon on the way it already wants to go' (Mynors and others, ep. 1341a) -- and before 29 July 1523 he married Dorothy, widow of Robert, Lord Willoughby, and daughter of Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset, Erasmus's former pupil in Paris. She outlived him and did not die until 1553. In 1525 Mountjoy solicited a treatise on the subject of marriage from Erasmus on Queen Katherine's behalf. Erasmus complied, and in 1526 published the 'Christiani matrimonii institutio', dedicated to Katherine. The presentation copy survives in Emmanuel College, Cambridge. In 1526 Mountjoy was elected a knight of the Garter and in the subsidy of 1527 he was rated at $1000. About 1529 he was elected steward of Cambridge University. After his twenty-year appointment as lieutenant of Hammes was completed in 1529, Henry permitted him to sell the office to William, Lord Grey of Wilton, and he surrendered his patent in May 1531. 
Although Mountjoy was one of the lords signing the open letter to Pope Clement VII urging the divorce in 1530 he remained Katherine's chamberlain. Chapuys wrote in April 1533 that he had been ordered to stay with Katherine to prevent her escaping from England. In July he was head of the delegation that went to see Katherine at Ampthill to persuade her to submit to the consequences of the king's new marriage and acknowledge herself dowager princess. Katherine spurned all their conditions, and Cromwell later declared to Chapuys that if Katherine had been a man she would have surpassed all the heroes of history. After this failed mission, no doubt repugnant to him, Mountjoy requested to be replaced as chamberlain and on 10 October 1533 he wrote to Cromwell that 'hit is not my parte, nor for me this often to vexe or unquyet her whom the kynges grace cawsed to be sworne unto and truly to serve her to my power' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 1.408). After his death he was not replaced in that office. 
In July 1534 Mountjoy was on the panel of lords at the treason trial of William, Lord Dacre. He died on 8 November following at Sutton on the Hill, near Barton Blount, Derbyshire, and was buried at his own request at Barton Blount. In his will, dated 14 October 1534, he asked patience of his creditors, considering that he had impoverished himself to provide for his son and that he had often been called abroad in service of the king to whom he had been a 'slender suter' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/25, fol. 243'v'). His house in London was on Silver Street. 
The mother of Mountjoy's daughter Gertrude was his first wife Elizabeth Say. Gertrude married on 25 October 1519 Henry Courtenay, who was created marquess of Exeter on 18 June 1525 and executed in 1539. She was close to Princess Mary and when the latter came to the throne she was rehabilitated and made a lady-in-waiting. The mother of his eldest son and heir, Charles, and his daughter Catherine (later Champernown and Berkeley) was Mountjoy's third wife, Alice Keble. His fourth wife, Dorothy Grey, was the mother of his son John, who was her principal beneficiary, and his daughters Dorothy (later Blewett) and Mary (later Dennys). Henry VIII's mistress Elizabeth Blount, who had been a lady-in-waiting to Katherine and who was the mother of Henry Fitzroy, was Mountjoy's cousin. 


@@@@@


doc= 2703


Blow, James (1676-1759), printer and bookseller, was born on 29 July 1676, the youngest of nine children of John Blaw (died 1709) of Culross, Perthshire, Scotland, and his first wife, Elizabeth Wilson. The Blaw family had owned Castlehill estate in Culross parish at least since 1543, and James was the first in the family to change the surname to Blow, this spelling subsequently being adopted by the Belfast branch of the family. 
James Blow achieved a long career as printer and bookseller. In 1694 he arrived in Belfast as assistant to Patrick Neill, who set up the first printing press in the town at the request of the sovereign (mayor) of Belfast, William Craford; James married Patrick's sister Abigail, and in 1688 his own sister Agnes had married Patrick. The first Belfast printed book was an edition of 'The Confession of Faith' (1694). James took over the printing establishment from Patrick Neill about 1705, the earliest surviving example from his own press being James Kirkpatrick's sermon 'The Saint's Life and Death' (1706). Many of the earliest books that Blow produced omitted details of author, printer, and location, since they were printed without permission of the religious authorities. The first important work printed by James Blow was Kirkpatrick's 'An Historical Essay upon the Loyalty of Presbyterians' in 1713, which is the first printed work to mention contemporary Belfast citizens, and provides a picture of the political and social position of Presbyterians in Belfast. In these pages the justification for the Blow press can be seen in the defence of printing Presbyterian books, which in Dr William Tisdall's castigating phrase 'corrupts the principles of the people' (Kirkpatrick, 523). In 1714 Blow printed 'The Experienced Huntsman' by Arthur Stringer, the first secular work by a local author originally printed in Belfast. In 1722 he printed 'The Church Catechism in Irish' by Francis Hutchinson, bishop of Down and Connor, in which Hutchinson strenuously supported the use of roman characters for the Irish language in print, and presented his Raghlin alphabet (named after Rathlin Island where he began his evangelizing mission). The personal autograph of James Blow can be seen in several copies of I. Watts's 'A Guide to Prayer' (1738) and W. Guthrie's 'A Christian's Great Interest' (1743) in the inscription at the end of the printed presentation: 'This Practical Piece of Piety, being a great help to Devotion, is with a religious Respect Recommended to my worthy friend By'. 
The least understood aspect of James Blow's printing history is his production of bibles. Blow's 'Bible' is dated 1751 and has the imprint 'Belfast: Printed by and for James Blow'. In several copies of the edition it can be clearly seen that this title-page is a replacement. A second version, the 'Genesis reprint', is just the first two gatherings reprinted from the 1751 'Bible' to replace the first two gatherings in various older bibles of a similar size. The two surviving copies of the so-called Blow 1702 'Bible' are in fact 1751 Blow bibles with the roman numeral date defaced to read 1702. A group of bibles and 'New' Testaments variously imprinted 'James Blow', 'George Grierson', '1745', '1755', and '1768' all have a common source. A 'Bible' printed by James Blow in 1725 claims on the title-page to have been printed in London in 1684. The so-called Sin-on-more 'Bible' was printed with an unfortunate typesetting transposition for 'Sin no more' and required replacement of the relevant sheet in 'upwards of 8000 copies' but the exact edition has not been identified (Hodgson, 76). It was claimed in his obituary that James Blow printed the first English edition of the 'Bible' in Ireland, and this is repeated by his son Daniel in 1806, although no Blow 'Bible' has yet been identified that is earlier than a 1714 Dublin 'Bible'. 
Blow died in Belfast; the charity board from the old parish church there recorded that 'Mr James Blow dyed the 16th August 1759' and left $40 10's'. 0died to the poor of the parish. He was succeeded by his son Daniel, after whose death in 1810 the original wooden press was reportedly still in use in Youghal, co. Cork, as late as 1824. James Blow's daughter Jane married the king's printer in Dublin, George Grierson, who was in turn succeeded by her son Hugh Boulter Grierson. 


@@@@@


doc= 2704


Blow, John (1648?-1708), musician and composer, was baptized at St Mary Magdalene, Newark-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire, on 23 February 1649. The record of his doctorate at Lambeth Palace confirms the identification; the age on his marriage allegation suggests that he was born in 1648. He was the second of three children of Henry Blow, who in 1646 married Katherine Langwith, a widow, at Newark, where other members of the family are also recorded. John Blow's recruitment into the Chapel Royal points to early musical training, perhaps under John Hinton, the master of Thomas Magnus's song school in Newark. 
Blow may have been one of five boys from Newark and Lincoln for whose procurement Henry Cooke, the master of the children of the Chapel Royal, was reimbursed under a warrant of 4 July 1661. An entry of 1665 in the accounts of the treasurer of the chamber describes the education of Chapel Royal boys, which included Latin, writing, and playing on instruments. Blow's memorial at Westminster Abbey states that he was a pupil of Christopher Gibbons, who at the Restoration became an organist of the Chapel Royal and organist of Westminster Abbey (where he was also master of the choristers, 1664-6); Hawkins adds that Blow was first a pupil of the court musician John Hingeston, formerly Cromwell's organist and master of music. Blow was clearly an apt scholar, for James Clifford's 'Divine Services and Anthems' (1664) contains the words of three of his anthems, and he joined two other boys, Pelham Humfrey and William Turner, in composing 'I will alway give thanks'. 
Blow's voice broke towards the end of 1664, payments for his maintenance after dismissal from the chapel being authorized from 25 December. His voice had not recovered by 21 August 1667, when with another of Cooke's boys he visited Samuel Pepys, who noted their 'extraordinary skill', notwithstanding which 'to hear them sing with their broken voices, which they could not command to keep in tune, would make a man mad, so bad it was' ('DNB'). 
Blow evidently continued his musical studies, and in 1668 was appointed organist of Westminster Abbey, succeeding Albertus Bryne, who had become organist in 1666 when Gibbons vacated both his abbey posts. Blow's oath on appointment was taken on 3 December, though the abbey's accounts misleadingly record his payment from the previous Michaelmas. 
Blow also obtained posts at court. He was admitted as a musician for the virginals from 25 March 1669, although there is no sign of the appointment's confirmation until 30 October 1674, when payment was ordered in consideration of his liveries for 1669-73. A warrant listing musicians of the Chapel Royal and string players who attended the king at Windsor from May to July 1671 includes Blow as organist; possibly he held an extraordinary post in the chapel, since the cheque book says he was sworn in as a gentleman (but not yet as an organist) on 16 March 1674. The large-scale anthem 'When Israel came out of Egypt' appears to have resulted from the new appointment. Further offices came Blow's way with the death on 14 July 1674 of Pelham Humfrey, who had followed Cooke as master of the children and to whose role Blow now succeeded. A warrant for his admission, dated 23 July, also granted him Humfrey's post of composer for voices in the king's private music. 
Besides his now extensive official duties, Blow was active in the Corporation of Musick, a society of court musicians on which a royal charter conferred unrealistically wide powers over other professionals. His signature occurs frequently in the corporation's minute book from 1673 to 1679; on 26 June 1673 he was elected one of two wardens for the ensuing year, and he was again a warden in 1676-7. 
In 1674 Blow married Elizabeth Braddock (died 1683) at St Paul's, Covent Garden: on 4 September according to the parish register, though the marriage allegation (giving his age as about twenty-six, hers as about twenty) is dated 23 September. Elizabeth's father, Edward Braddock, was master of the choristers of Westminster Abbey, and a gentleman of the Chapel Royal and clerk of the cheque. By 1683 the Blows lived in Great Sanctuary, where Braddock already lived, and Blow remained there for the rest of his life. 
Marmaduke Alford states that Blow became one of the organists of the Chapel Royal following Gibbons's death on 20 October 1676. Just over a year later, on 10 December 1677, Blow was created a doctor of music by the dean and chapter of Canterbury Cathedral (the archbishopric being vacant). Some two years after that he relinquished his post as organist of the abbey, perhaps because of his other duties, or because Henry Purcell, whom Blow's memorial and Henry Hall's verse in 'Amphion Anglicanus' describe as his pupil, was ready for the post. The abbey's annual accounts for the year ending Michaelmas 1679 record payments to Blow, and the next set names Purcell as organist; as with Blow's appointment, this may be misleading and Purcell may have taken over in the course of 1679-80. 
Official records contain much evidence of Blow's presence as a liveried musician at court, though they also show that, like other servants of the king, he often experienced long delays in payments due to him. As master of the children Blow was charged with seeing that the choristers were housed, fed, clothed, and cared for when sick, and with seeking new boys for the chapel. Their academic and musical training was his responsibility, a by-product of which may be his treatise on thorough bass (BL, Add. MS 34072). Testimony to Blow's effectiveness as a teacher is found in the careers of William Croft, Jeremiah Clarke, and others among his pupils. 
Blow's industry as a composer was great, and a document detailing his music copied for the Chapel Royal in the period 1670-76 lists two services, a 'Benedicite' and 'Te Deum', and nine anthems. In fact, by 1680 he had written over thirty anthems, many with instrumental accompaniments such as Charles II favoured, though his output decreased markedly once Purcell started to share the burden. The stamp of Blow's personality is firmly impressed on his early sacred music, despite the initial influence of Matthew Locke and Humfrey. His anthems contain much of his finest work, skilfully incorporating a variety of styles, and while unevenness must be admitted, a breadth of conception is undeniable. Blow's compositions for special occasions began with 'O Lord, I have sinned' for General Monck's abbey funeral in 1670. Almost every year from 1678 to the end of the century he provided a court ode marking the new year, and he wrote seven further odes celebrating royal birthdays; these contain fine moments but betray a sense of duty and only fitful engagement. 
Blow's early work as a songwriter is represented in the second book of 'Choice Ayres & Songs' (1679), one of more than a dozen song collections to include his music during his lifetime. Blow's duties as a performer are revealed only in part by his extant compositions for keyboard, and while many of his organ and harpsichord pieces presumably date from his early years, most are found in later sources. 
Blow's 'Venus and Adonis' may have been performed before the court at Oxford in 1681. It reflects Blow's knowledge of Lully's stage works, and notwithstanding its small scale may be accounted the first true English opera; the passionate dialogue in act III is among Blow's finest achievements. He never attempted another piece of the kind, and its natural successor is Purcell's 'Dido and Aeneas'. 
In mid-1682 Blow and Nicholas Staggins, the master of the king's musick, jointly obtained a post 'for the composition and practize of the violins'. In April 1683 they petitioned the king for a licence permitting them to set up an 'Academy or Opera of Musick' where their compositions might be performed, but it seems that action was stayed. While Staggins was responsible for music in the secular sphere, it is clear that Blow by now had overall charge of the chapel's music. Although he was the junior organist until Purcell replaced Edward Lowe in 1682, his other senior colleague, William Child, was elderly, and it was to Blow that Staggins was instructed in 1683 to send the instrumental musicians required for practising anthems. 
On 29 October 1683 Elizabeth Blow died in childbirth, aged about thirty, and she was buried two days later in the abbey's north cloister. She had borne five children, all of whom were buried at the abbey. Four died unmarried: Henry (died 1676), John (died 1693), Catherine (died 1730), and Mary (died 1738), who was buried in her father's grave. The wills of Catherine and Mary are extant; the latter's legatees include her cousin Elizabeth Blow of Theobald's Park, Hertfordshire. Another daughter, Elizabeth, died in 1719, four months after marrying William Edgeworth at St Anne's, Soho; during her brief marriage she wrote her name in a book (Brussels conservatory, MS 15418) into which, about 1700, her father had copied German keyboard music (reflecting his lifelong interest in the work of other composers), she herself adding part of one of his grounds. 
Blow was still comparatively young and continued to work with vigour. In 1684 he composed 'Begin the Song', his first ode for the Musical Society's annual celebration of St Cecilia's day; others followed in 1691, 1695 (when he also supplied a 'Te Deum' and 'Jubilate', with trumpets and strings), and 1700. In 1684, too, Blow and Purcell joined in demonstrating an organ built for the Temple Church by Bernard Smith, in competition with Renatus Harris -- a contest not decided in Smith's favour until the winter of 1687-8. Smith and Blow were to share the post of tuner of the royal instruments, which fell vacant when Purcell died in 1695. In 1708 it became Blow's alone, following Smith's death. 
Blow and Purcell worked closely together on music for James II's coronation in 1685, though Blow's three anthems, including the broadly conceived 'God spake sometime in visions', were the largest contribution by any composer. In a review of court posts conducted in the new reign, Blow kept his places in the Chapel Royal, and a composer's place in the private musick; that of virginalist went to Purcell, but Blow regained it after Purcell's death. In 1687 Blow assumed another responsibility with the death of Michael Wise, almoner and master of the choristers at St Paul's since the choir's reconstitution in Wren's unfinished building. Blow took Wise's place, in 1697 producing the instrumental anthem 'I was glad' for the consecration of the chancel, and, to celebrate the treaty of Ryswick during the same service, 'Praise the Lord, O my soul' with organ accompaniment only. He remained in the post until 1703. On 28 November that year the dean and chapter resolved that Jeremiah Clarke should replace Blow, who was to surrender his patent; Clarke's indenture is dated 11 January 1704. 
Compared with James II's coronation service, that of William III in 1689 was musically less demanding, and Blow's principal work, 'The Lord God is a sun', is accordingly modest. William's visit to the Netherlands in 1691, accompanied by a group of musicians, was the only occasion on which Blow and Purcell are known to have left England. Purcell's death in 1695 meant that composition for state occasions fell mainly to Blow; but he still found time for other activities. In 1698 he was a steward of the Festival of the Sons of the Clergy, supplying the somewhat dry 'Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord'; in 1702 he reused part of this in the notably fresh 'O sing unto the Lord a new song', for a charitable concert at Stationers' Hall. Purcell's death also left vacant the organist's post at Westminster Abbey, to which Blow was immediately recalled. Purcell died on 21 November, and a week later the 'Post Boy' reported Blow's reappointment. In March 1700 he was admitted to a new post of composer for the Chapel Royal (the cheque book's '1699' is clarified by Bodl. Oxf., MS Mus. E. 17). 
Blow's long series of odes ended in 1700 with 'Appear, Appear in All thy Pomp' for the new year and 'Come, Bring the Song' for Princess Anne's birthday. When Anne was crowned in 1702 Blow seems merely to have adapted two earlier coronation anthems. Although many of his late anthems are short, sober, polyphonic pieces for full choir (perhaps a response to King James's institution of a Catholic chapel with its own musicians, and to a direction of 1691 that the Chapel Royal should have 'solemn musick like a collegiate church'), the years 1703-7 saw the composition for official functions of six elaborate instrumental anthems with florid vocal solos. While tonal planning was never Blow's strongest point, these pieces manifest a well-developed architectural sense despite their relatively independent movements. 
Towards the end of his life Blow prepared some of his music for publication. 'Amphion Anglicanus' (1700), 'for one, two, three and four voices, with several accompagnements', is modelled on 'Orpheus Britannicus' (1698), a posthumous collection of Purcell's songs; but while Blow shared Purcell's musical ideals and often his manner, his work frequently suffers by comparison. Blow's songs too often lack harmonic and melodic certainty; yet a few, such as 'The Self-Banished', have worn well, and a genuinely rich vein of expression is found in pieces like the deeply felt 'Ode on the Death of Mr. Henry Purcell'. 
Blow's harpsichord pieces appeared in several anthologies, starting with 'The Second Part of Musicks Hand-Maid' (1689), but he may himself have planned 'A Choice Collection of Lessons' (1698), where he is the only composer represented. His suites show familiarity with French harpsichord music and a wish to emulate the Italian musicians living in London. They share the weaknesses of his songs, but nevertheless contain much that is interesting and attractive. Blow's organ music remained unpublished in his lifetime, except for his settings of psalm tunes (printed in 1703, though the surviving copy is a reprint of 'c'.1730). The body of Blow's organ works is larger than that of any of his contemporaries; while rooted in the tradition handed on by Gibbons and Locke, his pieces reveal a keen awareness of developments abroad (three in fact quote from Frescobaldi). 
The best of Blow's music is to be found in his sacred works, where he appears as a composer of considerable stature, both imaginative and innovative, as the short 'Cry aloud, and spare not' demonstrates. A number of such pieces survive in autograph copies (listed by Shaw), but his intention of publishing some, expressed in the dedication of 'Amphion Anglicanus', remained unfulfilled. Blow's memorial rightly focuses attention on his church music as his principal legacy. Even Charles Burney, who failed to recognize Blow's historical position and whose condemnation of 'Dr. Blow's crudities' was excessive, acknowledged that 'Some of his choral productions are doubtless in a very bold and grand style'. Despite Blow's shortcomings, attributable in part to his intensive labours over more than thirty years, he was second only to Purcell among English composers of his day. 
Glimpses of Blow's friendships with colleagues are afforded by their wills. He received mourning rings under those of John Harding (1684) and John Twiss (1687). He witnessed the will of Richard Hart in 1689, and in 1702 was an overseer of the will of Moses Snow, who bequeathed him a guinea piece of gold. Blow made his own will on 3 January 1708, observing that he was sick. His father-in-law, Edward Braddock, who still held his posts at the abbey and in the Chapel Royal, died on 12 June. Blow himself did not die until 1 October 1708; he is presumed to have died at his home in Great Sanctuary, Westminster. The words 'in the 60th year of his age' on his memorial must mean 'aged sixty'. The abbey's register states that he was buried in the north aisle on 8 October, 'against the door going up to the organ'. His will was proved on 14 October by his daughters, to whom he left most of his property, including several leases and a copyhold estate at Hampton in Middlesex. 
Hawkins, who probably heard it from those who remembered Blow, said he was 'a very handsome man in his person, and remarkable for a gravity and decency in his deportment'. Robert White's engraving in 'Amphion Anglicanus' was drawn from life, and incorporates the arms adopted by Blow. Of the other pictures said to portray Blow (all in private collections), probably only a half-length by John Riley has a claim to authenticity; a small head attributed to Lely or Riley and an oval head and shoulders attributed to Closterman are reportedly spurious. 


@@@@@


doc= 2705


Blower, Samuel (d. 1701), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Loughborough, Leicestershire. Little is known of his background and family, but Blower later in life used to boast that he and his fellow nonconformist minister John Howe were both born in the same town and had attended the same school, by which he probably meant Winwick grammar school in Lancashire. He matriculated from Magdalen College, Oxford, on 20 February 1649, graduating BA in 1652 and MA in 1654, and being incorporated at Cambridge in 1656. He was a fellow of Magdalen from 1652 to 1660 and its senior dean of arts in 1658-9. On 8 April 1657 he was admitted by the committee for plundered ministers lecturer at Woodstock, Oxfordshire, and later that year, on 29 September, was appointed an assistant to the Oxfordshire triers. 
In 1660 Blower was ejected both from his fellowship at Magdalen, on the grounds of slight nonconformity, and his lectureship at Woodstock. He found a place as chaplain to Samuel Dunch of North Baddesley, Hampshire, who in 1667 left him $20 per annum for life, for his 'great paines for the spirituall good of both me and my Family' (Cliffe, 48). In 1672 Blower was licensed as a congregationalist preacher at Sudbury in Suffolk, where he seems to have had family connections, but finally settled at Northampton in 1674 or early 1675 after an invitation to serve as pastor to the presbyterian Castle Hill congregation. In 1692 he was one of those ministers who condemned the evangelizing activities of the Northamptonshire Independent pastor Richard Davis with its echoes of an earlier, more radical phase of dissent. In 1689 Blower is also found serving a congregation at Coventry. In 1694 he retired from his ministry at Northampton and moved to Abingdon. 
Blower's will, made at Abingdon on 16 June 1699, reveals the existence of a wife, Elizabeth, but does not mention any children. He held property at Eynsham, some of which had been conveyed to him through their marriage settlement, and elsewhere in Oxfordshire. A cousin was to preserve his books, writings, and papers 'except some English authors which his wife desires to have for her own use' (Gasquoin and others, 90). Blower died in 1701 and was buried on 13 October at St Helen's Church, Abingdon. Edmund Calamy had a good opinion of him, describing him as 'of a meek temper, peaceable principles, and a godly life', one who was 'very desirable as a friend; for he was free and communicative, candid in the last degree, of a very sympathising spirit'. Calamy recorded that 'scripture revelation in scripture language' was a favourite subject for his discourses and that 'he affected not a pompous way of preaching' (Calamy, 'Continuation', 2.717). Blower's only published work was a funeral sermon for Mrs Elizabeth Tub on 'Psalm 18:' 46 (1697). 


@@@@@


doc= 2706


Bloxam, Andrew (1801-1878), naturalist, was born at Rugby on 21 September 1801, the fourth son of the Revd Richard Rouse Bloxam (1767-1840), a master at Rugby School, and his wife, Anne (1767-1835), sister of the painter Sir Thomas Lawrence. Bloxam entered Rugby in 1809, leaving in 1819 for St John's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated on 5 March. In 1820 he moved to Worcester College, Oxford, where he held a scholarship. 
After graduating in 1824, Bloxam accepted the position of naturalist on HMS 'Blonde', on which his eldest brother was chaplain. The ship transported the bodies of the king and queen of the Hawaiian Islands, who had died in England, back to their homeland, a voyage lasting eighteen months. During it a large collection of natural history specimens was made which was deposited in the British Museum on the 'Blonde's' return in 1826. The same year Bloxam, with his captain, George Anson, Lord Byron, published an account of the voyage. 
In 1827 Bloxam took holy orders and in 1830 he became a fellow of Worcester College. On 3 July 1838 he married Ann (1808/9-1883), daughter of the Revd John Roby, rector of Congerstone, Leicestershire. They had at least six children. From 1839 to 1871 he served as priest in charge of Twycross, Leicestershire, and from 1871 to 1878 was rector of Harborough Magna, Warwickshire, where he died on 2 February 1878. 
Bloxam has been described as an all-round naturalist, although he himself claimed to be no more than a 'holiday botanist'. His works are not numerous but he contributed to several regional natural histories of the midlands and he was a corresponding member of the Birmingham Natural History and Microscopical Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 2707


Bloxam, John Rouse (1807-1891), antiquary, was born at Rugby on 25 April 1807, the sixth son of Richard Rouse Bloxam DD (1765-1840), under-master of Rugby School for thirty-eight years, and rector of Brinklow and vicar of Bulkington, both in Warwickshire, and his wife, Anne (1767-1835), sister of the painter Sir Thomas Lawrence. Bloxam and his five brothers, who included Andrew Bloxam and Matthew Holbeche Bloxam, were all foundationers at Rugby School. In 1826 Bloxam proceeded to Worcester College, Oxford, where he held a 'Bible' clerkship. From 1830 to 1835 he held a demyship at Magdalen College, Oxford, obtaining an honorary fourth class in classics in 1831 and graduating BA in 1832. He was ordained deacon by the bishop of Oxford in 1832 and priest in 1833, and took the further degrees of MA in 1835, BD in 1843, and DD in 1847. 
In July 1832 Bloxam became chaplain and classical master in the private school at Wyke House, near Brentford, of which Dr Alexander Jamieson was principal, and from 1833 to 1836 he was second master at Bromsgrove School. In 1836 he returned to Magdalen, having been elected a probationer fellow, and resided there until 1862. Among the college offices he held were bursar, vice-president, and librarian (1851-62), though he was never a tutor. In 1837 he succeeded Isaac Williams as curate to J. H. Newman at Littlemore, where he had the opportunity to promote the cause closest to his heart, the revival of ceremonial in the Church of England. Peter Maurice (1803/4-1878), the evangelical chaplain of New College, attacked Bloxam's alterations in church decoration and ritual after a visit to Littlemore (P. Maurice, 'Popery of Oxford', 1837). One of the most zealous followers of the Tractarians, Bloxam caused a scandal in 1839 when it was reported that he had bowed to the host during the celebration of mass during a visit to Alton Towers, the seat of the Roman Catholic earl of Shrewsbury. He resigned the Littlemore curacy in the following year. A carriage accident in a Leicestershire lane introduced him to Ambrose Phillipps De Lisle. They corresponded in 1841 and 1842 on a possible reunion of the Anglican and Roman churches. In 1842 he privately printed an incomplete 'Book of Fragments', giving a series of extracts from authorities on ecclesiastical rites. Further publication was halted on the appearance of a similar volume, 'Hierugia Anglicana', under the auspices of the Cambridge Camden Society. Bloxam was an early member of the Oxford Society for Promoting the Study of Gothic Architecture, founded in 1839, and became a friend and patron of A. W. Pugin, securing for him the commission for a new gateway to Magdalen College, which was built in 1844. On Christmas eve 1845 he resisted Newman's entreaties to join the Roman communion, but they maintained a regular correspondence and close friendship until Newman's death. 
At Magdalen, Bloxam was considered the 'incarnation of all that was ideal in the College, its mediaevalism, sentiment, piety' (W. Tuckwell, 'Reminiscences of Oxford', 2nd edn, 1907, 165). At the centre of his room, which was hung with religious icons, was a model of the tomb of the college founder, William Waynflete ('Oxford Magazine', 25 May 1906, 389-90). He edited for the Caxton Society the 'Memorial of Bishop Waynflete, by Dr Peter Heylyn' (1851) and later collected the series of documents 'Magdalen College and James II' (Oxford Historical Society, 1886), showing the college's earlier successful resistance to the depredations of the monarch. He particularly cherished the college's choral tradition, and claimed to have been responsible for ensuring, from 1844, a more reverential celebration of the May day custom of singing a Latin hymn on Magdalen College tower (and was a prominent figure in Holman Hunt's depiction of the ceremony, first exhibited in 1891). Although doubt attaches both to his version of the origins of the custom, and how far its celebration altered after 1844, he did succeed in making the ceremony a self-conscious occasion. His subsequent antiquarian labours, inspired by the example of Dr Routh, the college president, were devoted to compiling a biographical register of members of the college; he rose daily at 5.30 in the morning for the purpose. Seven volumes appeared between 1853 and 1881. The venture was continued by W. D. Macray. Bloxam also compiled a bibliography of the works published by members of the college, partly, it was said, to refute Edward Gibbon's aspersions about the idleness of the Magdalen fellows. 
In February 1862 Bloxam was appointed by his college to the vicarage of Upper Beeding, near Steyning in Sussex, vacating his fellowship in the following year. He was acknowledged in later life as 'the Grandfather of all ritualists' (Frederic Rogers, Lord Blachford, to Bloxam, 1 Nov 1884, Magd. Oxf., MS 304). By then revivals pioneered by Bloxam, such as the wearing of a black stole by priests and the adornment of altars with elaborately decorated cloths, had become widely adopted within the Church of England. Conspicuous in his Oxford days as 'a striking figure, spare and erect, with reverent dignity' ('DNB'), he enjoyed excellent health almost to the end of his life. Bloxam, who never married, died at The Priory, Upper Beeding, on 21 January 1891 and was buried in Beeding churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 2708


Bloxam, Matthew Holbeche (1805-1888), architectural historian, was born at midnight on 12 May 1805 in a boarding-house at the corner of Lawrence Sheriff Street and Sheep Street, Rugby, opposite Rugby School, where his father was an assistant master. Matt, as he was known, was the eighth of the ten children of Richard Rouse Bloxam (1765-1840), later rector of Brinklow and vicar of Bulkington, Warwickshire, and his wife, Anne Lawrence (1767-1835), sister of the painter Sir Thomas Lawrence. All six Bloxam boys became foundationers at Rugby School, Matt joining in the second term of 1813 at the age of eight, and leaving in 1821 after an undistinguished academic career to become articled to George Harris, a Rugby solicitor. In 1827 he travelled to London to be admitted to practice in the courts of law and equity. During his subsequent long career as a solicitor in Rugby, Bloxam held several local offices: he was clerk of the Rugby petty sessions from 1831 to 1871, sometimes officiated as deputy registrar of the county court, was a member of the local board from 1855 to 1863, and audited the Rugby Union accounts from 1836 until the appointment of district auditors. 
However, as Bloxam himself admitted, although the legal profession assured his financial stability, his passions lay elsewhere. From an early age he had been fascinated by archaeology, a pursuit probably fostered by his father, and as a clerk he visited countless churches and found the time to read John Carter's antiquarian articles in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. A natural talent for draughtsmanship (which could be attributed to his maternal side) allowed him to record the visual details of buildings, which, together with his methodical character, discriminative observation, and prodigious memory for detail, combined to produce an ideal antiquary. His first book, 'The Principles of Gothic Architecture', was published in 1829, a slim volume of seventy-nine pages, presented in question and answer form. Under the title 'The Principles of Gothic Ecclesiastical Architecture' the book was added to and improved in subsequent editions and the catechetical arrangement was replaced by narrative. Sir George Gilbert Scott persuaded Bloxam to publish the eleventh, final, and definitive version in 1882, consisting of three volumes concerning the development of Gothic architecture, the internal arrangement of churches prior to and following the Reformation, and a 'Companion' volume addressing the subject of church vestments. A copy of this edition was presented to Cardinal Newman by Bloxam's younger brother, the Revd John Rouse Bloxam (1807-1891). The popularity of the book, of which 17,000 copies had been sold before the 1882 publication, was due to its pocket size, cheapness, clear, concise, and comprehensive text, and good woodcut illustrations, the latter being the work of Thomas Orlando Sheldon Jewitt (1799-1869), based on his own and Bloxam's drawings. 
In 1834 'A glimpse at the monumental architecture and sculpture of Great Britain, from the earliest period to the eighteenth century' was published, and read by Thomas Rickman (1776-1841), who felt compelled to write to Bloxam personally requesting the removal of 'the very puzzling and absurd term 'Florid' in speaking of the latest gothic work' (Payne Smith, xxvii). Although Bloxam perhaps complicated matters by introducing transitional categories of architectural style, his works are eminently readable, factual, informative, well structured, and certainly less opinionated than those of many of his contemporaries. Bloxam also wrote about 200 articles, based on his knowledge of over 1000 churches and his particular interest in effigies and costume. These appeared in 'Archaeologia Cambrensis', the 'Archaeological Journal', the 'British Critic', the 'Gentleman's Magazine', the 'Rugby Almanack', and numerous architectural and archaeological society transactions and periodicals. 
A member of the Oxford Architectural Society, and honorary member of the Ecclesiological Society, Bloxam was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1863, and belonged to many regional associations. His advice on ecclesiastical architectural matters was frequently sought and freely given. 
Identifying closely with Rugby, Bloxam became the historian of both town and school. His writings on the latter were collated by W. H. Payne Smith and published posthumously as 'Rugby: the School and the Neighbourhood' (1889). Bloxam regularly attended the Sunday afternoon chapel services, gave athletics prizes for the younger boys, presented gifts annually on the occasion of his birthday, read papers to the Natural History Society, contributed articles to the school magazines 'Meteor' and 'Leaflet', and encouraged any boys who evinced interest in archaeology. He bequeathed his library of rare books and manuscripts and his collection of antiquities to the school. 
Described in an obituary as 'the most amiable and, at the same time, the most modest of men' ('Proceedings', 387), photographs portray Bloxam as a studious-looking individual with small round-rimmed glasses perched on the bridge of his nose, the long face accentuated by a high, domed forehead and Piccadilly weepers. In 1843 Bloxam built himself a three-storey house with basement in St Matthew's Place, within sight of Rugby School, and lived there with his unmarried sister Mary Isabella until his death. The only idiosyncrasy in this practical, spacious, yet unpretentious house was a fourth-storey turret from which Bloxam probably studied the stars through his Dolland telescope. 
Scrupulous in his search for truth, Bloxam had no qualms in demystifying popular legends. He asserted that Godiva's nude canter through Coventry was pure invention, and told a dismayed audience at Lutterworth that their objects of veneration associated with John Wyclif were fakes. It is therefore surprising that, without bothering to corroborate his facts, he perpetuated the myth that the game of rugby originated with William Webb Ellis handling the ball during a Rugby School match in 1823. Correspondence in 'The Standard' in 1876 concerning the interest in rugby football initially prompted Bloxam to declare that the game was entirely different when he left the school in 1821. However, probably influenced by fellow Rugbeians and pride in his alma mater, he retracted the statement, having 'ascertained' that a foundationer had run with the ball, and by 1880 was successfully embellishing his story with authentic detail. 
Bloxam never married. He enjoyed a healthy constitution until weakened by bronchitis late in 1887. On 18 January and 5 March 1888 he suffered paralytic seizures and died on 24 April in his home town. Rugby School and the parish church lowered their flags to half-mast, tradesmen closed their shops, and blinds were drawn in most homes on Friday 27 April 1888 when Bloxam was buried, at his own request, near a yew tree in the churchyard of St Michael and All Angels, Brownsover, near Rugby. 


@@@@@


doc= 2709


Bloxham, John (d. 1334/5), Carmelite reformer, joined that order in Chester, and later studied at Oxford University. Evidently his talents impressed his superiors, for while only a BTh he was granted a royal safe conduct on 4 April 1325 to travel to Ireland as vicar of the prior-general, and to conduct a visitation of the Irish Carmelite houses there. He is presumed to have presided at the Irish provincial chapter held at Ardee later that year, and to have introduced reforms into the province following the new constitutions that had been issued by the general chapter the previous year. As a result of his activities a house of studies was established at Dublin for the Irish Carmelite students. Bloxham continued to study and lecture at Oxford, and he incepted as DTh some time before 1333. In that year he was elected provincial of the English province, at a provincial chapter held in Lincoln. In the following year, 1334, he was nominated for a second time as vicar-general, this time to conduct a visitation of the Scottish Carmelites. He presided over the English provincial chapter at Gloucester the same year, but then, after only two and a half years in office, he died in late 1334 or 1335 and was buried in the Carmelite house at Oxford. He wrote a number of works of which John Bale preserves the titles of three in an early notebook: a commentary on the 'Sentences' of Peter Lombard, an index to Henry Cossey's book on the 'Apocalypse', and a collection of 186 letters. Later, Bale added statutes for Ireland, and the usual collections of questions and sermons. A short extract from one of his questions on the 'Sentences' is preserved in Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 73, fol. 45'v'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2710


Bloxham, John (c.1340-1387), theologian and college head, evidently came from Bloxham, Oxfordshire. He was elected fellow of Merton in 1361, and spent his whole life thereafter at the college, as bursar in 1365-7, and as warden from 16 October 1375 until his death. He studied theology as a fellow, and having completed all the requirements for the doctorate by October 1375 qualified as an inceptor in theology; but, presumably omitting to perform his necessary lectures as a regent master, he did not graduate as a doctor. He benefited from the ecclesiastical patronage of his college, becoming vicar of Embleton, Northumberland (1369-72) and rector of the free chapel of Kibworth Harcourt, Leicestershire (1385-7). He was also made archdeacon of Winchester by Bishop William Wykeham (1382-7), though no other connection between Wykeham and Bloxham can now be traced. He served in various university capacities, acting as one of the arbitrators appointed to settle both the contentions in Queen's College in 1379, and the disputed election to the provostship of Oriel College in 1386. He seems not to have shared the sympathy for John Wyclif (died 1384) and his radical colleagues felt by several fellows of Merton, including John Aston, Robert Rygge (lately fellow and afterwards chancellor), and William James; indeed he sat with the council of theologians and canon lawyers convoked by Archbishop William Courtenay (died 1396) at Blackfriars, London, in May 1382, in which the teaching of Wyclif was condemned, and before which at least two fellows or former fellows of Merton, Aston and Rygge, were arraigned. As warden Bloxham was active in forwarding college building: although the completion of Mob Quad by the building of the library was initiated in 1371, before he was elected, he travelled with William Humberville, the architect, who had worked at Windsor Castle, to inspect other buildings, notably the library of the Blackfriars in London. The work was completed by 1379. As executor of William Rede, bishop of Chichester (died 1385), he effected the bishop's great bequest of about a hundred books to Merton; he left two theological books of his own, a repertory of theological questions, and the commentary of the Franciscan William of Nottingham (died 1254) on the gospels. The works ascribed to his authorship by Pits and Tanner are based on confusion with an earlier John Bloxham, a Carmelite who died in 1335. Bloxham died shortly before July 1387. There is a memorial brass in Merton College chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 2711


Blund, John (c.1175-1248), ecclesiastic, is first recorded as one of a group of scholars lecturing on the liberal arts in the schools of Oxford at the end of the twelfth century. The only source for his early career is a Latin verse panegyric written by Henry d'Avranches in 1232 in support of Blund's election to the see of Canterbury. From this it is known that he studied arts, probably at Paris, and returned to Oxford to lecture on the arts in the last years of the twelfth century. Possibly this phase of his career was terminated by the suspension of the Oxford schools in 1209 after the summary hanging of two clerks by the city authorities. He returned to Paris to study theology and after twelve years he incepted and taught as a doctor of theology. He again suffered displacement by the 'great dispersal' of the University of Paris in 1229, a protest at the violent repression by the provost of Paris of student disorder. Matthew Paris names Blund as one of five famous English masters who returned home at this time, perhaps in response to an open invitation made by Henry III to the aggrieved scholars of Paris. Four of them, including Blund, were promptly rewarded with royal notice and patronage -- though with John Blund it is necessary, but not always easy, to distinguish him from a contemporary of the same name, a royal clerk and canon of Lichfield, who died in 1239. 
Master John Blund had acquired a prebend in Chichester Cathedral at some time before 1232, and besides this he obtained the parish livings of Horsley in Derbyshire and Barton in Cambridgeshire, which he held in plurality. He stood high in the favour of the king and the king's mentor, Peter des Roches, the bishop of Winchester. Consequently, on 27 August 1232 he was elected archbishop, by the monks of Canterbury, to succeed Richard Grant, who had died in Italy in the preceding year. The royal assent was promptly signified on 30 August, and on 10 September Blund embarked for Rome with a party from the Canterbury chapter. At the curia, however, Pope Gregory IX, acting on the advice of Simon Langton, the archdeacon of Canterbury, quashed the election. It was alleged that Blund's case failed because he was found to be a pluralist, holding two benefices involving cure of souls, without the requisite dispensations. This is implausible as he was immediately granted the necessary dispensations and received an indult allowing him to be elected to any other bishopric. He was more likely to have been compromised by the support of Peter des Roches, whose political activities were regarded with suspicion at the curia. Returning home, he continued to be favoured with gifts from the king. In 1234 he was appointed chancellor of York Cathedral by Archbishop Walter de Gray, a position he held until his death in 1248. 
Blund wrote a treatise on the soul, the only work of his known to survive. A typical scholastic dissertation, disputatious in form, it is probably a product of his Oxford lectures in arts. The fact that Alexander Neckham borrowed from it indicates that it was composed in the years 1197-1204. Although the author's analysis of cognition and the powers of the soul shows familiarity with the 'Physics' and the other 'libri naturales' of Aristotle, his major source of inspiration is the 'De anima' of the Muslim philosopher Avicenna 
(Ibn Sina; died 1037)
. His work thus demonstrates the absorption by the schools of Paris and Oxford at the beginning of the thirteenth century of Arabic science as well as of the newly translated scientific books of Aristotle. 


@@@@@


doc= 2712


Blundell, Henry (1724-1810), art collector, was born at Ince Blundell, Lancashire, the son of Robert Blundell (died 1773) and his wife, Katharine, daughter of Sir Stanley Rowland, bt, of Hooton, Chester. Like many Catholics he received his education abroad, first at the college of the English Jesuits at St Omer, and then at the English College at Douai, where he remained until 1745. He then travelled to Paris where he was placed under the care of Dr Joseph Holden, president of the St Gregory's English seminary. He returned to England by 1750, and in 1760 married Elizabeth (1733/4-1767), daughter of Sir George Mostyn, bt, of Talacre, Flintshire, with whom he had a son, Charles Robert, and two daughters, Katherine and Elizabeth. The year following Henry's marriage his father settled the family estates on him, and retired to Liverpool with his second wife, Margaret Anderton, whom he had married in 1752. It was a marriage that was to prove providential to Henry. The family's modest income was dramatically increased with the death in 1760 of Sir Francis Anderton without male heir. His estates of Lostock and Lydigate then passed to the Blundell family. Henry's wealth increased further with the deaths in 1767 and 1773, respectively, of his wife and father, his wife's income and that from his mother's estates devolving to him. With this substantial change in his financial fortunes, and the loss of much of his immediate family, Blundell devoted himself to improving the house and estate at Ince. 
Blundell's collection began modestly in the 1760s, with the limited patronage of leading artists of his generation. He commissioned a portrait of his wife from Joshua Reynolds, and, on Edward Penny's advice, employed Richard Wilson to paint four pieces ('c'.1763-7) for the dining room at Ince Blundell Hall. Blundell paid 70 guineas for the paintings, although Wilson asked only 50, for what were mainly studio works. This was not the only example of Blundell's generosity: he also paid Antonio Canova 100 zecchini more than the agreed price for a sculpture, 'Psyche', commissioned in 1790. In the 1770s Blundell began to buy old masters, eventually amassing a collection of over 300 works which included paintings by and after Poussin, Ruisdael, Breughel, Jacopo Bassano, Veronese, and Andrea del Sarto. He purchased some of these paintings on visits to Paris, including a copy of Veronese's 'Marriage at Cana'. However, many works were bought in Italy, where he also patronized the painters Gavin Hamilton and Anton Raphael Mengs, and acquired most of the classical antiquities for which his collection was, and is, renowned. 
Blundell was probably encouraged to start collecting at the age of fifty-three not only by his new-found wealth, but also by his Catholic friend and neighbour Charles Townley, who had already formed a significant collection. In 1776 Blundell set out for Italy with the intention of joining Townley there. Travelling via Milan, Venice, and Ancona, he arrived in Rome in February 1777 before making a brief tour to Naples with his neighbour. Townley, who was well connected with those involved in the excavation and sale of antiquities in Rome, introduced Blundell to the dealer Thomas Jenkins. It was through Jenkins that Blundell made his first purchases of antiquities: a seated philosopher and eighty pieces from the Villa Mattei. This latter purchase included not only busts and statues but also urns and inscriptions, and represented what remained of a large collection from which 'the very best pieces had already been extracted', those items still in Jenkins's hands being 'heavily, and often, very imaginatively, restored' (Vaughan, 14). 
Initially Blundell was not a highly discriminating collector, and his wholesale acquisition of antiquities continued with a group from Villa Borrioni (probably also in 1777); again the best pieces had already been dispersed. He was happy to buy works he knew to have been imaginatively restored, purchasing a number of pieces from the restorers and dealers Bartolomeo Cavaceppi and Giovanni Volpato. He was also content for his collection to include modern copies, to which end he bought from Giuseppi Angelini and Carlo Albacini. Blundell may simply have been 'interested in the sculptures for the classical ideas that they represented... and not unduly worried initially whether a piece was ancient or not' (Southworth). This opinion is further encouraged by Blundell's treatment of the statue 'Sleeping Hermaphrodite', which he purchased in 1801 from Lord Bessborough's sale. He had the subject's male genitalia and the genii that surrounded the figure removed, in order to recast the subject as a sleeping Venus. 
Blundell made three further visits to Italy; he was in Rome in 1782-3, 1786, and 1790, when he also revisited Naples. He had grown to distrust Jenkins, and on the last two visits relied principally on Father John Thorpe (whom he had probably first met at St Omer) to assist him as his agent. However, it was through Jenkins that he purchased, in 1786, the statue of Minerva from Palazzo Lante. This was an important acquisition and, as an antique of the finest quality, marked a new phase in the sort of works Blundell sought to acquire. For example, he purchased twelve pieces from Villa d'Este including a 'Theseus' that Townley regarded as the 'best specimen in Blundell's collection' (Vaughan, 16). In addition he bought significantly more marbles -- Townley observed 39 pieces in 1786 and 325 in 1793 (ibid.). However, the Napoleonic wars halted the expansion of his collection, for a time anyway. 
In England, Blundell paused in his collecting mania and built a garden temple to house his collection. However, in the early 1800s, perhaps having come into further money, he began to collect again. Advised by Townley, he bought at the sales of the collections of Lord Cawdor (1800) and Lord Bessborough (1801). The extent of Blundell's increased wealth may be exemplified by his purchase of a sarcophagus relief, 'Phaeton before Helios', at Christies. The work had been recovered in May 1800 from a French cargo ship 'en route' for Paris from Italy, where it had previously been in the papal collection. Blundell had earlier bought this work soon after it was uncovered at Villa d'Este, for $10. After cleaning, its fame had spread and Blundell obliged Pope Pius VI's desire for it to enter the papal collection. Blundell had to pay 260 guineas for the same piece in 1801, but as he proclaimed in a letter to his brother-in-law that same year, 'You may think me extravagant... but if I lay out 1000 pounds it is no great affair to me: the money is no object' (Fejfer and Southworth, 12). 
In 1801 Blundell began work on the construction of a pantheon in the grounds of Ince Blundell Hall, also to house his growing collection. He evidently received many visitors, for he found it necessary to limit the number of days he made the collection available to the public. In 1803 he published 'An account of the statues, busts, bass-relieves, cinerary urns, and other ancient marbles, and paintings at Ince. Collected by H.B.' which was 'written with the sole view of serving as a kind of interpreter, in order to obviate the daily questions of those visitors who are not much versed in history, or heathen mythology' (frontispiece). This publication listed 553 items, but by the time of the next published account in 1809-10 there were 599 items in the collection, then the largest private collection of antiquities in Britain. It was on the advice and with the assistance of Townley that he published in 1809 'Engravings and etchings of the principal statues, busts, bass-reliefs, sepulchral monuments, cinerary urns etc. in the collection of Henry Blundell, esq., at Ince', a two-volume collection of 150 engravings. 
Although, as a Catholic, Blundell could not hold public office, he was a well-known figure in Liverpool society. He was involved with the early exhibitions held in Liverpool and was the first patron of the Liverpool Academy in 1810. In November 1808 Joseph Farington recorded that Blundell was nearly blind (Farington, 'Diary', 10 Nov 1808). He died on 28 August 1810 at Ince Blundell and was interred in the family vault at Sefton church in Lancashire. The funeral procession was reputed to have extended nearly half a mile ('GM', 385). 
The relationship between Blundell and his son was unhappy. Charles was unsociable and refused to marry. Consequently, to preserve the family succession, Blundell left the Lostock estate to his daughters and only Ince Blundell to his son. The will was contested, but sustained. When Charles died in 1837 he left the estate to a cousin, Thomas Weld of Lulworth, on the condition he took the Blundell name; again following litigation the will was upheld. Despite these problems with inheritance, Charles kept the collection intact, adding a significant number of old master drawings. In 1959, with the sale of the estate, the Ince Blundell collection of antiquities was offered as an unconditional gift to the city of Liverpool; it is now part of the collection of the National Museums and Galleries on Merseyside, housed in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool. It is the largest collection of antiquities in Britain outside the British Museum. The pictures, bronzes, and modern sculptures remained with the family for many years, although most of the pictures were dispersed at Christies in 1980 (12, 18 December), 1991 (12, 19 April), and 1992 (3 April). 


@@@@@


doc= 2713


Blundell, James (1790-1878), physician and physiologist, was born in London on 27 December 1790. Educated first by the Revd Thomas Thomason, and then at the United Borough Hospitals by his maternal uncle, the physiologist John Haighton, he graduated MD at Edinburgh in 1813. Haighton proved to be a great influence on his nephew, who lived with him for some time. From 1814 Blundell lectured in London on midwifery in conjunction with his uncle, and soon after began to lecture on physiology. In 1818 he succeeded his uncle as lecturer in midwifery and as lecturer in physiology at Guy's Hospital. As professor of obstetricy and lecturer on the diseases of women he was reputed to have the largest classes in midwifery in London. He was the author of 'Researches Physiological and Pathological' (1824) and two papers on abdominal surgery and blood transfusion, edited by S. Ashwell, and published in 1828; the 'British Medical Journal' considered him to be the father of the operation of transfusion in Britain. He also published 'Principles and Practice of Obstetricy' (1834) and 'Observations on some of the More Important Diseases of Women' (1837). He was considered to be in advance of other obstetric practitioners, not least in using the uterine sound for diagnostic purposes. 
Blundell left Guy's in 1834 following a dispute with the hospital's treasurer. He became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1838. Blundell, who retained an interest in the classics from his days with Thomason, published his 'Hexametrical experiments, or, A version of four of Virgil's pastorals... with hints to explain the method of reading, and a slight essay on the laws of metre' in the same year. With a large private practice and significant bequests, he amassed a fortune estimated variously at between a third of and half a million pounds, and was thus able to retire from full-time practice in 1847. During his later years he never rose until around noon, saw patients during the afternoon, dined, and commenced visits at 8 or 9 pm. He always carried books with him on his rounds, reading them by means of a light specially installed in his carriage. 
Blundell died on 15 January 1878 at his home at 80 Piccadilly, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 2714


Blundell, Peter (c.1520-1601), clothier and philanthropist, was born in Tiverton, Devon, of humble parentage. As a boy he saw the little community freed from the dominance of the Courtenay earls of Devon, and he lived to see it, untrammelled by either civic or industrial regulation, and somewhat encouraged by the protestant ethic, enter a period of considerable growth and prosperity based on the manufacture of kerseys, the woollen cloths in which the town and its immediate hinterland specialized. Whether the young Blundell himself learned any of the necessary industrial skills is not apparent. He was essentially an industrial entrepreneur -- still a rarity in late sixteenth-century Devon -- but it was his ability to find a market in London for the lightweight and inexpensive west-country product that enabled him to prosper so exceedingly. There is no evidence that he was ever a freeman of the City of London or a member of any of its guilds, but when he made his will in 1599 he left $150 to each of the twelve great livery companies, part of the income of which was to be given to poor inmates of the city's various penal institutions. He left more sizeable sums to each of the three great London hospitals (St Bartholomew's, St Thomas's, and Christ's Hospital) and to some of his London business friends. Ann Whitmore, a merchant's widow living in the parish of St Michael Paternoster Royal, was generously provided for by the elderly bachelor, as were each of her nine children (one of them a future lord mayor) and several of her servants, suggesting that Blundell had lodged with the family when he was in London; and indeed it was in this parish that he was assessed for tax in 1581. It was on no less a person than his friend Sir John Popham, the lord chief justice and a fellow west-countryman, that he placed the main burden of carrying out his multifarious wishes. 
The bulk of Blundell's considerable fortune went to a wide circle of fellow clothiers, their widows and children, many of them also his relations, in and around Tiverton, with a few in the city of Exeter. His many employees also benefited -- even his carrier, William Wood, receiving $50. His only brother, James, having predeceased him, his heir presumptive was his nephew John, who, with his infant son Peter, received rather less than another nephew, Robert Chilcott, his clerk. Blundell's residuary legatees were the five men he named as his executors, two of them London merchants and the other three Tiverton cousins. He created several charitable trusts, including one enabling four Tiverton boys a year under the age of fifteen to be apprenticed to husbandry -- a new idea in 1599, reflecting Blundell's appreciation of the need for a healthy rural economy. Others to benefit were the ten inhabitants of Tiverton most heavily assessed for the subsidy. In all, Blundell provided for cash disposals amounting to the amazing sum of over $32,000. This included $2400 to build premises for what was to be his lasting memorial, a free grammar school in Tiverton, the running costs to be met from his estate. His extraordinary will, which he claimed to have written in his own hand, contained the most detailed particulars regarding the school's construction, the choice of pupils, and the provision of staff. Finally, for the increase of preachers of the gospel, he provided scholarships to support six former pupils at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge. Blundell died, possibly on 18 April 1601, in the London parish of St Michael Paternoster Royal, his second home. The parish register for 9 May 1601 lists the burial of 'P er Blunden', but this may be a copyist's error. 


@@@@@


doc= 2715


Blundell, William (1620-1698), royalist landowner and topographer, was born on 15 July 1620 at Crosby Hall, Little Crosby, Lancashire, the second son of Nicholas Blundell ('c'.1590-1631) and Jane (died 1640), daughter of Roger Bradshaigh of Haigh, near Wigan. In 1635 at the age of fifteen he married, in Scotland, Anne ('c'.1620-1685), daughter of Sir Thomas Haggerston. On the death of his grandfather, also William Blundell, in July 1638, he succeeded to the family estates. As a Roman Catholic he did not attend university, but as a youth he had a taste both for learning and travel, and visited Dublin in 1639. 
On 22 December 1642 Blundell was commissioned at Leigh, Lancashire, as a captain in Thomas Tildesley's dragoon regiment. Made a prisoner at Preston on 9 February 1643, he was released in time to march to Lancaster, where on 18 March 1643 his thigh was shattered by a musket shot. So serious was this that early in 1644 an attempt was made to take Blundell to Chester for proper medical care, and he continually petitioned Sir Thomas Fairfax and the local parliamentary leader John Moore about this. Time spent hiding in north Wales between 1644 and 1646 apparently did not help: Blundell commented that 'after I was lamed in the war, tho' I could not use a sword, I was 4 times made a prisoner and payd my ransom twice' (Baines, 216-17). In addition he claimed that his wound cost him 3 inches in height. In February 1651 Blundell, who dubbed himself Halt-Will, described in a letter to his sister-in-law his 'gross full body of an ell or more in the waist, with an old peruke clapped on a bald pate' ('Cavalier', 39). 
As a Catholic delinquent Blundell could not compound for his estate, and all his real property was seized by the sequestration commissioners for nine or ten years. In the late 1640s, in order to escape further notice, he resorted to the use of the pseudonym Cicely Burton in signing his letters. On 12 May 1648 his estate was used to finance part of the $10,000 paid to compensate Liverpool for war damage. In 1653, however, he was able to repurchase the estate at a cost of $1340. 
Blundell's experiences weighed heavily on him. He later wrote that after the repurchase 'I was so overcharged with care, debts, business and imprisonments, that I took no exact account of the value of any goods until the yeare 1658' ('Cavalier', 40). None the less, he was possessed of a lively, inquisitive mind, and made the most of his travels. In 1646 and again in 1648 he had sailed to the Isle of Man, and his second stay produced the first extensive study of the island. The manuscript work is divided into three books. The first deals with topography and economic geography, the second covers politics, history and the law, and the last discusses Manx customs, society, and religion. The scope of the work makes it a prime source for the history of Man in the seventeenth century and its study of Manx agriculture is deemed to be especially valuable. 
Blundell also wrote 'A short treatise on the penal laws'. He made copious notes on many subjects in two small quarto volumes of 1200 manuscript pages each entitled 'Historia' and 'Adversaria', as well as in a large quarto 'Hodge Podge'. None of these is dated. Extracts were published by T. E. Gibson in 1880. 
Blundell remained a marked man throughout the Interregnum, being listed as a royalist suspect in 1655 and a holder of a commission in 1658, in which year he visited Rouen. He was also in Breda in 1660 prior to Charles II's departure for England, having taken his youngest son, Thomas, for education at St Omer. With the Restoration his fortunes improved and, after paying a further $1202 5's'. 8died to clear rent arrears to the crown, he was eventually able to settle his estates in 1662. 
Much later, in the charged atmosphere following the revolution of 1688, Blundell was again imprisoned, this time at Manchester. He was not arrested in 1694 as he was clearly peripheral to the Lancashire Jacobite plot of that year. Blundell, who had fathered five sons and seven daughters, several of whom had entered convents abroad, died on 24 May 1698 at Crosby Hall and was buried in the family chapel at Sefton parish church three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 2716


Ranulf (III), sixth earl of Chester and first earl of Lincoln (1170-1232), magnate, was the elder son of Hugh, earl of Chester (1147-1181), and Bertrada de Montfort. 
Ranulf was born in 1170 according to the Chester annals, a source compiled after 1265 but usually reliable for events of importance to the comital house. Like other dates in the annals -- the birth of Hugh (1147), his marriage (1169), and the birth of his second child, Matilda (1171) -- it is compatible with record evidence. Ranulf's mother, Bertrada, is now thought to have been sister rather than daughter of Simon de Montfort (died 1188), and hence aunt rather than sister of Simon de Montfort (died 1218), father of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester. Born 'c'.1155, Bertrada lived until 1227 without remarrying. Ranulf had a younger brother, Richard, who is mentioned in his father's acts, but his disappearance after 1181 suggests he died in childhood. The name by which Ranulf has hitherto been known, de Blundeville, has been taken as a reference to his birth at Oswestry on the Shropshire-Wales border. But B. E. Harris demonstrated in 1971 that the name occurs first in the (perhaps late fourteenth-century) Dieulacres annals, and is linked with Oswestry only from the sixteenth century. His birthplace must therefore be regarded as unknown. Ranulf's two marriages, in 1188 or 1189 to Constance of Brittany and in 1200 to Clemence de Fougeres, produced no children. Because of this, his great inheritance was divided between his four sisters, who had all made important dynastic marriages, and their descendants on his death in 1232. 
Little is known of Ranulf's upbringing, apparently in Chester. His nurse, Wymarc, came from a local family, and Earl Hugh gave a Cheshire heiress in marriage to 'Alexander my son's tutor' 'c'.1177-81 (Barraclough, 'Charters', 193-4). Hugh's death on 30 June 1181 made Ranulf a royal ward; incomplete accounts of Chester appear on the pipe rolls down to Michaelmas 1187. Why did the minority end then? The answer must lie in Henry II's ambitious plans for Ranulf, who was soon married to Constance (c.1161-1201), daughter and heir of Conan (IV), duke of Brittany (c.1135-1171), widow of Henry's son Geoffrey since 1186, and custodian of the duchy on behalf of Geoffrey's posthumous son, Arthur. According to the Chester annals, Ranulf was knighted by the king on 1 January 1189 and the wedding followed on 3 February (St Werburgh's day) 1189, but the text is confused at this point and 1188 is more likely for both events. Henry II thus brought the young earl into the forefront of Angevin continental politics, charged with helping to resist French intervention in Brittany. The marriage also augmented Ranulf's English possessions with the honour and earldom of Richmond held in right of his wife. Perhaps by 1190 he celebrated his new status by commissioning a second seal modelled on those of his Breton predecessors, and he also used the titles duke of Brittany and earl of Richmond in his charters, though never consistently. 
Ranulf's political activity between 1189 and 1194 did not match this potential importance. He did not accompany Richard I on crusade, despite later legends to this effect, and avoided entanglement in the contests for power among Richard's deputies in England and his brother John. Nor is Ranulf known to have played an important role in Normandy or Brittany. The distribution of charters he issued in this period, many of them in Chester, suggests that the earl's first priority was to take a firm grip of his inheritance after his minority. But in 1194 Ranulf helped to capture Nottingham Castle for the recently released Richard, and then carried a ceremonial sword at the formal crown wearing that followed. By September 1194 he had joined the king in France and spent much of the period from 1194 to 1199 there, mostly in Normandy to judge from his attestations of royal charters. One substantial reward he received was royal acceptance of his claim to the Lincolnshire barony of Bolingbroke on the death of his cousin (they had a common great-grandmother in Countess Lucy, wife of Ranulf (I), third earl of Chester) William de Roumare in 1198. But however useful Ranulf's support was to Richard I, his success was limited by the token nature of his marriage. Since 1189 Constance had presided over an effectively independent duchy, with little documented influence from her husband. In 1196 Ranulf imprisoned her in his castle of St Jacques de Beuvron on the Norman frontier, driving the Breton nobility into open revolt, while Constance's son, Arthur, took refuge with Philip Augustus of France. Richard may well have supported the earl's actions, and was prepared to back his claims by invading the duchy, but in retrospect the episode seems a last unsuccessful attempt to assert an authority over his wife and her lands that Ranulf had never really possessed. 
On Richard's death in 1199 Ranulf thus saw no advantage in the succession of his stepson Arthur, the latter backed by his own alienated wife, now freed from captivity. He supported John, and Constance reacted by terminating their marriage (though there is no formal record of this) and making a second alliance at once with the French noble Gui de Thouars. Ranulf accepted, perhaps even welcomed, the inevitable, and in 1200 he married Clemence (died 1252), daughter of Guillaume de Fougeres and widow of Alain de Dinan. This second Breton alliance must, in a more modest way, have had similar aims to the first: bolstering the earl's position in western Normandy where he was hereditary vicomte of the Bessin and Avranchin, and hence his influence over the Norman-Breton frontier. Clemence brought him some dower lands in England and Normandy, and the possibility at least of a more successful marriage and the birth of an heir. The fact remains that Ranulf had lost the honour of Richmond, which went to Gui de Thouars on Constance's death in 1201, and then to Robert de Breteuil, earl of Leicester (died 1204), on Gui's defection in 1203. The French conquest of Normandy in 1204 caused him further heavy losses. Nor did Ranulf receive any substantial compensation elsewhere in the early years of John's reign. Some historians have argued that this put great strain on his relations with the king. All that is known for certain is that on two occasions John demanded surrender of lands or castles and security for the earl's loyalty: the first in Normandy in April 1203 just after the defection of the Fougeres family, the second in England in December 1204, when Ranulf was in alliance with the king's Welsh enemy Gwenwynwyn of Powys. Each time the earl convinced the king of his allegiance and the threatened sanctions were soon lifted. The evidence of charter attestations shows that Ranulf was frequently in attendance on the king, especially during John's last months in Normandy early in 1204. Nevertheless he had suffered heavy losses, and even if there is no real evidence that he was on the verge of rebellion, John seems to have decided not to test his loyalty too far. In March 1205, with Leicester dead, the king granted most of the Richmond lands in Yorkshire to the earl of Chester, along with substantial remissions of debt. 
Having devoted much of the first phase of his career, from 1187 to 1204, to the defence of the continental lands of the Angevin empire, Ranulf now embarked on a second phase, from 1205 to 1218, in which he became more and more prominent in domestic politics as a loyal supporter of John, and later of John's son Henry III. He regularly witnessed royal charters, and received a steady flow of the gifts usual for a noble in royal favour. In 1205 and 1209 he was deputed to escort the king of Scots south. He took a leading role in successive Welsh campaigns between 1209 and 1212. At the same time Ranulf systematically consolidated his local rule in Cheshire, where the appearance of a chancellor by 1190 and a justiciar by 1202, as well as the earlier evolution of an 'exchequer' modelled on that of the king, give some indication of its exceptional independence. Both the Chester annals and Lucian, a monk of St Werburgh's Abbey writing in the 1190s, call the earl a 'prince' ('princeps'). The comital charters illustrate further development of this distinctive regional autonomy under John, even as the king was putting great pressure on many other magnates' local powers. In the decade 1205-15 both king and earl seem to have concluded that it was in their own interest to treat Cheshire as a special case; this was one reason for Ranulf's loyalism. 
In 1214 Ranulf returned to France to participate in John's Poitou campaign, acting as one of the negotiators of the eventual truce with Philip Augustus. In January 1215 he was among the very few magnates to defend John against the initial demands of the baronial dissidents, and no contemporary source suggests any wavering of Ranulf's support through to the promulgation of 'Magna Carta' and the slide into civil war. Probably in the aftermath of John's grant the earl issued his own 'Magna Carta of Cheshire', defining local customs, apparently in response to a petition from the honorial baronage. But Ranulf also received great rewards from the king: half of the honour of Leicester in custody for the younger Simon de Montfort in July 1215 (presumably because of his mother), the shrievalties of Lancashire, Shropshire, and Staffordshire in April 1216, and other grants of castles and rebel possessions. Chester's support was crucial to the king once civil war broke out in October 1215: with William (I) Marshal he kept the Welsh march largely loyal; with his brother-in-law William de Ferrers he set up a power bloc in the midlands which helped to neutralize the threat of the northern rebels, and divide them from their allies in the south. Even so, there were limits to the earl's power, and the patterns of allegiance in his lordships was mixed. While his Cheshire tenants followed him almost without exception in supporting the king, the tenants of Richmond in Yorkshire with equal unanimity rebelled, rejecting the influence of their (probably largely absentee) lord. In Lincolnshire the response of tenants was rather more mixed. 
On John's death in October 1216 Ranulf and William Marshal were the two leading magnate supporters of the young prince Henry. Within days the Marshal had accepted the role of regent, but even the eulogistic 'Histoire de Guillaume le Marechal' makes it clear that he needed, and received, the consent and support of the earl of Chester to do so. Ranulf's role in the subsequent struggle against Louis of France can be traced through formal actions, like his attestation of the revised 'Magna Carta' in November 1216, and also through the piecemeal process of local campaigning and bargaining with individual rebels that followed. In spring 1217 he raised a large force to attack Mountsorrel Castle near Leicester, on which he had a claim, and drew part of Louis's army north in response, precipitating the decisive battle of Lincoln in May. William Marshal and several others played major parts in this victory but Ranulf received the greatest reward: a grant of the earldom of Lincoln, made within days of the battle. In September 1217 he was among those who ratified the peace agreement by which Louis left England. Tensions between the royalist leaders appeared occasionally: some time early in 1217 it was proposed to Pope Honorius III (not necessarily by Ranulf himself) that Chester should be made co-regent with the elderly Marshal. But winning a civil war and then imposing peace without the influence of an adult king was bound to be a delicate process; on balance it is remarkable how little evidence suggests that the earl did anything that destabilized the minority government. Nor did his decision to depart on crusade in June 1218 indicate any lingering ambitions to succeed the Marshal. Ranulf did all he could to safeguard his position, by a private agreement with Llywelyn ab Iorwerth of Gwynedd, and by obtaining quittances of his shrieval accounts, but he was still prepared to take a risk in leaving England for what turned out to be over two years. In doing so, he discharged the crusading vow he had taken with John back in March 1215. He travelled with many relatives and allies, including the earls of Derby and Arundel, and what evidence there is suggests that other participants saw him as the most important of the English leaders. 'L'estoire de Eracles empereur', for instance, credits him with leading 100 knights. Ranulf joined the forces of the fifth crusade in Egypt and participated in the capture of Damietta in November 1219, leaving on the return journey in spring 1220 before the crusade ended in disastrous defeat. 
Back in England by July 1220 Ranulf went first to Chester where he was received, according to the Chester annals, 'with the greatest veneration' ('Annales Cestrienses', 50-51). He embarked on a third phase of his career in which, without ever threatening rebellion, he became ambivalent towards a royal government increasingly dominated, after the Marshal's death, by the justiciar Hubert de Burgh. Faced with pressure to surrender castles and custodies he had been granted in the civil war Ranulf gave ground gradually, conceding in 1221, for instance, that he would account for the revenues of his shrievalties outside Cheshire. The nearest approach to conflict came at Christmas 1223, when de Burgh demanded a general resumption of royal rights and property. Ranulf first took the lead in opposing this, then assessed the balance of forces on both sides and yielded, surrendering his custodies and royal castles on 30 December. In 1224, when Falkes de Breaute openly rebelled against the minority regime, Chester was sympathetic enough to give him refuge and intercede for him, but again, not to compromise his own allegiance. This was easier for him because, unlike some of the other old royalists who had now lost ground, he had much to fall back on, including his power base in Cheshire. From 1225 he constructed there a great new castle at Beeston, all too obviously defending the county from England rather than Wales, and intended perhaps as a symbol of the power he still retained. Ranulf also buttressed his position by strengthening the alliance with Llywelyn initiated in 1218. In 1222 he married his nephew John the Scot, son of his sister Mabel and David, earl of Huntingdon, whose custody he had taken over after David's death in 1219, to the Welsh prince's daughter Helen. 
Ranulf gave only the most grudging support to royal campaigns against Llywelyn launched by Hubert de Burgh in 1223 and 1231. But on their side de Burgh and his allies did not want to alienate the powerful earl too seriously, so even his ambivalent loyalty was acknowledged. The custody of half of the honour of Leicester returned to him in 1220 became a grant for life in 1227. The Yorkshire lands of the honour of Richmond were regranted in 1227, a grant of royal demesne between Ribble and Mersey in Lancashire was added in 1229. The wardship of John the Scot, retained until John came of age in 1227, was another important concession, all the more so because Ranulf, his second marriage now childless for over twenty years, may already have intended this son of his eldest sister to be his heir for the earldom of Chester. The problem was that his other three sisters also had claims to a share of his property, so creating the risk that Cheshire would have to be divided. This provides an additional motive for the earl's acquisitiveness in his latter years; some of these gains went to swell the shares of the coheirs outside Cheshire to an acceptable size. It may also explain his willingness late in his life to cede custodies which would in any case lapse with his death and could not benefit his heirs. In 1230 he gave up his Richmond lands to the king's unreliable ally Pierre de Dreux, duke of Brittany, and by 1231 he had agreed to transfer his honour of Leicester lands to the king's French protege, Simon de Montfort (died 1265). In May 1232, when Ranulf fell ill while at court, the king undertook to observe the terms of his will. Probably after this he conveyed his earldom of Lincoln to his sister Hawise de Quincy, who in turn granted it to her son-in-law John de Lacy (c.1192-1240), an arrangement that must have required royal consent. This final manoeuvre meant that all Ranulf's heirs held an earldom. 
In 1230-31, perhaps also to maintain good relations with the young king, Ranulf took an active role in his French campaign, eventually taking over command of the English forces in 1231 after Henry's return to England, and negotiating a truce with the French. He was also able to reoccupy his family castle of St Jacques, and revisit the border areas he had contested in the 1190s. On his return to England he quarrelled briefly with the king, probably because he still resented Hubert de Burgh's influence over royal policy towards France, Wales, and domestic patronage. The following year Chester helped to bring about de Burgh's fall from power in July 1232, though in September 1232 he intervened with others to protect the former justiciar from the extreme of royal vengeance. Earl Ranulf died at Wallingford on 26 October 1232. His heart was buried at Dieulacres Abbey in Staffordshire, a Cistercian house which he had refounded in 1214 (it was previously at Poulton in Cheshire), in accordance with the terms of his charter. His body was interred at St Werburgh's Abbey in Chester on 3 November. His properties were divided, with John the Scot installed as earl of Chester by the end of the month, which confirms the impression of a prior agreement, though if so the coheirs subsequently changed their minds, and had issued writs to contest the division by 1235. But even after Ranulf's great earldom was absorbed by the crown after 1237, his reputation persisted and legends about him occur in late medieval sources. Despite an attempt to argue the contrary, there can be little doubt that he was the subject of the 'rymes of Randolf erl of chestre' alluded to in 'Piers Plowman' (Langland, 49). 


@@@@@


doc= 2717


Blundeville, Thomas de (d. 1236), bishop of Norwich, was a member of a minor gentry family who held small estates of the honour of Hockering at Deopham and Newton Flotman in Norfolk. His uncles were Hubert de Burgh, the justiciar, and Geoffrey de Burgh, bishop of Ely, and his older brother William served as constable of Corfe Castle. He himself became an exchequer clerk, and by 1225 was constable of the Tower of London. In September 1226 he was appointed dean of the royal free chapel of Tettenhall in Staffordshire, but within a month he was granted custody of the bishopric of Norwich, to which he was elected in October; the temporalities were restored on 21 November, and he was consecrated on 20 December, the day after he was ordained priest. In September 1227 he was one of those sent to Antwerp to meet the imperial ambassadors, but after his elevation, apart from attendance at great councils such as Merton in January 1236, there is little evidence of continued service to the crown outside East Anglia where, for example, he was custodian of Norwich Castle until September 1228. 
Within his diocese, the main evidence for Blundeville's activities is provided by a collection of almost a hundred 'acta'. He obtained various grants for the bishopric and church of Norwich from Henry III, and was himself generous to the monks of the cathedral priory, who commemorated him as a benefactor. He conducted a visitation of his diocese in 1233, after the papal mandate to the English bishops so to do, and he acted on various occasions as papal judge-delegate. The main themes that emerge from his 'acta' include his support of small new Augustinian houses such as Kersey in Suffolk and Spinney in Cambridgeshire; his insistence on the establishment of vicarages in parish churches appropriated to religious communities; and a campaign to extend the ecclesiastical patronage of the bishop by insisting, in return for financial concessions, that monastic patrons should allow him and his successors to choose the parochial clergy nominally presented by the religious. His episcopate saw another round of the long struggle between the diocesan and the men of Bishop's Lynn, this time in 1234 over the making of the mayor. He also battled with the priors of the Norfolk Benedictine houses of Binham and Wymondham over the extent of the obedience and reverence owed by daughter houses of exempt St Albans, and over the respective rights of bishop and priors in parish churches; this was settled amicably by papal judges-delegate. There is some evidence in the records of the king's courts of conflict between royal and ecclesiastical jurisdictions; the bishop's officers were frequently cited to appear at the 'curia regis' to answer why they had heard cases in the court Christian which were beyond its competence according to the common law and after a writ of prohibition. In 1234 Blundeville claimed that the local sheriff was releasing to chancery excommunicates, who had been imprisoned on Blundeville's signification, before they had made satisfaction to the church. 
Of Blundeville's personality and relationships there is little evidence. His career was obviously fostered by his uncle; his withdrawal from secular government, despite his earlier career in administration, may be explained either by Hubert de Burgh's loss of royal favour from late 1229, or by the opposition of the episcopate in general to the justiciar; but it was to Bishop Thomas's house at Terling in Essex (rather than, as some sources state, Brentwood) that Hubert fled, and whence he was dragged from the altar in September 1232. Some indication of Blundeville's religious sentiments is provided by his statement in a charter for Christ Church, Canterbury, of his devotion to St Thomas, and even more by his counter-seal, showing a bishop kneeling before the Virgin and Child with the legend 'Est' 'Thome' 'signum Virgo'. He died on 16 August 1236 and was buried in his cathedral church. 


@@@@@


doc= 2718


Blundeville, Thomas (1522?-1606?), author and translator, was the eldest son of Edward Blundeville (1492/3-1568), of Newton Flotman, Norfolk, and Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Godsalve. His brother was Jeremy Blundeville of Toft Monks. Suggestions that he was educated at Cambridge remain unsubstantiated; it is possible that he entered Gray's Inn in 1541. Blundeville apparently lived in London for some years before returning to live in Norfolk on the death of his father, aged seventy-five, in 1568, when he inherited the family estate at Newton Flotman. He married twice, first Rose Puttenham in 1554 and second Margaret Johnson of Woodnorton (died 1617) in 1581. With his first wife he had a son, born in 1555 (probably named Anthony although sometimes referred to as Andrew), who was apparently killed in the Low Countries and died unmarried. He had two daughters from his second marriage: Elizabeth ('bap'. 1584) in 1610 married Rowland Meyrick of Gladestry, Radnorshire, son of Sir Gelly Meyrick, and had, among others, one son named Blundeville Meyrick, probably also born in 1610; Patience ('bap'. 1585, died 1639) in 1605 married Robert King of Culpho, Suffolk (who later styled himself Robert King Blundeville). 
Thomas Blundeville was the author of a number of works covering matters as diverse as horsemanship, astronomy, and the study of history. Most of his writings are prose, except the 'Three Morall Treatises' (1561), which includes two pieces in verse. Two of his works deal directly with horsemanship. 'The Fower Chiefyst Offices Belonging to Horsemanshippe' (1565-6) is a substantial and wide-ranging work, discussing such matters as horse breaking, the art of riding, the diet and diseases of horses, and the various offices of the rider, the breeder, and the farrier. It also includes a number of engravings of horse bits and shoes. 
Among Blundeville's other interests were mathematics and navigation. He had been a mathematics tutor in the households of Sir Nicholas Bacon and Justice Francis Wyndham for a time, and among his friends were some of the leading mathematicians of the age, including John Dee and Henry Briggs. His navigational writings were principally directed towards young gentlemen, providing instruction on astronomy, maps, and instruments. In 'The Theoriques of the Planets' (1602) he describes (with diagrams) the motions of the planets as well as lunar and solar eclipses. In this treatise he also discusses the measurement of latitude and provides engravings of various navigational instruments. Likewise, his 'M. Blundevile his Exercises, Containing Sixe Treatises' (1594) considers arithmetic, cosmology, the elements of the earth, and navigation. 
Blundeville's other works include 'The Art of Logicke' (published in 1599, though probably written about 1575) and a treatise entitled 'The True Order and Methode of Wryting and Reading Hystories' (1574). This is the first separately printed English work to deal with the study of history. It not only explains sixteenth-century notions of history, but also anticipates more recent historical views, for instance the relationship between man and the environment. Several of Blundeville's other works were translations -- he had, apparently, travelled in Italy, and was able to translate accurately. In 'A Very Briefe and Profitable Treatise' (1570) he translated from Italian a treatise originally written in Spanish by Federigo Furio, which had been translated into Italian by Alfonso d'Ulloa; he was also responsible for translating Jacopo Aconcio's account of the fortification of cities, though the translation of John Sturmius's work under the title 'A Ritch Storehouse, or, Treasurie for Nobilitye and Gentlemen' (1570), was -- contrary to some modern bibliographies -- by Thomas Brown ('fl'. 1570) of Lincoln's Inn. 
In 1571 Blundeville erected a monument to his family at the church in Newton Flotman, with effigies of his great-grandfather, his grandfather, and his father, and with a place for his two wives and two daughters. He, too, is buried there, under an effigy representing him in armour, kneeling at a faldstool, on which are lying a book and helmet. Blundeville's will is dated 1605, and it is believed that he died in 1606. He left the bulk of his estate to his wife, Margaret, while his elder daughter, Elizabeth, was to be paid her portion provided she married with her mother's consent. Her bequest was to be made up to $100 when her mother thought this was suitable. Blundeville also left charitable bequests to twenty households in Newton Flotman and Swainthorpe, and $5 to his lawyer and friend Robert Redmayne. He stipulated that pieces of furniture, armour, books, and astronomical instruments were to be left in the house for the use of future generations. A series of suits in chancery show that the implementation of Blundeville's will proved a matter of some contention. It appears that he had initially intended Elizabeth to marry Robert King, but that Elizabeth jilted him and instead married Rowland Meyrick. Blundeville, as a result, permitted King to marry his younger daughter, Patience, and (according to King) granted him the right to bear the name of Blundeville. The contents of the household were fought over for some time, but it appears that Robert King finally established his title to the manor of Newton Flotman; in 1646 he sold the estate to John Burman of Norwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 2719


Blunt, Henry (1794-1843), Church of England clergyman and writer, the son of Henry Blunt and Mary, 'nee' Atkinson, was born at Dulwich on 12 August 1794 and baptized at the chapel of Dulwich College on the 20th. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1806, and went to Pembroke College, Cambridge, as Parkin exhibitioner, in 1813. He took his BA degree as ninth wrangler in 1817, and became fellow of his college. He was ordained on his fellowship by William Howley, bishop of London, receiving deacon's orders on 5 July 1818 and priest's orders on 20 December of the same year. After filling preacherships at the Philanthropic Institution, at Park Chapel, Chelsea, and at Grosvenor Chapel, in 1820 he was appointed vicar of Clare in Suffolk, and on 21 December of that year married Julia Ann, 'nee' Nailer, one of the six daughters of a merchant living in Chelsea. At Clare, in addition to his parochial duties, Blunt took private pupils. 
In 1824 G. V. Wellesley (a brother of the first duke of Wellington), then rector of Chelsea, persuaded Blunt to resign his country living to become his curate. This post he filled for six years with steadily increasing fame as a preacher, and when Trinity Church was built in Sloane Street, London, in 1830, he was appointed its first incumbent, becoming a rector on 15 June 1832. So high was the estimation in which Blunt was held that, on Wellesley's resignation in 1832, he was offered by Lord Cadogan, the patron, the mother church of St Luke's, with the understanding that he was to hold the two livings together, with a sufficient staff of curates. This offer Blunt unhesitatingly declined. In 1835 he was presented by the duke of Bedford to the rectory of Streatham, Surrey. Blunt's health, always delicate, had by that time been completely undermined by the demands of a large London parish, and pulmonary weakness compelled him to pass successive winters at various health resorts, including Rome, Pau, and Torquay. He died in his rectory at Streatham on 20 July 1843, and was buried at Streatham. 
Blunt's chief work as a preacher and a writer was done at Chelsea. Here the influence he exerted, especially over the propertied classes, was very great, while the clearness and simplicity of his style made him also acceptable to the labouring classes. Blunt was a staunch evangelical, strongly, but not narrowly, opposed to Tractarianism. His was 'perhaps the most influential congregation in London' (Balleine, 156), but he did not favour interdenominational co-operation. The most popular of his published works were the courses of lectures delivered in successive Lents at Chelsea to crowded audiences on the lives of various leading persons in the 'Old' and 'New' testaments. These were published between 1823 and 1839, and went through many editions. He also published a life of Christ (3 vols., 1834-6), a book on the articles (1835), selected sermons (1837 and 1838), and an 'Exposition of the Pentateuch' (3 vols.) for family reading. Three volumes of sermons were published posthumously under the editorship of his old friend the Revd John Brown, of Cheltenham, and passed through a number of editions. 
Despite frequent ill health, Blunt was a hard-working parish priest. He started the first Sunday school in Chelsea at the Clock House, and also, amid much ridicule and determined opposition, introduced 'Bible' and communicants' classes. He published the first parish magazine, called the 'Poor Churchman's Evening Companion'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2720


Blunt, John Henry (1823-1884), ecclesiastical historian and theological writer, was born at Chelsea on 25 August 1823, where he was educated in a private school. For some years after leaving school he was a manufacturing chemist, but in 1850 he entered University College, Durham, intending ordination in the Church of England. In 1852 he became licentiate in theology; he was ordained deacon in 1852 and priest in 1855. In 1855 he became an MA of Durham. After filling a number of curacies he was appointed in 1868 vicar of Kennington, near Oxford, by the warden and fellows of All Souls College. In 1873 he was presented by W. E. Gladstone with the crown living of Beverston in Gloucestershire, which he retained until his death. In June 1882 his university made him a doctor of divinity. 
In his earlier years Blunt was a constant contributor to church reviews and magazines, and the author of many pamphlets and sermons. In 1855 his first volume, 'Atonement', was published. He afterwards became a voluminous writer in the fields of theology and ecclesiastical history. His theological dictionaries collected much valuable matter in a convenient form. His 'Annotated Book of Common Prayer', which went through many editions, is still of some value. 'The Reformation of the Church of England' (1868) was republished in a variety of formats. It reflects his high-church views. His 'Directorium pastorale' (1864) and his 'Book of Church Law' (1872) were both standard works for the late Victorian church. 
Blunt was a man of great mental and physical energy, and his passion for literary work in all probability hastened his death. He died rather suddenly at 47 St Stephen's Avenue, Shepherd's Bush, London, on 11 April 1884 (Good Friday), and was buried in St Mary's church cemetery, Battersea. At the time of his death he was working on 'Cyclopaedia of Religion', published posthumously (1884), and a dictionary of religion, completed by William Bentham (1887). 


@@@@@


doc= 2721


Blunt, John James (1794-1855), Church of England clergyman and theological writer, was born at Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire, in 1794 and baptized on 29 June, the son of the Revd John Blunt (1765/6-1843), master of the local grammar school. No details are known of his mother. He was educated by his father, a former fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, and was admitted a pensioner there in 1812, afterwards securing a scholarship. In 1813 he became first Bell's scholar in the university and was awarded the Browne medal for a Latin ode in the year following, and members' prizes for a Latin essay in 1817 and 1818. His degrees were BA 1816 (fifteenth wrangler), MA 1819, and BD 1826. St John's elected him to a fellowship in 1816, which he held for twenty years until his marriage. Having been awarded a Worts travelling bachelorship in 1818 Blunt visited Italy and Sicily; since he was required to write an account in Latin to the vice-chancellor of foreign customs and rarities he was fortunate to meet a peasant who related to him anecdotes of Napoleon at the battle of Waterloo. This expedition and further tours in 1820-21 provided materials for 'Vestiges of Ancient Manners and Customs Discoverable in Modern Italy and Sicily' (1823), which was translated into German but was not republished. 
After his ordination Blunt obtained the curacy at Hodnet in Shropshire under Reginald Heber, and after Heber's appointment to the bishopric of Calcutta in 1822 he remained there for some years under his successor. He later held the curacy of Chetwynd in Shropshire. During these years of parish work he began to write long miscellaneous review articles for the 'Quarterly Review' on Heber, Paley, Parr, Milton, Gibbon, and other subjects. He is said to have known Butler's 'Analogy' and 'Paradise Lost' almost by heart. Academic scholarship was not neglected; he gave the Hulsean lectures at Cambridge in 1831 and 1832, which were published. He held Great Oakley, a rich college living in Essex, between 1834 and 1839, where he rebuilt the parsonage and established the parish school. At Barlaston, Staffordshire, on 14 June 1836, he married Elizabeth Roylance Child, youngest daughter of Baddeley Child of that place; they had two daughters before his wife's early death on 12 April 1841. On 13 January 1852 at Uttoxeter, he married Harriet (1810-1889), second daughter of Thomas Sneyd-Kynnersley of Loxley Park, Staffordshire; they had no children. On 9 May 1839 Blunt was elected to the Lady Margaret chair of divinity at Cambridge and worked conscientiously in that post. Lord Aberdeen, who preferred moderate, uncontroversial churchmen in the House of Lords, offered more than once to appoint him bishop of Salisbury in 1854 but he declined. Joseph Romilly, the university registrary, commented 'Blunt is now looked on as a prodigy by all Clergymen: he is not 60, but considers himself too old for a Bishop'. In truth Blunt's health had begun to fail, and he died of erysipelas at Cambridge on 17 June 1855. He was buried with his first wife at Barlaston on 23 June. 
Blunt's publications were successful and widely read for a generation. His most popular book, 'A Sketch of the Reformation in England' (1832), went through many editions and was translated into French and German; it was followed in 1837 by 'A Sketch of the Church of the First Two Centuries after Christ', which like much of his work was revised from material originally given in sermons or lectures. His principal series of books on related themes was at the same time old-fashioned and novel, an attempt to widen the application of William Paley's interpretation of scripture on the basis of 'undesigned coincidences'. It underlay his 'Veracity of the Gospels and Acts of the Apostles' (1828) and works with a similar theme on the 'Pentateuch' and other 'Old Testament' scripture. They were brought together and revised as 'Undesigned Coincidences' in 1847, which reached a sixth edition in 1859 but did not survive the new biblical criticism that was then in the ascendant. For Blunt, 'the truth of Christianity depends upon the truth of its leading facts' ('Essays Contributed to the 'Quarterly Review'', 1860, 147). His Cambridge lectures on the early fathers appeared in 1840 and 1843, and were reprinted together soon after his death, as were other unpublished lectures, 'On the Right Use of the Early Fathers' (1857) and 'A History of the Christian Church during the First Three Centuries' (1856). His pieces in the 'Quarterly Review' were collected in one volume in 1860. 
As early as 1832 Blunt had published on the role and duties of the Anglican clergy and this subject was considered in 'Acquirements and Principal Obligations and Duties of the Parish Priest' (1856), which was based on his Cambridge lectures. Although he could draw on wide experience for this work it soon became obsolete, not simply because of its donnish tone but because the book presupposed a readership of university-educated country clergy (it recommended extensive reading for the preparation of sermons), whose parishioners were mostly agricultural workers: the industrial revolution and problems of the church in large cities might not have existed. Yet the Cambridge authorities during Blunt's time as professor were more aware than before of the need for a formalized training of the Anglican clergy, and (although he disliked the compulsory element enforced towards the end of his life) his teaching was well thought of. His schedule of lectures from 1840 appears in 'Two Introductory Lectures' (1856 edn, xiii-xiv). An obituarist wrote that 'It was by his lectures that he was principally known; and by their means the influence of a sound judgment and reasonable allegiance to the Church of England were spread through the land' ('Clerical Journal'). At second-hand Blunt's influence was carried through the empire. A moderate high-churchman, he eschewed overt theological controversy and, while his studies of the early church did not lead him to adopt Tractarian views, nor did they bring him to understate the place of tradition in its usages. Yet his writings and teachings were essentially polemical, since they expressed a conviction that the English church of the Reformation was consonant with early Christianity and that the contemporary church should seek to emulate both. In academic life he was conservative and voted against attempts to admit dissenters to Cambridge degrees. Writing in 1854 E. H. Browne detected a falling off in Blunt's influence, 'perhaps that he is older... but more it may be, because he is not quite up the age. The theology of the day is not the theology of fifteen years ago' (Kitchin, 228-9). 


@@@@@


doc= 2722


Blyke, Richard (d. 1775), antiquary, was the son of Theophilus Blyke (died 1718), deputy secretary at war. He may have been a native of Hereford but a Richard Blyke was baptized on 26 June 1716 at St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, whose parents were Theophilus and Mary Blyke. On his father's death his mother married a Gloucestershire clergyman. Blyke was deputy auditor of the office of the imprest, and was a member of the committee appointed to prepare the rolls of parliament for the press. In 1767 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries; he was also a fellow of the Royal Society. In 1775 he edited Sergeant Glanville's 'Reports of Determinations on Contested Elections' in collaboration with John Topham FRS. He gathered together an extensive manuscript collection, in twenty-two volumes, in preparation for the publication of a topographical history of Herefordshire, but his death in 1775 prevented him from achieving this. The collection was purchased by Charles Howard, earl of Surrey, later tenth duke of Norfolk, with the hope of encouraging someone else to undertake this work. It was later used by John Duncombe in his own history of the county. Blyke was buried in the churchyard at Isleworth, Middlesex, where his father was also buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 2723


Blysse, John (d. 1530), physician, was born in the diocese of Bath and Wells. He graduated BA at Oxford in June 1507 and was elected a probationary fellow of Merton College in 1509, having the character of 'an excellent disputant in philosophy' (Brodrick, 248). In 1510 he was selected by the university to dispute with a Spaniard from the University of Montpellier. He proceeded in arts, and applied himself to the study of medicine. He was appointed guardian of the Danvers chest in 1513, and had to replace 53's'. deficient when he left the office in July 1515. Blysse married, and moved to London, where he was practising in 1525; he became a fellow of the College of Physicians in 1529. He proceeded DM in February 1528. Being an astronomer as well as a physician he left certain astronomical tables at Merton, which disappeared long ago. He died a Dominican in April 1530 and was buried in the church of the Blackfriars' convent at London. Blysse's will mentions his 'wellbeloved wife Alice'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2724


Blyth, Sir Arthur (1823-1891), politician in Australia, was born at Birmingham on 19 March 1823, the third of the four sons of William Blyth (1788-1855), a wholesale merchant of Birmingham, and his wife, Sarah ('c'.1797-1861), the daughter of the Revd William Wilkins of Bourton on the Water, Gloucestershire. He was educated at King Edward VI Grammar School, Birmingham, before emigrating with his parents to Adelaide in 1839. Having worked in his family's business for two years, Arthur established a successful ironmonger's business with his brother Neville. They also invested heavily in land, and became wealthy, with several directorships of major local companies. On 5 March 1850 Arthur married Jessie Ann ('c'.1827-1891), the daughter of Edward Forrest of Birmingham. They had five children, two of whom died soon after birth. 
Blyth was elected to the South Australian legislative council in 1855 for the seat of Yatala, before moving in 1857 to the house of assembly, where he represented Gumeracha. He held this seat until 1868 -- when he travelled to England for two years on account of his wife's ill health -- and then again from 1870 to 1875. He represented North Adelaide from 1875 to 1877, in which year he was knighted. 
From 1861 Blyth relinquished all direct involvement in his business interests and devoted himself entirely to politics. In an unstable political era, he held the positions of commissioner for public works, commissioner for crown lands and immigration, treasurer, and chief secretary, on numerous occasions in various ministries in the period 1857 to 1876. Blyth was first elected to the position of premier on 4 August 1864, his ministry lasting until March the next year. A 'convinced free trader' ('The Times'), he was widely respected in political circles, and by the public, for the hard work and efficiency he demonstrated in all roles he was given. He was chosen as premier on a further two occasions -- November 1871 to January 1872, and then for almost two years from July 1873 to June 1875. 
A 'leading Anglican layman... well known for his commitment to religious equality' (Elford, 315), Blyth was also an early proponent of the revision of marriage practices in his state. In 1856, after a local furore erupted over the acceptability of applying church laws to marriage arrangements, he proposed a bill to make 'the ceremony of marriage merely a civil contract' (ibid.). His political views generally were characterized as 'practical, liberal, and moderate' ('The Times'), although his 'nervous temperament' (Bowes) was less well regarded, since it was thought to weaken his decisiveness and abilities as a political leader. A contemporary judgement was that he 'originated no measure of first-rate importance' (ibid.). 
On his retirement from parliament, Blyth was appointed South Australian agent-general in London. He held this post from February 1877 until 1891. He died on 7 December 1891 at his home, Sunnydene, Grassington Road, Eastbourne, Sussex. His wife, Jessie, survived him by only a fortnight. 


@@@@@


doc= 2725


Blyth, Edward (1810-1873), zoologist, was born on 23 December 1810 at 9 Ironmongers Lane, City of London, the son of Clare Blyth (1749-1821) from Norfolk, clothier, and his second wife, Catharine Saunders. After his father's death he was educated at Robert Fennel's gentlemen's boarding-school in Wimbledon, Surrey. His industry and prodigious memory were remarkable, as was his inclination to truancy to pursue natural history. He was originally intended for the church but Fennel suggested that he study chemistry, so he was apprenticed to Mr Thomas Keating, druggist, of Keating & Co., 79 St Paul's Churchyard, City of London. He bought a druggist's business in Lower Tooting, London, around 1832 but neglected it, which led to its failure in 1837. 
From a young age Blyth devoted himself to zoology, and became a leading ornithologist. He published several hundred natural history contributions and conducted a voluminous correspondence with fellow naturalists throughout his adult life. His early, mainly ornithological, work appeared in Rennie's 'Field Naturalist', Loudon's 'Magazine of Natural History' (later 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History'), Wood's 'The Naturalist' and 'The Analyst', and the proceedings of the Ornithological and Zoological societies of London. He published an edition of White's 'Natural History of Selborne' (1836). He moved to Brixton, Surrey, by May 1837, and, though unsuccessful in seeking employment in the British Museum, in 1838 he was appointed curator (possibly honorary) of the Ornithological Society of London's new museum. 
In 1840 Blyth edited and enlarged the mammals, birds, and reptiles sections for a single-volume English edition of Cuvier's 'Regne animal', further establishing his scientific credentials, and marking his interest in larger mammals, including sheep, hyenas, and horses, on which he wrote lengthy papers. In 1841 he was recruited by Horace Hayman Wilson, librarian of the India House Museum, as the curator of the Asiatic Society of Bengal's museum. He arrived in Calcutta in September 1841, and remained curator effectively until 1862. During his curatorship he greatly increased the range and volume of the museum's natural history collections by establishing an extensive network of correspondents and donors, including hunters, travellers, foreign curators, and local animal enthusiasts. The society's collection was purchased by the crown in 1865, and formed the national Indian Museum. 
Blyth's contribution to Asiatic zoology was substantial. Around 140 items, including monographs (on ungulates, birds, felines, primates, and others), notes, and curatorial reports, appeared in the 'Journal of the Asiatic Society'. He also encouraged and advised the work of field collectors such as Brian Houghton Hodgson, Allan Octavian Hume, Thomas Caverhill Jerdon, and Arthur Purves Phayre. His failures as a curator stemmed partly from his difficult personality, which caused conflict with society members and senior officials. Although generous and unfailingly helpful to all who sought assistance, he tended to underrate field naturalists (treating their claims to priority carelessly), resented authority, and relied overmuch on the patronage of the nobility. In 1847 he was severely censured by the Asiatic Society and denied a long-sought pay rise. Despite this stringent criticism (partly resulting from past conflicts and prejudice against his lack of formal qualifications), he retained his position. Some of the museum's problems were caused less by incompetence than by a severely limited establishment. He supplemented an inadequate salary with live-animal dealing and writing pseudonymously for the 'Indian Sporting Review' (later the 'Indian Field') and the 'Calcutta Review'. 
Blyth married Elizabeth Mary Turner Hodges (1825-1857), widow, and daughter of James Sutton, on 20 February 1854. The shock of her sudden death from hepatitis in December 1857 caused Blyth's near-fatal physical collapse. Despite restorative field trips to Burma, this led eventually to his departure from Calcutta in November 1862 and retirement finally in 1863, on a belatedly awarded pension of $150. From at least 1865 until the end of his life he suffered recurring ill health, of possibly psychological origin, sometimes with mania and paranoid tendencies, and exacerbated by alcohol abuse. In 1866 he was briefly placed in an asylum. Nevertheless, he continued to write prolifically, usually as Zoophilus or Z. Lengthy pieces on domesticated animals (mostly based on previously published work), correspondence, and an anonymous column on new arrivals at London Zoo appeared in 'Land & Water' (1866-9). Numerous notes, letters, and articles, including a series of papers on the animals of Burma and a monograph on cranes, appeared in 'The Field' (1869-73). He also published in 'The Ibis'. 
From 1855 Blyth was one of Charles Darwin's most indefatigable correspondents and a major source of information on domestication and sexual differences in birds and animals. Mistakenly identified by Eiseley as the inspiration for Darwin's theory of natural selection, he was actually a conservative zoologist, unusually interested in locality and ecology. His attention to detail and encyclopaedic knowledge gave his work continuing value but often delayed his papers, to the frustration of his employers and the regret of his obituarists. He became an enthusiastic Darwinist after the publication of 'On the Origin of Species' (1859). 
In 1872 Blyth again became ill, probably with the heart disease from which he died on 27 December 1873, at his sister's residence, 11 Regent's Park Terrace, London. He was buried at St James's cemetery, Highgate, on 2 January 1874. His 'Catalogue of the Mammals and Birds of Burma' was published posthumously in 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 2726


Blyth, Geoffrey (c.1470-1530), bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, born at Norton, Derbyshire, was the second son of William Blyth of Leeds, Yorkshire. His mother was the sister (name unknown) of Thomas Rotherham, archbishop of York. His brother John Blyth became bishop of Salisbury and master of the rolls. Geoffrey Blyth was educated at Eton College and at King's College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1487 and MA in 1490. Ordained priest on 4 April 1495, he incepted as a doctor of theology in 1497-8; a papal dispensation of 1498 still referred to him as a bachelor of theology, but papal letters when he became a bishop in 1503 describe him as master of theology, confirming that he had proceeded to the doctorate. In 1498 or 1499 he became warden of the King's Hall, a position he retained until 1528. 
A successful pluralist, Blyth held prebends in Beverley and York minsters in the diocese of York, and became rector of Hedon, Nottinghamshire. He also became rector of Corfe Castle, Dorset, and was collated to prebends in Salisbury Cathedral and St Paul's Cathedral. On 9 May 1493 his uncle Archbishop Rotherham collated him to the archdeaconry of Cleveland, a position he vacated in 1498, when he became archdeacon of Gloucester, while his brother John collated him first (1 November 1494) to the treasurership, and then (22 August 1499) to the archdeaconry, of Salisbury. He was also elected dean of York (26 January 1497). All those benefices which he still held he resigned when he became a bishop. He probably owed his elevation to his serving Henry VII as an ambassador; on 27 May 1502 he was sent on an embassy to Ladislas II, king of Hungary and Bohemia, and he went on many subsequent, though less important, diplomatic missions. 
Blyth was provided to the see of Coventry and Lichfield on 5 May 1503. The temporalities were released on 26 September, and he was consecrated on the following day by Richard Fox, bishop of Winchester. As bishop, Blyth seems to have been unable to avoid controversy. He was hampered by the independence enjoyed by the dean and chapter, which exempted them from taking an oath of obedience, but still performed a small number of ordination ceremonies and carried out the occasional visitation of religious houses (where he appears to have found fewer serious problems than his contemporaries on the bench, and those more financial than doctrinal). Early in 1509 he found it expedient to obtain a pardon, to cover his financial responsibilities as executor of the wills of both uncle and brother, while between 1510 and 1513 he was drawn into the testamentary jurisdiction disputes between Bishop Fox and Archbishop Warham (supporting Fox). 
In 1512 Blyth was appointed lord president of the council in the marches of Wales, an office he held until 1524; on taking up office he set up a commission to investigate 'insurrection, rebellions and Lollardy' in south Wales and the counties of the Welsh march (Hudson, 34), but it is not known if any action followed, and Blyth usually seems to have been something of a figurehead as president. Meanwhile, an inquest held on 15 June 1513, following the death of Sir Ralph Langford, leaving a minor as his heir, found that Langford and Blyth had conspired in January 1511 to convey the title to lands and manors in Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and Lincolnshire to Anthony Fitzherbert, so as to defraud the king of his wardship. Then in 1523 Blyth faced a charge of treason, accused by an unknown Welshman; the background to the affair remains obscure (it may have arisen from ill will within the Lichfield chapter), and Blyth was eventually cleared following examination by a committee of peers, but only after three months in custody. 
Despite his troubles, Blyth seems to have dealt seriously with his episcopal responsibilities. He acted vigorously against heresy, trying to halt the spread of Lollard literature, and taking some forty abjurations in person between January and February 1512. In the famous case of Richard Hunne, a suspected London heretic who died in the bishop's prison in suspicious circumstances following his arrest in 1514, Blyth was called upon to examine Hunne's annotated copy of the 'Bible', and his observations were central in several of the articles Bishop Fitzjames later objected against Hunne, as well as being useful in the anti-heresy campaigns of other bishops. Personal difficulties persisted, however, and, on 11 July 1530, following Wolsey's downfall, a 'praemunire' information was filed in king's bench against Blyth and thirteen other clerics. The basis of the information appears to have been his having abetted Wolsey's papal legacy by having granted him a third of his annual income through a negotiated composition. Although this might have been related to the dropped treason charge of 1523, he was none the less guilty of 'praemunire' by association. Little seems to have come of it, however, and Blyth died in London soon afterwards. 
Blyth was buried in Lichfield Cathedral before the image of St Ceadda (Chad), where a monument (long since destroyed) was erected to his memory. He had secured offices and benefices in his diocese for a number of his relations. In his will, dated 28 April 1530 and proved on 1 March 1531, he bequeathed legacies to his cathedrals, to the churches of St Chad in Shrewsbury and Norton, to Eton College, and to King's College and King's Hall, Cambridge. To Eton and King's College he left great standing cups, both gilt with covers. A notable builder, in his lifetime he built houses for the choristers of Lichfield and a chapel at Norton (in which he erected an alabaster tomb for his parents), also establishing a chantry there. He gave King's College a gilt mitre for the boy-bishop in 1510, a pair of great organs worth $40 in 1512, a rochet of the best cloth for the boy-bishop in 1518, and a fair banner representing the assumption of the Virgin in 1519. He also collected all the statutes of Lichfield, and had these confirmed by Cardinal Wolsey, in his capacity of legate, in 1526. 


@@@@@


doc= 2727


Blythe, Geoffrey (1496/7-1542), clergyman, was the son of Thomas Blythe of Barnby, Yorkshire, where he was born. He was probably the nephew of Geoffrey Blythe, bishop of Lichfield, and of John Blythe, bishop of Salisbury; presumably it was the former who arranged for his younger namesake to be educated at Eton College, having himself been a schoolboy there. A king's scholar at Eton, in 1515 the younger Geoffrey Blythe, now aged eighteen, was elected to King's College, Cambridge, where he was a fellow between 1518 and 1524, and where he graduated BA in 1520 and proceeded MA in 1523. Between these degrees he was collated successively to the prebends in Lichfield Cathedral of Pipa Minor (1520) and Tervin (1521). He also went to Louvain, travelling in 1521 with Nicholas Daryngton (later prebendary of Lichfield and diocesan visitor), who noted that Blythe was seriously ill at the time, and matriculating at the university there on 6 December 1522. In 1528 he was appointed warden of the King's Hall, Cambridge, as both his likely uncles had been before him, and was vicar of Chesterton from then until 1534. In 1529 he was admitted to the degree of DCL at Cambridge. 
Probably in 1529 Blythe became archdeacon of Stafford, but resigned following his collation to the treasurership of Lichfield on 6 June 1530. It may have been in 1529 that he was one of the 'swarme' of divines recorded by Foxe as 'preachyng... and barking' at Cambridge against Hugh Latimer (Foxe, 2.1735). In 1541 he resigned his wardenship of the King's Hall, and he died in the following year, presumably in Cambridge, being buried in All Saints' Church there on 8 March 1542. 


@@@@@


doc= 2728


Blyth, John (c.1450-1499), bishop of Salisbury, was the son of William Blyth of Norton, on the Derbyshire-Yorkshire border, and of a sister of Thomas Rotherham, archbishop of York (died 1500). His younger brother Geoffrey Blyth (died 1530) became bishop of Coventry and Lichfield. A fellow from 1476-7, and warden from 1488 to 1498, of the King's Hall in the University of Cambridge, John Blyth was created a DCL in 1485 and served as chancellor of the university from 1494, probably until his death. Rotherham, while bishop of Lincoln, gave him the archdeaconry of Stow in 1477, and then the archdeaconry of Huntingdon in 1478, which he held until 1494; he also held a canonry in Lincoln Cathedral with the prebend of Leighton Ecclesia (1482-5). Benefiting further from Rotherham's patronage after his uncle's translation to York, Blyth was a canon of York Minster, with the very valuable prebend of Masham, 1484-94, and held the important office of archdeacon of Richmond (1485-94). Henry VII promoted him to the bishopric of Salisbury by papal provision on 13 November 1493, and he was consecrated on 23 February 1494. 
From March to August 1499 Blyth presided over a series of heresy trials at Reading, Sonning, and Ramsbury. Otherwise he left little impression on his see, retaining the officials of his predecessor and employing a suffragan to celebrate ordinations on all but two occasions (in 1498). He was installed in his cathedral church by proxy, and his first recorded presence in the diocese was in August 1494. He resided chiefly at the episcopal manors at Ramsbury and Sonning. He advanced his brother Geoffrey, to whom he gave several benefices including -- on the day before he died -- the archdeaconry of Sarum. In 1496 the islands of Jersey and Guernsey were taken from the see of Coutances and added to that of Salisbury, but in 1499 they were incorporated in Winchester diocese. 
On 5 May 1492 Blyth was appointed keeper (or master) of the rolls. This was an office several times given to trained civilians who afterwards became bishops in the later middle ages, and like other such holders Blyth resigned it when he was consecrated to his see. The appointment suggests involvement in government at this time, as does the fact that he was appointed to commissions of the peace for fifteen counties in the midlands in May 1493; however, from November 1494 he served only on the commissions for Berkshire, Dorset, and Wiltshire (that is, for the counties in his diocese), and for the town of Cambridge. He died on 23 August 1499 in Ramsbury, apparently suddenly, and was buried behind the high altar of his cathedral church, beneath the confessional chair, being laid north and south, in a tomb which, according to Leland, was constructed but not used by Bishop Richard Beauchamp (died 1481). Blyth's will, made on the day of his death and proved one month later, does not survive. 


@@@@@


doc= 2729


Blythe, John Dean (1842-1869), writer, son of Peter Dean Blythe and his wife, Elizabeth, was born at Ashton under Lyne, Lancashire, on 12 April 1842. His grandfather James Blythe was a notable Scottish schoolmaster at the village of Limekilns, about 15 miles from Edinburgh. After a brief stay at the Ryecroft British School, he worked in a factory. He then obtained a post on a local paper as a reporter, and afterwards entered a firm in Manchester, in whose employment he remained until his death. He attended evening classes and studied on his own. He learned Latin, French, and Spanish, and read English literature, and his retentive memory enabled him to recall an immense number of passages, especially from Shakespeare. On one occasion he supplied the references to fifty-seven out of sixty passages selected to test him. His literary efforts were encouraged by the Revd Joseph Rayner Stephens and John Critchley Prince. A contribution to 'Punch' and some verses in the Ashton newspapers are the only pieces known to have been printed during his lifetime. 
In his politics Blythe was a philosophical radical. For the greater part of his life he taught at the Sunday school of the Methodist New Connexion in Stamford Street, Manchester. He also edited a manuscript magazine which circulated among the members of a self-improvement society. On 5 February 1869 he was killed by the accidental discharge of a revolver in the hands of a friend. He left behind him a considerable amount of manuscript, and a small memorial volume entitled 'A Sketch of the Life, and a Selection from the Writings, of John Dean Blythe' was issued in 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 2730


Boaden, James (1762-1839), biographer and playwright, was born on 23 May 1762 in Whitehaven, Cumberland, the only son of William Boaden (1735?-1790) and his wife, Elizabeth. His father (originally from Penryn, Cornwall), a merchant in the Russian trade, took the family to London, where Boaden was educated for a mercantile career. But after a period in a counting-house he turned to journalism, and in 1789 was installed editor of 'The Oracle', a newly founded literary newspaper. On 12 June 1793 he was admitted as a student of the Middle Temple. Though he remained in membership for almost thirty-three years, until early 1826, he was not called to the bar. 
Boaden's first dramatic work, the musical romance 'Ozmyn and Daraxa' (songs published 1793), earned him $100. More significant are the melodramas 'Fontainville Forest' (1794, described in the prologue as being '[c]aught from the Gothic treasures of Romance', and acted fifteen times in 1794-5) and 'The Italian Monk' (1797) -- both adapted from Mrs Radcliffe -- and 'Aurelio and Miranda' (1798; published 1799), based on Lewis's 'The Monk'. In 'Cambro-Britons' (1798), set in the time of Llewelyn and Edward I, Boaden gothicizes Celtic myth, drawing partly on Gray's ode 'The Bard'. His last plays, 'The Voice of Nature' (adapted from Caigniez) and 'The Maid of Bristol' (both 1803), are in more sentimental vein. His one poem, 'A Rainy Day' (1801), celebrates in blank verse the 'salubrity' of Brighton's air and its 'very excellent' theatrical company and library. 
Boaden published nothing after 1803 for twenty-one years. Of independent means, he none the less acted as an army agent during 1805 (possibly longer) and from at least 1812 was associated with the Whitehall firm Donaldson and Boaden. Late in life, however, the catastrophic failure of his private income in 1824 projected him into a new career as theatrical biographer. In the 'Quarterly Review', Sir Walter Scott described his 'Life of John Philip Kemble' (2 vols., 1825) as 'grave, critical, full and laudably accurate', if stylistically somewhat 'too Gibbonian' (Scott, 203, 241), and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (95/1, 1825, 334) praised its learning and 'manly... tone of feeling'. His 'Life of Mrs Siddons' (2 vols., 1827) (sold for $100 including copyright) was preferred for its vibrancy and authoritativeness over Thomas Campbell's version (1834). His memoir of Mrs Jordan (2 vols., 1831) more accurately balanced her stage career and private life than previous attempts, and the memoir of Mrs Inchbald (2 vols., 1833), based on her letters, introduced important new material. Boaden also edited Garrick's correspondence (1831). His quasi-novels from the same period -- the pseudonymous 'Man of Two Lives' (1828), on metempsychosis, and the moralistic 'Doom of Giallo' (1835), inspired by an idea in Beckford -- are literary curiosities, but Boaden's biographies, founded mostly on personal acquaintance with his subjects, remain standard works, valued for their vivid detail and descriptions of acting styles and performances of the period. 
Boaden was fascinated by literary puzzles, but his premature endorsement of 'Vortigern' and the other so-called Shakespearian discoveries of William Ireland ('The Oracle', Feb-April, 1795) was unequivocally retracted in his 'Letter to George Steevens, Esq.' (1796). From this lifelong interest in Shakespeare, mainly antiquarian rather than critical, came two late essays: his discussion of the authenticity of Shakespeare's iconography (1824) and his influential theory ('GM', 1832; published in a longer version 1837), devised some twenty years previously, that identified William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, as addressee of the 'Sonnets'. Since his time Boaden's contributions to the Shakespearian debate have gone largely unrecognized, but Schoenbaum ('Shakespeare's Lives', 1991) redresses the balance with a detailed discussion of Boaden's theories and a graceful tribute to his scholarship. 
Repeated applications to the Royal Literary Fund from 1831 reveal Boaden's grievous financial state as new work became increasingly difficult to place. Publishers, he lamented in his last letter to the Fund (24 March 1838), seemed interested only in 'the writings of the whimsical 'Boz''. Although his distinguished record ensured him assistance to a total, over eight years, of $140, creditors forced him to surrender the family's residence (60 Warren Street, Fitzroy Square, London) in late 1831, and for three months during 1835 to seek refuge in the Fleet gaol. Remarkably, destitution compromised neither his scholarly integrity nor instinct as a gentleman. 
Valued for his intellect and fund of anecdote, Boaden had a range of literary and theatrical friends. Deafness aside, he enjoyed good health almost to the end. He died of dropsy in lodgings at 36 Waterloo Bridge Road, London, on 16 February 1839, and was buried at Kensal Green with his wife, Sarah (1763/4-1838), who had died as a result of dysentery on 1 August the preceding year. Of their nine children, John Boaden was an artist and Caroline ('fl'. 1825-1839) wrote at least nine plays and some short fiction for the 'Lady's Magazine'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2731


Boaden, John (1792/3-1839), portrait and figure painter, was one of the nine children of James Boaden (1762-1839), the dramatist and critic, and his wife, Sarah (1763/4-1838). Boaden exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1810 to 1833, at the British Institution from 1810 to 1839, and at the Society of British Artists from 1827 to 1840. Boaden's sitters included many theatrical figures, such as the celebrated actress Fanny Kemble (1809-1893) (ex Sothebys, 25 November 1998). He often portrayed actors and actresses in their stage roles, and his dramatic sketches of John Philip Kemble in eight of his principal characters (exh. British Institution, 1818) were seen by Kemble himself, who 'thought the whole of them exceedingly like him' (Lane, 1). They were later lithographed by Richard Lane. Boaden assisted with illustrations for his father's book entitled 'An inquiry into the authenticity of various pictures and prints, which from the decease of the poet to our own times have been offered to the public as portraits of Shakespeare' (1824). According to Mark Haworth-Booth, Boaden's portrait of the poet the Revd C. H. Townshend (exh. RA, 1828; Victoria and Albert Museum, London, Townshend bequest) captures an early 'Byronic and Pushkinian splendour' which predates the sitter's melancholy decline (Haworth-Booth, 12). He also painted rustic peasant figures, set in landscape and often in regional or national costume, notably Constantine Soferes (Victoria and Albert Museum, London, Townshend bequest), a youth in Albanian costume. 
Boaden's style was compared to Sir Thomas Lawrence and Harlow (Seguier, 21), but his work, according to Redgrave, 'although pleasing, did not rise above mediocrity' (Redgrave, 45). Boaden died, unmarried, at his home, 58 Newman Street, Oxford Street, London, on 4 April 1839. He was buried at Kensal Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 2732


Boudicca (d. AD 60/61), queen of the Iceni, popularly known as Boadicea since the eighteenth century as a result of misreading manuscripts of the works of the Roman historian Tacitus, was the wife of Prasutagus ['see under 'Roman Britain, British leaders in (act. 55 BC-AD 84)], king of the Iceni, a tribe that occupied modern-day Norfolk, eastern Cambridgeshire, and northern Suffolk. Although the Iceni are not documented before the writings of Tacitus, they are probably the same people as the Cenimagni referred to by Julius Caesar in discussing his campaign in 54 BC. Like the Brigantes, the Iceni had also entered into an alliance with the Romans, as Tacitus makes clear; they may have been among the eleven unnamed kingdoms recorded as submitting to Claudius (10 BC-AD 54) in an inscription on a triumphal arch erected in Rome. The Iceni paid tribute, and supplied a quota of troops; but when in AD 47 they were deprived of their weapons, in accordance with Roman law, they rose up in revolt. Tacitus describes how they gathered in what he calls a 'rustic earthwork', possibly Stonea Camp, in the heart of the fens, but were swiftly overwhelmed. Whether Prasutagus was ruler at this time is not known; some assume that he became a client king in AD 43, but it seems more likely that he was installed in this position after the events of AD 47. Evidently, he was untainted by the rebellion, and his wealth was such as to be worthy of note by Tacitus. Some confirmation of the affluence of the region is provided by the discovery of nine hoards of gold and silver torcs, ingots, bracelets, and coins at Snettisham, Norfolk: although dated a century or so earlier, they surely belonged to a ruling clan. Indeed, Boudicca, who is described as coming from a royal house, is said by Cassius Dio ('c'.150-235) to have worn a large golden necklace as invariable attire. 
Prasutagus died about AD 60. In his will he made the Roman emperor Nero coheir to his kingdom, together with his two daughters; he hoped in this way to safeguard the future both of his family and of part of his lands, a not uncommon practice in antiquity. In the event, the estates were plundered 'as though the spoils of war' (Tacitus, 'Annals', xiv.31), Boudicca was flogged and her daughters raped. Meanwhile, their neighbours the Trinovantes were suffering from the arrogant behaviour of the Roman colonists now based at Camulodunum (Colchester), who seized what they wanted at will. Furthermore, the procurator of Britain, Decianus Catus, chose that moment to call in grants made by Claudius to pro-Roman Britons, deciding that they should be regarded as loans: thus were sown the seeds for rebellion. 
The course of events is described by both Tacitus and, much later, Cassius Dio. Tacitus would have had a firsthand account from his father-in-law, Gnaeus Julius Agricola (later a distinguished governor of Britain, 'c'.AD 78-84), for he was on the governor's staff at the time. The governor, Gaius Suetonius Paullinus, was on the island of Mona (Anglesey), suppressing a druidical centre, when the revolt broke out in AD 60 or 61, and thus was powerless immediately to intervene. Camulodunum was first sacked, the final siege, which lasted two days, being of the Temple of Claudius, where the defenders took refuge; it now underlies the Norman castle. Burnt deposits encountered in almost every excavation confirm the ferocity of the assault. The ninth legion and its infantry were then ambushed and the infantry wiped out; and Poenius Postumus, the camp commander of the second legion, based at Isca Dumnoniorum (Exeter), refused to march. Meanwhile Suetonius Paullinus hurried back to London with some of his troops. London was by this time a thriving town, although probably not yet the provincial capital. It was certainly an obvious target for the rebellious Iceni and Trinovantes, and Suetonius realized that, without the support of the second and ninth legions, he could not defend it. He therefore retreated, probably north-westwards along the Watling Street, to join up with the rest of his force. London was then attacked, the buildings fired (as archaeological investigation again shows), and the remaining population butchered. The rebels next moved on to Verulamium (St Albans), which received similar treatment. 'The Britons took no prisoners... [and] wasted no time in getting down to the bloody business of hanging, burning, and crucifying', observes Tacitus ('Annals', xiv.33). The official figure was that 70,000 were massacred at the three towns, and archaeology offers no dissent from this picture of a huge scale of destruction. 
The final denouement probably took place in the midlands, although the exact site is not known. Suetonius had an army of about 10,000, while Cassius Dio estimates the British force at 230,000. The Romans took up a position in a defile, with a plain in front and dense woodland behind. Boudicca's tribesmen entered the plain, drawing up their wagons at the back, together with the women and children, as though in a grandstand. Lured into attack, the Britons were met first with a shower of javelins, and then by a disciplined assault. Hemmed in by the carts, there was a terrible slaughter of the tribespeople: 80,000 according to Tacitus. Boudicca was able to slip away, but died soon afterwards by poison (Tacitus) or illness ('Dio's Roman History'): the former seems the more likely. She was given a costly burial by the Britons. When Poenius Postumus heard the news of the Roman triumph, he too killed himself by falling on his sword, recognizing his indecisiveness in not moving from his base at Isca Dumnoniorum. 
Suetonius Paullinus now took his revenge, using reinforcements brought in from the Rhine army. Although not yet satisfactorily attested archaeologically, Tacitus records that the territory of hostile or neutral tribes was laid waste with fire and sword. Fortunately, Julius Alpinus Classicianus, the procurator who replaced Decianus Catus (who had escaped to Gaul), was a provincial, probably from the Trier area of Germany, and thus had some sympathy for the position of the Britons. He made an adverse report on Suetonius and a commission of inquiry was set up: as a result, a pretext was found for the recall of Suetonius. His successor as governor, Petronius Turpilianus, was evidently not a vindictive man, and Classicianus clearly handled the financial side of the aftermath of the revolt with consideration and tact, calming down a still volatile situation. 
Boudicca, whose name is best rendered as Victoria, very nearly ended Roman rule in Britain. She emerges in Cassius Dio's description as an awesome but heroic figure, being 'very tall, in appearance most terrifying... [with] a harsh voice, and with a great mass of the tawniest hair [which] fell to her hips' (lxii.2,3). This helps to explain why she became an attractive subject for writers and poets from the sixteenth century onwards, not least as a symbol of national patriotism. She has acquired a firm place in British history, with Thomas Thornycroft's great statue on the Embankment in London, erected in 1902, as a fitting reminder of the leadership and valour of the first Queen Victoria. 


@@@@@


doc= 2733


Boag, John (1775-1863), lexicographer, was born at Highgate in the parish of Beith, Ayrshire, on 7 January 1775. He matriculated at the University of Glasgow in 1797, and completed his course with a view to taking orders in the Church of Scotland. However, he joined the body of Independents or Congregationalists who in 1812 formed themselves into the Congregational Union of Scotland. He acted for many years as an evangelist, and not infrequently in the open air or by the wayside. He had small charges in the Isle of Man and Helensburgh. Ultimately he accepted the appointment of pastor over a very small Independent congregation in the village of Blackburn, Linlithgowshire, from which, it is believed, he never received more than $25-30 a year. He married Agnes Hamilton on 19 June 1798; they had six sons and three daughters. One of his sons was Sir Robert Boag, mayor of Belfast. 
Boag kept a day school on his own account, and it was in this humble position that he compiled his 'magnum opus', the 'Imperial Lexicon'. His aim was to combine etymology, pronunciation, and explanations of scientific terms and others used in art and literature. He wished also to incorporate new words that had emerged since Dr Johnson's dictionary, and to include modifications and other changes of meaning. He began this arduous undertaking after he had entered his seventieth year. Within three years his manuscript was ready for the press. It was printed and published by the Edinburgh Printing and Publishing Company. Unfortunately this company speedily became bankrupt. About 1847 Messrs Fullarton & Co. became proprietors of the 'Imperial Lexicon' and issued it in parts or numbers, constituting two massive volumes. The work had an enormous sale and held its own until the publication of John Ogilvie's 'Imperial Dictionary of the English Language', which drew on it. Prefixed was a 'Popular grammar of the English language' by R. Whyte. 
Besides his 'Imperial Lexicon', Boag was the author of a number of pamphlets on questions of the day, and was a frequent contributor to contemporary religious periodicals. He died at Craigton House, Linlithgowshire -- the residence of a daughter-in-law, with whom he had lived in his later years -- on 15 September 1863, in his eighty-ninth year. 


@@@@@


doc= 2734


Boardman, Andrew (d. in or after 1595), Church of England clergyman, was a native of Lancashire. He was admitted a scholar of St John's College, Cambridge, on 9 November 1568, matriculating as a pensioner three days later. He graduated BA in early 1572, and was admitted fellow on Lady Margaret's foundation on 12 March 1573, the same day as his friend Everard Digby, to whose 'Theoria analytica' (1579) he contributed some prefatory Greek verses. Having proceeded MA in 1575, on 5 September 1580 he was appointed Greek lecturer at St John's, and was elected one of the college preachers some days later, at Michaelmas. He was made junior bursar on 27 January 1582, and, proceeding BD shortly afterwards, was that year appointed minister of St Mary, Bury St Edmunds, where his house was identified in the feoffees' accounts for 1586 as 'next St. James steple'. 
Boardman left Bury in 1586, moving to the benefice then known as Allchurch, near Warwick. On 11 January 1591 he was appointed by the town corporation to the vicarage of the collegiate church of St Mary, Warwick. Here he clashed with the presbyterian Thomas Cartwright, master of Leycester's Hospital, who claimed that Boardman welcomed into his pulpit preachers who issued 'whole sermons invective' against him (Pearson, 451). Cartwright's imprisonment during the Star Chamber trials of 1590-91 left him vulnerable, and in January 1592 he wrote to Lord Burghley that Boardman, already possessed of a living worth $100 per annum, had designs on the hospital. If so, Boardman did not succeed, and Cartwright remained in possession. 
In 1594 Boardman was granted the degree of DD at Cambridge, but in 1595 Thomas Hull succeeded to the vicarage of St Mary, and after this date nothing further is known of Boardman. Although he has been identified as the writer of some English commendatory verses, subscribed A. B., prefixed to Thomas Morley's 'Plaine and Easie Introduction to Practicall Musicke' (1597), the attribution seems highly unlikely. 


@@@@@


doc= 2735


Boase, Charles William (1828-1895), historian and antiquary, born in Chapel Street, Penzance, on 6 July 1828, was the eldest child of John Josias Arthur Boase JP (1801-1896) and Charlotte (1802-1873), second daughter of Robert Sholl of Truro, who had married at St Clement, near Truro, on 4 July 1827 ('The Times', 12 Sept 1896, 9). George Clement Boase (1829-1897) and Frederic Boase (1843-1916) were younger brothers. 
Charles Boase was sent to Penzance grammar school to 1841, and to Truro grammar school from that date to 1846. At Truro he gained several medals and prizes, and during four years (1846-9) he held from it an Elliot scholarship at Exeter College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 4 June 1846. From 1847 to 1850 he combined with it an open scholarship at his college, and on 18 May 1850 he graduated BA with a second class in classics. He was elected to a Cornish fellowship on 30 June 1850, proceeded MA in 1853, and was ordained deacon at Cuddesdon by Bishop Wilberforce on 4 March 1855. 
From the day of his matriculation to that of his death Boase lived at Exeter College. He witnessed its rebuilding, and took an especial interest in the construction and fitting of its library buildings. He was assistant tutor 1853-5, tutor 1855-84, lecturer in Hebrew 1859-69, lecturer in modern history 1855-94, and librarian from 1868. Between 1857 and 1875 he examined in various schools, and he was appointed in 1884 the university reader in foreign history. He resigned this last appointment and his college lectureship in modern history (which he held for nearly forty years) in the summer of 1894, but retained the place of librarian. He died in his rooms at Exeter College on 11 March 1895, and was buried in St Sepulchre's cemetery, Oxford, on 13 March. 
Boase had acquired vast stores of knowledge, which were given ungrudgingly to others, and was endowed with much quiet humour. He had long studied the history of Exeter College and its alumni, and in 1879 two hundred copies were printed for private circulation of his annotated 'Register of the Rectors, Fellows, Scholars... of Exeter College', with a historical introduction. A second edition, but without the introduction, came out in 1893-4, and a third edition, with the introduction revised and greatly expanded, forms volume 27 of the publications of the Oxford Historical Society, the cost of the printing, a sum exceeding $200, being defrayed by the author. The second part of the college register, containing a similar list of the commoners, being 'all names other than those in the previous volume', was issued by him in 1894. He contributed the article on Exeter College to Andrew Clark's 'Colleges of Oxford'. 
On the formation of the Oxford Historical Society in 1884 Boase was one of the honorary secretaries, and he acted on the committee to 1 June 1892. Much of its success was due to his judgement and energy, and its first publication consisted of the 'Register of the University of Oxford, 1449-63, 1505-71' (1885-9), which he compiled and edited. He also wrote the preface to J. E. T. Rogers's 'Oxford City Documents... 1268-1665', which the society issued in 1891. 'Oxford', published by Longmans as part of their 'Historic Towns' series in 1887, was written by Boase, but much of the information which he had collected was omitted. 
Boase edited, with G. W. Kitchin (afterwards dean of Durham), the 'History of England', the translation in six volumes of the work by Leopold von Ranke, published in 1895, and was entirely responsible for the rendering of the first volume. In conjunction with his two brothers he compiled an 'Account of the Families of Boase or Bowes', tracing his ancestors back in west Cornwall to the end of the sixteenth century (1876; 2nd edn, 1893). He contributed to the 'Literary Churchman', 'The Academy', and 'English Historical Review', wrote the article on the Macedonian empire in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (9th edn), and the lives of the Cornish saints in W. Smith and H. Wace, 'Dictionary of Christian Biography' (1877-87). An account of the deeds and writs (1306-1836) in the Dawson collection was compiled by him for the 'Catalogue of... Penzance Public Library' (1874; pp. 336-43). 
Boase was a noted bibliophile and the possessor of large collections of Cornish genealogies. The bulk of his library, of which he kept a full record, was catalogued and sold by Blackwells booksellers after his death. Some of the most valuable items, however, passed to his college, including a now famous fourteenth-century manuscript of Suetonius' 'Twelve Caesars', later recognized to have been owned and annotated by Petrarch. His own working methods were somewhat disorderly, and the books which he wrote are often inadequately referenced by modern standards. His main claim to fame, beyond his local distinction as the historian of Exeter College, lies in his position as a mainstay of the Oxford history school during the decades of its first flourishing. As his surviving tutorial notebooks testify, he taught widely and conscientiously, though without any great originality of mind, and he was a popular figure in his college and university: 'He had a quick way of talking, altogether without the least air of pretension or even consciousness that he was pouring forth an amount of knowledge, skilfully and humorously compounded, which would have made the reputation of many a professed conversationalist... His friends will speak of his geniality, his cheery good nature, his unfailing kindness, which in a moment made children feel at home with the most human of old bachelors. ('The Athenaeum')' 



@@@@@


doc= 2736


Boase, George Clement (1829-1897), bibliographer, born at Chapel Street, Penzance, on 20 October 1829, was the second son of John Josias Arthur Boase (1801-1896), a banker, and his wife, Charlotte (1802-1873), daughter of Robert Sholl of Truro. Charles William Boase and Frederic Boase were his brothers. He was educated at Regent House Academy and the grammar school at Penzance, and for a short time in 1844 at Bellevue House Academy, Penryn. From that year to 1846 he was in a local bank at Penzance; from 1847 to 1850 he was with Nehemiah Griffiths, ship and insurance broker, at 2 White Hart Court, Lombard Street, London; and from 1850 to 1854 he was a clerk with Ransom & Co., bankers, at 1 Pall Mall East. 
Boase sailed for Australia on 29 April 1854. He became corrector of the press on the 'Melbourne Age'. He went on to become a gold-digger at Simpson's ranges, and then worked in a general store. During 1855-64 he was tutor with the Darchy family on the Murrumbidgee River, New South Wales, and on Lachlan River, and was also correspondent of the 'Sydney Morning Herald'. In 1864 he returned to Britain, and managed the business of Whitehead & Co., provision merchants, from 1865 to 1874, when he retired and occupied himself in biographical and antiquarian literature. During his retirement years he lived in London, successively at 15 Queen Anne's Gate and at 36 James Street (later 28 Buckingham Gate), where he collected a unique library illustrative of the biography of the nineteenth century. 
Boase was the joint author, with W. P. Courtney, of the 'Bibliotheca Cornubiensis' (1874-82), and the sole author of a kindred volume, 'Collectanea Cornubiensia' (1890). With his brothers Charles William and Frederic, he compiled 'An Account of the Families of Boase or Bowes' (1876), helped in the compilation of the works on Exeter College, Oxford, by his elder brother, Charles William, and the magnificent compilation 'Modern English Biography' (1892-1901) by his youngest brother, Frederic. He compiled with W. P. Courtney, for Walter William Skeat, the Cornish portion of 'A Bibliographical List of the Works... Illustrative of the Various Dialects of English' (English Dialect Society, 1877), and he assisted John Ingle Dredge in his tracts on Devon bibliography. He was a frequent contributor to 'Notes and Queries' and the 'Western Antiquary'. He supplied 723 memoirs to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Boase died at 13 Granville Park, Lewisham, London, on 1 October 1897, and was buried at Ladywell cemetery on 5 October 1897. 


@@@@@


doc= 2737


Boase, Henry (1763-1827), banker and writer on finance, was born at Madron, Cornwall, on 3 June 1763, the fourth son of Arthur Boase (died 1780) and Jane, daughter of Henry Lugg. He was educated privately in classical languages and French, and in 1779 became a clerk in the office of a relative, Stephen Luke, of Penzance. In 1785 Boase went from Penzance to Roscoff, in Brittany, in a fishing boat, and resided for a time at Morlaix, where he perfected his knowledge of French. 
In 1788, not finding any business opening in Cornwall, he obtained a situation in London, as corresponding clerk in the West End banking house of Ransom, Morland, and Hammersley. This house had an extensive continental connection, and after the flight of Louis XVI in 1791 a large part of the funds for the support of the emigrant clergy and nobility passed through its hands. Boase prospered in this position, being promoted to chief clerk in 1792. Seven years later he became the managing partner. On 26 October 1794, Boase married Anne, only child of Matthew and Anne Craige, of Walsall, at St Andrew's Church, Holborn, London. They had a large family, consisting of eight daughters and five sons, including Henry Samuel Boase, geologist and chemist. 
During his residence in London, Boase moved in philanthropic and reforming circles and was acquainted with Granville Sharp and Robert Owen. He was a leading member of the London Missionary Society ['see 'Founders of the London Missionary Society], and played a considerable part in the foundation of the British and Foreign Bible Society, in conjunction with the Revd Thomas Charles, of Bala. He was also much interested in the formation of schools on the new monitorial system of Joseph Lancaster. 
Boase wrote a number of works on financial questions, including, in 1802, a discussion of the 'Bank Restriction Bill', as well as various proposals for the reform of the currency. In 1804 he went to Scotland to examine the affairs of the Dundee New Bank. This led to its reconstruction under new proprietors, including two of Boase's own sons. 
Boase's health was seriously affected by the severe winters in London, and in 1809 he retired from his business interests in the City, and went to live at Penzance. There he became a partner in the banking house of Batten, Oxham, and Carne, from 1810 until 1823, when, with the copper manufacturers George Grenfell and Pascoe Grenfell as partners, Boase took over the Penzance Union Bank. A prominent figure in the town, Boase served as a magistrate before becoming mayor of Penzance in 1816. 
Scientific and literary pursuits flourished in Cornwall early in the nineteenth century, and Boase found time for both. He played an active role in 1814, along with Dr John Paris and Ashhurst Majendie, in the foundation of the Royal Geological Society of Cornwall: he contributed to its 'Transactions', and his eldest son, Dr Henry S. Boase, served as its secretary. He also helped promote the Penzance Public Library. In 1821 Boase was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. 
Boase died at Alverton, Penzance, on 8 April 1827. He was survived by his wife and twelve of his children, and was buried at St Mary's Church, Penzance. His wife died in 1863 at the age of eighty-eight. Boase's sons were also important Cornish figures, and extended their father's banking and intellectual pursuits. 


@@@@@


doc= 2738


Boase, Henry Samuel (1799-1883), geologist and chemist, was born at 6 Knightsbridge, London, on 2 September 1799, the third child of Henry Boase (1763-1827), a banker, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Matthew Craige. He came from an extensive Cornish family; three of his nephews, C. W. Boase, G. C. Boase, and Frederic Boase, were noted for their historical and biographical work. He first attended school in Sloane Street, and in 1809 went to Blundell's School, Tiverton. He showed an early interest in chemistry, and in 1815 his father, after consulting members of another Cornish family, the Davys, decided that he should go to the Royal Cork Institution to be taught by Edmund Davy, and to work in his chemical laboratory. By 1816 Boase had decided that he wished to study medicine; he therefore left Cork against the advice of Davy, and in September 1817 started at the University of Edinburgh. He graduated in 1821 with an MD. 
After graduation Boase returned to Penzance, where his family now lived, and in February 1822 was appointed physician to the Penzance Dispensary. He held this post for less than four years, and did not practise again, having found medicine a most unattractive profession. In 1824 he married Elizabeth Valentina (1799-1876), daughter of William Stoddard of Dorset; there were ten children from this marriage. In the same year he joined his father as a partner in the Penzance Union Bank, and in a company of tin smelters, Grenfell and Boase. He began to show an interest in geology, and in 1822 was appointed secretary to the Royal Geological Society of Cornwall, a post which he held until 1827 and again from 1833 to 1837. During this time he delivered two series of lectures on chemistry and read twenty-five papers on geological subjects, four of which were published in the society's 'Transactions'. In 1827, he resigned his position as secretary in order to devote time to an extensive study of Cornish geology, with the intention of completing a geological map of that county. He claimed to have walked more than 2500 miles in the course of his investigations. The map was published in 1834 in the fourth volume of the 'Transactions of the Royal Geological Society of Cornwall', together with a long paper, 'Contributions towards a knowledge of the geology of Cornwall'. The map was, however, based on Boase's conviction that granites were stratified and of the same age as the surrounding rocks, a theory which was becoming discredited, and it did not contain any information on mineral deposits, so important to Cornwall. It was therefore of little value, and only five years later was superseded by the larger scale and more detailed maps of the Geological Survey. In 1834 Boase published 'A Treatise on Primary Geology', intending to present his theory on the formation of granites before the meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science at Edinburgh (1834), at which he was to deliver a paper. His ideas, which were closer to those of Werner than to Hutton, were forcefully criticized by the established geologists, Sedgwick, Buckland, and Lyell. He argued that mineral veins were formed at the same time as the surrounding rocks, and that all had been formed by the action of water. 
While in Cornwall, Boase served on the committee of the Royal Cornwall Polytechnic Society, and as president of the Penzance Literary and Scientific Institution. In 1837 he moved to London, hoping to be appointed to a post at one of the colleges of the new university, but was disappointed. He was elected a fellow of the Geological Society in April 1837, and was a member of its council in 1838-9. In May 1837 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. In 1838 he moved to Dundee, a town with which his family had banking connections. His chemical researches into dyeing and bleaching products had brought him into contact with the Scottish textile industry and he became a partner in the textile bleaching firm of Turnbull & Co. In 1846 he became managing director of the same company, which then took the name of Boase & Co. In this capacity he continued his chemical researches, and in 1855 he took out a patent relating to 'the process of drying organic substances' ('DNB'). While resident in Dundee, Boase published several books on the nature of science, including 'The Philosophy of Nature' (1860), in which he argued that all phenomena are the consequences of two opposed causes, and that all natural bodies are dualisms of powers, attractive and repulsive. This book attracted little notice. In a sequel, 'An Essay on Human Nature' (1865), he discussed human will and the necessity of revealed religion, and made clear his opposition to the evolutionary ideas of Darwin. He retired from his textile business in 1870. He died on 4 May 1883 at his home, Seafield House, 5 Magdalen Place, Dundee, and was buried at the western cemetery, Dundee. 


@@@@@


doc= 2739


Boate, Arnold (1606-1653), biblical scholar and writer on natural history, was born in Gorinchem in the Netherlands, a younger son of Godefroy de Boot ('c'.1570-1625), knight, and Christina van Loon ('fl'. 1600-1630). With his elder brother Gerard Boate he studied arts and medicine at the University of Leiden, graduating as a doctor in 1630. In the same year the two brothers moved to London to practise as physicians, and they were subsequently involved in some disputes with the College of Physicians. Arnold Boate was, however, lucky enough to be appointed personal physician to Robert Sidney, earl of Leicester, then viceroy in Ireland. As a result of this, and possibly owing to scholarly contacts with James Ussher, archbishop of Armagh, Boate moved to Ireland in 1636, where he became physician to Ussher and to Lord Deputy Wentworth. Ussher acted as Boate's patron in Dublin and it was to him and Robert Sidney, Boate's initial patron, that Arnold and Gerard dedicated their attack on the Aristotelian system, 'Philosophia naturalis reformata' (1641). Through Ussher's influence Boate was appointed as surgeon-general for Ireland, an experience that encouraged him to write 'A Remonstrance of Divers Remarkable Passages... of our Army in... Ireland' (1642). 
Boate's marriage to Margaret Dongan or Dungan (died 1651), daughter of Thomas Dungan, justice of the court of common pleas at Dublin, on Christmas day 1642 strengthened his links with the protestant Dublin gentry. They had three children: the elder daughter died on 2 October 1647 aged three and her brother died on 15 May 1649, aged seven months; the younger daughter, Maria Anna Boot, born on 13 September 1646, later married Marcus Beyerman. On the death of his wife, due to complications in pregnancy, on 17 April 1651 Boate wrote a very affecting memoir of his marriage to her, 'The character of a trulie vertuous and pious woman, as it hath been acted by Mistris Margaret Dungan' (1651). 
The aftermath of the Irish rising of 1641 had forced Boate to leave Ireland in 1644. He initially stayed with his brother in London from May to October, but he then moved to Paris, which became his base for the rest of his life. It is this period that saw Boate's involvement in scholarly disputes with Louis Capel, French Calvinist theologian at Saumur. Boate had already published at Leiden a work, in conjunction with Francis Taylor, in 1636 entitled 'Examen Praefationis Morini in Biblia Graeca de textus Ebraici corruptione et Graeci authoritate'. In 1644 Boate published at London a further treatise concerned with the Hebrew text of the 'Old Testament', 'Animadversiones sacrae ad textum Hebraicum veteris testamenti', which evoked a reply from Capel. A pamphlet war ensued that not only involved Boate and Capel but also J. Morin, Capel's editor, and John Buxtorf, who rejected some of Capel's conclusions. Boate was also successful in involving Ussher in his dispute with Capel, as is demonstrated by his 1650 publication at Paris, 'De textus Hebraici veteris testamenti certitudine et authoritate contra Ludovici Capelli criticam epistola Arnoldi Bootii ad reverendissimum Jacobum Usserium archiepiscoporum Armachanum'. Boate's last printed work, 'Arnoldi Bootii vindiciae, seu, Apodixis apologetica pro Hebraica veritate' (1653), containing a dedication to Gisbert Voet, professor of theology at the University of Utrecht, was also concerned with the Capel dispute. 
However, Boate's interest extended beyond Hebraic studies, as is demonstrated by his 'Observationes medicinae' (1649) and even more significantly by the vital role that he played in the consolidation of an Irish wing of the Hartlib circle, a wide-ranging group of scholars who corresponded on scientific, religious, and political issues with Samuel Hartlib. Even after he departed from Ireland Boate continued to act as a conduit between Ussher and Hartlib, exchanging letters, books, and news of scholarly advances and disputes between the two. He played a major role in the development of one of the major publications of the Hartlib circle concerning Ireland, Gerard Boate's 'Irelands Naturall History' (1652), which had prefaces by Hartlib and Arnold Boate. The latter's preface indicates not only his millenarian preoccupations, but also the fact that much of 'Irelands Naturall History' was based on his own recollections of his journeys in Ireland, particularly in the provinces of Leinster and Ulster, as his brother had never actually been there. The 1652 edition of 'Irelands Naturall History' included only the first part of the work, illustrating the essentially Baconian empirical approach of the Hartlib circle. The initial project had, however, encompassed a far wider endeavour, covering areas such as Irish flora and fauna, but all the time aiming at a consolidated approach to colonization. Hartlib was already aware of Boate's own interest in the natural history of Ireland for Boate had written a commentary on Hartlib's own 'Legacie of husbandry' in 1652. He therefore wanted Arnold to finish the entire project, but Boate's death in Paris in 1653 prevented him from doing so. 


@@@@@


doc= 2740


Boate, Gerard (1604-1650), physician and natural historian, was born in Gorinchem, the Netherlands, one of five children born to Godefroy de Boot ('c'.1570-1625), soldier and author, and Christina van Loon ('fl'. 1600-1630). He entered the University of Leiden, possibly first as a student of letters, but certainly as a medical student, on 21 June 1628. He graduated DM on 3 July 1628. In 1630 he published the well-received 'Vrolycke uuren (Horae jucundae)', a book of Low German and Latin poems. About 1630 Boate and his younger brother Arnold Boate, also a medical student from Leiden, went to England to join their mother and sisters. Boate settled in London, where he was appointed physician to the king. In 1631 he married Katherine Menning. 
Most of what we know of Boate and his brother stems from their close association with the Boyle family and other Anglo-Irish politicians, and with Samuel Hartlib. They were men of science, Baconian empiricists, protestants, and improvers. Webster suggests that they were part of Boyle's Invisible College and they were certainly involved in Hartlib's Office of Address for Communications for the dissemination of useful learning. The brothers turned their reforming pens first to philosophy and in 1641 published a treatise critical of Aristotelian philosophy, an event referred to by Samuel Beckett in his poem 'Whoroscope': but Gerard is remembered mainly for his natural history of Ireland. This was a project of some importance to the Hartlibians. When he wrote his natural history Boate had never visited the country. He relied on information from his brother, who had spent eight years travelling and practising medicine there, and from Sir William Parsons, surveyor-general of Ireland, his son Richard, and other families who had been driven from their large Irish estates by the civil war. Boate apparently completed his natural history by 1645, having begun work in 1644 when Arnold sent information, but it was not published immediately. 
Boate was admitted a licentiate of the College of Physicians on 6 November 1646 and his London practice throve. On 17 July 1647 Boate's Irish connections secured him appointment as physician to the army in Ireland, but the disturbances there delayed his arrival until towards the end of 1649 and he died in Dublin in January 1650. 
Boate's papers were acquired by Hartlib after his death. They included medical papers, particularly Boate's 'choicest secrets', namely '1. Receipt against the Consumption Cough for which he was mainly cryed up. 2. Receipt against the stone. 3. Receipt of his Purge which the old Archbishop Abbot hugely commended because the next day the body was not costive or bound which was a great inconveniency in all other purges' (Hartlib MSS, Ephemerides 1653, pt 2 28/2/57A). They also included his natural history, which Hartlib, with the agreement of Arnold Boate, who was then in Paris and who edited the text, published as 'Ireland's naturall history... conducing to the advancement of navigation, husbandry, and other profitable arts and professions... published... for the common good of Ireland, and more especially for the benefit of the adventurers and planters there' (1652). The dedication to Oliver Cromwell and Charles Fleetwood, commander-in-chief in Ireland, apparently by Hartlib but in fact by John Durie, is a fine piece of religious writing. He expresses the hope that Ireland will be settled by Adventurers and perhaps exiled Bohemians and other protestants. Boate's text itself is described by Webster as 'a major development in economic geography' (Webster, 429). In a break with the chorographic tradition of Camden which emphasized antiquities and local curiosities, Boate describes natural resources plainly and systematically to produce a coherent regional geography. There is little topographic information and there are no maps, but his scientific education is evident from his descriptions of geology and processes such as glass making. His aim was systematic description as a prelude to improvement by and for protestant settlers: consequently the natural features of the country are described with enthusiasm to interest new settlers, but the Irish are reproached for their failure to improve the land and for their unruliness and disorderliness. This might well reflect the influence of William Parsons who was fiercely anti-Catholic and bitter towards the Irish. In a letter to Hartlib prefixed to the volume Arnold Boate stated that his brother had contemplated three further books on the flora, fauna, and people of Ireland respectively. A French translation was published in 1666 and further versions were published in Dublin in 1726, 1755, and 1860. Hartlib prevailed unsuccessfully on several others to complete the work of producing a natural history of Ireland: Arnold Boate contributed an 'interrogatory' or questionnaire about Ireland to Hartlib's 'Reformed Spiritual Husbandman' of 1652. Further progress was made by Robert Wood and Miles Symner but the impetus for scientific reform in Ireland passed to the surveying and mapping of Petty and others, and Gerard Boate's contribution remained the most important part of the natural history project. 
Boate and his wife are listed among the Adventurers who financed the English suppression of the Irish rising of 1641, and in repayment Boate's widow Katherine obtained under certificate dated 15 November 1667 more than 1000 acres of land in co. Tipperary. Boate's sons Gerard, Godefroy, and Gerson, became respectively a lawyer, a Treasury secretary, and a preacher to the German congregation in Dublin. Other descendants played a distinguished part in the history of Irish medicine into the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 2741


Bobart, Jacob, the elder (c.1599-1680), botanist and gardener, was born at Brunswick. After a period as a soldier, during which he added a working knowledge of English and Latin to his native tongue, he settled in Oxford, possibly as an innkeeper, before being appointed superintendent of the university's new physic garden, apparently shortly before 1641, by its founder, the earl of Danby. Danby's estate was subsequently sequestrated and for at least seven years Bobart went unpaid, but he must have continued to work assiduously, for in 1648 the 64-page 'Catalogus plantarum horti medici Oxoniensis', which though anonymous is credited to him on the testimony of Dillenius, boasted an impressive 1600 ''stirpes'' (many of them now known to be mere horticultural varieties), among which Canadian plants feature prominently. An improved edition (1658) was issued in conjunction with his son and two others. By then admiring tributes to the beauty and richness in species he had effected in the garden had long been coming from its visitors, who included Evelyn, Ashmole, Pepys, the grand duke of Tuscany, and the prince of Orange (with whom he conversed in Dutch). 
Thomas Baskerville knew Bobart as a stocky, square-set man, tall and strong, and recorded how one Whitsuntide he tagged his waist-length beard with silver and drew a crowd to the garden as a result. A later writer in the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' (1885, 208) was to remark on the patently strong character caught in a portrait of him, that of someone who 'could hold his own among the dons of the University'. 
Bobart's two sons, from his first marriage, to Mary (died 1655), also became professional gardeners, the elder, Jacob Bobart the younger, succeeding to his physic garden post. His second wife, Ann, outlived him, and died in 1696. Bobart died in office on 4 February 1680 and was buried in the church of St Peter-in-the-East, Oxford, where a tablet to his memory describes him as 'a man of great integrity'. His will, made three years earlier, reveals him as the owner of considerable local property: an inn was left to his elder surviving son, some houses to the younger one, and a further house to one of his six daughters. 'Bobartia', a genus of South African members of the iris family, was named by Linnaeus in honour of him and his elder son jointly; though he himself invariably spelt his name Bobert, his elder son changed this to Bobart, which has traditionally been used for both. 


@@@@@


doc= 2742


Bobart, Jacob, the younger (1641-1719), botanist, was born in Oxford on 2 August 1641, the elder of the two sons of Jacob Bobart the elder (c.1599-1680) and his first wife, Mary (died 1655). After a schooling which imparted a graceful literary style but a poor command of Latin he worked under his father in the Oxford Physic Garden until the age of nearly forty. Though Thomas Baskerville may merely have been referring to their respective sizes in saying the son was but a shrimp compared to the father, the forceful personality suggested by the father's portrait could have produced a diffident son. 
In contrast to the elder Bobart, who remained essentially a gardener, the younger displayed more scholarly inclinations. At about the age of twenty he started a personal herbarium, which grew to fill twelve folio volumes with some 2000 named specimens, most presumably from the garden; although not documented further, it is of lasting value for tracing the history of old horticultural varieties. A record contributed to Merret's 'Pinax' (1666) shows that he was also studying the local wild flora by then, to such effect that he impressed John Ray by producing from his herbarium a British species new to Ray. A short list of his finds in Ray's 1691 'Synopsis' includes four plants new to Britain and shows that, besides extensive fieldwork around Oxford, he had ranged as far as Somerset. He also botanized in the Netherlands, Flanders, and the Jura before his marriage to Anna (died 1718), about 1673. 
On his father's death in 1680 Bobart succeeded him as superintendent. Only three years later he lost his scientific mentor too, with the untimely death of the professor of botany, Robert Morison, in an accident, and was asked to take over the latter's lecturing. This caused many of his contemporaries to assume he had also succeeded to Morison's post, but that was precluded by his never being a member of the university. The elevation nevertheless led to his contributing to the proceedings of the Philosophical Society of Oxford and, more important, to being entrusted by the University Press with the editing and completion of Morison's 'Plantarum historiae universalis Oxoniensis', of which only the second of three projected parts had been published. Bobart necessarily had to neglect his garden work for much of the thirteen years this massive undertaking took. The first part proved irretrievable, but with much help from William Dale of Queen's College he substantially wrote 'Pars tertia' -- as it is traditionally known -- and greatly extended it to include very many plants unknown to Morison, in the research for which he was much assisted by the young William Sherard. External events, however, led the press to lose interest for five years and, demoralized, Bobart talked about leaving Oxford for a position elsewhere, preferably at Chelsea. Fortunately at that point, in 1691, the project was revived and concluded, but Bobart's key role was not adequately acknowledged and for a century afterwards botanical authors denied him the credit he deserved. 
Bobart published nothing further in his lifetime, reserving his energies for manual work in the garden and further enrichment of its collections by exchanging seeds, plants, and dried specimens with a wide range of fellow enthusiasts, especially with Petiver, with whom he was on particularly friendly terms. Hence, expecting a fellow learned gentleman, Zacharias von Uffenbach was shocked, on paying a visit in 1710, to find a 'praefectus horti' not at all as he had imagined. Instead, he was confronted with: 'an unusually pointed and very long nose, small eyes deeply set in his head, a wry mouth with scarcely any upper lip, a large and deep scar on one cheek, and his whole face and hands as black and coarse as those of the meanest gardener or labourer,' dressed in clothes that were 'very bad' ('Merkwurdige Reisen', 3, 1754, 163). 
In 1717 illness caused Bobart to place the garden temporarily in the care of his brother, Tilleman, who substantially exceeded its approved budget. The vice-chancellor declared the university would rather have no garden than pay as much as $100 a year for its upkeep, and Bobart was required to resign as a result. His family and friends denounced this as callous, but he was allowed to stay on in the Garden House. Only a few months later, though, on 28 December 1719, he died. He was buried two or three days later in the church of St Peter-in-the-East, Oxford, alongside his parents and his wife of forty-five years, who predeceased him by just over a year. His personal stock of plants, seeds, and tools, extensive library, papers, and the two herbaria he had formed (one, the so-called 'Morisonian herbarium', designed to illustrate the 'Historia') were left to the university; he also bequeathed a field for the use of the poor of the parish. A year later his twelve-page 'Historiae naturalis sciographia', of high interest as the sole complete exposition of Morison's classificatory system, was published anonymously. Apart from the genus 'Bobartia', which Linnaeus named in honour of father and son jointly, he is commemorated in a colour form of the knotted figwort, 'Scrophularia nodosa'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2743


Bockenfield, Adam of (d. 1279x92), commentator on Aristotle, was born at Bockenfield near Morpeth in Northumberland, on lands he eventually inherited from his father, Robert of Graunteleye. Since Adam's name differs from his father's, the supposition is that his name is toponymic. Adam's position as a landowner led him into several judicial actions between 1255 and 1278. However, his name first appears in 1238, when he was among those arrested in an Oxford riot. Owing to the efforts of Robert Grosseteste, then bishop of Lincoln (died 1253), the king ordered that Adam de Bokingfeld and three others were to be allowed to leave Oxford, should they so wish. In 1243, now styled master, Bockenfield was presented by the prior and convent of Durham to the church of West Rounton in Yorkshire, and in 1249 was granted the living of Iver in Buckinghamshire by Grosseteste. For the latter appointment Adam enjoyed the strong support of Adam Marsh (died 1259), an Oxford friend and colleague, who wrote that 'his profession of the sacred scriptures ['divinorum eloquiorum'] as well as humane letters renders him worthy of commendation' ('Monumenta Franciscana', 165). By 1263 he was a canon of Lincoln Cathedral, and in that capacity installed a new abbess of Little Marlow, Buckinghamshire, in 1264. By order of the pope, moreover, Adam and the archdeacon of Lincoln were appointed in 1267 to collect the papal tithe in the diocese. Before 1276 he had resigned the West Rounton living, and by late 1278 his name is omitted from a listing of the canons of Lincoln. Since his will was proved during the archbishopric of John Peckham, it is assumed that he died between 1279 and 1292, probably some years after he retired from active teaching. 
Bockenfield's contribution to the discipline he professed was as commentator on all of the treatises that constituted the 'corpus vetustius' of Aristotle, as well as three falsely ascribed works. Several of these have two or three recensions, so that a total of at least twenty-two works issued from his hand. Of these only a part of the commentary on the 'Metaphysics' and the commentary on the 'De anima' have been edited; an edition of the commentary on the 'De vegetabilibus', which incorporates most of Alfred of Shareshill's glosses on the same work, is in preparation. The impressive number of manuscripts containing some or all of Adam's commentaries -- fifty-eight at the latest count -- testifies to the vogue these works enjoyed, especially on the continent, where most of the copies are found. At the same time, the fact that they stopped being copied at a relatively early date (virtually by the end of the thirteenth century) most probably means that the kind of glossing they represented, namely a literal exposition and analysis in the manner of Averroes's middle commentaries, had by then passed out of fashion. In the middle decades of the century, however, and before the new translations of Aristotle began to make their appearance in the 1260s, Adam was by every measure the most influential English commentator on that philosopher. 


@@@@@


doc= 2744


Bocher, Joan (d. 1550), religious radical, also known as Joan Knell and Joan of Kent, is of unknown origins, but Bocher and Knell families are found either side of the rim of Romney Marsh. Her religious history is also obscure. The earliest that is known for certain is that she was much in favour in reforming circles in Canterbury in the late 1530s and early 1540s. After being denounced for words against the sacrament of the altar she was imprisoned for a period, before being released largely on the initiative of Cranmer's commissary Christopher Nevinson. The failure properly to prosecute Joan at this time was one of the charges made against Cranmer in the prebendaries' plot of 1543. Her opponents alleged that she had previously abjured in Colchester, a charge which has led to her being identified with the 'mother Bocher' and 'Joan Bocher, widow' named in Bishop Cuthbert Tunstall's 1528 investigations in Essex. There is no record, however, that this Bocher abjured, although one who did abjure was a William Bocher of Steeple Bumpstead, a man with a family history of heresy. It is possible therefore that Joan Bocher had a Lollard background, a possibility also raised by some of the accusations against her, for instance that she had declared 'that matins and evensong was no better than rumbling of tubs' (Davis, 229). However, the execution for treason in 1538 of William Knell, head of the Kentish Knell family, may point to religious conservatism elsewhere in her family. 
In the years after 1543 Bocher's beliefs took an Anabaptist turn. She became convinced of the theory of Christ's celestial flesh -- that Christ did not derive his physical body from his mother but that it was a divine distillation. Such views were unusual in England. Although they had been heard from exiled Dutch Anabaptists in the mid-1530s, it is more likely -- as Martin Micron, himself Flemish born, hinted -- that she picked them up from the influx of refugees early in the reign of Edward VI. She was arrested, probably in 1548, and convicted of heresy in April 1549. She was then imprisoned for more than a year, for some of the time in the house of Lord Chancellor Rich, while great efforts were made to persuade her back to Edwardian orthodoxy, led by Archbishop Cranmer and Bishop Ridley of London. When she remained adamant in her opinions, the privy council decided to proceed with her execution by burning, despite the lack of a statute under which to proceed. Although there are difficulties with Foxe's account of Cranmer's browbeating the reluctant Edward VI into signing the death warrant, it is likely that the archbishop did indeed have some role in bringing Joan Bocher to the stake. She was burnt at Smithfield on 2 May 1550, still upbraiding those attempting to convert her, and maintaining that just as in time they had come to her views on the sacrament of the altar, so they would see she had been right about the person of Christ. She also asserted that there were a thousand Anabaptists living in the diocese of London. 
Immediately after Bocher's death attempts were made to discredit her: there were sermons from Hugh Latimer, an academic refutation from Roger Hutchinson, and doggerel verse from Edmund Beck. Her views were described by Latimer and others as 'Arian', that is, heretical in denying the full divinity of Christ, which they were not, having far more in common with those of extreme opponents of Arius. Her death led to Joan's being much cited by opponents of the Elizabethan church. She was adopted by separatists for whom her fate exposed the true nature of established episcopal church government; and her execution was also used by Catholics responding to charges of cruelty in the Marian persecutions. The Catholic apologist Robert Persons, writing in 1599, is the first to record three interesting stories about her which are otherwise unattested: that she took part in the smuggling operations to bring Tyndale's 'New Testament' to England; that she smuggled books to the Henrician court hidden under her skirts; and that she was a close friend of Anne Askew. All are possible and although the stories are late, Persons claims to have spoken to someone present at her trial. It was not for her views however, which despite the fears of the Edwardian establishment never became popular, but as a victim of intolerance that Joan Bocher was to be remembered -- and by none more eloquently than William Wordsworth in whose sonnet to her she is described as condemned by 'mandates nature doth disown' ('Poetical Works', 343). 


@@@@@


doc= 2745


Bock, Eberhard Otto Georg von, Baron von Bock in the Hanoverian nobility (1755-1814), army officer, was born on the family estate at Elze, north of Hanover. His military career started in 1774, when he joined the Hanoverian 5th infantry regiment. He later moved to the 13th infantry regiment, and in 1779 he transferred to the mounted life guards as a second lieutenant, rising to captain in 1783, major in 1794, and lieutenant-colonel in 1799. After joining the newly founded 'King's German Legion' after the collapse of the Hanoverian army in 1803 he was appointed colonel of the legion's 1st heavy dragoon regiment on 21 April 1804. From 1806 onwards he was permitted to use the title baron. 
In 1805 Bock took part in the expedition to north Germany, which, though unsuccessful, gained many new recruits for the legion; some of these recruits helped to form the legion's 2nd heavy dragoon regiment. Bock was promoted major-general on 25 July 1810, and in 1811 took command of the brigade formed by the two heavy dragoon regiments. In 1812, after five and a half years' service in Ireland, his brigade was sent to the Iberian peninsula, where Bock won the army gold medal (Salamanca) for the unparalleled achievement of his men in riding down and taking prisoner three battalions of French infantry at Garcia Hernandez on 23 July 1812. Before leading the charge, the short-sighted Bock had to ask Lieutenant-Colonel May to point the enemy out to him. He then briefly replaced the wounded General Stapleton Cotton as commander of the British cavalry in the Peninsula. He fought with distinction at Vitoria on 21 June 1813 and received a clasp to his army gold medal. While returning to England on the transport 'Bellona', he was caught in a storm in the Bay of Biscay and struck the Tulbest Rocks, near Pleubian, France, on 21 January 1814. Bock drowned together with his son, Ludwig, a captain in the 2nd hussars of the King's German Legion. His body was washed ashore at the Breton village of Pleubian, where he was buried on 24 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 2746


Bocking, Edward (d. 1534), Benedictine monk, may have been a relation of the Bocking family settled at Ash Bocking, Suffolk. The church there was appropriated to Canterbury Cathedral priory, where Edward was professed a monk in 1500. In 1504 he was admitted a scholar to Canterbury College, Oxford, where he became warden in 1510. In 1512 he supplicated for the degree of BTh, to which he was admitted on 16 June 1513. He proceeded DTh in June 1518 and resigned his wardenship in the same year, a step doubtless accounted for by his becoming cellarer at Canterbury, also in 1518. In 1526 he was a member of the commission appointed by Archbishop William Warham to investigate the divine revelations allegedly received by Elizabeth Barton, a servant of Thomas Cobb, the steward of the archiepiscopal manor of Aldington, Kent. The commissioners judged Barton to be genuinely inspired. Soon afterwards she left Aldington to become a nun of St Sepulchre's, Canterbury, and Bocking became her confessor and spiritual adviser. 
By October 1528 Barton had turned to politics, agitating against Henry VIII's plan to annul his marriage to Katherine of Aragon, and from the beginning of these activities Bocking was her closest confidant. His most important role, however, was as a publicist for Barton. He was often accused, both by Henry VIII's government and by later historians, of having concocted rather than merely disseminated her revelations. It is impossible to tell whether there is substance in the charge but it has the appearance of misogyny, and certainly the government benefited greatly by using it to undermine the commonplace assumption that Barton's revelations must have been holy because a woman could not normally have had the wits to invent them on her own. 
Bocking is known to have spread word of Barton's vision that Henry VIII would lose his crown if he married Anne Boleyn, describing the vision in person to the prior of Leeds, the prior of Monks Horton, and a number of priests and merchants in Kent. He also wrote in his own hand a 'great book' of Barton's revelations, a compendium of her visions that later became the principal evidence on which Barton and her associates were attainted of treason; on several occasions he is known to have lent out portions of this manuscript, one quire at a time, for scribal reproduction. In 1533 a fair copy of Bocking's manuscript was made by Thomas Laurence of Canterbury, and 700 copies of the book were issued by the printer John Skot, who supplied 500 copies to Bocking. The government's crackdown on the Barton circle prevented distribution of the book, however, and all copies were apparently confiscated and destroyed; none exists today. There does survive in Bocking's hand a single-page manuscript entitled 'Elizabethae virginis spiritualis gratiae libri secundi prologus', which may have been part of another book about Barton (TNA: PRO, SP 1/80, fol. 140). 
Bocking had been arrested by 25 September 1533 and was imprisoned in the Tower. Denounced for his involvement with Barton he was among her associates who shared her public penance and humiliation first at Paul's Cross on 23 November and then in Canterbury on 7 December. Sent back to the Tower at the end of March 1534 he was attainted of treason under the statute 25 Hen. VIII. c. 12, and hanged at Tyburn on 20 April along with Barton herself and four other of her associates. His head was set on one of the city gates, but his other remains were interred in the cemetery of the London Blackfriars. These deaths were the first Catholic 'martyrdoms' of the English Reformation. The most detailed sources for Bocking's career -- the act of attainder and the Paul's Cross sermon preached against Barton on 23 November 1533 -- were composed as propaganda by Bocking's enemies in an effort to discredit him and his allies. These sources have in the past been taken at face value by many scholars, who have thus suggested that Bocking encouraged Barton to fake her revelations, that he coerced her into opposing the crown, and that the two were sexual partners. Such stories are almost certainly slanderous, and letters written to Bocking in the early 1530s suggest that he was widely respected by his associates not only for his principled opposition to the royal divorce but also for his holiness. 


@@@@@


doc= 2747


Bocking, Ralph (d. after 1272), Dominican friar and hagiographer, wrote a life of St Richard of Wyche, bishop of Chichester, whom he had known as a friend and served as confessor. Nothing is known of Bocking other than what he relates himself in the life of St Richard, which, as is shown by internal evidence, was composed in the years 1268-72. He states that he wrote it on the instructions of Robert Kilwardby (died 1279), then prior provincial of the English Dominicans and later archbishop of Canterbury, and at the request of Isabella d'Aubigny, countess of Arundel, known from other sources to have been an enthusiast for hagiographical literature. He based it upon his own memories of Richard and the dossier of the saint's canonization process, to which he evidently had access. From his knowledge of patristics it is apparent that he was a theologian who had been trained in the schools. Despite the oleaginous rhetoric of his style, which sometimes obscures his meaning, he is sparing and sober in his evocation of the miraculous. Some years later ('c'.1276-93), the life was translated into Anglo-Norman verse by Master Peter of Fetcham or Peckham (died 1293). 


@@@@@


doc= 2748


Bockman, Gerhard (1686-1773), portrait painter and engraver, is believed to have been born in the Netherlands, at Amsterdam. He worked in Britain from at least 1711 until his death, painting and copying portraits, and engraving portraits in mezzotint after both his own work and that of others. Notable among his own works are a life-size, half-length portrait, 'Admiral Russell' (date unknown; Maritime Hospital, Greenwich), the 'Coningsby Family' (date unknown), and 'St Dunstan Holding the Devil by the Nose with a Pair of Tongs'. His engraving of this last is signed with his name, with the addition 'pinx.et sculp 1743' (impression in the British Museum department of prints and drawings). As many as nine copies by Bockman after Kneller are in the Royal Collection at Hampton Court Palace. He engraved over twenty portraits, mostly after other artists including Van Dyck, Van Loo, and Michael Dahl, four being after James Worsdale. Portraits engraved after his own work include the 'Duke of Cumberland' (1746, impression in the British Museum department of prints and drawings). Most of Bockman's engravings were commissioned. He published only three mezzotints himself: 'Sir Thomas Reeve', after Jacopo Amigoni ('c'.1737), 'Charles, Lord Talbot' ('c'.1737, impression in the British Museum department of prints and drawings), and the 'Children of Frederick, Prince of Wales', after Enoch Seeman (date unknown, impression in the British Museum department of prints and drawings). 
Bockman's portraiture is notable for its similarity to Kneller's treatment of faces and his arrangement of poses. Although his obituarist recorded that he was 'the last surviving disciple of Sir Godfrey Kneller' ('London Magazine'), suggestions that he was a pupil of Kneller appear to be unfounded, and nothing is known about his education. It is possible that the two had a close association before or not long after 1711, when the Academy of Drawing and Painting in Great Queen Street, London, was founded, with Kneller as its president, and Bockman, spelt Borman by Vertue in his list of members, as one of its students, aged twenty-five. Bockman was also listed by Vertue as a member of the Rose and Crown Club in 1724. Previous biographical outlines of Bockman have been uncertain as to whether his initial was C, G, or R (his prints show it clearly to be G), and by Redgrave's incorrect statement that Bockman's widow applied for relief to the Society of Artists in 1769. Very little is known of Bockman's personal life. The identities of his parents are not known, and there is no evidence he was married or had children. He is not recorded as having left a will. He lived in London at Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury (about 1737), and King Street, Covent Garden (in the 1740s). He died on 2 April 1773 'at his home in Tash Street, Gray's Inn Lane' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 2749


Buckland, Geoffrey of (d. 1225), justice and administrator, was, like many contemporary government officials, a close associate of Hubert Walter. He witnessed several of Hubert's deeds and they appeared together in final concords, for example at Oxford in November 1195, St Benet of Hulme in April 1197, and Shrewsbury in January 1198. Final concords likewise record his activities as a justice, for example at Dunwich in July 1201, at the Tower of London in August 1202, and at Westminster in August 1204. He was also an itinerant justice in the east of England in 1194, and in the south under Geoffrey fitz Peter in 1202. However, and again like many Angevin administrators, Buckland did not exercise his talents in any one field. He devoted considerable time to the exchequer. When Robert de Bernieres had his farm for Ormesby in Norfolk reduced in 1199 it was through Buckland that the justiciar passed this information to the exchequer barons. The pipe roll of 1203 mentions a roll of fines which Geoffrey of Buckland entered into the treasury, and he may at times have acted as the justiciar's deputy at the exchequer. An account of a lengthy dispute between the monasteries of Crowland and Spalding also reveals his prominence, reporting that when judgment was given in 1202 he was one of many 'nobles' who were at court for the business of the realm. 
Buckland's importance at this time clearly stemmed in part from his close relationship with the justiciar, Geoffrey fitz Peter, whose sister-in-law had married William of Buckland, probably Geoffrey's elder brother. Indeed on one occasion after the justiciar's death a chancery clerk mistakenly described the two Geoffreys as brothers, when ordering Geoffrey of Buckland to sell to the king the corn and stock of Geoffrey fitz Peter's estate at Berkhamsted. Buckland witnessed several of the justiciar's writs, including the earliest surviving returned writ of novel disseisin, and various of Geoffrey fitz Peter's charters recording gifts to the church, for example the foundation of Shouldham Priory in Norfolk, which Buckland attended together with Hubert Walter. 
Buckland's ecclesiastical career had begun by 24 September 1198 when he was archdeacon of Norwich, a post he may have held until about 1203. He received the churches of Teynham and Pagham in 1205 and 1206 respectively, and by 1210 he had been made dean of St Martin's-le-Grand. A dispute of the early 1220s shows him in conflict with the canons of St Martin's-le-Grand over the vicarage of Witham, while in 1224 a claim was made against him by the archdeacon of Colchester for Newport, an important portion of the deanery, and he obtained a writ of prohibition against the archdeacon. Buckland appears to have been less prominent in royal administration after 'c'.1203-4, but late in John's reign the king entrusted him with the custody of Aylesbury. However, he became involved in the baronial revolt, and although he received letters of safe conduct to appear before the king, in 1216 his manor of Datchworth in Hertfordshire was forfeited and granted to Nicholas of Yealand. He returned to favour with the accession of Henry III and was still serving the king in 1224. He appears to have become a baron of the exchequer, and was an itinerant justice in eastern England 1218-21. He died between 31 August and 14 September 1225. 


@@@@@


doc= 2750


Buckland, Hugh of (d. 1116x19), administrator, was sheriff of Berkshire and several other counties. He took his name from the manor of Buckland, near Faringdon, of which he was tenant under the monastery of Abingdon. Before the death of William Rufus he was already sheriff of Berkshire, Hertfordshire, and also possibly Bedfordshire. He is stated in the Abingdon history to have been one of the people who profited by the unjust transactions of Modbert, whom the king had appointed to administer the affairs of the monastery in the interest of the royal revenues, during the period when the office of abbot was vacant. A grant of 3 hides at Hanney was made to Buckland because he was sheriff of Berkshire and a royal justice. He was ordered by Henry I to restore to the abbey the possessions that he had in this manner wrongfully obtained. Notwithstanding this, the Abingdon historian gives him a high character for uprightness and wisdom. The same authority states that he was held in great esteem by Henry I, and that in 1110 he was sheriff of eight counties. The evidence of charters enables us to identify six of these, namely, Berkshire, Hertfordshire, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Essex, and London and Middlesex. Buckland was an addressee of the copy of Henry I's coronation charter that was sent to Hertfordshire. He held 10 hides at Buckland from the abbey of Abingdon for one knight's service, 1 hide from Richard of Winchester, perhaps at Missenden, and land at Ludgate from Roger of Salisbury. In 1102 Henry I granted him warren in his land of Kensworth, Hertfordshire. He may have been a canon of St Paul's, holding the prebend of Harlesden. 
The date of Buckland's death is uncertain; he witnessed a royal charter on 28 December 1115, but a charter of the queen in 1116 or 1117 refers to him as if he had died shortly before. The Abingdon history says that William de Bochelande, presumably a son of Hugh, was sheriff of Berkshire in 1119, so it can be inferred that Hugh of Buckland was certainly dead by then. 
Another Hugh of Buckland, who may have been a grandson of the subject of this article, was sheriff of Berkshire from 1170 to 1176, and was one of the itinerant justices in 1173 and 1174. In 1166 he held one knight's fee in chief, another from Abingdon, and Faringdon at farm. 


@@@@@


doc= 2751


Boddington, Henry John (1811-1865), landscape painter, was born in the Marylebone district of London, as Henry John Williams, second son of the painter Edward ('Moonlight') Williams (1781-1855) and his wife, Ann Hildebrandt ('bap'. 1780, died 1851), who was of German-Jewish extraction. Edward Williams was a nephew of the painter James Ward. In 1832, Henry John married Clarissa Eliza Boddington (1812-1905), and at once adopted her maiden name, in order to distinguish his work from that of his five brothers, all of whom also became landscape painters: Edward Charles Williams (1807-1881), George Augustus Williams (1814-1901), and Alfred Walter Williams (1824-1905) retained the family name, but Sidney Richard Percy (1821-1886) and Arthur Gilbert (1819-1895) worked under their last forenames. 
Boddington, who trained in his father's studio, developed a style clearly derived from the Dutch landscape tradition of Ruisdael and Hobbema, but characterized by greater naturalism and a more vivid use of colour. This air of modernity soon made his green and leafy landscapes very popular with the public. His name was well established by 1842 when he was elected a full member of the Society of British Artists, with whom he had exhibited since 1837 and where he displayed a total of 244 works. 
Boddington was also a regular exhibitor with the Royal Academy and other London art associations, as well as provincial bodies such as the Royal Liverpool Academy. His bright style greatly appealed to the wealthy manufacturing classes who were the new art patrons, and he was a popular choice with Art Union prize winners. The front page of the 'Illustrated London News' for 6 March 1847 showed a wood-engraving of 'The Village Church', exhibited at the British Institution in that year and described in the accompanying text as 'a genuine scene of English life'. Sketching tours of Devon, Yorkshire, and the Lake District had broadened his scope. A first visit to north Wales in 1846 made a still deeper impact, and he later returned many times to the Merioneth area to produce some of his most admired and frequent subjects. 'On the Hills, North Wales' (exh. Society of British Artists, 1860) won a lyrical description from a critic for the 'Art Journal', who wrote 'The mountains are melting in vapoury sunlight... the artist is a master of this effect' ('Art Journal', 22, 1860, 143). 
Boddington's only child, Edwin Henry (1836- 'c'.1905), painted in the manner of his father, but with less talent, disappearing from the exhibiting scene about 1870, and later from the family circle when he emigrated to Australia. H. J. Boddington always lived in the London area, finally in 1854 setting up a handsome establishment at 1 Lonsdale Villas, Barnes, where his father and brothers were already in neighbouring houses. Boddington was known as a kind and cheerful man, much respected by fellow artists. His last years were marred by failing eyesight and the crippling effects of a brain tumour, which led to his death, at his home, in mid-career, at the age of fifty-three, on 11 April 1865. He was buried in the Old Barnes cemetery; his grave is near those of Edward Williams, George Augustus Williams, and several other members of the family. An obituary in the 'Fine Arts Quarterly Review' noted that 'He was an artist, who if he fell into mannerism, had yet during a hard working life, painted pictures not only large, but sometimes grand. His landscapes of mountain, lake and river had scenic breadth and power' (p. 371). 
The paintings of H. J. Boddington are now considered the most aesthetically pleasing of those produced by the Williams family, but they do not command such high prices as those of S. R. Percy. Works are held in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; the National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff; the Glasgow Art Gallery; the City Art Gallery, Blackburn; the Harris Museum and Art Gallery, Preston; the Graves Art Gallery, Sheffield; the City Art Gallery, York; and the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, USA. 


@@@@@


doc= 2752


Bode, John Ernest (1816-1874), Church of England clergyman and poet, was the son of William Bode, who worked for the Post Office, and his wife, Mary, only daughter of the Revd T. Lloyd of Peterly House, Oxfordshire. He was educated at Eton College and Charterhouse School, 1830-34, where he became a scholar on the foundation. From Charterhouse he proceeded to Christ Church, Oxford, and was the first winner, in 1835, of the Hertford scholarship, instituted the year before. He took his BA degree in 1837, with a first class in 'literae humaniores', and his MA in 1840. He became a student and a tutor of his college, 1841-7, of which he was appointed censor in 1844, and acted as one of the public examiners in 'literae humaniores' for the years 1846-8. He was ordained deacon in 1841, and priest in 1843. In 1847 he was presented by his college to the rectory of Westwell, Oxfordshire, and on 22 July in the same year was married to Hester Charlotte, 'nee' Lodge, of St Nicholas, Guildford. 
In 1848 Bode was appointed one of the select preachers in the university, and on 12 December 1850, being founder's day, preached a sermon at the Charterhouse chapel, which was afterwards published as 'Our Schoolboy Days Viewed through the Glass of Religion' (1850). In 1855 he preached the Bampton lectures before the University of Oxford, published as 'The absence of precision in the formularies of the Church of England, scriptural and favourable to a state of probation' (1855). In 1857 Bode was defeated by Matthew Arnold in the election for the chair of poetry at Oxford; his claims rested mainly on a volume of poems suggested by a course of reading of the old English and Scottish ballads from 1841, published as 'Ballads from Herodotus, with an Introductory Poem' (1853; 2nd edn with four additional poems, 1854). Bode also published 'Short Occasional Poems' (1858), and a smaller volume entitled 'Hymns from the Gospel of the Day' (1860). In 1860 Bode was presented by the governors of Charterhouse to the living of Castle Camps, Cambridgeshire, at the rectory of which he died suddenly, at the age of fifty-eight, on 6 October 1874; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 2753


Boden, Joseph (d. 1811), army officer in the East India Company and benefactor, details of whose birth and parentage are unknown, was appointed lieutenant in the Bombay native infantry on 24 November 1781. He became captain on 25 October 1796, major on 12 October 1802, and lieutenant-colonel on 21 May 1806. His name was borne at various times on the rolls of the 3rd, 5th, 6th, 8th, and 9th native infantry, and he held successively the offices of judge-advocate, aide-de-camp to the governor, quartermaster-general, and member of the military board at Bombay. He retired from the service in 1807, and died at Lisbon on 21 November 1811, where he had gone for the benefit of his health. 
Following the death of his daughter Elizabeth (29 August 1827), Boden's property went to the University of Oxford, under conditions recorded on a tablet placed by his executors in Trinity Church, Cheltenham. This set out Boden's plan that his estate, said to be valued at about $25,000 in 1827, be presented to the university for the creation of a chair in Sanskrit language as a means 'of enabling my countrymen to proceed in the conversion of the natives of India in the Christian religion, by disseminating a knowledge of the Sacred scriptures among them, more effectually than by all other means whatever'. 
The offer was accepted by the university in convocation on 9 November 1827, and the first election took place in 1832, when Professor Horace Hayman Wilson was appointed to the chair. Four Sanskrit scholarships in connection with the same endowment were founded by decrees of the court of chancery in 1830 and 1860. Boden was not himself a Sanskrit scholar. The Boden professorship and the Boden prize remain important features of Sanskrit teaching at Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 2754


Bodenham, John (c.1559-1610), literary patron and grocer, was born in London, perhaps in the parish of St Stephen Walbrook. He was the eldest son in a family of five children of William Bodnam (died 1580), grocer, and his wife, Katherine Wanton (died in or before 1598), eldest daughter of Thomas Wanton of York. On 3 December 1570 he was admitted to the Merchant Taylors' School, London, and was also educated by a tutor, a 'Mr Thackam'. Bodenham was admitted to the Grocers' Company in 1580, of which both his father and paternal grandfather, John, were free, his father having been elected junior warden in 1563 and senior warden in 1570. Bodenham attained his majority in 1580, and having been left a substantial paternal inheritance, he apparently was not very active in the Grocers' Company. He owned income-producing property in the grocery colony in the parish of St Mary Woolchurch and in Bucklersbury, in the parish of St Stephen Walbrook, including a dwelling at the latter known as The Woolsack, the family home; a tenement called The Lamb; and a warehouse. Bodenham may have obtained the coat of arms depicted in the front matter of 'Belvedere' (1600) and of 'Englands Helicon' (1600), though this may have been fabricated to honour him as the books' patron. 
Bodenham's historical importance is as the initiator, projector, and patron of a series of five printed prose and poetical commonplace books, material for which he gathered from his extensive reading before handing it over to others for final arranging and editing. Three of the five are dedicated to Bodenham: 'Politeuphuia, Wits Commonwealth' (1597), edited by Nicholas Ling; 'Belvedere, or, The Garden of the Muses' (1600), a collection of 4482 one- or two-line poetical citations arranged, like the prose compilations, under commonplace headings, edited by Anthony Munday and dedicated to Bodenham, who is called: '
Arts lover, Learnings friend, 

First causer and collectour of these floures 

' and 'Englands Helicon' (1600), edited by Nicholas Ling, with a dedicatory poem by A. B. (possibly the editor), 'To his loving kinde friend, Maister John Bodenham', that praises Bodenham for collecting the poetry and projecting the previous works. Francis Meres's 'Palladis tamia, Wits Treasury' (1598) was dedicated to Thomas Eliot, but, Rollins points out (Rollins, 47-8), it was conceived as the second of a series of three prose compilations projected by Bodenham. The fifth text, 'Wits Theater of the Little World' (1599), was edited by Robert Allott and published by Ling. 

'Politeuphuia' and 'Wits Theater' are commonplace-book compilations of prose aphorisms, sententiae, and reading notes, representing a practice widespread in manuscript culture, the material arranged under set headings facilitating their subsequent use in speech and writing. To this end, as Crawford has shown (Crawford, 199), the compiler, presumably Bodenham, rewrote some poetical selections as prose to fit the general format. These popular publications went through many editions through the next century. In 'Belvedere' the one- and two-line pentameter excerpts are arranged under commonplace headings -- many prose excerpts actually being reformulated as verse. Its ballad-writing editor (Anthony Munday), the patron, and the collection itself are mocked in the contemporary Cambridge satiric comedy 'The Second Part of the Return from Parnassus' (I.ii.173-335). A reprint of 'Belvedere' was published in 1875 by the Spenser Society. 

'Englands Helicon', perhaps the finest of the Elizabethan poetical miscellanies, is a rich collection including such authors as Breton, Barnfield, Chettle, Drayton, Dyer, Greene, Lodge (Bodenham's relative through his mother's family), Marlowe, Munday, Peele, Ralegh, Sidney, Spenser, Surrey, Watson, and Young. It prints for the first time Marlowe's 'The Passionate Shepherd to his Love', with Ralegh's reply. This pastoral anthology contains some non-pastoral pieces modified to give them a pastoral flavour or setting. A second edition, with an additional nine poems, was published in 1614, and a modern critical edition was produced in 1935 by Rollins. At his death on 16 July 1610 Bodenham was unmarried and childless; he bequeathed his estate to his sister Mary, the financially distressed widow of the grocer Thomas Vesey. 


@@@@@


doc= 2755


Bodichon, Barbara Leigh Smith (1827-1891), artist and women's activist, was born on 8 April 1827 in Whatlington, near Robertsbridge, Sussex, the eldest of the five children of the radical MP Benjamin Smith (1783-1860) ['see under 'Smith, William (1756-1835)] and Anne Longden (1801-1834), a milliner. The Smiths were a Liberal reforming dynasty, members of the nineteenth-century 'intellectual aristocracy'. Barbara Bodichon's paternal grandfather was MP for Norwich and, together with William Wilberforce and Thomas Clarkson, played a significant role in bringing about the abolition of slavery. He was also the leading spokesman in parliament for protestant dissenters. Ben Smith believed that the laws of England were inimical to justice for women and gave that as a reason for not marrying Barbara's mother, Anne Longden. It seems likely that the liaison started in 1826 when Ben Smith met her on a visit to his sister, Fanny Nightingale, at her home, Lea Hurst, in Derbyshire. Anne Longden was the daughter of a corn miller in Alfreton, about 6 miles from the Nightingale home. After the death of Anne Longden from tuberculosis in 1834, despite advice from some sections of his family to have the children discreetly brought up abroad, their father brought them up himself, first at Pelham Crescent, Hastings, and later at his London home, 5 Blandford Square, Marylebone. As the Leigh Smith children were illegitimate they were not acknowledged by many of their Smith relations, including their aunt Fanny Nightingale and their first cousin, Florence Nightingale. Barbara's ambiguous social position paradoxically allowed her unusual social mobility. 
In her early youth Barbara's education was largely supplied by a governess, Catherine Spooner, and a private tutor, Harry Porter. Ben Smith employed James Buchanan, a Swedenborgian who had originally been the teacher in Robert Owen's experimental school in New Lanarkshire, in Westminster infant school, which he supported. Ben sometimes sent Buchanan down to Sussex to teach the Leigh Smiths, where he principally read aloud to them from the 'Bible', the 'Arabian Nights', and Swedenborg, and took them on long walks, talking to them about the harmony of nature. Barbara's secondary education was at the Unitarian Misses Wood's School for Girls in Upper Clapton, London, where the rote learning struck her as dull compared with Buchanan's imaginative and child-centred teaching. In 1848, when her brother, Benjamin Leigh Smith, went to Cambridge University, Barbara studied political economy at home with a private tutor, Philip Kingsford, engaged by her father from the College of Preceptors. 
Although the majority of the Smith relatives refused to recognize the 'tabooed family' when they were young, nevertheless Barbara's aunts Julia Smith, on her father's side, and Dorothy Longden, on her mother's side, befriended them. Several 'motherly' women also had great significance in her youth. These were Elizabeth Parkes (the granddaughter of Joseph Priestley), the writer Mary Howitt, and the art critic and historian Anna Jameson. The last two women also provided models of professional women earning their own living. 
In 1848, on reaching her majority, Barbara's father gave her a portfolio of shares and property, which yielded an independent income of between $250 and $300 per annum. This independent income put Barbara Leigh Smith in a very rare position for a young woman of her time. She was able to study and to enact her ambitions to become a professional artist and to embody her social reforming theories. The closest friends of her youth were Bessie Rayner Parkes (later Belloc), the poet and writer, Anna Mary Howitt, the Pre-Raphaelite painter, and Joanna Samworth, a painter of landscapes and flower studies. In the early 1850s she met Marian Evans (George Eliot), who regarded Barbara as her 'first friend' ('George Eliot Letters', 3.63), and Elizabeth Blackwell, the first woman doctor, whom Barbara encouraged to move from America in order to open up the medical profession to women in England. 
Barbara's first public statements were under the pen-name of Esculapius in the 'Hastings and St Leonards News'. Early pieces included an attack on the foolishness of feminine fashion, especially the injurious habit of tight-lacing stays, and a plea for the education of women. In 1854 she adopted the initials B. B. to write two letters to 'The Leader' on the subject of prostitution, advocating the provision of training and work opportunities for women as the way to 'cure' prostitution rather than Magdalen hospitals. She regarded prostitution as essentially an economic matter, and was never interested in quasi-spiritual cant about purity. 
Barbara was an extremely striking young woman, tall, with vivid expression and golden-red hair. She had several suitors, but in 1855 both her personal attractions and her wealth attracted the attention of John Chapman, editor of the 'Westminster Review'. He proposed a 'free-love' relationship with her, and she was deeply tempted despite his being already married. She withdrew from his influence after her father revealed that Chapman was feckless with both women and money. In the winter of 1856, owing to the ill health of one of her sisters, Isabella, Ben Smith took his three daughters to Algiers. There Barbara met Eugene Bodichon (1810-1885), a French physician, ethnographer, and scholar whom, despite the misgivings of some family members, she married on 2 July 1857 at Little Portland Street Unitarian Chapel, London. Her father's wedding gift was his house in Blandford Square, which had been his political base and was to serve Barbara similarly. As a consequence of her marriage she spent half of each year in Algiers with her husband concentrating on her artistic career and half the year in England involved with social reform. In 1859 she bought a Moorish-style house on Mustapha Superieure, overlooking the Bay of Algiers, which she named Campagne du Pavillon. It became a centre for English and French artistic and literary visitors to Algiers, including Matilda Betham-Edwards, Eliza Bridell-Fox, Sophia, Lady Dunbar, Gertrude Jekyll, and Frederick Walker. As her husband hated London, in 1863 she built another house, Scalands Gate, on the Glottenham estate, Robertsbridge, Sussex, which her brother Benjamin Leigh Smith had inherited from their father. Her husband was an eccentric man who neither learned English nor made much effort to endear himself to her family or friends. More positively, he accepted his wife's commitment to her career as an artist and her work as a social reformer. Towards the end of their lives there were a few sad years when he was too ill to travel to England and she was too ill to travel to Algeria; they did not meet after 1880 and he died in 1885. 
Barbara's ambition to be a professional landscape painter was formed at an early age. In Hastings she was taught by W. Collingwood Smith and Cornelius Varley, and was advised by William Henry Hunt. In 1849 she attended art classes taught by Francis Cary at the newly opened Bedford Ladies' College, London; she left Bedford College $1000 in her will. In 1850 Barbara made an unchaperoned trip across Europe with her friend Bessie Rayner Parkes to visit two artist friends, Anna Mary Howitt and Jane Benham (Hay), who had gone to study with Wilhelm von Kaulbach in Munich because the Royal Academy Schools were not open to women. While there Barbara formed a plan for an art-sisterhood of writers and painters, which Anna Mary Howitt described in 'An Art Student in Munich' (1853). Barbara was at the forefront of campaigns to enable aspiring women artists to become professional. She helped to establish the Society for Female Artists in 1857 and in 1859 organized a petition to persuade the Royal Academy to admit women students. 
Through her friendship with Anna Mary Howitt she came into the orbit of the Pre-Raphaelite group and was especially friendly with Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Elizabeth Siddal. They formed an art club called The Folio, in which they contributed paintings or drawings monthly, loosely based on a particular theme, and gave each other critical feedback. In 1864 she studied in Corot's studio in Paris and became a great friend of Charles-Francois Daubigny of the Barbizon school. In the 1860s she formed a fast friendship with Hercules Brabazon Brabazon, and they painted together whenever he was in England. Having no children she was free to travel widely and her landscapes included -- as well as Sussex, the Isle of Wight, the Lake District, Cornwall, and Wales -- France, Spain, Italy, North America, and north Africa. She exhibited her landscape paintings steadily all her working life (1850-81), and her greatest critical successes were probably her solo exhibitions at Gambart's French Gallery in Pall Mall, London (1859, 1861, and 1864), where her oriental landscapes were extremely successful. In 1875 she bought the poorhouse in Zennor, Cornwall, as a base for painting for herself and her many artist friends. At her death this house was left to Gertrude Jekyll, the garden designer and craftswoman. 
Barbara's network of friends was the rock on which her feminist campaigns were built. As leader of the Langham Place group she was at the heart of feminist agitation in England and led four great campaigns: for married women to be granted legal recognition, and for women's right to work, to vote, and to have access to education. Perhaps partly as a result of her parents' unorthodox relationship Barbara was especially concerned with the legal and civil rights of women. Her earliest political act was to write and publish a pamphlet, 'A brief summary of the laws in England concerning women: together with a few observations thereon' (1854). This was largely a precis of J. J. S. Wharton's 'An Exposition of the Laws Relating to the Women of England' (1853), although she also took advice from a family friend, Matthew Davenport Hill, the recorder of Birmingham. The 'Summary' was widely circulated and read, and in 1856 a second edition was published. Davenport Hill brought the 'Summary' to the attention of the Law Amendment Society, founded by Lord Brougham in 1844, which was dedicated to reforming outdated laws. It was decided by the Law Amendment Society to introduce a 'Married Women's Property Bill' in order to safeguard the property and earnings of married women. Barbara formed a committee to collect signatures for seventy petitions in support of the measure, and by a chain-letter system they collected 26,000 signatures altogether. A women-only petition was presented in parliament on 14 March 1856 by Lord Brougham in the Lords and by Sir Erskine Perry in the Commons. In February 1857 Lord Brougham introduced a bill in parliament which aimed to establish a married woman in the same position as an unmarried woman with respect to property. It took persistent campaigning until 1882 to achieve this significant change in the law. Property law reform was a prerequisite for a change in the suffrage to include women. Representation in parliament was dependent upon two things: a property qualification and a gender qualification. If married women could not own property, even were the gender qualification removed, they could not vote. There was also an assumption that their interests were represented by their husbands, and that therefore they could not possibly need direct representation. Marian Evans immediately recognized that Barbara's first campaign was merely 'one rung of a long ladder stretching far beyond our lives' ('George Eliot Letters', 2.227). 
Barbara had a sophisticated grasp of the importance of the press in influencing public opinion; her uncle, Octavius Smith, was a major shareholder in the 'Westminster Review'. Subsequently she became the major shareholder in the 'English Woman's Journal' (1858-64), founded primarily by herself and Bessie Rayner Parkes, for which she wrote many articles, continuing Smith family tradition by writing a series of abolitionist articles protesting against slavery in the southern states of North America, which she had visited in 1857-8. In an article published in a feminist journal called the 'Waverley', and subsequently reprinted as a pamphlet entitled 'Women and Work' (1857), Barbara argued that middle-class women must not be denied meaningful work. The offices of the 'English Woman's Journal' in Langham Place became a centre for a wide variety of feminist enterprises. These included a women's reading-room and dining club, offices for the Society for Promoting the Employment of Women, and offices for training law copiers. In conjunction with these activities Emily Faithfull set up the Victoria Press, which trained and employed female compositors. Barbara also helped Maria Rye set up the Female Emigration Society to help women (especially governesses) who could not find work in England to emigrate to the colonies. In 1863 Barbara appointed Emily Davies as temporary editor of the 'English Woman's Journal' when Bessie needed a break. This was the start of an important partnership which continued after the close of the journal in 1864. 
Barbara was an equal-rights feminist and her political endgame was always to achieve full citizenship for women. She took every opportunity to increase women's participation in social reform and persuaded Lord Brougham to invite women to participate in the Social Science Association. From its foundation in 1857 the association acted as a powerful pressure group on government policy and offered one of the very few places where women could make their contribution to social policy. In the spring of 1865 Barbara led the members of the Langham Place group in supporting the election campaign of John Stuart Mill, who had committed himself to female suffrage in his election addresses. In May 1865 Barbara was a founding member of a fifty-strong women-only discussion group called the Kensington Society. It was there that Barbara made contact with John Stuart Mill's stepdaughter, Helen Taylor (1831-1907), who provided a significant link to Mill himself. After consulting Helen Taylor, in May 1866 Barbara formed a committee to gather signatures for a petition to parliament. On 7 June 1866 Mill presented the petition of 'Barbara L. S. Bodichon and others' which protested the anomaly that 'some holders of property are allowed to use this right, while others, forming no less a constituent part of the nation, and equally qualified by law to hold property, are not able to exercise this privilege.' This petition contained the signatures of 1499 women. Her Kensington Society paper, slightly revised and entitled 'Reasons for the Enfranchisement of Women', was read at the Social Science Association meeting held in Manchester in October 1866, where it attracted the attention of Lydia Becker (1827-1890), who then went on to form the Manchester Women's Suffrage Committee early in 1867. The Manchester group asked for 3000 copies of Barbara's pamphlet to encourage another wave of petitioning. In response to hostile articles in the press Barbara wrote 'Objections to the Enfranchisement of Women Considered' (1866). Ten thousand of each of Barbara's pamphlets were circulated in order to encourage further petitioning campaigns. A general petition of 3559 signatures of men and women sympathetic to female enfranchisement was presented in parliament on 28 March 1867 and another petition with the signatures of 1605 'women householders' was presented on 8 April 1867. On 20 May 1867 John Stuart Mill moved an amendment on Disraeli's 'Representation of the People Bill' (clause 4) to leave out the word 'men' in order to insert the word 'person' instead. Although the amendment was defeated by a majority of 123, Mill gained 79 favourable votes. This was as much as Barbara had hoped for on this occasion. Helen Taylor insisted that a women-only suffrage committee should be formed. Barbara disagreed with this strategy, believing that the loss of politically experienced men from their committee might cost them ten years, and she attempted, but failed, to change Helen Taylor's mind. As a consequence Barbara resigned from the general suffrage committee (envisioned as permanent) in June 1867. However, her two articles were combined and published once again in 1869 and 1872 as 'Reasons for and against the Enfranchisement of Women', so she continued to influence public opinion. 
Barbara inherited her father's interest in educational experiments. She founded Portman Hall School in Paddington in 1854, a secular co-educational school, which she financed until 1863. Her experience at Bedford College, which had been founded by Julia Smith's friend Elizabeth Reid, was important because it had revealed to her the inadequacies of the education provided for middle-class girls. She wrote a paper about these inadequacies for the Social Science Association entitled 'Female education in the middle classes', which was reprinted in the 'English Woman's Journal' of June 1858. Barbara had dreamed of a university college for women since first reading Tennyson's 'The Princess' at about the same time as her brother, Ben, went to Cambridge. In 1862 a small group of members of the Social Science Association who were committed to the higher education of women formed a committee which included Barbara and Emily Davies. In the spring of 1867 an executive committee to establish a university college for women was set up by Emily Davies which omitted Barbara's name because she was so publicly associated with 'strong-minded' women's rights campaigners. Nevertheless both women were involved in planning the campaign during 1867. Barbara had caught typhoid in Algeria and was convalescing at Scalands Gate, so Emily spent August with her planning. Barbara promised $1000 to build the college, although she made three conditions: one, that the college should be set up as a secular educational institution; second, that Elizabeth Blackwell should be appointed as professor of hygiene; and third, the college should be in the heart of Cambridge. Emily did not keep faith with Barbara on any of the three issues. Nevertheless, following her father's maxim 'bis dat qui cito dat' ('he gives twice who gives early'), Barbara put down the first $1000 and chaired the building committee to raise money for permanent buildings. Barbara formally joined the executive committee in February 1869 to help organize the entrance examination for students at her Blandford Square home. Barbara was antagonistic to beginning the college in rented accommodation, which she regarded as a waste of resources; nevertheless Emily persuaded the executive committee to begin in a rented house at Hitchin. They began with only five students and Cambridge dons having to travel by train to Hitchin. In the summer term of 1872 Barbara briefly took the role of acting mistress. 
Emily and Barbara continued to argue over the issue of the location of the permanent college. At length a compromise was reached and 50 acres of land was purchased at Girton, 2 miles from the centre of Cambridge. The architect Alfred Waterhouse was commissioned to design dignified but relatively inexpensive buildings. Barbara was involved in all the details of building the college, and sent up furniture and books to help furnish it. She was a frequent and enthusiastic visitor and gave holidays to the early students at Scalands Gate. She remained on the executive committee of Girton College until 1877, when she suffered a stroke which reduced her to semi-invalidism. In 1884 Barbara gave Girton College another $5000 to help it expand. In 1891 she donated all of her pictures that she had lent over the years and in her will she left another $10,000, thus helping to secure the college's establishment without debt in its early years. 
After her stroke in 1877, when Barbara could no longer travel to Algeria, she asked Gertrude Jekyll to design a reading-room as an addition to her Sussex home. This served as a night school for local young men who could not read and write. Her old friend William Ransom, erstwhile editor of the 'Hastings and St Leonards News', taught in it during the winter months. During the six summer months Barbara's husband joined her in England until he himself became too ill to travel. 
Barbara was disappointed not to have children of her own, but one happy result of her involvement with Girton College was that she met a young Jewish woman called Hertha Marks (1854-1923) ['see 'Ayrton, (Phoebe) Sarah], who virtually became a daughter to her. Barbara encouraged Hertha to apply for a scholarship at Girton, and when she did not succeed organized what amounted to a personal scholarship fund so Hertha could go up to Girton in 1876. Barbara died at Scalands Gate on 11 June 1891 and was buried four days later in Brightling church at a funeral attended by family and friends and a long line of her night-school 'boys'. There is a memorial plaque at her Hastings home. In her will Barbara left enough money for Hertha to resume her studies in electrical engineering. Hertha named her daughter Barbara Bodichon after her benefactress. This 'granddaughter', Barbara Bodichon Gould (1886-1950), entered parliament as a Labour member in 1945, thereby embodying and fulfilling Barbara Bodichon's dream of women taking up their full roles as citizens. 


@@@@@


doc= 2756


Bodkin, Sir William Henry (1791-1874), legal writer, the son of Peter Bodkin, descended from a well-established family in the county of Galway, was born at Islington on 4 August 1791. His mother was Sarah Gilbert of Lichfield. He was educated at the Islington Academy. In 1812 he married Sarah Sophia Poland (died 1848), the eldest daughter of Peter Raymond Poland of Winchester Hall, Highgate. He was called to the bar in 1824 by Gray's Inn, of which society he became a bencher in 1826. For several years he worked on the home circuit. He practised in criminal law at the Middlesex, Westminster, and Kent sessions, and at the central criminal court, and was made recorder of Dover in 1832. 
In 1821 Bodkin became honorary secretary to the Society for the Suppression of Mendicity; in the same year he published 'Brief observations on the bill now pending in parliament to amend the laws relative to the relief of the poor in England'. His interest in poor-law reform probably influenced his decision to enter politics. At the general election in 1841 he was returned to parliament as a Conservative at Rochester, as the colleague of James Stoddart Douglas, defeating Lord Melgund by two votes. He supported Peel over free trade in 1846, and was defeated easily in 1847. He did not stand in 1852, but was defeated at a by-election for Rochester in 1856. He was responsible for the passage of a statute stipulating that confirmed paupers should be chargeable to the common funds of the unions. Bodkin's act was passed for one year only; but it was continued and extended. 
In 1859 Bodkin was appointed assistant judge of the Middlesex sessions. He married again on 25 March 1865, his second wife being Sarah Constance Miles, the daughter of Joseph Johnson Miles JP of Highgate. On 3 August 1867 he received a knighthood. He was for many years counsel to the Treasury, and the president of the Society of Arts, of which he was one of the earliest and most enthusiastic members. Bodkin was also a deputy lieutenant of Middlesex and chairman of the Metropolitan assessment sessions. An attack of cancer in the cheek led him to resign his office some weeks before his death, on 26 March 1874, at his house, on West Hill, Highgate. He was buried in Highgate cemetery. He had one son and one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 2757


Bodley, Sir Josias (c.1550-1617), soldier and military engineer, was born in Exeter, the fifth and youngest son of John Bodley (c.1520-1591), merchant and later publisher, and his wife, Joan, 'nee' Hone (died 1586). His brothers included the more celebrated Sir Thomas Bodley (1545-1613), founder of the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and Laurence Bodley (1547/8-1615), Church of England clergyman. During the Marian persecution the family fled to Wesel and Geneva, where Josias received his early education and may have been influenced by such renowned teachers as Calvin and Beza, and certainly by Drusius who corresponded with him and his brothers. After his return to England he studied, but briefly, at Merton College, Oxford. For a long interval he remains obscure. He seems to have been employed in commerce in Danzig, Poland, where the English ambassador noticed him as the son of John Bodley in 1581 ('CSP for.', 15.582). Later, in his 'Journey to Lecale', he wrote about Polish and Irish drinking habits which he participated in and closely observed. 
Bodley chose the soldier's life and by 1615 he could boast of having had three apprenticeships in the army, all of which included continental service. Of his early military career little is known, but he was with Leicester's expeditionary forces in the Netherlands at Leiden in 1586. When Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone, was in the ascendant with his victory at the Yellow Ford in August 1598, Bodley was one of the captains sent with a large force under Sir Samuel Bagenal from the Netherlands to Ireland. Apart from desultory visits to England he spent the remainder of his life and busy career there as soldier, engineer, surveyor, and map maker. He was first stationed at Newry and later at Mountnorris, the new fort erected by Mountjoy in his strategy of encircling Ulster with garrisons and forts; but Bodley was also active with Mountjoy's mobile field army in 1601-2. He won Mountjoy's praise for bravery in skirmishes at Carlingford and particularly for his imaginative attack with Captain Edward Blaney on the island fortress of Loghrorcan near Newry on 6 April 1601 when he had arrows tipped with wildfire shot into the fort, which the defendants deserted leaving much pillage of cattle, sheep, and stores to Bodley's men. At the Spanish landfall at Kinsale on 2 October 1601, Bodley's company moved south to join Mountjoy and Carew. He is much mentioned in the whole Kinsale campaign of both siege and battle there and especially, as trenchmaster-general, in advising Mountjoy on trench plans, and as chief engineer in the erection of siege forts at a stipend of 10's'. per diem. After Kinsale, Bodley was at the neighbouring sieges of Baltimore, Berehaven, and Castlehaven, co. Cork. In January 1602 he travelled to England with a strong recommendation from Mountjoy to the privy council to support his undisclosed ambitions. It is likely that on that visit he donated a quadrant, an astronomical sphere, and other brass instruments, all signs of his mathematical and engineering skills, to the Bodleian Library in Oxford. He is favourably mentioned in the queen's letter to Mountjoy and the Dublin council of 17 June 1602 on the question of what places to fortify in Ireland. 
On his return to Ireland, Bodley was briefly governor of an Armagh garrison, probably Mountnorris in Ulster, but the following year he was transferred to work on the fortifications at Waterford, where Sir Richard Moryson was governor. Bodley was knighted by Mountjoy on 25 March 1604 and from then until 1606 he held the command of the nearby fort of Duncannon. In these years he was also engaged in coastal fortifications in Munster especially at Cork and in Limerick where his engineering skills were much in demand. The Dutch engineer Levan de Rosa and Sir Arthur Chichester, the future lord deputy and driving force in the Ulster plantation, worked with Bodley in selecting sites, drawing up plans which he presented to King James on his next visit to England. He returned with orders to build St Patrick's Fort at Waterford and another at Cork, and he appears to have had a hand in the building of Mountjoy Fort in Ulster, but all on condition of resigning his post at Duncannon and relinquishing his band of foot soldiers for which he gained a pension. In April 1606 Bodley was again in London promoting his own interests and to get arrears of pay. Sir Arthur Chichester urgently wanted him back in Ireland to complete his work on fortifications. In 1607 Bodley was appointed superintendent of castles in Ireland at 20's'. per diem and by the end of that year he was the agent of the English privy council to oversee the forts at Cork, Limerick, Waterford, and Kinsale; it was not a patented post but paid out of the annual Irish establishment list which caused him to run into large debts. His reports of his inspections of fortifications accompanied by Levan de Rosa, by another Dutch engineer, Joyes Everard, and by Sir Henry Danvers, the president of Munster, show him travelling over 700 miles by December 1608. For the improvements to such important forts as Elizabeth Fort, Cork, and St Augustine's, Galway, and to Limerick Castle, Bodley was paid about $6700 in the years 1607 to 1609. 
Not much is known of Bodley's further activities until his involvement with surveying for the Ulster plantations, except that Sir Francis Bacon in writing his 'Certain considerations touching plantation in Ireland' in the summer of 1608 mentioned that a Mr Jones (was it Inigo?) wished to introduce Sir Josias Bodley to him. It is most likely that Bacon had seen Bodley's reports and may have wanted his advice on forts in the plantations. Part of his professional duties was the surveying of land and in 1609 he helped William Parsons, surveyor-general, survey the six escheated counties of Ulster -- Tyrone, Armagh, Coleraine, Fermanagh, Cavan, and Donegal -- but he took full honours for himself and his assistants in the production of a coloured set of maps within sixty-seven days. In 1611 he petitioned for 'some competent allowance during the few days that he has to live' but in the same breath offered to survey all the fortifications in Ireland ('CSP Ire.', '1611-14', 154-5). In 1612 he covered Ulster again with the help of John Ball, making a survey of the progress of the new plantations which apparently so pleased King James that in January 1613 Bodley finally got a patent to be director-general and overseer of the fortifications and buildings in Ireland, for life and at his former salary. In March 1613 he attended the funeral of his brother Sir Thomas, who left him $100, leaseholds in London, and a release from debts due to loans. Sir Josias was still in London in November 1613 when Sir Arthur Chichester asked him to report to the privy council on sites and plans for defence works left incomplete at Cork and Waterford. Maybe because Cecil held the patronage of conferring patents of forfeited Ulster lands, Bodley failed in his application to get a grant on account of the family's friendship with the earl of Essex: he complained bitterly of this not only to Michael Hicks, Cecil's secretary, but, more successfully, to Sir Ralph Winwood (the secretary of state, who married his brother Thomas's stepdaughter), for the latter ordered that arrears of his allowance be paid. Under Chichester's direction Bodley surveyed the plantations of the London Companies in Londonderry; once again he presented his report to the king who was angered at the defects found in the non-fulfilment of the plantations' conditions and, while thanking Bodley, wanted him to extend his investigations into other Ulster plantations in 1616. In the last year of his service in Ireland he surveyed 16,500 acres in co. Wexford for a new plantation there using the improved technique of the surveyor's chain. He was succeeded in his office of director-general of fortifications by the joint appointment of Sir Nicholas Pynnar and Sir Thomas Rotheram. 
Apart from his reports, letters, surveys, and maps Sir Josias Bodley wrote a light-hearted description in colloquial Latin of his journey to and a party at Lecale in co. Down in 1602, in which he extols the delights of hard drinking and the taking of tobacco. (One of several transcripts is published by Falkiner, 1904.) He has perhaps been underestimated as a military engineer and surveyor at a time when military geography was institutionalized in Ireland by the creation of the office of overseer of fortifications, the responsibilities of which he fulfilled with little profit to himself. Bodley was unmarried and died intestate on 22 August 1617, probably in Dublin. He was buried on 26 August in Christ Church, Dublin, where he has a memorial tablet. 


@@@@@


doc= 2758


Bodley, Laurence (1547/8-1615), Church of England clergyman, was the son of John Bodley (c.1520-1591), an Exeter merchant, and his wife, Joan, 'nee' Hone (died 1586). Laurence was the brother of Sir Thomas Bodley, founder of the Bodleian Library, and of the soldier Sir Josias Bodley. Their father, a man of strongly protestant convictions, helped finance the government's suppression of the western rebellion of 1549, and during the reign of Mary took his family to Frankfurt, and then to Geneva, where he opened a printing office and late in 1557 became an elder of the exiles' church. The records of those taking refuge in the city mention the young Laurence. 
The Bodley family returned to England in 1559, settling in London, though Laurence soon left for Oxford. He became a student at Christ Church in 1561, graduating BA in 1566 and MA in 1568. By 1575 he was back in the Swiss confederation as a student of the University of Basel. His talent and his commitment to Calvinistic church discipline were already well developed, for on 13 March 1576, William Barlow (probably the future archdeacon of Salisbury who had been at Oxford with Bodley) wrote to Zurich a letter of introduction on his behalf, trusting that the pastor, Joseph Simler, would treat him kindly: 'He is a man of small stature, but of distinguished erudition and probity, and exceedingly partial to your church' (Robinson, 270). It seems, however, that Bodley did not stay long; before 24 August he had returned to England with a letter from Rodolph Gualter which he delivered to Archbishop Parker. 
Bodley's religious sympathies did not prevent his becoming a notable pluralist. On 27 October 1579 he was instituted to the rectory of Hinton St George, Somerset, on the presentation of Amias Paulet. On 21 March 1580 he compounded for the first fruits of the rectory of Sampford Peverill, Devon, and on 10 August 1580 for those of the canonry of Worminster (not to be confused with Warminster) in the diocese of Bath and Wells. He also held Seavington St Michael, resigning in 1580, and on 17 April 1581 he compounded for the first fruits of the rectory of Seavenhampton, Gloucestershire. The yearly value of these livings in 1581 was more than $50. But Bodley continued to accrue ecclesiastical preferments. He was admitted to the crown living of Shobrook, Devon, on 25 September 1582, and is thought to have built the rectory there. In 1585 he was occupying a house in the cathedral close at Exeter, having been instituted to a canonry. In 1602 the dean and chapter gave eighty-one early manuscripts which were then in the keeping of Exeter Cathedral Library to the library newly founded at Oxford by Thomas Bodley. Outstanding among them was the Leofric missal (now MS Bodley 579), a composite volume of materials from the ninth to the eleventh centuries notable for containing what are probably the earliest English examples of drawings in coloured line. The gift may very well have been inspired by Laurence Bodley, who himself in 1610 gave the large sum of $20 to his brother's library. 
On 30 May 1613 Bodley was admitted DD at Christ Church, Oxford, to which college he donated books. Perhaps it was for the pursuit of his studies that he bought 'my best cristall spectacles which alone cost mee fifteene shillings' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/125, fol. 465'v'). In his later years Bodley and a fellow canon named Leach were rewarded by Exeter city chamber with sugar loaves, 'in approbation of their pains in the morning lecture at St Peters' (Rose-Troup, 724). He also inherited both money and property from his brother Sir Thomas in 1613. Unmarried, he was able to bequeath substantial sums to brothers, sisters, and other members of his family. Bodley left books on divinity to Exeter Cathedral Library and provided $400 for the purchase of land to fund a third lectureship for the city. The lecturer was to be chosen by the mayor and corporation, but should be 'allowed for his sufficiencie and conformitie accordinge to the lawes of the Realme either by the Lord Bishop of the diocesse or by the Lord Archbishop of Canterburie' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/125, fol. 466). The subsequent choice of John Hazard to be the first lecturer led to much contention between the bishop and the town. Bodley died on 19 April 1615, aged sixty-seven, and was buried in Exeter Cathedral close on 9 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 2759


Bodley, Sir Thomas (1545-1613), scholar, diplomat, and founder of the Bodleian Library, Oxford, was born on 2 March 1545 in a house on the corner of High Street and Gandy Street, Exeter, the eldest son of John Bodley (c.1520-1591), religious radical and publisher, of Exeter, and his wife, Joan (died 1586), daughter of Robert Hone of Ottery St Mary, Devon. His brothers included Laurence Bodley (1547/8-1615) and Sir Josias Bodley (c.1550-1617). The family was related to the Bodleys of Dunscombe. 
Being identified with protestant reform during Mary I's reign, 'so cruelly threatned, and so narrowly observed' (Bodley, 'Life', 1), John Bodley departed, probably in 1555, to exile in Europe, and was followed by his family. They resided for a short time at Wesel before moving to Frankfurt, where Bodley was involved in the controversy over the prayer book and ritual which split that congregation. When the party led by John Knox moved to Geneva in September 1556, the Bodley family followed, arriving there in May of the following year. With Bodley were his wife, his brother Nicholas, his sons Thomas, Josias, and Laurence, his daughter Prothesia (Prothesy), and three servants. Also in the party was Nicholas Hilliard (1547?-1619), then aged nine, who had been placed with the Bodley family by his father. John Bodley came to occupy an important place in the English congregation at Geneva. 
It was in Jean Calvin's Hieropolis, meeting place of English and continental religious and intellectual life, that Thomas Bodley received his early education. He was lodged in the house of Philibert Sarrasin, a French physician and schoolmaster. The curriculum included Latin and Hebrew, and he read Homer with the lexicographer Robert Constantin. Although his name does not appear in the register of students, he followed courses in the Geneva Academy from June 1559, when it was founded, to September, when his family left the city. Thus he is able to describe himself as an 'auditor of Chevalerius [Antoine Chevalier] for Hebrew, of Beroaldus [Francois Berault] in Greek, of Calvin and [Theodore] Beza in Divinity' (Bodley, 'Life', 2). After Mary's death, John Bodley returned with his family on 5 September 1559 to London, where he settled and became a freeman of the Drapers' Company later that year. 
Thomas Bodley matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1559. He entered as a commoner and was placed under the tuition of Laurence Humphrey, also a Marian exile and leader of the Calvinists at Oxford. He graduated BA in 1563, and in that year was accepted as a probationer fellow of Merton College, being admitted as a fellow in 1564. His academic career was distinguished by the diversity of his talents and interests. Merton led Oxford at this time in teaching beyond the curriculum, and in 1565 Bodley was appointed its first lecturer in Greek. He served three times as bursar, and was also for a time garden-master. 
Bodley's interest in Hebrew developed, enabling him to translate inscriptions in college deeds and bringing him into close association with Joannes Drusius in the promotion of Hebrew studies in the college, when the latter resided there between 1572 and 1576. His linguistic versatility is shown further by his contribution to the appendix of Humphrey's 'Ioannis Iuelli... vita & mors' (1572) of a Hebrew poem. This poem shows a level of competence in Hebrew that was unusual in Oxford at this time. He also became known outside the college. After taking the MA in 1566 he read natural philosophy in the schools; in 1569 he was elected junior proctor; and for some years he deputized for the public orator, Arthur Atye. In view of his later achievement, the most significant outcome of Bodley's time at Merton was the lifelong friendship established with Sir Henry Savile, who became his principal adviser in the refoundation of the university library. 
Bodley left Oxford in 1576, for 'I waxed desirous to travell beyond the Seas, for attaining to the knowledge of some speciall moderne tongues, and for the encrease of my experience in the managing of affaires' (Bodley, 'Life', 4). In September 1576 he was given leave by the college to travel. Initially, he went to France before spending the next four years in Germany and Italy, achieving proficiency in Italian, French, and Spanish. On his return he continued to reside at Merton, being senior fellow for three years before his resignation in 1586. However, Bodley was frequently absent because he was increasingly involved in state affairs, under the patronage of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, and Sir Francis Walsingham, principal secretary. About 1583 he became a gentleman usher to Elizabeth I and in 1584 was returned as MP for Portsmouth, Hampshire, preferring that seat to Hythe, Kent, which was offered on the recommendation of William Brooke, tenth Baron Cobham, lord warden of the Cinque Ports. In the next parliament he was returned for St Germans, Cornwall. He was not a very active parliamentarian. 
During his European travels Bodley became engaged in the foreign affairs which were to be the chief concern of his political career. In October 1579 his presence in Paris was confirmed by the English special ambassador, Edward Stafford, in reply to a letter from Leicester's secretary, Atye. The resident ambassador, Sir Henry Cobham, entrusted to him, because of his knowledge of their language, negotiations with a group of expatriate Italians in July 1580. Bodley's first major diplomatic mission took place from April to July 1585, when he was dispatched by the queen to Denmark and Brunswick. This was a fruitless attempt to bring together Frederick II of Denmark with the duke of Brunswick, William (IV) Hesse-Cassel, landgrave of Hesse, and other adherents of the Augsburg confession, in a conference which was intended to lead to an alliance in favour of Henri of Navarre and the French protestants. In May 1588 he was sent, unaccompanied and bearing letters in Elizabeth's own hand (in which he is described as 'confidant et sage et secret'), on a mission to Henri III at the time when the French king was forced to flee from Paris by Henri Guise-Lorraine, prince de Joinville and third duc de Guise ('CSP for.', '1588', 611, 629). Bodley claimed that the mission was one of great benefit to the French protestants, and that it contributed to the fall of Guise in September. In August 1588 he was dispatched on an urgent mission to the king of Denmark and the merchants at Hamburg, urging them not to offer assistance to the Spanish Armada ('APC', '1588', 225, 229). 
Between these missions, Bodley married Ann (1564-1611), daughter of Richard Cary of Bristol, on 19 July 1586. She was the widow of Nicholas Ball, a wealthy fish merchant and mayor of Totnes, Devon. It was largely his wife's fortune, inherited from her father, a wealthy merchant (augmented in 1591 by $1000 inherited from his own father), that laid the foundation of Bodley's subsequent career. They had no children. 
Not long after his return from the second embassy to France, Bodley was dispatched upon the most important of his missions, as Elizabeth's ambassador to the United Provinces. His formal status was as one of the two members of the council of state she was entitled to appoint under the treaty of Nonsuch. He was resident at The Hague from December 1588 until early 1597, apart from absences in 1591, when he was granted leave to settle his financial affairs on the death of his father, and again, after the death of his brother Miles, in 1595. On 24 May 1589 a safe conduct was issued for Ann Bodley to take ship to the United Provinces, but it is not clear whether, or for how long, she resided at The Hague. 
Bodley's principal instructions concerned Elizabeth's relations with the United Provinces. Among other things he was to ensure their acceptance of a revised treaty; to require them to give military assistance to her campaign against Spain and to pay the expenses of the English auxiliary forces; and above all to repay her considerable loans, largely borrowed at usurious rates from Sir Horatio Palavicino. In the last matter in particular Bodley was perpetually frustrated. Effective power lay not with the council of state but with the states general, its secret committees, and the advocate-general Johan van Oldenbarnevelt, 'by whom they are strangely ruled and overruled' ('CSP for.', '1592', 51). The states, increasingly prosperous in trade, and under the efficient military leadership of Maurice, count of Nassau, saw little reason to bend to Elizabeth's will, and found endless procedural excuses to delay decisions about repayment. This was a principal reason for Bodley's disillusion and eventual demission from an office he found irksome throughout, and in which he often incurred the queen's displeasure. In May 1595 he wrote to Anthony Bacon that 'I hear for my comfort, that the Queen on Monday last did wish I had been hanged' (T. Birch, 'Memoirs of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth', 2 vols., 1754, 1.244). He asked frequently to be recalled. In October 1592 he wrote to Sir Robert Sidney 'I would I were departing together with your Lordship, being wonderfully weary of this Hage, and this Soile, and this paltrie kinde of People' (A. Collins, ed., 'Letters and Memorials of State', 2 vols., 1746, 1.340). He finally returned to England, disillusioned and ill, in 1597, and resigned from all public service. Bodley seemed naturally destined for higher office, but his ambitions were compromised in the rivalry between the Cecil family and Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, each faction seeking to associate the possibility of his preferment to the secretaryship with their own political aims. Eventually his disenchantment with this 'throng of Court contentions' led him to take his 'full farewell of State imployments' (Bodley, 'Life', 12, 14). His reputation remained high: William Camden gave him much credit for the eventual settlement with the United Provinces. He was proposed in 1598 and 1601 for embassies to France and in 1602 for a resumption of his mission to the United Provinces. In 1604 Robert Cecil, Viscount Cranborne, supported him again for the secretaryship. 
All these proposals were rejected by Bodley, because by now he was completely immersed in the project which was to occupy the last fifteen years of his life: the restoration of the former university library at Oxford. A celebrated passage in the 'Life' relates how: 'I concluded at the last to set up my Staffe at the Library doore in 'Oxford'; being throughly perswaded, that in my solitude and surcease from the Common-wealth affaires, I could not busy my selfe to better purpose, then by reducing that place (which then in every part lay ruined and wast) to the publique use of Students. ('Life', 14-15)' He felt qualified to carry out this task because of his linguistic and scholarly background, wealth, and influential connections. These qualities are implicit in the letter which he wrote on 23 February 1598 to Thomas Singleton, the vice-chancellor, announcing his momentous offer to restore the library at his own expense and 'to stirre up other mens benevolence, to helpe to furnish it with bookes' ('Letters... to the University', 4). After acceptance by convocation of this offer matters moved rapidly. Bodley's letter of 19 March recommended that a delegacy be set up to consider a design which Savile and he would bring before them at Easter. He had already ordered the construction materials, including the timber (a gift from Merton), and arranged for its sawing and seasoning. The shelves were modelled on those in the west wing of Merton College library, which were based on the continental plan introduced for the first time in England in 1589. The delegacy was set up immediately and, since Bodley lived in London, was vital in seeing through the project, as was Savile, who was consulted on all matters of design. In the statutes, which Bodley wrote as early as 1605, and which were accepted by convocation on 12 June 1610, the delegacy was replaced by a body of curators headed by John King, the vice-chancellor. 
Refurbishment was well under way by December 1599 when Bodley wrote to Thomas James, the first keeper of the library, that this phase of the operation would be finished within two or three months. The letters to James which followed, throughout the rest of Bodley's life, deal with every aspect of the library: acquisitions; cataloguing and classification; binding; preservation; cleaning; the receiving of visitors. They constitute a manual of library management, and a uniquely detailed account, from its founder's point of view, of the birth of a great library. In June 1602 Bodley wrote to the vice-chancellor that, the construction work being completed, he had begun to busy himself and his friends about 'gathering in Bookes'. His flair for public relations and 'understanding of the psychology of giving' ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 4: '17th-cent. Oxf.', 137) ensured that the library was famous from its inception. Already in March 1598 Dudley Carleton reported that 'every man bethinks himself how, by some good book or other, he may be written in the scroll of benefactors' ('CSP dom.', '1598', 35). And those who were inscribed in the register, which Bodley saw as a vital part of his fund-raising, demonstrate the extent of his network of well-wishers, including leading courtiers, family, and friends. The first gift reported to George Abbot, the vice-chancellor, in June 1600 was the large number of books taken by Essex in 1596 from the episcopal library in Faro. 
Several London antiquaries, including Camden and Sir Robert Cotton, were benefactors; these, together with a number of academics, such as Thomas Allen and Thomas James, were important in obtaining many manuscripts alienated from monastic libraries, then beginning to find their way through private collections into public access. Many of the gifts were of money and, together with Bodley's own resources, enabled the founder to pursue an extraordinarily adventurous acquisition policy. In this Bodley exercised his own choices, but depended also on the judgement of the booksellers who worked for him: John Norton, who imported twice yearly from the Frankfurt fair; and his apprentice John Bill, who between 1602 and 1604 made several book-buying excursions to Paris and Frankfurt, to a number of towns in Italy, and even to Seville. Bodley's vision extended beyond European languages, and he built up an impressive collection of Hebrew material, and through benefactors such as Paul Pindar, consul of the Aleppo Merchants, works in or on Syriac, Arabic, Turkish, and Persian. Chinese books, regarded by other collectors as curiosities, were acquired by Bodley as early as 1604. 
Bodley insisted that the library should have a respectable collection of books before being opened, and after several delays it was finally inaugurated, in his absence, with about 2000 volumes, on 8 November 1602. It rapidly became internationally renowned. In the first two years of the library's existence twenty-two foreign readers were admitted. It grew rapidly, and a main concern of Bodley's letters was now with the arrangement of the books and with cataloguing. He saw the catalogue as an important feature of the library's first royal visit. James I had already become a patron of the library. On 18 April 1604 he knighted Bodley, and on 20 June issued letters patent granting licence for the library to be endowed with lands in mortmain, declaring that it should be known as 'Bibliotheca ex fundatione Thomae Bodley Militis' (Macray, 31). The king visited the library on 20 August 1605, being presented with a copy of the catalogue. He also made an offer, later rescinded, that Bodley should receive such works as he might select from the royal library. The culmination of Bodley's activities in the acquisition of books came in December 1610 when the Stationers' Company entered into an agreement to supply a free copy of every book registered at Stationers' Hall, ultimately the foundation of legal deposit in Britain. Bodley feared that this source might introduce into the library 'idle books, and riffe raffes', and was anxious about 'the harm that the scandal will bring unto the Librarie, when it shalbe given out, that we stuffe it full of baggage books' ('Letters... to Thomas James', 219, 222). It was perhaps the prospect of the influx of London books which led to a change in the design of the first extension of the library, already proposed as early as 1609, built between 1610 and 1612. Here, for what has generally been agreed to be the first time in England, is to be found wall shelving with a gallery offering accommodation for the increasing numbers of books of smaller format which could not be chained. 
From the outset Bodley was concerned with sound finance and endowment for the library, which until his death he funded personally. In 1609 he purchased from Francis Norris, second Baron Norris, the manor of Hindon, in the parish of Cookham, Berkshire and tenements in Distaff Lane, London, and in his will bequeathed these to the university, ensuring from the rents annual incomes of $90 10's'. and $40 respectively. He was intent on further extension. On 5 November 1611 he wrote to the vice-chancellor outlining an ingenious scheme by which funds might be raised to provide an eastern expansion of the library, which he intended to finance himself. This addition was constructed, as part of the schools quadrangle, under Savile's supervision, after Bodley's death. 
Bodley suffered from increasing ill health during his final years. He long suffered from the stone, and John Chamberlain reported in July 1612 that he was now also afflicted with scurvy and dropsy. Although he seems to have recovered sufficiently to visit Oxford, presumably to see the arts end extension, in August, it seems unlikely that he could have left London thereafter, and he died there, at his house adjacent to St Bartholomew's Hospital, on 29 January 1613. Lady Bodley had died in 1611, and had been buried on 12 June in St Bartholomew-the-Less, where she is commemorated by a monument on which her husband wrote of the twenty-four years of their happy married life. He was buried with much ceremony on 29 March in Merton College chapel, having left $666 13's'. 4died for this purpose. Two volumes of commemorative verse were published ('Bodleiomeneme', by members of Merton, and 'Iusta funebra Ptolemae Oxoniensis Thomae Bodleii'), as well as sermons by John Hales and the public orator, Sir Isaac Wake. His will includes a large number of legacies, amounting to about $1500, to individuals, as well as annual grants to poor people in Oxford and elsewhere. By far the greater part of his fortune was left to the university, and Chamberlain, who computed its value at $7000, recorded the disappointment of many friends and relatives, and complaints of Bodley's being 'so drunk with the applause and vanitie of his librarie, that he made no conscience to rob Peter to pay Paul' ('CSP dom.', '1613', 187). The will was indeed contested, by Bodley's brother Laurence and his niece Elizabeth Willis, who were left $200 and $210 respectively, but judgment was given in favour of the executors. 
A question open to interpretation is that of Bodley's intention in restoring the library. It was asserted first by Thomas Hearne that 'the original design of the library [was] chiefly for books against the Roman Catholicks' (T. Hearne, 'Remarks and Collections', Oxford Historical Society, 11 vols., 1885-1921, 8.262), a view often supported, most recently by D. Trim. However, his coolness towards Thomas James's anti-papist intention in collations of the fathers, his trust in members of Gloucester Hall (then reputedly a home of recusancy), the Catholic connections and sympathies of many of the early donors, and the very universality of the collections argue against so narrow an interpretation. 
Any estimate of Bodley's character and motives should take into account his autobiography of 1608, printed in 1647. This has some claim to be considered the first English autobiography in which an author writes 'a skilfully structured apologia for his career' (Wooden, 62-75). Where the record might suggest a largely frustrated diplomatic career, Bodley claimed one of independence and success marred only by faction; where some of his contemporaries saw ambition and vanity, the 'Life' proposed a disinterested ideal of 'duty towards God' exemplified in 'the true part of a profitable member of the State', who 'need not be the publisher of the dignity and worth of mine owne Institution' ('Life', 14-16). His coat of arms incorporates three crowns. The most plausible interpretation of his motto 'Quarta perennis' is that it derives from an aphorism of Rabbi Schimeon in which the three crowns, of learning, priesthood, and kingship, are surpassed by a fourth, congenial to the Renaissance mind, that of a good name. Posterity will doubtless agree that Bodley's breadth of vision and his single-minded assiduity in the use of his talents and fortune have ensured his renown as the greatest benefactor of Oxford University of his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 2760


Boece, Hector (c.1465-1536), historian and college head, was born in Dundee into the Boyis or Bois family of Panbride in Angus (Forfarshire): Boethius is a Latinized version of the original name and Boece a retranslation. His father was probably Alexander Boyis ('fl'. 1460-1500), a burgess of Dundee, whose name appears in the register of the great seal between 1481 and 1487. 
According to Boece his great-grandfather Hugh had received the lands at Panbride in 1332 through marriage with an heiress, as recognition of his father's death at Dupplin that year, fighting for David II. Boece, however, consistently refers to himself as Deidonanus and refers to Dundee as his 'patria', suggesting that his own family was a cadet branch. His father was none the less wealthy enough to put at least three sons through advanced schooling and to send two for further study in Paris; among Hector's colleagues at King's College in Aberdeen was his brother Arthur, a scholar of civil law, and nearby was another brother, Walter, the priest at St Mary's ad Nives, the parish church of Old Aberdeen. There may well have been other brothers, since other Boises appear in the records in the early years of the sixteenth century; without doubt, the family were important members of Dundee society. 
After his initial education, probably at Dundee grammar school, Boece went to the University of Paris, specifically to the College de Montaigu, probably not later than 1485. Montaigu was then under the leadership of Jan Standonc, a native of Mechelen in Brabant and an austere man, who ran the college under the rules of poverty and discipline. There, as well as following the traditional arts course, Boece met many men who were to make their own mark on Scottish affairs, as he commemorates in his description of his time in Paris in his own 'Vitae episcoporum Aberdonensium et Murthlacensium'. They included John Mair, the scholastic philosopher and fellow historiographer, Patrick Paniter, private secretary to James IV, and George Dundas, later the master of the knights of St John of Jerusalem in Scotland. In addition he also met and struck up a friendship with the great humanist Desiderius Erasmus, receiving from him the dedication of Erasmus's only volume of poetry (1495). Through his acquaintance with Erasmus it is possible that Boece gained an introduction to some of the humanist circles in Paris, including that of Robert Gaguin, who was both a historian of France and a translator of Julius Caesar. After he returned to Scotland, Boece seems not to have maintained any degree of intimacy with Erasmus, though he wrote to him in 1528 when the Dutch humanist had been condemned by the Sorbonne, commending one of his books and assuring him of his esteem. While there was little enough that Boece could do for his old acquaintance, doubtless Erasmus was pleased by any show of support. 
Boece completed his MA in 1492, when he is likely to have been in his late twenties, and thereafter remained at Montaigu as a regent while studying for his degree in theology. Then in 1497 William Elphinstone, bishop of Aberdeen, invited Boece to come to Aberdeen to teach liberal arts at the recently founded King's College. Elphinstone's university was designed to serve the north-east of Scotland and also to provide education for laymen as well as those intending to go into the church. In choosing Boece and his associates as the first teachers Elphinstone was aligning King's College both with humanist study of the arts and also with an austere and orthodox position in religion, an alignment which was evident in the teaching of liberal arts, more particularly of theology, within the college. Once Elphinstone had obtained the foundation charter for King's College, granted on 17 September 1505, he nominated Boece as first principal of the university. The appointment could not have been made previously, since one of the requirements of the principal was that he should hold a master's degree, or at the very least a bachelor's degree, in theology, a qualification Boece could have attained only a little earlier. As principal Boece received a substantial salary, with board and lodging, in return for wide-ranging duties which included administering the finances and the practical running of the college, monitoring the behaviour of teachers and students alike as well as the quality of the lectures. He also acted as the first librarian, an office not laid down in the foundation charters but evident from Boece's signatures and comments on many of the early volumes currently belonging to Aberdeen University Library. He was responsible for teaching theology and arts, and for preaching publicly in the vernacular six times a year. Boece seems to have performed these duties well, keeping the college together after Elphinstone's death in 1514, and furthering its development under Gavin Dunbar, bishop of Aberdeen from 1518 to 1532. As well as being principal Boece was a canon of the cathedral, rector of Tyrie from at least 1509, vicar of Tullynessle by 1528, and chaplain of the altar of St Ninian in the town's kirk of Aberdeen. 
Despite being committed to all these positions Boece continued his own intellectual development. Shortly after gaining his first qualification in theology he also finished his bachelorship in medicine, for he describes himself as a medical graduate in a document dated 1 October 1506. There is only one anecdote of his practising medicine, dating from 1535, late in his life, when he was summoned to the bedside of Thomas Crystall, abbot of Kinloss. Unfortunately Crystall was dying, and Boece was unable to do more than note his condition and ease his passing. Boece's interest in medicine is, however, evident in his writings, where there are some professional considerations of disease and causes of death; his library contained Galen's 'Thegnis, seu, Ars medica' and Pliny the elder's 'Historia naturalis', two standard medical textbooks of the period. Boece also continued his studies in theology, becoming a doctor in the subject in 1528. More famously he also undertook several literary projects. His first book, on logic, was 'Explicatio quorundam vocabulorum ad cognitionem dialecticos conducentium opera', and was printed probably in Paris, in 1519; only one copy, in Glasgow University Library, seems to survive. It has been described as an undergraduate textbook, sound in its approach and particularly strong in the area of inference. That Boece should publish on logic demonstrates that no matter how enthusiastic he was in his devotion to the 'studia humanitatis', his thinking was none the less deeply imbued with scholastic modes of thinking, particularly in philosophy and theology. 
Boece's other works are better known and clearly aspire to humanist models of historiography. The first, 'Vitae episcoporum Aberdonensium et Murthlacensium', was printed in Paris in 1522 by Jodocus Badius Ascensius, a printer from the Low Countries who seems to have been a favourite among Scottish writers. Possibly modelled on Bartolomeo Platina's 'Lives of the Popes', a copy of which Boece owned, Boece's 'Lives of the Bishops of Aberdeen' is primarily a biography of Bishop Elphinstone, whose life takes up nearly half the volume. While the tone of Boece's account tends towards the hagiographic, it nevertheless provides detailed information on the foundation of King's College and on Elphinstone's actions as bishop. The discussion of Elphinstone and King's College was also designed as a goad to Gavin Dunbar, bishop of Aberdeen when the work was published, since it highlights works still to be completed or even undertaken for the benefit of the university. The lives of the earlier bishops are treated more cursorily, though there is more detail as the account approaches Boece's own time. The work demonstrates several of the concerns which were to underwrite Boece's second historiographical work, the 'Scotorum historia', namely the use of antiquity, the relationship of church and state, the importance of morality for rulers, and finally humanist style. 
Boece's greater work is 'Scotorum historiae a prima gentis origine libri xvii'. Published in Paris at the author's expense in 1527, again by Ascensius, the 'Scotorum historia' (as it is generally known) is an account of the Scottish people from their very earliest origins and the foundation of the Scottish realm in Scotland in 330 BC until the death of James I and the capture and punishment of his murderers in 1438. In seventeen books, it takes the form of a dramatic narrative, with speeches before battle, councils, and embassies, in its style emulating classical historiography as exemplified by Livy and thus also contemporary humanist practice as seen in the writings of such men as Marcantonio Sabellico and Paolo Emilio. Boece also makes use of the latest in humanist learning in presenting the recently rediscovered 'Agricola' and 'Annales' of Tacitus as a source. With some help from Tacitus, Boece presents the Scots as a people of antique virtue and unyielding independence, notably through an unbroken line of kings. Throughout the narrative Boece draws attention to the connection he perceives between the austere virtue and devotion to duty of the ruler and good government. That poor rulers, especially in the earlier books, are frequently punished and deposed for their failures and misdeeds does not necessarily mean that Boece himself was a republican or a particularly radical republican, even though that was the interpretation applied to his work by George Buchanan; rather it falls into the category of more general 'advice to princes', common in Scottish literature and historiography, and with an awareness of conciliarist arguments. 
The 'Scotorum historia' is dedicated to James V, to whom Boece presented a copy at its first publication. In return the king rewarded Boece with an annual pension of $50 Scots, which was afterwards doubled, and he also commissioned John Bellenden to make the first translation of the work into Scots. When searching for an account of the Scots to inform his new queen, Madeleine, James seems also to have chosen the 'Scotorum historia' as the basis of a French version. The king's enthusiasm for Boece's account was repeated elsewhere. The Latin edition was reprinted in 1574 and again in 1575 in Lausanne, though circulated from Paris, under the guidance of Giovanni Ferrerio, who met Boece while he was resident at Kinloss Abbey. The later editions contain two further books, 18 and 19, which brought the account up to the death of James III. Ferrerio explains that the additional books remained incomplete at Boece's death, and himself completes the account of James III with a brief annal. Although the additional books are slight there is no reason to doubt that they are of Boece's composition. Narrative sources for the second half of the fifteenth century seem to have been scarce, and perhaps Boece's age disinclined him for extensive research. Polydore Vergil used the 'Scotorum historia' as an occasional source for his 'Historia Anglica' (1534), while both John Lesley's 'De origine, moribus et rebus gestis Scotorum' (1578) and George Buchanan's 'Rerum Scoticarum historia' (1582) depended heavily upon it. 
The 'Scotorum historia' proved just as popular in the vernacular. After completing his first translation of the work for James V, Bellenden embarked on a second, printed in Edinburgh around 1535 to 1540 and allegedly corrected by Boece himself. It is unclear whether this assertion is in fact true, since Bellenden did not translate the additional books, nor do the alterations made for the second translation appear to move the translation closer to the original Latin. However, Bellenden's printed text circulated quite widely, not least to the compilers of Holinshed's 'Chronicles', and hence to Shakespeare. There are two further translations of the 'Scotorum historia', both nearly contemporary with Bellenden's versions. The first, in pentameter couplets, was composed by William Stewart, a courtier of James V; the second, written in prose, is known as the 'Mar Lodge Translation', since the manuscript in which it appears does not contain the name of the author. There are also at least two continuations, one by John Lesley and the other by Robert Lindsay of Pitscottie, suggesting that they at least perceived the 'Scotorum historia' as the standard account of the Scottish past. 
Despite the popularity and immense influence of the 'Scotorum historia' in its various forms, it has always had its critics. On its first publication, other historiographers, particularly those from England such as John Leland and John Bale, criticized its presentation of Arthur and the Brutus myth, crucial to their own versions of the English past. More recent critics have remarked upon Boece's style and approach, contrasting it unfavourably with that of his contemporary at the College de Montaigu, John Mair. In his 'Historia majoris Britanniae, tam Angliae quam Scotiae' (1521), Mair eschews ornate oratory, dismisses the origin myths of both England and Scotland, and applies his logic to arguing his case for the union of the crowns; so great is the difference between the two works that it has been suggested that the 'Scotorum historia' was written with the particular purpose of answering the arguments in 'Historia majoris Britanniae'. However, references to the 'Scotorum historia' in Boece's 'Lives' demonstrate that the author was composing his 'Scotorum historia' before the publication of 'Historia majoris Britanniae', and moreover that the two works -- both published by Ascensius -- seem designed to serve different functions: Mair's argues a strongly held political cause, while Boece's belongs to the humanist fashion for historiography on a grand scale to affirm national identity. 
The most serious criticism of the 'Scotorum historia' has always been focused on Boece's identification of his sources for his account of the early history of the Scots, among whom he cites Elphinstone as well as Veremundus, Cornelius Hibernicus, and John Campbell. No writings by men of these last three names survive, and it is common to question whether such material ever existed independently of Boece. Forgery of this kind was not unknown in the period, and Boece's line of forty kings neatly fills the gap left by his predecessors John Fordun and Walter Bower. It is also clear that the continuous kingship of the Scots underpins Boece's presentation of Scottish identity. Queries about the nature of Veremundus and the others first appear in the sixteenth century, particularly around Buchanan's use of Boece's early narrative. Some commentators, such as Humphrey Lhuyd, were still enthusiastic supporters of the Brutus myth, but others, such as John Twyne, raised serious questions about the authority and nature of Boece's sources. 
The first detailed analysis of Boece's history was undertaken by Thomas Innes in 'A Critical Essay on the Ancient Inhabitants of the Northern Parts of Britain or Scotland' (1729). As a Jacobite, Innes also had a political agenda to meet, but as a scholar he identified the major deficiencies of Boece's narrative: that there is no corroboration for the sources (later references by David Chambres in his 'Histoire abregee' are unreliable, since most of the information on the Scottish past is taken from the 'Scotorum historia'); that Boece used the genealogies contained in Fordun's 'Chronica' and turned them into king-lists; and that some of Boece's material contradicts Roman accounts and other versions of events. Innes believed that Boece's intention was to convince his audience that the deposition of unsatisfactory monarchs had always been part of Scottish government, and that he had invented authorities and manipulated his material to prove it. Innes's view that Boece's sources could not be what he claimed them to be prevailed for the next two centuries, though opinion was divided as to whether Boece had fabricated his authorities as Innes claimed, or whether he had been deceived by a forgery. In the nineteenth century only William Skene considered the possibility of Veremundus's existence. Recent study, however, both of early Scottish historiography and of Boece himself, has suggested that Boece may have been neither a forger nor a dupe. 
Since the first edition of the 'Scotorum historia' stopped its account in 1438, and since the later books in the second edition are so curtailed, the work is a disappointing witness for events in Scotland during Boece's lifetime. There are some interesting anecdotes, such as how Boece's ancestors came to Angus, the action of Katherine Douglas in trying to protect James I by using her arm as a door-bar, and an unexpectedly positive summary of James III in the catalogue of kings at the beginning of the narrative, but nothing more substantial. Boece's 'Vitae', however, is different, being a major source for the life of Elphinstone. Although designed to praise rather than to criticize, this work does offer some insights into Scottish affairs in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, particularly as they affected Aberdeen. Otherwise Boece's principal contribution to modern understanding of his own time is to be found in his expression of the nature of good government and his presentation of national identity. 
As well as being respected for his literary and administrative achievements Boece seems to have been well liked. He was accompanied to Aberdeen by two of his brothers, and by his schoolfriend William Hay, who succeeded him as principal at King's College. He is also recorded as acting as defence in a case in Dundee in 1522, though his advocacy appears to have been unsuccessful. On 5 September 1528 Aberdeen town council awarded him a present of either a tun of wine or else $20 to buy bonnets. Elphinstone evidently made a good choice in the first principal of his new university. There survive two likenesses identified as Boece. One came into the possession of King's College in the early nineteenth century and is reproduced as the frontispiece to the collective volume published in 1937 as 'Quatercentenary of the Death of Hector Boece'; it represents a cleric dressed in the garments of the seventeenth century, and is unlikely to be Boece. The other, also in the possession of the University of Aberdeen, is older and is more likely, though not definitely, the principal. The last mention of Boece in the surviving records was made in 1532, when he witnessed the marriage settlement of Isabella Boyiss, assumed to be a niece. He had died by November 1536, when the king awarded the rectory of Tyrie to another man. He was buried in King's College chapel, where his tombstone is still visible. On the outside of the chapel is his coat of arms together with his initials and a notice of his date of death -- 'ob. 1536'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2761


Boehm, Anthony William (1673-1722), Lutheran minister and religious writer, was born on 1 June 1673 at Osdorf in the county of Waldeck, Germany, the fifth son of Anton Bohme (1623/4-1679), pastor, and Anna Catharina Oynhausen (1640/41-1717). Educated at the newly founded University of Halle from 1693 to 1698 Boehm was the leading representative in England of Halle pietism, a 'new Reformation' within the Lutheran church of Germany, which sought to revive the practice of Christianity through inward and personal spiritual renewal. In Halle, Boehm was influenced by August Hermann Francke, the organizational mastermind and charismatic promoter of Halle pietism. A brief stint as a court tutor in Arolsen, Germany, ended in controversy because of Boehm's uncompromising pietist beliefs. He then moved to London to establish a school for German children; however, his frail, asthmatic constitution curtailed his ability to teach and he lived for years in poverty. His fortunes changed in 1705 when Prince George of Denmark invited him to become his court chaplain at the German Lutheran chapel at St James's, where he remained until his death. 
Boehm's legacy is threefold. First, as the prince's chaplain he carried on an active pastoral ministry even though he was never ordained. His primary role was preaching and Prince George held it in such esteem that he appointed a second chaplain to administer the sacraments. Boehm made weekly visits to the prisons and became a significant figure in their reform. His introduction to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK) resulted from a shared interest in prison reform. Known for his concern for the destitute he was eulogized as 'a Hearty Friend to the Poor at Home' by the secretary of the SPCK (Newman). However, his dominant pastoral concern as a pietist was for the salvation of individual souls. Not only was Boehm engaged in the pastoral care of Germans in London but he also reached out to the thousands of German Palatine emigrants who arrived in London between 1708 and 1710, seeking passage to the New World. By procuring large shipments of bibles and devotional writings he hoped primarily to care for their spiritual well-being. Indeed Boehm and future Lutheran chaplains adopted an unofficial mothering role toward their 'daughter' churches in the colonies, thereby influencing the rise of American Lutheranism. 
Second, Boehm was remembered for his involvement in the SPCK. A newly founded voluntary society, its main 'modus operandi' was education, made evident by its co-ordination of the fledgeling charity school movement and by its distribution of Christian publications. After taking a tour of charity schools Boehm decided to translate and publish Francke's account of the rise of the orphanage in Halle. 'Pietas Hallensis' appeared in 1705, helping to further the charity school movement and to encourage the SPCK. On 7 September 1710 the society, following Boehm's proposal, decided to lend its support to the East India mission. Principally at Boehm's instigation the SPCK became increasingly entwined in international operations that overshadowed its domestic interests for the next thirty years. Most unusually, in the East India mission an Anglican society supported a royal Danish mission in sending German Lutheran pietist missionaries from Halle to southern India. As a non-Anglican SPCK member Boehm prodded the SPCK to sustain its participation. At one point he found himself mediating in a brewing conflict within the society (initiated by Archbishop Thomas Tenison) over the use of non-episcopally ordained missionaries in an Anglican-supported enterprise. The society considered him the 'grand cement' that held together this remarkable effort in pragmatic ecumenism (Henry Newman to William Wake, Middle Temple, 28 May 1722, Christ Church Library, Oxford, Wake MS 24.121). The worldwide focus of the society intensified in 1720; Boehm was the mainspring in persuading the SPCK to take on its most ambitious publishing venture to date, the preparation of an Arabic psalter, 'New Testament', and catechism. 
Finally, Boehm's legacy is seen in his publishing activity. From 1709 to 1721 he kept the East India mission before the English public with updated editions of 'Propagation of the Gospel in the East'. Among his English translations of German works, he translated and edited various works by Francke, including two Latin pieces by which he hoped to contribute to theological study in England. The most influential of Francke's works was 'Nicodemus, or, A Treatise Against the Fear of Man', which John Wesley later abridged and published. The most important author to Boehm, however, was Johann Arndt, whose 'True Christianity', in the early seventeenth century, revived an emphasis on piety lost since the Reformation. Boehm placed high hopes on his translations into both Latin and English of 'True Christianity'; this work best represented his own desire to spread a common, non-sectarian Christianity that would rise above party differences. Many of Boehm's own works were also published, including sermons, catechisms, and his major treatise 'Enchiridion precum' (1715), which consisted of prayers and extracts in over fifty categories. Most of his published sermons were collected in 'Several Discourses and Tracts for Promoting the Common Interest of True Christianity' (1717). From 1705 scarcely a year passed in which Boehm did not publish at least one work. Through his literary output he influenced many Anglicans, nonconformists, and evangelicals; he was one of the few 'respectable' non-Anglican writers who promoted neglected Reformation ideals in the period between puritanism and the evangelical revival. Boehm died, unmarried, on 27 May 1722 in Greenwich, at the country home of his friend Dr Frederick Slare. Isaac Watts wrote of him: 'I fear there are but few such Men in the Ministry, British or German, Episcopal or Presbyterian, etc. I am sorry the World and the Church has sustained so heavy a Stroke' (Isaac Watts to [J. C. Jacobi], Rambach, 40). Boehm was buried at Greenwich on 30 May 1722. 


@@@@@


doc= 2762


Boehm, Sir (Joseph) Edgar, baronet (1834-1890), sculptor, was born on 4 July 1834 in Vienna, the youngest son of Josef Daniel Bohm (1794-1865), court medallist, engraver, and director of the imperial mint at Vienna, and his wife, Maria Aloysia Lussman (1797-1839), daughter of Dominic Lussman. Josef Daniel Bohm was a Hungarian who settled in Vienna in 1813 and formed a major art collection which served as a basis for his son's education. From 1848 to 1851 the younger Boehm attended Leigh's art academy (later Heatherley's) in London and then returned to Vienna, where he studied medal design and modelling at the Akademie der Bildenden Kunste. After visiting Italy he worked in Paris from 1859 to 1862, where he was influenced by contemporary realist practice. 
Boehm's marriage in 1860 to (Louisa) Frances (Fanny) Boteler ('c'.1835/6-1890) was one reason for his decision to settle in London in 1862. Another was the dreary and insular state of English sculpture. Boehm could capitalize on his recent Parisian experience and thus increase his impact. In his sculpture he avoided anachronistic classical idealism. He believed that art which is 'not of its time is failing in the all essential element of common sense' (Meynell, 336). He was equally confident whether carving in marble or modelling in terracotta, a material more common in French sculpture than in English. From the outset critical opinion was divided about Boehm. Francis Turner Palgrave, for example, commented that his 'showy work delighted the vulgar' (Stocker, 'Sculpture', 92), a sentiment echoed by Thomas Woolner, who used his influence to delay Boehm's election to the Royal Academy. 
Boehm's first work to attract major interest was a statuette of William Makepeace Thackeray (1864, National Portrait Gallery, London). Its success led to an edition of seventy plaster casts. Anthony Trollope admired Boehm's rendition of 'the figure of the man exactly as he used to stand before us' (Stocker, 'Royalist and Realist', 63). Thackeray's waistcoat, watch strap and glasses, and his inelegant pose -- with hands in pockets -- immediately distinguished Boehm's realism from the neo-classical mainstream. Boehm also sculpted equestrian statuettes, a genre which as a passionate horseman naturally attracted him. His eye for a horse is evident in bronzes of racehorses and hunters, for example 'Johnny Armstrong' (1863, National Horseracing Museum, Newmarket). Sporting sculpture has been so neglected by art historians that Boehm's introduction of it, under the influence of the French 'animalier' Pierre-Jules Mene, has passed virtually unnoticed. It was, however, admired by contemporary critics, including Edmund Gosse, who noted 'the refinement and delicacy' of his horses (ibid., 307). 
Portrait busts form the majority of Boehm's works. In their quantity and quality they reveal how he effectively cornered the market of the famous and the fashionable. His sitters included James Whistler, John Ruskin, Thomas Huxley, Herbert Spencer, and Franz Liszt. His busts reflect his diversity, ranging from the vivid alertness of 'W. E. Gladstone' (1879, plaster, Victoria and Albert Museum, London) to the sensuously neo-rococo 'Adeline, Countess of Cardigan' (1869, marble, Deene Park, Northamptonshire). Adeline reappeared as a loving widow in Boehm's monument to James Thomas Brudenell, seventh earl of Cardigan (1868-70, St Peter's, Deene, Northamptonshire). Some of Boehm's fifty-seven documented church monuments, such as those in Westminster Abbey to Benjamin Disraeli (1881-3) and Arthur Stanley (1882-4), are highly convincing as portraiture. He collaborated with Philip Webb and Edward Burne-Jones in the charming, lyrical relief commemorating Charles and Mary Howard (1879-81, Lanercost Priory, Cumberland). 
Boehm's work attracted Queen Victoria's attention in 1869. His talents, together with her regard for his 'very gentleman-like, clever and excessively modest' personality (Stocker, 'Royalist and Realist', 80), led to an association which lasted until his death in 1890. In all, he received over forty royal commissions, and he gave lessons to Princess Louise, Queen Victoria's daughter. In 1880 he was appointed sculptor-in-ordinary to the queen and in 1889 was created a baronet. Royal patronage made other sculptors jealous but it was a mixed blessing for Boehm. Some commissions were straightforward, such as the life-sized marble figure of the queen's collie, 'Noble' (1884, the Royal Collection). Queen Victoria's main concern with more ambitious sculptures was for precise renderings of uniform, costume, and likeness. Gosse's gibe that Boehm 'sacrificed humanity to buttons' thus rings true (ibid., 239). His talent for creating what his patrons wanted, his efficiency in delivering the goods, and his gentlemanly inability to refuse a commission meant that he sacrificed imaginative creativity. Among his finest works for Queen Victoria are the effigies of her father, the duke of Kent (1872-4), and her daughter Princess Alice (1878-80), both in the Royal Mausoleum, Frogmore, Windsor. The former is swathed in an impressive marble cloak, while the latter pays moving tribute to Alice's maternal affection. 
Boehm's most famous work is his life-sized statue of Thomas Carlyle (1875; bronze version of 1882, Chelsea Embankment Gardens, London). A close friendship arose between sculptor and sitter, which led to Boehm's undertaking research for Carlyle on portraits of John Knox. There are close links between the 'Carlyle' and Jean-Antoine Houdon's 'Voltaire' (1778, Comedie-Francaise, Paris), a work which Boehm greatly admired. In the portrait Boehm fulfils his belief in treating modern dress 'con amore', while his truthfulness to life and dislike of classical affectation made him the perfect artist for Carlyle. The statue was unanimously praised at the 1875 Royal Academy show and won a silver medal at the Paris Universal Exhibition in 1878. 
Other notable examples of Boehm's fifty-seven known public monuments include the craggy bronze of Field Marshal Sir John Fox Burgoyne (1877, Waterloo Place, London) and the carefully researched historical portraits of John Bunyan (1872-4, St Peter's Green, Bedford) and Sir Francis Drake (1882-3, Tavistock, Devon; 1882-4, The Hoe, Plymouth). One of his most ambitious monuments, to the duke of Wellington (1884-8, Hyde Park Corner, London), was less successful. The central group of Wellington and his mount, Copenhagen, fails to cohere with the corner figures of Napoleonic war veterans, added by the memorial committee as an afterthought. Even less satisfactory was his effigy of Queen Victoria for the jubilee coinage (1887). During its protracted history, changes in design were repeatedly made but the outcome pleased no one, least of all Boehm. With its small crown threatening to slip from the queen's head, the effigy was ridiculed by cartoonists and public alike and was soon replaced. 
These failures lowered Boehm's reputation, and his consequent distress probably hastened his death. His late work, however, did not necessarily deteriorate in quality. An example is 'Cupid and the Mermaid' (1889), which exists in two versions at Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire -- a large outdoor statue and a bronze statuette. The latter, a lithe, lively work, beautifully cast by the Compagnie des Bronzes in Brussels, shows Boehm's willingness to learn from the New Sculpture movement of Alfred Gilbert and Edward Onslow Ford. Like much of the New Sculpture, it was also influenced by Italian Renaissance bronzes. 
Boehm died suddenly on 12 December 1890 at his home, The Avenue, 76 Fulham Road, London, and was buried on 20 December in St Paul's Cathedral. Frances Boehm had died four months earlier. Boehm was survived by three daughters and a natural son. Princess Louise's presence in Boehm's studio when he died provoked press gossip and subsequent, unsubstantiated speculation upon their possible sexual relationship. All accounts agree about Alfred Gilbert's central role in comforting Princess Louise in her distress. What followed was significant: the rapid advancement of Gilbert's career as a sculptor of royalty and the destruction of almost all Boehm's papers. 
Boehm's talented studio assistants included Gilbert, Alfred Drury, Edouard Lanteri, and Robert Glassby. Even allowing for their role, they cannot fully account for the huge total of 360 different works documented in Boehm's name. A collection of 156 letters addressed to Boehm (Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles) which escaped destruction reflects his significance in the Victorian art world. He was frequently consulted by his friend Frederic Leighton, and also by George Frederic Watts, for help with their respective sculptural projects. In turn, he took advice from Gilbert about themes, interpretations, and techniques. Boehm admired Auguste Rodin, another correspondent, and helped secure acceptance of 'The Age of Bronze' at the 1884 Royal Academy show. Despite his delayed election as an associate member of the academy (1878), Boehm was loyal to the institution and lectured there as well as serving as a visitor at the schools. He was elected to full membership in 1881. In addition, he was elected to the Rome and Florence academies in 1880 and 1881 respectively, and to the Akademie der Bildenden Kunste in Vienna in 1890. 
Boehm's art-historical neglect was caused by factors beyond the critical unfashionability of Victorian sculpture. The more innovative talents behind the New Sculpture obscured his own achievements. He was the victim of his own success and consistency. Burne-Jones noted how 'it sickened him to let... life go by and be so little of what he could have been as an artist' (Stocker, 'Royalist and Realist', 281). When Boehm did attempt imaginative, large-scale works, they were less convincing than his portraiture. Gosse observed that 'St George and the Dragon' (1885, Swanston Street, Melbourne, Australia) lacked 'not size, for it is enormous, but largeness, which is quite another thing' (ibid., 290). In his important essay 'The New Sculpture, 1879-1894' Gosse portrayed Boehm as a dominating personality who sought to monopolize prestigious sculptural commissions and to exclude rivals. This, however, is contradicted by his kindness towards and encouragement of other, younger sculptors. An example was his role in securing Gilbert the commission for the Shaftesbury memorial (1886-93) in Piccadilly Circus, London. While he cannot be given the traditional art-historical accolade of a 'genius', Boehm was the most popular, prolific, and successful sculptor of late nineteenth-century England. Examples of his work are in the Royal Collection; the Tate collection; the National Portrait Gallery and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; St George's Chapel, Windsor; and Westminster Abbey and St Paul's Cathedral, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 2763


Bogan, Zachary (1625-1659), classical and biblical scholar, was born about 24 June 1625 at Gatcombe House, Little Hempston, Devon, the third son of William Bogan ('bap'. 1582, died 1658), gentleman, and his wife, Joane Irish, daughter of Zachary Irish. His paternal grandmother was Prothesia (Prothesy) Bodley, sister of Sir Thomas Bodley; the Bogans were originally merchants from Totnes. Having been 'excellently grounded in Grammar, and the Classick Authors' by an eminent local schoolmaster, Mr Batten (Prince, 118), Bogan became a commoner of St Alban Hall, Oxford, in Michaelmas term 1640, matriculating on 13 November, and was tutored by the puritan Ralph Button. On 26 November 1641 he entered Corpus Christi College as a scholar but a year later, the city having become a royalist garrison, he retired to his parents' home. After parliament captured Oxford in 1646 he returned and graduated BA on 21 October. He was elected a probationary fellow of Corpus Christi College in 1647. 
When summoned by the parliamentary visitors on 9 May 1648, most college members objected on legal grounds. Bogan answered, 'When I shal be satisfied in conscience that I may lawfully doe it, I will readily submitt', and was listed for expulsion with the rest (Burrows, 62). He escaped on account of illness: James Metford, one of those expelled, recalled that Bogan was 'consumptive and his death daily expected'; the visitors left him 'by their Charity' as one whom 'twas plain inhumanity to drive out' (Fowler, 217). He was formally readmitted as a fellow on 2 November 1648, and is named in the visitors' register for 1649 and 1651. He became MA on 19 November 1650. Wood described him as 'a retired and religious Student, and much noted in the University for his admirable skill in the Tongues'; he mentioned him with Edward Pococke for excellence in Hebrew and the oriental languages (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.237, 160). Bogan was an outstanding tutor, whose students included Daniel Agas, to whom he left his library, and the antiquary William Fulman. After years of ill health, he died on 1 September 1659 at Corpus Christi College and was buried to the south of the college chapel. He had inherited $1500 from his father, and in his will, dated 1 August 1659, he left most of it to his elder brother William. He bequeathed $500 to sponsor apprenticeships in five Oxford parishes, in appreciation of which his portrait, 'drawn more to the Death, than to the Life (so wan and pale it looks)' (Prince, 121), hangs in the city council chamber. 
Bogan greatly enlarged Francis Rous's 'Archaeologia Attica', a popular companion to Greek studies. His additions (published in 1649 and acknowledged by Bogan in 1654) deal with 'customes in Marriages, Burialls, Feastings, Divinations &c.' A postscript apologizes for this product of 'my 'Tyrocinium'' (first attempt) written 'to divert my humor of Melancholy' but impeded by illness and want of time. In 1652 he recalls being 'in a manner buried alive in melancholy', for months unable to read and for years to remember what he had read. That is in the dedication 'To my honoured father' (sig. *3'r') of 'A View of the Threats and Punishments Recorded in the Scriptures, Alphabetically Composed' (1653), drafted with surprising energy 'in very little more than a fortnight's time' (sig. A2'r'). Bogan had already written 'Meditations of the Mirth of a Christian Life' (1653): not his own experience ('whole yeares altogether in 'Sadnesse'') but what 'other Christians better than I am, 'may' have', and definitely not ''carnall merriment'', which he would have castigated at greater length but for 'a troublesome, and dangerous sicknesse' ('To my honoured mother'; sig. PP2'r'- 'v'). In 1655 Bogan contributed to Edmund Dickinson's 'Delphi Phoenicizantes', a Latin dissertation that connects the giants in 'Job' 26: 5 with Hesiod's Typhon. This line of speculation led to his 'Homerus 'Hebraizon', sive, Comparatio Homeri cum scriptoribus sacris quoad normam loquendi' (1658). Structured as a commentary on Homer, this substantial Latin discourse accumulated comparable expressions from the 'Old Testament' and also the 'New'. Bogan wrote it for pleasure when illness forced him to discontinue a treatise on Greek particles. He never finished that book, or another on the use of the poets. His last publication was posthumous, edited by Daniel Agas: 'A Help to Prayer, both Extempore, and by a Set Forme' (1660). This was another collection of scriptural texts similar to 'Threats and Punishments', unpublishable when written in 1651 on account of its impressively open-minded preface in which Bogan compared the old forms of his childhood worship with the extempore prayer that he now found more affecting. 


@@@@@


doc= 2764


Bogdani, Jacob (1658-1724), still-life and bird painter, was born on 6 May 1658 in Eperjes, upper Hungary, the son of Lucas Bogdani ('fl'. 1656-1684), painter, and his wife, Susanna. He was educated at the Felsomagyarorszagi Evangelikusok Kollegiuma, Eperjes, and probably became his father's pupil. By 1684 he was in Amsterdam -- an obvious refuge at that date for a young protestant with artistic ambitions -- and is documented as still being there in the company of the still-life painter Ernst Stuven (1660-1712) in 1686. By the spring of 1688 he had moved to England and was living in Tower Street, St Giles-in-the-Fields, the area of London in which he probably remained for the rest of his life. In 1693 (on or after 29 November) he married Elizabeth Hemmings (died 1722), and two of their five children survived infancy. According to Vertue, 'he was always a mild gentle temper'd man, courteous & civil' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.127). He was at first known only as 'the Hungarian' but within a short time had 'gain'd great applause & was much employd by people of Quality, in whose possessions are many of his peices ['sic'] to be seen' (ibid.). One of his early commissions was a set of flower pieces for Queen Mary's 'Looking Glasse Closett in the Thames Gallery' at Hampton Court (1694), and he also supplied paintings for William III's palace at Dieren in the Netherlands (1700). Other patrons included the first duke of Devonshire, Edward Harley, the second earl of Oxford, Matthew Prior, Sir Robert Walpole, the first earl of Albemarle, and Queen Anne 'who was pleas'd with his performances & encourag'd him much' (ibid.). 
Both contemporary comment and pictorial evidence indicate that initially Bogdani painted mainly flower and fruit still-lifes in the Dutch manner and that the bird paintings for which he is probably better known today were a later addition to his 'oeuvre'. Clearly influenced by Melchior de Hondecoeter (1636-1695) though lacking his more ferocious elements, Bogdani's exotic and English birds, poultry, game, and occasionally small animals, somewhat improbably grouped in park or landscape settings, are more civilized and restful. They are also meticulously and accurately represented, and richly colourful and decorative -- qualities greatly valued by his aristocratic patrons. Some of Bogdani's earliest bird paintings, a unique record of the rare birds in the famous Windsor aviary of the duke of Marlborough's brother Admiral George Churchill, were acquired by Queen Anne after the admiral's death. 
Bogdani's surviving works, all oil paintings on canvas, are never dated but usually signed 'J. Bogdani'. Occasionally, probably prior to his naturalization in 1700, he signed 'J. v Bogdane' or added the inscription 'Hungarus'. His prolific output and exact repetitions of his more successful images suggest a reliance on sketches and the use of assistants. His son William Bogdani (1699-1771), a distinguished civil servant who 'formerly painted in his father's manner' (Walpole, 143), and his son-in-law, the Transylvanian painter Tobias Stranover (1684-1756), are thought to have been his pupils. They inherited his 'Modells' (probably sketches) and Stranover often adopted motifs from Bogdani's paintings. Many public and private collections contain examples of his work, including the Royal Collection; Chatsworth House, Derbyshire; the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge; the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut; and the National Gallery of Hungary, Budapest. By the end of his life Bogdani 'had gain'd by his industry a pretty fortune' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.127) and owned property in Finchley, Spalding, and Hitchin where he was lord of the manor, a position also enjoyed by his son and grandson. He died 'at his house, the sign of the Golden Eagle, in Great Queen Street', Lincoln's Inn Fields, London (Walpole, 3.143), and was buried on 11 February 1724 at St Mary's, Finchley, Middlesex. After his death his work was largely forgotten until Hungarian interest 'c'.1900 aroused international attention that continued to increase throughout the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 2765


Bogle, George (1746-1781), diplomatist, was born on 26 November 1746 at Daldowie, near Bothwell, Lanarkshire, the third son and youngest of nine children born to George Bogle (1700-1784), merchant and rector of Glasgow University, and his wife, Anne (died 1752), daughter of Sir John Sinclair, fourth baronet (died 1726), of Stevenson, Haddingtonshire, and his wife, Martha Lockhart. He received his early education in Haddington and Glasgow, and after attending the University of Edinburgh from November 1760 to April 1761, he was sent to a private school at Enfield for three years. After six months' travel on the continent, in June 1765 he entered as clerk the counting house of Bogle and Scott in London, of which his eldest brother, Robert, was the head. In 1769 his friends obtained for him an appointment in the East India Company, and the following January he sailed on the 'Vansittart' for Calcutta, arriving there on 19 August. His first letters home provide a vivid description of a devastating famine in Bengal. While serving first as writer with the select committee that had charge of political matters, he quickly learnt Persian. On 10 October 1772 he was appointed assistant secretary to the board of revenue and in that capacity accompanied the governor of Bengal (and future governor-general), Warren Hastings, on a tour to Cossimbazar. On 9 March 1773 he was made registrar of the court of appeals ('diwani adalat') and soon after secretary to the select committee, holding the two posts simultaneously. To save the family home at Daldowie from being sold to meet the debts of his brother Robert, he began from this time to send nearly all his savings to his father. 
For the respect and loyalty he showed to Warren Hastings, already caught in a web of factional strife, Bogle was rewarded by appointment as envoy to the third Panchen Lama of Tibet, Lobsang Palden Yeshe (1738-1780). The lama, a broad-minded scholar-statesman who maintained close contact with many Asian courts, had interceded with Hastings on behalf of the Bhutanese in a border conflict. The governor was quick to exploit this overture, not only with the aim of securing the free flow of British goods across the Himalayas into Tibet but also to satisfy his scientific and scholarly interests. Hastings was exceptionally well served by Bogle, whose qualities of good humour and warm tolerance were matched by diligence and efficiency. After a protracted delay in Bhutan for four months, he and his companion Alexander Hamilton entered Tibet on 23 October 1774, the first Britons ever to reach that country. They were the guests of the Panchen Lama, first for a month at an isolated monastery where he had gone to escape from a smallpox epidemic, and then for five months at his principal seat of Tashilhunpo at Shigatse. The mission returned to India in June 1775 after a further two months in Bhutan. Owing to opposition from the Chinese in this period of the Qing ascendancy in Tibet, Bogle won only temporary and limited commercial gains for the British. However, the very genuine friendship that developed between him and the lama opened the door to further contacts between the British and the Tibetans. 
It is difficult to think of anyone who fits the colonial stereotype less than Bogle. As he admitted, 'I always like to do at Rome as they do at Rome' (Markham, 88). He was quick to adopt Tibetan dress and to master colloquial Tibetan, enjoying many opportunities to indulge in 'merriment' as he feasted with his Tibetan hosts, hunted with the lama's nephews, played chess with Kalmyk merchants, and, it can be assumed, pursued amorous dalliance (see below). Yet he was no profligate, taking his duties very seriously in the course of complex negotiations with many interested parties at Tashilhunpo. The lively prose of his surviving correspondence (preserved at the Mitchell Library, Glasgow) and mission journal (not published until 1876, a hundred years after the mission) reveals a warm, cultivated humanity dedicated to friendship, intellectual curiosity, and the pleasures of life. 
Bogle found himself unemployed on his return to India because the powerful factions opposed to his patron, Hastings, were blocking all nominations. However, in November 1776, after the governor-general had again secured a majority in council, Bogle was appointed both to oversee the renewal of the leases of the company's provinces and to serve as commissioner of lawsuits. In April 1779 Hastings asked him to lead a second mission to Tibet, but this was abandoned when it was learnt that the Panchen Lama had left for Peking (Beijing), where he later died. In September of that year Bogle was appointed collector of Rangpur, where he established an annual trade fair for merchants from Bhutan. In January 1781 he was recalled by Hastings to serve on a new committee of revenue in Calcutta. There he was taken ill and died on 3 April. His tomb lies in the South Park Street cemetery. 
Although Bogle's papers appear to have been censored by his family, it is clear that he fathered at least five children during his career in the east. Two daughters, Martha and Mary, were sent after his death to the care of his family at Daldowie, both later marrying Scotsmen. Their descendants asserted that the girls' mother had been a Tibetan lady called Tichan (Dechen, a common Tibetan name properly romanized as bDe-chen), describing her as 'sister of the Teshoo [Panchen] Lama' (Richardson, 76). She was more probably a niece or other more distant relative of the lama and may perhaps be identified with the Beebee Bogle who was still being paid a pension in Calcutta from Bogle's estate fifty-seven years after his death. Alternatively, that lady may have been the mother, probably a Bengali, of yet another daughter of Bogle, also called Mary, whom he had sent to the care of a friend in London in 1780. Bogle also had two, possibly three, sons, one of whom died on 31 April 1782, and another, George, who was baptized in Calcutta on 10 February 1784 on the same occasion as (his true sisters?) Martha and Mary, who were sent to Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 2766


Bogue, David (1750-1825), Independent minister, was born on 18 February 1750 at Dowlaw, in the parish of Coldingham, Berwickshire, the sixth of the twelve children of John Bogue ('bap'. 1713, died 1786), who became laird and farmer at Hallydown, and Margaret Swanston (died 1805). He was educated at the parish school of Eyemouth and Duns grammar school, whence he proceeded in 1762 to the University of Edinburgh. He studied for the ministry of the Church of Scotland, and received licence as a preacher. 
Bogue's father, however, refused on principle to ask the patron of the Coldingham living, Lord Marchmont, to present him, and instead advised him to seek work in London. Thus in 1771 Bogue taught in schools in Edmonton, Hampstead, and finally Chelsea, with the Revd William Smith, whom he assisted also in his ministerial duties. In 1777 he became minister of an Independent or Congregational chapel at Gosport in Hampshire, and played a key role in the formation of the Hampshire Association of Independent Churches. He provided some tuition for students, and from 1789 was able to develop the Gosport Academy for the education of young men destined for the Independent ministry. On 28 August 1787 he married Charlotte Uffington (died 1824). 
Early in 1792 Bogue emerged as a pioneer in the cause of protestant missions overseas, expressing his concern forcefully in 'A sermon preached at Salters-Hall, March 30th, 1792, before the Society in Scotland for Propagating Christian Knowledge in the Highlands and Islands' (1793). Thereafter he took a leading part in the foundation of the London Missionary Society, notably through his influential appeal published in the 'Evangelical Magazine' for September 1794 and the consultations which it stimulated ['see 'Founders of the London Missionary Society]. He preached the closing sermon at the society's inauguration in 1795, hailing its interdenominational principle as 'the funeral of 'bigotry'' ('Sermons Preached in London at the Formation of the Missionary Society, September 22, 23, 24, 1795', 1795, 130), and was one of the society's original directors. In 1796 he and his friend Robert Haldane of Airthrey planned to go to India themselves as missionaries, but the East India Company refused to sanction the scheme. Bogue's major contribution to the society instead became the education of its missionaries. Most of its directors at first considered this unnecessary, but Bogue convinced them otherwise, especially for those who would work amid the ancient civilizations of Asia; so, from 1800, prospective missionaries were trained at the Gosport Academy with Bogue as their tutor. He retained this position for the rest of his long life, providing a course centred on divinity but not neglecting other subjects. Bogue also took an active part in founding the Religious Tract Society (1799), to which he contributed the first of a series of long-popular tracts, and also -- though less conspicuously -- the British and Foreign Bible Society (1804). 
In 1790 Bogue had published 'Reasons for Seeking a Repeal of the Corporation and Test Acts'. He argued consistently that religious freedom was dependent on civil liberty: initially he hailed the French Revolution with enthusiasm, seeing in it the overthrow of a Roman Catholic tyranny oppressive to protestants. In 1802 he published an 'Essay on the Divine Authority of the New Testament', which was quickly translated into French and other languages, and appeared as the preface to a French edition of the 'New Testament'. During the brief peace of 1802 he visited France. His pacifist principles are clear in his 'On Universal Peace, being Extracts from a Discourse Delivered in October 1813', published as tract 6 of the Society for the Promotion of Permanent and Universal Peace in 1819. 
Bogue's address at the foundation of Mill Hill School, published as 'The Nature and Importance of a Good Education' (1808), demonstrated his concern for a broad Christian and liberal education. His 'Proposal for establishing a university for dissenters' ('London Christian Instructor', May 1820) contributed to the subsequent foundation of University College, London. 
Bogue's major scholarly work was his 'History of Dissenters from the Revolution in 1688 to the Year 1808' (4 vols., 1808-12), prepared in association with Dr James Bennett. A second edition in two volumes was issued in 1833: painstakingly researched, it was for long a standard work. It contains material which remains of value, especially on the dissenting academies and the careers of notable individuals. Written from the standpoint of moderate Calvinist evangelicals, it is polemical in places, for example in its critique of the Arminian Wesley. A major theme is concern for religious liberty -- that peaceable citizens should have the right to form churches 'which the state should neither establish nor oppress, but protect' (1.xxvi). This commitment to toleration is attested by the authors' condemnation of persecution even by regimes of which they approve, such as the reformers of Edward VI's reign, while the religious policy of William and Mary and of the early Hanoverian kings is warmly commended. Other publications included numerous sermons, his theological lectures, and articles in the 'Evangelical Magazine' and other periodicals. In 1815 Yale College, Connecticut, conferred upon Bogue the degree of doctor of divinity. 
Charlotte Bogue died on 26 February 1824; four of their seven children also predeceased him. Bogue himself died at Brighton during the course of a preaching tour on behalf of the London Missionary Society, on 25 October 1825. He was buried at Alverstoke parish church, Gosport, on 2 November. 
Bogue was a moderate Calvinist, but relatively undogmatic as a teacher. His learning was extensive rather than profound. As a preacher he was rational -- even dry -- rather than emotional. Energetic and industrious, firm without being domineering, he was an impressive, indeed patriarchal, figure: one of the most influential Congregationalists of his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 2767


Bogue, Richard (1783-1813), army officer, was the son of John Bogue MD (died 1811) of Fareham, Hampshire, and his wife (died 1806), the eldest daughter of Richard Bargus JP of Fareham. He entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, on 31 January 1797, passing out as a second lieutenant, Royal Artillery, in July 1798, and becoming a captain in March 1806. In June 1813 he went to north Germany with artillery detachments, which were united under his command as a rocket brigade (later the 2nd rocket troop, Royal Artillery), using Congreve rockets. The brigade, the only British unit there, while attached to the army of Bernadotte, the prince royal of Sweden, served at the battle around Leipzig on 16-19 October 1813. On 18 October, while supporting Bulow's corps, which formed the extreme left of Bernadotte's forces, the rocket brigade bombarded the French-held village of Paunsdorff and the enemy, confused, began to retreat. Bogue charged them with his brigade's cavalry escort, a squadron of dragoons. Over 2000 enemy soldiers surrendered. When the rocket brigade then attacked another village and came under heavy fire, Bogue was shot through the head. He was buried next day in the village of Taucha, about 4 miles north-east of Leipzig. He left a widow, the eldest daughter of John Hanson of Great Bromley Hall and of the Rookery, Woodford, Essex, and two infant children. He was awarded, posthumously, the Swedish order of the Sword. His memorial, erected in 1815, is still in Taucha cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 2768


Boheme, Mauritius (fl. 1646-1662), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Kolberg, Pomerania. In a rare reference to Boheme's early life, Simon Ford, minister at Reading, states that 'being a pilgrim in this land, [he hath] by the gracious providence of God been transplanted from his native soil, to labour in Christ's vineyard within this nation', which may encourage the speculation that the family's drastic move was occasioned by zeal or persecution (Bohemus, preface). Certainly Mauritius was the nephew of Johannes Bergius (1587-1658), chaplain to the elector of Brandenburg, but as to the date of his arrival in England it is known only that his parents emigrated some time after the birth in 1628 of Mauritius's younger brother, George (died 1711), later vicar of New Sleaford, Lincolnshire, who after the Restoration was a schoolmaster at Walcot, Lincolnshire. 
Boheme became rector of Hallaton, Leicestershire, some time between the death of a previous incumbent, Edward Shield, who was buried on 16 February 1644, and an incident during the last days of the civil war. On 5 April 1646, the county committee was informed, a band of troopers, having deserted the Leicester garrison in search of plunder, arrived in Medbourne and attacked some of its inhabitants. They then plundered the vicarage, where the minister, Mr Doughty, was entertaining Mr Bohemus, minister of neighbouring Hallaton, and both men were fortunate to escape through a side door. 
It seems likely that at first Boheme's legal status in the parish was insecure or uncertain; John Walker records that his successor had been sequestered, and Boheme compounded for the south portion of the rectory on 3 September 1651. Boheme was married at least three times, first to Jane, who was buried at Hallaton on 14 December 1647. His second wife, Eizabeth, gave birth to a daughter, Ann, baptized on 12 March 1652, but also died at an early age and was buried on 10 July 1654. On 27 February 1656 Boheme married Hannah Vowe, who gave birth to a son, Samuel, on 15 December 1656. 
Mauritius Boheme served as assistant to the Leicestershire and Rutland commission for approving parish ministers in 1654. In that year, he issued 'A Christian's Delight, or, Morning Meditations', with a Latin epistle, dedicating the work to Sir Arthur Heselrige. Evidently the godly ministers of London were anxious to encourage him, for as a second preface by Thomas Jacombe, minister of St Martin Ludgate, reports, several of his brethren in the city, having read the manuscript, 'do unanimously judge this treatise to be sound, wholesome, savouring a spirit of piety'. The following year Boheme issued a translation, dedicated to Cromwell, of an eirenic work by his uncle, Bergius, under the title 'A Pearle of Peace and Concorde'. Walker reports that Boheme was ejected by act of parliament in 1660, and it appears that his successor was instituted to the rectory on 10 October in that year. The Leicestershire antiquary John Nichols, however, asserts that a loose parchment in the parish register maintains that Boheme was ousted from Hallaton only in 1662. All authorities are agreed that not long after his ejection Boheme returned to Germany, but nothing is known of his further activities. 


@@@@@


doc= 2769


Bohler, John (1797-1872), botanist, was born at South Wingfield, near Alfreton, Derbyshire, on 31 December 1797. He began work as a stocking-weaver, but his early interest led him to gather plants and he became a collector of medicinal plants for doctors. His expanding knowledge and experience (and perhaps the extirpation of rare saleable plants) permitted him to forgo the patronage of doctors in favour of more scientific pursuits. He became an expert field botanist and microscopist, traversing England, Ireland, and Wales. In time he became acquainted with almost all the indigenous plants, as well as with many fellow botanists. 
In 1835-7 Bohler published 'Lichenes Britannici, or, Specimens of the Lichens of Britain', containing sixteen fasciculi, each of eight actual specimens, collected and mounted by him, with original descriptions. About 1860 he explored Snowdon and the adjacent mountains and hills under the auspices of a botanical committee of the British Association. As well as papers in scientific journals, his publications include a list of the plants of Roche Abbey in an appendix to Dr Aveling's 'Roche Abbey, Yorkshire' (1870), and a description of the flora of Sherwood Forest in Robert White's 'Nottinghamshire' (1875). Later in life he became a great collector of rare fungi, gathered from widely scattered localities throughout the land. He died at Sheffield on 24 September 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 2770


Bohn, Henry George (1796-1884), translator and publisher, was born on 4 January 1796 and baptized in London on 7 February, the first of four sons of John Henry Martin Bohn ('c'.1757-1843), of Munster, Westphalia, Germany, and Elizabeth Watt, niece of James Watt, inventor of the steam engine; one of his brothers was the bookseller James Bohn. Bohn was educated at George III's expense, his father being the court bookseller. When he left school he joined his father's second-hand bookselling business. After a disagreement with him, he spent a short but successful period working in the City, before being persuaded to return to the family business. At an early age Bohn was entrusted by his father with the purchase of rare books. He travelled to the chief continental centres of the book trade and was one of the few bidders at a book fair at Leipzig on the day of the battle of Waterloo. While working for his father, he began his career as a translator, largely of German authors, although he was also fluent in French. His translations of Schiller and Humboldt afterwards appeared in his 'Foreign Classics' series. He also gained experience of antiquarian books by cataloguing his father's acquisitions and by compiling a list of the library of Samuel Parr, which his father and J. Mawman published in 1827. Later, he assisted William Beckford and the duke of Hamilton in the acquisition of their libraries, being employed by the latter to compile a handlist of his collection. 
Bohn, however, began to perceive that there was little hope of a partnership, and so, with the experience in his father's business behind him and a starting capital of $2000, he set up his own firm at 4 York Street, Covent Garden, London, in 1831, subsequently expanding to take over the neighbouring two houses. In the same year he married Elizabeth Lamb Simpkin ('c'.1802-1890), only child of the bookseller William Simpkin. They had three sons and one daughter. 
His father let Bohn have some remainders at cost price and enabled him to buy stock on the continent before he started up on his own. In 1841, after ten further years of quiet progress, he astounded the book world with his guinea catalogue, so called because of its price. It cost Bohn upwards of $2000 to make and was famous not only for its size -- it contained over 23,000 articles and, with a list of remainders 152 pages long, was the largest of its day -- but also for its descriptions of the works for sale. It became a collector's item in its own right and made Bohn's reputation as a second-hand bookseller. 
In 1843 Bohn's father died and his brother James went bankrupt. Family tensions developed, and, possibly unaware that his father had left instructions that his book stock was to be divided and sold at different auction houses, Bohn sought to dispose of the stock himself. His brothers disputed his right to do so and brought an injunction against him. The matter was resolved and James put back on his feet with the help of his brother John and three investors. 
Shortly after this, Bohn turned to the remainder trade, reissuing dependable and instructive works in cheap formats. The stimulus for this was a dispute with David Bogue of Fleet Street who had published in his 'European Library' series a life of Lorenzo de' Medici containing illustrations for which Bohn owned the copyright. Bohn brought an injunction against Bogue, and started a cheaper, rival series, his 'Standard Library'. When Bogue went out of business, Bohn added the 'European Library' to his own series. The 'Standard Library' was soon followed by the 'Scientific and the Antiquarian' (1847), 'Classical' (1848), 'Illustrated' (1849), 'Shilling' (1850), 'Ecclesiastical' (1851), 'Philological' (1852), and 'British Classics' (1853) series, together with further 'Collegiate', 'Historical', and 'Uniform' series -- over 600 volumes in all. The libraries represented one of the boldest and most successful experiments in publishing serious works at low prices -- initially the 'Standard Library' retailed at 3's'. 6died per volume, while later additions were priced at 5's'. The libraries were successful largely because of Bohn's personal commitment to the project. He was a practical and shrewd man in business, an energetic worker, and tireless promoter of his libraries. He wrote, edited, translated, and indexed works he believed would enhance the series and selected the best of his remaindered copyrights for the purpose. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' commented that these cheap editions 'established the habit in middle-class life, of purchasing books instead of obtaining them from a library' ('GM', 5th ser., 257, 1884, 413), and Ralph Waldo Emerson said that Bohn had done 'as much for literature as railroads have done for internal intercourse' (Mumby, 400). 
Bohn sold many of his works overseas and was all too aware of the problems of international copyright. On one occasion, Bohn's publication of Washington Irving's work, to which John Murray claimed the British rights, brought into public debate the issue of the protection of American copyright in Britain. His strong feelings on the issue led Bohn to publish a report of a public meeting held on 1 July 1851 on the question and he later claimed that he had been 'a main instigator and abettor in overthrowing American and other foreign pretences of copyright in this country' (Bohn, 6). Bohn was also an advocate of free trade in books and in 1852 campaigned as a member of the booksellers' committee against restrictions on their sale. The free traders won their point by the majority of a single vote and the Booksellers' Association was disbanded. Eight years later he objected to the abolition of paper duty, believing it would not lead to the fall of paper prices but to increased foreign competition in the manufacture and export of books to the colonial market. This time the political tide was against him and the paper duty was abolished. 
When it became evident that his sons did not wish to follow him into the business, Bohn decided to retire and sell his various enterprises. In 1864 he sold the stock, copyrights, and stereotypes of the libraries and some other works to Bell and Daldy for $40,000 and they moved into his York Street premises. They continued to publish the libraries, adding their own series including the 'Reference' (1875), 'Novel' (1876), 'Artists' (1877), 'Economics' (1881), 'Select' (1888), and 'Sports and Games' (1891) libraries. In 1921 the last new title was added to Bohn libraries. In January 1875 Bohn sold the remainder of his publishing business to Chatto and Windus for about $20,000. 
Bohn withheld two favourite works from this deal: his 'Dictionary of Quotations' (1867), into which he introduced a few verses from his own manuscript poems, and George Gordon's 'Pinetum' (1875), to which he added an index and a list of plates from three earlier nineteenth-century botanical works. His friendship with the author encouraged him in his own enthusiasm for gardening at his home at North End House, Twickenham, Middlesex, which he had bought in 1850. His remarkable collection of conifers, rare shrubs, and roses was displayed in annual entertainments attended by Charles Dickens, George Cruikshank, and others, and his plants frequently figured in illustrated gardening journals. 
After the sale of his publishing business Bohn catalogued his general second-hand stock which he kept in several Covent Garden warehouses, and secured temporary premises at his father's former business address in Henrietta Street. His contribution to bibliography resides largely in his enlargement and revision of W. T. Lowndes's 'Bibliographer's Manual' (1864) carried out between 1857 and 1858, which is based on the knowledge he had gained through his acquisitions. The auction of Bohn's collection in 1872 contained many rare and valuable books including some volumes from the library of Horace Walpole. It raised above $13,500. 
Many of Bohn's original works testify to his practical involvement in the projects he endorsed. For instance, he published a working plan to create a catalogue of the library of the British Museum, and played an important role in the Great Exhibition in 1851 and in the subsequent Crystal Palace Company. He also wrote for the Philobiblon Society on the progress of printing and contributed a 'Biography and Bibliography of Shakespeare' (1864), drawing on his revised edition of Lowndes. Through his participation and regular attendance at meetings and debates, he played a valuable part in the life of the societies of which he was a member. These included the Society of Antiquaries, and the Royal Horticultural, Linnean, and the Royal Geographical societies. 
One of the works Bohn contributed to his libraries was a guide to the collection of pottery, which grew out of his own interest in and knowledge of the subject. He had begun collecting seriously in the mid-1830s, accumulating a historical collection of rare and curious examples of pottery including some fifty pieces of so-called Lowestoft porcelain and earthenware, some bought from descendants of workers. Between 1875 and 1878 he sold this collection together with his china, porcelain, and ivories, raising nearly $25,000. After the sale, and with more room in his house, he turned his mind to pictures and in his eighties he compiled a catalogue raisonne. He revised the proof just before his death and his daughter, Elizabeth Munton, finalized the catalogue. Speculating on the size of her father's collections his daughter estimated he 'must have bought about a dozen [pictures or virtu] a month for 50 consecutive years' ('The Times', 1 April 1885). The final part of his art collection was sold in March 1885 raising about a further $20,000. Bohn died on 22 August 1884 at his home, North End House. 


@@@@@


doc= 2771


Bohn, James George Stuart Burges (1803-1880), bookseller and bibliographer, was born on 20 December 1803 in London, the son of (John) Henry Martin Bohn ('c'.1757-1843), bookseller of London, and his wife, Elizabeth, niece of James Watt. The translator and publisher Henry George Bohn (1796-1884) was his brother. He was educated at Winchester College, and was also sent to Gottingen to study German and French. 
Bohn assisted in his father's business for some years, and in February 1834 began bookselling on his own account at 12 King William Street, Strand, London, where his knowledge of literature and bibliography soon attracted customers. Bohn's shop became a meeting place for a number of distinguished scholars and Bohn published catalogues in 1834 and 1837. Then in 1840 he produced a substantial catalogue which became a reference source for bibliographers; it included nearly complete lists of the works of Gilbert Burnet, Daniel Defoe, Thomas Hearne, and Joseph Ritson. Despite these accomplishments, or perhaps because they were unprofitable, this first shop failed as a business. 
Bohn's second bookselling venture lasted from 1845 until 1847, this time at 66 St James's Street, London. Here he published an eight-volume edition of Sir William Dugdale's 'Monasticon Anglicanum' (1846). After this second business failed in 1847 he made his living by writing. Bohn's work included contributions to the 'Family Herald' and service as assistant editor on 'The Reader'. In 1857 he prepared another scholarly catalogue, this time of theological books in foreign languages, for the bookseller David Nutt. In later years he was employed to compile catalogues of foreign-language books for his friend Nicholas Trubner, the bookseller. James Bohn married, at Lenton, Nottinghamshire, on 2 October 1832, Elizabeth (1809/10-1871), third daughter of John Stones, coachmaker. They had at least two sons. Bohn died at Peckham, London, on 4 January 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 2772


Bohun, Edmund (1645-1699), writer and press licenser, was born on 12 March 1645 at Ringsfield, Suffolk, the only son of Baxter Bohun ('bap'. 1616, died 1658) and his wife, Margaret Lawrence (died 1687). Edmund's father and grandfather, also Edmund, both died in 1658, leaving the thirteen-year-old boy the family's estates in Suffolk. On 11 February 1662 Edmund was admitted as a fellow-commoner to Queens' College, Cambridge, but he left in 1666 without a degree, apparently having been driven out by the plague. On 26 July 1669 he married Mary Brampton (died 1719), and the following year they settled at Westhall Hall, near Halesworth. He became a Suffolk justice of the peace in 1675. From 1677 Bohun wrote a diary intermittently which charted his struggle with debts, deafness, and the damage wrought by his abrasive personality. In his first published work, 'An Address to the Free-Men and Freeholders of the Nation', which appeared in three parts in 1682-3, he recalled that he had been 'bred a dissenter... and taught betimes to fear Monarchy', but as JP and writer he assailed religious diversity and disloyalty to 'jure divino' kingship ('Address', 3). An adversary called him 'as furious a Prosecutor of Protestant Dissenters as was to be found in England', although John Dunton praised him for 'a wit so pregnant and prompt' (Blount, 17; 'Diary', 100). 
In 1684 Bohun moved with his wife to London, aiming to write to 'earn my bread' and hoping for preferment from acquaintances including Archbishop William Sancroft ('Diary', 77). In 1684 he wrote 'A Defence of Sir Robert Filmer' against Algernon Sidney's scaffold speech, and in 1685 he published and prefaced an edition of Filmer's 'Patriarcha', based on a manuscript supplied by Sancroft. In 1688 Bohun witnessed William of Orange's entry into London and argued against continued support for James II, with the result that 'by the end of February, I had not one friend left' (ibid., 83). His 'History of the Desertion', published in April 1689, provided one of the first narratives of the 'Stupendious Revolution' (p. 13), while the apparent volte-face on his part was discountenanced by 'The doctrine of non-resistance or passive obedience no way concerned in the controversies now depending between the Williamites and the Jacobites' (1689). His acceptance of William alienated his Jacobite acquaintances but he was also a target for the whigs, both generally for his tory views and because of allegedly pro-James changes made without his knowledge to a second edition of his 1688 'Geographical Dictionary'. 
Despite this unpopularity, in August 1692 Bohun was recommended for the post of licenser of the press by John Moore, bishop of Norwich, assisted by a manuscript defence he wrote of the 1662 'Licensing Act'. He took up the post on 7 September, at $200 a year, and 'thought myself the happiest man alive' ('Diary', 98). The happiness was short-lived. On 2 December he heard that his son Humphrey, the eldest of six children surviving childhood, had died at Cambridge (ibid.). Then on 11 January 1693 Bohun licensed an anonymous tract attributed to Charles Blount, 'King William and Queen Mary conquerors, or, A discourse endeavouring to prove that their majesties have, on their side against the late king, the principal reasons that make conquest a good title'. Bohun, who had used conquest arguments in his 'History', said he read the book 'with incredible satisfaction'. However, when it was published a few days later, 'the title alone offended almost everybody' (ibid., 103). The Commons ordered Bohun's arrest, burnt the book, and declared that asserting William and Mary to be king and queen by conquest undermined their rightful title and the rights of the English people. On 28 January Bohun was removed from his post. The episode suggested the unworkability of the licensing system and within two years the 'Licensing Act' lapsed, ending pre-publication censorship. A traditional view held that Bohun's endorsement of conquest theory was so singular that the book was a satire intended to trap him, but more recently Bohun's own claim that the subject had 'been treated of very often before' has been largely confirmed (ibid.). In the 'History', a manuscript account, and the 'Diary' Bohun deployed a 'jus gentium' argument derived from Grotius to insist that William's and Mary's title was not founded on 'de facto' conquest 'but upon her majesty's hereditary title, brought into present possession by the vanquishing of King James in a just war, and his deserting the kingdom' (ibid., 119-20). Bohun protested that his dismissal was based not only on a failure to read the book but to read the full title, which indicated that the conquest was of James, not of the nation. 
Bohun saw the affair as a plot to remove him, evidenced by the publication by an 'outrageous whig' of 'The Just and True Character of Edmund Bohun', appended to a tract against licensing ('Diary', 100). He returned to Suffolk but complained of being ejected as a JP 'by the republican party'. In 1698 Bohun left England to become chief justice of South Carolina, where his son Edmund was a merchant. Letters indicate that he managed to antagonize several settlers before falling victim to a fever epidemic. He died on 5 October 1699. Bohun's eight-volume collection of printed and manuscript tracts and papers, covering 1675-92, is in Cambridge University Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 2773


Bohun, Henry de, first earl of Hereford (c.1175-1220), magnate, was the son of Humphrey (III) de Bohun (b. before 1144, d. 1181) and Margaret (died 1201), daughter of Henry of Scotland, earl of Northumberland, and widow of Conan (IV), duke of Brittany. He was identified in 1185 as a minor, aged ten, in the custody of his grandmother, Margaret de Bohun (c.1121-1196/7), daughter of Miles of Gloucester, earl of Hereford. She was administering his estates in 1187, but he had been given control of his own lands by 1190. He attested a number of her charters and accounted for relief for her lands in 1197. The elder Margaret brought to the Bohuns her family's claims to a royal constableship and to the earldom of Hereford. The office of constable had been granted to her son, Humphrey (III) de Bohun by 1174 and was inherited by Henry de Bohun, who styled himself 'Henry the constable' in a number of his early charters. Despite his youth he occasionally attested charters of Richard I and was one of the king's sureties in negotiations with the count of Flanders in 1197. He married Maud or Matilda (died 1236), the daughter of Geoffrey fitz Peter, earl of Essex, and sister and heir of William de Mandeville, earl of Essex. Charters issued to Llanthony Priory by Henry, as earl of Hereford, indicate that their son, Humphrey (IV) de Bohun, was born after 28 April 1199. 
King John created Bohun earl of Hereford by charter on 28 April 1200, explicitly prohibiting him, with Bohun's acquiescence, from making any claims by virtue of a charter issued by Henry II to his ancestor Roger, earl of Hereford. His grandmother's determination was a factor in this process of restitution, but his political significance also owed much to the fact that his mother was a granddaughter of David I, king of Scots, and that, in 1199, the king of Scots was his uncle, William the Lion. Between 1204 and 1211 he was engaged in a long dispute to establish his claim to part of his mother's dowry lands, the estates and twenty fees of the lordship of Ryhall, Rutland. Relations between King John and Earl Henry deteriorated in 1212 when William (I) Longespee, earl of Salisbury, laid claim to Bohun's honour of Trowbridge. The king assumed control of the honour, but allowed Earl William's agents to levy scutage from its tenants. In protest Bohun joined the rebels against the king, and was one of the twenty-five barons appointed to ensure that 'Magna Carta' was observed ['see also 'Enforcers of Magna Carta]. His lands were seized by the crown in June 1215, and he secured the restoration of his honour, although not of Trowbridge Castle, later in the year. 
On John's death Earl Henry remained loyal to Louis of France, and was taken prisoner at the battle of Lincoln on 20 May 1217. He made peace with the new government, attending the court of the young Henry III, receiving the third penny of Herefordshire, and accounting for scutage. He died on pilgrimage to the Holy Land on 1 June 1220; the transfer to his son, Humphrey, of his responsibilities and eventually his lands was in hand before Michaelmas 1221. His widow married Roger of Dauntsey, of Dauntsey, Wiltshire, between 1221 and 1226, and in 1227 succeeded to the earldom of Essex, which was eventually also inherited by her son Humphrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 2774


Bohun, Humphrey (III) de (b. before 1144, d. 1181), constable to Henry II, was the son and heir of Humphrey (II) de Bohun ['see below'] and his wife, Margaret de Bohun (c.1121-1196/7), the eldest child of Miles of Gloucester, earl of Hereford. The family name was derived from St Georges de Bohon in the Cotentin, from where Humphrey (III)'s great-grandfather, Humphrey 'with the beard', came to England with William the Conqueror. During William Rufus's reign this Humphrey's son, normally described as Humphrey (I) de Bohun, married Maud, the daughter of Edward of Salisbury, and as a result acquired estates based on Trowbridge, Wiltshire. He died 'c'.1123, leaving 
Humphrey (III) de Bohun attested several of Henry II's charters as constable, an office previously held by Miles of Gloucester, and distinguished himself on the king's side in the war of 1173-4. He was in the royal army at Breteuil in August 1173, and with the justiciar Richard de Lucy later sacked Berwick and led troops into Lothian against William the Lion, king of Scots, before having to return south to deal with rebellion in England. In October 1173 he featured prominently in the defeat and capture of the earl of Leicester and others at Fornham near Bury St Edmunds. He witnessed the treaty of Falaise between Henry II and the king of Scots at the close of 1174. Through his marriage, which took place between February 1171 and Easter 1175, to Margaret (died 1201), daughter of Henry of Scotland, earl of Northumberland (died 1152), and widow of Conan (IV), duke of Brittany (died 1171), he became brother-in-law to the king of Scots. He died while a member of the army led into France towards the end of 1181 by Henry II's sons to assist Philippe II against the count of Flanders, and was buried at Llanthony (Secunda) Priory, Gloucestershire. He left a daughter, Matilda, and a son, Henry de Bohun, who in 1187 was a minor in the custody of Margaret de Bohun, the widow of Humphrey (II) de Bohun. 


@@@@@


doc= 2775


Bohun, Humphrey (IV) de, second earl of Hereford and seventh earl of Essex (d. 1275), magnate, was the eldest son of Henry de Bohun, first earl of Hereford, and Matilda or Maud, daughter of Geoffrey fitz Peter, earl of Essex, and sister and heir of William de Mandeville, earl of Essex. His father (the first Bohun earl of Hereford) died in June 1220, and in June the following year, at the petition of King Alexander of Scotland and the barons of England, Humphrey was permitted to succeed to the family estates, concentrated for the most part in the Welsh marches and in Wiltshire, including the castle of Caldicot in Monmouthshire and a share of the honour of Trowbridge. Through the marriage of Humphrey's grandfather to Margaret, sister of King William of Scotland, the Bohuns also controlled a considerable estate in Scotland. In February 1225 Humphrey de Bohun witnessed the reissue of 'Magna Carta' as earl of Hereford, and his title to the third penny of the county of Hereford was confirmed in October 1225, presumably at the same time that he was belted as earl. William de Mandeville died in 1227, leaving Bohun's mother as countess of Essex for the remainder of her life. Following her death in August 1236 Bohun succeeded to her title, and to the honour and castle of Pleshey in Essex. Earl Humphrey married twice. His first wife was Matilda, daughter of Raoul de Lusignan, count of Eu (died 1219), whom he had married by 1238 and who brought her husband various lands in Kent. She died on 14 August 1241 and was buried at Llanthony. He married second Matilda of Avebury, who died on 8 October 1273 at Sorges in the Dordogne. 
In 1227 Bohun joined the earls of Cornwall, Chester, and Pembroke in their brief confederation against the king, but he served on the king's expedition to Brittany in 1230, and, at the coronation of Queen Eleanor in 1236, carried out the ceremonial duties of marshal of the king's household. In 1237 he made a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela, and in 1239 he was one of the sponsors at the baptism of Edward, the king's first-born son. From 1239 until 1241 he was sheriff of Kent and constable of Dover. He took part in the king's expedition to Poitou in 1242, and in 1244 assisted the repression of a Welsh rising on the marches. However, later that same year the Welsh rose again, angered, it was said, by Bohun's retention of the dower lands of Isabella de Briouze, his son's sister-in-law and the wife of Dafydd, son of the Welsh prince Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (died 1240). In 1246 Bohun was among the English barons who wrote to the pope in defence of the liberties of the church in England. In 1250 he took vows as a crusader, but seems not to have gone on crusade. Two years later he was one of the barons who spoke in defence of Simon de Montfort against the king. In 1253 he joined the king's expedition to Gascony, but took offence at the actions of the king's Lusignan half-brothers who had inflicted summary punishment upon various Welsh mercenaries, without referring the case to the court over which Bohun presided as hereditary constable of the king's army. As a result he returned to England together with various other leading barons. In 1257 he was one of those set to defend the marches against attacks from the Welsh. 
Humphrey de Bohun joined the confederation of the barons in 1258, and was appointed to enforce the sentence of banishment imposed upon the king's Lusignan kinsmen. Under the provisions of Oxford, he was elected to the baronial council of fifteen and in 1260 was nominated as justice on eyre for the counties of Gloucester, Worcester, and Hereford. Thereafter, however, he broke with the party of Simon de Montfort, and renewed his support for the king, receiving custody of the Welsh lands of the honour of Gloucester between July 1262 and August 1263. He was one of the royalists captured at the battle of Lewes in May 1264, in which his son, Humphrey (V) de Bohun (known as Humphrey the younger), took the side of the barons. Humphrey the younger was himself taken prisoner during the royalist victory at Evesham in 1265, after which Earl Humphrey obtained the reversion of his son's lands. In October 1265 he served as royalist keeper of the city of London, and in 1266 was one of the arbiters appointed to administer the dictum of Kenilworth. He died on 24 September 1275 and was buried at Llanthony (Prima) Priory, in Monmouthshire. 
Shortly before his death Bohun had conveyed the honour of Pleshey to his younger son, Henry de Bohun. The remainder of his estate passed to his grandson, Humphrey (VI) de Bohun (d. 1298), son and heir of Humphrey the younger, who had died in captivity on 27 October 1265, at Beeston Castle, near Chester. Besides his son Humphrey, Bohun had other sons named Henry, John, and Savaric, and at least four daughters, including Matilda, the wife of Anselm Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1245). He was a regular though not lavish patron of the religious orders, granting and confirming lands to Llanthony, to the Mandeville abbey of Walden in Essex, and shortly before his death to the nuns of Lacock in Wiltshire. Despite his supposed hostility to the king's alien courtiers, it is intriguing to note the Poitevin and Gascon connections of both of his wives. 


@@@@@


doc= 2776


Bohun, Humphrey (VI) de, third earl of Hereford and eighth earl of Essex (c.1249-1298), magnate, was the son of Humphrey (V) de Bohun (died 1265) and Eleanor, daughter and coheir of William (V) de Briouze (died 1230) and his wife, Eva, one of the daughters and coheirs of William (II) Marshal. Humphrey inherited his titles and paternal lands, centred in Essex and Wiltshire, directly from his grandfather, Humphrey (IV) de Bohun, on the latter's death in 1275. Through his mother Humphrey (VI) gained a significant stake in the march of Wales, consequently playing a leading role in the Welsh wars as well as in the politics of Edward I's reign. 
Humphrey (VI) de Bohun's father was wounded and captured at the battle of Evesham in 1264 and died in captivity the following year. His son was only sixteen, so the Briouze lands were taken into royal custody. Henry III granted the marcher lordship of Brecon to Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester, along with the heir's marriage. Bohun inherited his mother's lands when he came of age in 1270, and promised Gloucester $1000 for his marriage, but Brecon was controlled by Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, who had conquered much of the Welsh marches in 1262-3. Indeed, Bohun had earlier joined his father in the struggle against Llywelyn. 
During the 1270s Humphrey de Bohun fought to regain his inheritance, attacking Llywelyn's men in Brecon. By 1275 the venture had largely succeeded, and in 1276 Bohun was among those lords in the king's council who gave judgment against Llywelyn. He served with Edward I in Wales in 1276 and again in 1277, and, when the campaign ended, he received protection from the king to go on pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. 
Bohun fought in Wales throughout the 1280s, when his relations with neighbouring lords degenerated into private warfare. In 1284 Edward awarded possession of Iscennen, which bordered on Brecon, and which Bohun felt belonged to him by right of conquest, to John Giffard. Bohun raided on Giffard's lands and men, but a royal court supported Giffard, and Edward confirmed his grant of Iscennen to Giffard in 1289. Irritation between Bohun and the earl of Gloucester had also been building. The latter claimed that Bohun had not fully paid his marriage fine, while Bohun chafed at being ordered to serve under Gloucester in 1282, as well as at Gloucester's appointment as captain of the army in Brecon in 1287. More dangerous was Gloucester's construction of a castle at Morlais, on the border between the lordships of Brecon and Glamorgan. Bohun was in an awkward position. His Welsh holdings were not as substantial as those of other lords were, he had never fully subdued the Welsh in Brecon, and now he was confronted by two assertive neighbours interested in enlarging their territories. In 1289-90 Bohun appealed to the king for aid against Gloucester, thereby breaking with marcher custom, but Gloucester seized the initiative and raided Brecon in February 1290, justifying his attack by citing those same customs. After two more raids and counter-attacks Edward asserted his authority and ordered the antagonists to appear before a royal tribunal. The final sentences, handed down in parliament in January 1292, condemned both to prison and declared Glamorgan and Brecon forfeit, though Bohun gained his freedom with a fine of 1000 marks and recovered Brecon on 15 July. 
Bohun was punctilious in upholding the dignity of his position. In 1277 he proffered the military service that he owed as hereditary constable of England, and throughout the subsequent campaigns in Wales he consistently served without pay. His request in 1282 for his wartime profits as constable prompted a search of exchequer records to ascertain the extent of his rights. In the previous year, when summoned to answer a complaint about unjust distresses, he asserted that the king's statutes had no place in his lands and refused to appear, at which the king marvelled greatly. Bohun's claim to the custody of the manors of the bishop of St David's in Brecon resulted in armed conflict during a vacancy in 1280, and was pointedly overruled by the king in parliament in 1293. Four years later Edward sent royal commissioners to hear complaints by the men of Brecon against Bohun and to take them into the king's peace, directly undermining the earl's lordship. 
Bohun's sensitivity about his rights, and the rebuffs that he received at Edward's hands, explain why he became such a staunch opponent of the king during the crisis of 1297. Edward's wartime demands had produced widespread resentment. When in parliament in February 1297, he asked the magnates to serve with him in Gascony, Roger (IV) Bigod, earl of Norfolk and marshal of England, refused. Edward went ahead and summoned an army, but when it was to be mustered, both the constable and the marshal refused to perform their duties. In July, at a meeting between the king's representatives and the barons near London, Bohun gave a lengthy speech summarizing the causes of complaint and demanding remedy. This formed the basis of the 'Remonstrances', the written articles submitted by the barons. Edward also tried desperately to raise money, but Bohun and Bigod appeared at the exchequer in August with an armed force to prevent the collection of any taxes. The danger passed when the Scots invaded England and Edward made concessions to the opposition in the documents known as the 'De tallagio' and the 'Confirmatio cartarum'. Both Bohun and Bigod received pardons, and then marched off to Scotland to defend the realm. 
Bohun married Maud, daughter of Enguerrand de Fiennes, in 1275. Their son Humphrey (VII) de Bohun (d. 1322) inherited the family estates on his father's death. Humphrey (VI) died at Pleshey on 31 December 1298, and was buried at Walden Priory, Essex. The Bohuns had long been patrons of Walden, and Humphrey (VI) de Bohun was remembered there as one who 'did much good to our monastery' (Dugdale, 'Monasticon', 4.141). His benefactions included licensing the monks to accept lands given or sold to them by his tenants. 


@@@@@


doc= 2777


Bohun, Humphrey (VII) de, fourth earl of Hereford and ninth earl of Essex (c.1276-1322), magnate and administrator, was the son and heir of Humphrey (VI) de Bohun, third earl of Hereford and eighth earl of Essex (c.1249-1298), constable of England, and his wife, Maud de Fiennes, daughter of Enguerrand, seigneur de Fiennes. Edward I received his homage and granted livery of his father's lands on 16 February 1298. Bohun attended the marriage of Edward I to Margaret of France at Canterbury on 10 September 1299. In 1300 he was present at the siege of Caerlaverock, and in the following year he was among those barons who sealed a letter of grievances to the pope. He married Elizabeth, youngest daughter of Edward I, and widow of John, count of Holland, in 1302; among their children was William de Bohun, first earl of Northampton. Before the marriage he surrendered all of his lands and rights as both earl and constable to the king. They were regranted jointly to the earl and his wife after the wedding took place. In October 1304 he was to have accompanied the prince of Wales to Amiens to perform homage on his father's behalf for Aquitaine, but the journey was not undertaken. In 1306 he and his wife were granted Lochmaben Castle and all the lands of Robert Bruce in Annandale. He participated at the knighting of Edward of Caernarfon (the future Edward II) on 22 May 1306, fastening one of the prince's spurs. Later, in the Scottish campaign, he served with Thomas of Lancaster, investing the castle at Kildrummy. 
Early on in Edward II's reign, Bohun seems to have been well disposed to the new king. He witnessed the grant of the earldom of Cornwall to Edward's Gascon favourite, Piers Gaveston, in August, he dined with the king in August and September, and he was present at court in October and November 1307. He attended the Wallingford tournament in December, when Gaveston defeated a party including himself and the earls of Arundel and Surrey. When he accompanied the king to France for his marriage to Isabella in January 1308, however, he appears to have entered the baronial opposition that was beginning to develop. He sealed the so-called Boulogne agreement which foreshadowed the opposition that was to emerge, led by the earl of Lincoln, at the parliament of April 1308. Nevertheless, at the coronation of Edward II he bore the sceptre with the cross, and throughout 1308-9 he was frequently present at court, as his presence as a witness in the charter rolls attests. In 1310 he was elected as one of the lords ordainer, appointed to reform the king's household and government. According to the 'Vita Edwardi secundi' he refused to accompany the king on the Scottish campaign of 1310-11 because of his hatred of Gaveston. Edward II stripped him of the constableship, but restored him to the office on 28 August 1311. When Gaveston returned from his third and final exile early in 1312, Bohun was among the magnates who organized opposition to the king and his favourite. He was charged with protecting Essex and the east while others hunted Gaveston down. Following Gaveston's capture Bohun was present at Warwick and participated in the deliberations that resulted in Gaveston's execution on 19 June. Indeed, on 18 June letters were sealed by the earls of Lancaster and Warwick guaranteeing Bohun against any losses he might suffer as a consequence of this act. He was active in the subsequent peace negotiations with the king, and was among those pardoned by Edward in October 1313. In the following year he fought at Bannockburn and was taken prisoner. According to the 'Vita Edwardi secundi' a dispute between Bohun, constable of England, and the young earl of Gloucester over who should have precedence in the line of attack was a major factor in the English failure. Bohun was subsequently exchanged for Elizabeth de Burgh, wife of Robert I. 
From 1315 until 1320 Bohun was regularly present at court, where he is constantly found as a witness in the charter rolls, eclipsed in the frequency of his attendance only by the Despensers. The full nature of his reconciliation with the king is clearly indicated by his presence at Kings Langley on 3 January 1315 for the long-delayed burial of Gaveston. On 11 February 1316 he was appointed captain of the English forces being raised to suppress the revolt of Llywelyn Bren in Glamorgan, and in this he was successful. Later in the year he was appointed to the committee established to reform the king's household and kingdom, but by 1317 he had entered an indenture of service with the king on very favourable terms. He was present at the negotiation of the treaty of Leake in 1318, and he was appointed to the new council that resulted. In 1318-19 he served in the war with Scotland. 
Throughout this period, however, the power and influence of the Despensers had grown inordinately. As an important marcher lord Bohun was the natural leader of the opposition to the younger Despenser's territorial aggrandizement. On 30 January 1321 he was sent a royal order not to attend or assent to an illegal assembly that he was about to hold with other magnates, including the earls of Arundel and Surrey. It is likely that soon after this he met with Lancaster to form an alliance. On 16 March the king occupied Bohun's castle at Builth for the latter's failure to appear at a conference with the earl marshal. Further warnings from the king and denunciations of the favourites by the marchers led to an escalation of tensions but no settlement. On 4 May Bohun and the marchers began the destruction of the Despenser estates. In the short term the marchers' objectives were achieved and the Despensers were driven into exile. But the king soon recalled them and showed an unwonted zeal in prosecuting a counter-offensive against his baronial foes in the autumn of 1321. Bohun occupied Gloucester in December, and burned Bridgnorth and destroyed its bridge. Forced to go as far north as Shrewsbury, Edward crossed the Severn on 14 January, after which many of the marchers, including the Mortimers, surrendered. Bohun withdrew to Pontefract, and on 23 January the king ordered the confiscation of his goods. Edward consolidated his grip on the south before turning north for a final confrontation with Bohun and the earl of Lancaster. This came on 16 March 1322 at Boroughbridge, where Bohun was killed in battle. He was buried at the Dominican house in York. 
Described in the Caerlaverock roll as 'a rich and elegant young man', Bohun's fluid political loyalties characterize the problems of Edward II's tumultuous reign. He was succeeded by the second of his six sons, John. Another son, Humphrey, succeeded John as sixth earl in 1335. 


@@@@@


doc= 2778


Bohun, William de, first earl of Northampton (c.1312-1360), magnate, was the fifth son of Humphrey (VII) de Bohun, fourth earl of Hereford and ninth earl of Essex (c.1276-1322), and Elizabeth (1282-1316), daughter of Edward I. He and his twin brother, Edward (died 1334), were close personal associates of the young Edward III and took part in the ambush and arrest of Roger (V) Mortimer, earl of March, at Nottingham Castle in 1330. In November 1335, when a papal dispensation was granted for his marriage to Elizabeth, 'nee' Badlesmere, the widow of Mortimer's recently deceased heir, it was stated that the alliance had been arranged specifically to heal the enmity between the two families. Bohun quickly established himself as a prominent figure in the king's household and participated actively in Edward III's Scottish wars. He fought in Scotland in 1333 and, as a knight-banneret of the household, led a contingent of sixty mounted archers on the Roxburgh campaign of 1334-5. He served on the summer expedition of 1335 with forty-three men at arms and eighty mounted archers, and was campaigning in Scotland again in 1336 when he was also appointed to negotiate an Anglo-Scottish truce. 
Such service was handsomely rewarded. Already in 1332 Bohun had been granted a series of manors formerly held by Thomas of Brotherton, earl of Norfolk; his wife, Elizabeth, not only brought to Bohun her dower from the Mortimer marriage but was also coheir to the estates of Giles Badlesmere. On 16 March 1337 Bohun was created earl of Northampton and was granted, in expectation, the lordships of Stamford, Fotheringhay, Grantham, and Oakham, together with a life interest in the shrievalty of Rutland; until he came into these rights, and to ensure that he maintained the income of $1000 deemed appropriate to his new estate, he was granted annuities from the customs revenues and the farms of London and Essex. In the 1350s Bohun added further to his landed base through purchases, particularly around the lordship of Brecon and in Essex. 
Bohun's promotion, like that of the other five earls appointed in March 1337, was intended to replenish the ranks of the military aristocracy in preparation for the impending war with France. In the winter of 1337-8 he was employed in negotiation with the French; and in the following year he represented the king in discussions with prospective allies in Brabant and Flanders and accompanied Edward on his journey to Koblenz. Having been sent back to England to treat with the council at the end of 1338, he spent 1339 in the Low Countries and participated in Edward III's campaign in the Cambresis and the Thierache. After travelling to England with the king for the spring parliament of 1340 he returned to the continent, and took part in the battle of Sluys on 24 June 1340. The loan of $800 to Edward III on the eve of this campaign was a mark not only of Bohun's loyalty but also of the king's desperate shortage of cash; ironically, in July, Bohun was temporarily arrested in Brussels as a hostage for the debts owed by Edward in the Low Countries, and he only escaped further victimization by absconding from the city of Ghent with the king in November and fleeing to England. 
Bohun played some part in Edward III's subsequent hostile attack on the domestic administration led by Archbishop John Stratford. He was present at the Tower of London when the chancellor, Robert Stratford, was forced to resign the great seal on 1 December 1340. He also acted as the king's spokesman in discussion with the archbishop when the latter was excluded from parliament in the spring of 1341, and was among the peers later appointed to hear the charges made against Stratford. But the reconciliation between king and archbishop in October allowed the aristocracy to turn its attention back to war, and on 20 July 1342 Bohun was appointed as Edward III's lieutenant in the duchy of Brittany. He raised the siege of Brest, defeated Philippe VI's candidate for the duchy, Charles de Blois, at Morlaix in September, and laid siege to Nantes. Although he gave up the lieutenancy on 2 April 1343 and spent most of the following two years in England planning an ultimately abortive diplomatic mission to Avignon, he was the obvious choice of commander for the new offensive planned against Brittany by Edward III in 1345, and was reappointed as king's lieutenant there on 24 April 1345. He joined in Edward III's invasion of Normandy in 1346, fought at Crecy, and participated in the early stages of the siege of Calais; but his replacement as lieutenant of Brittany on 10 January 1347 signified his return to diplomacy, and between 1347 and 1349 he was occupied in negotiations with the Flemings and the French. 
The early 1350s saw another change of focus, as Bohun was deployed as warden of the Scottish marches, admiral of the fleet in the north, and commander of Carlisle; he was present at Roxburgh in January 1356 when Edward Balliol surrendered his claims to the Scottish throne to Edward III. He accompanied the king to Calais in 1355, took part in the French campaign of 1359-60, and was one of the English witnesses to the treaty of Bretigny (8 May 1360). He died on 16 September 1360 and was buried on the north side of the presbytery at the Benedictine abbey at Walden, Essex. His wife, who had died in June 1356, was buried at the London Blackfriars. 
Despite his busy military career, Bohun took part in the political and cultural life of the English court. He was a frequent witness to royal charters and, when in England, a regular participant in the council. He was present at tournaments held at Dunstable in 1334 and 1342. Although not a founder member of the Order of the Garter, he was quickly recruited into its ranks to fill the stall left vacant by the death of Sir Hugh Courtenay in September 1349. His friendship with Edward III probably facilitated the rehabilitation of his stepson, Roger (VI) Mortimer. As cousins to the king Bohun and his brothers enjoyed a particularly exalted status, and Edward III provided the gilt cloth used at the earl's funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 2779


Boileau, Sir John Peter (1794-1869), antiquary, was born at Hertford Street, London, on 2 September 1794, the eldest son of the John Peter Boileau (1747-1837) and his wife, Henrietta (died 1817), the daughter of the Revd George Pollen of Little Bookham, Surrey. His father, who had been a member of the council at Masulipatam, had returned to England in 1785 and invested his Indian earnings in the Tacolneston estate in Norfolk. The family was descended from Charles Boileau, baron of Castelnau and St Croix, a Languedoc Huguenot immigrant to England in 1691, and his French aristocratic origin, even more than his recent nabob inheritance, gave Boileau a taste for heraldry, genealogy, and antiquities, and a decidedly masterful streak of personality. 
Boileau was educated at Merton College, Oxford (he matriculated in 1811 but did not take a degree), and at Edinburgh University. He was commissioned into the rifle brigade on 9 September 1813, and served under Lynedoch in the Netherlands, where he was present at the capture of Bergen-op-Zoom. On 14 November 1825 he married Lady Catherine Sarah Elliot (died 1862), the third daughter of the first earl of Minto. He acquired Thursford Hall, near Fakenham, and then in 1836 the Ketteringham estate, where he built a spacious Gothic hall and resided from 1841. On 24 July 1838 he was created a baronet in the coronation honours. A prominent whig, Boileau was a county magistrate and a deputy lieutenant; he was high sheriff of Norfolk in 1844. 
In London Boileau was connected with many learned and charitable organizations and at various times served as a vice-president of, among others, the Archaeological Institute, the British Association, the Royal Institution, the Society of Arts, the Statistical Society, and the Zoological Society. He was elected FRS on 1 June 1843. 
Wealthy and civilized, Boileau was a learned antiquary with a keen interest in local, especially Roman, history. His estates included the site of the large Roman fort Garianonum, at Burgh Castle, just over the Suffolk border, near Great Yarmouth. He was a founding vice-president of the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological Society, and its president from 1849. He published a number of papers in 'Norfolk Archaeology' (volumes 5 and 7), and commissioned from Joseph Hunter a monograph on Ketteringham published in the same journal (3, 1852, 245-314) and reprinted for private distribution. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 9 December 1852, and served two four-year terms as a vice-president of the society between 1858 and 1867. 
Boileau's diligent local service and cultivated metropolitan activity are reflected in his diary, now in the Norwich City Library. This was skilfully drawn on in 1960 by Owen Chadwick, whose 'Victorian Miniature' portrays a strong personality of pious disposition and a high sense of pastoral responsibility to his rural tenantry. By way of contrast Chadwick also had the use of the diary (in private hands) of William Wayte Andrew, the evangelical vicar of Ketteringham. Andrew was as proud-spirited a minister to his flock as his squire was a paternal governor of his broad acres. The contrasting journals provide an unusually detailed vignette of acrimonious relations between mansion and parsonage, but one which nevertheless confirms Boileau's high contemporary reputation in antiquarian circles. 
Boileau, who died at Torquay on 9 March 1869, was buried at Ketteringham. He had four sons and five daughters; his second son, Francis George Manningham Boileau, succeeded him in the baronetcy and estates. 


@@@@@


doc= 2780


Bois, John (1561-1644), biblical translator, was born on 3 January 1561 at Nettlestead, Suffolk, the only child to live to adulthood of William Bois (1513?-1591), rector of West Stow, Suffolk, and his wife, Mirabel, 'nee' Pooley ('c'.1513- 'c'.1601). William Bois, an early protestant and a scholar (he was a foundation fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge), who originated in Yorkshire, gave his son an ideal start as a 'Bible' scholar. By five John Bois had read his 'Bible' through, by six he could write Hebrew, and he learnt Greek. Home education was supplemented by the grammar school at Hadleigh, Suffolk, whose master, John Still, was also master of St John's College, Cambridge. Still was probably influential in Bois's being admitted to St John's aged fourteen. Bois records that he was admitted on 12 November 1575, but also that his parents sent him to Cambridge on 27 February, presumably 1576, and that he was admitted on 1 March; he had matriculated in the Easter term of 1575. Andrew Downes, fellow of the college and regius professor of Greek, delighted in his knowledge of Greek and gave him special tuition in the most demanding Greek authors. After six months Bois was chosen as a scholar, and he it was who composed Greek epistles for various college occasions. He graduated BA early in 1579, and in 1581, aged twenty, he was elected fellow. Though he had smallpox at the time, Downes and his tutor carried Bois in his sickbed to be admitted, almost costing him his life but ensuring he lost no seniority. He proceeded MA in 1582. 
Bois thought of studying medicine but, imagining he had every disease of which he read, gave it up. Yet his constitution was strong. He often walked the 20 miles from college to his mother's house for dinner, reading as he walked if he fell in with tedious company. Throughout his life he was careful of his health. He picked and rubbed his teeth so assiduously that, in his biographer Anthony Walker's phrase, 'he carried to his grave almost an Hebrew alphabet of teeth' (Allen, 147), that is, about two-thirds of his teeth. He ate only dinner and supper, with nothing in between except occasional aqua vitae and sugar for wind, and would allow an hour or more for digestion, either sitting or walking. Following three precepts for health from William Whittaker, a master of St John's for whom he wrote a funeral oration, he always studied standing, never studied in a window, and never went to bed with cold feet. 
If health was a fetish, study was a passion. Bois frequently worked from four in the morning until eight at night in the university library; even in old age he studied eight hours a day. Elected lecturer (praelector) on 2 January 1582 and Greek lecturer on 4 November 1588 (re-elected 1590, 1593, and 1595), he proceeded BTh in 1590 and was appointed principal lecturer on 4 July 1595. He supplemented normal teaching with a voluntary 4 a.m. lecture in his chambers. He became a thoroughly dutiful senior dean (appointed on 11 December 1593), and when a senior fellow (from 11 June 1593) he initiated the practice of moderating after set speeches. The college gave him $100 when he left for a life in the church and marriage. 
Bois's career in the church was, like the man, modest. He was ordained deacon at Norwich on Friday 21 June 1588, and priest by dispensation the following day. When his father died in 1591, his mother wished to stay at West Stow, so, through the patronage of her brother, Bois took the living, but resigned it when she went to live with the brother. By this time one Holt, rector of Boxworth, some 6 miles from Cambridge, had died, providing a dowry and a spouse for one of his daughters (her name is lost). He gave her the patronage of the living, and requested some friends that, 'if it might be by them procured, Mr Bois of St John's might become his successor by the marriage of his daughter' (Allen, 137). Bois and Miss Holt, it seems, had not met. Bois was instituted to the living on 13 October 1596 and married Holt's daughter on 7 February 1597 or 1598. 
Bois's exemplary conduct as rector and from 25 August 1615 as a prebend of Ely is fully described by Walker. He prayed that he might live only so long as he could preach, and serve God and his people as minister. Taking nothing but his 'Bible' into the pulpit, his ambition was always to be understood by all. Although he published nothing of his own, he remained a scholar and a teacher. At Boxworth he established a weekly study circle with eleven or twelve other ministers. He usually kept a scholar to help with his children's education and that of the poorer local children, and he took in children of gentlemen as boarders and students. 
Bois's lasting claim to fame is that he alone of the men who worked on the King James 'Bible' made notes on some of the discussions. Though some of the Cambridge fellows were jealous, thinking they needed no help from the country, Bois was appointed in 1604 to the second Cambridge company to work on the 'Apocrypha'. His old mentor, Downes, was also a member. Walker, who had his information from Bois but is not wholly reliable, thought parts were done individually. Bois, he writes, 'showed me the very copy he translated by', and adds, 'but, to my grief, I know not which part' (Allen, 139). At this time Bois spent six days a week at St John's and one in his parish. He undertook a second part, presumably of the 'Apocrypha', this time having commons in another college. By the end of 1608 James I was hurrying the work to a conclusion. The Cambridge, Oxford, and Westminster companies each sent a copy of their work to London, and their delegates reviewed the work. Bois and Downes went from Cambridge, probably as representatives of the 'Apocrypha' group, though Walker writes that they were the only two to go from Cambridge and that they met with 'four fellow labourers'. Bois's priceless notes were long thought lost, but a copy was discovered in Corpus Christi College Library (MS CCC 312, Fulman collection). A second copy was found in the British Library (Harley MS 750); this, though in some ways inferior because of weaknesses of the copyist, appears to be a copy of Bois's original, and shows that the Fulman manuscript was a copy of a copy. 
Bois was always a note taker and maker. After hearing a sermon, for instance, he would note the date, text, and preacher and much of the content. His notes of the discussions have the same qualities and are personal memoranda on nearly 500 points in the epistles and 'Revelation': the text at issue is recorded and the discussion of it summarized with occasional references to his own views if they differed from those of his colleagues. They reveal the highly scholarly nature of discussions which characteristically focused on the meaning of the original. His interest is always in the problem rather than the eventual solution adopted for the English of the 1611 'Bible'. 
The notes contain frequent references to St John Chrysostom. Both Bois and Downes contributed extensively to Sir Henry Savile's multi-volume edition of Chrysostom, and the page references in the notes show that they were made after the publication of the 1610 volume and before the publication of the 1611 volume. Sadly, the work on Chrysostom led to an estrangement between Downes and Bois. Downes, by now a cantankerous old man, thought Savile preferred Bois's work to his own and remained unreconciled with his former pupil at his death. 
In 1628 Bois moved to Ely, though he retained the living of Boxworth until 1636. The following year he became rector of Thorpe Parva. His marriage was not always smooth. Bois left money matters to his wife and unawares found himself in debt. To clear this, he sold at great loss 'his darling', his library. Perhaps because of this there was strife between the two of them and he was rumoured to have thought of going overseas. Although his wife's temper was not always the best, things mended, and at her death on 16 May 1642 Bois described her as his 'dearest wife, with whom, in blameless marriage, I have lived five and forty years and more'. They had four sons and three daughters; the second son, John, and oldest daughter he saw married, the latter, Mary ('bap'. 1599, died 1638), to William Walker, father of Anthony Walker (bap. 1622, d. 1692). 
Bois's inclination for fame was as slight as his learning was great. In his will of 6 June 1643 (copied in Walker's manuscript) he was most careful of his books and papers. Some borrowed books were to be returned with his apologies for having filled their margins with annotations. His own books and papers were to be 'skilfully regarded & duely looked unto'. Among the papers was an incomplete collation of commentaries intended to have covered the whole 'New Testament', eventually published in 1655 as 'Veteris interpretis cum Beza aliisque recentioribus collatio in quatuor evangeliis, & Apostolorum Actis'. Of sums totalling $244 in his will, $80 went to the poor of Boxworth and Ely, and $20 to reparation of the church at Boxworth. Bois's youngest daughter, Anne, already had $500 following her mother's death. Bois died at Ely on 14 January 1644 and was buried there on 6 February. Of his children, only John and Anne survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 2781


Boisil (d. c.661), prior of Melrose, is reliably recorded only in the pages of Bede. He was celebrated among his contemporaries as a learned and holy priest and spiritual guide, and in 651 his reputation attracted Cuthbert to his community, in which Boisil held office under Abbot Eata, and he became the future saint's spiritual director. As well as teaching his pupil the scriptures, he inculcated in him by personal example the duty of going out to visit and preach to the inhabitants of neighbouring villages. When 'c'.659 Eata and Cuthbert were summoned south by Aldfrith, son of King Oswiu of Northumbria, to establish a monastery at Ripon, Boisil remained at Melrose. He died of plague about 661. Cuthbert, who had by then returned from Ripon, attended him during the last week of his life, and according to Bede received prophecies about his future career and elevation to the episcopate. In later life Cuthbert spoke with great affection of Boisil, and reputedly, although reluctant, accepted episcopal office as the fulfilment of his dying master's words. 
Boisil is known to have inspired a similar affection in, and to have exercised similar posthumous influence over, at least one other pupil, a companion in Ireland of the Northumbrian 'peregrinus' and bishop, Ecgberht. When Ecgberht was planning a missionary visit to Germany 'c'.716, Boisil appeared to this man in two visions to forbid the proposed expedition and command Ecgberht to go to Iona instead. His injunctions were obeyed and eventually resulted in the conversion of Iona to the generally observed method of calculating Easter. 
Bede reports that Cuthbert spoke of Boisil as a saint. An eighth-century stone reliquary-coffin, fragments of which survive at Jedburgh and which perhaps originated at Melrose, may be his shrine, but the identification is far from certain. His remains were allegedly translated to Durham by Alfred Westou 'c'.1120, together with those of other saints associated with Cuthbert, and placed next to Cuthbert's shrine. Boisil's cult is commemorated by the place name St Boswells, Roxburghshire, and in the dedication of the church at Tweedmouth. His cult spread in Scotland and England in the middle ages, and he is commemorated in calendars on 23 February, 7 July, and 9 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 2782


Boissier, George Richard (1790/91-1858), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Robert Boissier of Penshurst, Kent, and his wife, Barbara Goring. He was educated at a school at Kirby Hill, Yorkshire, and matriculated at Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1824. He graduated BA in 1828, the same year in which he published anonymously 'Notes on the Cambridgeshire Churches'. Drawing its terminology from Thomas Rickman's 'An Attempt to Discriminate the Styles of Architecture in England' (1817), it was an unusually early work of ecclesiology. Boissier's comments concerning unsuitable later additions to medieval churches, such as singing galleries, anticipated the arguments of the Ecclesiological Society, as did too the central message of his preface. Here he complained that the churches of Cambridgeshire and other counties were sadly neglected, describing them rather colourfully as 'cold, comfortless, unhealthy; the haunts of colds, catarrhs, and rheumatism; the receptacle frequently for filth, and the abode of toads and reptiles' (Boissier, 'Notes', 13). 
Boissier was ordained deacon on 2 March 1828, and priest on 14 June 1829. He was curate of Chiddingstone, Kent, in 1828, and subsequently became the priest-in-charge of Oakfield, Penshurst. He died at Penshurst on 23 June 1858. 


