@@@@@


doc= 27027


Taylor, George Ledwell (1788-1873), architect, was born on 31 March 1788 in London, the son of Henry Taylor and his wife, Elizabeth. He was educated at Rawes's academy, Bromley. In 1804 his uncle General George Harris (afterwards first Baron Harris) introduced him to James Burton. This architect, being about to retire, transferred his pupil to Joseph T. Parkinson (1783-1855) of Ely Place, London, who was district surveyor of Westminster, and then engaged in laying out the Portman estate. Taylor, while articled to Parkinson, superintended the building of Montagu Square and Bryanston Square (both 1811) and the neighbouring streets. His fellow pupil, both at Rawes's academy and under Parkinson, was Edward Cresy (1792-1858), with whom he maintained an uninterrupted friendship for more than fifty years. In 1816 he took two walking tours with Cresy to study English architecture -- the first in the south-western counties, the second, a tour of forty days, from York to Lincoln, Peterborough and Ely. On 23 June 1817 he started with Cresy on a grand tour, at his mother's expense, which lasted two years. In 1817 they travelled, mostly on foot, through France, Switzerland, and Italy, spending the winter at Rome and Naples. On 1 May 1818 they left Naples for Bari and Corfu, and spent the summer in Greece, in company with John Sanders and William Purser. Their one discovery of importance, found by Taylor himself when his horse stumbled over the buried remains, was that of the famous Theban lion at Chaeronea on 3 June 1818. Taylor was later to be compelled to write an account of the find ('The Builder', 20, 1862, 908) to counter claims then being made that attributed the find elsewhere. After a second winter spent at Rome, Taylor returned to Britain on 12 May 1819. Of a journey of 7200 miles, 4000 miles had been performed on foot. His sketchbook of this tour is in the Victoria and Albert Museum collection, with additional drawings at the Brighton Art Gallery. 
Taylor now took an office with Cresy in Furnival's Inn, London. He lived at 52 Bedford Square, and afterwards in Spring Gardens, until he built a house for himself at Lee, Kent. On 8 June 1820 he married Bella Neufville, with whom he had eleven children. Taylor was married three (according to some accounts four) times. Between 1820 and 1822 he exhibited thirteen drawings at the Royal Academy. On 3 February 1824 he was appointed surveyor of buildings to the naval department, the successor to Edward Holl. In this capacity he superintended important works in the dockyards at Chatham, Woolwich, and Sheerness, and in 1828-32 alterations in the Clarence victualling yard, Gosport. A survey he made of the naval dockyards is in the National Maritime Museum. He built the Melville Hospital, Chatham, Kent (1827); the Woolwich River wall (1831); a custom house, Glasgow ('c'.1840); and various schools, rectories, and private houses. His most remarkable building was the 170 foot high Gothic tower of Hadlow Castle, Kent ('c'.1840), an early Victorian folly. (A lithograph by Taylor of his 'projected tower' appears in C. Greenwood, 'An Epitome of County History: County of Kent' 1838.) He received some attention from William IV, and claimed credit for inducing the king in 1830 to accept 'Trafalgar Square' instead of 'King William IV Square', the name originally proposed for the site. In 1837 a scheme for retrenchment at the Admiralty involved Taylor's dismissal. He was obliged to take up general practice, and qualified as a district surveyor. In 1843-8 he laid out considerable portions of the bishop of London's estate in Paddington, including Westbourne Terrace (where he built a house for himself), Chester Place, and parts of Hyde Park Square and Gloucester Square. In 1848 he succeeded his former teacher Joseph Parkinson to the post of district surveyor of Westminster. In 1849 he undertook the continuation of the north Kent Railway from Stroud, through Chatham and Canterbury to Dover, but the negotiation fell through, at a considerable financial loss to Taylor. He seems after this to have abandoned active professional work for archaeology. 
In 1856 Taylor revisited Italy with his wife, and stayed at Rome from 20 November 1857 to 22 March 1858, collecting materials for 'The Stones of Etruria and Marbles of Antient Rome', which he published in 1859. He finally returned to Britain in 1868. During 1870-72, while residing at Broadstairs, Kent, he published a collection of sketches and descriptions of buildings which he had visited in his travels, under the misleading title 'The Autobiography of an Octogenarian Architect' (2 vols., 1870-72). He also published several pamphlets on technical and professional subjects, and published jointly with Edward Cresy 'The Architectural Antiquities of Rome' (2 vols., 1821-2; new edn, 1874), 'Revived Architecture of Italy: Palaces of Genoa' (1822), and 'Architecture of the Middle Ages in Italy: Pisa' (1829). 
Taylor was a member of several clubs and societies: he belonged to the Architects' Club (founded in 1819) and was its president between 1822 and 1823; he was a fellow of the Institution of Civil Engineers, the Society of Antiquaries, and the Royal Institute of British Architects, becoming an honorary member of the latter institution shortly before his death at his home, The Maisonette, Broadstairs, on 1 May 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 27028


Taylor, Helen (1818-1885), children's writer, was the only child of Martin Taylor (1788-1867), of Ongar, Essex, and his first wife, Elizabeth Venn. Martin Taylor was the second surviving son of the nonconformist preacher Isaac Taylor (1759-1829), of Ongar, whose family were well known for their skill at engraving and their writing; Isaac Taylor (1787-1865) and Jefferys Taylor were Martin's brothers. Martin was regarded as the least talented of the Taylor children; in 1809 he was sent to London to work in a publishing house in Paternoster Row. Thereafter he and his family are little noticed in any account of the Taylor family. 
Helen was presumably born in London. Her immediate family, like that of her uncle Isaac Taylor of Stanford Rivers, apparently became members of the Church of England. Her publications indicate involvement in religious education for children. Two, 'Sabbath Bells: a Series of Simple Lays for Christian Children' (1844) and 'Missionary Hymns, for the Use of Children' (1846), emulate the children's verses of her aunts Jane Taylor and Ann Gilbert ['see under 'Taylor, Jane]. Helen also wrote 'The Child's Book of Homilies, by a Member of the Church of England' (1844), and she contributed to 'The Teacher's Treasury'. Her works have been generally obscured by the great outpouring of Sunday school literature in the middle of the nineteenth century as well as the fame of her aunts. Helen Taylor never married. She died on 25 June 1885 at Mayfield, Parkstone, Dorset, and was buried at Parkstone. 


@@@@@


doc= 27029


Taylor, Henry (1711-1785), religious controversialist, was born at South Weald, Essex, in May 1711 and baptized there on 17 June 1711, the second son of William Taylor (1673-1750), and his wife, Anne Crisp (1680-1739), daughter of Edward and Ann Crisp. His father was a London merchant with property in Essex and enjoyed some reputation as a wit. Taylor was sent to school in Hackney, where John Hoadly, the youngest son of Benjamin Hoadly, was a contemporary, and from there he matriculated at Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1729. He took his BA in 1731, and was elected a fellow in 1734 before proceeding MA the next year. 
Taylor was ordained deacon in 1733, then priest in 1735 by the bishop of Winchester, Benjamin Hoadly, 'that great defender of civil & religious liberty', and his major patron (H. Taylor to the third duke of Richmond, 3 Oct 1774, CUL Add. MS 7901/4/14). In 1736 he became curate of Rivenhall, Essex, and in 1737 he was instituted to the rectory of Wheatfield, Oxfordshire, which he held for a minor. On 16 June 1740 he married Christian (Kitty) Fox ('bap'. 1715, died 1769), fourth daughter of the Revd Francis Fox, vicar of St Mary's, Reading, and his wife, Susannah. Her fortune relieved his indebtedness and they had a family of eight surviving children. Taylor was meanwhile enhancing his preferment. On 1 February 1744 Hoadly collated him to the rectory of Baughurst, Hampshire, which he held with Wheatfield. On 12 December 1745 he was instituted to the vicarage of Portsmouth by Winchester College and thereupon resigned Baughurst. In 1748 he was appointed chaplain to James Dalrymple, third earl of Stair. On 3 August 1753 he was collated to the rectory of Ovington, also in the bishop's gift, resigning Wheatfield. In early 1755 he was instituted to the rectory of Crawley with the chapel of Hunton, Hampshire, which he held with Portsmouth, resigning Ovington. From this date Crawley became his main residence and he employed curates at Portsmouth parish church. 
Unlike his patron Bishop Hoadly, Taylor openly espoused the restrained Arianism of Samuel Clarke, and this held him back from the highest offices, especially after he went a step further and embraced the Apollinarian heresy which questioned the human nature of Christ's person. This he did in a series of letters addressed to Elisha Levi (1771-7) purporting to be the 'apology' of Benjamin Ben Mordecai for embracing Christianity. Though anonymous, the work was known as Taylor's, and was so acknowledged in the second enlarged edition of 1784. It abounds in learning and argument, but is very discursive. In 1772 Taylor was one of the clergy petitioning for relief from subscription; Mrs Taylor's nephew, Francis Stone, was chairman of the Feathers tavern petitioners. He was disappointed by the unsuccessful outcome, as would be expected from one who habitually omitted the Athanasian creed in his services. 'How', he complained of his Winchester colleague, Archdeacon Thomas Balguy, 'can a man have the face to tell us, that the doctrine of three coequal persons is plainly revealed in scripture?' (H. Taylor to Mrs Jebb, CUL Add. MS 7901/3/9, n.d., 'c'.1774). His 'Considerations on Ancient and Modern Creeds' appeared posthumously in 1788, edited by his son William. 
Taylor was an ambitious controversialist who used a number of pseudonyms. He appeared as Indignatio in a tract directed against Bishop William Warburton called 'Confusion Worse Confounded' (1772), and as Khalid E'bn Abdallah with 'An Enquiry into the Opinions of the Learned Christians' (1777). In that year he engaged anonymously against Soane Jenyns with his 'A Full Answer to a... Late View of the Internal Evidence of Christian Religion', and then replied to Gibbon (within a broad millenary context) on his five causes favouring the progress of Christianity in 'Thoughts on the Nature of the Grand Apostacy, with Reflections on... Gibbon's History' (1781). In this, as in most of Taylor's writings, there was a sharp anti-Roman Catholic flavour. He published 'Farther Thoughts on the Nature of the Grand Apostacy of the Christian Churches' two years later. Here, 'inter alia', he contended that the 'Bible' was the unique test of faith and not made-up articles of human framing. Taylor was an entertaining, sometimes idiosyncratic letter writer who inherited his father's wit and epigrammatic skills. His verses on marriage, 'Paradise Regain'd', are in Dodsley's 'Collection of Poems by Several Hands' (1758, 6.126). In politics, he was staunchly whig and an opponent of the American War of Independence. The Cambridge antiquary William Cole called him 'a cheerful, lively, and sensible little man, very thin, and of no promising appearance' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 8.428). 
Taylor was respected as a controversialist, but inclined to prolixity. He was a copious correspondent and on good terms with non-Anglican Arians such as Richard Price. He died at Titchfield, Hampshire, on 27 April 1785 (the residence of his son, the Revd Peter Taylor), and was buried on 3 May in the chancel of Crawley church. His wife had died earlier, on 23 July 1769. 


@@@@@


doc= 27030


Taylor, Sir Henry (1800-1886), poet and public servant, was born on 18 October 1800 at Bishop Middleham, co. Durham, the youngest of three sons of George Taylor (1772-1851), gentleman farmer and classicist, and his first wife, Eleanor Ashworth (died 1801?), the daughter of a Durham ironmonger who shared her husband's literary interests. Shortly before his wife's death, George Taylor had resettled his family at St Helen Auckland, where he farmed and pursued his classical studies for the next eighteen years, publishing an occasional essay in the 'Quarterly Review'. Although preferring a quiet, retired life, George Taylor served briefly as secretary to the commission on the poor laws in the early 1830s before family concerns forced his resignation. In 1818 he married Jane Mills (1770-1853), long-time family friend; she became a devoted companion and adviser to the young Henry, though unfortunately she was as emotionally reserved as his father. On his marriage George Taylor moved to the village of Witton-le-Wear, where he lived until his death thirty-two years later. 
In his 'Autobiography' Henry Taylor describes his childhood home as sombre, marked by his father's melancholy following the death of his first wife. George Taylor educated his three sons at home, and Henry confessed that by comparison with his talented, older brothers he proved an indifferent scholar, acquiring, literally, little Latin and less Greek. In 1814 his father permitted him to follow his desire to go to sea. In April he went aboard the 'Elephant' as a midshipman, later being transferred to a troopship and finally a frigate; between them these postings took him to Canada and near the United States at the end of the Anglo-American War of 1812-14. In December he was discharged, finding life aboard ship suited neither his character nor his health. He returned home where he read widely in his father's library. When he was sixteen, he obtained, through the offices of Charles Arbuthnot, then secretary of the Treasury and a family friend, a clerkship with the storekeeper-general. At first he lived in London with his brothers until, in 1818, they contracted typhus and died shortly after within the same month. Following their deaths, Henry continued for a short while in London on his own before being transferred to Barbados. His duties came to an end in 1820 when his department was consolidated with another branch of the Treasury, and he returned a second time to his father's house. 
For the next three years Taylor lived quietly at home. Looking back, he called this time 'dull, almost to disease' ('Autobiography', 1.43). He filled his days with miscellaneous reading, ranging from Machiavelli and Hume to the 'Koran' and Milner's 'Church History'. He also improved his Latin and Greek and taught himself Italian, translating Ariosto and reading widely in Italian poetry. At night he devoted himself to writing his own poetry. He had read the popular poets and novelists of the day -- Scott, Byron, Moore, and Campbell -- and composed long narrative poems on exotic topics in the manner of Byron. He also wrote his first verse drama, a tragedy on the story of Don Carlos. Apart from these Byronic juvenilia, he began his literary career in earnest. In 1822 he made his publishing debut, submitting an essay on Moore's 'Irish Melodies' for the 'Quarterly Review'. The 'Quarterly' editor William Gifford invited his new contributor to submit another essay, which he soon did. He also found his articles welcome at the 'London Magazine'. The success of these first attempts at journalism encouraged him to venture to London in 1823 to earn his living by his pen. These early literary efforts were encouraged by his stepmother and her cousin Isabella Fenwick, a woman of independent means who was for many years a close friend and neighbour of Wordsworth and, while Taylor's senior by some years, one of his most intimate literary confidantes until her death in 1856. 
During the early 1820s Taylor began to form friendships with important literary contemporaries as well. He met and corresponded with Wordsworth, visited Coleridge often at Highgate, and developed an especially close bond with Southey, despite differences of age, temperament, and politics. The two toured Holland, France, and Belgium in 1825 and again in 1826, and Southey wrote the only favourable review of Taylor's first published drama, 'Isaac Comnenus' (1827). In London, Taylor also became a frequent guest at Samuel Rogers's literary breakfasts, and he joined the debate society frequented by John Stuart Mill, Charles Austin, and other 'radical, Benthamite, 'doctrinaires'' ('Autobiography', 1.77) where he spoke against Benthamite principles and for pragmatic reform. 
Taylor's need to earn a living by writing was permanently altered in 1824 when Sir Henry Holland recommended him for a clerkship in the Colonial Office, based on his prior colonial experience as well as his literary abilities. Taylor immediately distinguished himself and in January 1825, despite his youth, was appointed senior clerk for the Caribbean colonies (initially at $600 per annum, later $900), a post he held until his retirement in 1872. In the Colonial Office at that time his status as a senior clerk gave him certain privileges. Colonial secretaries and under-secretaries allowed a large part of the administrative load to devolve on the senior clerks. Taylor even had direct access to the colonial secretary, especially during the period (1846-52) when his friend Henry George, the third Earl Grey, held the post. 
Taylor dealt with the West Indian colonies during the agitation that led to the end of slavery in 1834, the brief but troubled apprenticeship period that followed, and the subsequent difficulties of a post-slavery society. Taylor supported emancipation, but distrusted the ability of black West Indians to be self-governing. As a result, he favoured an apprenticeship plan to effect a transition from slavery to freedom as well as safeguards against what he foresaw as abuses by the planters who remained in control of local assemblies, except in crown colonies. When abuses led to a premature end of the apprenticeship period in 1838, Taylor argued that West Indian assemblies needed to come more directly under crown control or he predicted disaster would follow. For Taylor, the 1865 Gordon riots in Jamaica were exactly that disaster, and resulted in the Jamaican assembly relinquishing sovereignty to the crown, a move he had argued for in 1838 and that he claimed would have prevented such riots. While he supported Governor Eyre's controversial restoration of order following the Gordon uprising, the uprising itself was in his mind the inevitable result of failed policies. 
Taylor took little part in the political questions of the day, except on two notable occasions: first, when he came to the defence of his close friend Charles Eliot, British plenipotentiary in China, who in 1840 was attacked in both parliament and the press for 'gunboat' diplomacy to protect British merchants, an action which precipitated the First Opium War; and, second, when he published a pamphlet, 'Crime Considered' (1869), addressed to Gladstone, then prime minister, on certain proposed reforms in the penal code, especially as they applied to the colonies, including his controversial support for corporal punishment. 
Taylor was an astute observer of the day-to-day workings of government bureaucracy, and he published a frank yet ironic look at those operations in 'The Statesman' (1836), a work composed of maxims and practical advice based on his career in the civil service. The manuscript was reviewed by his Colonial Office colleagues and friends, Edward Villiers, James Spedding, editor of Francis Bacon, and Gladstone. Contemporaries regarded the work as too cynical, even Machiavellian, but it has since become something of a minor classic, remaining in print throughout the twentieth century. Taylor's superiors offered him advancement, including the under-secretaryship, but various reasons always kept him from taking advantage of proffered promotion. In 1859, when a severe asthmatic attack nearly forced his retirement, he was allowed to work at home rather than in the Downing Street offices. 
Working in the Colonial Office brought Taylor friendships with a number of the leading statesmen of the time. One particular friendship with Thomas Spring Rice, secretary for war and colonies in Melbourne's first cabinet, eventually led to his marriage to the secretary's daughter Theodosia Alice Spring Rice (1818-1891) on 17 October 1839, following a three-year courtship marked by a break in relations owing to Taylor's religious diffidence. Despite their differences in age (he was nearly twenty years her senior), their home life was by all accounts happy and affectionate, full of the pleasure of company and friends and the complete opposite of the sombre home of his youth. The couple settled first in London, in Blandford Square, moving in 1845 to Ladon House at Mortlake on the Thames. In 1853 they built a house designed by Alice abutting Sheen Common where they lived until Taylor's retirement. They had five children. The eldest son, Aubrey, died on 16 May 1876, and a daughter, Una, wrote 'Guests and Memories' (1924), a memoir about her parents, their Bournemouth summer home purchased in 1861, and the notable guests they entertained there, in particular, Aubrey De Vere, James Spedding, Benjamin Jowett, Robert Louis Stevenson, and Mary Shelley and her son Sir Percy. Their eldest daughter was the biographer Ida Alice Ashworth Taylor. 
Despite his appointment in the Colonial Office and the often long hours required of him there, Taylor pursued his career as a poet, publishing five novel-length verse dramas and a volume of lyric poems. Following the failure of 'Isaac Comnenus', Taylor worked for seven years on his next historical drama and produced his greatest success in 1834 with the publication of 'Philip Van Artevelde', a tale drawn from Froissart and Barante in which he blends political conflict with domestic drama in an Elizabethan style but with a modern emphasis on psychological states more than dramatic action. In 'Van Artevelde' Taylor also championed a more restrained poetic style against what he regarded as the excesses of the school of Byron and Shelley. Aware of going against popular taste, he provided 'Van Artevelde' with a preface that set forth at length his critique of Byron and Shelley whose poetry, despite its powerful feeling and beautiful imagery, lacked, in his view, moral reflection and the balance of passion with reason. For his contemporaries, the 'Preface' to 'Philip Van Artevelde' signalled a significant shift in poetic taste, corresponding to Carlyle's call to set aside Byron for Goethe. 
The publication of 'Van Artevelde' was widely and extensively reviewed, including in the 'Revue des Deux Mondes'. It brought Taylor immediate fame, and he was briefly lionized by Lady Holland and other London hostesses, and was ever afterwards referred to by close friends as Philip Van Artevelde Taylor. His contemporaries compared the accomplishment to Shakespeare's, and William Macready was so taken by the work that he staged an abridged version which, however, ran for only six nights. But Taylor never again achieved the popular success of 'Philip Van Artevelde'. In 1842 he published 'Edwin the Fair', a work even he came to regard as deficient in dramatic interest. For his next play Taylor attempted an Elizabethan romantic comedy, 'The Virgin Widow' (1850). He published only one other drama, 'St Clement's Eve' (1862), a return to Barante as a source and his most successful work since 'Van Artevelde'. Although his work is uneven, he did win the regard of contemporaries, including admirers as different as Macaulay and Swinburne, the latter being so genuinely impressed by the historical dramas he sought out the elderly poet's company and friendship in the 1870s. A collected edition of his work in five volumes appeared in 1877-8, but following his death his poetry quickly sank into obscurity and has not been reprinted since. 
In his later years Taylor received a number of honours. Oxford University awarded him the DCL in 1862 and he was made KCMG in 1869 for his contributions in the Colonial Office. Although he stopped writing poetry, he did revise his plays for the collected edition, and continued to see close friends, such as De Vere, Tennyson, and his irrepressible Freshwater neighbour Julia Margaret Cameron, who found his features extremely handsome and used him frequently as a model for her photographs. He died at his home, The Roost, Bournemouth, on 27 March 1886, survived by his wife, who died on 1 January 1891, and his youngest son Harry and three daughters. 
Taylor sought fame as a poet, yet, ironically, it is his prose which has remained significant. His 'Autobiography' has proved invaluable to historians of the Colonial Office and West Indian affairs. Likewise, 'The Statesman' provides a portrait of the Colonial Office and civil service in the years preceding the Northcote-Trevelyan report. Even of his historical dramas, only the 'Preface' to 'Philip Van Artevelde' is still read and then as a classic statement of the shift in taste from Romantic to Victorian, even though the play itself, among all Taylor's work, is most deserving of being remembered. In her photographs Julia Margaret Cameron appears to have given Taylor a fame more lasting than any of his writings, as she has immortalized the calm face, pensive eyes, and magnificent flowing beard he grew after the 1859 asthmatic attack left him unable to shave. 


@@@@@


doc= 27031


Taylor, Sir Herbert (1775-1839), courtier and army officer, second son of the Revd Edward Taylor (1734-1798), of Bifrons, Kent, rector of Patrixbourne, and his wife, Margaret (died 1780?), daughter of Thomas Payler of Ileden, Kent, was born on 29 September 1775 at Bifrons. He was educated privately on the continent between 1780 and 1790, and became a good linguist. Through Lord Camelford and Lord Grenville, he was employed in the Foreign Office under James Bland Burgess. His knowledge of foreign languages made him very useful, and Lord Grenville occasionally employed him on confidential work at his own house. In December 1792 Taylor accompanied Sir James Murray (afterwards Murray-Pulteney) on a special mission to the Prussian headquarters at Frankfurt. After a few weeks Murray left Frankfurt to take up his military duties as adjutant-general to the duke of York's army at Antwerp, and Taylor remained behind for a short time in charge of the mission. In April 1793, he joined the army headquarters where Murray presented him to the duke of York, to whom he became greatly attached. He was employed as Murray's secretary, and was present as a volunteer at the action of St Amand (8 May), the battle of Famars (23 May), and the sieges of Valenciennes and Dunkirk. 
On 25 March 1794 Taylor was given a commission as cornet in the 2nd dragoon guards, and in July was promoted to be lieutenant. On Murray's return to England, Taylor remained with the duke of York as assistant secretary. He generally joined his regiment when in the field, and was present at the April actions near Cateau Cambresis, those near Tournai in May, and at other operations of the campaign, including the retreat into the Netherlands. In May 1795 he was promoted to be captain in the 2nd dragoon guards. When the duke of York returned to England, Taylor remained with the army as assistant secretary to the commander-in-chief of the British forces on the continent, and served in that capacity successively with Lieutenant-General Harcourt and Sir David Dundas. 
On 16 September 1795 Taylor returned to England, having been appointed aide-de-camp to the duke of York. He was soon afterwards nominated assistant military secretary in the commander-in-chief's office. In July 1798 he accompanied Lord Cornwallis to Ireland on the latter's appointment as lord lieutenant, in the threefold capacity of aide-de-camp, military secretary, and private secretary. Cornwallis described him as 'indefatigable in business; and in honesty, fidelity and goodness of heart he has no superior' ('Taylor Papers', 56). He returned to England in February 1799 to take over the duties of private secretary to the duke of York. He went to the Netherlands as aide-de-camp to the duke in the expedition to The Helder in September, and was present at several battles. 
In January 1801 Taylor was promoted to be major in the 2nd dragoon guards, and in December of the same year to be lieutenant-colonel in the 9th West India regiment. On 25 June 1802 he was placed on half pay, and on 25 May was brought into the Coldstream Guards, of which the duke of York was colonel. He rose to the rank of lieutenant-general in 1825. He continued in the appointment of private secretary and aide-de-camp to the duke until 13 June 1805, when he was appointed private secretary to the king. The king placed every confidence in him, so that his position was one of great delicacy, but his straightforwardness secured the good opinion of all. On the establishment of the regency he continued in the same office to the queen, who was appointed by act of parliament guardian of the king's person. By the same act Taylor was appointed one of the three commissioners of the king's real and personal estate. 
In November 1813 Taylor was appointed to command a brigade in the army of Sir Thomas Graham (afterwards Lord Lynedoch), which was besieging Antwerp. He returned to England in March 1814, when he was sent on special military missions to Bernadotte, crown prince of Sweden (then commanding the Swedish force in Germany), and to The Hague. During these absences from the court his place was taken by his brother Brook Taylor ['see below']. He resumed the duties of private secretary to Queen Charlotte on his return, and continued in this office until her death in November 1818. In 1819 he was made a knight of the Royal Guelphic Order, and on 5 October of the same year he married Charlotte Albinia, daughter of Edward Disbrowe of Walton Hall, Derbyshire, vice-chamberlain to Queen Charlotte, and granddaughter of the third earl of Buckingham; they had two daughters. 
From 1820 to 1823 Taylor represented Windsor in parliament, resigning his seat because he found he could not satisfactorily fulfil both his parliamentary and his other duties. On 25 March 1820 he was appointed military secretary at the Horse Guards, and in 1824 he was made a knight grand cross of the Royal Guelphic Order. In January 1827 he was appointed military secretary to the new commander-in-chief, the duke of Wellington; but on the duke resigning in July 1827, Taylor was nominated by Lord Palmerston to be a deputy secretary at war in the military branch of the War Office; the king had already made him his first and principal aide-de-camp. 
On 19 March 1828 Taylor was appointed master surveyor and surveyor-general of the ordnance of the United Kingdom. On 25 August of the same year he became adjutant-general of the forces, an appointment which he held until the accession of William IV, to whom he became private secretary, and continued in that office during the whole of the reign. He played a significant part as mediator between the king and the government during the 'Reform Bill' crisis. 
On 16 April 1834 Taylor was awarded the grand cross in the Order of the Bath. On the death of William IV in 1837 he retired into private life, but remained first and principal aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria. He had already received from George III a pension of $1000 a year on the civil list, with remainder to his widow. In the spring of 1838 he went to Italy, and he died at Rome on 20 March 1839. His body was embalmed for conveyance to England, but was buried in the protestant cemetery at Rome. In the middle of April his remains were exhumed and sent to England, and on 13 June were deposited in a vault of the chapel of St Katherine's Hospital, Regent's Park, London, to the mastership of which he had been appointed in 1818 by Queen Charlotte. 
Taylor, who was a confidential friend of the duke of York and his go-between in the financial negotiations with Mary Anne Clarke, wrote the 'Memoirs of the Last Illness and Decease of HRH the Duke of York' (1827). He was prepared to go to lengths to defend the royal family's reputation. As one of York's executors he defended what was left of York's estate from the attempts of York's many creditors to recover their lost money, directing enquirers to pursue their case in the court of chancery. On behalf of George IV between 1828 and 1830 he negotiated with Captain Thomas Garth, son of the king's sister Sophia, to obtain papers from Garth that allegedly revealed secrets about Garth's parentage damaging to the royal family; Taylor was said to have paid the scandalous journalist Charles Molloy Westmacott $5000 for his help in overcoming Garth. 
Taylor's younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 27032


Taylor, Isaac (1730-1807), engraver, was born on 13 December 1730 in the parish of St Michael in Bedwardine, Worcester, the third of the seven known children of William Taylor ('fl'. 1710-1753), brass-founder, and his wife, Anne ('fl'. 1710-1740). In 1739 he was apprenticed to his father and he soon made a speciality of engraving book-plates and silverware. By the late 1740s his father's business interests included the production of engraved prints commemorating local events. At some point, perhaps in 1753, Taylor became a freeman of the city of Worcester, but the evidence for the date is confused. Early in 1752, after a quarrel with his father, he set off for London, walking 'by the side of the waggon' (C. Taylor, 593) and 'fired with the ambition of distinguishing himself as an artist' (I. Taylor, 'Jane Taylor', 81). Soon after his arrival in London he found work with Thomas Jefferys, the topographer and map engraver, and in due course was entrusted with the engraving of a number of plates for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and for 'Owen's Dictionary'. 
It was through this connection that Taylor met his future wife, Sarah Hackshaw Jefferys (1733-1809), the niece and housekeeper of Thomas Jefferys and the daughter of Josiah Jefferys (1709?-1770), a successful cutler, and his wife, Jane ('nee' Hackshaw). They were married on 9 May 1754 at Shenfield, Essex, where Taylor's father-in-law had property. For a short time after his marriage Taylor practised unsuccessfully as a land surveyor at Shenfield, before returning to London to resume the profession of engraver. There were five children: Charles Taylor (1756-1823); Isaac Taylor (1759-1829); Josiah (1761-1834), a successful bookseller and publisher; Sarah (1763-1845), who married Daniel Hooper; and Ann (1765-1832), who married James Hinton (1761-1823) and was the mother of the Baptist minister John Howard Hinton (1791-1873). Isaac Taylor appears to have been more conscientious than loving as a father: he ensured that his sons were scrupulously well trained as engravers, but 'though a strictly moral man... he exhibited towards his family an austere reserve which was little calculated to awaken the domestic affections to genial life' (Gilbert, 1.5-6). 
Isaac Taylor undoubtedly fulfilled his ambition to distinguish himself as an artist and in particular as an engraver. Before about 1750 superior examples of the engraver's art had been virtually a monopoly of French and other continental engravers, but during Taylor's working lifetime, and owing in part to his own achievements, that pre-eminence passed decisively to England, albeit with the help of immigrants such as Francesco Bartolozzi, of whom Isaac Taylor's sons possibly became pupils. Taylor did, as was common practice, produce full-scale engravings of other artists' paintings -- his engraving for John Boydell, 'A Flemish Collation' (1765), after Van Harp was an early example -- and between 1765 and 1780 he exhibited them and other works regularly at the Incorporated Society of Artists, of which he was a director in 1772-3 and secretary from 1775 probably until his death. 
However, Taylor's speciality was book illustration. In this field he almost always engraved to his own designs. After the death of Anthony Walker in 1765 he could lay claim to be the pre-eminent living illustrator. Among his finest works were the vignettes to the 'Poetical Works' of John Langhorne (1766) and to Oliver Goldsmith's 'Deserted Village' (1770) and the illustrations for Samuel Richardson's 'Sir Charles Grandison' (1778). Towards the end of his active career Taylor also engraved a number of county maps. Plates engraved by him were said to wear better at the press than those of any other engraver of his time. 
In 1770 Taylor bought the business, and premises at the Bible and Crown, Holborn, of the booksellers and publishers A. and Henry Webley, with whom he had worked as an engraver since 1767. Architectural works were already prominent in Webley's catalogues, and Taylor concentrated almost exclusively upon such publications. The business, which became known as the Architectural Library in 1787, later achieved, under Taylor's son Josiah, a virtual monopoly in this field. Taylor appears to have been a shrewd businessman and initially gave priority to the practical manuals required to support the building boom of the late eighteenth century, such as 'The Practical Builder' (1774) by William Pain and 'The Builder's Price Book' (1776). However, he also had an eye for emerging talent and was quick to secure the young John Soane for his list. 
Engraving and publishing made Taylor's reputation and his fortune, but painting was perhaps nearer to his heart. He retired early when he was little more than fifty and moved from London to the village of Edmonton, Middlesex. There he amused himself by painting in oils. 
Although Taylor's sons became prominent dissenters, there is no reason to suppose that Isaac Taylor was of that persuasion. According to his granddaughter Ann Gilbert (1782-1866) ['see under 'Taylor, Jane], he was, though 'a man of sense and ability', not 'under the influence of Christian principle' (Gilbert, 1.5). He was a supporter of John Wilkes and lost the astonishingly large sum of 'considerably more than $1000' (ibid., 1.184) as a result. He had many friends in the literary and artistic world, including Oliver Goldsmith, Francesco Bartolozzi, Robert Smirke, Henry Fuseli, and, probably, David Garrick. Thomas Bewick was his protege and mentions him in his autobiography with affection and respect, despite the fact that Taylor had reacted ungraciously when the young Bewick decided to abandon a promising career in London. 
Shortly after his marriage in 1754 Taylor painted a fine pair of portraits in oils of his wife and of himself, outdoor subjects in the manner of Gainsborough. Another surviving portrait, a pencil drawing of Taylor in late middle age, probably by his son Isaac, brings out the austere side of Taylor's nature. Isaac Taylor died at his home in Church Street, Edmonton, on 17 October 1807 and was buried on 24 October in the churchyard of the parish church of All Saints, Edmonton. 




@@@@@


doc= 27033


Taylor, Isaac (1759-1829), engraver and educationist, was born in London on 30 January 1759, the second son of Isaac Taylor (1730-1807), engraver, and his wife, Sarah Hackshaw, 'nee' Jefferys (1733-1809). He spent his early years at Shenfield, Essex, and was first educated locally, probably at Sir Anthony Browne's School in Brentwood, before briefly attending a school in the City of London. Like his brother Charles Taylor (1756-1823) he was apprenticed to his father as an engraver and may later have become a pupil of Francesco Bartolozzi. 
One of Taylor's first commissions was to oversee the preparation of the plates for Abraham Rees's revised edition of the 'Cyclopaedia' of Ephraim Chambers. This work and Taylor's many discussions with Rees were, by his own account, what first filled him with a thirst for knowledge. In 1777 and in 1780 he exhibited landscapes and drawings at the Incorporated Society of Artists, of which his father was secretary. From an early age Taylor became a committed member of the Fetter Lane Independent congregation in London and was prevented from seeking ordination as a young man only by severe illness. Throughout his life he rose early and spent the first hour of every day, and usually the last also, in prayer. 
On 18 April 1781 Taylor married Ann Martin (1757-1830) ['see 'Taylor, Ann]; three sons and three daughters of the marriage survived to adulthood. The couple first set up house in Islington. Taylor's capital was $30, supplemented by Ann's dowry from her grandfather of $100 and his own income of half a guinea a week for three days' work for his brother Charles, together with whatever he could earn for himself in the other three days. 
Taylor used Ann's dowry to commission Robert Smirke to produce four circular paintings representing morning, noon, evening, and night, which he then engraved and sold. Between 1783 and 1787 he was engaged with his brothers and with several painters, including Smirke, in an enterprise to produce illustrations to Shakespeare's plays, 'The Picturesque Beauties of Shakespeare' (1783-7). The success of this enterprise prefigured the later, larger project of John Boydell, in which Taylor was a leading participant (he received 500 guineas for an engraving of 'Henry VIII's First Sight of Anne Boleyn', 1802, after Thomas Stothard). It certainly drew Taylor to the attention of Boydell and won him the lucrative commission (250 guineas) to engrave 'The Assassination of Rizzio' by John Opie; this work was awarded the gold palette of the Society of Arts for the best engraving of the year in 1790. 
Taylor's success as an engraver lay in his great technical skill combined with a flair for design, qualities which he also demonstrated as a painter of portraits and landscapes. One of his finest achievements was 'Specimens of Gothic Ornament' (1796), a series of engravings illustrating architectural details of the parish church of St Peter and St Paul in Lavenham, Suffolk. Later in his career he engraved the illustrations for Josiah Boydell's 'Illustrations of Holy Writ' (1813-15), the designs for which were accounted the finest artistic work of his son Isaac Taylor (1787-1865). Thereafter his published engraving was confined to illustrations of books by members of the family. 
In 1783 the Taylors moved to Holborn but the annual rent of $20 was high and the environment injurious to the health of a growing family, almost all of whom were prone to illness. In 1786 Taylor made the decision to move to the country and, after characteristically diligent enquiry about prices and amenities, rented for $6 per annum a large house, Cooke's House, in Shilling Street, Lavenham, Suffolk. There his two eldest children, Ann and Jane, and his business, flourished. 
Taylor's sketchbooks from his time in Lavenham contain many fine drawings and watercolour portraits of family members and of local acquaintances. The garden at Lavenham also provided the setting for his best-known portrait in oils (1792; NPG), that of his daughters Ann Gilbert (1782-1866) ['see under 'Taylor, Jane] and Jane Taylor (1783-1824). In 1792, however, the Taylors' landlord gave them notice to quit and Taylor bought, for $250, the house next door, which was then in a ruinous condition. Its renovation (interrupted by Taylor's contracting typhoid, which nearly killed him) cost a further $250, but his careful and imaginative planning transformed house and garden from dereliction to delight. 
Taylor had become a deacon of the Independent congregation in Lavenham and was closely involved in the founding of a Sunday school there. In 1794 he might have become minister, had the congregation not shrunk from the appointment of one of its own number. In late 1795 Taylor, who was gaining a reputation as a preacher, was invited to become minister of the Bucklersbury Lane Independent congregation in Colchester. In January 1796, having accepted the call, Taylor and his family moved to Colchester, where they rented a house in Angel Lane (now West Stockwell Street). On 21 April 1796 Isaac Taylor was ordained. 
The move to Colchester coincided with a period of high inflation and the collapse of the art market in the wake of the war with France. Taylor suffered 'a grievous reverse of fortune' ('Autobiography', ed. Gilbert, 1.100) and was reduced to engraving dog collars. Taylor wanted his daughters to be able to earn their own living; as soon as they were old enough all the children were employed to assist in the engraving business. The boys, Isaac (1787-1865), Martin (1788-1867), and Jefferys Taylor (1792-1853), were formally apprenticed, but his daughters, who were both to become published writers, were tolerated, rather than encouraged, in their literary vocation. 
In Lavenham, Taylor's successive workrooms had doubled as schoolrooms for his own children and later for those of neighbours too, Taylor giving instruction from his engraving stool as he worked. This practice continued in Colchester, providing a welcome supplementary source of income. Taylor's object was 'to give them a taste for every branch of knowledge that [could] well be made the subject of early instruction' ('Family Pen', 126) and he believed that 'a principal object of education [is] to prevent the formation of a narrow and exclusive taste for particular pursuits, by exciting very early a lively interest in subjects of every kind' (ibid., 113). His teaching methods were original and he made much use of carefully drawn visual aids, in the preparation of which his older children assisted. In late 1798 he began a series of monthly lectures for young people, delivered free of charge in the parlour of his own house; these proved extremely popular and the programme continued for several years. 
Later in life Taylor wrote, and illustrated with engravings, a large number of very successful educational books, including the 'Scenes' series ('for the Amusement and Instruction of Little Tarry-at-Home Travellers'), and two volumes, 'The Mine' (1829) and 'The Ship' (1830), for the popular 'Little Library' series published by John Harris. He also produced a number of books for the young, of a religious and improving nature, including 'The Child's Birthday' (1811), possibly originally written for his youngest child, Jemima (1798-1886), 'Advice to the Teens' (1818) -- the first recorded use of the word to denote young people -- and 'Bunyan Explained to a Child' (2 vols., 1824-5). The preface to this last book is revealing of Taylor's approach to education and to religion, warning parents against expecting their children to read 'all the many hours a wet Sabbath presents', lest they 'make that day hated, which ought to be loved' (p. iv). 
In June 1810 Taylor, exasperated by the apparently ineradicable antinomian tendencies of many in his congregation, announced his resignation from his pastorate in Colchester. A year later he accepted a call from the congregation at Ongar, where he remained for the rest of his life, rejuvenating and expanding the congregation, stimulating the intellectual life of the small town, and earning the respect even of the Anglican clergy. He instituted weekly lectures and prayer meetings, restarted the Sunday school, and played a leading part in a thriving book society -- the while continuing to exercise his profession as an engraver and producing more than twenty books. He rented, first, Castle House and then New House Farm, just outside the town, and finally, in 1822, he bought a house at what is now 10 Castle Street. 
Taylor, who had a stocky frame and an appearance usually of rude health, was described as 'a genial portly figure... his cheek ruddy with apple tints' ('Autobiography', ed. Gilbert, 2.94). However, his life was punctuated by serious illnesses, including a three-year period in his late fifties, during which he almost succumbed to successive bouts of rheumatic fever. For almost a decade thereafter he maintained a pace of life that eventually proved too much for his constitution. On 12 December 1829, after a short illness, he died at his home. He was buried on the 19th in the Independent chapel's burial-ground; his grave now lies under the vestry floor of the United Reformed church, beside those of his wife and of his daughter Jane. 


@@@@@


doc= 27034


Taylor, Isaac (1787-1865), writer on theology, artist, and inventor, was born at Lavenham, Suffolk, on 17 August 1787. He was the fourth child and eldest surviving son of Isaac Taylor of Ongar (1759-1829), artist, engraver, and dissenting minister, and his wife, Ann Martin (1757-1830) ['see 'Taylor, Ann], author of several advice and conduct books. The family moved to Colchester in 1796 when the senior Taylor was called as pastor of an independent congregation; in 1810 they moved to another Essex pastorate in Ongar. 
The three sons and three daughters of the Taylor family were educated together at home. All were taught drawing and engraving by their father; both parents shared in directing reading, discussions, and religious instruction. While living in Colchester, Isaac and his brother Martin went to a neighbour for some instruction and attended lectures by visiting speakers. All the children were encouraged to write and to make drawings and engravings, first for the family circle and then for publication. By the turn of the century the elder daughters, Ann and Jane ['see 'Taylor, Jane], were beginning to publish verses and stories for children in periodicals and in book form. These works were illustrated by various family members including Isaac; most probably the entire family also contributed to the stories. After the move to Ongar, Isaac the younger executed engraving and drawing commissions and worked with his father on several projects. In 1810 he joined Martin in London, where they worked as engravers for a publishing house in Paternoster Row. 
London air did not agree with Isaac; by 1812 he had developed a pulmonary or bronchial complaint which responded favourably to the milder climate of the west of England. He spent the next three or four winters at Ilfracombe, Devon, and Marazion, Cornwall. His sister Jane was his primary companion during this period; they became close friends and confidants. Isaac encouraged Jane in her writing, and she listened to his ideas and plans. In the summers they returned to Essex and made visits to London. Taylor's time was spent in reading, writing, and discussions with friends made in the west. It was probably during this period that he became attracted to the Church of England, although he may not have become a member until after Jane's death. Taylor also began his lifelong interest in the early church and patristic studies in this period. He is said to have coined the word patristic. 
In 1818 Josiah Conder, editor of the 'Eclectic Review', invited Taylor to join his staff as a regular contributor. Conder was a family friend who had been publishing the work of Ann Taylor Gilbert and Jane Taylor for several years. While continuing his study of the writers of the early church Taylor also became interested in the philosophy of Francis Bacon. His first independently published work, 'Elements of Thought' (1822), was an introduction to the study of moral philosophy for young people. His second work, a new translation of the 'Characters of Theophrastus' (1824), appeared pseudonymously under the name Francis Howell. The first edition included the Greek text and illustrations by Taylor. He continued to live at Ongar, making visits when necessary to London. The death of Jane in 1824 precipitated several changes in her brother's life. 
Taylor was his sister's literary executor. In 1825 he published 'Memoirs and Poetical Remains of the Late Jane Taylor'. A revised memoir, correspondence, and other family sketches were published by Isaac's son, also Isaac Taylor, as 'The Family Pen: Memorials, Biographical and Literary, of the Taylor Family of Ongar' (2 vols., 1867). Taylor moved to Stanford Rivers, about 2 miles from Ongar, in 1825. According to his son, the 'rambling old-fashioned farmhouse, standing in a large garden', provided seclusion and space for the 'literary labours' and 'silent meditations' of a 'literary recluse' (Taylor, 1.65). On 17 August 1825 he married Elizabeth (1804-1861), second daughter of James Medland of Newington; she had been a friend and correspondent of Jane Taylor. For the remainder of his life Taylor lived at Stanford Rivers with his wife and large family. Six daughters (Jane, Phoebe, Rose, Catherine, Jessie, Euphemia) and three sons (Isaac, James Medland, Henry) survived their father; two daughters predeceased their parents. The children were educated at home: in 'Home Education' (1838) his method and plan for training children from infancy to the late teens were outlined. He encouraged flexibility and attention to the varying talents and abilities of children. He was opposed to schools for girls and compulsory public education. 
Although Taylor always maintained that because he was a layman he was not a theologian, most of his publications were concerned with Christianity, its doctrines and history, and the various manifestations of church organization and teachings. He argued in favour of the historical validity of the 'Bible' in 'History of the Transmission of Ancient Books to Modern Times' (1827) and 'The Process of Historical Proof' (1828), urging that the same methods be applied to scripture as to pagan Greek histories. His interest in textual studies of the classics and the 'Bible' continued throughout his life. In 1829 Taylor published his abridged translation of Herodotus; he edited a new translation of 'The Jewish Wars of Flavius Josephus' (2 vols., 1849-51). At the end of his life 'The Spirit of Hebrew Poetry' (1861) and 'Considerations on the Pentateuch' (1863) reflected this aspect of his studies. He was not, however, trained in modern critical methods, so that his arguments in the end rested primarily on moral grounds. The 'Bible' must be true because it was pure, beautiful, and morally right. 
The work which made Taylor's reputation was 'The Natural History of Enthusiasm' (1829). Responding to the social, political, and religious ferment of his own day, he set out the dangers inherent in all sorts of excessive enthusiasm. His path was the Anglican middle way; the belief that the study of scripture and moderation would mean the victory of protestant Christianity. Many of his later works continued this theme. 'Fanaticism' (1833), 'Spiritual Despotism' (1835), and 'Four Lectures on Spiritual Christianity' (1841) all stressed the need to return to scripture and the advantages of Anglican polity. Two studies of religious leaders, 'Loyola' (1849) and 'Wesley and Methodism' (1851), continued Taylor's arguments that the best kind of religious establishment was to be found in the Anglican model. 
The Oxford Movement's use of the early church to support its proposals for reforming the Church of England took Taylor back to his patristic studies. His vehement and lengthy attack on the Tractarians, 'Ancient Christianity, and the Doctrines of the Oxford 'Tracts for the Times'' (2 vols., 1839-40) attempted to prove that Puseyite doctrine was already permeated with all the errors and superstitions of the middle ages. His views were attacked or praised according to the convictions of the reader. 
By the mid-1830s Taylor's works were highly regarded by many serious students of theology and philosophy. In 1836 he was urged to stand for election to the chair of logic at the University of Edinburgh. This seems to have been the only time he was tempted to leave his retreat at Stanford Rivers. He allowed his name to be put forward, but he was narrowly defeated by Sir William Hamilton. According to his son he was asked to stand for other Scottish chairs, but he never again considered such a post. 
Taylor seldom left Stanford Rivers except to give lectures or to make an occasional visit to a family member. As a change from reading and writing he took long solitary walks and worked in his shop. In 1824 he patented a widely used beer tap. He also developed a machine for engraving on copper, patented in 1848. Although he lost considerable sums on this invention, it was ultimately adapted for engraving patterns on copper cylinders used in printing calicos. In 1862 he received a civil-list pension of $200 a year. He died at Stanford Rivers on 28 June 1865 and was buried in the churchyard there. 
A liberal Anglican of an old-fashioned type, Taylor's ideas about religion, education, and society were grounded in the eighteenth century and showed little awareness of the changes taking place in his own day. None the less his works were popular in both Britain and the United States; his straightforward style and lack of sectarianism commended him to many protestants. But advances in scholarship, science, and economics made many of his views seem irrelevant and outdated by the latter part of the nineteenth century. His rural seclusion allowed him to cultivate 'the breadth and catholicity of his religious feelings, and the calm judicial tone of his literary temper' (Taylor, 1.76), but it also sheltered him from many contemporary realities. He was, however, the most prolific and best-known member of a remarkable family. 


@@@@@


doc= 27035


James Taylor (1737/8-1790), engraver, was a younger brother of Isaac Taylor. He was born in 1737 or 1738 and it is a reasonable supposition that he was born in Worcester. He worked for some years as a china painter in Worcester, before following his brother to London, where he practised engraving, first in association with his brother and then independently. He exhibited at the Society of Artists between 1770 and 1776. Anker Smith was one of his pupils. He died, according to an obituary by his nephew Charles in the 'Literary Panorama' of 1808, on 21 December 1790, aged fifty-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 27036


Taylor, James (1753-1825), naval engineer and potter, was born on 3 May 1753 at Leadhills, Lanarkshire, the son of John Taylor, the overseer of the earl of Hopetoun's mines there. He was educated at Wallacehall School, Closeburn, Dumfriesshire, and then at Edinburgh University where he was a student from 1775 to 1781, studying medicine, mathematics, and natural philosophy. Sponsored by Hopetoun, he was destined for the ministry or medicine, but while in Edinburgh he became interested in a career 'where his love of chemistry, mechanics, and mineralogy could be put to good use' ('Ayr Advertiser', 22 Sept 1825). After he left Edinburgh he seems to have set up a foundry and engineering works in Ayr in partnership with his brother John. Through his friendship with Alexander Fegusson of Craigendarroch, also in Dumfriesshire, Taylor was appointed tutor in 1785 to the children of Patrick Miller, who had newly acquired the Dalswinton estate. At the time Miller was devoting much of his time to experiments with the mechanical propulsion of ships on the Forth and almost certainly recruited Taylor to assist him as well as to teach his children. Taylor quickly suggested that the obvious solution was to replace hand-turned windlasses with a James Watt steam engine modified to drive paddle wheels. Through his father he introduced Miller to the engineer William Symington, and this led to the famous trials of a steamboat at Dalswinton in 1788 and on the Forth in 1789. 
By this time Taylor had come to the notice of Margaret, countess of Dumfries, who was full of misplaced enthusiasm for introducing industrial practices to the family's Ayrshire estates, leaving behind a trail of half-completed projects and disappointed artisans. The countess, convinced that coalmining and iron-working were the road to wealth, commissioned Taylor in 1790 to carry out a mineral survey of the estate. In the following year the earl appointed him manager 'of the lime works, coal works, black lead or wadd works, ironstone, clays, leads and whole works or operations regarding every kind that are discovered or should be thereafter discovered' (Quail, 9). This was an ambitious prospectus which was never to be realized. Taylor's first project was to reopen the flooded black lead Craigman mine. When it was found that the quality was not good enough for pencils the countess turned her attention to making foundry crucibles and then to establishing a pottery. Her imagination quickly ran away with her and she conceived a sizeable venture with no consideration of whether her china would survive a journey across the bumpy roads of Ayrshire. It was James Taylor's misfortune to be given the task of supervising the establishment of the pottery at Cumnock, the nearest village to Dumfries House, in 1794. Nothing went well; the Glasgow potters, who were responsible for the day-to-day management, left within two years without producing a pot and debts mounted. In order to avoid bankruptcy Taylor, who was a partner in the business, had no alternative but to begin production. For almost twenty years he struggled to keep it going, making an attractive domestic creamware from local clays along with crucibles. In some years the pottery remained closed due to lack of demand, adding to Taylor's difficulties. Although Taylor managed the earl's coal mines efficiently the price of coal was depressed and local competition intense. He resigned in 1815, but continued to operate the pottery with rising debts which could be largely attributed to the terms of his lease. 
In 1822 Taylor looked for some relief from the campaign to reward those who had been involved with the development of the steamboat. At first he took issue with the now dissolute William Symington about his role in this, and then after a meeting they came, as he thought, to an understanding. Early in 1823 he took out a patent (no. 4751) for the construction of ships' bottoms and the positioning of pumps to prevent damage to the cargo, and declared that he was engaged in other important developments. At the end of his tether, he petitioned parliament for a pension in April 1824. He died at Cumnock on 18 September 1825 before a decision was reached. Soon after his death Symington and his supporters attacked the accuracy of Taylor's claim to have contributed to the development of the steamboat and dismissed him simply as a schoolteacher. After a long struggle against the continuing attacks from Symington (himself desperate for money), Taylor's widow was granted a pension of $50 p.a. and his surviving daughters were awarded a bounty of $50 apiece. Taylor was included in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' along with all those who had been associated with the beginnings of steam propulsion; but in reality he deserved inclusion as a representative of all those men and women who nurtured small enterprise often at considerable cost to themselves during the first phase of industrialization and by so doing laid the foundation of Britain's later prosperity. 


@@@@@


doc= 27037


James Taylor (1788-1863), brother of John Taylor, was born in East Retford on 28 February 1788. In 1802, after receiving a local education, he moved to Bakewell, Derbyshire, home for the rest of his life, to help his sister Ann and her husband in their linen drapery business, later establishing himself as a successful and influential banker there and marrying in 1811. James Taylor was the lifelong intimate of his publisher brother, and kept the latter's business ventures solvent with numerous sizeable loans. A polymath like his brother, he published about a dozen (firmly identifiable) works, mostly on political economy, specifically currency matters, and on theological subjects. He died on 27 August 1863 at Bakewell, where he had been chairman of the local Wesleyan Missionary Society for nearly forty years. He was buried there on 9 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 27038


Taylor, James (1813-1892), minister of the United Presbyterian church, civil servant, and historian, was born in Greenlaw, Berwickshire, on 18 March 1813, the son of Alexander Taylor, farmer, and his wife Violet, 'nee' Pringle. From the parochial school of his native district he passed to the University of Edinburgh, and afterwards to the Divinity Hall of the United Secession church with a view to ordination. On 29 May 1839 he was ordained minister of the United Secession church in St Andrews. He graduated MA at Edinburgh University on 20 April 1843. His marriage to Mary Munro brought them at least two sons and a daughter, born between 1840 and 1845. 
On 26 February 1846 Taylor was translated to Regent Place Church, Glasgow, and on 11 July 1848, with the greater portion of the members, he left for the new church erected in Renfield Street, Glasgow, where he ministered until 1872. From 1872 until 1885 he was secretary to the new education board for Scotland set up by the Liberal government in that year (the United Presbyterian church had been active in safeguarding its interests during the passing of the bill). Taylor oversaw the establishment of a national system of school boards for all except Episcopalians and Roman Catholics, a smoother and more comprehensive system than its English equivalent. 
The rest of Taylor's days were spent in Edinburgh in literary work. Besides numerous articles in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', 'Imperial Dictionary of Biography', 'United Presbyterian Magazine', and individual sermons and pamphlets, Taylor published several works on Scotland, including 'The Pictorial History of Scotland' (2 vols., 1852-9; enlarged edn, 6 vols., 1884-8), 'The Scottish Covenanters' (1881), 'Curling, the Ancient Scottish Game' (1884), 'The Great Historic Families of Scotland' (2 vols., 1887), and 'Lord Jeffrey and Craigcrook Castle' (1892). He also enlarged and continued Tytler's 'History of Scotland' (1845, 1851, 1863), abridged Kitto's 'Cyclopaedia of Biblical Literature' (1849), and edited 'The Family History of England' (6 vols., 1870-5). His 'The Victorian Empire' (3 vols., 1897-8) was published posthumously. 
Taylor received the degrees of DD from St Andrews University in 1849 and of LLD from Edinburgh University in 1892. He was an effective preacher, a forcible debater, and a clear and accurate historian. Lord Beaconsfield, in his humorous mention in 'Lothair' of the United Presbyterian church of Scotland as being founded in recent times by two Jesuits, made sarcastic reference to Taylor as one who had a wide knowledge of the statesmen and statecraft of his time and who urged his views on members of parliament and other leaders in church and state with unflagging pertinacity. Taylor died of heart disease at St John's, Corstorphine, Edinburgh, on 16 March 1892. 


@@@@@


doc= 27039


Taylor, Jane (1783-1824), children's writer, was born on 23 September 1783 in Islington, London, the second of the eleven children (six of whom survived infancy) of the Revd Isaac Taylor (1759-1829), engraver, writer, and nonconformist minister, and Ann Taylor, nee Martin (1757-1830), children's writer. Jane Taylor's sister, Ann [
In 1796, when Jane Taylor was thirteen, the family moved to Colchester, Essex, where her father presided over a nonconformist church. The engraving business fell on hard times, so he let his apprentices go and trained his eldest children, including Jane and Ann, as engravers. In 1798, with other adolescent girls of Colchester, Jane and Ann formed a literary circle, known as the Umbelliferous Society, which required them to produce an original piece of poetry or prose each month. The circle was called umbelliferous to indicate that many buds and blossoms might flourish from the one productive stem. The sisters had so little leisure to write that they would scribble down poems in their spare moments on the margins of their engraving projects. In 1798 Ann published a rhymed answer to a riddle in the 'Minor's Pocket Book' and, for the next thirteen years, continued to make contributions to the same periodical, including her poem 'Crippled Child's Complaint', which was prompted by the lameness of her brother Jefferys Taylor (1792-1853), also a writer for children. Following Ann's lead, in 1804, Jane published her first poem, 'The Beggar Boy'. The publishers Darton and Harvey next invited the sisters to contribute to 'Original Poems' (1804-5), which achieved immediate and enduring success, and was translated into Dutch, French, German, and Russian. Although the book had other contributors, most of the poems were by Jane and Ann, whose 'My Mother' was much loved, imitated, and parodied in the nineteenth century. 
The Taylor sisters' talent for capturing the child's voice is again evident in 'Rhymes for the Nursery' (1806), especially in Jane's classic 'Twinkle, twinkle little star', and in Ann's 'The Baby Dance', which imitates the pleasurable rhythms of baby-talk: '
Dance little baby, dance up high, 

Never mind baby, mother is by; 

Crow and caper, caper and crow, 

There little baby, there you go. 

' From 'Limed Twigs to Catch Young Birds' (1808) and 'The Associate Minstrels' (1810) to 'The Linnet's Life' (1822), the Taylor sisters' books were often composite productions including poems and engravings by other family members. Jane herself engraved the frontispiece for 'Hymns for Infant Minds' (1810), an enormously popular book written in the tradition of Isaac Watts and Mrs Barbauld. According to family legend, their great-grandmother had sat on the knee of Watts and been given a precious copy of his 'Divine Songs for the Use of Children' (1715). Ann Taylor describes the thrill of meeting Mrs Barbauld in 1807: 'a small, plain, lively, elderly lady made her appearance; but it was Mrs. Barbauld, and that was enough!' (Gilbert, 133). 
In the winter of 1812-13, when their brother Isaac Taylor (1787-1865) was forced by bad health to move to Ilfracombe in Devon, Ann and Jane accompanied him. The daily collaboration of the sisters ended when Ann moved to Yorkshire on her marriage on 24 December 1813 to Joseph Gilbert (1779-1852), a Congregational minister, who courted Ann after falling in love with her poetry. Mrs Gilbert found it difficult to achieve the high standard of her early writings while raising eight children, but her autobiography (written during the last decades of her life) is a memorable account of her girlhood struggle to become a writer and of her mixed feelings regarding the superior celebrity of her sister. 
During the years 1813-16, while living in Devon and Cornwall with Isaac, Jane Taylor revelled in wandering on the wild coastline. She completed 'Display: a Tale for Young People' (1815) and 'Essays in Rhyme' (1816), in which she began to write openly as a dissenter. In response to a letter criticizing her for impropriety, she rejected the idea that women should be silent on controversial topics. After all, she quipped, 'Who ever blamed Mrs. [Hannah] More for poking the steeple into almost every page of her writings?' ('Memoirs' 1.154). In 1816, when a crowd assembled to welcome her to Sheffield, the shy writer became uneasy. Yet, upon being asked 'What do you consider the principal defect in the Quaker system?', she retorted with ready wit, 'Expecting women to speak in public, sir' (Gilbert, 227). Early in 1817 Jane confided to Ann, as the only married woman not too 'blunted' to understand her literary ambitions, that she rejoiced in her 'increasing capability of intellectual pleasure' ('Memoirs', 1.162-3). 
Tragically, that spring Jane Taylor detected a lump in her breast; her health began a slow decline. In the autumn she made a public profession of faith and put herself under the pastoral charge of her father, who had since 1811 presided over the meeting-house in Ongar. Jane's final essays, written periodically for the 'Youth's Magazine' (1816-22), are shrewdly designed to appeal to the intellectual and ethical interests of teenagers; they are collected in 'The Contributions of Q. Q.' (1824). Jane died of breast cancer on 13 April 1824 in her parents' house, New House, Ongar, and was buried beside her father's church in Ongar. Ann died at her home in College Street, Nottingham, on 20 December 1866, and was buried in Nottingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 27040


Taylor, Jefferys (1792-1853), children's writer, was born on 30 October 1792 in Cooke's House, Shilling Street, Lavenham, Suffolk, the ninth child of Isaac Taylor (1759-1829), engraver, and his wife, Ann Taylor, nee Martin (1757-1830), also a children's writer. He was named for the family of his paternal grandmother, who was born Sarah Jefferys, the niece of Thomas Jefferys the geographer. Taylor was born lame, a misfortune commemorated in an early poem by his sister Ann (Ann Gilbert (1782-1866) ['see under 'Taylor, Jane (1783-1824)]). Like all his siblings he was educated at home, benefiting from a remarkably broad curriculum devised by his father and aimed principally at exciting intellectual curiosity. He was trained by his father as an engraver and, like his older brothers, Isaac Taylor (1787-1865) and Martin, formally apprenticed to him. 
Until Taylor's marriage on 20 June 1826 to Sophia Mabbs of Mount Nessing, Essex, he appears to have lived at home, successively in Lavenham, in Colchester, and in Ongar, and it was at New House Farm just outside Ongar, during a painful illness, that he wrote his first book, 'Harry's Holiday', which was published in 1818. It ran to several editions and was followed over the next ten years by a string of other successful books for the young, including 'Aesop in Rhyme' (1820), 'The Little Historians' (1824), and 'Parlour Commentaries on the Constitution and Laws of England' (1825). Most of his books were overtly educational in purpose, but often supplied with a superficial fictional context; in a few, such as 'Harry's Holiday' and 'Ralph Richards the Miser' (1821), this emphasis was reversed and the fictional element predominated. Most were illustrated with engravings; those not signed by others were probably his own work. 
Throughout his life, Jefferys Taylor was fascinated by machinery and, in his ramshackle attic under the leads at New House Farm, he invented a machine for ruling straight and close lines for engravings, which was a considerable financial success. On the death of his father in 1829, he seems to have taken on his commitments to the popular 'Little Library' series published by John Harris, for which he wrote 'The Forest' (1831), 'The Farm' (1832), and 'The Ocean' (1833). There is then a gap of nearly ten years before the publication of his next book, 'The Young Islanders' (1842), an early Robinsonnade, in which an entire boys' school is cast away on a desert island; it was particularly successful in America, where it ran to eight editions over the next forty years. 'Incidents of the Apostolic Age of Britain' (1844) was an early historical novel for children and probably the first of the genre to deal with very remote events. 'A Glance at the Globe and at the Worlds Around Us' (1848), an introduction to cosmology and world history, is interesting in that it anticipates Charles Kingsley in avowedly attempting to reconcile for children belief in a divine creator with recent discoveries in geology and palaeontology. 
Jefferys Taylor's first married home was grand, a large Jacobean house (now the Dower House) at Forty Hill, Enfield, Middlesex. Later, for over ten years, he lived at Pilgrim's Hatch, Essex, then a common abutting extensive woodland, until in 1846 financial difficulties forced him to sell up and move to Broadstairs St Peter's, Kent. Here, in July 1852, in a house in the High Street, he suffered a paralytic stroke from which he never recovered. Nursed at the end by his recently widowed sister Ann -- his own wife lay bedridden in an adjacent room -- he died on 8 August 1853. Although brought up a dissenter, like his brothers he had joined the established church in later life, and he was buried in the churchyard of St Peter's, Broadstairs. His tombstone, sketched by a relative in 1895, has not survived. 
Jefferys Taylor was by all accounts an avuncular and genial man, much given to jokes and puns, but had also a penchant for the ghostly and the macabre, a combination likely to appeal to children then as now. (It was his tragedy that the only child of his own marriage, Edward, had died young.) His appearance and character are described by his nephew Josiah Gilbert: 'Indeed, his massive head and sparkling grey eye seemed to indicate more of power than the delicate features of his brother Isaac, but it was a power untrained, and fitfully exerted, and the whole aspect of the man, the halting gait, supported by a stick, the burly form, the quizzical features, bespoke the wayward genius he too truly was. (Gilbert, 2.141)' 



@@@@@


doc= 27041


Taylor, Jeremy (bap. 1613, d. 1667), Church of Ireland bishop of Down and Connor and religious writer, was born at Cambridge, where he was baptized at Trinity Church on 15 August 1613. He was the third son of Nathaniel Taylor, a barber, and Mary Dean. The Taylors were a well-established Cambridge family: Nathaniel and his father, Edmond (died 1607), were both churchwardens of Trinity Church; at the time of Jeremy's birth the family was probably living at a house known as the Black Bear, opposite Trinity Church, but at some date after 1621 they moved to the Wrestlers' Inn in Petty Cury, in the parish of St Andrew the Great. Jeremy was instructed in grammar and mathematics by his father, and later educated at the Perse School under its master Thomas Lovering. He entered Gonville and Caius College as a sizar, or poor scholar, on 18 August 1626 and matriculated on 17 March 1627. His tutor was Thomas Bachcroft, who later became master of the college. Taylor was elected a scholar on the Perse foundation at Michaelmas 1628 and took his BA in 1631. In 1633 he was elected to a Perse fellowship of the college and was ordained, although still under twenty-one years old. He proceeded to an MA in 1634 and was appointed a praelector in rhetoric by the master of Caius. 
Apparently Taylor came to the attention of Archbishop William Laud when he stood in for Thomas Risden, his university friend, as a lecturer at St Paul's Cathedral. According to George Rust's sermon at Taylor's funeral, Laud had Taylor preach before him and was impressed, especially by his quick-witted response to the remark that he was very young: Taylor 'humbly begged his grace to pardon that fault, and promised, if he lived, he would mend it' ('Works', 1.17). Laud organized his preferment within the University of Oxford. On 20 October 1635 Taylor was admitted MA from University College. A few days later Laud recommended him for a vacant fellowship at All Souls, and when Gilbert Sheldon, the warden, objected to his election on a technicality, Laud used the authority which devolved to him as college visitor to ensure that Taylor was admitted -- first as a probationary and then, on 14 January 1636, as a permanent fellow. Soon afterwards Taylor was appointed chaplain to Laud and a chaplain-in-ordinary to Charles I. 
Taylor was a rising star and inevitably attracted adverse as well as positive comment. There were rumours of crypto-popery. In 1641 he was to be accused of 'teaching that a man cannot be saved without confession to a priest' (Milton, 74n.). His friendship with the Franciscan Christopher Davenport gave rise to suspicions. Perhaps these rumours were allayed by the Gunpowder Plot sermon Taylor preached at the university church of St Marys, Oxford, on 5 November 1638. Dedicated to Laud, the published sermon was a virulent and historically detailed attack on the treachery of Roman Catholics. Although Davenport told Anthony Wood that Taylor had 'expressed some sorrow for those things he had said against them' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.782), Taylor remained a fierce critic of 'popery' throughout his life. In a letter from the late 1650s published as part of 'A Dissuasive from Popery' (1664) he described Rome as 'a church that protects itself by arts of subtilty ['sic'] and arms, by violence and persecuting', and states that its erroneous doctrines pandered to evil inclinations: the Church of England was a far safer path, yet Taylor could not bring himself to say that all Catholics were damned ('Works', 11.187, 197). Taylor was a combative preacher, and even his admirers voiced the occasional reservation: William Chillingworth told a mutual friend that, for all his qualities, Taylor: 'wants much of the ethicall part of a discourser, and slights too much many times the arguments of those he discourses with; but this is a fault he would quickly leave, if he had a friend that would discreetly tell him of it. ('Holy Living', xvii)' In 1638 Bishop Juxon preferred Taylor to the rectory of Uppingham in Rutland. Taylor was instituted into the living on 23 March 1638 and took up residence in his parish; the parish registers attest to his concern for his flock and his church, and his pulpit and paten survive in the parish church. It was at Uppingham on 27 May 1639 that he married Phoebe Langsdale (died 1651), daughter of Gervase Langsdale of Holborn, London, and sister to Edward Langsdale (1619-1684), who had been one of Taylor's pupils at Cambridge in 1633. Taylor and Phoebe had several children: William, who was buried at Uppingham on 28 May 1642; two other sons (George? and Richard), who succumbed to smallpox in the winter of 1656-7; Charles, who survived to adulthood only to die a few days after his father; and two daughters, Phoebe, who never married, and Mary, who in 1662 married Francis Marsh, dean of Armagh and later archbishop of Dublin. When John Evelyn met Mary in 1680, 'she seemed to be a knowing woman beyond the ordinary talent of her sex' ('Diary of John Evelyn', 4.19). 
Jeremy Taylor was not able to enjoy the life of a parish priest for long. The outbreak of the civil war impelled him to join Charles I. Although details of his movements are not entirely clear, and depend heavily upon Wood's account, it seems that he joined the king at Nottingham and then accompanied the court to Oxford. On 1 November 1642 Taylor received a DD from the University of Oxford by royal mandate, probably in recognition of his recently completed book 'The Sacred Order and Offices of Episcopacy' (Oxford, 1642). After Charles I had allegedly declined the honour, this outspoken book was dedicated to Christopher Hatton, later Lord Hatton, royalist courtier and politician, and a stalwart patron of Taylor for several years to come. In 1644 there appeared from the university printer at Oxford 'The Psalter of David', an anonymous work that was frequently attributed to Hatton and yet which bears Taylor's literary hallmark. Wood writes of Taylor as preaching frequently before the court at Oxford in the early 1640s and accompanying the royal army as a chaplain. There are no more entries by Taylor in the register at Uppingham after the summer of 1642, but it was not until May 1644 that his living was finally sequestered and the royalist 'Mercurius Aulicus' could luridly report his house plundered, his estate seized, and his family put out. Since the living of Uppingham was effectively lost to him in 1642, his institution to the rectory of Overstone, Northamptonshire, in 1643 may have been intended as some form of compensation, but there is no evidence of his residence there, and his successor was in possession by May 1647. Meanwhile the fortunes of war had gone against Taylor. In January or February 1645 he was taken prisoner after the defeat of the royalist force under Colonel Charles Gerard outside Cardigan Castle in Wales. His prominence was such that the parliamentary propagandists crowed at the capture of this 'most spruce neat formalist, a very ginger-bread Idoll, an Arminian in print' ('Walker rev.', 302). 
Taylor was probably free again by April and able to resume his scholarly and clerical life. Whether his role as a military chaplain had brought him to south-west Wales or he had retired there looking for peace, he found refuge as a teacher at a school in the grandly named Newton Hall in the parish of Llanfihangel Aberbythych, Carmarthenshire. Set up by William Nicholson, the ejected vicar of nearby Llandeilo, with the assistance of William Wyatt, this school prepared the sons of local gentlemen for university. In 1646 Taylor and Wyatt wrote and published 'A New and Easie Institution of Grammar' (Oxford, 1646), and the same year Taylor's 'Discourse Concerning Prayer ex tempore' also appeared at Oxford. It is uncertain whether Taylor's presence at the school brought him into the orbit of Richard Vaughan, second earl of Carbery, or the school owed its location and even existence to the proximity of Carbery's mansion. Whichever it was, Taylor soon became chaplain to the Carbery household and a resident at Golden Grove (Gelli-aur), a few miles south-west of Llandeilo and to the east of Carmarthen. Carbery's early Elizabethan house was palatial. It was taxed at thirty hearths in 1670, and if, as has been suggested, the engraved frontispiece to Taylor's book 'Golden Grove' includes a depiction of the house in an idealization of the Tywi valley, it was a delightful retreat (Gathorne-Hardy and Williams, 63-5). Carbery had retired here from politics in 1644 after a less than distinguished military career as a royalist general. He enjoyed a parliamentary pardon and the protection of the earl of Essex. Taylor savoured a congenial atmosphere of piety -- especially with Frances, countess of Carbery -- and bookishness. 
During the next few years Taylor produced a series of important works. 'The Liberty of Prophesying' (1647) was the first and perhaps most uncharacteristic, as it argued for religious toleration. Then 'weary and toiled with rowing up and down in the seas of questions' ('Works', 2.xiii), Taylor turned his mind to winning people over to Christianity rather than to a party, and produced a series of devotional works, 'The Great Exemplar' (1649), 'Holy Living' (1650), and 'Holy Dying' (1651). The last two were dedicated to Carbery. Poignantly 'Holy Dying' was intended as tribute to the countess of Carbery, but before Taylor could finish it, she died in childbirth on 9 October 1650. Taylor preached and later published a funeral sermon for the 'dear departed Saint'. When he came to dedicate 'Holy Dying' (which was entered in the Stationers' register on 23 June 1651, while Thomason dated his copy 3 September 1651), Taylor added a personal note by remarking on his own sad experience of grief. Apparently his wife, Phoebe, had died in the first half of 1651. 
To judge by his publications, Taylor spent the next year or two assiduously preaching at Golden Grove and preparing two volumes of sermons 'for all the Sundays of the year', which were published as 'Eniautos' in 1651 and 1653. Yet even in the fastnesses of Carmarthenshire, religious controversy was alive. Taylor found himself at odds with a Jesuit, John Sarjeant, over the doctrine of the eucharist. By April 1653 Taylor had completed 'The real presence and spirituall of Christ in the blessed sacrament, proved against the doctrine of transubstantiation' and sent the manuscript to Brian Duppa, the deprived bishop of Salisbury. By November Duppa had received a copy of the printed book and recommended it to Sir Justinian Isham: 'You will find it to be a discourse occasioned by a conference he had with a Jesuit, against whom he hath argued with so much sharpness as if all his study had been in controversies, and yet hath framed his bookes of devotion so as if he understood nothing of them. ('Correspondence of... Duppa and... Isham', 75)' There were many calls on Taylor's time and energy, as can be glimpsed from another of Duppa's letters. On 9 May 1654 he wrote that Taylor 'hath been lately at London with an intention to make use of some books for the perfecting of a very good work which he hath now in hand. But being here, the labours of the pulpit took him off from the care of the press: for he was not suffer'd to be in quiet. Preach he must, both in season and out of season, till at last being wearied out with it, he is retired back to the Golden Grove. ('Correspondence of... Duppa and... Isham', 88)' Taylor had conceived a grand project, a work of casuistry or 'cases of conscience', which would be his 'magnum opus' and a complete protestant answer to the many Roman Catholic manuals of casuistry. His correspondence of the 1650s contains frequent references to his progress on the book: part one was complete late in 1654; in April 1656 the book, entitled 'Ductor dubitantium', was entered in the Stationers' register; parts of the text were being set up on the printing presses in the winter of 1656-7; he was still hard at work in 1659, by which time he was in Ireland; and the huge tome finally appeared in 1660. Throughout these years Taylor's life was precarious. Money was always a problem. He depended on the generosity of sympathizers and patrons, some of whom had fallen on hard times themselves or even, like Hatton, gone into exile. Through Duppa he received at least one donation from Sir Justinian Isham; John Evelyn would be another benefactor, and there was some rather tense financial arrangement with Gilbert Sheldon. Taylor's personal liberty was far from assured. A letter to Taylor from John Evelyn, dated 9 February 1655, appears to refer to some recent restraint or imprisonment that Taylor had undergone in Wales. There is no other evidence of this, and yet some scholars have supposed a connection between this putative imprisonment and possible offence given to the authorities by the outspoken episcopalianism of the preface to 'Golden Grove', his devotional manual which appeared in December 1654 (despite a title-page date of 1655). Tradition and over-enthusiastic scholarship may have exaggerated the number of occasions on which Taylor was imprisoned, but the fear and insecurity were all too real. 
In March 1655 Taylor was once again in London. He preached at St Gregory by Paul's, where he was heard by Evelyn. He no doubt also took this opportunity to deliver the manuscript of 'Unum necessarium' to Richard Royston, the Anglican royalist bookseller who printed most of Taylor's works. This title was entered in the Stationers' register on 3 May, and Thomason dated his copy July 1655. At some stage Royston, either on his own initiative or at the behest of the author, sent several of the printed sheets of this work to Duppa. This was a wise precaution because Taylor had denied the doctrine of original sin. Yet when Duppa returned 'his exceptions and arguments with some severity' and Bishop John Warner of Rochester wrote in protest, Taylor simply included their complaints and his reply in the preface. He 'thereby tells everybody of it, before they read so farr into the booke, & by that meanes, it is universally spoken of, and by every single person that I heare of, disliked, and by the B[isho]ps disclaimd. I wish with you, hee would advise before he runs these hazards[.] But I feare, it will not bee. Poor man is in affliction close at Chepstow Castle. (Hammond? to Sheldon?, 14 September [1655], BL, Harley MS 6942, fol. 124)' The unrepentant Taylor was confined in Chepstow Castle between May and October 1655, possibly as a consequence of the crackdown prompted by the royalist rising in Wiltshire in March 1655. His gaolers were, however, 'civil to my person' and allowed him unimpeded correspondence and the facilities to write ('Works', 9.365). Taylor was free and back in Carmarthenshire by November, but he was now living at Mandinam, near Llangadog, on the estate of his second wife, Joanna Bridges. The date of their marriage is unknown. Mandinam was close to Golden Grove, but Taylor may no longer have been officiating there in view of the recent ordinance prohibiting the employment of Anglican clergymen as domestic chaplains. 
In the winter of 1655-6 Taylor was busy defending his position on original sin both in private letters and in works intended for the press. 'A Further Explication of the Doctrine of Original Sin' was published in November 1655 and was subsequently incorporated in later editions of 'Unum necessarium' as chapter 7. He visited London in the following spring: on 12 April he dined with Evelyn at Sayes Court in the company of Robert Boyle, John Wilkins, and George Berkeley; and in May Evelyn visited Taylor in London and successfully sought his help in gaining episcopal ordination for Jacques Le Franc, minister of the Walloon church in Norwich. In July Taylor was back in Wales, but keen to settle in London; he was also looking forward to the imminent publication of 'Deus justificatus' and his 'Answer to a Letter', both further defences of his teaching on original sin. It is sometimes suggested that Taylor was imprisoned in Wales in the winter of 1656-7, but this claim seems to rest on a letter to Evelyn dated 21 November 1656. Internal evidence indicates that this letter has been misdated and was sent in November 1655. Certainly the winter of 1656-7 was not kind to Taylor. In February 1657 he wrote to Evelyn of the death from smallpox of two of his sons: 'I have now but one son left, whom I intend (if it please God) to bring up to London before Easter; and then I hope to wait upon you, and by your sweet conversation and other divertissements, if not to alleviate my sorrows, yet, at least, to entertain myself and keep me from too much intense and actual thinkings of my troubles. ('Diary and Correspondence', 578)' That summer Taylor seems to have finally moved to London: he was to be found baptizing Evelyn's newborn child in June, preaching the funeral sermon for Sir George Dalston, a pious supporter of the church, in September, and frequently preaching in one or more private houses to a circle of pious Anglicans. He was befriended by Lord and Lady Conway and visited them at Kensington and Ragley in Worcestershire. He collected his controversial works, going back to his 1642 defence of episcopacy and including some of his works on original sin, in one folio volume, 'Simbolon ethiko-polemikon, or, A Collection of Polemic and Moral Discourses', and produced 'A Collection of Offices, or Forms of Prayer' (appeared December 1657), which was explicitly designed to fill the gap left by the ban on the 'Book of Common Prayer'. Yet, characteristically, Taylor remained unsettled: 'I have some thoughts of retiring from noise and company, and going to my studies in a far distant solitude, but not to Wales. This place [London] is expensive of my no money and my little time, concerning both which I am constrained to take some more care. (19 December 1657, BL, Tanner MS 52, fol. 216)' The last clause was a reference to his wife's current pregnancy, which was mentioned in Lady Conway's letters and the outcome of which is unclear. Taylor and Joanna Bridges had at least two children: Edward, who was buried at Lisburn, co. Antrim, on 10 March 1661, and Joanna, upon whom her mother's estate was settled in reversion as part of her marriage settlement of 1668 with Edward Harrison (1644-1700) of Magheralin, MP for Lisburn. 
In London during the winter of 1657-8 Taylor continued to preach, to write, and to offer spiritual guidance and moral support to a mainly Anglican group. A story that he was imprisoned in the Tower of London seems based on a misreading of a letter from Evelyn to the lieutenant of the Tower: Evelyn alludes to suspicions of Taylor as popishly affected and suggests a meeting, and this in turn suggests that the letter may properly belong to January 1658 rather than its apparent date of 1657. If that is the case this allusion may be connected to the council of state's recommendation of 22 December 1657 that Peter Gunning and Taylor be summoned for 'an account of the frequent meetings of multitudes of people held with them' and that the ban on the prayer book be enforced ('CSP dom.', '1657-8', 226). One fruit of this was the raids on various congregations using the prayer book on Christmas day 1657, but there is nothing to confirm that Taylor was caught up in these events ('Diary of John Evelyn', 3.203-5). 
Taylor's desire to retire from London was noted by his friends. In May 1658 he refused Conway's offer of a lectureship at Lisburn (Lisnagarvey), co. Antrim, in which he would have alternated with another lecturer and been dependent on the whim of the subscribers and the local ecclesiastical authorities. Moreover the stipend was insufficient to cover even the costs and trouble of moving his family to Ulster. Nor were the authorities any keener to let him go to Ulster. On 10 June the council of state had refused a pass for Taylor to travel to Ireland. Edward Conway was not to be thwarted, however. He dragooned his friends to cajole Taylor with offers of land in Ireland and help from local patrons, and he even got a pass for Taylor and his family from Lord Protector Cromwell himself. So later that summer Taylor and his family arrived in Ireland. 
Taylor was based on Conway's estate at Portmore, in the parish of Ballinderry, 8 miles from Lisburn. The religious situation in Antrim, as in the whole of Ireland, was complex. The majority of the population was Roman Catholic, while the protestant governing elite was divided. The episcopalian Church of Ireland had suffered like the Church of England, yet it had maintained an identity and a presence. The aged Bishop Leslie of Down and Connor had not lost contact with his diocese. He had been sheltered in Arthur Hill's house at Hillsborough, where 'the publick liturgy of the church is greatly valued, and diligently us'd' (Barnard, 151). The presbyterians who had occupied many of the livings of the Irish church were a strong group, closely linked to the Scottish presbyterians but also royalist. The Cromwellian army of occupation had brought religious radicals, Baptists and Independents, to political dominance in Ireland in the early 1650s. However, since the arrival of Henry Cromwell in 1655 there had been a steady transfer of local power back to the protestant landed class and a weakening of religious radicalism. Presumably the arrival of Taylor was intended to bolster this process in the corner of Antrim where Conway had his large estates. Despite the displeasure of the local presbyterians at his presence, Taylor quickly set to work. He preached; he served as chaplain in the Conway household and that of Conway's brother-in-law, George Rawdon, commander of the Lisburn garrison; and tradition has it that he officiated in the ruined church of Ballinderry in the marshes west of Lough Beg. He was involved in the uniting of parishes and in the building of a new parish church. And in his study he polished the final chapters of 'Ductor dubitantium'. 
A minor irritation arose in June 1659 when Philip Tandy, a local Independent preacher, complained to Henry Cromwell that Taylor had baptized a child with the sign of the cross. There may have been an element of pique in this: Lord Conway had heard that the quarrel was because Tandy 'thinks Dr Taylor more welcome to Hillsborough than himself' ('Works', 1.cccxxxviii). Tandy's complaint was overtaken by events. The following month Henry Cromwell lost power and left office; following the collapse of the protectorate, radical republican elements assumed authority. On 11 August it was ordered that Taylor be brought to Dublin to answer charges, but nothing was done: on 3 November Taylor confessed himself baffled by events. Then, in December, he was summoned to Dublin only to find, after a painful journey, that the radical regime had fallen apart. He was soon back in his study at Portmore watching events unfold and waiting for the end of winter and a safe passage to England. 
April 1660 was an opportune moment to arrive in London: Taylor signed a 'loyal' or royalist address to General Monk on 24 April; and he dedicated his 'Ductor dubitantium', which appeared in June, to Charles II. On 6 August Taylor was nominated as bishop of Down and Connor. His preferment in Ireland is explicable in several ways. He was a well-known and respected devotional and controversial writer, and an undisputed 'sufferer' for the Anglican and royalist cause, but he was also an uncompromising episcopalian and heterodox in his teaching on original sin: in short, Taylor was not the kind of churchman to suit the inclusive English church under consideration in 1660. In Ireland, however, with John Bramhall designated for the primacy and the duke of Ormond a powerful ally at court, the strident Taylor was a natural choice. 
In Ireland a power struggle was in full swing. After nominating the Irish bishops, Charles II had not rushed to have them consecrated or translated to their new posts for fear that the sight of zealous Irish prelates acting against local presbyterians would damage the delicate English negotiations. Taylor, still only a nominee, was wise to tread carefully in Down. In the course of 1660 many presbyterian clergy had regained the livings that they had lost to Independents in the Cromwellian years. In December Taylor heard that the presbyterian ministers 'have lately bought my books, and appointed a committee of Scotch spiders to see if they can gather or make poison out of them' and that they were now planning to charge him before the Irish privy council as an Arminian, Socinian, and 'a heretic in grain' (Seymour, 196-7; 'CSP Ire.', '1660-62', 115). They had refused his invitations to confer, saying they would 'speak with no bishop'. For his part, he told Ormond, he would prefer to be a village curate 'than a bishop over such intolerable persons' ('Holy Living', xxxi). But Taylor was not one to shrink from a fight. He wrote to Lord Conway in January 1661 from Dublin, hoping that his business would be done speedily so 'that I may go into the North and take care of my friends and my enemies' (Stranks, 225). The consecration of Taylor and eleven other prelates took place on 27 January 1661 in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. Taylor himself preached the sermon and did not mince his words: 'without bishops there can be no priests, and consequently no sacraments' and no church; the presbyterians were simply schismatic ('Works', 6.349). In Rawdon's view he 'taught them the office of a Bishop' ('CSP Ire.', '1660-62', 199). He had now been sworn in as vice-chancellor of Trinity College, Dublin, an institution which he proceeded to reform energetically. In February he gained his wish to become a member of the Irish privy council. Disappointed of his hopes for the bishopric of Meath, he was given the additional responsibility of administering the diocese of Dromore. On 8 May he preached at the opening of the Irish parliament and was vitriolic about the 'criminally disobedient' dissenters. He castigated the presbyterians for not conforming to the protestant episcopal church and denounced the notion of liberty for tender consciences. A few days later parliament issued a declaration that all subjects conform to episcopal church government and the liturgy as established by law. 
Steps were now taken to bring the presbyterian clergy to heel. Bishop Taylor was undeniably belligerent. His visitation at Lisburn was probably held in March or April 1661, in other words before parliament's declaration, but this made no difference to his attitude or that of the presbyterians. Only two presbyterian ministers attended, and Taylor immediately declared thirty-six livings vacant. One hostile witness claimed that he did so because their ministers did not have episcopal ordination. No doubt Taylor did not believe them properly ordained (although there was no explicit legal requirement for episcopal ordination in Ireland until 1667), but more obviously he would not brook opposition to his own authority as bishop. 
Taylor was now 'full of public concerns and the troubles of business in my diocese' ('Diary and Correspondence', 599, Dublin, 16 November 1661). His duties took him to Dublin often: he preached there on 4 May and 10 August 1662, and on 15 February and 16 July 1663. In the summer of 1663 he planned 'to visit the churches in Antrim up as farre as Colerane and so about to Glenarme and Caricfergus; to put all perfectly right' (Gathorne-Hardy and Williams, 110-11). In 1662-3 he investigated local ghost sightings, and this information eventually found its way into Joseph Glanvill's 'Saducismus triumphatus' (1682). In 1664 Taylor published a 'Dissuasive from Popery', which linked what he considered to be false Catholic doctrines such as purgatory and transubstantiation to the credulity and folk beliefs of the Irish-speaking natives, and revealed his own increasing pessimism about the success of the Church of Ireland. Taylor's was a strenuous and troubled episcopate, and he dreamed of a return to England, if only for the winter; 'and I hear is preparing court sermons already' reported Rawdon in 1665 ('CSP Ire.', '1663-5', 551). Although his health was indifferent, he was still working hard as bishop and controversialist: in July 1665 he 'is so close at his study replying to [the] answers to his book against Popery that he is hardly got out of his closet' (ibid., 603). In 1660-61 he had lived at Hillsborough and then Portmore, but after 1664 he lived mainly in Castle Street, Lisburn, although he owned other houses and a farm at Megharalin. It was at Castle Street, Lisburn, after suffering ten days of fever, apparently contracted while visiting the sick, that Taylor died at about 3 p.m. on 13 August 1667. According to George Rawdon, who was present, Taylor had to be reminded to write his will, and contrary to expectations he left little save $1500 in the hands of the earl of Donegal and $600 held by Lord Conway ('CSP Ire.', '1666-9', 425, 429). It was Taylor's wish to be buried either in the church he had built at Dromore or at Ballinderry if that church was consecrated before his death. He was buried in a vault in the chancel of the cathedral church at Dromore. 
Taylor's difficult years in Ireland and his early death around the age of fifty-four cannot overshadow his literary achievements, which are all the more impressive in view of the hand-to-mouth existence he was leading for much of the 1640s and 1650s. His published writings were the basis of his fame during his lifetime and since. Although many of his works defy easy classification, there are three areas in which he made his mark. 
Taylor enjoys a reputation as a proponent of religious toleration. This is entirely due to his early work 'The Liberty of Prophesying', which is an extended essay, in a plainer prose than he later used, on the need for religious liberty. This liberty was defined as freedom from persecution and the freedom to profess and teach all religions so long as they did not promote impiety or disturb the public peace. Taylor was prepared to include Anabaptists and Roman Catholics within such a liberty. Although the influence of William Chillingworth and John Hales is discernible, Taylor was undoubtedly far in advance of most protestant thought on the subject, and yet there is an apparent absence of rigour in his position. His central tenet was that there is no more certain and universal rule of faith than the apostles' creed, and so this must become the measure of Christian unity of faith; he proposed that it should serve as the basis of church communion, with all other theological, liturgical, and ecclesiological teachings dismissed as non-fundamentals. Taylor assumed that all individuals had to judge for themselves, and that the honest error of an innocent person would incur no punishment: 'it concerns all persons to see that they do the best to find out the truth; and if they do, it is certain that, let the error be ever so damnable, they shall escape the error, or the misery of being damned for it. ('Works', 8.231)' Beyond this, the tract is merely an exhortation to prudence, charity, and humility and a denunciation of pride, violence, and schism, all made, of course, at least in part on behalf of a proscribed and persecuted Anglican church. Even during his own lifetime, this tract began to haunt him. Taylor added more than twenty-three folio pages to the 1657 edition to show why Anabaptism was an error. It hardly needs to be said that his own episcopate demonstrated scant tolerance of those who disagreed with the episcopalian church. 
The achievement of which Taylor was most proud was his contribution to the creation of an English casuistry. 'Ductor dubitantium, or, The Rule of Conscience' (1660) was designed as a comprehensive manual of cases of conscience which would form a capstone to the English protestant edifice already created by Robert Sanderson, Joseph Hall, and William Perkins. No longer would English clergy need to consult Roman Catholic casuists and run the risk of being misled by their 'probabilism' (the teaching that a course of action was allowed if 'some', rather than a majority of, moral theologians permitted it). Taylor promised general rules from which every particular case could be resolved. Unfortunately, in the opinion of many readers, his huge work lost sight of this goal and became lost in its own digressions: K. E. Kirk described it as 'erudite, tortuous and garrulous' (Kirk, 205); Cardinal Newman marvelled 'how weak a thread of thoughts' connected the book's quotations and references (Miller, 132-3). In common with his fellow protestant casuists, Taylor inclined towards 'probabiliorism' and was often severe in his conclusions; for example, he denied the distinction of mortal and venial sins. In effect, Taylor believed that there is always a right answer in moral dilemmas, even if human reason cannot fathom it; and while offering the conventional teaching on the obligation of an 'erroneous conscience', he placed an overwhelming emphasis on the duty of human reason to discern the good act where 'good' is defined by rational nature and divine commands. 
Among his contemporaries Taylor's devotional works were far more popular than his 1100-page casuistical tome. His devotional writings ranged from liturgical collections to sermons, from arguably the first English life of Christ, 'The Great Exemplar', a mixture of narrative and prayer, to two great manuals of practical piety, 'Holy Living' and 'Holy Dying'. The popularity of Taylor's writings in this vein was overwhelming: they were among the best and steadiest sellers of the century; 'Holy Living' and 'Holy Dying' had both reached their nineteenth edition by 1695. These pious books were treasured by devout Anglicans like John Evelyn, who used Taylor's meditations and prayers as inspirations for his own private devotions. In a letter of 1654 Dorothy Osborne described herself as a devotee of Taylor's works and paraphrased 'Holy Living' on the duty of submission. Clandestine Anglican congregations may have used his various liturgical works in place of the prohibited prayer book. 
Taylor's success owes as much to his literary talent as his intellect. He was notable for his eloquence, his almost poetical imagination, and his wide biblical and classical learning: even his opponents recognized his 'admirable wit, great parts, quick and elegant pen, his abilities in critical learning, and his profound skill in antiquities' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.784). His sonorous prose has been criticized as over-elaborate; some have suggested that Taylor exemplifies an ornate and copious prose style, occasionally described as Ciceronian, which depends upon extended similes and self-conscious flights of fancy to achieve its powerful emotional effects. He certainly builds up long sentences of linked clauses, often using figurative language and embellished with classical and biblical parallels, but rarely does so without a clear rhetorical purpose in mind. And when necessary, brevity is employed. 
Taylor was not a systematic, nor even a particularly consistent, thinker or theologian; the confusion of his sacramental doctrine, for instance, has often been noted by commentators. Taylor's churchmanship, as is to be expected in a protege of the Laudians, included a preference for such things as private confession to the priest, confirmation, vestments, and ritual, and a single-minded devotion to the 'Book of Common Prayer'. In theology he was uncompromisingly Arminian: he described the works of the Arminian systematizer Episcopius as 'excellent' and containing 'the whole body of orthodox religion'; Hugo Grotius was also among his influences. Taylor's assertion of episcopacy in 1642 took a Cyprianic line on the necessity of bishops to the being of a church, and he may have been the first to deny categorically the validity of the clerical orders of the European Reformed churches. He was a central figure in what is sometimes called the 'holy living' school of mid-seventeenth-century Anglicanism. This severe outlook required a rigorous commitment from the individual Christian. In Taylor's writings, repentance was a once-and-for-all event. So convinced was he of this that he took his view to its logical, and controversial, conclusions: in 'Holy Living' and elsewhere, Taylor dismissed deathbed repentance as utterly inadequate and ineffective. When preparing his manual on repentance, 'Unum necessarium', he 'found the usual doctrines of original sin to be one' of the 'principles of evil life', and so without compunction he repudiated the doctrine (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 52, fol. 101). In chapter 6 of 'Unum necessarium', he argued from 'Romans' 5 that Adam's sin was imputed to humankind: 'the effect of one sin, and the cause of many; a stain, but no sin' ('Works', 9.94). In other words, human beings do not inherit original sin, so sin can neither destroy our liberty nor make us sin of necessity. For Taylor, God does not damn anyone solely on the grounds of an inherited sin, but for the actual sin they voluntarily commit. Taylor was adamant that humans enjoyed free will, and would not retract his teaching on original sin even in the face of a barrage of criticism from fellow Anglicans such as Sheldon, Sanderson, and Duppa, and from puritans such as Henry Jeanes, John Gaule, and Nathaniel Stephens. He consoled himself that his teaching was on 'that side where God's justice and goodness stand apparently'; the 'precepts of holiness might as well be preached to a wolf as to a man, if men were naturally and inevitably wicked' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 52, fol. 101; 'Works', 9.46). In all this, Taylor stood so far outside the Augustinian assumptions of the majority of English protestant theologians that he was widely perceived as 'semi-Pelagian'. Modern readers, however, may find Taylor's work remarkable for its emotional power, acute sense of human capabilities and responsibilities, and emphasis on the practical duties of a Christian profession. 
Taylor was stubborn and surprisingly pugnacious for one so famed for his piety. Those who knew him remarked on his polemical tendencies. 'I am glad he left no more trouble behind him', remarked Archbishop Sheldon on news of his death. 'He was of a dangerous temper apt to break out into extravagancies, and I have had, till of late years, much to do with him to keep him in order, and to find diversions for him' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 45, fol. 222). In 1664, when asking for translation to an English see, Taylor told Sheldon that he had heard on good authority 'that your grace was pleased once to say, that I myself was the only hindrance to myself of being removed to an English bishopric'. It was obtuse of Taylor not to appreciate what Sheldon really meant and tactless (or brazen) to repeat it to him. Others, however, saw Taylor as a saintly figure: for John Evelyn he was a spiritual guide, his 'ghostly father'. Taylor's circle of friends was diverse, including Henry More and Herbert of Cherbury, and several notable women, such as the poet Katherine Philips, Lady Conway, and the countess of Carbery. Above all it was his literary legacy, admired by Wesley, Coleridge, Lamb, Arnold, Heber, and Gosse, that was most significant. For once, even the acerbic Anthony Wood has only praise to offer: Taylor's writings 'will be famous to all succeeding generations for the exactness of wit, profoundness of judgement, richness of fancy, clearness of expression, copiousness of invention, and general usefulness to all the purposes of a Christian' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.783). 


@@@@@


doc= 27042


Taylor, John (d. 1534), Catholic priest and diplomat, was born into a poor family at Barton under Needwood in the parish of Tatenhill, Staffordshire, the eldest of male triplets. According to tradition, the boys were presented to Henry VII, who undertook to pay for their education. In 1500 Taylor was a student in the law faculty at Ferrara, where he received the degree of DCnL. By the time he was ordained a priest in April 1503 Taylor had already begun to accumulate benefices in England, beginning with the rectory of Shottesbrooke, Berkshire, followed by that of Bishop's Hatfield, Hertfordshire, in December 1500, and a prebend at Wells in April 1505. His advancement was aided by papal dispensations for plurality granted in 1501 and 1504. In August 1504 he was sent on his first diplomatic mission, in the company of John Yonge, master of the rolls and a fellow student at Ferrara, to negotiate a commercial treaty with the duke of Burgundy. His efforts were rewarded with the rectory of Sutton Coldfield, Warwickshire, in January 1505, and he was soon appointed a royal chaplain to Henry VII. 
With the accession of Henry VIII, Taylor's career prospered, and he soon added the rectory of All Hallows-the-Great in London and Coldingham in Northamptonshire to his portfolio of livings, together with the prebend of Eccleshall at Lichfield. Despite his lack of chancery experience, Taylor was appointed clerk of parliaments on 20 October 1509, and by 1515 his reforms of record keeping had produced the first proper Lords' journal. He accompanied the English army invading France in the summer of 1513, composing a detailed account of the campaign for his patron John Yonge (BL, MS Cotton Cleopatra C.v 64). His diplomatic work continued: he regularly replied to foreign ambassadors' orations at court, and in early 1515 he was included in an aborted embassy to Rome. Taylor also served as prolocutor of the 1515 Canterbury convocation, in which capacity he addressed the bishops on behalf of the lower clergy, rejecting royal tax demands. Closely associated with Cardinal Wolsey, by late 1516 he was employed in chancery as deputy to the master of the rolls, Cuthbert Tunstall. These services to crown and cardinal continued to bring rich rewards, with appointments as archdeacon of Derby (March 1516) and archdeacon of Buckingham (December 1516) followed by a canonry of St Stephen's, Westminster (March 1518). As a royal chaplain Taylor was present both at the Field of Cloth of Gold in the summer of 1520, and shortly afterwards when Henry VIII met the emperor Charles V at Gravelines. 
Taylor's first major diplomatic assignment came in the autumn of 1525, when he was dispatched as an ambassador to France following the battle of Pavia. He was present at the release of Francois I at Bayonne in March 1526, and spent several months travelling with the itinerant French court; the Venetian ambassador credited Taylor with persuading Francois I not to ratify the treaty to which he had agreed while a prisoner of the Habsburgs. As in 1513, Taylor kept a diary of his travels, recording his impressions of French churches and the many fraudulent relics they contained (BL, Cotton MS Caligula D.ix 107). Throughout the summer of 1526 he worked under Wolsey's direction to arrange a league between England, France, and the papacy, but in mid-August he was replaced by John Clerk, like himself a clerical diplomat. Returning via Paris (where he attended some Greek lectures), Taylor reached Dover in late November. 
On 27 June 1527 Taylor was named master of the rolls, but four months later returned to France to invest Francois I with the Garter, and then remained in Paris as ambassador. By the summer of 1528 he was occupied in making arrangements for the journey of the papal legate Campeggi to England, and dealing with one of his servants under investigation for Lutheranism. Taylor's second French embassy lasted until Easter 1529, when the imminent legatine court in England necessitated his recall. He was present at the opening session on 18 June 1529 and was soon occupied in taking depositions from witnesses. The failure of the legates to resolve the king's Great Matter led to the fall of Wolsey; as master of the rolls Taylor took custody of the great seal, surrendered by his former patron on 7 October 1529, and delivered it to the king three days later. 
In September 1531 the veteran diplomat led a third embassy to France, designed to strengthen the Anglo-French alliance in order to pressure Pope Clement VII to grant Henry VIII an annulment. Having successfully concluded a treaty and arranged a meeting between Henry and Francois at Calais, by November 1532 Taylor had returned to his duties as master of the rolls at Westminster. He resigned the archdeaconry of Derby in early 1533, but rumours that he might be elevated to the episcopate (perhaps to the vacant see of Coventry and Lichfield) proved unfounded. However, another John Taylor (d. 1554), bishop of Lincoln from 1552, is thought to have been his nephew or illegitimate son. In May 1534 it was believed that Taylor would soon resign as master of the rolls (probably due to illness); on 21 September Stow reported that he had been discharged from office. Five days earlier Taylor had made his will, which was revised on 1 October and proved on 24 November 1534. He died during October and was buried in the chapel of the former hospital of St Anthony, in Threadneedle Street, London, but his enduring monument is the church which he erected during the 1520s, on the site of the humble Staffordshire cottage where he was born. 


@@@@@


doc= 27043


Taylor, John (d. 1554), bishop of Lincoln, was probably born at the beginning of the sixteenth century, either a nephew or an illegitimate son of John Taylor (d. 1534) of Barton, Staffordshire, who was extensively used by Henry VIII on diplomatic missions. The two Taylors had similar coats of arms. The younger was educated at Cambridge and eventually became DTh in 1538, but had spent some of his time as fellow of Queens' College (1523-37) and proctor for the university (1532-3). He was clearly known at court. He received his first living, that of St Peter Cornhill, London, from the king's physician, William Butts, and was appointed master of St John's in July 1538 by Henry VIII himself. He subsequently said that he owed everything to the king, 'he looked for nothing of the gift of any of the bishops' (Baker, 1.123). In the event, he was to need all the help that the king could give him. He quarrelled with the fellows of St John's, and the bishop of Ely was required to adjudicate as visitor between master and fellows in 1542. It was by grant of the king, to whom by 1543 he was a chaplain, rather than at the gift of John Longland, bishop of Lincoln, that Taylor was made dean of Lincoln early in 1539. Longland had wanted a conservative candidate who would be resident, and had expected the king to agree to his suggestion. He was outwitted. Taylor was inducted by proxy to the deanery on 29 March that year, but was not installed in person until August, and he did not reside in the close or preside at chapter until 1546. 
While still master of St John's, Taylor began to make a name for himself as a preacher, though not without unsettling effect. When preaching in London in 1538 in his own church, he was questioned about his views on the sacrament by John Lambert, who had a history of heresy behind him. Taylor asked Lambert to put his views in writing. The result was that Lambert's views were referred successively to Robert Barnes, Cranmer, and Henry VIII, and Taylor was appointed with others to dispute them formally. Lambert was burnt. Taylor in this incident revealed his sympathy with the evangelicals of Lutheran persuasion, but he was clearly prepared to hand over to the stake a man like Lambert, whose sympathies lay with south German and Swiss protestantism. This was not time-serving, because in the following year he was one of two who had the courage in the lower house of convocation to oppose the decision to allow the king and bishops to answer the questions of faith which were ultimately enforced in the six articles; no doubt Taylor took the temperature of the king and house of bishops correctly. 
In March 1547, after the death of Henry VIII, Taylor's conscientious dilemmas were to be resolved and his fortunes were to advance notably. He resigned the mastership of St John's, and on 3 March 1549 was presented to the lucrative prebend of Corringham to support his residence at Lincoln. What lay behind his resignation is not wholly clear. It may have been that he was compromised both in the college and at court by the outspoken opinions of a former fellow, Thomas Dobbe, who took issue with clerical celibacy and interrupted a sermon in St Paul's, so giving reforming evangelicals cause to fall out among themselves and a bad name. But it is also apparent that by the time Taylor protested major residence at Lincoln on 13 August 1546, and resided sufficiently to take chapter meetings, his relationship with Dobbe, if not Dobbe's memories of him, were a thing of the past. There was a need for strong leadership among the evangelicals to advance reform. This may have been easier for Taylor to undertake from Lincoln than from an acrimonious and somewhat conservative college in Cambridge. In any event he was well placed to promote change after the king's death, and in 1547 he was appointed a royal visitor for the dioceses of Peterborough, Lincoln, Oxford, and Coventry and Lichfield. 
Taylor made no contribution as dean of Lincoln until he took up residence. Thereafter his tenure was marked by very generous grants of decanal property to his friends. The manor of Little Chester was granted to Thomas Smith, secretary to Protector Somerset, in whose house Taylor was eventually to die. The grant was for eighty years, and envisaged an increase in rent after the first five of $1 6's'. 8died Another grant of the lands of the rectory of Chesterfield was made, to commence in 1587 for fifty-nine years, when neither Taylor himself nor the other members of the chapter would be alive to face the consequences. In effect, the rectory had been granted away well into the next century at the same rent. He gave advowson grants, not just for one term, but always for two. But he was more careful in religious matters. His injunctions to his cathedral church in 1548 required of the chapter that they make sure that scripture was read daily and in the houses of the vicars and choristers, and that a rota for preaching was introduced. He also ordered that the library be checked for its holdings in the early fathers. He required that all anthems be sung in English, and this made his cathedral an obvious testing place for their eventual use. He was among the small group of reformers who helped Cranmer draw up the prayer book of 1549, and then defended 'The Supper of the Lorde and the Holy Communion, Commonly called the Masse' during the debates about it in convocation and the House of Lords. He was also on commissions to examine Anabaptists, and he seems to have served for a time on the commission to reform the canon law. 
Taylor had strong views against the celibacy of the clergy. He is reported when attending convocation in November 1547 to have said 'that the prystes of Englande are not votoryes, nor bounde with any vowe of single life, but that they maye frely and with good conscience marry' (Bailey, 57). It is not certain that Taylor married: he is one of many whose deprivation under Queen Mary was thought to have been due to his marital status, but actually seems to have had more to do with his appointment by letters patent on 13 May 1552 to be bishop of Lincoln, as well as with his views on the sacrament; these had impelled him to walk out of the House of Lords when mass was celebrated in the first year of Mary's reign. In the event he was imprisoned in the Tower on 5 October 1553, and although he was pardoned on 5 January 1554, he was deprived of his see on 20 March on the grounds of the nullity of his consecration and defect of his title. 
Taylor's appointment as bishop of Lincoln, and his subsequent consecration on 26 June 1552, preceded the death of Edward VI by a single year, so his reforming zeal as bishop can only be inferred from sparse but significant details such as his appointment of Matthew Parker as dean. His diocesan register does not survive. He was clearly a friend of Thomas Cranmer as well as of his predecessor at Lincoln, Henry Holbeach. Fuller said that he had 'the merriest and pleasantest wit' (Fuller, 2.399); true, maybe, but not for those like Lambert who aroused his antagonism. He died in December 1554 at Ankerwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 27044


Taylor, John (1578-1653), poet, was born in the parish of St Ewen's, Gloucester, on 24 August 1578. His parents are unknown, though a stray comment he made many years later suggests that his father was a barber-surgeon. The family was prosperous enough for Taylor to be sent to an elementary school in Gloucester and then on to a grammar school, perhaps the Crypt School, but he found Latin grammar impenetrable and soon left. In the early 1590s he moved to London, and was apprenticed to a waterman, probably in Southwark. He became a proud Londoner; his life was to be bound up with the watermen's affairs for the next fifty years, and in publications he styled himself 'John Taylor the Water-poet'. 
There are only fleeting glimpses of Taylor's early years in the capital. The Watermen's Company supplied men for the navy in times of war, and Taylor later boasted of having served Elizabeth at sea on seven occasions. He took part in 1596 in the expedition to Cadiz led by Essex and Lord Howard of Effingham, and sailed in the 'Rainbow' on the voyage to the Azores in 1597. On one occasion, he later recalled, he and some friends went ashore to explore the small island of Flores, and were stranded for five days without food by bad weather. Taylor also hints at an early visit to Ostend, possibly during the siege of 1601-4. After completing his apprenticeship, about 1597, Taylor plied his trade as a waterman. He also married at some point before 1612; his wife's identity is unknown, though her first name was probably Abigail and her maiden name possibly Miles. The couple settled on the Bankside in Southwark, and remained there until 1643. About 1605 Taylor was appointed 'bottleman' at the Tower, under its lieutenant, Sir William Waad. The post involved rowing out to ships bringing in cargoes of wine, and demanding two large bottles as a perquisite due to the lieutenant. Taylor served very happily until Waad was removed from office in 1613 and his successors demanded large fees for Taylor's continuation in office. He was eventually turned out on refusing to pay a further exorbitant increase, but was so stung by rumours that he had been sacked for dishonesty that he bought it back in 1616 for an annual fee of $72, which, rather perversely, he recouped by selling some of the wines collected for the lieutenant for his own profit. Late in 1617 a rival offered a higher bid for the post, and Taylor was ousted again, this time for ever. In 'Taylors Farewell to the Tower Bottles' (1622) he presented an account of his experience. 
Native wit, an affable personality, and good manners made Taylor stand out from the start among the rough breed of Thames watermen, and attracted the notice of some of the courtiers he ferried. In 1613 he was recommended by Viscount Haddington to be one of the King's Watermen, a select and liveried group who served the crown on ceremonial occasions. He also became a spokesman for the Watermen's Company on official business, and in 1614 was chosen to press its suit to the king against the new theatres erected north of the river. The watermen had enjoyed a huge trade ferrying visitors to the Globe and other theatres on the Bankside, and the move to the northern suburbs was a serious blow. Despite sympathetic words from Francis Bacon and Somerset, the king's favourite, nothing was achieved. 
Taylor's links with the Bankside theatres included actors, writers, and spectators with court connections. These contacts, and those he made through his post at the Tower, triggered a new interest in books and learning. He began to read voraciously, and before long started to write himself. In 1612 he brought his verses together and published them as 'The Sculler, Rowing from Tiber to Thames', with a simple woodcut of the author rowing his boat and a Latin version of the waterman's cry as an epigram. The title-page encapsulated the strategy he was to pursue throughout his literary career, playing on the novelty and incongruity of a lowly waterman aspiring to poetry and rubbing shoulders with men of letters and power. There were complimentary verses by Samuel Rowlands and Nicholas Breton, and though Ben Jonson offered nothing, Taylor pointedly claimed Jonson as a dear friend. 
One of Taylor's verses made a derisive reference to the humorous writer and traveller Thomas Coryate, and this sparked a heated pamphlet war which he relished as a further opportunity for self-publicity. Both Coryate and Taylor petitioned the king, and one of Taylor's pamphlets was ordered to be burnt by the public hangman, providing still more publicity. In 1614 he became embroiled in conflict with another writer and entertainer, William Fennor. They arranged a joint appearance at the Hope theatre to stage a contest by performing dramatic impressions of contemporary characters. Taylor's flair for publicity ensured that the theatre was full, and Fennor's failure to turn up left him facing a near riot by his audience. He published a damning account as 'Taylors Revenge' (1614), and though Fennor replied, Taylor fired a second salvo and claimed victory. 
During these years Taylor was also busy turning out publications of many other kinds. There were verses on the death of Prince Henry in 1612, and the marriage of Princess Elizabeth the following year. A miniature 'thumb-bible', a verse summary of scripture published in 64mo, appeared as a toy for courtiers in 1614, with a dedication to the queen and Prince Charles. A similar version of John Foxe's 'Acts and Monuments' appeared the following year. 'The Nipping and Snipping of Abuses' (1614) offered satirical comments on the manners and vices of the age, while 'Taylors Urania' (1615) presented his religious reflections in verse. He published verse essays, mock encomia, and nonsense writings too. His influences, as diverse as the genres, included Thomas Nashe, George Wither, and Thomas Heywood, while he also expressed his admiration for Philip Sidney, Christopher Marlowe, and Jonson. He could number many of the writers of the age among his friends and acquaintances, among them Samuel Daniel, Thomas Dekker, Breton, Rowlands, Philemon Holland, Heywood, and Wither. 
Taylor was to continue producing verse throughout his life. He never achieved the recognition or material rewards he felt he deserved, notwithstanding his frequent self-deprecating allusions to his modest talents and lack of education. Many better and better-connected writers found it equally hard to make a living by their pens, or to win substantial patronage. Taylor had an unusually entrepreneurial spirit, however, and found his own solution, by promoting his image as a 'personality' and turning it to financial account. His greatest success lay in designing a series of exotic journeys, publicizing them in advance, and persuading large numbers of acquaintances to sponsor him in return for a copy of a published account of his adventures following his return. The destination was usually of little importance; the point lay in the mode of travel, and the mock-heroic account of his adventures on the way. There were several models for such ventures, including Coryate and Will Kempe, but none matched Taylor in the publicity they achieved or the rewards they obtained. The first of these journeys was to Hamburg, in the summer of 1617, which Taylor used to publish a jocularly xenophobic account of German customs and society, in the popular style of the grotesque. The adventure was sufficiently successful to encourage Taylor to plan more adventurous schemes. 
Taylor's next, and most successful, adventure was described in 'The Pennyles Pilgrimage' (1618), an account of his visit to Scotland in the summer and early autumn that year. He travelled on foot, pledging to take no money, and not to beg any food, drink, or lodging on the way, a handicap sufficient to persuade 1650 sponsors (among them Edward Alleyn the actor-manager) to pledge to pay for an account of his adventures if he survived to publish them. Given his huge circle of acquaintances and invincible bonhomie, Taylor was unlikely to die of starvation. Friends old and new provided him with food and shelter, and the later stages of his journey to Edinburgh took on something of the character of a progress. He enjoyed the sights of Edinburgh, and later joined the earl of Mar on a lavish hunting party in the highlands at Braemar. Some alleged that Taylor's visit was designed to parody or steal the thunder from Ben Jonson's own trip to Scotland that year, a charge he repudiated; he paid a friendly call on Jonson at Leith on 25 September before returning to London. By now a consummate showman, he orchestrated his return to London in impressive style, arranging a grand supper for his friends at Islington, with entertainment by the earl of Derby's players, who performed 'The life and death of Guy of Warwick' -- a jocular device, perhaps, to celebrate a new 'hero' by recalling the adventures of an old one. Taylor's humorous account of his travels was finished within a fortnight of his return, and published with a dedication to Buckingham, the king's new favourite. 
Several further 'travels' followed in quick succession. The first and most bizarre was in July 1619, when Taylor and a friend sailed down the Thames to Quinborough in a boat he had fashioned, for a wager, out of brown paper, kept half afloat by inflated animal bladders attached to the sides. In August 1620 he set out on a much longer and less frivolous journey, to Prague. Taylor was a fervent protestant and patriot, and deeply disturbed by news of the Catholic Habsburg armies massing to crush the Bohemian revolt and drive out the new king, Frederick, and his British wife, Elizabeth. He had welcomed the marriage of Frederick and Elizabeth in 1613 as an important building block in an anti-Habsburg alliance, and was appalled that Frederick's election to the Bohemian crown was now under threat. In 'An English-Mans Love to Bohemia' (1620) he urged English readers to enlist in the volunteer forces being raised to defend the Bohemian protestants, offering stirring reminders of English heroism in earlier campaigns from Crecy to the Armada. His journey to Prague, which he began on 4 August 1620, was designed to boost public interest further and feed the huge appetite for fresh and reliable news. Taylor can be plausibly seen as a forerunner of the modern war correspondent. He and his friend Tilbury Strange travelled via Amsterdam and Leipzig, joined along the way by his brother, who lived at Buckeburg, the seat of Count Ernst von Schomberg, and may have been able to act as interpreter. They found a warm welcome at the royal court in Prague, where they remained for several weeks before returning in an epic boat-trip 600 miles down the Elbe to Hamburg. Taylor's published account had to tread carefully in handling the political issues, but its partisan spirit would have been obvious to all. The battle of the White Mountain crushed the Bohemian revolt only a few weeks after Taylor's return, however, and signalled the collapse of his dreams. Some of the short pamphlets he published in the last years of James's reign made it clear that he was dismayed by the government's failure to intervene in the continental struggle, and that he shared the national relief at Prince Charles's safe return from his quixotic mission to Spain in search of a royal, Catholic bride. 
The next two journeys were ambitious 'voyages' in a waterman's wherry. In July 1622 Taylor and some friends rowed a wherry down the Thames into the North Sea, and then along the east coast to the Humber, and so to York. At Hull he was feted by the mayor, and at Cawood he dined with Toby Matthew, the archbishop of York, though to his chagrin the mayor of York declined to buy the battered wherry as a souvenir. In July 1623 he set off on a similar 'voyage' to Salisbury, through the English Channel and up the Wiltshire Avon. This trip capitalized on the king's own recent progress to the west, and had the more serious goal of promoting a scheme to investigate whether Salisbury's struggling economy could be rescued by making the Avon navigable to the sea. In the event Taylor and his companions were lucky to survive, for their boat was repeatedly battered by high seas and came close to foundering; when they were driven ashore one day their misery was compounded by a suspicious constable who thought they were pirates and tried to detain them. There were compensations too, however; at Portsmouth they were welcomed aboard the flagship of the fleet waiting to fetch Prince Charles home from Spain, and during his stay at Salisbury, Taylor found an opportunity to go sightseeing at Wilton House, seat of the earls of Pembroke. But despite the jocular tone of his published narrative, Taylor was so chastened by his narrow escape from drowning that he never again went to sea in a small boat. 
The more sober court of Charles I was a less auspicious milieu for comic eccentrics, and from choice or necessity Taylor now began to present himself in a slightly more dignified manner. In 1625 he was among the royal watermen to escort the new queen, Henrietta Maria, to Oxford to escape the plague; he occupied lodgings in Oriel College during the court's residence there, and wrote a vivid pamphlet on the epidemic. In 1630 he published his collected 'Workes', an extraordinary decision for a popular rhymer who was placing himself in the company of Shakespeare, Jonson, and Daniel (a friend). It was an act of defiance and self-assertion, however, rather than triumph or celebration. Taylor had no grand patrons, and pointedly dedicated his volume to 'the world', with dispirited comments on his failure to win recognition. It is typical that the same year that saw this bid for literary respectability also saw him devising a project to bring Nicholas Wood, 'the Great Eater of Kent', to London and turn his gargantuan appetite into a money-raising venture by holding public 'performances' at the Bear Garden. 
For much of the ensuing decade Taylor was employed on official business. In 1631 he accompanied an expedition sponsored by the crown to survey the upper Thames, from Staines to Oxford, and report on the obstacles to navigation and opportunities for improvement. This was a project close to his heart, and he published an account of his personal observations on the trip, noting hazards and the appropriate remedies. During the 1630s he was frequently preoccupied with the affairs of the Watermen's Company, one of the largest and most turbulent of the city's companies. He served as one of its rulers, or overseers, in 1630-32 and again in 1638-40, and later as its clerk. Probably the most polished and well-connected of the ruling group, he was the obvious choice to lead the company's campaign to defend the watermen against competition from the hackney coaches, which were stealing much of their trade. From April 1634 Taylor was busy pleading their cause to government officials, and his efforts bore some fruit in a royal proclamation in January 1636 which banned hackney coachmen from carrying fares on journeys of under 3 miles. This fell short of the watermen's aspirations, however, and deepened the resentment and distrust of rank-and-file watermen which was to explode only a few years later. 
Taylor's literary output during the 1630s was more journalistic than in earlier years. One of his most successful pieces was a humorous verse-biography of the centenarian Thomas Parr, who was brought to London in 1635 as a prodigy at the alleged age of 152; Taylor's account passed through three quick editions and was reprinted at Amsterdam in a Flemish translation. Other offerings included two consumers' guides to taverns in London and the home counties, a characteristic combination of business and pleasure, and 'The Carrier's Cosmographie' (1637), a valuable handbook which set out information on the times and departure points of carriers and wagons leaving London for destinations in the provinces, and similar information on packet-boats. In 1639 Taylor took advantage of one of the periodic revivals of the 'woman question', which his friend Heywood had stirred up once more, and published two jocularly misogynist collections ('Divers Crab-Tree Lectures', 1639, and 'A Juniper Lecture', 1640). They were quickly followed by a spirited and sometimes perceptive counterblast giving the woman's view, 'The Womens Sharpe Revenge' (1640), which was published anonymously but bears clear signs of Taylor's own hand. At the very end of the decade Taylor revived his old practice of making a summer jaunt to the provinces. In July 1639 he embarked on a lengthy and convivial tour of the midlands, East Anglia, and Yorkshire, travelling this time by horse. Following his return to London in September he published an account which gave no hint of the gathering storm clouds. 
The collapse of Charles I's personal rule marked a decisive turning point in Taylor's life as well as in the affairs of the country. He played a characteristically combative role in the upheavals that followed. There were some aspects of the new order he could welcome in the months after parliament met in November 1640. He rejoiced at the attack on monopolies with a powerful broadside, 'The Complaint of M Tenter-Hooke' (1641), illustrated with a woodcut of a monster whose fierce claws and grotesque costume showed how the consumer had been exploited and devoured by greedy monopolists. Taylor also praised the crackdown on Catholics, and identified parliament and the Scots as crucial defences against the threat of popery. He readily took the protestation (against Catholicism) twice. But in most respects the new order appalled him. In 'Differing Worships' (1640), written before the Short Parliament met, he mounted a strong defence of the established church, including controversial practices such as bowing at the name of Jesus, against presbyterian and separatist critics. As a traditionalist, Taylor had always strongly disliked religious radicals, and he was deeply alarmed by their new prominence and confidence. When rioters smashed the altar-rails which had long stood in St Saviour's, Southwark, his parish church, in June 1641 he joined in petitioning the House of Lords, successfully, for their arrest and punishment. He is also found interrupting a radical preacher at Rotherhithe. More importantly, he poured out a flood of polemical pamphlets, some of them appearing anonymously, defending the episcopal church, lamenting that the prayer book was being abandoned in parish worship, and ridiculing the radicals. 'A Swarme of Sectaries' (1641) sparked a ferocious and obscene pamphlet war with the parliamentarian preacher Henry Walker, which continued into 1642, and included an inspired burlesque sermon published as 'A Seasonable Lecture' (1642), soon famous as 'Toby's Dog'. 
The political upheavals also triggered a crisis in the Watermen's Company. Like many other London companies it faced strong pressure for reform from rank-and-file members who accused the ruling oligarchy of corruption and demanded a more democratic system in which the 'rulers' would be directly elected by every waterman. The ruling group viewed this demand as anarchic, and sought to tighten its own grip. In March 1641 the two sides presented rival petitions to parliament, and in May a Commons committee considering a bill to strengthen the overseers' authority was ordered to consider the radicals' complaints too. Taylor was one of the inner circle now accused of corruption, and he played a leading role in the bitter and sometimes violent exchanges. When the reformers changed tactics and took their case to the mayor and aldermen in February 1642, it was Taylor who was chosen to present the overseers' case. The eventual outcome, perhaps inevitably, favoured the reformers. A new system of choosing officers was introduced, though based on indirect rather than direct elections, and the company's elections in March 1642 swept away the old guard. It was the end of Taylor's association with the company, which had lasted over half a century. 
Taylor continued to cling on to other aspects of his old life for as long as he was able. In the summer of 1641 he had made another of his epic wherry-voyages, sailing up the Thames as far as Cirencester, carting the boat across to a tributary of the Severn, and then navigating the Severn, Avon, and Wye. The voyage lasted twenty days, during which he calculated his party had rowed and sailed 1200 miles. The published narrative offered a familiar blend of humorous anecdote and passionate advocacy for the cause of inland navigation, including the value of a canal to link the Thames and Severn river systems, and detailed assessments of the problems and opportunities for commercial traffic on each of the rivers they had explored. 
The king's enforced flight from London early in 1642 filled Taylor with dismay, and the ensuing slide to civil war left him in a highly exposed position. His devotion to the crown and the 'Book of Common Prayer' was widely known, and no one doubted where his allegiance lay. But he was too old to fight and lacked the means to retire to a place of safety. In November 1642 he was arrested and interrogated by the radical MP Miles Corbet and the lord mayor over seditious remarks he was alleged to have made about the five members. In December he called for a compromise between royal prerogative and parliamentary privilege that would restore peace and enable the two parties to unite to crush the Irish uprising. But committed parliamentarians saw Taylor as an enemy, and rumours of death threats crystallized in an alarming attack by a mob while he was drinking in a tavern near the Guildhall, when he was lucky to escape with his life. He faced new dangers after refusing to pay a parliamentary tax early in 1643, and decided that flight was his only remaining option. Taking a boat to Windsor, where some parliamentary soldiers recognized him and accused him of planning treachery, he made his way on foot to Henley and arrived safely at Abingdon, in royalist territory, after a series of adventures. From there he made his way to Oxford, where the king gave him a friendly welcome and, more important, a livelihood. Taylor was appointed a yeoman of the guard and joint water bailiff, with responsibility for taking up boats to transport ammunition and supplies, and for keeping the waterways clear. His wife, whom he had been forced to leave behind in Southwark, died shortly after his departure, and can probably be identified with the Abigail Taylor buried at St Saviour's, Southwark, on 18 September 1643. Their modest estate was seized by parliament. 
Taylor's most important contribution to the royalist cause lay in the stream of political squibs he produced during his time in Oxford. Polemical and satirical, they were designed to boost morale rather than convince the uncommitted, and the tone was jaunty and confident. Taylor was more concerned to establish appropriate images for the king and his enemies than plunge into the details of the issues at stake, largely beyond him and many of his readers. He presented the king's war as a defensive struggle, with Charles a good protestant upholding the established church and his traditional prerogatives against hypocritical and aggressive parliamentary enemies. According to the parliamentarian John Booker, Taylor also collaborated with George Wharton and John Berkenhead on the royalist newspaper, 'Mercurius Aulicus'. He remained in Oxford until its surrender in July 1646. Under the terms of surrender, the king's former household servants were allowed to apply for a competent allowance from the committee for the king's revenue, and Taylor became a zealous campaigner on his own and their behalf, forwarding some two hundred petitions to the committee. But it was no secret that he had been a political activist rather than a mere household attendant, and he can hardly have been surprised that he was awarded nothing. 
Taylor's final years were spent in poverty. There was no longer a royal court, the Watermen's Company was in the hands of his enemies, and most likely patrons were living in poverty or exile. Taylor settled in Westminster, and by 1647 was running the Crown alehouse near Covent Garden. About 1647 he married again, though his wife's identity is unknown except that her first name was Alice. After the king's death he changed the alehouse's name to the Mourning Crown, and then, when this aroused disapproval, to the Poet's Head, with a sign bearing his own portrait. 
As the alehouse afforded only a modest living, Taylor continued to supplement it by his pen. He never abandoned his support for the royalist cause, though circumstances now obliged him to support it with more circumspection. When the king was held captive in the Isle of Wight in 1648, Taylor decided to visit him, acknowledging frankly that he was moved by the need to make money as well as by a genuine longing to see his sovereign once more. His published account of the visit mixed comedy and pathos, describing his misadventures on the road before going on to stress the king's unshakeable piety and patience, and the miraculous cures he had wrought on the island by the royal touch. Although Taylor was still clinging to hopes of a settlement, his portrayal of the king was already that of a royal martyr. In the books of nonsense he published in his last years, he made it clear that the absurdly fractured language and jumble of ideas and images were intended to reflect the madness of the age. 
In his last few years Taylor made four more of his traditional travels, designed to relieve his poverty. For his journey to the west in the summer of 1649 he found almost 3000 subscribers, testimony to his remarkable enduring popularity as well as his energy. He wrote a vivid account of the war-torn land he passed through on a long and sometimes dangerous journey that took him all the way to Land's End, where he carved his name on the shore. The journey brought him little profit, however, for on 15 August, shortly after his return, he was arrested on suspicion of espionage, and his papers were seized. Among them were the names and addresses of his sponsors, and their loss dealt a crippling blow to his marketing plans. 
Despite this setback Taylor made another journey in the summer of 1650, this time sailing to Ipswich, travelling through East Anglia, and returning via Cambridge. This was a less demanding expedition, and he enjoyed the warm welcome he found from Sir William Paston at Oxnead and many other hosts. The Scottish invasion of 1651 ruled out any travels that year, but in 1652 Taylor embarked on an ambitious journey that took him to Chester and then on a tour round the Welsh coast. He was greeted warmly by the cavalier gentry, but viewed with suspicion by the parliamentary garrisons, and was afraid of being arrested as a spy once more. The summer of 1653 saw his final journey: a much shorter trip to Sussex, where he enjoyed the rich food and drink lavished on him by his various hosts. 
Taylor's later pamphlets contain numerous references to his failing health, and he did not long survive this last journey. He was buried on 5 December 1653 in St Martin-in-the-Fields. His widow, Alice, died in January 1658. 
Like most writers, Taylor never achieved the recognition he thought his due. Having successfully constructed a comic persona as the rhyming waterman, it was an impossible challenge to be accepted as a serious poet. His achievement was none the less impressive. As a literary entrepreneur and showman he was far more prosperous in his heyday than most writers; few watermen or struggling poets were also subsidy men or had to pay ship money. Taylor pursued a successful literary career for over fifty years, demonstrating a remarkable range, facility, and inventiveness. He played a pioneering role in the development of nonsense verse, popular political journalism, and travel writing. His travel pamphlets offer a distinctive veneration for antiquity combined with a ringing endorsement of innovation: he admired the public amenities of well-ordered towns, and championed signs of economic progress, whether manifested by coal mines or developments in inland navigation. Taylor anticipated Daniel Defoe more than he echoed John Leland. The travel writings, like almost everything he published in both verse and prose, had a strongly autobiographical dimension, and they provide a vivid picture of a bluff, shrewd, convivial man, with an appetite for life that won him friends across the political spectrum. William Winstanley and Anthony Wood paid tribute to his natural gifts as a writer. The portrait in Watermen's Hall and those contained in his publications reinforce the surviving pen portraits from Taylor himself and his friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 27045


Taylor, John (1597-1655), diplomat, was born in Yorkshire, the eldest of five children (three sons and two daughters) of Stephen Taylor (died 1618) of Bickerton, steward of the earl of Cumberland, and his wife, Dowsabell ('fl'. 1597-1620), daughter of William Grimston of Newport, Isle of Wight. His parents were both Roman Catholics and saw to it that he was brought up and educated in the Catholic faith. In 1612 he was enrolled in the English College, St Omer, in Flanders, where he studied for seven years. On 19 October 1619 he was admitted as a convictor at the English College, Rome. However, he decided to forgo a religious career and left in the late spring of 1621, after less than two years of study. 
Taylor's whereabouts and activities during the following seven years are unclear, though it may have been during this time that he married Jane Gibbs; they had three children by 1639. Taylor settled upon a career in government service, and by 1628 he had secured his first government employment, probably on the strength of his language skills and contacts made through the earl of Cumberland. By 1630 he had begun serving as a diplomatic agent at foreign courts, particularly those of the Habsburgs in Vienna, Brussels, and Madrid. In his dealings abroad Taylor served the interests of the court party which supported peace with the Habsburgs. This was often a difficult task, for the emperor had deprived Charles I's brother-in-law, Frederick V of the Palatinate, of his hereditary lands and titles and parcelled them out to Spain and Bavaria. On his first known assignment Taylor gathered news in Brussels, where he was present in April 1630. He was soon sent to the empire in an unofficial capacity to promote a peaceful settlement of the Palatinate question, first at the electoral meeting at Regensburg in October and November 1630, and afterwards at the imperial court in Vienna. Despite his efforts and those of Sir Robert Anstruther, the accredited English ambassador to the emperor, no agreement was reached, and Taylor departed Vienna in August 1632. He returned to Brussels in October and resumed his news-gathering activities there for a time, but soon returned to England, where he was investigating a scheme to promote trade between Ireland and Spain for Wentworth in the summer of 1633. 
Taylor quickly became more directly involved in Spanish affairs: from July 1634 to May 1635 he was employed on a diplomatic mission to Madrid to expedite negotiations for an Anglo-Spanish maritime treaty underway in England. In the estimation of Hopton, the English resident agent at Madrid, Taylor was 'a very honest and careful man' who acquitted his duties there satisfactorily (MS Clarendon 5, fol. 324). Soon after Taylor's return to England he secured an important post as resident agent to the imperial court in Vienna, where he arrived on 22 November 1635. He was instructed to remonstrate against the peace of Prague and offer the emperor a provisional alliance with England in return for satisfaction regarding the Palatinate. Taylor, ever hopeful of an agreement between England and the Habsburgs, allowed himself to be convinced that the emperor was willing to grant full restitution and sent home optimistic reports to this effect. On the basis of these reports Charles I sent the earl of Arundel as ambassador-extraordinary in 1636 to conclude the final settlement; however, he was soon disappointed in his mission and returned to England in disgust. Taylor remained at the imperial court to continue the negotiations, but his role was limited after the death of Ferdinand II in February 1637, since Charles I refused to recognize the new emperor, Ferdinand III, or to send Taylor fresh credentials. During the following two years Taylor continued to represent English interests at the imperial court. He was periodically reprimanded for indiscretions in his conduct of the negotiations, and was finally recalled in early 1639. 
In April that year Taylor reached England and was soon called to account for promoting a conference with the Habsburgs at Brussels without the commission to do so. The real cause of his disgrace, however, was not his undertakings with the Habsburgs (which were covertly encouraged by the crown), but rather that their exposure prejudiced English negotiations for a French treaty underway at Hamburg. Taylor was committed to the Tower in September, where he remained for at least seven months. In dire financial straits, he repeatedly petitioned Windebank for his release, which was probably granted before the outbreak of the civil war. 
Despite this bad treatment, Taylor remained a staunch royalist, and at some point he left England for the continent, eventually returning to Vienna. Although he was lightly esteemed by Sir Edward Hyde, who regarded him as a 'fool', he was employed on the strength of his loyalty and good reputation with the emperor to muster support for Charles II's cause from various Catholic princes and the imperial diet during the interregnum ('Clarendon State Papers', 3.97; 'Diary of John Evelyn', 4.257). He may have acted as an agent to the emperor for some weeks in the autumn of 1649. In September 1652 he was accredited as agent to the electors of Cologne and Mainz and the emperor in Vienna, where his brother Francis was court chaplain. This was the final mission of Taylor's career; he died, presumably in Vienna, in the autumn of 1655, probably in November. 


@@@@@


doc= 27046


Taylor, John (1694-1761), Presbyterian minister and tutor, was born at Scotforth, Lancaster, the son of an Anglican timber merchant and his wife, a dissenter. Destined for the Christian ministry, he entered Thomas Dixon's dissenting academy at Whitehaven in 1709, where Caleb Rotheram, afterwards of Kendal, was among his contemporaries. During the course of his studies (1712) he devised his own Hebrew grammar, which ran to 100 pages, thereby laying the foundation for his scholarly eminence in that field. Three years of further instruction followed at Findern Academy under the capable classicist Thomas Hill. In his funeral oration for Taylor, Edward Harwood pronounced his classical scholarship 'almost unrivalled', though Samuel Parr queried his competence in Latin. Taylor left Findern on 25 March 1716. On 7 April he took charge of the extra-parochial chapel at Kirkstead, Lincolnshire, which was used for dissenting worship under the patronage of the Disney family, and was ordained by Derbyshire ministers on 11 April, no formal doctrinal subscription being sought. He undertook to 'maintain the truths of the Gospel, especially such as are beyond controversy determined in the Holy Scriptures' (James, 804). On 13 August 1717 he married a widow, Elizabeth Jenkinson (died 1761) of Boston. Their two surviving children were Richard (died 1762), father of Philip (1747-1831), minister at Kay Street, Liverpool (1767), and at Eustace Street, Dublin (1771), and of John (1750-1826), the hymn writer; and Sarah (died 1773), who married John Rigby of Chowbent, and whose son was the physician Edward Rigby (1747-1821). 
Life was hard at Kirkstead. Taylor eked out his annual stipend of $33 by conducting a boarding-school. Even so he was not always able to heat his study -- to which cause he later attributed the rheumatism in his knees; neither could he afford to complete the abridgement of Matthew Henry's commentaries on which he had embarked. Though invited to the Pudsey church in 1726, Taylor continued at Kirkstead until 1733, when he became Peter Finch's colleague at Norwich. Finch, the son of the ejected Henry Finch (1633-1704), had been maintaining orthodox Calvinism and expounding the Westminster catechisms at Norwich since 1691, and did so until his death in 1754. On his arrival, Taylor selected Samuel Clarke's 'The Scripture-Doctrine of the Trinity' for congregational study, and was himself influenced by it in the direction of Arianism. As Harwood later remarked, 'if ever he expressed an uncommon warmth and honest indignation against anything, it was against 'Athanasianism', which he thought one of the greatest corruptions of pure and genuine Christianity, as this doctrine entirely subverts the unity of God' (Harwood, 40). 
In 1735, under the influence of Samuel Clarke, Taylor finished writing 'The Scripture-Doctrine of Original Sin', but it was not published until 1740, with a second edition in the following year. It is widely reported that an unnamed Irish Calvinist minister warned his flock, 'I desire that none of you will read it, for it is a bad book, and a dangerous book; and, what is worse than all, the book is unanswerable' (Davis, 36). Influenced by Limborch, Taylor sought to rebut the Calvinist view of original sin on scriptural grounds, larding his case with moral repugnance. The Calvinist doctrine turns God into a monster: 'pray consider seriously what a God He must be who can be displeased with and curse His innocent creatures even before they have a being' ('Scripture-Doctrine of Original Sin', 151). Among respondents to Taylor were John Wesley, who in 'The Doctrine of Original Sin' (1757) charged Taylor with overthrowing the foundations of primitive, scriptural Christianity; Samuel Hebden who, standing foursquare on the Westminster confession, upheld the sole agency of the Holy Spirit in regeneration against Taylor's view that virtue and holiness result from the free and right choices of human beings; and Jonathan Edwards who, in 'The Great Christian Doctrine of Original Sin Defended', argued that if we do not posit universal depravity we cannot explain how every individual does, in fact, freely choose what is evil. Nevertheless, with hindsight it was observed that Taylor's 'Original Sin' 'did more than any other [book] to emancipate the English Presbyterian Dissenters from Calvinism' ('British and Foreign Unitarian Association Centenary Exhibition', 'Transactions of the Unitarian Historical Society', 3, 1923-6, 228). 
In the meantime Taylor had, in 1737, earned the favour of some and the disapprobation of others for his defence of the layman Joseph Rawson, who had been accused of embracing Arianism, and had accordingly been removed from the membership roll of Castle Gate Church, Nottingham, at the instigation of the minister, James Sloss, a former pupil, though clearly not a clone, of the liberal John Simson of Glasgow, who had himself been threatened with a heresy trial. Taylor was utterly opposed to what he took to be unwarrantable tests of church membership, and in 'A Further Defence of the Common Rights of Christians' (1738) he thundered, 'A popish, anti-christian Spirit, I will ever oppose, as God shall enable me' ('Further Defence', 78). In 1745 he published his 'Paraphrase with Notes on... Romans', which prompted John Barker's expostulation to Philip Doddridge in a letter of 26 March 1745: 'What an Audacious theolougue is that Taylor! Unhappy Norwich! Poor Mr. Finch!' (Nuttall, no. 1048). Taylor prefixed a 'Key to the apostolic writings' to his 'Paraphrase', concerning which, and with reference to Taylor's indebtedness to Locke, Doddridge, in a letter to Samuel Wood of 19 April 1745, declared that 'a certain Key... seems broke in the Lock' (ibid., no. 1055). 
In 1750 Taylor published 'A Collection of Tunes in Various Airs', to which is prefixed an introduction to the art of singing. He used the book when training his choir of young people at Norwich. 'The Scripture-Doctrine of the Atonement' appeared in 1751, followed by the two volumes of Taylor's 'The Hebrew Concordance Adapted to the English Bible' (1754, 1757). In the former work, which drew a reply from the high-Calvinist Baptist John Brine, Taylor insists (unlike later liberal exponents of exemplarist views of the atonement) that Christ died to take away sin, but he does not accept that the Son had to die in order to make the Father merciful. The first volume of the latter work, dedicated to the archbishops and bishops of England and Ireland, contains a subscription list including twenty-two English bishops, fifteen Irish bishops, and such prominent nonconformists as Job Orton, Joseph Priestley, and Taylor's college contemporary Caleb Rotheram. For his biblical work Taylor was, on 20 January 1756, awarded the degree of DD by the University of Glasgow, his promoters including William Leechman and Adam Smith. Looking back, the Congregationalist John Stoughton judged that 'The Independents had no Hebrew scholar to be compared with Taylor of Warrington' (J. Stoughton, 'History of Religion in England, from the Opening of the Long Parliament to the End of the Eighteenth Century', 1881, 6.322). 
On 12 May 1756 Taylor preached at the opening of the Octagon Chapel in Norwich, the foundation-stone of which he had laid on 25 February 1754. When John Wesley visited the building, designed by Thomas Ivory, on 23 December 1757 he described its elegant interior, ruefully wondering, 'How can it be thought that the old coarse gospel should find admission here?' (J. Wesley, 'The Works of the Rev. John Wesley, A.M.', 1872, 2.431). In 1756 Taylor published 'The Lord's Supper Explained upon Scripture Principles', and in 1757 there appeared 'The Covenant of Grace, and Baptism the Token of it', in which he drew an analogy between paedobaptism in the church and circumcision in the 'Old Testament'. The Baptist Grantham Killingworth published a rebuttal in the following year. 
By the end of 1757 Taylor had, in response to insistent appeals, moved to Warrington to become the first tutor in divinity and moral philosophy at the academy which had opened on 20 October. The secretary of the trustees and inspiration of the entire project, John Seddon, received a letter from his friend Philip Holland concerning the proposal to extend an invitation to Taylor: 'There can be no doubt, I think, but he will undertake the care of the Academy, when invited to it, but I wish there will not be some little difficulty in finding him a colleague that he will approve of, and that he may not aim at too much in the business of lecturing. (McLachlan, 'Warrington Academy', 18)' In the event, Taylor was not happy at Warrington: 'My condition ever since I came to Warrington has been very uneasy, and I may say, wretched' (Harwood, 49). A variety of factors conspired against him. For a start, he was not in good health, and rheumatism now required his use of two sticks, and he was concerned for his wife's frailty. His relations with Seddon deteriorated for he was incensed when Seddon took it upon himself to offer some theological lectures, and complained that Seddon refused to purchase library books recommended by the tutors. He opposed Seddon and those Liverpool ministers who were urging set forms of worship, and in his posthumous work 'The Scripture Account of Prayer' (1761) he made out a strong case for free prayer in worship, though 'only so far as it is rational; not any extravagant effusions' ('Scripture Account of Prayer', 5). Although in his annual address to the students Taylor advocated the impartial weighting of evidence and the according of conscientious rights of judgement to others, it is suggested that he waxed dictatorial when students adopted opinions other than his own. In particular, and despite his associations with Glasgow, he is said to have been displeased when the students inclined more towards Hutcheson's moral sense theory of ethics (of which Taylor published an 'Examination' in 1759) than towards that of William Wollaston, to whose book 'The Religion of Nature Delineated' Taylor's 'A Sketch of Moral Philosophy' (1760) was intended as a guide and endorsement. However there is no evidence of friction on this score between Taylor and Hutcheson's pupil and disciple Samuel Bourn during the latter's assistantship to Taylor from 1754 to 1757. The rightness of an action, Taylor argues, does not depend upon the agent's will, or upon teleological considerations, but solely upon the nature of the action as such, this being determined by reason -- that is, by conscience. Taylor's divinity class notes, 'A Scheme of Scripture Divinity', first printed for the use of students by the Warrington trustees in 1761, were posthumously published in 1763. 
Taylor died in his sleep, a disappointed man, in Warrington on 5 March 1761. A number of subscribers to Warrington Academy invoked the ungracious treatment of Taylor as the ground (or the pretext) of their discontinued support, but other more deep-rooted problems brought about its closure twelve years later. Taylor and his wife, who died three months later, on 2 June 1761, were buried at Chowbent Chapel graveyard, Atherton, Lancashire. A tablet in the vestibule at Chowbent commemorates them both, and in the Octagon Chapel, Norwich, there is a memorial tablet to Taylor. 


@@@@@


doc= 27047


Taylor, John (bap. 1704, d. 1766), classical scholar and Church of England clergyman, was baptized on 22 June 1704 at St Alkmund's Church in Shrewsbury, where his father, John Taylor, was a barber. He was educated under Richard Lloyd at Shrewsbury School, where his grandfather John Taylor ('bap'. 1629, died 1688) had been third master from 1659 to 1688. A bookish boy, he was noticed by one of his father's customers, Edward Owen of Condover, who decided to fund his education at university. On 7 June 1721 he was admitted a sizar at his grandfather's college -- St John's, Cambridge -- whence he graduated BA in 1725 and proceeded MA in 1728. He became a fellow and tutor of his college in 1726. In 1730 he delivered the Latin oration in Great St Mary's Church on the anniversary of Charles I's execution, and the music speech at the public commencement in July; both were published. In March 1732 he was appointed university librarian, an office that he exchanged for that of registrar in 1734. 
Taylor, who shared his family's tory allegiance, had found himself increasingly at odds with his patron's Jacobitism, and broke with Owen when he refused to join in a Jacobite toast, thus dashing his hopes of benefiting from the considerable church preferment at Owen's disposal. Taylor therefore concentrated on establishing his reputation as a classicist. In 1732 he issued the prospectus for a new edition of Lysias, which appeared in 1739. In the following year he took the degree of LLD, and in 1741 he published an edition of 'Demosthenes contra Leptinem', which he intended as a specimen of a projected complete edition of Demosthenes and Aeschines. He published the third volume of the work in 1748 and the second in 1757, but he failed to complete the first volume, which is represented only by the notes that Anthony Askew gave to Johann Jacob Reiske. He henceforth was known as Demosthenes Taylor. 
A scholar not only of Greek oratory but also of Greek law, it is unsurprising that Taylor turned to the law as an alternative career to the church. He was admitted to Doctors' Commons in 1742 and began to practise in the court of arches as an advocate later in that year. About this time he gained the favour of a valuable patron, Lord Carteret (later Lord Granville), who in 1742 seems to have considered making Taylor his under-secretary of state. Instead Taylor was appointed chancellor of the diocese of Lincoln in 1744, having been introduced to the bishop, Dr John Thomas, by Carteret. He remained in office until 1766. 
Taylor returned to his first choice of career -- the church -- when he was ordained deacon and priest in September 1747 at Lincoln, resigning from Doctors' Commons that year. He received the college living of Lawford, Essex, in April 1751 and became archdeacon of Buckingham in January 1753; he resigned as registrar of Cambridge University in 1751. In 1752-3 he tutored Granville's grandsons the third Viscount Weymouth (1734-1796) and Henry Frederick Thynne (1735-1796) while they were undergraduates at St John's College, Cambridge. In response to Granville's request that his grandsons received a thorough grounding in the principles of civil law Taylor drew up extensive notes on the subject, amply illustrated by quotations from classical texts. These notes were published as 'Elements of the Civil Law' (1755; 2nd edn, 1769) and in an abridged version as 'Summary of the Roman Law' (1773). His account of the persecution of the early Christians was severely attacked by William Warburton, who took great offence when Taylor reportedly declared that Warburton was 'no scholar'. Taylor also contributed to the second edition of John Foster's 'Essay on the Different Nature of Accent and Quantity' (1763) and began an appendix to Suidas. 
In July 1757 Taylor was appointed a canon residentiary of St Paul's Cathedral, once again thanks to the good offices of Granville. He moved to London, where he took part in the learned societies; elected fellow of the Royal Society and of the Society of Antiquaries, he contributed to the transactions of the former and served as director and vice-president of the latter. He died at his house in Amen Corner, Paternoster Row, on 4 April 1766 and was buried in the vault under St Paul's Cathedral. He bequeathed his extensive library to his old school, which could then boast of having the best school library after Eton College, and a fund to found an exhibition at St John's. His manuscripts and annotated books were left to Anthony Askew, his executor, most of which are now in the Bodleian Library, Cambridge University Library, and the British Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 27048


Taylor, John (1703-1772), itinerant oculist, the elder son of John Taylor (died 'c'.1709), a Norwich surgeon and apothecary, was born in Norwich on 16 August 1703. He came from a family which produced medical men for at least five generations. In 1722 he became an apothecary's assistant in London, where he also studied surgery under William Cheselden at St Thomas's Hospital and developed a special interest in eye diseases. He practised for some time in Norwich as a surgeon and oculist but encountered opposition, and in 1727 he began travelling around Britain as an itinerant eye-doctor. 
In 1733 Taylor obtained an MD degree from Basel, where he was made a fellow of the College of Physicians; in 1734 he was granted further MD degrees from the universities of Liege and Cologne. In the same year he made a tour through France and the Netherlands, and visited Paris. Taylor returned to London in November 1735, and was appointed oculist to George II in the following year. For more than thirty years he continued his itinerant method of practice, with London as his headquarters. He visited in turn nearly every court in Europe, with a tour through Spain and Portugal from 1737 to 1742; an appearance in Rouen in 1743; another tour of the British Isles from 1744 to 1746; the Netherlands and Flanders in 1747; Germany and Austria in 1750; Rostock in 1751, at the invitation of the duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, followed by visits to Hamburg and Denmark; Sweden in 1752; a return visit to northern Europe and Russia in 1753 to 1754; Germany and Bohemia in 1755; a visit to Italy in 1756; Vienna and Ghent in 1757; and another tour of the British Isles in 1759 to 1760, living for a while at Gravel Street, Hatton Garden, London. Taylor went around in style, travelling with two coaches and many liveried servants, and presenting the appearance of a grand seigneur. The ostentatious narration of his wanderings in his three-volume autobiography, 'History of the Travels and Adventures of the Chevalier John Taylor' (1761-2), with its endless name-dropping of eminent people treated and grand ladies flirted with at masked balls, must be taken with a pinch of salt, but he was clearly a tireless traveller in pursuit of glory in his craft. 
Taylor possessed considerable skill as an operator. His early book 'Mechanism of the Eye' (1727) is an able compendium of contemporary science; his 'Nosographia ophthalmica' (1746) was the first attempt at an atlas of diseases of the external eye, containing an accurate description of conical cornea and dealing in a competent fashion with lesions of the eyelids, lacrimal passages, conjunctiva, and cornea. Taylor's main claim to priority lies in his views on strabismus. He kept up with the discoveries of the day, made original contributions to the treatment of squint, and was expert at couching for cataract. Works such as 'An Exact Account of 243 Diseases to which the Eye and its Coverings are Exposed' (1759) show the range of his knowledge. No less a figure than Albrecht von Haller judged him 'a skilful man, but too liberal of promises' (Coats, 152). 
One of the principal medical entrepreneurs of his day, Taylor was a shameless self-advertiser, continually dropping the names of princes and savants. Styling himself 'Chevalier' and 'ophthalmiator pontifical imperial and royal', he stated in his autobiography that he was 'the most public man under the sun, being personally known not only in every Town in Europe, but in every part of the globe' (Taylor, 2.100). His vanity and range of boasted cures knew no bounds: he claimed to have restored Bach's sight (in truth he may have been remotely responsible for the composer's death). He also treated Handel in 1758, diagnosing a paralytic disorder in the near-blind composer. Taylor finally quit England about 1767, and, after visiting Paris, he died in a convent at Prague on 6 June 1772. He is said to have become blind before his death. With his wife, Ann King, he had an only son, John Taylor ['see below'], but little is known of his family life. 
Taylor's methods of self-promotion were those of a charlatan, which caused him to become the subject of many satires and pasquinades, including 'The Operator: a Ballad Opera' (1740) and 'The English imposter detected, or, The life and fumigation of the renown'd Mr. J -- -- T -- -- ' (1732). He was accustomed to make bombastic orations before performing his cures, expressing himself in what he called the true Ciceronian style; its idiosyncrasy consisted in commencing each sentence with the genitive case and concluding with the verb. He skilfully played upon the fascination with light and sight that was so strong in the age of enlightenment, and stressed before Johann Kaspar Lavater how the eye was the index of the mind -- hence the oculist was also a kind of psychologist. Johnson declared him 'an instance of how far impudence could carry ignorance' (Boswell, 1022), and doubtless his ostentatious behaviour betrays personal vanity; but it also says much about the need for self-promotion at that time in the precarious world of those pioneering the new medical specialities. 
His son, 


@@@@@


doc= 27049


John Taylor (c.1724-1787), oculist, was born in London and educated at the College du Plessis in Paris. About 1739 he moved to London, and, after studying under his father, he practised independently as an oculist. On the death of the Baron de Wenzel, Taylor succeeded as oculist to George III in 1772. In 1761 'A Life and Extraordinary History of the Chevalier John Taylor' was published in his name. Exceedingly scurrilous, it represented his father as a libertine and his alleged cures as mere frauds. No serious attempt to disown the book was made at the time by the younger Taylor, but according to John Taylor, the chevalier's grandson, the biography was really the production of Henry Jones (1721-1770), who, after being entrusted with the materials, had betrayed his trust. Taylor died at Hatton Garden, London, on 17 September 1787, and was buried six days later in the new burying-ground of St Andrew's. Taylor and his wife, Ann Price, had three sons, of whom the eldest, John Taylor (1757-1832), was afterwards oculist to George III and George IV. 


@@@@@


doc= 27050


Taylor, John (bap. 1711, d. 1788), friend of Samuel Johnson, baptized at Ashbourne, Derbyshire, on 18 March 1711, was the son of Thomas Taylor (1671-1730?) of Ashbourne and his wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas Wood. He was educated with Samuel Johnson by the Revd John Hunter at Lichfield grammar school, and he and Edmund Hector were the last survivors of Johnson's schoolfriends. Taylor would have followed Johnson to Pembroke College, but was dissuaded by his friend's report of the ignorance of William Jorden, the tutor, and on the same advice matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 10 March 1729, with a view to studying the law and becoming an attorney. He left without taking a degree, and apparently for some years practised as an attorney. On 9 April 1732 he married at Croxall, Derbyshire, Elizabeth, daughter of William Webb of that parish. She was buried at Ashbourne on 13 January 1746. His second wife was Mary, daughter of Roger Tuckfield of Fulford, Devon. They were not happy, and in August 1763 she left him. 
At some time after 1736 Taylor was ordained in the Church of England, and in July 1740 he was presented, on the nomination of the family of Dixie, and, as it is believed, by purchase from them, to the valuable rectory of Market Bosworth in Leicestershire. This preferment he retained until death, although he was unpopular with his parishioners. As a whig in politics and a political power in Derbyshire, Taylor was made chaplain to the duke of Devonshire, lord lieutenant of Ireland from 1737 to 1745. He returned to Oxford and graduated BA and MA in 1742. In 1752, as a grand-compounder, he proceeded LLB and LLD. 
On 11 July 1746 Taylor obtained, no doubt through the influence of the duke of Devonshire, a prebendal stall at Westminster, which he retained for life. By the appointment of the chapter he held in succession a series of preferments, all of which were tenable with his stall and with his living of Market Bosworth. These were the post of minister of the chapel in the Broadway, Westminster (1748); the perpetual curacy of St Botolph, Aldersgate (1769); and the place of minister of St Margaret's, Westminster, which he held from April 1784 to his death. Johnson remarked of this position: 'It is of no great value, and its income consists much of voluntary contributions' ('Letters of Samuel Johnson', 2.397). Although Taylor was possessed of large resources, both official and private -- amounting in all, so it was rumoured, to $7000 per annum -- and never voluntarily paid a debt, he always hankered after better preferments. 
Taylor spent much time at his family residence at Ashbourne. He became JP for Derbyshire on 6 October 1761, and thenceforth was known as 'the King of Ashbourne'. Through life he maintained his friendship with Johnson. Johnson was at Ashbourne in 1737 and 1740, and in the thirteen years from 1767 to 1779 only thrice failed to visit Taylor. He acted in 1749 as mediator in the quarrel of Garrick and Johnson over the play 'Irene'. He read the service at Johnson's funeral. 
Johnson said of Taylor that he was 'a very sensible, acute man', that he had 'a strong mind', and that 'he had great activity in some respects, and yet such a sort of indolence, that if you should put a pebble upon his chimney-piece, you would find it there, in the same state, a year afterwards' (Boswell, 827). Boswell and Johnson arrived at Ashbourne on 26 March 1776, driving from Lichfield in Taylor's 'large roomy postchaise, drawn by four stout plump horses, and driven by two steady jolly postilions'. The house and establishment accorded with this description, and their host's 'size and figure and countenance and manner were that of a hearty English squire, with the parson superinduced' (Boswell, 716). Boswell thought that Taylor 'praised everything of his own to great excess' (Boswell, 867) and wondered how Johnson and Taylor could be friends. Joshua Reynolds had speculated that Johnson was to be Taylor's heir. However, Johnson had said of Taylor: 'I love him; but I do not love him more; my regard for him does not increase. As it is said in the 'Apocrypha', 'his talk is of bullocks': I do not suppose he is very fond of my company. His habits are by no means sufficiently clerical: this he knows that I see; and no man likes to live under the eye of perpetual disapprobation. (Boswell, 861)' Taylor died at Ashbourne on 29 February 1788, and was buried in Ashbourne church, tradition says in the nave, on 3 March. He had no surviving child and disappointed his nieces by leaving all his property -- $1200 a year besides personalty -- to a boy, William Brunt ('b'. 1772), who had been engaged as a page. It was stipulated that the legatee should take the name of Webster, which had long been connected with this family of Taylor. 
Taylor published in 1787 'A Letter to Samuel Johnson, LL.D., on the Subject of a Future State', which was inscribed to the duke of Devonshire, at whose command it was issued. It is said to have been drawn up at Johnson's request, and with reference to his remark that 'he would prefer a state of torment to that of annihilation'. Appended to it were three letters by Dr Johnson. After Taylor's death there came out -- volume 1 in 1788, and volume 2 in 1789 -- 'Sermons on Different Subjects, Left for Publication by John Taylor, LL.D.', which were edited by the Revd Samuel Hayes. They were often reprinted, and are believed to have been in the main the composition of Johnson, in whose 'Prayers and meditations' is the entry, on 21 September 1777, 'Concio pro Tayloro' ('A sermon for Taylor'). Boswell wrote down in Taylor's presence, and incorporated in the 'Life', 'a good deal of what he could tell' about Johnson. Many letters from Johnson to him were printed in 'Notes and Queries' (6th ser., 5.303-482). Three of them were known to Boswell, and about twelve were printed by Sir John Simeon, their owner in 1861, for the Philobiblon Society. These communications, with others, are included in Hill's edition of Johnson's letters. Further letters are in the same editor's 'Johnsonian Miscellanies' (2.447, 452). 


@@@@@


doc= 27051


John Taylor (1745?-1806), landscape painter, was born in Bath. He painted marine landscapes with figures and cattle, and was also an etcher. He died at Bath on 8 November 1806. 


@@@@@


doc= 27052


Taylor, John (d. 1808), writer, entered the service of the East India Company in 1776 as a cadet in the Bombay army. He was promoted lieutenant on 1 May 1780, captain in December 1789, major on 20 March 1797, and lieutenant-colonel on 6 March 1800. At some time before 22 August 1789 he married. On that date he set out from London with his wife, two male companions, and two servants for an overland journey to India. Personal matters demanded his attention in India and, there being no prospect of his travelling by the normal sea voyage, he resolved to make an overland journey. He later described it in 'Travels from England to India in 1789 by way of the Tyrol, Venice, Scandaroon, Aleppo and over the Great Desart to Bussora' (2 vols., 1799). This work is an odd mixture of a travel journal, a compendium of useful information for travellers, a discussion of the strategic importance of the Middle East as a meeting place of East and West, an analysis of the contemporary strategic and political situations in the Middle East and India, and a detailed account of why the overland route to India is preferable to the normal sea route. Taylor had no eye for landscape, little interest in the individuals he met, and no pretensions to a pleasing style. While seeking to show that the overland route was perfectly feasible for ordinary travellers, Taylor did not attempt to boast its attractions. Instead he relentlessly described the delays he experienced in Europe, where he bemoaned the shortage of horses as a continual problem, his descriptions of the places he passed through being largely confined to practical details concerning accommodation and provisions which the traveller might need to know. 
After successfully making the overland journey to India, Taylor became a firm advocate of the route. In 1795, after having made his journey but before having published his 'Travels', he published 'Considerations on the practicability and advantages of a more speedy communication between Great Britain and her possessions in India'. This work was based on James Capper's 'Observations on the Passage to India' (1783) but Taylor particularly recommended the use of the overland route for letters through Egypt, he having found the delay in receiving news in India particularly frustrating and having successfully taken with him several important papers on his own overland voyage. Taylor published two more works on India before his death at Poona on 10 October 1808. Under the terms of his will his wife, Joanna, was his sole executor and residuary legatee. She was described as his 'present wife' and thus may or may not have been the wife who accompanied him on his voyage. Joanna had entrusted to her the care of his natural daughter. 
The John Taylor described above should not be confused with 


@@@@@


doc= 27053


Taylor, John (1743-1818), minister of the New Connexion of General Baptists, was born on 16 June 1743 at Fold in the township of Northowram in the parish of Halifax, the fourth of eight children of Azor Taylor, coalminer, and his second wife, Mary, daughter of Robert Willey of Fold. His elder brother was Dan Taylor (1738-1816), the founder of the New Connexion of General Baptists. John was put to work in a coalmine in 1749. Such education as he had came from his mother and brother Dan. The home was not particularly religious although his parents attended the parish church. It was his brother Dan who stimulated his spiritual interests. By the time John was eleven he and his brother were reading the 'Bible' and praying together. He met for worship with the local Methodists for a number of years but never joined a class or became a member of the society. He was drawn to the Particular Baptist cause in Halifax, and this resulted in discussion and debate with his brother Dan who, as a consequence of his Methodist background and Arminian theology, was strongly opposed to Calvinism. Doctrinal differences between the brothers were resolved, and when his brother started an Independent church at Wadsworth John became a member, was baptized on 7 March 1770, and subsequently started preaching. On 22 April 1764 he had married Betty Whitely (died 1806) at Halifax. 
When a church was formed at Queenshead, near Halifax, John Taylor was ordained its first pastor on 30 September 1773. The ordination took place in the context of personal tragedy: his three-year-old daughter died on the evening of the ordination and his son at the end of the week on the Friday; both died from smallpox. The infant church had a troubled early history: internal problems, together with poverty and a heavy debt on the church building, resulted in little progress. For most of his ministry John Taylor worked either as a miner or wool-comber. Although he received invitations to more prosperous churches he complied with the request of the New Connexion's assembly to continue his ministry at Queenshead. He had a thirst for knowledge, was self-taught, and read widely. Theologically a General Baptist he was much influenced by the evangelical revival, 'I preach experience', he said (Taylor, 'Memoirs', 63). He wrote a manuscript autobiography and two 'Association letters', 'Family worship' in 1790 and 'The religious education of children' in 1810. 
In the early stages of the development of the New Connexion, formed in 1770, John assisted his brother Dan, thereby giving him more time to travel the county on connexion business. His own ministry involved a considerable amount of travel, preaching and meeting the pastoral needs of the churches of the connexion: 'For two years I was not one Lord's day more than half my time at home' (Taylor, 'Memoirs', 37). In 1795 he lost sight in one eye; his son Adam attributed this to the 'fatigues of so many journeys, during the winter season' (ibid., 63). The effect was to curtail his travels. Although he was assisted by a number of young preachers their tenure was short, usually as a result of being called to minister elsewhere. 
The area around Queenshead suffered badly during the depression at the turn of the century. In January 1801 Taylor described the distress this caused as 'inexpressible' (Taylor, 'Memoirs', 74). Following his wife's death in March 1806 he married 'a poor but worthy widow' in November of that year. The final years of his life were marked by increasing debility. He died at Queenshead on 26 December 1818. A man whose ministry was exercised in adverse circumstances, Taylor had a reputation for piety and devotion. His two sons, Adam and James, also became ministers in the connexion, and the elder, Adam, wrote an early history of the connexion. 


@@@@@


doc= 27054


John Taylor (d. 1821), translator, who was born in Edinburgh and graduated MD from the university in 1804. He entered the Bombay service and was appointed assistant surgeon on 26 March 1808, and promoted surgeon in 1821. He was the author of several translations from Sanskrit and was a member of the Asiatic Society of Bombay and of the Literary Society of Bombay. He died on 6 December 1821 at Shiraz, Persia, leaving a son, John (1804-1856), who became a member of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, and died in that city on 14 July 1856. 


@@@@@


doc= 27055


Taylor, John (1750-1826), hymn writer, was born at Norwich on 30 July 1750, the second son of the eight children of Richard Taylor (died 1762), a manufacturer, of Colegate, Norwich, and was grandson of John Taylor (1694-1761). His mother was Margaret (died 1781), daughter of Philip Meadows, mayor of Norwich in 1734, and granddaughter of John Meadows, the ejected divine. Her only sister, Sarah, was the grandmother of Harriet Martineau. 
Taylor was educated under Mr Akers at Hindolveston, Norfolk, but upon the death of his father he left to assist his mother in the family business. Three years later he was apprenticed to Martin and Wingfield, a firm of manufacturers in Norwich, after which he spent two years as a clerk to a banking firm in London. He there began to contribute verses to the 'Morning Chronicle'. In 1773 he returned to Norwich, and started a yarn factory in partnership with his younger brother, Richard. On 24 April 1777 John Taylor married Susanna (1755-1823), 'nee' Cook ['see below']; they had seven children. 
Taylor was active in municipal and social affairs at Norwich, and was a prominent member of the Octagon Presbyterian Unitarian Chapel, of which he acted as deacon for nearly fifty years. He devoted his leisure to literary pursuits, and his verse and hymns were held in wide repute. He was a member of the Norwich Anacreontic Society, and sang in more than one of the festivals. His stirring song 'The trumpet of liberty', with the refrain 'Fall, tyrants, fall', was first published in the 'Norfolk Chronicle' of 16 July 1791; it has been ascribed in error to William Taylor (1765-1836). 
Taylor was the author of several hymn tunes, but his musical composition was inferior to that of his elder brother, Philip Taylor of Eustace Street Presbyterian Chapel, Dublin, grandfather of Colonel Philip Meadows Taylor. On the other hand, his hymns and verses were everywhere used in Unitarian services. He edited 'Hymns Intended to be used at the Commencement of Social Worship' (1802), in which ten by himself are included, and published a collection of forty-three of his own compositions in 1818. These, with additions, were reprinted in 'Hymns and Miscellaneous Poems' (1863), with a memoir reprinted from the 'Monthly Repository' (September 1826) and edited by his son, Edward Taylor. Many of these hymns are to be found in Robert Aspland's 'Psalms and Hymns for Unitarian Worship' (1810; 2nd edn, 1825), the 'Norwich Collection' (1814; 2nd edn, 1826), James Martineau's 'Hymns of Praise and Prayer' (1874), 'Hymns for the Christian Church and Home' (1840), and W. Garrett Horder's various collections. Perhaps the best-known are those beginning 'Like shadows gliding o'er the plain', 'At the portals of Thy house', and 'Supreme o'er all Jehovah reigns'. 
Taylor contributed anonymously to the 'Cabinet' (3 vols., 1795) verses in the style and orthography of the seventeenth century, of which those on Richard Corbet were included in Gilchrist's edition of the bishop's poems, and others on 'Martinmasse day' were cited in 'Time's Telescope' (1814) as an ancient authority for the way in which that day is kept. Taylor's 'History of the Octagon Chapel, Norwich' was completed by his son Edward, and published in 1848. John Taylor died after a fall from a gig near his son Philip's house at Halesowen in Shropshire on 23 July 1826, and was buried in the Unitarian burial-ground at Birmingham. 
John Taylor's wife, 
Susanna Taylor took charge of her daughters' education, instructing them in philosophy, Latin, and political economy. Susan Taylor (1788-1853) was later to marry Henry Reeve (1780-1814), and Sarah Taylor was to achieve fame as Sarah Austin (1793-1867), translator and literary hostess, the wife of John Austin (1790-1859), jurist. Susanna Taylor's sons were also gifted: John Taylor (1779-1863) was a successful mining engineer; Richard Taylor (1781-1858) became a printer and naturalist; Edward Taylor (1784-1863) became Gresham professor of music; Philip Taylor (1786-1870) was a civil engineer; and Arthur Taylor ('b'. 1790) was a printer and author of historical works. 
Susanna Taylor died in June 1823. A monument to her and her husband was erected by their children in the Octagon Chapel, Norwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 27056


Taylor, John (1757-1832), writer and journal editor, was born in Highgate on 9 August 1757, the eldest son of Ann Price and John Taylor (c.1724-1787) ['see under 'Taylor, John (1703-1772)]. His grandfather was the Chevalier John Taylor (1703-1772), well-known oculist to George II, and his father followed the same profession with equal success, becoming oculist to George III. John Taylor received a basic education under Dr Crawford in Hatton Garden and at a school at Ponder's End, Middlesex. At first he followed the family profession, and with his brother, Jeremiah Taylor MRCS, was appointed oculist to George III. His love of the theatre, combined with an ability to write verse, however, gradually attracted him to journalism. For some time he was drama critic to the 'Morning Post' before succeeding William Jackson as the paper's editor about 1787. He purchased the 'True Briton', and in 1813 went on to become editor and proprietor of 'The Sun', a violent tory paper. The existing editor, William Jerdan, owned a share in 'The Sun', and there was a bitter quarrel followed by two or three years' litigation before Jerdan was bought out by Taylor in 1817. In 1825 Taylor sold the paper to Murdo Young, who changed its politics. 
As a writer Taylor is best known for 'Monsieur Tonson', a poem suggested by a prank of Thomas King, the actor. A dramatic version of the poem was read or rehearsed by William Thomas Moncrieff on 8 September 1821, but never publicly performed. When it was recited by John Fawcett at the Freemasons' Tavern, however, it drew large crowds. In a later publication (1830) it was illustrated by Richard Cruikshank. 
At the Turk's Head Coffee House and the 'Keep the Line' Club, Taylor mingled with the celebrities of his day. He wrote numerous addresses, prologues, and epilogues for the stage and was totally captivated by the theatrical world. Jerdan vividly describes him as 'a being of the artificial stage, not of the actual living world... looking for surprises and denouements; as if the game of life were a comedy or a farce' (Jerdan, 73). According to his own account he gave advice to Boswell on the eve of his publication of the 'Life of Johnson'. He entered into brief correspondence with Wordsworth who sent him a copy of the 'Lyrical Ballads', wanting to know 'what impression his poems, written by an author living in rural retirement, had made upon a man living in the bustle of active life' (De Selincourt, 1.325). In his later years Taylor wrote 'Records of my Life' (1832), a work full of gossip and discreditable stories. 
Taylor was married twice and wrote a number of moving sonnets about his first wife, who died young. He died in Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, London, in May 1832. Other works by Taylor include: 'Statement of Transactions Respecting the King's Theatre at the Haymarket' (1791); 'Verses on Various Occasions', including 'The stage' (1795); 'The Caledonian Comet' (1810); 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1811); and 'Poems on Various Subjects' (1827). 


@@@@@


doc= 27057


Taylor, John (1739-1838), portrait painter, was born in Bishopsgate, London, the son of a customs official. He may have been the John Taylor baptized on 24 February 1739 at St Ethelburga, Bishopsgate, the son of John Taylor and his wife, Mary. He studied art at the drawing academy in St Martin's Lane, London, and also under Francis Hayman. He was with Hayman by the mid 1760s, 'by which time he had produced a drawing of Hayman's 'Triumph of Britannia' for S. F. Ravenet to work up into a large engraving published by Boydell in 1765' (Allen, 506). In 1766 he was one of the original members of the Incorporated Society of Artists. In 1772 he gave his address as 'At Mr Hayman's, Dean Street, Soho', suggesting that he was with his master for some years. His lengthy anecdotal poem 'Frank Hayman: a Tale' contains many witty reminiscences of those years. Although few of his early works (which were painted in a variety of media) survive, a large number of highly finished pencil portraits (his speciality), dating from 1767 to 1771, are in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. 'A Young Scholar and his Tutor', signed and dated 1772, is a typical example and shows the influence of his master in the treatment of the eyes and lips. As he only obtained between 7's'. 6died and 1 guinea for his drawings he became, with the assistance of his friends Paul Sandby and J. A. Gresse, a drawing-master in London. Between about 1788 and 1791 he was in Rome, where he made miniature copies after the old masters. By March 1788 Lord Gardenstone had bought his miniature after Correggio's 'Mystic Marriage of St Catherine' ('c'.1520s) and commissioned several others. In 1790 he was recorded as a miniature painter living by the Quartiere dei Avignonesi. 
Taylor's teaching enabled him to accumulate a sum which he invested in annuities to last him to the age of 100. This he nearly attained (thereby gaining the distinguishing title Old Taylor), as he died in Cirencester Place, Marylebone, Middlesex, on 21 November 1838 in his ninety-ninth year. He exhibited a variety of historical, literary, and mythological works at the Society of Artists (1764-77), the Royal Academy (1778-1824), and the British Institution (1808-38). He was a friend of the eccentric sculptor Joseph Nollekens, who made a bust of him, and left him a legacy in his will. 
Another 


@@@@@


doc= 27058


Taylor, Sir John (1771-1843), army officer, was born on 29 September 1771, the son of Walter Taylor of Castle Taylor, co. Galway, and his second wife, Hester, daughter of Richard Trench, and sister of William Power Keating Trench, earl of Clancarty. He entered the army in November 1794 as ensign in the 105th foot, became lieutenant in the 118th on 6 December, and captain in the 102nd on 9 September 1795. He was brigade major and aide-de-camp to Major-General Trench during the 1798 Irish uprising, and was aide-de-camp to General Hutchinson during the 1799 campaign in the Netherlands and that of Egypt in 1801. He had been transferred to the 26th foot on 30 October 1799, but was soon afterwards placed on half pay. He was made a brevet major on 2 September 1801, and a lieutenant-colonel on 28 February 1805. 
On 18 May 1809 Taylor was made lieutenant-colonel in the 88th (Connaught Rangers), and went to Cadiz in command of the 2nd battalion in 1810. In the following winter it joined Wellington's army within the lines of Torres Vedras. It was attached to the light division, and after Massena's retreat it took part in the combat of Sabugal (3 April 1811). A year afterwards it was sent home, having been reduced by a large draft to the 1st battalion to make up for its losses at Badajoz. On 4 June 1813 Taylor was made brevet colonel. He returned to Spain soon afterwards, and on 9 September took command of the 1st battalion, which formed part of the 3rd division. He commanded it until the end of the war, and received the gold medal with two clasps for Nivelle, Orthez, and Toulouse. At Orthez he was severely wounded. 
Taylor was made CB for his Peninsular services and afterwards KCB (17 October 1834). He was promoted major-general on 12 August 1819, and lieutenant-general on 10 January 1837. On 15 March 1837 he was made colonel of the 80th foot. 
Taylor married Albinia Frances, daughter of St John Jeffreys of Blarney Castle, co. Cork, and widow of Lieutenant-Colonel Freemantle; they had two daughters. Taylor died in London on 8 December 1843. 


@@@@@


doc= 27059


Taylor, John (1779-1863), mining manager and entrepreneur, was born on 22 August 1779 at 75 Gildengate, Colegate, Norwich, the eldest of the seven children of John Taylor (1750-1826), yarn manufacturer and dissenting minister, and his wife, Susannah Taylor (1755-1823) ['see under 'Taylor, John (1750-1826)]. The many activities of his father included being a Hebrew scholar, as well as a hymn writer and founding the Octagon Chapel, Norwich. Taylor was apprenticed as a land surveyor and civil engineer. In 1798, at the age of nineteen, he was appointed manager of the Wheal Friendship copper mine near Mary Tavy, Devon, as a result of his family's connection by marriage with the Martineau family, who owned shares in the mine. At his instigation major improvements were made to the mine, including the introduction of advanced methods for dressing copper ore and the construction of the Tavistock Canal, which provided water transport between the mine and the port of Morwellham. At this time he also took a direct financial interest in the reopening of the neighbouring Wheal Crowndale mine. In these early years he developed a reputation for being an innovator of the latest mining technology and for developing mines by the heavy investment of capital, which was contrary to normal practice within the industry. On 14 October 1805 he married Ann Rowe Pring of Awliscombe, Devon, the adopted daughter of Dr Thomas Burnaford, who was a surgeon to many of the mines in the Tavistock area. They had two sons, John ('b'. 1808) and Richard ('b'. 1810). 
In 1812 Taylor established a chemical works for the manufacture of vitriol in Stratford, Essex, with his brother, Philip, and with the financial backing of the Martineau family. This company later diversified into mechanical engineering and it manufactured printing equipment for Marc Isambard Brunel. The Taylor brothers also formed a separate company for producing gas from oil. John Taylor withdrew from these businesses in the 1820s as he increased his involvement in metal mining. The expansion of his mining activities led him in turn to go into partnership with his sons in 1837. 
Taylor became involved in all the major metal-mining areas of the British Isles, either by himself or through the firm of John Taylor & Sons. This included acting as mineral agent to a number of great estates, including those of the duke of Devonshire and the duchy of Cornwall. He also served as secretary of the Wheal Friendship mine in Devon; as inspector of the Greenwich Hospital mines; and as adviser to the commissioners of woods and forests regarding their mineral property. John Taylor & Sons also owned the Charlestown tin-smelting works in Cornwall, owned shares in numerous mining companies, and leased and managed mines throughout Britain and Ireland. Under Taylor's influence and through his extensive business operations, efficient mining equipment was introduced in all the major metal-mining areas. Similarly his distinctive management and employment practices were widely adopted, including the extensive use of the tribute system of paying miners in proportion to the quantity and quality of ore mined (a system admired by Charles Babbage and John Stuart Mill). 
Taylor's activities were also international. In 1824 he became involved in the South American mining boom, and was instrumental in founding the British Real del Monte Mining Company and the Bolanos Mining Company in Mexico. These proved relatively unsuccessful, and the London-based management was criticized for failing to appreciate the difficult local conditions. Taylor was later involved in the Nouveau Mond Gold Mining Company, which operated in California and Spain, the Spanish mines of the Linares Lead Mining Company, and other mining activities in France, Germany, Italy, and Australia. 
Taylor developed an interest in science and education and the dissemination of scientific knowledge, to which he applied his administrative skills. He was an early member of the Geological Society of London and later became its vice-president; he was also its treasurer from 1816 to 1847. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1825 and was an early member of the Institution of Civil Engineers. He was one of the founders of the University of London (later University College, London) in 1826 and served on its council and committee of management; he was treasurer from 1842 to 1860. He was also involved in the founding of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and was its treasurer from 1831 until 1861. Through his involvement in the British Association, he was instrumental in the founding of the Museum of Economic Geology in 1839 for the collection of mining data. He was the author of 'Statements Concerning the Profits of Mining in England' (1825); he edited 'Records of Mining' (1829), in which he advocated the establishment of a mining school in Cornwall; and he contributed numerous articles to scientific journals. 
Taylor maintained a reputation for honesty and trustworthiness in his business dealings, as well as for managerial and financial expertise. Towards the end of his life, when affected by ill health, he withdrew from mining to devote himself to his other interests. He died at his home, 31 Chester Terrace, Regent's Park, London, on Easter day, 5 April 1863, aged eighty-four. The family business continued in operation as an international mining concern until 1969. 


@@@@@


doc= 27060


Taylor, John (1781-1864), publisher and writer, was born on 31 July 1781 at Market Square, East Retford, Nottinghamshire, the third of the nine children of James Taylor (1752-1823), bookseller and printer, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Drury ('b'. 1760). Following his education at Lincoln and Retford grammar schools he assisted in his father's business at East Retford before moving to London in 1803. There, over the next three years, he worked for various publishers and booksellers. In 1806 Taylor, along with his close friend James Augustus Hessey (1785-1870), set up the firm of Taylor and Hessey, publishers and booksellers, at 93 Fleet Street, London, with Taylor assuming responsibility for publishing matters (this side of the business moved to 13 Waterloo Place in 1823). 
The partnership, never economically sound, was dissolved in 1825. Until then the staple publishing fare of the house had been 'sermons, domestic homilies, and moral tracts [...] books which firmly reflected the interests of the reading public' (Chilcott, 12, 67). Taylor, however, is best-known for publishing and supporting a number of predominantly second-generation Romantic writers, especially the poets Keats and John Clare. Publishing such writers often proved a high-risk, low-profit venture; outstandingly so in the cases of William Hazlitt and Keats, where the ideologically liberal Taylor attracted considerable personal critical hostility from many tory periodicals by his advocacy of supposedly anti-establishment writing. In an age of increasing commercial detachment he none the less developed unusually close personal, artistic, and financial associations with many of his writers -- Keats and Clare particularly -- even if several later complained of his extensive, usually unauthorized, copy-editing. 
From 1821 to 1825 Taylor was joint owner with Hessey of the 'London Magazine'. He always remained the main power behind the venture and, with varying degrees of editorial assistance, acted as managing editor until late 1824. Under Taylor, the magazine cost 2's'. 6died until December 1824, when the price increased to 3's'. 6died During the first two years of his editorship the magazine, with its brilliant and critically perceptive if temperamentally brittle group of contributors, came to exemplify the artistic spirit of its age. The famous monthly 'London' dinners of the early 1820s, hosted by Taylor for his writers, who included Lamb, De Quincey, and Hazlitt, became a paradigm for editor-contributor harmony, short-lived though this was in most cases. 
Operating under his own name only, Taylor became publisher and bookseller to the new University of London in 1827. Among the books he published were 'A System of Popular Algebra' (1827), 'Familiar Astronomy' (1830) by George Darley, and 'Lectures on the Steam Engine' (1828) by Dionysius Lardner. In 1836 he formed a new publishing partnership with a Mr Walton. Until 1853, when he retired from business, he published mostly ephemeral works of 'useful knowledge'. 
Erudite, depressive, deeply Christian with a moderate dissenting bent, and possessing a liking for litigation over copyright matters, Taylor was also a prolific writer. He published four of his own works on the identity of Junius in the 1810s and went on to write over forty scholarly, usually well-received, books, pamphlets, tracts, and magazine articles on a disparate range of subjects. Many of these concerned politico-economical matters (most often the vexed question of the relative importance and value of bullion and paper money); others handled religious, scientific, antiquarian, geographical, and philological themes. Additionally he contributed two dozen or so miscellaneous articles and poems to the 'London' as well as compiling many of the editorial 'Lion's Head' columns for the magazine. 
Having spent the whole of his publishing life in London, Taylor died there, a bachelor, at 7 Leonard Place, Kensington, on 5 July 1864. He was buried in the village churchyard in Gamston, near East Retford. 




@@@@@


doc= 27061


Taylor, John (1829-1893), author and librarian, born on 12 September 1829 at 15 (later 32) Berkeley Place, Clifton, Bristol, was the eldest son of John Taylor, ironmonger, and his wife, Ann Ackland. After leaving school he assisted his father in his business, but found time for much private study. During 1858-9 he contributed to the 'Bristol Times' several pieces, chiefly translations from the early Latin poets of the church. His attainments attracted notice, and he was appointed, on 26 March 1860, under-librarian to the Bristol Library Society, the largest subscription library in the west of England. He was elected librarian on 30 March 1863 and under him the number of subscribers, previously in decline, steadily increased. The Bristol Library and the Bristol Institution having united, in 1871 he became librarian of the Bristol Museum and Library, as the joint association was designated. 
In 1874 Taylor proposed the formation of an archaeological society in Bristol and Gloucestershire and began to gather signatures in support of the idea. His scheme bore fruit in 1876, when the Bristol and Gloucestershire Archaeological Society held its first meeting. Spurning dilettantism, the society set itself high standards, which it substantially attained. Between 1876 and 1886 Taylor contributed antiquarian articles to the 'Saturday Review'. His connection with the 'Athenaeum', which began in 1876, continued until his death. 
On 16 October 1883 Taylor was elected city librarian of Bristol, which then had four free libraries. He kept this office until his death. In June 1885 a branch for Redland and West Clifton was opened, and in January 1888 one for Hotwells. This extension of branch libraries into middle-class suburbs, as well as into poorer districts, was actively supported by Taylor, who sent regular reports to the local press to argue that public libraries were not just philanthropic institutions for the poor, but an essential part of urban life. 
Taylor wrote on the history and antiquities of Bristol and the west country. He was author of 'Tintern Abbey and its Founders' (1867), 'Guide to Clifton and its Neighbourhood' (1868), 'A Book about Bristol... from Original Research' (1872), which was part guidebook, part antiquarian work, and 'Bristol and Clifton, Old and New' (1877). His most important work was the 'Ecclesiastical History' [of Bristol] (1881), which forms the second volume of 'Bristol Past and Present' and is the most valuable part of a generally useful book. Some of his 'Antiquarian Essays Contributed to the 'Saturday Review'', were collected and published in 1895. Taylor died at Wordsworth Villa, Redland, Bristol, on 9 April 1893. He left a widow, three sons, and three daughters. His eldest son, Lancelot Acland Taylor, became librarian of the Museum Reference Library, Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 27062


Taylor, John Edward (1791-1844), newspaper editor, was born at Ilminster, Somerset, on 11 September 1791. His father was the Revd John Taylor (1753-1817), who came of a Lancashire farming family and was educated at Stand grammar school, near Manchester; his mother was born Mary Scott (1751/2-1793), daughter of a linen manufacturer of Milborne Port, Dorset. He had one elder sister. Taylor senior was one of two ministers sharing dissenting chapels at Ilminster and South Petherton who were decisively influenced by the French Revolution but in different directions: Taylor to become a Quaker and his colleague, the Revd John Noon, to enter extreme radical (Jacobin) politics. Mrs Taylor, a friend and correspondent of the poet Anna Seward, wrote feminist essays, religious verse, and an epic entitled 'The Messiah'. The parents' marriage (May 1788) took place after an engagement of eleven years, protracted by Miss Scott's attentions to her aged mother. It was described (McLachlan, 30) as unhappy, deeply so for the mother, who was unable to reconcile her adherence to the Unitarian faith with the evident harshness of her husband's Quakerism. She died on 4 June 1793, when John Edward was not yet two. 
After a short appointment in Bristol, Taylor senior moved to Manchester where, under Quaker patronage, he set up a classical academy in the rural suburb of Hulme. John Edward received all his formal education, apart from some instruction in mathematics by the scientist John Dalton, at his father's school, which he left at the age of fourteen. Against his father's wishes he decided as a young man to follow his mother's religious persuasion, and became an active member, from 1840 a trustee, of the Cross Street Chapel, the home of Unitarianism in Manchester. 
Taylor was originally intended for medicine, but his father apprenticed him instead to a cotton manufacturer, Benjamin Oakden, with whom, before he was twenty-one, he became a partner. On parting from Oakden he became a partner in the mercantile business of John Shuttleworth. He plunged into public life in Manchester as a founder of the Junior Literary and Philosophical Society and secretary, about 1810, of the Lancasterian school in the town. 
During Taylor's boyhood popular opinion in Manchester was almost as much opposed to the early reformers, most of them middle class, as were the magistracy and the moneyed inhabitants of the town. ('The people', Haslam Mills wrote, 'voted steadily for Barabbas'.) With the economic crisis towards and at the end of the war with France, sentiment shifted. Strikes became frequent. Machine smashing disturbed the Lancashire cotton towns. It was then that Taylor, alongside a successful business career, involved himself in liberal politics. He went to London occasionally and was much impressed by, among others, Leigh Hunt, whom he visited in gaol. In 1812-13 he began to write regularly for the town's newspapers, principally William Cowdroy's 'Manchester Gazette', which among the several, mostly short-lived, papers of the time was the only representative of liberal opinion. Taylor's contributions were given credit for much of the paper's success in circulation. In a time of social turbulence he found himself constantly balancing his keen desire for political reform against inflammatory outbursts in the streets. Judicious comment, where friends and colleagues would have preferred more vigorous opposition to the perceived abuses of the time, was to be characteristic of his later career. 
Also in 1812 a meeting called to support Lord Sidmouth's appointment as home secretary led to a riotous counter-demonstration in which the Royal Exchange was burned down. Rumours attributed to Taylor a handbill headed 'Now or never' which was posted in the town and was held to have provoked the arson. Six years later, in 1818, a conservative manufacturer, John Greenwood, at a meeting of commissioners of police called to appoint assessors, caused Taylor's name to be rejected on the specific ground that he was indeed the author of the manifesto. Taylor demanded withdrawal of the charge and, failing to secure it, published a letter calling Greenwood 'a liar, a slanderer, and a scoundrel'. A grand jury at Salford quarter sessions found an indictment against him for criminal libel. At his trial at Lancaster assizes on 29 March 1819, in which he conducted his own defence, Taylor made legal history in being allowed by the judge, Baron Wood (who was otherwise hostile), to plead the truth of his statement, a defence not previously admitted in a libel case. Counsel for the prosecution, James Scarlett (later Lord Abinger), surprisingly acquiesced in that decision. In his address to the jury Taylor asserted that he, not Greenwood, was the injured party. After conferring well into the night, under the persuasive foremanship of John Rylands, the jury went to the judge's lodgings and delivered to him, in bed, its verdict of not guilty. 
This episode was quickly followed by a graver one. On 16 August 1819 a huge but apparently peaceful crowd gathered in St Peter's Fields, Manchester, to hear the popular orator Henry Hunt. The magistrates ordered Hunt to be arrested by the Manchester yeomanry, who were largely recruited from young members of the tory families in the town, supported by six troops of the 15th hussars. The mounted yeomanry quickly found themselves immersed in the crowd, and turned their swords on those around them. In the bloodshed which became known as the Peterloo massacre eleven people were killed and some hundreds wounded. 'The Times''s correspondent, John Tyas, having been arrested along with Hunt, Taylor sent a report of the event to a London newspaper so that the magistrates' own report should not by default become the received version. Archibald Prentice, his colleague on the 'Gazette' and neighbour in Islington Street, Salford, did likewise, and their reports were corroborated by the 'Liverpool Mercury' and 'Leeds Mercury'. Sidmouth wrote to thank the magistrates for their 'prompt, decisive, and efficient' measures and placed the government's own account before parliament. Taylor responded with a substantial pamphlet, 'Notes and Observations Critical and Explanatory' (1820), which, though anonymous, was known to be from his hand, in eloquent rebuttal of the government's account of the disturbance. Here again his cautious use of language was evident. He referred to the 'tragedy' rather than the 'massacre', differentiated between good and bad magistrates, and attributed the attack upon the crowd to a minority in the yeomanry's ranks 'whose political rancour approaches to absolute insanity'. He devoted much time to the committee set up to relieve the sufferers. 
Largely on the strength of these events Taylor became the obvious choice among leaders of the moderate reform movement, most of them Unitarians, as the man to control a new newspaper catering for their interests. Twelve men together subscribed $1000, although Taylor was sole proprietor from the start. These men were mostly engaged in the textile trade, and included George Philips MP as well as the leading Manchester Liberals Thomas and Richard Potter. The 'Manchester Guardian' was launched on 5 May 1821. 
Until then Taylor had enjoyed the friendship and support of Prentice, who was influential among the radicals of the town, but Prentice soon found the 'Guardian' insufficiently outspoken for his taste. In later years his criticism developed into animosity, more especially after Prentice, supported by some of Taylor's original backers who were disillusioned by the line taken by the 'Guardian', had himself taken over one rival newspaper and started another. Taylor joined the Anti-Corn Law League on its foundation in 1838, but was prepared to accept a reduction in the levy on imported grain if abolition was not forthcoming. His detractors alleged that his opposition to the grain duty owed more to his wish to keep wages down than to his consideration for the poor, but the ethical underpinning of his career suggests that was a calumny. 
Taylor's 'Manchester Guardian', which he conducted in collaboration with Jeremiah Garnett, established a personality which endured for many years. It combined reformist editorial policies with a much more thorough news service than the town had previously been given. It thus became the required reading of manufacturers and merchants who valued its reporting and overlooked its politics; its price at 7died, including 4died stamp duty, in any case restricted a wider sale. 
Taylor's credit with the business community was augmented in 1823 by another libel action which this time he lost. He had denounced a local lawyer, John Dicas (though not by name), for putting out worthless currency notes. Dicas sued, was technically successful, but was awarded only $10 in damages against the $5000 he demanded. The action cost Taylor $483, of which businessmen contributed $307. The balance was in effect Taylor's purchase price for much favourable publicity. He was able to repay the initial subscribers and assume the sole ownership. 
Taylor took on the business and civic responsibilities expected of one in his position. He frequently attended deputations to London to promote parliamentary legislation in the interests of his town and for several years he was deputy chairman of the improvement committee of the commissioners of police. He was a small man of louring mien and a priggish temperament. 'Moral indignation came easily to him and he could be infuriatingly patronising' (Ayerst, 87). On 4 May 1824, after a five-year engagement, he married his cousin, Sophia Russell Scott, daughter of Russell Scott, Unitarian minister, and C. P. Scott's aunt. The fourth of their children, also named John Edward Taylor, succeeded to the headship of the newspaper. Sophia died in 1832; on 1 June 1836 Taylor married Harriet Acland (1802-1844), youngest daughter of Edward Boyce of Tiverton, who had joined his household the previous year as governess. Of the three daughters of this marriage, Harriet Ann Taylor married the economist William Stanley Jevons. Taylor died of a chronic inflammation of the throat at his home, Beech Hill, Cheetham, on 6 January 1844, and was buried on 13 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 27063


Taylor, John Ellor (1837-1895), curator and popularizer of science, was born on 21 September 1837 at Levenshulme, near Manchester, the eldest son of William Taylor (died 1864), a Lancashire cotton-factory foreman, and his wife, Maria Ellor ('b'. 'c'.1806, died after 1895). He received minimal education, and was first employed at a locomotive works at Longsight, Manchester, about 1850. About 1852 he was bound apprentice there as a fitter and turner. Encouraged to private study in classical languages and natural history, he attended classes at Manchester Mechanics' Institution when seventeen, and a year later became a Wesleyan lay preacher. 
Taylor's opinions obliged him to choose between a religious and a scientific career; geological studies led him to Norwich, where he began popular lecturing about 1858. He commenced sub-editing on the 'Norwich Mercury' for Richard Noverra Bacon in 1863, and soon gained success as editor of its offshoot, the 'People's Weekly Journal', which he made a vehicle for his popular scientific effusions. He was scarred by smallpox while investigating social conditions attending a severe outbreak of the disease in Norwich. He married on 22 January 1867 Sarah Harriet ('b'. 1846/7), youngest daughter of William Bellamy, headmaster of the Boys' Model School, Norwich. They later had four daughters. 
Together with John Gunn, Taylor established the Norwich Geological Society in 1864, and his original researches in Pliocene and Pleistocene deposits led to his election as fellow of the Geological Society of London in 1869. In 1870 he founded the Norwich Science-Gossip Club and by invitation catalogued the displays at Ipswich Corporation Museum, where he was appointed curator in 1872. Between 1872 and 1892 he delivered annual free lecture series in natural sciences in Ipswich (the material was later reworked as popular books), frequently commanding attendances of more than 450, meeting all expenses, and winning widespread affection. Robert Hardwicke appointed him editor of 'Hardwicke's Science-Gossip Magazine' in 1872 (where he gained a national readership), and the following year introduced him to fellowship of the Linnean Society. He may have obtained a doctorate about 1874 -- from about this date he identifies himself in book titles as a PhD. Taylor lectured in many parts of England, and through the Ipswich Scientific Society he guided a young intellectual circle towards industrial and technological innovation, so promoting enlightened governance of that town in the forthcoming generation. He helped assemble the founding group of the 'East Anglian Daily Times' (1874), through which his lectures were widely disseminated. 
Taylor was a companionable man of liberal and humane sympathies, and his teaching reconciled orthodox science with reverence for the divine principle in creation; his gifts of popular exposition were particularly admired by Professor Ray Lankester. Having enlisted Richard Wallace's patronage, he masterminded the creation of the new museum at Ipswich in 1881, soon afterwards receiving a testimonial of $733 raised from public subscription in recognition of his public service and modest salary. R. S. Smythe promoted his successful lecture tour of Australia in 1885. Weakening health compelled him to resign his editorial duties and curatorship in 1893, and in September 1893 he was declared bankrupt, owing $735. Taylor continued to lecture until two weeks before his death at his home, 3 Little Colman Street, Ipswich, on 28 September 1895. He was buried at Ipswich cemetery two days later. He was survived by his wife and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 27064


Taylor, John Sydney (1795-1841), journalist, was born in Dublin, the second son of John M'Kinley, a goldsmith. His father (who assumed the name of Taylor) was descended from Captain David M'Kinley, who led the advance of King William's troops at the Boyne, while his mother was a descendant of Patrick Sarsfield, titular earl of Lucan. Taylor was educated at Samuel White's academy in Dublin, the school of Richard Sheridan and Thomas Moore, and at Trinity College, Dublin, which he entered in 1809. He obtained a scholarship in 1812, graduated in 1814, and was a prominent member of the College Historical Society. 
In 1815 Taylor was admitted to the Middle Temple, and was called to the English bar in 1822. As a student in London in 1820 he edited a weekly paper with Thomas Crofton Croker called 'The Talisman'. Shortly after his call he began writing for the 'Morning Chronicle'. In 1827 he married a Miss Hull, niece of James Perry, who had been a proprietor of the 'Morning Chronicle'. He also began writing for the 'Morning Herald', of which he was for a time the editor. Under his management the newspaper became the voice of the Anti-Slavery Society, and was particularly associated with Thomas Clarkson. 
Taylor resigned as editor in order to return to the bar, where he made his name in the Roscommon peerage case in 1828, when he established the claim of Michael James Robert Dillon to the dormant peerage. He also proved the madness of Edward Oxford who was charged with shooting at the queen. Taylor was a close college intimate of Charles Wolfe, the author of the lines on the death of Sir John Moore, and in a letter addressed to the 'Morning Chronicle' (27 October 1824) first established Wolfe's claim to the authorship of the poem. In 1823 he was a member of a committee, led by Lord Brougham, which promoted the founding of the London Mechanics' Institute, later Birkbeck College. He also spoke in the defence of a number of London church buildings threatened by inappropriate restoration, and was successful in protecting the screen of York Minster. Taylor died on 10 December 1841 and was buried at Kensal Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 27065


Taylor, Joseph (bap. 1586?, d. 1652), actor, was probably (although his name was far from uncommon) the child who was baptized under that name at the church of St Andrew by the Wardrobe, London, on 6 February 1586. He is first recorded as a player in 1610, when he became a founding member of the Duke of York's Men, a company formed under the patronage of the ten-year-old Prince Charles. A patent of 30 March 1610 names seven players, including 'John Garland Willyam Rowley' and 'Joseph Taylor... already sworne servauntes to our deere sonne the Duke of york and Rothesay' (Chambers and Greg, 273). Garland was the leader of the group. Will Rowley was the playwright and comic actor who later collaborated with Thomas Middleton in his greatest plays. 
The King's Men, the acting company that performed Shakespeare's plays in London up to 1642, acquired Joseph Taylor in 1619, when Richard Burbage died. Burbage had been the company's leading player for the first twenty-five years of its existence. He was the first player of Hamlet and all the other leading roles in Shakespeare, most of which Taylor inherited. Taylor must therefore have been a highly skilled and versatile player. Even before he joined the King's Men, who worked, and most of whom lived, in Southwark, parish records appear to locate Taylor as living in the parish of St Saviour's, Southwark. He married Elizabeth Ingle there in 1610, and between 1612 and 1623 eight of his children were baptized there, and one buried. Taylor must have known some of Shakespeare's company long before he began to work with them. 
One of the King's Men whom Taylor knew was very likely John Heminges. In 1610 five of York's players in the new venture bought their company's first costumes from Heminges, a purchase which later gave Taylor some trouble. At Easter 1611 he left the company 'by the licence and leave of his said Master the Duke upon some speciall reason' (Chambers, 2.243). The reason was to help form the Lady Elizabeth's Men, who came into existence with a patent just after Easter 1611. Heminges brought a lawsuit for non-payment of the York's company's bill against Taylor, who alleged that the other four signatories had contrived to lay the blame on him. His 1611 departure was to join the last of the five companies formed in King James's time to be given royal patronage. James had made himself patron of the leading company in 1603, and given the next two best to his elder son and wife. In 1608 a new company was established for his younger son, Charles, then aged eight, and his daughter Elizabeth acquired hers in 1611. The Lady Elizabeth's Men was formed, like York's before it, with a core of six experienced adult players and several youths from a company of boy players, now grown into their early teens. Taylor led this group until 1615, a difficult time for players, when more playing companies were struggling to stay in London than there were playhouses to perform in. His company then amalgamated with the Prince Charles, the former Duke of York's, his original company. He was not a man to hold grudges, and was to prove a sturdy team player and leader. For the next three years the merged company divided its time between playing at the Curtain Theatre, the oldest and poorest in London, and the new dual-purpose theatre also used for bear-baiting, the Hope. Its leader player was a graduate of the Blackfriars boy company, Nathan Field, who led the company with Taylor for several years, until Field preceded him into the King's Men. 
Under Field and Taylor the company did not lack ambitions. The King's Men were pre-eminent, abandoning their traditional open-air Globe each winter for the roofed hall playhouse, the Blackfriars. With Edward Alleyn's support the Taylor company tried to get themselves a hall too, the abortive Porter's Hall project. When the privy council banned it, they reverted to the new Hope, playing Jonson's 'Bartholomew Fair' there in 1614. But that proved not to be a desirable venue. On 20 March 1616 Alleyn and Henslowe's old partner in the royal bear business, Jacob Meade, signed an agreement with a group of the leading Prince Charles's and Lady Elizabeth's players, one of whom was Taylor. An undated letter to Alleyn from Taylor, Rowley, and five others, which probably belongs to 1616, is an apology for leaving the Hope on Bankside, not because of the intemperate weather but because of the 'more intemperate Mr. Meade', the controller of the bears, who were also players at the Hope ('Henslowe Papers', 93). The letter asks Alleyn to find them another playhouse, and to give them a loan to tide them over. The last record of his work for the merged Lady Elizabeth's-Prince's Men is when he performed in the Inner Temple masque of January or February 1619. 
While in the Lady Elizabeth's, Taylor played in such hits as Jonson's play and two Beaumont and Fletcher plays, 'The Coxcomb' and 'The Honest Man's Fortune'. Once he joined the King's Men, about April 1619, he played Hamlet, and Iago in 'Othello', Truewit in 'Epicene', Face in 'The Alchemist' and Mosca in 'Volpone', Philaster in the Beaumont and Fletcher play of that name, Amintor in their 'Maid's Tragedy' and Arbaces in 'A King and No King', Ferdinand in Webster's 'Duchess of Malfi', Mathias in Massinger's 'The Picture', Paris in his 'The Roman Actor', and Rollo in 'The Bloody Brother'. These were not all roles he inherited from Burbage, since Burbage played Othello and Subtle. On some evidence that has not survived, Edmond Malone also thought that he might have painted the Chandos portrait of Shakespeare. 
Once John Heminges retired from working as a King's Men's player and their financial manager in the mid-1620s, a role he performed for thirty years, Taylor became one of the two leaders of the company. Traditionally at least two of the leading players, or 'sharers' in a London-based company's costs and profits, had the authority to sign papers and collect payments on behalf of the whole company. From about 1625 until 1642, when all the companies were dissolved, Taylor served with John Lowin, and sometimes Eliart Swanston, as the King's Men's chief agent and co-leader. After Heminges died in 1629 Taylor acquired a share in the company's two playhouses, the Blackfriars and the Globe, a source of revenue at least equal to his income as an actor. His status as the King's Men's manager also gained him a royal appointment in 1639 as yeoman of the revels, a post which gave Taylor access to the wardrobe of costumes and properties used for court performances and paid him 6died per day, about half the daily wage of a skilled artisan. Five years earlier, on twelfth night 1634, Taylor had presented a revival of Fletcher's 'The Faithful Shepherdess' before the king and queen at Whitehall, with costumes given to Taylor by Henrietta Maria from 'the year before of her owne pastorall' (Bentley, 2.595). 
After the theatres closed in September 1642 Taylor's occupation was gone, but he stayed loyal to it. He was one of the ten King's Men who signed the dedication to the 1647 Beaumont and Fletcher folio, and he was captured at the Cockpit in 1648 during an illegal performance of 'Rollo, Duke of Normandy, or, The Bloody Brother'. He died in 1652 in Richmond, Surrey, and was buried there on 4 November. After the Restoration he was remembered nostalgically as the most distinguished player in the great company which kept the plays of Shakespeare and Jonson on stage up to 1642. 


@@@@@


doc= 27066


Taylor, Philip Meadows (1808-1876), army officer and official in the Hyderabad service and novelist, was born in Liverpool on 25 September 1808. His father, Philip Meadows Taylor, was a merchant in Liverpool, and was descended from John Taylor (1694-1761) of Norwich; his mother was Jane Honoria Alicia, daughter of Bertram Mitford of Mitford Castle, Northumberland. At the age of fifteen, Taylor was sent out to India to enter the house of Mr Baxter, a Bombay merchant, with the promise of being made a partner when he should come of age. On arriving, however, he found that the condition of Baxter's affairs had been much misrepresented, and took up the offer of a commission in the service of the nizam of Hyderabad which was procured for him in November 1824 by Mr Newnham, chief secretary to the Bombay government, a relative of his mother's. After a short period of military service he obtained civil employment and taught himself surveying, engineering, Indian and English law, botany, and geology. Before long, however, he was obliged to return to the army, and was promoted adjutant in the nizam's service in 1830. At about this time he appears to have married. His autobiography inaccurately gave 1840 as the date of his marriage, but is otherwise reticent of details. 
Independently of Colonel William Henry Sleeman, Taylor became interested in the detection and suppression of thuggee, and turned his inquiries to account in his first novel, 'The Confessions of a Thug', which was published in 1839 on his return to England on furlough and proved a great success. After his return to India he acted as a correspondent for 'The Times' (1840-43). In 1841 he was commissioned by the resident of Hyderabad to pacify the rebellious state of Shorapur, which he continued to administer during the minority of the raja, until 1853. Taylor was then transferred to Berar, recently ceded by the nizam, where he organized surveying operations and road building. On the outbreak of the Indian mutiny in 1857 Taylor was dispatched to the district of Buldana in north Berar, which he kept in order until British forces reappeared. He was also able to supply General Whitlock's Madras division with the means of transport which enabled it to capture the Karwi treasure, subsequently the object of much litigation, and out of which Taylor himself never received a rupee. In the same year (1858) he was appointed commissioner of his old district of Shorapur, which his former pupil the raja had forfeited by rising against the British government. 
In 1860 Taylor's health failed, and he returned to England, where he wrote five more Indian novels. He also wrote an autobiography, published in 1877, after his death, the letterpress for several illustrated works on India, and a students' manual of Indian history. He was made a companion in the Order of the Star of India in 1869. In 1875 his sight failed, and on the advice of physicians he decided to spend the winter in India, where, however, he was further debilitated by an attack of jungle fever. He died at Menton, France, on his way home, on 13 May 1876. 
Meadows Taylor's modest background and work in the service of an Indian prince guaranteed that he would not leave a large mark on the annals of British Indian history. However, as a man of letters, he occupied a unique position among Anglo-Indian writers. His 'Confessions of a Thug' is a classic adventure novel, which inspired the young of several imperial generations and was much imitated by other colonial fiction writers for over a century. 


@@@@@


doc= 27067


Taylor, Michael Angelo (bap. 1757-1834), politician, was baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, London, on 13 July 1757, the only child of Sir Robert Taylor (1714-1788), architect, and his wife, Lady Taylor (1722/3-1803), of whom no further details are known. He entered Westminster School in January 1766 and then, destined for the law, he was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1769, transferring to Lincoln's Inn in 1770. He was called to the bar in November 1774, three weeks after admission to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1778, proceeding MA from St John's College in 1781. Endowed by his father with $20,000 and $2000 a year, he subordinated his professional to political ambitions, at first supporting Pitt the younger's administration. His initial bid to enter the House of Commons in 1784, as MP for Preston, was thwarted by an unfavourable decision on the electoral franchise, but he found another constituency, Poole, where he was newly appointed recorder during the same election. A diminutive figure, disingenuous and pompous by turns, although not malicious, he excited ridicule after describing himself in debate on 9 February 1785 as 'but a chicken' in his profession: in that guise he was lampooned by Sheridan and often caricatured by Gillray and others. He first differed from Pitt over parliamentary reform, to which he was opposed from 1784 to 1785. In 1787, too, he became one of the managers' committee for the impeachment of Warren Hastings, which was espoused by the whig opposition leaders. 
The death of his father in 1788 provided Taylor with a life interest in $100,000, the residue of which was reserved for founding the Taylor Institution at Oxford. On 7 August 1789 he married Frances Anne Vane (died 1835), the attractive daughter and heir of the Revd Sir Henry Vane, first baronet (1729-1794), of Long Newton, co. Durham, and his first wife, Frances Tempest. They had one daughter. His marriage procured him a whig electoral interest. He joined Brooks's Club in 1789 and the Whig Club in 1791. Despite defeat at Poole in 1790, he regained the seat on petition on 25 February 1791, after sitting by substitution for Heytesbury, Wiltshire, since 22 December previous. He became a regular whig spokesman and teller on many issues, publicly converting to parliamentary reform on 30 April 1792 as a member of the Society of Friends of the People. His bid on 28 March 1792 to abolish the national lottery on moral grounds failed. Critical of the hostilities with revolutionary France, he opposed repression and growing state power at home and subsidies to continental allies. He also espoused the cause of George, prince of Wales. His electoral interest at Poole was undermined by his agent, and he was defeated in 1796. Despite talk of his switching to Southwark, it was as MP for Aldeburgh that he was returned to parliament. After joining Fox in arguing for the dismissal of the ministry and in favour of parliamentary reform, in May 1797 he seceded from parliament with the Foxites until June 1798. Subsequently he opposed Pitt on all major measures. On 17 March 1800 he succeeded his brother-in-law as member for Durham City. In 1801 he was mentioned as a plausible candidate for the speakership. He lost his Durham seat in 1802. 
Taylor remained out of parliament until 1806, when his friends took office. He had taken up residence in Yorkshire, first at Park Hill, Bawtry, then at Ledstone Hall, where he entertained the prince of Wales, and later at Cantley. In 1806, refusing other offers, he was returned for Rye as a Treasury nominee. Illness curtailed his attendance, but he voted against his friends' dismissal by George III on 9 April 1807. At the ensuing election he came in for Ilchester on the prince of Wales's interest, becoming in 1808 a member of the prince's duchy council. He acted with the whig opposition unless the prince objected, and served as amanuensis for the prince when he wrote his acceptance of the regency on 11 January 1811. In 1812 he was one of two MPs who took evidence from witnesses to Spencer Perceval's assassination. The regent's abandonment of the whigs embarrassed him, particularly as his return for Poole in 1812 received Treasury support. He still leaned to opposition on some questions, such as legal reform and Catholic relief; but he had no wish to quarrel with the regent, who professed 'he loved no man so well' ('Creevey Papers', 1.211). Frances Taylor was a vivacious hostess and their dinner table at Privy Gardens, Whitehall, was at her connivance a frequent resort of whig politicians. It was there that the regent's daughter Princess Caroline fled in June 1814. Taylor's break with the regent, foreshadowed by his vote against renewed hostilities with Napoleon in 1815, became complete after Sheridan's death in 1816, Taylor's hopes of succeeding to his duchy office being dashed. He turned increasingly to opposition, and his recapture of Durham in 1818 enabled him to join the whigs with impunity: he held the seat until 1831. In 1827 he claimed, 'I have supported the Whigs for eight and thirty years at an expense of above $30,000' (ibid., 2.116). 
Whatever his political difficulties, Taylor was untrammelled in his pursuit of one aim in parliament: the reform of the chancery court, which under Eldon's chancellorship had become a byword for delay. From 1810 he regularly sought a remedy. The creation of the vice-chancellorship in 1813 helped, but he was unable to obtain sufficient support, nor was he severely critical of Eldon: by 1823 the whigs counted on another reformer, John Williams. Taylor continued to play his part: on 12 February 1828 he told the house the history of his campaign, and in his last speech, on 31 July 1833, claimed that the court operated to the ruin of all property. Aspects of criminal law reform also interested him. In 1815 he secured the abolition of the pillory, and he opposed capital punishment for forgery. Another interest was improvement of public environmental amenities: his 'Metropolitan Paving Act' of 1817 legislated for the removal of nuisances and obstructions from London streets: he also promoted their gas lighting. In 1820-21 he sought to curb pollution from steam engines and furnaces and to reduce the speed of stagecoach drivers, and in 1825 he exposed faults in London's water supply. He advocated poor law relief, and humane treatment of ailing prisoners (1823) and lunatics (1827). 
Disappointed in hopes of office in 1827, Taylor had to be satisfied with a privy councillorship, granted on 23 February 1831 following the whigs' return to power. That month he presented a Durham parliamentary reform petition, even though he was critical of strident reformers. In the reformed house of 1832 he sat for Sudbury, Suffolk. Sometimes styled 'Father of the House', he appeared in Sir George Hayter's oil painting of the Commons of 1833. He died on 16 July 1834 at his town house, in Privy Gardens, Whitehall, and was buried on 23 July in the family vault in St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. His wife died on 14 January 1835. 


@@@@@


doc= 27068


Taylor, Michael Waistell (1824-1892), physician and antiquary, son of Michael Taylor, an Edinburgh merchant, was born at Portobello in Midlothian on 29 January 1824. He was educated at Portsmouth and matriculated at Edinburgh University in 1840, and he graduated MD in 1843. In the following year he obtained a diploma from the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. While at Edinburgh University he made a special study of botany, and was appointed assistant to Professor John Hutton Balfour. Taylor was also one of the founders and early presidents of the Hunterian Medical Society. In 1844 he studied surgery at Paris for nine months, and afterwards he visited various foreign cities collecting botanical specimens. 
In 1845 Taylor settled in Penrith in Cumberland, and soon after succeeded to the practice of Dr John Taylor. In 1858 he achieved distinction by ascertaining that scarlet fever might be caused by contamination of the milk supply. In the same year he married Mary, a daughter of J. H. Rayner of Liverpool. In 1868 he played a large part in founding the border counties' branch of the British Medical Association, and he was the second to hold the office of president. He was the author of many treatises on medical subjects, and in 1881 wrote an important article on the fungoid nature of diphtheria. He was a member of the Epidemiological Society. 
Taylor was a member of the 1st battalion of the Cumberland volunteer corps, and he served as its staff surgeon. He also played an important part in the founding of the Penrith Literary and Scientific Society. Professionally he was no less known as an antiquary than as a physician. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London on 27 May 1886, and was a fellow of the Scottish Society of Antiquaries and a member of the council of the Royal Archaeological Institute. He joined the Cumberland and Westmorland Antiquarian and Archaeological Society soon after its formation in 1866. Taylor made several important local discoveries, particularly of the vestiges of Celtic occupation on Ullswater, the starfish cairns of Moor Divock, the prehistoric remains at Clifton, and the Croglin moulds for casting spearheads in bronze. By the time of his death he had completed a very elaborate work, 'Old Manorial Halls of Cumberland and Westmorland' (1892). 
Taylor retired from medical practice in 1884. He died at his home, 202 Earls Court Road, London, on 24 November 1892, and was buried at Penrith in the Christ Church burial-ground. He left a widow, three sons, and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 27069


Taylor, Peter (bap. 1756, d. 1788), decorative artist and painter, was baptized at South Leith on 21 January 1756, the son of Peter Taylor and his wife, Katherine Carfrae. On 21 March 1786 he married Elizabeth Low and resided in West Register Street, Edinburgh, where he worked as a coach painter and interior decorator. He is said to have painted portraits of his friends, but his seated, half-length portrait, executed in oils on a small wooden panel, of Burns is the only work definitely attributed to him. 
Burns and Taylor met in December 1786, shortly after the poet's arrival in Edinburgh, at a dinner party which extended into the small hours. Burns agreed on the spur of the moment to sit for his portrait the very next morning. He gave three sittings, taking breakfast with Taylor before each session. Mrs Taylor was present at the last and by far the longest session shortly before Burns left Edinburgh on 5 May 1787. 
The existence of this portrait was unknown until 1812 when James Hogg and two friends paid a visit to Taylor's widow. Mrs Taylor opened a clothes-press and removed the small wooden panel from a little box. Hogg commented, 'It is particularly like Robert in the form and air; with regard to venial faults I care not' (J. Hogg, letter of 27 Nov 1829 cited in 'Burns Chronicle', 1, 1892, 86). Several of the poet's contemporaries, when shown the Taylor portrait, failed to recognize Burns and thought that it might be his brother Gilbert; but both Burns's widow, Jean, and his confidante Mrs Agnes McLehose (Clarinda), as well as Sir Walter Scott and Mrs Dunlop of Dunlop, considered it a good likeness. Mrs Taylor's account was confirmed by the engraver John Burnet who stated that a friend of his, at one time in Taylor's employment, recalled him working on the painting. The panel has the inscription 'T. 1786' on the reverse, although that could have been added at a later date. This painting was used as the basis of J. Horsburgh's engraving, executed in December 1829, and a stone statue-group carved by John Greenshields in 1830. The panel portrait was bequeathed to the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh, in 1927 by the artist's great-grandnephew. Taylor also produced a larger version of the portrait, in oils on canvas. Its existence did not come to light until 1893 and was first publicly exhibited in 1895. It was purchased by Captain Wardlaw Ramsay of Whitehill and acquired by the Scottish National Portrait Gallery in 1938. 
Taylor was also interested in industrial developments and introduced the manufacture of painted waxcloth, 'the figuring of linen floorcloth for carpeting', into Scotland, for which he was awarded a premium of $100 on 13 February 1788 by the board of manufactures 'towards the expense incurred by him in erecting the necessary building, machinery, and apparatus for carrying on the work' ('Edinburgh Literary Journal', 5 Dec 1829). Taylor suffered from pulmonary tuberculosis and retired to the south of France where he died at Marseilles on 20 December 1788, leaving his widow and an infant daughter, Elizabeth. 


@@@@@


doc= 27070


Taylor, Peter Alfred (1819-1891), politician and radical, was born in London on 30 July 1819, the eldest of the five children of Peter Alfred Taylor (1790-1850), silk merchant, and his wife and first cousin, Catherine ('b'. 1795, died in or after 1875), daughter of George Courtauld of Braintree, Essex. His uncle Samuel Courtauld instigated the celebrated Braintree case against church rates. He was educated at the school in West Hove, Sussex, run by the Revd J. P. Malleson, his cousin and the Unitarian minister at Brighton. It was through this connection that he met Clementia Doughty, who became governess to the Taylor family ['see 'Taylor, Clementia (1810-1908)]. They married on 27 September 1842 and jointly undertook many activities in support of radical causes. 
Taylor entered the family firm of Samuel Courtauld & Co. in the late 1830s. He later became a partner, and it was the wealth from this family connection that enabled him to develop his radical interests and to support them financially. He grew up in the Unitarian circle centred on South Place Chapel, Finsbury, of which his father was a leading member. His father helped to bring PAT, as he was widely known, into a leading position in the Anti-Corn Law League, where he met the leading radicals of the day. 
In 1845 the Taylors met Giuseppi Mazzini, the Italian patriot, who made an indelible impression on them, and they became his close friends and supporters. A secret hiding place was prepared for Mazzini in the Taylors' home, in case his life should be threatened. In the late 1840s Taylor helped to found the Society of Friends of Italy, and as its first treasurer was its primary fund-raiser. The Taylors kept open house for leading radicals from Britain, Europe, and America, first, from the early 1850s, in Powis Place, Great Ormond Street, London, and then from 1861 at Aubrey House, Notting Hill Gate. 
Taylor advocated a democracy in Britain, and was an early member of the Northern Reform Union, founded in 1858 to promote manhood suffrage. After unsuccessful candidatures at Newcastle upon Tyne (1858) and Leicester (1861), he was elected unopposed as an advanced Liberal MP for Leicester in February 1862. At his election, when his programme included abolition of church rates and separation of church and state, he was attacked as 'anti-everything'. He was a member of the Emancipation Society, founded in 1862 to promote the cause of the northern states in the American Civil War, he supported Polish independence (1863), and he was a member of the Garibaldi committee, set up in 1864 to welcome the Italian patriot to Britain. He was a vice-president and one of the few middle-class supporters of the Reform League, constituted early in 1865 to campaign for manhood suffrage and the ballot, and appeared on league platforms during the parliamentary reform crisis of 1866-7. He attempted to achieve unity with the National Reform Union, which sought the more limited aim of household suffrage. With J. S. Mill he was a parliamentary spokesman for the Jamaica committee, formed in response to Governor Eyre's brutal suppression of riots in Jamaica in 1865. 
After 1868 Taylor championed all the leading radical causes: women's suffrage, opposition to the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', payments for MPs, disestablishment of the church, land tenure reform, abolition of the game laws, the abolition of flogging in the army and navy, opening of museums on Sundays, opposition to compulsory vaccination, and press freedom. Critics saw his many causes as 'the very embodiment of faddism' ('Leicester Daily Post'). He attracted notoriety in 1871 by his identification with the republican cause; he supported Charles Dilke's motion opposing the dowry and annuity to Princess Louise. He was proprietor of the radical newspaper 'The Examiner', edited by William Minto, from 1873 to 1878. 
In 1873 ill health forced Taylor to retire from London to Brighton, where he founded clubs for working men, notably the Nineteenth Century Club, a forum for advanced radical and secularist views. He stood down from parliament in June 1884. During his twenty-two years as MP for Leicester he had 'refused, though a wealthy and generous man, to subscribe to a single public object in Leicester, that it might be perfectly clear he was not buying his seat in the Commons' ('The Times', 21 Dec 1891). In retirement he cut himself off from other radicals in 1886 by refusing to support Irish home rule. In 1875 he published an opulently bound history of the Taylor family. Taylor died at his home, 18 Eaton Place, Brighton, on 20 December 1891 and was buried at the extramural cemetery in Brighton on the 23rd. Clementia Taylor, his widow, survived him; there were no children. His funeral service was conducted by Dr Stanton Coit of South Place, thus maintaining a long family connection with that Unitarian congregation. 


@@@@@


doc= 27071


Taylor, Philip (1786-1870), civil engineer, was the fourth son of John Taylor (1750-1826), hymn writer of Norwich, and his wife, Susanna Taylor (1755-1823) ['see under 'Taylor, John (1750-1826)], essayist and daughter of John Cook of Norwich. He was the brother of Richard Taylor (1781-1858), Edward Taylor (1784-1863), and the better-known John Taylor (1779-1863), a mining engineer. Philip was educated at Dr Houghton's school in Norwich, and at fifteen was sent to live with his brother John and to study surgery under Dr Harness, a relative of John's wife, at Tavistock. However, having a horror of witnessing or causing pain, he returned to Norwich, where he joined a Mr Fitch in business as a chemist and druggist, and set up a factory for making wooden pillboxes by machine. In 1812 he and his brother John started a chemical works at Stratford, east London. 
In 1813 Taylor married Sarah, daughter of Robert Fitch, surgeon, of Ipswich. They settled at Bromley by Bow, adjoining Stratford, where the brothers' visitors included many of the famous engineers and chemists of the day, both English and French. In 1816 and 1818 Taylor patented the application of high-pressure steam to evaporation, a process which was taken up in Whitbread's brewery and by various sugar refiners. He then devised a method of making gas from oil (that is, naphtha) and was able to light public and private buildings by naphtha, which was at first cheaper and more efficient than coal gas. Covent Garden Theatre, Mile End Road, the Imperial Library at St Petersburg, and the city of Bristol were lighted by his process; but when the gas companies lowered their prices, Taylor was driven out of business. 
Between 1816 and 1825 Taylor's inventive nature led him to apply for several engineering patents, and in 1822 he made his first visit to Paris. He assisted Marc Isambard Brunel in 1821 in his debt crisis, and he was a director of the Thames Tunnel Company. In 1824 he moved his family to south Wales when he became connected with the British Iron Company and took out a patent for making iron. Involved in the company's ruin, and with his chemical works rendered unprofitable by the bad management of his partners, he went in 1828 to Paris, founded engineering works, and patented the hot-blast process in the manufacture of iron, which two other engineers simultaneously patented in London. The validity of the French patent was disputed, and was not established until 1839, just before its expiration. In 1834 Taylor submitted to King Louis-Philippe a scheme for supplying Paris with water by a tunnel from the Marne to a hill at Ivry, just as he had previously proposed for London a 9 mile tunnel to Hampstead Hill; but the expense was too great and nothing came of it. 
In 1834, moving south for the benefit of his wife's health, Taylor erected machinery for a flour mill at Marseilles and became a partner in the business, which, however, under protectionist pressure, was soon deprived of the privilege of grinding in bond. Taylor thereupon, with his sons Philip Meadows and Robert, founded in 1836 engineering works at Marseilles, and in 1845 he bought a shipbuilding yard at La Seyne, near Toulon, which became a large and flourishing concern employing 2000 men. Papa Taylor, as he was called, was very popular with his workmen. From 1847 to 1852 he resided at San Pier d'Arena, near Genoa, where the Sardinian government had invited him to establish engineering works; but the political troubles induced him to return to Marseilles. The sudden loss of four of his eight children having affected his health, he disposed of his business in 1855 to the Compagnie des Forges et Chantiers de la Mediterranee. 
Taylor prided himself on having taken part in the first steamboat trip at sea, on having seen the start of the first steam engine, and on having witnessed Sir Charles Wheatstone's first electric telegraph experiments, at Somerset House. He was made a knight of the French Legion d'honneur in 1846 and was awarded the Sardinian order of St Maurice and St Lazarus. He died at his home at St Marguerite, near Marseilles, on 1 July 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 27072


Taylor, Polycarpus (1706/7-1781), naval officer, whose parentage and upbringing are unknown, was promoted second lieutenant in the 'Augusta' with Sir Chaloner Ogle on 21 June 1739. He appears to have gone out with Ogle to the West Indies, and in June 1741 was moved by Edward Vernon in to the 'Boyne', his own flagship. On 2 May 1743 he was promoted captain of the frigate 'Fowey' on the Jamaica station and he continued in her until 1747 when he was moved by Rear-Admiral Charles Knowles to the 'Elizabeth' (64 guns). Later, following the abortive attempt on Santiago de Cuba, he moved to Knowles's flagship, the 'Cornwall'. 
As flag captain Taylor took part in the engagement off Havana on 1 October 1748 and his conduct was clearly well regarded by his commanding officer. Writing to Lord Anson on 25 January 1749, Knowles included Taylor among several seamen who 'are good' (BL, Add. MS 15956, fol. 169). He was then appointed commander of the 'Ripon' and senior officer on the station at Knowles's return to England. He was recalled soon afterwards, arriving at Spithead early in January 1750. In 1756 he was appointed to the 'Marlborough' but then moved (7 June) to the 'Culloden' with orders to take Sir Edward Hawke and join her new ship at Gibraltar. 
Taylor appears to have brought the 'Culloden' to England in 1757 and to have had no further active service. He is sometimes wrongly credited with the command of the 'Ramillies' in 1758 -- in fact held by Wittewronge Taylor, who was no relation, who also served on the 'Cornwall' with Knowles on the Jamaica station. Taylor was superannuated with the rank of rear-admiral five years after his retirement in 1762, and passed the rest of his life at Norton, co. Durham. Details of his family life are scant, though a son, also Polycarpus, was baptized at Norton on 20 July 1753. The elder Taylor died aged seventy-four at Durham in January 1781, and was buried at St Mary the Virgin, Norton. 


@@@@@


doc= 27073


Taylor, Reynell George (1822-1886), army officer, was the youngest son of Thomas William Taylor of Ogwell, Devon, who served with the 10th hussars at Waterloo. Taylor was born at Brighton on 25 January 1822. From Sandhurst, where his father was lieutenant-general, he was gazetted cornet in the Indian cavalry on 26 February 1840. He first saw service with the 11th light cavalry (Bengal) in the Gwalior War of 1843, and at the close of the war was appointed to the bodyguard. In the First Anglo-Sikh War he was severely wounded in the cavalry charge at Mudki on 18 December 1845, and on his recovery was appointed assistant to the agent at Ajmer. Thence, in 1847, he was sent to Lahore, and became one of that famous group of men who worked under Henry Lawrence, and subsequently John Lawrence, in the Punjab. The same year, and when only twenty-five years of age, he was left, at a critical period, 'hakim-i-wukt' (ruler) of Peshawar, in charge of 10,000 Sikh troops and the whole district. His firmness and his justice in criminal cases earned him the love of the people, ensured discipline, and gained the praise of his superiors. When it was decided to occupy the province of Bannu, Taylor organized the column from Peshawar, and led 4000 men in safety through the Kohat Pass (November and December 1847). The outbreak of the Second Anglo-Sikh War found Taylor in charge of Bannu. On hearing of the murders of Patrick Alexander Vans Agnew and W. A. Anderson at Multan on 20 April 1848, he at once dispatched all his most trustworthy troops to the assistance of Sir Herbert Benjamin Edwardes, and remained alone at his post. In July he was ordered to proceed to Multan, which was besieged, and thence he set out as a volunteer to rescue the English captives at Peshawar. His efforts being frustrated by treachery, he endeavoured to help Herbert, who was besieged at Attock. With this end in view, he gathered an irregular force of 1021 foot, 650 horse, and 3 doubtful guns, and laid siege to the fort of Lakki, the key to the Derajat, on 11 December 1848. Though far removed from all possibility of support, and unaided by a single fellow-countryman, he captured the fort on 11 January 1849. For his services he was promoted captain on 15 December 1851, and major the next day. On 11 December 1854 he married Ann, daughter of Arthur Holdsworth of Widdicombe, Devon. They had a large family and she survived him. 
In 1855, after his prolonged visit to England, Taylor was appointed commandant of the corps of guides. During the Indian mutiny he was in charge of the Kangra district, and in 1859 he was appointed commissioner of the Derajat. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 21 December 1859 and in 1860 he took part, as chief political officer, in the Waziri expedition. Before retiring from the Derajat, in order to become commissioner of Peshawar in the spring of 1862, he induced the Church Missionary Society to establish a station in the district at considerable cost to himself. In 1863 he served throughout the Ambela war, was gazetted colonel on 3 April 1863, and CE the following month; but it was not until June 1866 that he was made CSI. After a short visit to England in 1865 he returned for the last time to India, to become commissioner of the Ambala division, and in 1870 of the Amritsar division. He retired in 1877 as major-general, becoming lieutenant-general that year, and general on 15 December 1880. He died at his home, Malston House, Newton Abbot, Devon, on 28 February 1886, and was buried at East Ogwell church, Devon, on 5 March. His bravery in the field had won him the title of 'the Bayard of the Punjab'; the Indians called him always their 'ferishta' (good angel), and his charity had made him a poor man. 


@@@@@


doc= 27074


Taylor, Richard (1781-1858), printer and naturalist, was born at Norwich, Norfolk, on 18 May 1781, the second son of John Taylor (1750-1826), wool factor, and his wife, Susannah Taylor, nee Cook (1755-1823) ['see under 'Taylor, John], and the great-grandson of the Presbyterian divine John Taylor (1694-1761). He was educated at a Norwich dissenting day school run by the Revd John Houghton, where he acquired a good knowledge of the classics and the stimulus to acquire proficiency in French, Italian, Flemish, Old English, and their literatures. He remained a practising Unitarian throughout his life. In March 1797, on the recommendation of the botanist Sir James Edward Smith, he was apprenticed to the Unitarian printer Jonas Davis, in Chancery Lane, London. It was through the happy accident that Davis printed the Linnean Society's 'Transactions' and, from 1798, the independent 'Philosophical Magazine', that Taylor became a printer and publisher of scientific books and periodicals. 
In 1800 Davis abandoned printing, selling the business to John Taylor and Richard Wilks on the understanding that Richard Taylor would become a partner on reaching his majority. The partnership was dissolved in 1803 after violent quarrelling between Wilks and Richard Taylor, the firm becoming R. Taylor & Co. A younger brother, Arthur (1790-1870), was a partner from 1814 to 1823, and a nephew, John Edward Taylor (1809-1866), from 1837 to 1851, by which time the firm was housed in Red Lion Court, Fleet Street. Its printing device, a roman lamp, and motto, 'Alere flammam', were first adopted in 1815. 
Taylor was at the forefront of new printing technology and between 1809 and 1818 he partnered Richard Bensley, George Woodfall, and Friedrich Koenig in the development of Koenig's mechanized printing press. Taylor lost money in this venture. Although John Walter, the owner of 'The Times', bought two machines in 1814, Taylor had to deal with financial discord between Walter and the partners, devious behaviour by Bensley, insuperable technical problems, and the appearance of cheaper machines from competitors such as Augustus Applegarth. Only after 1828, when Taylor contracted to print the 'Weekly Dispatch' on his own cylindrical press, did his firm become financially secure. 
On 7 April 1807 Taylor married Hannah Corke of St Paul's, Covent Garden. Their only daughter, Sarah, was born in 1808. It was not a successful marriage, and Taylor fell in love with Sarah Taylor's governess, Frances Marshall Francis (1797-1854), described at her death as the 'widow of Richard Francis, printer'. There were two illegitimate children, William (1817-1904) and Rachel Francis (1820-1913). Despite Hannah's likely death in the 1830s, Taylor never legitimized Frances's position, his real relationship with their children being kept a closely guarded family secret that scandalized his distinguished brothers John (1779-1863) and Edward (1784-1863) in 1852, when William Francis, who had studied chemistry and biology in Germany at Giessen and Berlin, was taken into partnership, the firm becoming Taylor and Francis. 
From the beginning Taylor acquired a reputation for careful printing that ranged across poetry, fine editions of Old English classics, newspapers, textbooks, and examination papers. His chief interest, however, was science. In 1807 he became a fellow of the Linnean Society, and its under-secretary from 1810 to 1857. He was also a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, the Royal Astronomical Society, and the Philological Society, as well as a regular supporter of the British Association from 1831. In 1822 he joined Alexander Tilloch as editor of the 'Philosophical Magazine', and he was a founder editor of the 'Annals of Natural History' in 1838. He also sponsored and edited five important volumes of translations, 'Scientific Memoirs', between 1837 and 1852. For thirty-five years he represented the ward of Farringdon Without on the common council of the City of London, where he played a particularly active role in educational matters such as the founding of the City of London School and the Guildhall Library. 
On suffering a nervous breakdown in 1852, Taylor retired to Richmond, Surrey, where he died from bronchitis at his home, Alton Lodge, on 1 December 1858. He was buried in St Peter's churchyard, Petersham, Surrey. The printing and publishing house was continued by William Francis. 


@@@@@


doc= 27075


Taylor, Richard Cowling (1789-1851), surveyor and geologist, the third son of Samuel Taylor, farmer, and Jane Cowling, was born at Hinton, Suffolk, on 18 January 1789. He was educated at Halesworth, Suffolk, and articled to Edward Webb, land surveyor at Stow on the Wold, Gloucestershire, in July 1805. He received further instruction from the geologist William Smith, who had also been a pupil of Webb, and finally became a land surveyor at Norwich in 1813. In 1820 he married Emily, daughter of George Errington of Great Yarmouth, with whom he had four daughters. He moved to London in October 1826. In the early part of his career he was engaged on the Ordnance Survey of England. Subsequently he reported on mining properties, including that of the British Iron Company in south Wales, his plaster model of which received the Isis medal of the Society of Arts. In July 1830, after the spectacular failure of the British Iron Company, he went to the United States of America. He first surveyed the Blossburg coal region in Pennsylvania, producing a report in 1833 (microfilm edn, 1991) on its geology and a possible railway connection to it. He then spent three years exploring the coal and iron veins of the Dauphin and Susquehanna Coal Company in Dauphin county, Pennsylvania, and published two elaborate reports with maps (1840). He also surveyed and reported on copper mining in Cuba (1836) and asphalt mining in Halifax, New Brunswick. 
Taylor's knowledge of theoretical geology led him to assign the Old Red Sandstone that underlies the Pennsylvania coalfields to the Old Red Sandstone of Europe. He was elected a fellow of the Geological Society of London and was a founder member in 1840 of the Association of American Geologists and Naturalists, from which developed the American Association for the Advancement of Science. His published works included early writings on the archaeology and geology of East Anglia and works on coal. As well as general works published in 1848 and 1861, he wrote numerous specialist reports, mostly published in the United States, about coal in places as far away as China. His crowning work was 'Statistics of Coal' (1845), a long, authoritative, and compendious work. He also wrote on Native American archaeology. He died at Philadelphia on 26 October 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 27076


Taylor, Robert (1710-1762), physician, was born in Newark, Nottinghamshire, in April 1710, the son of John Taylor, twice mayor of the town. He was educated at Newark grammar school before going on to St John's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted on 23 June 1727. However, on 27 October 1727 he moved to Trinity College. It was there that he became a scholar in 1729, and there that he took the degree of bachelor of medicine in 1732, followed by that of doctor of medicine on 7 July 1737. 
Immediately after taking his first degree Taylor entered medical practice in Newark, where he filled the vacancy that had been left unoccupied since the death of Mordecai Hunton in 1723. He quickly won the esteem of his fellow townsfolk, for his polished manners, professional assiduity, and general erudition. It was while practising at Newark that the event occurred which laid the foundation for his professional success in London. Richard Boyle, third earl of Burlington, was on a visit to Belvoir Castle, some 25 miles from Newark, when he was taken dangerously ill. Taylor was summoned and managed to save his patient, despite the gravest apprehensions, by the bold administration of opium. Thereafter, Lord and Lady Burlington persuaded Taylor to move to London, where, owing especially to the efforts of Lady Burlington, he quickly built a large practice and obtained the patronage of Edward Hulse, physician to the king -- the position which Taylor was in time to hold himself. 
Taylor became a fellow of the Royal Society on 23 June 1737. He was admitted a candidate of the Royal College of Physicians on 4 April 1738, being elected a fellow on 20 March 1739. The following year he gave the Goulstonian lecture and in 1755 the Harveian oration, making clear the college's then favourable views on the recently introduced practice of inoculation. A collection of his writings was published as 'Miscellanea medica' in 1761. 
Taylor was married twice: first to Anne (died 1757), the youngest daughter of John Heron, and then, on 9 November 1759, to Elizabeth Mainwaring of Lincoln, who had a fortune of $10,000 and who died on 10 May 1812, aged eighty-six. With Elizabeth he had a son, Robert, who died an infant, and a daughter, Elizabeth, who survived both parents and in 1781 married Charles Chaplin (1759-1816) of Blankney Hall, Lincolnshire, who was later MP for that county. 
Taylor died on 15 May 1762 and his body was interred in South Audley Street Chapel, London. However, in 1778 it was moved to Winthorpe, near Newark, where his widow had constructed a small private vault and where she and their infant son were also laid to rest. A monument to their memory was erected by their daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 27077


Taylor, Sir Robert (1714-1788), architect, was the son of Robert Taylor (died 1742), master mason and master of the London Masons' Company in 1733, who 'built himself a villa at Woodford in Essex and lived beyond his means' (Colvin, 'Archs'., 962). Horace Walpole states that Taylor got nothing from his father, 'excepting some common schooling, a fee, when he went pupil to the sculptor Sir Henry Cheere, and just enough money to travel on a plan of frugal study in Rome' ('Anecdotes of Painting', 5.192). The future Sir Robert was apprenticed in 1732 to Cheere, whose rococo style, especially in chimney-pieces, later greatly influenced his architecture. His father's death in 1742, the year he left for Rome, required his immediate return; he discovered that his father was bankrupt. This crisis undoubtedly persuaded Taylor to adopt a hard-working regime. His pupil George Byfield told the landscape painter and diarist Joseph Farington that 'Sir Robert Taylor had three rules for growing rich, viz: rising early, keeping appointments and regular accounts' (Farington, 'Diary', 4.841). Walpole comments that 'he never slept after four in the morning' ('Anecdotes of Painting', 5.195). 
Having been apprenticed to Henry Cheere, Taylor was working for him still in 1736-7, when payments to him were recorded in Cheere's account at Hoare's Bank. He was admitted to the freedom of the Masons' Company by patrimony on 4 August 1744 and his emergence as an independent sculptor occurred in the same year, when, in competition with Roubiliac, Rysbrack, and others, he received the commission for the pediment relief on the newly built Mansion House. The choice of Taylor was made largely because of his City connections and the executed composition is certainly less accomplished in design than those proposed by Roubiliac and Rysbrack, as well as being carved with less finesse than works by his rivals. Later views of Taylor as a sculptor have, however, made too much of hostile remarks by contemporaries, and his later work shows him to have been an inventive artist whose designs were original and distinctive, even if their execution is often somewhat crude. His next major commission was that given by parliament for the monument to Captain Cornewall; this followed a Commons vote in 1747 after a debate in which the only figure to have emerged with any credit after the battle of Toulon was used as a focus for opposition to the government. Completed in 1755, the monument was then one of the largest in Westminster Abbey and was given a very prominent position at the west end, being moved in a truncated form to the cloisters only in the 1930s. Notwithstanding its later neglect, the monument attracted much comment as an 'illustrious instance of national gratitude' ('GM', 25, 1755, 90). With its rocky base, battle relief, and figures of Fame and Britannia flanking a palm tree, it recalled the French 'pompes funebres' mentioned by P. A. Grosley, who thought that the 'pomp and magnificence displayed around it seem rather to suit a funeral decoration, than a standing monument' (Grosley, 2.67). Of all native-born sculptors until Wilton, Taylor showed the deepest familiarity with continental sculpture and his smaller monuments, such as that to General Guest (erected 1761) in the abbey -- praised by Vertue ('Note Books', 3.161) for its 'ornaments to the bust and beautyes of the Marble' -- make intelligent use of the rococo motifs of Oppenord and Meissonier. (Given these French interests, perhaps the later bequest of his fortune to found an institute for the study of modern languages is not so surprising.) The French and Italian qualities of his sculpture are most evident in the book containing both his own designs -- some sketches as well as more finished drawings -- and drawings made in Rome after works by sculptors such as Pierre Legros the younger; this, along with his library, is housed in the Taylor Institution, Oxford. While Taylor was beaten by Peter Scheemakers in his bid to secure the commission for the Shelburne monument at High Wycombe in 1751, he successfully contended with the same rival sculptor for the unusual monument to Lord Somers at North Mimms, Hertfordshire. During the 1750s his workshop continued to produce modestly sized monuments such as those to Daniel Adey at Wotton under Edge, Gloucestershire, and Edward Manning in Kingston, Surrey; many of them are recognizable from their distinctive decorative features, recalling Taylor's chimney-piece designs. 
It is uncertain when Taylor turned to architecture. He was wealthy enough to build himself a house at 66 Charing Cross after 1745. His first recorded architectural work is for interiors at 14 St James's Square (1748-50) for Peter du Cane. By 'c'.1750 he had designed 112 Bishopsgate Street for John Gore. In making the transition from sculptor to architect he must surely have made a study tour of the neo-Palladian architecture of Lord Burlington, William Kent, and Roger Morris. William Chambers later did the same when he established himself in London in 1755. As Taylor grew in stature, so does the pattern of his patronage become clear. His commissions came principally from the newly wealthy, principally bankers and directors of the East India Company, West Indian merchants and traders, lawyers and judges, and also soldiers and sailors who became wealthy through their exploits. In the course of his hard-earned career he was involved in a dozen public buildings, probably more than fifty country houses, and a very large number of town houses, in addition to groups or terraces of urban building. 
Like Chambers, Taylor drew out of his Palladian observations ideas for the making of a Taylorian style applicable to the design of an evolving sequence of villas: Harleyford, Buckinghamshire (1755); Copfold Hall, Essex (1755); Barlaston Hall, Staffordshire (1756); Asgill House, Richmond (1761); Danson Hill, Kent (1762); Chute Lodge, Wiltshire (1768); Sharpham House, Devon (1770); Mount Clare, Surrey (1771); and Thorncroft, Surrey (1772). He clearly admired Roger Morris's astylar 'cubist' villas of the 1730s, notably Combe Bank, Kent, Whitton House, Middlesex, and Westcombe House, Greenwich. Similarly, all Taylor's villas are astylar, without porticoes or orders. Volumetric movement is provided by the projection of canted or semicircular bays of varying height to the elevations. He favoured the use of rustication or vermiculation, as might a sculptor, to enliven the surrounds of windows and entrances, as at Chute Lodge, or the ground floor of Ely House, London, or later at the Guildhall, Salisbury (1788). His plans are compact, the rooms sometimes arranged around a stairwell, as in Campbell's Stourhead. In contrast to the neo-classical conformity outside and in of Chambers's villas, at first Taylor was influenced by his training under the arch-rococo Cheere, evident in the decorative trophies in the saloon at Harleyford, or the ornaments in the dining-room at Trewithen, Cornwall (1763). Among the few surviving designs by Taylor, those for chimney-pieces (Taylor Institution, Oxford) are in a rococo style commonly associated with Cheere as a sculptor. A parallel can be made with John Linnell the cabinet-maker, who was equally proficient in both the rococo and neo-classical styles. 
By the 1770s Taylor had abandoned the rococo and was competing with Adam and Chambers. The ceilings of the octagonal saloon at Chute (1768), or the hall at Purbrook, Hampshire (1770), could be mistaken for something by Chambers. There can be little doubt that Taylor admired Chambers's Gower House, Whitehall (1765). As a colleague of Chambers, Taylor would have examined his works with care. Indeed, at Danson almost identical rooms by Taylor and Chambers ('c'.1770) are located cheek by jowl. Purbrook is a departure from the cubist villa model and reverts to the compact Palladian (tower) house theme of Morris's Combe Bank. However, the hall may claim to be the first columnar Roman atrium in domestic planning. Here Taylor has discovered his true metier based on his revived ideas of ancient Roman architecture, using the ornamental vocabulary of Palladio's fourth book of the 'Quattro libri'. This is a result of the challenge to design new apartments for the Bank of England from 1765. In 1777 at Gorhambury, Hertfordshire, the hall was based upon the Pantheon via the Bank Stock Room, and its facade with a noble hexastyle Corinthian portico is Roman in spirit. If Taylor departed from the villa or enlarged villa norm at Gorhambury, so did he at the same time at Heveningham Hall, Suffolk, in an unusual palace or palazzo style that has been likened to a piece of urban architecture prefiguring John Nash's Regent's Park Terraces, and owing something to Chambers's Strand front of Somerset House. 
Urban, not the least speculative, building in London was Taylor's principal source of wealth. He was involved in more than forty houses, and probably many more, including eighteen in John Street and Theobalds Road (1759-61) and fourteen in Grafton Street (1768-75). He eschewed the use of orders, preferring plain brick facades, as did Chambers. An exception was the stone facade of the astylar Ely House, Dover Street (1772), 'a masterpiece of street architecture... a narrow front that shall at once be self-contained and yet part of the street's elevation' (Hussey, 26). The interiors of his town houses cannot be dissociated from those in the country. His early rococo trade marks are octagonal glazing, rococo plasterwork and chimney panels, serpentine inset panels to doors, and chinoiserie fret balustrades to stairs. Busts on brackets or set in roundels owe much to the decor of James Paine, who was likewise a child of the rococo, and one whom Taylor regarded with respect. Always the staircases are spatially ingenious, influenced by those by Paine and Chambers. By the mid- to later 1760s, the period of the bank designs, Taylor was drawing on the ornament of ancient Rome, but would also have been aware that that was the case with Burlington and Kent. He favoured cross-vaulted passages and corridors. The walls of the ballrooms of 4 Grafton Street ('c'.1768) and The Oaks, Epsom ('c'.1770), have a columnar articulation based on an arched recess motif and combined with circular bas-reliefs, a style that could be by no other than Taylor. 
This was the great public work of Taylor's career, as was Somerset House for Chambers. Walpole wrote of the bank rooms, that when 'M. de Calonne saw them, he pronounced them, with no exception but St Paul's the first architecture in London' ('Anecdotes of Painting', 5.194). This cannot be disputed. His first essay, the bank buildings of 1764, was outside the main older complex, on the site of the present Royal Exchange. To the 'Civil Engineer and Architect's Journal' (vol. 10, 1847, 340) it was 'a masterpiece of street architecture, not surpassed by any in Europe'. It has never received its proper modern due. The following year Taylor tackled the problem of enlarging the bank proper. He did this by creating two blocks of offices extending the accommodation to east and west, tying them altogether behind a noble elevation of porticoes and attached columns, in its total elevation looking like the later Heveningham, which it may well have influenced. The eastern block contained his Roman Rotunda, a mini-Pantheon enclosed on three sides by vaulted columnar bank or transfer offices, and entered by a noble oval vestibule. Within the west block was a Garden Court or West Quadrangle, with the Court Room on its north side and the reduced annuity office in the south-west corner. What is remarkable about the transfer offices and the reduced annuity office is their evolutionary method of top-lighting, which later provided Sir John Soane with inspiration when he, too, was appointed bank architect following Taylor's death. Were it not for the destruction of Taylor's bank halls, he would undoubtedly be judged with Chambers, Adam, and Wyatt as one of the outstanding English architects of the second half of the eighteenth century. 
In the course of Taylor's career, appointments and honours flowed in. He had been appointed surveyor to the Bank of England in 1764; in March 1769 he joined the office of works, succeeding Chambers in the post of one of the two architects of the works; in 1777 he became a member of the board of works with the title of master carpenter; in 1780 he was promoted master mason and deputy surveyor, again to Chambers; in 1788 he became surveyor to Greenwich Hospital, and he was also surveyor to Lincoln's Inn and the Foundling Hospital. In all these appointments he was exceptionally conscientious, a fact that would have pleased Chambers. His architectural practice was notable as he was the first English architect to take pupils, as opposed to apprentices. Among the better-known of these were Charles Beazley, George Byfield, S. P. Cockerell, John Nash, and William Pilkington. In 1782, following his public service as a magistrate, first in Westminster, then the City, on his election as sheriff of London he was knighted. He died at his house at 34 Spring Gardens, Westminster, on 27 September 1788 and was buried with extravagant pomp in St Martin-in-the-Fields. He was survived by his wife, Lady Taylor (1722/3-1803), about whom further details are unknown; she died on 27 December 1803. 
The study of Taylor's works has been made more difficult by the almost total loss of the paper contents of his office. His will of 4 January 1788 is extraordinary for its tiresome length of more than sixty pages. His executors were long-suffering. Of his fortune said to be more than $180,000, he left bequests totalling about $85,000, including $50,000 to his only son, Michael Angelo Taylor, who in 1792 commissioned for private distribution a set of thirty-two aquatint plates by Thomas Malton of his father's principal works. The beautiful drawings for these are in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. He generously rewarded the pupils in his office with $5000 each. Surprisingly, his most famous bequest, to the University of Oxford, 'for erecting a proper Edifice... for establishing a Foundation for the teaching & improving the European Languages' (the Taylor Institution) took the form of a codicil which he failed to sign (TNA: PRO, DEL 9/9, fol. 13). After a long dispute with Taylor's son the university eventually accepted a settlement of $65,000 in 1835. The Taylor Institution is by C. R. Cockerell, the son and pupil of S. P. Cockerell, who was himself a pupil of Sir Robert Taylor. 


@@@@@


doc= 27078


Taylor, Robert (1784-1844), deist, the sixth son of John Taylor (died 1791), ironmonger, and his wife and cousin, 'nee' Elizabeth Jasper, was born at Walnut Tree House, Edmonton, Middlesex, on 18 August 1784. Following his father's death, he was placed in the guardianship of his uncle, Edward Farmer Taylor of Chicken Hall, Bridgnorth, Shropshire. He attended the Revd Morgan Davis's boarding-school at Edmonton, and in 1801 he was articled to Samuel Partridge, then house surgeon at Birmingham General Hospital. He underwent a conversion experience in Birmingham, having heard the Calvinist preacher Edward Burn. In 1805 he walked Guy's and St Thomas's hospitals under Sir Astley Paston Cooper and Henry Cline; he was admitted an MRCS in 1807. 
The influence of Thomas Cotterill, perpetual curate of Lane End, Staffordshire, led Taylor to study for the church, and in October 1809 he matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, as Queen Margaret's foundation scholar. He came under the influence of Charles Simeon, the evangelical preacher, who, following Taylor's graduation and ordination in 1813, secured for him the position of curate-in-charge at Midhurst, Sussex. He preached his first sermon on the day of his ordination to the diaconate, 14 March 1813, at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, London. Ordained priest in October, he remained at Midhurst until the summer of 1818, holding also the neighbouring perpetual curacy of Easebourne. A Midhurst tradesman gave him the use of his library, and, from reading Gibbon, Paine, and Voltaire, sceptical doubts were raised in Taylor's mind. He announced his conversion to deism in January 1818, and resigned his curacy the following July after preaching a contentious sermon on Jonah. He recanted in December, placing an advertisement in 'The Times' on 11 December in which he ascribed his lapse to a mental aberration. He was invited by George Gaskin, rector of Stoke Newington, to officiate at Edmonton, Tottenham, and Newington, but his views (which had not, in fact, changed) made it difficult for him to obtain preferment until a friend gave him the curacy of Yardley, near Birmingham, where he hoped to rehabilitate his clerical reputation. But the bishop of Worcester insisted on his dismissal, and Taylor, under notice to quit, openly preached deism in the parish church. 
Taylor's brothers offered him a monthly allowance on condition that he leave England. He went to the Isle of Man; when his allowance was stopped, he wrote for local newspapers. An article justifying suicide brought him before the bishop, George Murray. Making off to Whitehaven, he got $10 from his old master, Partridge, and sailed for Dublin, where he became assistant master in Jones's school in Nutgrove; he also assisted the rector of Rathfarnham, co. Dublin, until his presence was discovered by Archbishop Magee, and he was again dismissed. He began a series of attacks on the church under the title 'The Clerical Review', and was noticed by Archibald Hamilton Rowan and Henry Augustus Dillon-Lee, thirteenth Viscount Dillon, under whose auspices he formed in 1824 the Society of Universal Benevolence. He hired the Fishamble Street theatre for Sunday morning lectures, but a riot at the second lecture (28 March 1824) closed the experiment. 
Having returned to London, Taylor drew up a petition for permission to preach 'natural religion' which was presented to the House of Commons by Joseph Hume on 18 June. He taught classics, formed a Christian Evidence Society, and gave lectures, followed by discussions, at various public rooms. In the summer of 1826 he hired an old independent chapel at Founders' Hall, Lothbury, and conducted (from 30 July) Sunday morning services with a liturgy, unusual for advocating a sitting position during prayer, and more remarkable for directing that no word or phrase was ever to be altered, added, or omitted. Richard Carlile, the radical publisher, whose attention had originally been drawn by Taylor's activities in Dublin, and who was otherwise sympathetic to Taylor, commented that 'Such trash as this new liturgy is not instructive, is hypocritical... and is a disgrace to the pretensions of Mr Taylor and his flock' (Royle, 'Radical Politics'). His preaching, none the less, drew large congregations, and their subscriptions enabled him to purchase Salters' Hall Chapel, Cannon Street, London. On 1 January 1827 it was reopened by Taylor as his Areopagus. In the same month he was arrested and indicted for blasphemy. He was sued simultaneously for the recovery of $100, a bill he had accepted from a Bristol man named May, and was imprisoned for debt. He went through the bankruptcy court to obtain his release, and the Salters' Hall Chapel was resold at a loss. 
Taylor was tried in full canonicals for blasphemy on 24 October 1827 before Charles Abbott, first Lord Tenterden, and found guilty. (Other charges, of conspiracy to overthrow the Christian religion, were dropped.) He was sentenced to a year's imprisonment in Oakham gaol and to find securities (amounting to $1000 in all) for good behaviour for five years. Richard Carlile raised a subscription for him and published a weekly letter from Taylor in his paper, 'The Lion'. In Oakham gaol Taylor wrote his 'Syntagma of the Evidences of the Christian Religion' (1828) and 'The Diegesis' (1829), his two most important works. On his release in February 1829 he lectured occasionally at Carlile's shop in Fleet Street, and at the Universalist Chapel, Windmill Street, Finsbury Square. In May he and Carlile set out on an 'infidel mission' to the midlands and north, challenging ministers to debate. They began their campaign in Cambridge, where Taylor fastened the challenge to the door of the divinity schools. No debate was forthcoming, and the two men moved on through Nottingham to Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Cheshire before returning to London. 
In May 1830 Taylor took the Rotunda, Blackfriars Road, London, and preached in episcopal garb to large audiences. His services were theatrical affairs, and his sermons full of 'coarse remarks' and 'excremental jokes', which mocked through imitation the rites of the Anglican church: in 1834 he was reported to have drunk gin and water, 'which he says is as good as the blood of Jesus Christ' (McCalman, 203). Two sermons on the devil (6 and 13 June) gained him the title of the Devil's Chaplain from Henry Hunt; the Rotunda became known as the Devil's Pulpit. The latter name was seized on by Taylor for the serial publication of his sermons in 1831. He was tried at the Surrey sessions in July 1831 for preaching blasphemy the previous Easter, found guilty, and sentenced to two years' imprisonment in Horsemonger Lane gaol, a fine of $200, and recognizances for good behaviour as before. Released from prison in 1833, Taylor retired from public view, although he again held infidel services at Theobold's Road Chapel in 1834. In 1833 he married an elderly woman of some property; the marriage was a happy one, but it exposed Taylor to an action for breach of promise of marriage on the part of Georgiana Richards, caretaker at the Rotunda, to whom the jury awarded damages of $250. To escape paying, Taylor and his wife fled to France, where he practised as a surgeon at Tours until his death there on 5 June 1844. 

'The Diegesis', a critical examination of the origins of Christianity through comparative mythology and philology, in which Christianity was expounded as a scheme of solar myths, was described in the nineteenth century as 'ill-arranged writings... of no original or scientific value' ('DNB'); a twentieth-century re-evaluation called it 'a major contribution to popular English freethought' (Royle, 'BDMBR', 469). Taylor's intellectual influence on Carlile was perhaps his most lasting contribution to freethought. 


@@@@@


doc= 27079


Taylor, Rowland (d. 1555), clergyman and protestant martyr, was born at Rothbury, Northumberland. Nothing is known of his parents or early years. He studied civil law at Cambridge, possibly at Pembroke College, where he proceeded to the degree of BCL in 1530 and DCL in 1534. He was principal of Borden Hostel, a hostel for law students, from 1531 until 1538, and also gave poorly attended lectures on Justinian's 'Institutes'. He was ordained exorcist and acolyte in 1528, but went no further until 1539, serving instead as an official of the archdeacon of Ely. In 1554 he said that he and his wife, Margaret (whose surname is unknown), had married in John Tyndale's London residence. W. H. Frere wrote that this had occurred twenty-nine years earlier, but this is inconceivable, since in 1525 Taylor would have been a nineteen-year-old undergraduate. The marriage probably took place after 1534, which would explain Taylor's move to Borden Hostel instead of into a fellowship. The Taylors had nine children. Susan, George, Ellen, Robert, and Zachary predeceased him, and there were at least three others, Thomas, Mary, and Anne. The ninth may have been the orphan Elizabeth, whom Foxe reports they adopted. 
In a letter to John Foxe, William Turner claimed to have been instrumental in Taylor's conversion to 'the evangelical doctrine' at Cambridge (Craig, 'Marginalia', 411). Hugh Latimer's sermons, which Turner persuaded Taylor to attend, were particularly influential, and Taylor soon attached himself to Latimer. During Latimer's brief term as bishop of Worcester, Taylor was his commissary-general and one of his chaplains. All of Latimer's chaplains preached in the diocese as part of his aggressive campaign to blanket it with reformist preaching. During a preaching tour in 1538 Taylor preached in Kidderminster, where a disgruntled tailor called his effort 'a folysshe sermonde of the new lernynge' and wished that the horse from which he preached 'had wynsyd and broken his necke' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/134, fols. 298'r'-300'r'). In March 1539 Latimer collated him to the parish of Hanbury, which he retained until his death, although he never served it personally. In the same year he was ordained deacon and admitted to St Swithin's in Worcester, with a dispensation for pluralism, which he held until 1544. After Latimer's resignation in July 1539 Taylor moved into Cranmer's service as a chaplain, and was ultimately ordained priest. In 1543 he investigated the prebendaries' plot, and in April 1544 Cranmer presented him to Hadleigh in Suffolk. 
Foxe depicts Taylor as the ideal pastor in Hadleigh. Until recently historians accepted that account. However, it is now clear that Hadleigh was served by curates, and Taylor was not active in borough affairs. His denunciation of 'nobl ritch gentlemens' as 'prowd, enviowis, slothfull, covetowis, glotenewis, letcherus, carnall and worldly, bestly, epycuyrs, oppressors, diffeyners, receyvers, tyrandes, hypochrytes, idolatars' (Craig, 'Marginalia', 415) may indicate his feelings about some of Hadleigh's merchants, and suggests tense relations with them. Taylor's many duties and appointments often kept him from Hadleigh. He preached in several dioceses for the 1547 royal visitation and, at the lord mayor's request, in London at Whitsuntide 1548. He was made a canon of Rochester Cathedral in August 1547, archdeacon of Bury St Edmunds in May 1548, one of the six preachers of Canterbury and a commissioner to reform the ecclesiastical laws in 1551, and archdeacon of Cornwall in May 1552. He was also employed in the 'sede vacante' administration of Norwich and Worcester in the early 1550s. In general Taylor served as Cranmer's troubleshooter and it is as that, not as Foxe's ideal pastor, that he is best regarded. 
Taylor was implicated in Northumberland's plot to secure the throne for Lady Jane Grey, and the council ordered his arrest on 25 July 1553. He was released on 9 November, but his reformist views and contempt for the Roman church, which he called 'the purpld spirituall hore, the gowldin giltd harrand drab' (Craig, 'Marginalia', 415-16), made a subsequent arrest inevitable. He refused to flee, writing later that ''verbum Dei' made us goo to London' (ibid., 414) when the council ordered his arrest on 26 March 1554. He was held in the king's bench prison for several months, during which time Gardiner examined him at St Mary Overie, Southwark. These examinations were dominated by spirited but inconclusive debates over transubstantiation and clerical celibacy. His views also appear in his prison letters, in which he rejected transubstantiation, affirmed that the pope was Antichrist and the 'Bible' was sufficient in all matters of doctrine and salvation, and supported the oath of supremacy. Writing to his wife he defended justification by faith, attacked the mass as 'spiritual whoredom', and denounced transubstantiation for contradicting scripture and the creed on the location of Christ's body and for making Christ a 'cake-god' (Brown, 87-92). 
Taylor once wrote in his 'bible' that 'preachars must be bowld and not mylk mowthed' (Craig, 'Marginalia', 420) and he was certainly that. But although he had a reputation for learning Taylor did not publish. His views are known from accounts of his examinations (BL, Harleian MS 590, fols. 64'r'-68'r'), marginalia in a Latin 'Bible' that he annotated from the late 1540s until his death, and a handful of letters -- one to Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer in his own hand (BL, Add. MS 19400, fol. 29) and copies of four written from prison (published by Bickersteth in 1837). He was also probably the author of the anonymous letter from 'the faithfull in Suffolke' to Nicholas Shaxton following Shaxton's 1546 recantation (Crowley). No contemporary paintings or drawings survive, but a favourable eyewitness to his examinations described Taylor as 'a man of comely personage, and good stature, his color good, his berd grate and somewhat short cut' (BL, Harleian MS 590, fol. 64'r'). 
On 22 January 1555 Taylor was condemned to death, and on 4 February was degraded by Bonner. He was executed on 9 February on Aldham Common, north of Hadleigh. Foxe's vivid description of Taylor's progress to his execution includes his humorous remarks about the worms of Hadleigh churchyard being cheated of the opportunity to feast on his large carcass. He also distributed alms to the local poor. Before his death many lamented while others treated him roughly. Foxe's account suggests that Taylor was killed by a blow to the head, after which his body was burnt. The place is marked by a rough-hewn stone bearing the inscription '1555 D. Tayler in defending that was good at this plas left his blode' (Brown, 1), as well as by an obelisk erected by public subscription in 1819. 


@@@@@


doc= 27080


Taylor, Samuel (1748/9-1811), stenographer and angler, was born probably at or near Shrewsbury, Shropshire. In his treatise 'Angling in All its Branches, Reduced to a Complete Science' (1800), Taylor stated that the Severn, particularly the Terne brook, was the scene of his earliest fishing exploits. When a boy he was permitted by the owner of those waters 'to angle in any part of it, where I have often taken so many of these noble 'Perch', that I have gone a mile or two round rather than pass by that gentleman's hall, as if conscious that I had made too shameful a slaughter. ('Angling', 35)' Taylor was apparently married and had two children. Nothing else is known of his life until late 1781 when, as the originator and teacher of a shorthand system more simplified and practical than those of his predecessors, he launched an extensive teaching tour of England, Scotland, and Ireland, which ended in the summer of 1784. Taylor taught his then unpublished system at Edinburgh, Aberdeen, and at least seven other cities and towns in Scotland. Among the testimonials to the excellence of his method and his teaching was that of the poet James Beattie, then professor of moral philosophy and logic at Marischal College, Aberdeen, to whose son Taylor gave six lessons for the fee of 1 guinea and 1 shilling. Taylor spent about a year in Ireland, and recorded on 29 October 1783 a speech in the Irish parliament by John Foster. 
Taylor's system, as modified and refined during the course of his tour, was published on 1 January 1786 as 'An Essay Intended to Establish a Standard for an Universal System of Stenography, or Short Hand Writing', its author being described as 'many years professor, & teacher of the science at Oxford, & the universities of Scotland & Ireland'. Dedicated to Frederick, Lord North, chancellor of the University of Oxford, the work had 312 subscribers, including Sir Thomas Dundas, to whom 'Angling' was later dedicated. 
Taylor's system, which was indebted to William Williamson's 'Stenography' (1775), was arguably the best shorthand system before that of Sir Isaac Pitman, whose early work was based on Taylor's. Taylor's system presented a simplified alphabet that admitted of less ambiguity when characters were joined, indication of vowels only when sounded in initial or final position, use of only three terminations, no arbitraries, and a high degree of legibility. 
Taylor did more than any of his predecessors to establish the art and use of shorthand in Great Britain, and his influence extended quickly throughout Europe. A petition promoting the adoption of Taylor's system was introduced in the Assemblee Nationale Legislative on 25 June 1792. His system was adapted and translated into French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, German, Swedish, and Hungarian. Adapted and improved in English by some forty authors, most notably William Harding, George Odell, and John Henry Cooke, it remained in use throughout the nineteenth century. 
In 1800 'Taylor notarius' yielded the field to 'Taylor piscator' (Wright, 1.34) with the publication of 'Angling in All its Branches'. Although some confusion arose in the nineteenth century concerning the authorship of this work, and it was often assigned to another writer of the same name (including in the British Library catalogue), evidence such as the wording of the dedication and other stylistic similarities indicates that Taylor wrote both on stenography and on angling (see A. T. Wright). 'Angling in All its Branches' represented the culmination of Taylor's more than forty years' experience as an angler: the work lists alphabetically the counties of Great Britain and describes the fishing waters of each, an arrangement borrowed by the Revd William Barker Daniel in his popular 'Rural Sports' (2 vols., 1801-2). It also describes various fish, and discusses the merits of different types of bait and artificial flies, with instructions for their creation and use. 
Allowing even for the rhetorical conventions of the time, Taylor's works suggest a man deferential to patrons and sometimes patronizing to others. Taylor died on or about 4 August 1811 at his home in Palace Street, Pimlico, London, and was buried on 10 August 1811 in St Margaret's Chapel yard, Westminster. His obituary ('Sun', 2 Sept 1811) claims he was an eccentric, secretive man of 'strange and rough' manners, who none the less held a high reputation as a teacher. 


@@@@@


doc= 27081


Taylor, Simon (1742-1772/1796), botanical artist, was born in October 1742 and trained in the drawing-school of William Shipley in London. About 1760 he was engaged by Lord Bute to paint the rare plants in the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew. John Ellis wrote to Carl Linnaeus on 28 December 1770: 'We have a young man, one Taylor, who draws all the rare plants of Kew Garden for Lord Bute; he does it tolerably well: I shall employ him very soon' ('Correspondence of Linnaeus', 1, 1821, 255). He was also employed by the physician and botanist John Fothergill. He died in 1772 (or possibly 1796). After Lord Bute's death in 1792, a large collection of paintings of plants on vellum by Taylor was sold by auction in 1794. The paintings he executed for Fothergill were sold on Fothergill's death in 1780 to Catherine the Great, empress of Russia, for $2000, not a high price considering that Taylor usually charged 3 guineas for each of his paintings. Examples of his work are in the British Museum, London, and the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew. 


@@@@@


doc= 27082


Susanna Taylor (1755-1823), born in Norwich on 29 March 1755, was the daughter of John Cook and Aramathea Maria Phillips. She was a woman of much force of character, who shared the liberal opinions of her husband, and is said to have danced 'round the tree of liberty at Norwich on the receipt of news of the taking of the Bastille'. Sir James Mackintosh corresponded with her on many subjects, and Anna Letitia Barbauld was her devoted friend, speaking of her 'strong sense, her feeling, her energy, her principle, her patriot feelings, her piety, rational, yet ardent' as marking 'a character of no uncommon sort' ('Monthly Repository', 20, 1825, 487). Her other friends included Sir James Edward Smith, Henry Crabb Robinson, John Alderson, Amelia Opie, William Enfield, Frank Sayers, William Taylor (who was no relation), Basil Montagu, the Gurneys of Earlham, and the Sewards. A political element was added to her literary gatherings by Sir Thomas Beevor, Lord Albemarle, and Thomas William Coke (afterwards earl of Leicester), member for Norfolk (1790-1818). Her intimate friends called her Madame Roland, from the resemblance she bore to the French champion of liberty. She also contributed essays and verse to the budget read at periodic meetings of the Taylor and Martineau families, for which many of her husband's verses were composed. 


@@@@@


doc= 27083


Taylor, Thomas (1576-1632), Church of England clergyman, was born at Richmond, Yorkshire, where, according to the account of his life in the 1653 edition of his works, his father was the recorder; both his parents were zealous supporters of the puritan cause. In 1592 he matriculated from Christ's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1595, proceeded MA in 1598, and was a fellow from 1599 to 1604 and Wentworth Hebrew lecturer from 1601 to 1604. For a time he was probably chaplain to William, Lord Russell of Thornhaugh, to whom in 1606 he dedicated his edition of William Perkins's 'Exposition upon... Jude'. Taylor was a prominent member of the group of Perkins's disciples who came to embody the mainstream of moderate puritan divinity in early Stuart Britain. He had entered the pulpit at the age of twenty-one and preached at Paul's Cross before Elizabeth I and James I, but he soon clashed with the emerging anti-Calvinist wing of churchman. At the university church in Cambridge he sharply attacked Archbishop Bancroft's campaign against puritan ministers. Samuel Harsnett, conducting Bancroft's metropolitan visitation in 1608, silenced Taylor and threatened him with degradation. 
Taylor left Cambridge, but it is not clear what benefices, if any, he held for the next seventeen years. By 1612 he was preaching at Watford, Hertfordshire, and he also preached frequently at Reading, where from 1616 his younger brother Theophilus was pastor at St Laurence's, and where Taylor himself directed a puritan seminary, 'a little nursery of young Preachers' ('Life', sig. B2'v'). He was evidently not without patrons and used what he called his 'silent time' for writing, notably his massive 'A Commentarie upon... Titus' (1612), published in a second, enlarged edition in 1619. His 'Davids Learning' (1617) was dedicated to William Knollys, Viscount Wallingford, then master of the court of wards. The dedication, in which Taylor refers to himself as 'one who you pleased to favour as a soules Physician' (sig. A1'r'), reads like an effort to urge Wallingford back to the protestant cause upheld by his father, the Elizabethan courtier Sir Francis Knollys. Taylor's 'Christ's Combat' (1618) was dedicated to the courtier's younger son and namesake. 
At some point Taylor served as chaplain to Edward Conway, secretary of state from 1623 and later first Viscount Conway. Sharing Conway's anti-Spanish outlook, Taylor spoke out firmly against James I's plans for a Spanish marriage for his heir. Reminding his readers in 'A Mappe of Rome' (1620) of 'how insatiable [Rome] hath alwaies been... of English Blood', he could not 'thinke we can be so inconsiderate as to dreame of any toleration' for English Catholics (p. 2). In two sermons, published in 1624 with a bold preface to MPs then in session, he roundly denounced anyone who proposed allying England and Spain, reconciling protestants and Roman Catholics, or advocating moderation towards Catholics anywhere. Their religion consisted of 'filthy and formall Idolatry', and he warned that 'whosoever communicates in the sinne of this Westerne Babel' would certainly 'drinke of the wine-presse of the wrath of God' ('Two Sermons', 1624, sigs. E3'r', E4'r'). 
In 1625 Taylor accepted a call made on 22 January to be lecturer and curate at St Mary Aldermanbury, London, one of the few city parishes in which the vestry owned the advowson and a rare but potent model 'of a congregational polity within the Established Church' (Seaver, 138). His parishioners there included Conway's son-in-law, Sir Robert Harley, to whom Taylor dedicated his 1630 treatise, 'The Progresse of Saints'. As in Reading, he kept a puritan seminary, and he continued to be active in the protestant cause. In 1627 Taylor joined William Gouge, Richard Sibbes, and John Davenport in an effort to raise funds to relieve the Palatinate's Calvinist preachers. In 1628 they were reprimanded by the court of high commission and the new bishop of London, William Laud, for this meddling in affairs of state. However, the same year efforts by the anti-Calvinist Bishop Matthew Wren of Ely to block the grant of Taylor's Cambridge DD were defeated, probably with help from Conway. 
Although in his many published works Taylor was indeed 'an iron pillar and a brazen wall against Popery and Arminianisme' ('Life', sig. B3'r'), his opposition to separatism and antinomianism was no less vigorous. Admitting that the Church of England was not 'free from all blemish and spotte', he nevertheless insisted that whoever doubted that 'in our assemblies wee have God present teaching his people' is 'as blinde as a Mole, and palpably deluded' (T. Taylor, 'The Beawties of Beth-El', 1609, 80-81). His much admired 'Regula vitae' (1635) opposed 'our new audacious Antinomists, and Libertines, and Familists' because he found some members of his own flock 'looking that way' (sigs. A4'v'-A5'r'). Wood called Taylor 'an illuminated doctor' for his skill at 'opening an allegory' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 1.457): his 'Christ Revealed' (1635) -- republished in 1653 as 'Moses and Aaron' -- was an early manual of typology that influenced many English and North American theologians in the seventeenth century. Taylor was liberal with charitable gifts 'without sounding of the Trumpet' ('True relation', sig. A4'r'); in 1629 he had given $15 to the aldermen and burgesses of his birthplace 'to be laid out yearly in coals for the use of the poor people' (C. Clarkson, 'The History of Richmond', 1814, 208). His will, made on 8 February 1631 when he was in good health, made careful provision for his wife, Anne, for his sons, Francis and Samuel, for his four daughters, for several siblings, and for the poor of St Mary Aldermanbury. He died of pleurisy in 1632 (his will was proved by his widow on 15 May) but went to his grave 'much cheered in his spirits for the great successes' of Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden against the Habsburgs ('Life', sig. B3'v'). He was buried at St Mary Aldermanbury after a funeral sermon preached by William Jemmat, Taylor's former assistant at Reading and the editor of several of his works, including 'Christ's Victorie over the Dragon' (1633) and 'Christ Revealed, or, The Old Testament Explained' (1635). In 1653 Edmund Calamy and eleven other leading puritan ministers brought out the first of several collections of Taylor's works (including previously unpublished ones), noting that 'the iniquity of the former times' had denied 'such births... a kindly delivery' (ibid., sig. B1'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 27084


Taylor, Thomas (1617/18-1682), Quaker minister and writer, was born at Carlton near Skipton in Craven, on the borders of Yorkshire and Westmorland, probably the son of Thomas Taylor of Ravenstonedale, Westmorland. Like his brother Christopher Taylor he was educated at Oxford and became a clergyman before eventually moving to Quakerism. He was licensed to preach and became lecturer at Richmond, Yorkshire, after which he was curate of the chapel of Preston Patrick in Westmorland, and preached in neighbouring places. A strong puritan, he moved well beyond godly orthodoxy and refused to baptize his own children, and in 1650 held a conference or disputation on baptism with three neighbouring ministers in Kendal church. He also refused to receive maintenance from tithes and gradually came to minister to separatists at Preston Patrick, taking only what they were willing to provide. The chapel there became the focus of a Seeker community. 
In 1652 Taylor went at Judge Fell's invitation to meet George Fox at Swarthmoor Hall. In reply to Fox's questioning he owned that he had never been called to preach as the apostles had been. Fox noted in his journal that Taylor was convinced about this time and accompanied him into Westmorland, where at Crosscrake chapel he was moved to speak of his state prior to conversion. Although he had a wife, Elizabeth (died 1682), and five or six children, Taylor resigned his benefice and 'travelled up and down in many parts of England, preaching the word of the Lord, and his gospel freely' (Fox, 'Testimony'). His itinerant work took him to south Lancashire, the midlands, and Yorkshire. Once when returning to Richmond: 'he was made to go there, and turn his back to the priest, and put his hands to both his ears and stop them, as a sign, how God had stopped his ears unto their sacrifice, and service, and offering. (ibid.)' In September 1653 Taylor was taken prisoner at Appleby for speaking in the church. He was released in 1655 but was again in Appleby gaol, possibly in 1656 (though this may well be confused with an earlier or later imprisonment) and certainly from August 1657 to August 1658 after he refused to pay the fine of 5 marks imposed on him for abusing Francis Higginson, the fiercely anti-Quaker vicar of Kirkby Stephen, when the latter was preaching at Appleby. Taylor had shouted at him, 'Come down, lyar, for thou speakes contrary to the doctrin of Christ, for Christ hath said, sweare not at all' (Raine, 79). He was also imprisoned at York, Richmond, Leicester, Worcester, and Coventry. At the Stafford assizes in 1662 he incurred a sentence of 'praemunire' for refusing to swear the oaths of allegiance, and was imprisoned for more than ten years. His wife hired a house nearby where he was sometimes allowed to go to be with his family. He was also permitted to write books and teach children, but was not released until the general pardon granted by Charles II in March 1672. In 1679 he was fined $20 for preaching to two or three friends in a house in Keele and was again imprisoned in Stafford gaol. He died from a 'distemper' at Stafford on 18 March 1682 in his sixty-fifth year; his wife, Elizabeth, died the following December. He was buried in Stafford on 21 March. 
Taylor was a man of some learning and a great admirer of Jakob Boehme. He wrote prolifically and his collected works, entitled 'Truth's Innocency and Simplicity' (1697), contains numerous addresses, warnings, and exhortations. Many of these are short testimonies against sports and amusements such as bear- and bull-baiting, maypoles, bells, bonfires, and lotteries, which Taylor believed to be cruel, or a waste of valuable time, and heathen in origin. Some of his longer tracts are also of interest, such as 'Ignorance and Error Refuted' (1662) which is an answer to the arguments of the ejected minister of Wolverhampton, John Reynolds, and outlines the Quaker position on various issues, for example the sufficiency of the inner light and the role of scripture in Friends' thought. He attacked Richard Baxter's 'The Cure of Church-Divisions', describing the author as 'a Man who (through a shew of Learning and Religion) had gotten in Oliver Cromwell's Days, a great Esteem in the Minds of the Ignorantly zealous professors of Religion in this Nation' (Taylor, 'Truth's Innocency', 201). Taylor in turn drew upon himself the fire of Lodowick Muggleton, who both attacked him in print and pronounced a curse upon him for the critical marginalia he had written in a Muggletonian book which he had been lent by a convert from Quakerism. 
Taylor's collected works contain numerous valuable testimonies to his life, including those from his son Thomas and daughter Hannah, and that from his brother Christopher, who wrote of him, 'the course of his life was eminently exemplary, so grave, tender and humble he was, and self-denying' (C. Taylor, 'Testimony'). A further testimony, from Robert Barrow, describes Thomas Taylor as 'comely... fair and ruddy' (Barrow, 'Testimony'). 


@@@@@


doc= 27085


Taylor, Thomas (1738-1816), Methodist preacher, son of Thomas Taylor, a tanner, was born on 11 November 1738 at Rothwell, Yorkshire, and raised as a Presbyterian. His parents died before he was six years old, and he proved careless and headstrong as a youth. At seventeen he was impressed by George Whitefield's preaching, but soon reverted to his old lifestyle. Three years later he was 'convinced of sin', joined the Methodists, and began to preach. Wesley met him at Birstall in 1761 and invited him to attend that year's conference in London, where he was appointed the first itinerant preacher of the connexion in Wales. During his fifty-five years as a travelling preacher he saw hard service, with privations and persecution in Wales, England, Ireland, and Scotland (where he pioneered Methodist work in Glasgow). He was one of the inner circle of preachers on whom Wesley relied in the last decade of his life. He was president of the conference in 1796, when Alexander Kilham, founder of the Methodist New Connexion, was expelled from the society, and again in 1809. 
In 1767 Taylor had married, at Chester, Nancy, the granddaughter of a Huguenot refugee. James Everett described him as: 'Large in person; ordinary features. Good understanding; a useful preacher; matter, manner, and style homely, though not coarse... voice a little husky, and natural temper short and peevish, but subdued by divine grace... with few drawbacks, a fine specimen of the old school. (Everett, 1.345-6)' A man of little formal education, Taylor had by hard study mastered Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. He published numerous sermons, controversial tracts, including 'An Answer to Paine's 'Age of Reason'' (1796), and a detailed 'History of the Waldenses and Albigenses' (1793). He died at Birch House, near Bolton, Lancashire, on 13 October 1816. His desire, expressed in his last sermon shortly before his death, 'to die, like an old soldier, sword in hand', was granted, and James Montgomery's poem ('The Christian Soldier's Death') conveys his indomitable spirit: '
Servant of God! well done, 

Rest from thy lov'd employ. 
('Methodist Magazine', 474)' 



@@@@@


doc= 27086


Taylor, Thomas (1758-1835), philosopher and translator, was born on 15 May 1758 near Bunhill Fields, London, the son of Joseph Taylor, staymaker, of Round Court, St Martin's-le-Grand; details of his mother are unknown. He was sickly as a child and spent some years in Staffordshire, but on 10 April 1767 he was admitted to St Paul's School, his parents intending him for the dissenting ministry. There he evinced an aptitude for philosophical studies, and began his acquaintance with classical languages, but his dissatisfaction with the teaching at the school, together with his disinclination for the Christian ministry, led to his withdrawal from the school after a few years. At about this time he fell in love with Mary Morton (died 1809), whom he later married. During this period at home he began his study of mathematics. When he was fifteen Taylor was sent to work for an uncle at the dockyard at Sheerness, which he left after three years. The next two years were spent as a pupil of Mr Worthington of Salters' Hall meeting-house, where he revived his knowledge of Greek and Latin, while at the same time paying court to his future wife, and deepening his knowledge of mathematics. The time came for him to go to the University of Aberdeen, but the discovery by their parents of his precipitate marriage to Mary Morton required him to seek employment, first as a boarding-school usher, and later as a bank clerk at Lubbock's Bank. At that time they moved south of the Thames to 9 Manor Place, Walworth. 
During this period Taylor in his spare moments embarked on his study of philosophy, beginning with Aristotle and then moving to Plato, both of whom he studied in the original, seeking guidance from ancient commentaries, mainly of Neoplatonic inspiration. After six years as a bank clerk Taylor sought escape by drawing on his studies to devise a perpetual lamp. The demonstration at the Freemasons' Tavern was disastrous, but brought him to the attention of potential patrons and thus enabled him to devote his time to the study of ancient philosophy. His next public enterprise was a series of twelve lectures on Platonic philosophy at the house of the sculptor John Flaxman. In Flaxman's circle he may very well have met William Blake, though there is no positive evidence of their personal acquaintance. In 1787 he began to publish translations of works of ancient philosophy, beginning with the earliest of Plotinus's 'Enneads' (i.6), on the 'beautiful', and the 'Orphic hymns', this latter with a lengthy preface on the life and theology of Orpheus. Various of these translations were subsidized by patrons, for instance his translation of Aristotle's 'Metaphysics' (1801) by the brothers William and George Meredith. However, his most notable early patron was Charles Howard, eleventh duke of Norfolk, who made it possible for Taylor to publish the first English translation of the complete works of Plato (1804), revising and completing the work begun by Floyer Sydenham (1710-1787), whom he had known in his latter years. 
In 1797 Taylor obtained the post of assistant secretary to the Society of Arts, which he resigned in 1806 to devote himself more completely to translation. While working on his translation of Plato, Taylor visited Oxford, where he was graciously received, though he felt himself the object of condescension on the part of the dons and was depressed by the 'monkish gloom' and 'black melancholy' of the university (letter dated 20 June 1802, Raine, 20n.). These translations were followed by many others, including the works of the later Neoplatonists, such as Plotinus, his disciple Porphyry, Iamblichus, Julian the Apostate, Synesius the Christian bishop, but especially Proclus, as well as the religious sources of their philosophy, for example, the Chaldaean oracles. 
Taylor's approach to this philosophy was determined by his initial encounter with it, through reading Aristotle and Plato together with the Neoplatonic commentaries, which encouraged an understanding of the essential unity of Aristotle and Plato, provided by their Neoplatonic interpretation. His approach then flew in the face of what understanding there was of classical philosophy; even someone like Samuel Taylor Coleridge, more sympathetic than most to later Neoplatonism, was profoundly convinced of the fundamental contrast between Plato and Aristotle. Taylor's translations were received with almost uniform derision, which focused on his awkward English and his evident enthusiasm for late Neoplatonism (not least its defence of paganism). Even Coleridge said that with Taylor 'difficult Greek is transmuted into incomprehensible English' ('Notebooks', n. 1740), and when Stephen MacKenna undertook his acclaimed translation of Plotinus's 'Enneads' he confessed 'for reasons mainly literary, that the work of this devoted pioneer would not be helpful' (Plotinus, 1.114). It was to be many years before Taylor's enthusiasm for later Neoplatonism would find any kind of echo in the world of scholarship. 
Taylor was also lampooned as 'the modern Platonist' in Isaac Disraeli's novel 'Vaurien' (1797), and is perhaps the model for Sipsop the Pythagorean in Blake's 'An Island in the Moon'; in both cases fun is made of his fondness for animals, especially cats. (An earlier publication had been his 'Vindication of the Rights of Brutes' (1792), written in response to Mary Wollstonecraft's 'Vindication... of Men' (1790), in which he asserted the rationality of animals.) Other nicknames included the Platonist, and the (English) Pagan. It was said of Taylor that there was 'nothing remarkable in his exterior', and that he was of 'middle size [...] regular, open and benevolent' of countenance (Welsh, 133). However, his surviving portrait, by Sir Thomas Lawrence, with his large eyes and thick eyebrows, makes him look rather hawkish. 
It was through Taylor's translations that the Romantic poets had access to Platonism: they are probably one of the sources of Blake's mythology, as well as his repudiation of the natural science of Bacon and Newton, and his late tempera painting 'The Arlington Court Picture' was almost certainly inspired by Taylor's translation of Porphyry's 'On the Cave of the Nymphs'; there is no doubt that Coleridge's acquaintance with Proclus was assisted by Taylor's translation and commentary, though Coleridge's appreciation of Taylor is invariably laced with acid criticism. Taylor's immediate influence in England was short-lived; only at the end of the century did those with an enthusiasm for ancient Gnosticism, such as G. R. S. Mead, revive his memory. His fate in America was very different. R. W. Emerson read Taylor's translations enthusiastically, and Taylor's influence was felt among Emerson's disciples, adepts of 'transcendental philosophy' such as Amos Bronson Alcott, William T. Harris, Thomas M. Johnson, Hiram K. Jones, and Thomas Wentworth Higginson, though that influence had waned by the end of the century. Emily Dickinson, who was a friend of Higginson, therefore probably owed her Platonism ultimately to Thomas Taylor. 
Taylor's marriage to his childhood sweetheart ended with her death on 1 April 1809; they had two daughters and four sons, the youngest of whom was called Thomas Proclus. Taylor married again, and had more children; his second wife died on 23 April 1823. He died of a disease of the bladder at Walworth on 1 November 1835, and was buried on 6 November in the graveyard of St Mary's, Newington Butts, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 27087


Taylor, Thomas (1786-1848), botanist and physician, was born on 10 May 1786 in a boat on the Ganges River in India, the eldest in the family of at least six children of Joseph Irwin Taylor (1765-1811), a wealthy major in the Bengal artillery of the East India Company, and his wife, an Indian woman known as Poor Begum. The Taylor family, freethinking Unitarians, had settled near Kenmare in co. Kerry in 1650 and Taylor's grandfather had inherited the townland of Dunkerron. About 1793 Taylor was sent back to Ireland for schooling -- he attended the French School at Cork. He proceeded to Trinity College, Dublin, graduating BA, in 1807, MB, and MD in 1814. He married his cousin Harriet, daughter of Colonel Thomas Taylor, on 6 September 1809. She had also been born in India and educated in Ireland; they later had two sons and a daughter. 
Taylor remained in Dublin after his graduation; he was physician-in-ordinary to Sir Patrick Dun's Hospital until 1820, when he was appointed professor of natural history in the Royal Cork Scientific Institution. In 1830 he retired to the family property at Dunkerron where he lived in increasingly declining circumstances as physician, magistrate, and farmer. During the 1840s he was physician to the union workhouse at Kenmare until he contracted the 'fever' and died at his home on 4 February 1848. He was buried in the protestant cemetery at Kenmare. 
Taylor was a member of the Royal Irish Academy, and became a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1813. His chief interests were botanical, especially bryophytes (both mosses and liverworts) and lichens, on which he published thirty-four papers or books, some of which were collaborative works with either William Jackson Hooker or Joseph Dalton Hooker. His major works included 'Muscologia Britannica' (with W. J. Hooker) in 1818; 'Lichenes' in Mackay's 'Flora Hibernica' of 1836 (the first major Irish lichen flora); and significant contributions, with J. D. Hooker, on southern hemisphere hepatics and lichens collected by Hooker on his Antarctic voyage of 1839-43. Taylor's herbarium, purchased in 1849 by the wealthy Bostonian, John Amory Lovell, passed to the Boston Society of Natural History, and then to the Farlow Herbarium of Cryptogamic Botany at Harvard. Taylor, either alone or in collaboration with the Hookers described more than 800 new cryptogamic species. His name is commemorated in the moss genus 'Tayloria', named by W. J. Hooker in 1816. 


@@@@@


doc= 27088


Taylor, Thomas Edward (1811-1883), politician, was born at Ardgillan Castle, Dublin, on 25 March 1811, eldest son of the Revd Henry Edward Taylor (1768-1852), fifth son of Thomas Taylor, first earl of Bective and first marquess of Headfort, and his wife, Marianne (died 1859), daughter of the Hon. Richard St Leger. He was educated at Eton College and commissioned in 1829 in the 6th dragoon guards, from which he retired as captain in 1846. From 1847 to 1874 he was lieutenant-colonel of the Royal Meath militia and subsequently honorary colonel. On 11 November 1862 he married Louisa (died 1928), second daughter of Hugh Francis Tollemache, rector of Harrington, and granddaughter of Louisa Tollemache, countess of Dysart. They had three sons and two daughters. 
In 1841 Taylor was elected as a Conservative MP for Dublin county and represented it until his death. From 1853 he was an assistant whip for the protectionist tories under Sir William Jolliffe, whom he succeeded as chief whip in 1860. He was a lord of the Treasury in the second Derby ministry in 1858-9 and became parliamentary secretary of the Treasury in the Conservative ministry formed in July 1866. In November 1868 he became briefly chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. In 1873 he was recalled as whip, during the illness of the chief whip, Gerard Noel. He resumed the post of chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster in the second Disraeli ministry. In the by-election caused by his appointment he was opposed by Charles Stewart Parnell, but his vote was nearly twice Parnell's. He was bitter when he failed to get a peerage in 1880. 
Taylor was given credit for the defeat of the Palmerston government on Thomas Milner Gibson's vote of censure in February 1858, and, by Disraeli himself, for his work during the 'Reform Bill' debates of 1867. He promoted party organization in the constituencies, and his responsibility for the party's central fund led to his citation in election petitions. In the 1850s he held that a revival of tory fortunes depended on the adoption of distinctive policies. He warned, when Derby was trying to form a cabinet in February 1855, that the adhesion of Gladstone would offend many protestant tories. He encouraged Disraeli's protestant strategy in the 1868 election. He helped the tory revival in Ireland in the 1850s, and in 1871 recommended home rule as a means of raising Irish support. In 1874 he expected tory gains, but thought they would be greater with the fifteenth earl of Derby as leader. Taylor died on 3 February 1883 at his sister's house at 15 Fitzwilliam Place, Dublin, and was buried in the family vault at Balbriggan, co. Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 27089


Taylor, Thomas Glanville (1804-1848), astronomer, was born at Ashburton, Devon, on 22 November 1804, the son of Thomas Taylor ('b'. 1772) and his wife, Susannah, 'nee' Glanville. In 1807 his father was employed as an assistant at the Royal Greenwich Observatory, and was persuaded by the astronomer royal, John Pond, to divert his son from an intended career in medicine to one in astronomy. The young Taylor joined the observatory in 1820 and in August 1822 was given responsibility for making the nightly transit observations. His skill and reliability as an observer was such that Sir Edward Sabine recruited him as an assistant in his pendulum observations. Meanwhile, Taylor devoted his spare time to calculations for Groombridge's star catalogue, and also compiled and published ephemerides for some of the asteroids and minor planets. 
Taylor's reward for these labours was his appointment as director of the East India Company's observatory at Madras, founded in 1819. He arrived there on 15 September 1830, with a set of apparatus by Dollond consisting of a 5 foot transit, a 4 foot mural circle, and a small equatorial telescope. Early in 1831 he began work with four Indian assistants, whom he trained to maintain the programme of observations during his obligatory absences on the trigonometrical survey of India. He married on 4 July 1832 Eliza Baratty, the daughter of Colonel Eley CSI; they had three sons and a daughter. 
In 1837 Taylor began a magnetic survey of southern India with John Caldecott, the astronomer at Trivandrum observatory, with Caldecott taking the western coast and Taylor the eastern; they went south from Madras, taking magnetic observations every 25 miles, crossing the magnetic equator and thence to Trivandrum. By this time they realized that their instruments were defective and, after having repairs effected locally, they took fresh observations on their northward passage, obtaining the first detailed picture of this magnetically important region. 
During the years 1831-9 Taylor published five volumes of astronomical observations, and in 1844 issued the 'Madras General Catalogue' of 11,015 stars for the epoch 1 January 1835, a production later praised by Sir George Airy as the greatest catalogue of modern times for the number of observations, the number and distribution of stars, and for the fact that the work had been entirely carried out in one place, under Taylor's supervision. His determination of the longitude of Madras was of value to navigators, though in need of further correction when submarine telegraphy made this possible. He also observed Halley's and Wilmot's comets. His observations were generally regarded as the first of satisfactory accuracy from this region. 
Taylor visited England in 1840 to restore his health and returned to Madras in 1841. Already a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society, on 10 February 1842 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society. In the following year, while staying at Trivandrum observatory, his poor sight led to an accident from which he never fully recovered. About 1845 the East India Company dispatched a set of meteorological instruments to him, but it was not until late 1846, when he was convalescing in the Nilgiri hills, that he was able to organize a meteorological station there, at 8640 feet above sea level, with a bungalow for an observer. 
Taylor returned to England on 4 April 1848 to see his daughter, who was gravely ill; she died the following day. Taylor himself was suffering from a wasting disease, and he died at 11 Hanover Buildings, All Saints, Southampton, on 4 May 1848. His widow, bereft of support for herself and her young family pending the probate of Taylor's will and the return of his possessions from India, appealed to the East India Company for assistance. She was granted $50 temporary relief, but the company declined further payment. 


@@@@@


doc= 27090


Taylor, Tom (1817-1880), playwright and comic writer, was born on 19 October 1817 in Bishopwearmouth, Sunderland, Durham, the second son of Thomas Taylor (1769-1843) and his wife, Maria Josephina, 'nee' Arnold (1784-1858). His father rose from farm labourer in Cumberland to partner in a brewery, and his mother was of German ancestry. After attending Sunderland Grange School, Taylor proceeded in 1832 to the University of Glasgow, where he received numerous awards. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1837, was elected to a scholarship in 1838, and graduated BA in 1840 as junior optime in mathematics, being in the first class in the classical tripos. According to John Sheehan, Taylor was 'the life of his College, and at the head of the intellectual fun of Trinity' (Sheehan, 148). A member of the University Reform Club, and one of the Apostles, Taylor organized theatricals, and wrote for the Liberal 'Cambridge Independent', and for the short-lived 'Cambridge University Magazine'. Elected a fellow of Trinity College in 1842, he proceeded MA in 1843. 
Taylor moved to London in 1844, where he served as professor of English at the University of London in 1845 and 1846, kept his terms at the Inner Temple, was called to the bar on 20 November 1846, and established himself as a dramatist and writer. Between 1844 and 1846, the Lyceum Theatre staged at least seven Taylor plays, including burlesques written with Albert Smith and with Charles Kenney, and his first major success, the 1846 comedy 'To Parents and Guardians'. He was also composing leaders for the 'Morning Chronicle' and the 'Daily News', and writing for 'Douglas Jerrold's Illuminated Magazine' and for the comic publication 'Puck'. With his first contribution to 'Punch' on 19 October 1844, he began a thirty-six year association with the magazine, which ended only with his death. 
Taylor made the northern circuit until 1850 when he became assistant secretary of the Board of Health. On its reorganization in 1854, he was appointed secretary, and when its functions were transferred to the local government act office in 1858, Taylor moved too. (He would retire in 1872.) During the 1850s he wrote or co-wrote over thirty comedies, extravaganzas, burlesques, farces, and pantomimes. Most notable were the comedies written with Charles Reade, including 'Masks and Faces' in 1852, 'Two Loves and a Life' and 'The King's Rival' in 1854, and 'The First Printer' in 1856. 'Still Waters Run Deep', his 1855 adaptation of a Charles Bernard novelette, was a success for the Olympic Theatre, and his Haymarket comedies included 'Victims' in 1857 and 'The Contested Election' in 1859. 'Our American Cousin', the play Abraham Lincoln was watching when assassinated in 1865, was a transatlantic success in 1858, largely owing to Edward Askew Southern's performance as Lord Dundreary. 
According to Winton Tolles, Taylor in 1860 was 'England's leading and most versatile living dramatist' (Tolles, 188). Despite twenty new productions in the following decade, however, his reputation would decline. 'The Overland Route' was a success in 1860, and his 1863 melodrama 'The Ticket of Leave Man' was Taylor's most popular play. The melodrama 'Mary Warner' and the comedy 'New Men and Old Acres' both pleased audiences in 1869, but his dramas do seem to be the work of the 'popular and transient Victorian playwright' Tolles describes (ibid., 220). In later years Taylor wrote a number of verse dramas on historical subjects, including 'Twixt Axe and Crown' in 1870, 'Jeanne Darc' in 1871, and 'Anne Boleyn' in 1876. 
Taylor was famous for drawing his plots from other plays and fictions, often French. Ellen Terry fondly called him 'Tom the Adapter' (Terry, 114), and his friend John Coleman admitted that the 'most successful works were not of native growth' (Coleman, 118). Others were less tolerant, and a lengthy public exchange occurred in 1871, when a profile in 'The Athenaeum' suggested that Taylor was virtually a plagiarist. Whether new or borrowed, though, his were some of Victorian England's most successful farces, sentimental comedies, melodramas, and historical plays. 
The other great constant in Taylor's literary life was 'Punch'. During the 1840s he averaged roughly three columns a month; in the 1850s and 1860s this output doubled. His contributions were generally humorous commentary or comic verses on politics, civic news, and the manners of the day. When the first editor of 'Punch', Mark Lemon, died in 1870, Taylor became an unofficial assistant editor to Shirley Brooks, and when Brooks himself died in 1874, Taylor succeeded him. Though according to M. H. Spielmann, the nineteenth-century historian of 'Punch', 'It cannot be said that his editorship was a success' (Spielmann, 340), R. G. G. Price finds it 'surprising to look at the paper he produced and see how much of it lives' (Price, 111). Sir John Tenniel and Gerald Du Maurier were still holding up the artistic side, and Francis Cowley Burnand, who would succeed Taylor as editor, was contributing to the textual side, though, especially during the summer, Taylor and Percival Leigh would find themselves writing almost the entire issue between them. What can perhaps be said is that while 'Punch' easily survived Taylor's editorship, under him it became rather sombre and pompous. 
As 'The Times' art critic from 1857, and 'The Graphic' art critic during the 1870s, Taylor was second only to John Ruskin in prominence. Many artists considered Taylor a kind-hearted philistine, fond of modest and sentimental pictures, and unsympathetic to innovation. When he testified during James Whistler's libel proceedings against Ruskin, for instance, Taylor described Whistler's paintings as only one step above delicately tinted wallpaper, earning him a place in that artist's 'Gentle Art of Making Enemies'. Taylor edited the posthumous autobiographies of two artists: a rather unsympathetic 'Life of Benjamin Robert Haydon' in 1853, and the highly favourable 'Autobiographical Recollections by the Late Charles Robert Leslie' in 1860. In 1865 Taylor also completed and published Leslie's manuscript on the 'Life and Times of Sir Joshua Reynolds'. 
Taylor was of middle height, bearded, with what John Coleman called 'a pugilistic jaw' and 'eyes which glittered like steel' (Coleman, 2.117). Though Ellen Terry praised his 'generous, kindly nature' (Terry, 116), friends like Coleman remembered him as 'bumptious and dictatorial' (Coleman, 2.120). He was 'quick spoken and fidgety', Burnand recalled, 'mighty obstinate and not ordinarily ready to forgive and forget' (Burnand, 2.6, 228). Taylor's energy was legendary. An avid swimmer and rower, a talented amateur actor, and one of the Whitehall Civil Service rifle volunteers, he rose each day at 5 or 6 and wrote for three hours before taking an hour's brisk walk to his Whitehall office from the home he and his wife had built on Lavender Sweep, near Clapham Common, Wandsworth. He had married Laura Wilson Barker (died 1905), the daughter of a Yorkshire clergyman, on 19 June 1855. She wrote music for Taylor's lyrics and plays, and composed her own orchestral works as well. The Taylors' two children, Laura Lucy Arnold and John Wycliffe, inherited their parents' artistic interests. 
Lavender Sweep became a gathering place for politicians and artists, with Taylor serving as 'showman, stage manager, chief tumbler, leader of all the revels', as his friend Thomas Hughes put it (Hughes, 299). Taylor's own politics were those of many 'Punch' men. A strong Liberal and social reformer, he was nevertheless sceptical and dismissive of working-class movements. And while Spielmann finds 'a decidedly Radical, anti-Beaconsfield, anti-Imperial turn' in the Taylor-edited 'Punch' (Spielmann, 99), Price claims that Taylor consciously strove to be more of a 'great Victorian' than his 'Punch' peers: 'As the record of his charitable enterprises and public functions extends, one feels he is turning into marble before one's eyes' (Price, 61). 
Taylor's literary reputation has always been mixed. Tolles describes him as 'an industrious and sound workman who aimed not at greatness or permanency for himself or his work, but rather at satisfying the demands of the public he so well understood' (Tolles, 273). His 'Punch' work, which Price describes as the 'result of long hours and grim determination' (Price, 69), is undistinguished. While admitting his 'punctuality, kindness of heart, open-handed charity, and thorough respectability', Edmund Yates, no friend of 'Punch', remarked that possessing 'such virtues does not qualify a man to be a contributor to a satirical journal' (Yates, 322). Arthur Adrian accurately claims that Taylor 'had a facile pen and could knock off a poem in an hour or two' (Adrian, 39), but Shirley Brooks's diary records an occasion when he asked Taylor 'for a 'good' poem' and was pleased to get back 'one better than usual' (Layard, 408-9). Even Taylor's 'Punch' obituary praised his industry and kindness, rather than his talent or wit. 
Taylor died suddenly at his home, Lavender Sweep, Wandsworth, on 12 July 1880; he was buried in Brompton cemetery three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 27091


Taylor, William (d. 1423), Lollard heretic, was born in Worcestershire, to unknown parents, and studied at Oxford. He was a master of arts by 1405-6, when he is recorded as principal of St Edmund Hall. He and his successor, Peter Payne, were probably responsible for making the hall a centre of Wycliffite teaching at Oxford. Taylor incurred official hostility when he preached a sermon at Paul's Cross in 1406, criticizing clerical rights of dominion, and supporting the power of the laity to withdraw ecclesiastical temporalities. The surviving text of this shows that he was a man of considerable learning. After failing to respond to a citation by Archbishop Thomas Arundel (died 1414) he was excommunicated for contumacy, the citation being renewed without success in 1410. At some unidentified date during this period he was replaced as principal of the hall, and probably left Oxford. 
Taylor presumably did not participate in Sir John Oldcastle's rebellion of 1414, for he is next noted as an offender in 1417, when twelve jurors in a secular court presented him for preaching against the honouring of images and speaking against the anti-Lollard statute of the Leicester parliament in 1414. He may initially have faced investigations before the bishop of Worcester, but in February 1420 was tried before Archbishop Henry Chichele (died 1443) and admitted that he had remained excommunicated for fourteen years after Arundel's sentence. He submitted, was absolved, and granted letters of purgation, but later in the year was arrested for heretical preaching, along with Thomas Drayton, a Lollard priest who had been prominent in the rising of 1414, but had been pardoned and received a benefice in Bristol. Drayton was tried in the Worcester episcopal court, but Taylor's case was reserved to convocation in the following May, when he was found guilty of teaching heresy and was condemned to life imprisonment. He was again pardoned, and gave pledges in chancery not to preach heresy in future. He relapsed, however, and in February 1423 was charged with communicating heretical ideas to another Bristol priest, Thomas Smith. The principal charges concerned veneration of images, but in none of the proceedings was he ever accused of denying transubstantiation. (Significantly in his sermon of 1406 he seems deliberately to have avoided this issue.) As this had been Wyclif's most radical heresy, Taylor probably did not share his master's views. Two men later accused of heresy who admitted association with him, John Walcote in 1425 and William Emayn in 1429, were also not accused of this belief. As in 1406 he was critical of priests exercising temporal dominion and was hostile to the mendicancy of the friars, declaring that his views were approved by Christ's law, despite their condemnation by the Council of Constance. After being found guilty he refused to recant, and was sentenced to death as a relapsed heretic. He was degraded from his orders, handed over to the secular arm, and burnt at Smithfield on 2 March 1423. 


@@@@@


doc= 27092


Taylor, William (1765-1836), reviewer and translator, was born on 7 November 1765 in Surrey Street, Norwich, the only child of William Taylor (1731/2-1819), merchant, and his wife, Sarah (1735/6-1812), daughter of John Wright of Debenham, Suffolk, and later Diss. Intended for a mercantile career, he was tutored in languages from an early age by John Bruckner, pastor of the French and Dutch protestant churches in Norwich. In 1774 he was sent to the recently opened school at Palgrave, near Diss, run by Rochemont and Anna Letitia Barbauld. The latter made a profound impact on Taylor, who subsequently described her as 'the mother of his mind' (Robberds, 2.570). Removed from the school in 1779, he was taken on a business tour of the Netherlands, France, and Italy by his father's trading partner, Casanave. After briefly returning to Norwich in 1781, Taylor was sent away again, this time to Germany, where he spent a year mastering German in Detmold. There he was befriended by Lorenz Benzler (1747-1827), a minor literary figure who nurtured Taylor's interest in contemporary German writing and confirmed his literary proclivities. Taylor returned to Norwich at the end of 1782 and immediately entered the family business; a 'Norwich Directory' for 1783 lists 'Taylor Wm. Son and Casanave, 'Merchants''. In his leisure hours he immersed himself in literary pursuits and read widely in heterodox literature. He resumed an important friendship with Frank Sayers, begun at the Barbaulds' school; it is possible the two men were lovers, and probable, in any case, that Taylor was homosexual. 
Ostensibly a Unitarian like his parents, in the late 1780s Taylor became increasingly prominent in the whiggish and dissenting intellectual circles in Norwich. He actively supported such liberal causes as the abolition of the slave trade and repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts'. He gained a reputation as a formidable conversationalist with a passion for argument. His literary efforts became more ambitious and increasingly reflected his other concerns: about 1789 he made an accomplished translation of Goethe's 'Iphigenie auf Tauris', then in 1790 proceeded to translate Lessing's 'Nathan der Weise' and make a startling free adaptation of Burger's 'Lenore'. Of these works, 'Nathan', which he felt encouraged 'mutual indulgence between religious sects' (preface to 1805 edn), meant the most to Taylor, and he had his translation printed for distribution among his acquaintances. The other translations circulated in manuscript for several years, that of 'Lenore' gaining considerable celebrity. In 1789-90, excited by the French Revolution, Taylor experienced the feelings of ebullience common to young radicals of his generation. He helped found the Norwich Revolution Society in November 1789 and subsequently conducted the society's correspondence. In May 1790 he made an enthusiastic visit to Paris, on his return publishing a series of pro-revolutionary articles in the 'Cambridge Chronicle' over the signature 'A Friend to Liberty'. There was something innately sceptical in Taylor's thinking, however, and it is the relativity of 'truth' which these letters finally seem to celebrate. 
Taylor's ambiguous stance towards religious and political 'progress' became more marked in 1791. After the Birmingham riots which destroyed the house of Joseph Priestley, he responded, rather surprisingly, with an adaptation of Samuel Butler's 'Hudibras' that presented Priestley as the mystical nonconformist Ralpho. A former admirer, he now felt, apparently, that Priestley's bigoted claims for Unitarianism had harmed the dissenting interest. In the 1790s Hume, whom Priestley had attacked on more than one occasion, became, and remained, the major influence on Taylor's thinking. Religion, he increasingly felt, should be judged according to its utility, not its 'truth'. Dialogue became Taylor's preferred mode for expressing ideas, and he appropriately embarked on a translation of several of Wieland's Lucianic 'Gottergesprache', a genre he imitated in one of his finest original works. The success of his friend Sayers's 'Dramatic Sketches of the Ancient Northern Mythology' (1790) had seemingly inspired Taylor with the idea that he too might attempt a literary career. In 1791-2 he was able to use the threat to the Norwich trade posed by disturbance on the continent to persuade his father that they should give up the family business. By 1795 the Taylors' withdrawal from commerce was complete, but already, in 1793, Taylor had become a regular, salaried reviewer for the best-selling 'Monthly Review'. His talents were perfectly suited to reviewing: he was exceptionally widely read, and his dialogic method engaged skilfully with a book's arguments and assumptions. Although he always took the 'liberal' side on political and religious questions, his underlying position remained the relativity of truth. He should almost certainly be considered the outstanding British reviewer of the 1790s; Hazlitt later credited Taylor with pioneering 'philosophical criticism' ('The Spirit of the Age', 1825, 308). Confirming his new status as a professional man of letters, Taylor now published his major translations: 'Iphigenia in Tauris' (1793), 'Dialogues of the Gods' (1795), 'Ellenore' (1796), and 'Nathan the Wise' (1805). In this period he was undoubtedly England's foremost Germanist. 
Taylor was closely involved with the immensely successful 'Monthly Magazine' from its foundation in 1796. It provided him with a suitable forum for articles on all manner of subjects, as well as short translations and original poems. His articles are of a peculiar originality. He often presented facts, ideas, and opinions culled from his vast reading as though they were the results of his own research: in this respect it would be easy to dismiss him as a compulsive plagiarist. But he had a talent for placing information in a fresh and provocative light, often by drawing out contradictions inherent in the material, or introducing contradictory facts from other sources. Moreover Taylor was the channel by which a great deal of knowledge of the intellectual scene on the continent, especially Germany, reached the English-speaking world. He was particularly attracted to the 'higher criticism', not only promoting Eichhorn's ideas, but making some bold sallies into biblical scholarship himself. His most notorious theory, published as 'A Letter Concerning the Two First Chapters of Luke' (1810), argued that 'Zacharius ['sic'], who wrote those chapters, meant to hold himself out as the father of Jesus Christ' (Robberds, 2.281-2). Many copies were destroyed by incensed readers. Another book-length work which developed out of his periodical writing was 'English Synonyms Discriminated' (1813). 
From the mid-1790s Taylor's life assumed a regular routine. He continued to live with his parents, working in the morning, exercising in the early afternoon, socializing in the evening. From this date his biography is a relatively straightforward account of involvement with various periodicals and increasing disrepute in Norwich. He left the 'Monthly Review' in 1799, having quarrelled with the editor, George Edward Griffiths; he did not write for it again until 1808. Between 1802 and 1808 he reviewed prolifically for the 'Annual Review'. In 1803-4 he edited a whiggish Norwich paper, 'The Iris', and in the same years wrote for the 'Critical Review', which he rejoined briefly in 1809. In 1807 he started writing for 'The Athenaeum', the periodical John Aikin had established in opposition to the 'Monthly Magazine'. After 1810 his writing commitments simplified, and he wrote mainly for the 'Monthly Review' and 'Monthly Magazine'. The total volume of Taylor's periodical writing is enormous, yet his Norwich contemporaries took less interest in his literary industry than his social habits. He became notorious for frequent drunkenness and spreading extremely unorthodox opinions among the young men he liked to surround himself with, the most famous of whom was George Borrow. 
Most of Taylor's best writing was done in the 1790s. In the early 1800s he wrote too much to maintain such standards, and by 1807 there were pressing financial reasons for him to privilege quantity. Though rich when he retired from business, Taylor's father had made a series of risky investments, which by this date were causing Taylor considerable anxiety. A long-developing financial crisis finally descended on the Taylors in 1811, and they were forced to move to a smaller house in King Street. It was to be a decade of constant attrition, with the death of both his parents, and the onset of Taylor's own long struggle with illness. His writing steadily deteriorated, and he lost faith in his ability to produce the sort of large-scale work his friends expected from him. About 1820, however, possibly inspired by Borrow, Taylor did start working towards what eventually became the three-volume 'Historic Survey of German Poetry' (1828-30). This gathered together four decades' worth of translations and critical writing on German literature, but was out of date, and accordingly condemned by Carlyle in the 'Edinburgh Review'. Taylor, who had already abandoned periodical writing, was past caring; his health had declined alarmingly and by 1830 he was given to 'sit[ting] for hours absorbed in a dull lethargic silence' (Robberds, 2.254). He clung on for another six years, died at his home on 5 March 1836, and was buried in the Octagon Chapel, Norwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 27093


Taylor, William Benjamin Sarsfield (1781-1850), painter of landscapes and military subjects and writer, was born in Dublin, the son of John McKinley Taylor ('fl'. 1765-1819), a map and seal engraver. John McKinley Taylor had assumed the name Taylor on inheriting property from his maternal grandfather. J. M. Taylor was descended from David McKinley, a captain of the Inniskilling dragoons, who fought at the battle of the Boyne. Through his mother, William Taylor was descended from Patrick Sarsfield, titular earl of Lucan. The barrister and journalist John Sydney Taylor was his younger brother. He became a pupil in the Dublin Society Schools in 1800 and in 1801 won the prize for the second best landscape. He exhibited at the society's exhibitions in various years from 1802 to 1817, although by 1804 he had left the schools and was supporting himself as a teacher of drawing. 
Taylor spent some time in the army, serving in the commissariat in the Peninsular War. He was present at the siege of San Sebastian, and would later exhibit sketches of the engagement. 
After returning to Dublin, Taylor exhibited there in 1815, 1816, and 1817. He became a member of the committee responsible for the foundation of the Royal Hibernian Academy in 1823. Afterwards he moved to London, although his work was exhibited at the Royal Hibernian Academy from 1827 to 1829. He exhibited landscapes, seapieces, and military subjects at the Royal Academy, the British Institution, the New Society of Painters in Water Colours, and the Society of British Artists between 1829 and 1847. He became better known as an art critic and writer, contributing critical essays to the 'Morning Chronicle', and he published in 1841 'The Origin, Progress, and Present Conditions of the Fine Arts in Great Britain and Ireland'. Other publications included 'A Manual of Fresco and Encaustic Painting' (1843); a translation of J. F. L. Merimee's 'Art of Painting in Oil and Fresco' (1839); an abridged translation of the 'Origin and Outline of the Penitentiary System in the United States of North America' (1833), from the report of G. de Beaumont and A. de Tocqueville; and his best-known work, a 'History of the University of Dublin' (1845), which contains biographical notices of alumni, and is illustrated with coloured plates drawn and etched by Taylor himself. 
Towards the end of his life Taylor was curator of the St Martin's Lane Academy. He died at his home, 46 Robert Street, Hampstead Road, London, on 23 December 1850, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. A 'Seascape' by Taylor is in the Williamson Art Gallery and Museum, Birkenhead. 


@@@@@


doc= 27094


Taylor, William Cooke (1800-1849), historian and journalist, born at Youghal, co. Cork, on 16 April 1800, was the son of Richard Taylor, a manufacturer, and a member of a family resident at Youghal from the time of the settlement by Oliver Cromwell. His mother was Mary Cooke, a descendant of John Cook, the regicide. He was educated by Robert Bell DD, at a school in Youghal, and then went to Trinity College, Dublin, which he entered on 13 January 1817. At the beginning of 1820 he removed his name from the lists, but replaced it in June 1821 to stand for a scholarship. He was unsuccessful in the competition, and returned to Youghal as an assistant at his old school. 
After a short time Taylor returned to the university, and graduated BA in 1825. While at college he won prizes for compositions in prose and poetry, and in 1825 and 1826 he won several of the primate's prizes for Hebrew. His first essays in print were some contributions, carefully concealed in later years, to a newspaper in Cork. His first book was 'A Classical Geography for Use of Youghal School'. He then edited several of the catechisms of William Pinnock and the various histories that had been compiled by Oliver Goldsmith. 
In 1829 Taylor settled in Camden Town, London, and set up as a writer. His considerable energy and wide knowledge equipped him well for his role, and he was much more than the mere journeyman author that his list of publications at first glance suggests. 
Taylor, unusually for his time, combined the writing of substantial histories with astute social and economic observation of the contemporary scene, which remains of interest and importance. Unfortunately, the sharp analytical approach of his observation of factory life in Manchester is largely absent from his histories, in which analytical intentions are blurred by narrative. 
Between 1829 and his death Taylor wrote sixteen historical works, many of them in several volumes. Although holding a generally whiggish view of progress, he was especially interested in interruptions to it, as is shown in his 'History of the Civil Wars in Ireland' (2 vols., 1831; Taylor believed that civil war was the constant feature of Irish history until 1800, when, he thought, the union abolished it) and 'The Revolutions, Insurrections, and Conspiracies of Europe' (2 vols., 1843). His work often discussed what he considered to be the disruptive force of Islam, and his 'History of Mohammedanism' (1834) went into several editions and was translated into German in 1837. His manuals for students on ancient history (1836) and modern history (1838) were standard works, the latter revised by C. D. Yonge and G. W. Cox and still used at the end of the century. Taylor stressed the historical significance of geography: 'The World as it is' (3 vols., 1849-53), whose compilation Charles Mackay assisted, was an attempt at a new and comprehensive system of modern geography. Taylor supplemented this sturdy output with works on India (1842), the fall of the Roman empire (1836), 'Memoirs of the House of Orleans' (3 vols., 1849) -- a work that irritated Louis-Philippe -- and many editions of classical and modern texts, including Homer, Cicero, Plutarch, Swift, and Bacon. Among many other works, Taylor published 'The National Portrait Gallery' (4 vols., 1846-8). 
Taylor wrote for 'The Athenaeum' from 1829 until his death. On the foundation of the British Association in 1831, he became one of its leading members and was often on its statistical committee. He was interested in inventions and wrote 'An Account of the Electro-Magnet Engine' (1841). He quite frequently returned to Ireland and became friendly with Richard Whately, archbishop of Dublin, to whom several of his works are dedicated and who often quoted them, especially Taylor's anonymous letters published as 'The Bishop' (1841). Having toured a number of French schools in 1846, he supported Whately's educational policy in his 'Notes of a Visit to the Model Schools in Dublin' (1847). 
Taylor was a strong free-trader. Prompted by Richard Cobden, he travelled in the industrial north and concluded that great industrial cities were the pattern of the future, not a passing aberration. He strongly opposed factory regulation and believed urban destitution was the result not of low wages but of rural incompetents who over-optimistically came to the towns. An early member of the Anti-Corn Law League, he edited its newspaper, 'The League', from its move to London in 1843. His articles gave the paper a historical dimension, with comments, for example, on the Roman corn laws. He published several pamphlets which are important accounts of the 'factory system' (as he called it). His book 'Notes of a Tour in the Manufacturing Districts of Lancashire: Letters to the Archbishop of Dublin' (1842) was secretly financed by the league. Taylor's 'Life and Times of Sir Robert Peel' (3 vols., 1846-8) is an interesting presentation of Peel from the league's point of view and the first of the various substantial studies of that prime minister. 
Some expected Taylor to be the first president of Queen's College, Cork, but he was not. After the repeal of the corn laws in 1846, C. P. Villiers, the prominent free-trader, got his brother Lord Clarendon, lord lieutenant of Ireland in the whig government, to give Taylor a post as statistical writer to the Irish government. He also wrote for the government's Dublin paper, the 'Evening Post', and wrote pseudonymous tracts, including 'Reminiscences of Daniel O'Connell. By a Munster Farmer'. In the late 1840s he was involved in agitating for the further extension of the franchise. 
Taylor's ability was recognized in his LLD from Trinity College, Dublin, conferred on 7 July 1835. In September 1836 he married, at Cork, Marianne, only daughter of John Taylor of Youghal. He died of cholera at 20 Herbert Street, Dublin, on 12 September 1849 and was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery. He was survived by his wife, three daughters, and a son, Richard Whately Cooke-Taylor of Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 27095


Taylor, Wittewronge (b. before 1719, d. 1760), naval officer, was the son of the Revd Thomas Taylor and his wife, Mary, daughter of James Wittewronge of Rothamsted, Hertfordshire, and Susanna Pedley. He entered the Royal Navy as a volunteer per order or king's letter-boy in the 'Kingston' about 1727; he was subsequently listed as being on seven other ships in just seventeen months. His first seagoing experience appears to have been in 1736 on the 'Windsor'. He remained in her, together with the 'Ipswich' and 'Anglesea' (in which he took part in the failed attack on Cartagena in April 1741), for five years. On 3 September 1741 he passed his lieutenant's examination, at which date he was judged more than twenty-two years old, having been at sea for more than ten years. 
On 7 September Taylor was promoted lieutenant of the 'Duke' on the home station. During 1743 and 1744 he held the same rank in the 'St George' from which in October 1744 he was chosen to accompany Vice-Admiral Davers to the West Indies in the 'Cornwall' in the rating of midshipman extra. In August of the following year Davers gave him a commission as fifth lieutenant of the 'Cornwall' and in November he appointed him to command the 'Vainqueur' tender. Taylor returned to the 'Cornwall' eighteen months later, was present at the action off Havana on 1 October 1748, and was subsequently promoted by Sir Charles Knowles to command the sloop 'Weasel'. Sent home, the ship was paid off in May 1749. In March 1755 he commanded the 'Seaford' and afterwards the 'Raven' in the channel and then with the western squadron until posted to the 'Monarch' on 2 December. On 28 September of the following year he married Catherine Vincent (died 1803), at Stoke Damerel parish church, Plymouth, while holding temporary command of the 'Magnamine'. 
Taylor held a number of commands over the next couple of years. In early 1758 he was appointed to the 'Ramillies' (90 guns), the flagship of Sir Edward Hawke with whom he served continuously until the blockade of Brest in 1759. He remained in her when Hawke struck his flag and moved to the 'Royal George' (14 November), taking command of the 'Ramillies' on her return to Plymouth for refitting. In February 1760 she sailed as part of a squadron of three-deckers under the command of Admiral Edward Boscawen. On 15 February a severe westerly gale divided the ships and forced the 'Ramillies' onto the rocks at Bolt Head with the death, including that of Taylor, of all but 26 of the 734 crew. Taylor was survived by his wife; shocked by the loss of the 'Ramillies' and so many of his former crew, Admiral Hawke soon afterwards sought to guarantee Taylor's widow's security. She subsequently married Philip Durell (1707-1766), port admiral of Plymouth, and after his death she married, in 1769, Sir Frederick Rogers, fourth baronet. Her will, written on 22 February 1803, was proved on 7 July of that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 27096


Taylor, Zachary (1653-1705), Church of England clergyman, the son of Zachary Taylor (1618/19-1692) and Abigail Ward, was born at Bolton, Lancashire, on 20 April 1653 and was baptized at the parish church four days later. His father, a graduate of Trinity College, Dublin, served as a chaplain in the royalist army during the 1640s, but in the following decade he joined Lancashire's second presbyterian classis and served a number of cures in both Cheshire and Lancashire. At the time of the Restoration Taylor senior was acting as assistant to the vicar of Rochdale and parish schoolmaster, and although ejected from the first post under the terms of the 1662 'Act of Uniformity' he retained the second until 1666. In 1672 Taylor took out a licence, under the terms of Charles II's declaration of indulgence, for a presbyterian meeting at Rochdale, but following the revocation of this declaration he returned to teaching, assuming the post of schoolmaster of Kirkham, which he was to hold until his death, aged seventy-three, in 1692. 
Zachary Taylor junior was admitted at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1671, where his tutor was the Lancashire native Richard Wroe, and graduated BA in 1675 and MA three years later. On 13 July 1678 he was incorporated at Oxford. No doubt aided by the support of his former tutor Wroe, who had left Cambridge in 1674 to take up a position as chaplain to the bishop of Chester, Taylor chose to make his career in the restored Church of England to which his father had found it impossible fully to conform. In 1677 Taylor was appointed one of Lancashire's six king's preachers, an office established in 1599 with the intention of furthering the Reformation in those parts of the county most resistant to protestantism, and it seems likely that during the late 1670s he also served as curate of Wigan, before being appointed on 9 March 1680 vicar of Ormskirk. Five years later, on 12 July 1685, Taylor married Barbara Stanley (1666-1689), the daughter of Sir Edward Stanley, third baronet, of Bickerstaffe, Lancashire. In 1692 Taylor resigned his cure at Ormskirk and returned to the post of curate of Wigan, in which he was to remain, apart from a brief spell between 1695 and 1696 as rector of Croston, Lancashire, until his death on 20 May 1705. He was survived by his second wife, Anne, and seven children. 
Though he never reached the higher echelons of the Anglican church, Taylor attained some contemporary notoriety through a number of pamphlets. His first surviving work, published in 1682, was 'A Dissuasive from Contention', in which he argued that the breach between Anglicans and protestant dissenters had been occasioned by disagreements concerning ceremonies rather than the more serious matter of doctrine, but that having created this schism dissenters had been drawn into activities which threatened to undermine both the church and state. Taylor's prescription was not, however, an accommodation with dissenters but a demand that they subject themselves to the discipline of the national church. Such sentiments were in keeping with the prevailing political sentiments of the early 1680s, but his next published work contributed to, rather than merely followed, national political developments. In 1689 Archbishop Sancroft had published, in response to the events of the revolution of 1688, the Anglican canons which had been drawn up in 1606, Sancroft pointing to the canons' denial of the subject's right of resistance. However, in 'Obedience and Submission to the Present Government', published between April and October 1690, Taylor emphasized the twenty-eighth of the canons, which stated that once a usurper had achieved stable government then allegiance was due to a regime which governed 'de facto' if not 'de jure'. For those tories and Anglican clergymen suffering a crisis of conscience caused by the conflict between the requirement to take the oaths to William and Mary, and their belief in the binding nature of their oaths to James II, Taylor's argument offered a justification for acquiescing to the demands of the new regime. His interpretation prefigured that of William Sherlock, the dean of Christ Church, whose pamphlet 'The Case of Allegiance due to Soveraigne Powers', published in 1691, expanded Taylor's arguments and prompted a long and fierce pamphlet debate. 
Taylor never again wrote on national matters, but he remained a controversial figure within the context of the political and religious divisions of Lancashire. In 1696 he published 'The Devil Turn'd Casuist', a critique of the claims made by local Catholics to have effected a successful exorcism, and two years later he attacked, in 'The Surey Impostor', the claims of a group of Lancashire's dissenting ministers to have exorcised Richard Dugdale. Taylor dismissed the episode as a fraud perpetrated upon the nonconformist ministers by local Catholics, and his attack upon Lancashire dissent led to his being criticized in two pamphlets for his hostility towards fellow protestants. Both were called 'The Lancashire Levite Rebuk'd' (1698), drawing a comparison between the story of the Good Samaritan, where the Levite had bemoaned the protagonist's misfortune but failed to offer any assistance, and Taylor's alleged indifference to the fate of Richard Dugdale. Taylor responded, in two pieces entitled 'Popery, Superstition, Ignorance and Knavery' (1698-9), with a vituperative attack upon dissenters, labelling them as schismatics whose division from the established church was both unwarranted and damaging to the protestant cause. Though retiring from political and religious pamphleteering after producing the second of these pamphlets, Taylor remained a staunch tory until the end of his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 27097


Teach, Edward (d. 1718), pirate, grew up in Bristol, according to most recent assessments. If true, he would have seen the steady rise of successful privateers during the wars with France after 1689. But his initial name and place of origin remain uncertain. One early unconfirmed source gave his family name as Drummond; another suggested that he was born in Jamaica. Whatever the reality it was from Jamaica, using the name Edward Teach or some similar variation, that he apparently sailed aboard a privateer during the War of the Spanish Succession. When that conflict ended in 1713 many sailors, including Teach, refused to give up this relatively free and profitable existence for the harsh discipline and arbitrary treatment found in the merchant marine or the Royal Navy. Instead they turned to piracy, swelling the ranks of Caribbean buccaneers to several thousand persons. Many of the pirate bands operated out of New Providence (modern Nassau) in the Bahamas, raiding shipping throughout the Atlantic and as far away as the Red Sea, then frequently selling their stolen goods in British North America, where Atlantic ports chafed under increasingly restrictive imperial trading laws. Colonial officials from New York to Charlestown, South Carolina, were often willing to tolerate, and even protect, ships carrying unauthorized goods, if crews would sell hard to obtain items at reasonable prices and then linger in town to spend their cash in local establishments. 
In 1716 Teach joined the crew of Benjamin Hornigold, one of the most skilled and ruthless of the Bahama pirates, and within months he proved such an aggressive figure that Hornigold put him in charge of a captured sloop. The two men terrorized shipping in the western Atlantic together, returning occasionally to New Providence for supplies. One of their richest prizes, taken in the eastern Caribbean late in 1717, was the 'Concorde', a large French vessel under Captain d'Ocier which had entered the African trade after a wartime sojourn in Rio de Janeiro. Apparently, this 300 ton ship, measuring 104 feet and carrying twenty guns, had been built by the English in 1710 and named the 'Concord', but when the French seized it the following year they modified the hull and altered the name. When Hornigold granted Teach command of the vessel the young pirate changed the name again, calling it 'Queen Anne's Revenge', and added another twenty guns. Now in command of a heavily armed vessel Teach reputedly bested the 'Scarborough', a British man-of-war sent from Barbados to destroy him, and went on to plunder at least eighteen ships in the next six months, usually sailing in consort with several smaller boats. His reputation spread rapidly, and he cultivated his flamboyant image as a fierce fighter, impetuous leader, and constant womanizer. Though no confirmed likeness survives, contemporary accounts and popular prints portrayed him as a tall, rugged man with a massive beard, which he decorated with ribbons (and even slow-burning hemp fuses on occasion) to heighten his fearsome appearance. 
Dismayed by the rise of rampant piracy in their Atlantic dominions, the British government took measures to suppress it. George I appointed Woodes Rogers, a former privateer from Bristol, to be the new governor of the Bahamas, instructing him to make war on brigands in the Caribbean and to grant pardons to any who would voluntarily surrender. Teach's wealthy former mentor, Hornigold, accepted a pardon from Rogers when he arrived at Nassau, but Teach, now known to the public and feared as Blackbeard, followed a different course. In May 1718, in the boldest gambit of his brief career, he brazenly ordered his flotilla, including Stede Bonnet's 'Revenge', David Harriot's 'Adventure', and a captured Spanish sloop, to blockade the busy port of Charlestown. In scarcely a week the brigands seized eight or nine vessels and ransomed their prizes to local authorities for a much needed chest of medicine before escaping by sea to the protection of North Carolina's treacherous outer banks. 
In early June, in the shallow waters of Topsail inlet (now Beaufort inlet), 'Queen Anne's Revenge' ran aground, as did the smaller 'Adventure'. The move may have been on purpose so that Blackbeard and a select crew of loyal men could transfer the accumulated booty to another vessel and abscond, leaving Bonnet and other irate pirates to fend for themselves. In September Bonnet and his crew were captured near the mouth of the Cape Fear River by a force from Charlestown, and by the end of the year Bonnet and forty-eight other pirates had been tried in that port and publicly hanged. Meanwhile Blackbeard entered Pamlico Sound and put in at North Carolina's new village of Bath Town, where he obtained a pardon from Governor Charles Eden and married the daughter of a planter. But captain and crew were not easily reconciled to land, and within months they were at sea again, laying hold of a heavily laden French ship and claiming that it had been found adrift without a soul on board. 
In Virginia, Governor Alexander Spotswood was locked in controversy with his council and saw an attack on Blackbeard as a way to upstage his opposition. He suspected Governor Eden and his Bath neighbour, Tobias Knight (North Carolina's secretary, chief justice, and collector of customs), of protecting the notorious pirate and sharing in his spoils. So Spotswood put a price of $100 on Blackbeard's head and financed an expedition south by land and sea to expose the supposed corruption. On 22 November 1718 Lieutenant Robert Maynard, commanding two sloops and fifty-four well-armed men, engaged the pirate force in a bloody seaboard battle at North Carolina's Ocracoke inlet. Having pledged neither to give quarter nor to seek it Blackbeard died fighting, and Maynard suspended his severed head from the bowsprit. The victors carried more than a dozen captured pirates back to Virginia, where they were hanged on gibbets along the path from James River to Williamsburg, later known as Gallows Road. If they left behind any treasure, its whereabouts remains a mystery, but in November 1996 divers at Beaufort inlet located the possible remains of 'Queen Anne's Revenge' in 20 feet of water, prompting a flurry of fresh interest in Blackbeard and the brief heyday of Atlantic piracy. 


@@@@@


doc= 27098


Teddeman, Sir Thomas (c.1620-1668), naval officer, was a son of Thomas Teddeman (died after 1658), sometime mayor of Dover, Kent. Captain Henry Teddeman was his brother. In August 1652, on the outbreak of war with the Dutch, Teddeman was appointed lieutenant of the 'Royal Sovereign', the largest ship in the navy, which suggests that he had some powerful patrons. His naval service was brief, however, for in 1653 he was commanding a small privateer, the 'Speedwell' of Dover, of four guns and 40 tons, against the Dutch. After the war he probably pursued a mercantile career for several years, but in 1657 he was appointed captain of the 'Victory'. Early in March 1660 he was appointed captain of the 'Tredagh' for the summer guard, no doubt by the influence of Edward Mountagu (later earl of Sandwich), and he acted as Mountagu's election agent at Dover, a seat which Mountagu won in 1660. Teddeman commanded in 'Tredagh' (soon renamed the 'Resolution') in the Mediterranean, where on 31 May off Algiers he encountered six Spanish ships which he chased into Gibraltar and under the guns of the forts. However, in December the ship's company petitioned to the king against him, and Sir William Coventry commented sarcastically, 'what Teddyman and his officers are may appear by their impeaching each other' (Longleat House, Wiltshire, Bath papers, Coventry MS 98, fol. 66). Teddeman survived an investigation and in May 1661 was appointed to the 'Fairfax'. 
In command of the 'Kent' in 1663, Teddeman carried the earl of Carlisle to Archangel on an embassy to Russia. In May 1664 he transferred to the 'Revenge', and in 1665, in the 'Royal Katherine', he was rear-admiral of the Blue squadron, with the earl of Sandwich, in the action off Lowestoft, for which he was knighted on 1 July. Following this success, in August he led a disastrous attempt to capture a Dutch East India Company fleet, rumoured that year to be returning from Smyrna and Batavia with exceptionally rich cargoes. This fleet had followed its normal wartime route round Shetland and was heading into the North Sea when it was ordered to take refuge; the ships anchored in Bergen, then under neutral Danish rule. A plot was then hatched whereby the Danes and English agreed to share the plunder, but no final orders had been given to each side when Teddeman's squadron arrived off Bergen on 10 August. Fearing lest he should be trapped by an approaching Dutch rescue force, Teddeman attacked on 12 August but, faced by a wind off the land, could not send in his fireships. The commander of the Danish fort, lacking instructions to the contrary, sided with the Dutch. After three and a half hours of battle Teddeman's squadron retreated in confusion, having suffered 500 or 600 casualties against fewer than 100 on the Dutch side. In the same year Teddeman was among those summoned to parliament in connection with the abuse of regulations concerning prize goods. 
Happier times arrived in 1666; as vice-admiral of the blue, in 'Royal Katherine', Teddeman was involved in what was known as 'the four-day fight', when between 1 and 4 June English vessels engaged a Dutch fleet in the channel. The Dutch lost six or seven ships and 2000 killed or wounded, the English lost more heavily but felt themselves to have put up a better fight. He was vice-admiral of the white in the 'St James fight' on 1 July, also against the Dutch, off North Foreland, which resulted in a brilliant and decisive English victory. In October 1667, the year in which he commanded the Dover squadron, Teddeman discussed the matter of discipline in the fleet with Samuel Pepys, who knew him well; Teddeman lamented its bad state, while praising his patron Sandwich. The following year Pepys found him languishing in a house in Old Street, Clerkenwell, very ill of a fever -- 'a good man, a good seaman, and stout' he remarked in his diary (Pepys, 'Diary', 9.164). Teddeman died on 12 May 1668. His funeral on 15 May, which Pepys attended, was held at Loriners' Hall, Moorgate, and he was buried the same day at St Mary's, Rotherhithe, Surrey. Nothing is known of Teddeman's wife or children, beyond a passing reference by Sir Thomas Allin, who met Teddeman's son-in-law at sea early in 1668. 


@@@@@


doc= 27099


Teeling, Bartholomew (1774-1798), Irish nationalist, was born at Lisburn, co. Antrim, the eldest son of Luke Teeling, a linen merchant, and his wife, Mary, the daughter of John Taaffe of Smarmore Castle, co. Louth. He had at least two younger brothers, 
Bartholomew was educated in Dublin at the academy of the Revd W. Dubourdieu, a French protestant minister, where he became proficient in French. Before the age of twenty he joined the United Irishmen and his family became ever more closely associated with the movement. In the summer of 1795 Charles travelled through Antrim, Derry, Tyrone, Fermanagh, Leitrim, and Westmeath, drumming up support for the Catholic Defenders. Bartholomew made his own recruiting journey on foot through Ireland and was influential enough to become a member of the national executive committee of the United Irishmen soon after it was set up towards the end of 1796. By then both his brother and his father were in gaol, having been arrested on 16 September 1796 by Lord Castlereagh on suspicion of treason. Luke was confined in Carrickfergus prison until 1802 but Charles appears to have escaped, for, according to his own account, he was on the run together with his brother-in-law, John Maginnis, and Alexander Lowry early in 1797. 
As one of the representatives of Ulster United Irishmen, Bartholomew attended a United Irish meeting in Dublin in early June 1797 to discuss plans for a rising. On returning to Ulster, he and his fellow delegates met resistance from their military leaders in Antrim, who refused to act without guaranteed assistance from the French. Learning that warrants had been issued for their arrest, Teeling and his fellow militants fled Ireland. He travelled via England to Hamburg, where he arrived on 13 July with instructions to check that the Dutch fleet under the command of General Hoche was preparing to set sail for Ireland. He reassured the United Irish leadership in Ulster that all was in order, but by the autumn the situation had dramatically changed, following Hoche's sudden death and the defeat of the Dutch fleet at the battle of Camperdown. Teeling's letter from Paris, where he was then based, to inform his Dublin contacts of the two disasters was crucially intercepted by the Irish authorities. 
In Paris, Teeling's friend Theobald Wolfe Tone procured him a commission in the French army. In the summer of 1798 Teeling, together with Tone's brother Matthew, was sent to join General Humbert's force at Rochefort, one of three fleets preparing to invade Ireland. Appointed aide-de-camp and interpreter to Humbert, Teeling set sail with more than a thousand men who made up Humbert's attack and landed at Killala on 22 August. A misguided campaign ensued: Humbert marched his troops southwards to capture the garrison at Castlebar, thereby losing precious time, and doubled back via Collooney to Ballinamuck, where they met the crown's forces under Cornwallis. The battle on 8 September was short and Humbert soon surrendered. Teeling and Matthew Tone were taken to Dublin, where they were court-martialled and sentenced to death. Although Humbert intervened on Teeling's behalf and praised him for his attempts to prevent the rebel troops from pillaging and carrying out revenge attacks, the lord lieutenant denied the plea for mercy. Teeling was hanged at Arbour Hill prison in Dublin on 24 September 1798. A century later a memorial to him was erected at Carricknagat, near Collooney, where he had distinguished himself in battle on 5 September. 
Charles Teeling remained in Ulster during the 1798 rising and its aftermath, and in 1802 he settled at Dundalk as a linen bleacher. In the same year he married a Miss Carolan of Carrickmacross, co. Monaghan. Later he became proprietor of the 'Belfast Northern Herald' and moved to Newry, where he established the 'Newry Examiner'. From 1832 to 1835 he also owned and edited a monthly periodical, the 'Ulster Magazine'. In 1828 he published his 'Personal narrative of the 'Irish rebellion' of 1798'; a 'Sequel' appeared in 1832. His history is particularly valuable for its description of the Catholic Defender movement in Ulster before 1798 and its relations with the United Irishmen, as well as for its description of the rising in Ulster. Teeling also published an alternative account of the battle of the Diamond in 1795 between the Catholic Defenders and protestant Peep o' Day Boys that led to the formation of the Orange order. Teeling died in Dublin in 1850. His eldest daughter Mary married Thomas O'Hagan, first Baron O'Hagan, in 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 27100


Charles Hamilton Teeling (1778-1850), newspaper proprietor, and George. The family business prospered in the 1780s, and Luke Teeling became a figurehead in the Catholic business community in Antrim. In December 1792 he attended the Catholic Convention as one of the Antrim delegates and spoke passionately in favour of demanding full Catholic emancipation from the British government, now that the Catholic position had been strengthened by the support of Belfast's United Irishmen, with whom Luke was in close contact. His speech was enthusiastically received and the motion carried, but the convention secured only extension of the franchise to Catholics, in the 'Relief Act' of 1793. 


@@@@@


doc= 27101


Teesdale, Sir Christopher Charles (1833-1893), army officer and courtier, was the son of Lieutenant-General Henry George Teesdale (1799-1871), of South Bersted, Sussex, and Rose Budd Dobree of Guernsey. He was born at Grahamstown, Cape Colony, on 1 June 1833. He entered the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich in May 1848, and received a commission as second lieutenant in the Royal Artillery on 18 June 1851. He went to Corfu in 1852, was promoted to first lieutenant on 22 April 1853, and in 1854 was appointed aide-de-camp to Colonel William Fenwick Williams, British commissioner with the Turkish army in Asia Minor during the Crimean War. 
Teesdale, with Dr Humphry Sandwith, another member of the British commissioner's staff, accompanied Williams to Erzurum, and thence to Kars, where they arrived on 24 September 1854, a year before it was besieged by the Russian army. Williams returned to the headquarters of the Turkish army at Erzurum, leaving Teesdale at Kars to establish what discipline and order he could. During the whole winter Teesdale, aided by his interpreter, a Mr Zohrab, worked incessantly to secure the well-being of the troops. Support having arrived at Kars in March 1855, Teesdale returned to Erzurum, rejoined Williams, and was made a major in the Turkish army. In a letter from the Foreign Office dated 7 March 1855, the British government commended Teesdale's efforts to avert a repetition of the previous year's famine at the Kars garrison. 
On 1 June 1855 a courier from Colonel Henry Atwell Lake informed Williams of the formidable Russian army assembled at Gumri, and the indication of a speedy advance upon Kars. On the following day Teesdale started with Williams and Sandwith for Kars, arriving there on 7 June. On the 9th Teesdale, with Zohrab his interpreter, went to his post at the Tahmasp batteries, and on the 12th he made a reconnaissance of the Russian camp. On the 16th the Russians, 25,000 strong, attacked early in the morning, but were repulsed by artillery fire. Two days later the Russians established a blockade of Kars, and shortly afterwards intercepted communication with Erzurum. The garrison of Kars was continually occupied in skirmishes with the enemy, and in the task of strengthening the fortifications. On 7 August an attack was made by the Russians, who were again beaten off. 
Teesdale lived in Tahmasp Tabia with General Kmety, a Hungarian soldier for whom he acted as chief of staff. He was constantly engaged in harassing the Cossacks with parties of riflemen, or in menacing and attacking the Russian cavalry with a company of rifles and a couple of guns. In September the weather deteriorated, provisions grew scarce, cholera broke out, and desertions became frequent. At 4 a.m. on 29 September the Russian general, Muravyov, attacked the heights above Kars and on the opposite side of the river. At Tahmasp the advance was heard and preparations made to meet it. The guns were charged with grapeshot. Teesdale, returning from his rounds, flung himself into the most exposed battery in the redoubt, Yuksek Tabia, the key of the position. The Russians advanced steadily to effect a surprise; but they were received with crushing artillery fire. Some Russian troops penetrated the defences, but Teesdale assisted in organizing the defence, rallied his Turkish gunners, and the Russians were denied success. He prevented Turkish troops from massacring the Russian wounded, and he led two bayonet charges against advancing Russians. The battle of Kars lasted seven and a half hours. Near midday the Russians were driven off in great disorder but, having failed to capture Kars, resumed its siege. 
Teesdale, who was hit by a piece of spent shell and received a severe contusion, was most favourably mentioned in dispatches. On 12 October General Williams wrote: 'My aide-de-camp, Teesdale, had charge of the central redoubt and fought like a lion.' After the battle Teesdale was decorated with the third class of the order of the Mejidiye, and promoted to lieutenant-colonel in the Turkish army. 
Cholera, famine, and severe cold debilitated the garrison and there were nightly desertions. Selim Pasha's large army was expected in November to relieve the besieged troops, but never came. On 24 November 1855 it was considered impossible to hold out any longer, and Teesdale was sent with a flag of truce to the Russian camp to arrange for a meeting of the generals and to discuss terms of capitulation; these were arranged the following day, and on the 28th the garrison laid down its arms, and Teesdale and the other English officers became prisoners of war. They were hospitably treated by the Russians, and started on 30 November for Tiflis, which they reached on 8 December. In January 1856 Teesdale accompanied General Williams to Ryazan, about 180 miles from Moscow. After having been presented to the tsar in March, they were given their liberty and returned to England. 
Teesdale was made a CB on 21 June 1856, though still a lieutenant of Royal Artillery. He was also made an officer of the Legion d'honneur, received the medal for Kars, and on 25 September 1857 was awarded the Victoria Cross for acts of bravery at the battle of 29 September 1855. He was also decorated by the tsar. 
From 1856 to 1859 Teesdale continued to serve as aide-de-camp to Williams, who had been appointed commandant of the Woolwich district. On 1 January 1858 he was promoted to be second captain in the Royal Artillery, and on the 15th of the same month to be brevet major in the army for distinguished service in the field. His gallantry recommended him to the prince consort, who was seeking to surround his eldest son with good influences, and on 9 November 1858 he was appointed equerry to the prince of Wales, a position which he held for thirty-two years. From 1859 to 1864 he was again aide-de-camp to Williams during his term of office as inspector-general of artillery at headquarters in London. He continued to rise in the army, becoming regimental colonel in 1882 and major-general in 1887. He was appointed aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria in 1877, and in 1887, on the occasion of the queen's jubilee, he was made KCMG. 
In 1890 Teesdale resigned the appointment of equerry to the prince of Wales, and was appointed master of the ceremonies and extra equerry to the prince, positions which he held until his death. He retired from the army active list with a pension on 22 April 1892. He died, unmarried, on 1 November 1893 at his home, The Ark, South Bersted, Sussex, from a paralytic stroke, a few days after his return from a small estate he had in Germany. He was buried on 4 November in South Bersted churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 27102


Tegg, Thomas (1776-1846), publisher, was born on 4 March 1776 at Wimbledon, Surrey, the son of Thomas Tegg (1740?-1781) and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Veargitt (1747-1785). His father, a prosperous grocer, died in 1781. His mother remarried the following year, but she died shortly thereafter, in November 1785, leaving Thomas a nine-year-old orphan. 
Thomas Tegg's deceased parents must have left enough money for him to attend boarding-school at Galashiels, Selkirkshire, Scotland, where he spent four happy years, due in large measure to a kindly schoolmaster. However, this pleasant period in his life altered dramatically when he became an apprentice to a tyrannical and drunken bookseller at Dalkeith, Alexander Meggett. Unable to endure his employer's abuse, he ran away, and for several years lived by his wits and hard work, taking different jobs, sometimes with booksellers, throughout the British Isles and Ireland. Just short of his twentieth birthday he decided to go to London to make his fortune in the book trade. There he won and lost several jobs before being hired by John and Arthur Arch, Quaker booksellers in Gracechurch Street. 
With an unexpected legacy of $200 in 1800 Tegg found a business partner and initiated 'Tegg and Dewick', a bookselling business at 6 Westmorland Buildings, Aldgate. He also now felt able to marry Mary Holland (1781-1852) in St Bride's Church on 30 April that same year. Unfortunately the business failed, leaving Tegg nearly bankrupt. Nevertheless he qualified for a licence as a country auctioneer, which allowed him to travel throughout Britain buying odd lots of books to sell later at auction. His wife served as clerk and cashier. This venture proved so successful that he continued holding nightly auctions in London for many years. 
Between 1801 and 1804 Tegg entered into partnership with Castleman. Their shop, the Eccentric Book Warehouse, was located at 122 St John's Street, West Smithfield, London. They not only sold books at retail, but also held auctions and published semi-lurid Gothic tales as chap-books with such titles as 'Albani, or, The Murder of his Child'; 'Almagro and Claude, or, Monastic Murder Exemplified in the Dreadful Doom of an Unfortunate Nun'; and 'Domestic Misery, or, The Victim of Seduction'. In 1804 Tegg severed his connection with Castleman and went into business for himself at 111 Cheapside, premises he kept for the next twenty years. In 1824 he acquired the Old Mansion House at 73 Cheapside, the location of the firm for the rest of his life. 
From the outset Tegg's publishing business, as distinct from auctions and the sale of stationery, divided itself into three main categories. He issued many reprints of books which had gone out of copyright; he purchased remainders, sometimes with the copyrights, from other publishers, and sold them at greatly reduced prices; and he produced a number of original works, often on commission. Tegg wrote: 'My line is to watch the expiration of copyright and then produce to the public either current works at a cheaper rate, or to revive works of merit which have been lost to the public by the perversity of authors, by bungling of the first publishers, or by excessive price; and I have in this way disinterred a number of good books, which, in my management, have had a great sale. (Tegg, 'Extension of Copyright')' At a time when Dr Samuel Johnson's 'Dictionary' was selling for 5 guineas Tegg came out with an edition at 2 guineas. He published several abridgements of Blackstone's legal 'Commentaries', one of which sold for as little as 4's'. 6died Other standard works he reissued included Adam Smith's 'Wealth of Nations'; ten volumes of John Locke's works; Burton's 'Anatomy of Melancholy'; Hooker's 'Ecclesiastical Polity'; and the writings of Bishop Butler. In general Tegg opposed copyright, since it interfered with his reprint business. He was dismayed at the prospect of an even longer term for copyright if Sergeant Talfourd and his supporters prevailed: an extension from twenty-eight to forty-two years, or seven years beyond the life of an author, whichever was the longer term. 
Authors targeted Tegg for opprobrium. Thomas Carlyle wrote to the House of Commons: 'May it please your honourable house, to forbid all Thomas Teggs, and other extraneous persons... to steal from him his small winnings, for a space of sixty years, at shortest. After sixty years, unless your honourable house provides otherwise, they may begin to steal. ('Parliamentary Debates, Commons', 9 Sept 1838)' Tegg lost this struggle, and copyright was extended in 1842, but by then he was resigned to watching others struggle to produce cheap reprints of standard and popular works. 
A second part of Tegg's business involved acquiring and subsequently selling remainders, the dead stock of others. One of the attractions of these transactions was that the expenses were usually borne by the original publishers who had either fallen on hard times or suffered bad luck. Certainly, opportunism marked Tegg throughout his career. The panic of 1825-6 devastated publishers and printers who owned the copyrights to Sir Walter Scott's novels. Tegg predictably took advantage of this and hastened to a sale by Hurst and Robinson where he bought 'the best of Scott's novels' at 4died a volume. In this instance he acquired only the leftover stock, not the copyrights. 
The firm of Colburn and Bentley became one of Tegg's best sources for remainders during the turbulent years from 1829 to 1832. At the conclusion of their partnership, Tegg agreed to buy the remainders of twenty-seven works from them, among which were: 'Adventures of an Irish Gentleman', 'Adventures of Perkin Warbeck', 'Caleb Williams', 'Basil Barrington', 'Clarence', 'Country Curate', 'Denounced', 'The English at Home', 'The English Army in France', 'Gertrude', 'Hope Lesley', 'Journal of the Heart', 'Midsummer Medley', 'Mussulman', and 'Tales of an Indian Caliph'. 
In 1834 John Murray reluctantly concluded that he had to dispose of the remaining volumes of his 'Family Library', and so turned to Thomas Tegg. In what became the largest outlay of his career, Tegg paid $8000 for 355,000 volumes of the library. According to their agreement, Tegg did not acquire the copyrights of the Murray volumes, but he did get all the leftover bound stock; the stereotype plates; woodcuts; copies bound in boards; and copies in quires. 
In addition to reprinting out-of-copyright books and selling remainders, Tegg became a major publisher of new books. Some were little more than extended pamphlets, while others were multi-volume editions. When news reached London of Horatio Nelson's death at Trafalgar in 1805, Tegg hastily commissioned someone to do a biography with a woodcut portrait, 5000 copies of which were sold for 6died each. Tegg also produced 4000 copies of a life of Napoleon Bonaparte at 6died Both were at the low end of the price scale, whereas his monumental 'London Encyclopedia' (1825), in twenty-two super royal octavo volumes, commanded many guineas. 
Representative samples among his entirely new publications include: 'Collection of Gothic Tales and Romances' (1811); 'Comic Song Book' (1817); 'A New Chronology, or, Historical Companion' (1811); 'Handbook for Emigrants' (1839); 'Present for Apprentices' (2nd edn, 1848); and 'Treasury of Wit and Anecdote' (1842). 
Thomas Tegg was the head of a large family of twelve children, and did what he could to further the business interests of his sons. Two of them, James and Samuel, emigrated to Australia in 1834 and established bookstores in Sydney and Hobart Town. Besides selling books, they published original Australian works and distributed new books imported from their father in London. Thomas was uncertain which, if any, of his sons would want to continue his publishing enterprise, especially after James died unexpectedly in Australia in 1845. 
Throughout his life Thomas Tegg took great pride in his accomplishments and would not let others forget his humble origins. He characterized himself as 'the broom that swept the booksellers' warehouses', and boasted in 1838, 'I have published more books, and sold them at a cheaper rate, than any bookseller in Britain' (letter to the editor of 'The Times'). His reputation, on the other hand, rested on his exploitation of the reprint and remainder trade. To appreciate Tegg's achievement it is instructive to compare his publishing output with that of a major firm like that of George Routledge. After fifty years in business from 1836 to 1888, Routledge estimated that he had issued approximately 5000 works, an average of two every week. Similarly, Tegg claimed to have published 4000 titles after forty years (1800-40), also averaging two volumes per week. An even more revealing comparison is their respective net worth at the time of their deaths: Routledge's estate had a value of $80,000, while Tegg's amounted to $90,000. 
Thomas Tegg died in Wimbledon on 21 April 1846 while his youngest son, twenty-year-old Alfred Byron Tegg, was at Pembroke College, Oxford. According to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', Alfred 'was so affected by the shock of his father's death, that his own followed shortly after, and their bodies were deposited on the same day on the grandfather's coffin in Wimbledon churchyard' ('GM'). 
Tegg's obituary reiterated the theme of his hard-won success: 'Mr. Tegg's early career was one of struggling and difficulty, and his life presents a striking illustration of how much can be accomplished by perseverance and earnestness of purpose' ('GM'). 
In 1847 William moved the firm to 12 Pancras Lane, London. Three years later it was relocated to 85 Queen Street where it remained until 1860, when it returned to 12 Pancras Lane for another twenty-three years. William continued the practice of reprinting standard works, buying up remainders, and commissioning new publications, particularly schoolbooks, children's literature, humour, reference works, and practical manuals. He borrowed the pseudonym Peter Parley to write books for the young, and his series 'Talks with Animals' ran through twelve editions. From 1854 to 1875 he was a member of the common council of the City of London. 
In 1883 William moved to 12 Doughty Street, and retired from the business in 1890. He died in London on 23 December 1895 and was survived by his wife, Mary Ann. 


@@@@@


doc= 27103


William Tegg (1816-1895), publisher, was born in Cheapside on 29 May 1816. He was articled to an engraver before joining his father's firm. In his will Thomas provided that William could select $5000 worth of books from the firm's stock prior to the rest being sold at auction. With this legacy William decided to carry on the business, although on a more modest scale and without the flamboyance of the founder. 


@@@@@


doc= 27104


Teilo (supp. fl. c.550), holy man and supposed bishop, was the founder of the episcopal church of Llandeilo Fawr in Dyfed. By the twelfth century he had been appropriated by the expanding see of Llandaff and erroneously turned into its second bishop. Along with David and Padarn, Teilo of Llandeilo was one of the most important saints in south-west Wales, although by the eleventh century his church had fallen within the sphere of the kingdom of Morgannwg in the south-east, which facilitated its eventual appropriation by Llandaff. His feast day is celebrated on 9 February. As a hypocoristic of a type very well attested among Irish and British saints of the sixth century, but only rarely thereafter, the name Teilo is good evidence for the saint's floruit, and for the antiquity of his cult. Although there are passing notices of Teilo in the twelfth-century lives of other Welsh saints, the main surviving accounts of his alleged life and deeds are two related versions of the 'Vita sancti Teiliaui'. This life was composed as part of the ecclesiastical propaganda in the 'Book of Llandaff', compiled under Bishop Urban in the early twelfth century and intended to provide the episcopal church with a demonstrable early history. Consequently the information supplied about Teilo is of uncertain reliability at best. Much of the text seems to be a rewriting of material from a (lost) life of St David with the intention of elevating the position of Teilo and therefore, of course, that of the church of Llandaff. There is also a Middle English metrical life of Telyou preserved in BL, Egerton MS 2810, folios 94-99, which is based on the earlier 'Vita' and was possibly composed at Gloucester. 
The earlier version of the life of Teilo (traditionally attributed to Geoffrey, brother of Bishop Urban) states that he was of noble parentage, while the second version, contained in the 'Book of Llandaff', adds that he was born at 'Eccluis Gunniau', near Penally in Dyfed, and names his parents as Ensig ap Hydwn Ddu and Gwenhaf ferch Llifonwy, thus making him the uncle of St Euddogwy. This link to Euddogwy (Oudoceus) was probably intended to provide Teilo with a suitable connection to his successor to the bishopric of Llandaff and casts suspicion over the whole genealogical scheme. Both versions claim that Teilo was a disciple of St Dyfrig 'archipresul', whom, it is claimed, he was to succeed as bishop of Llandaff. However, Rhigyfarch's life of St David, composed 'c'.1090, has Eliud as disciple of David, perhaps suggesting that the connection to Dyfrig was also a later invention at Llandaff. The 'Vita sancti Teiliaui' also contains an elaborate description of the alleged journey of David, Teilo, and Padarn to Jerusalem, as well as an account of Teilo's visit to Brittany, including Dol. His death, at or near Llandeilo, is said to have led to a three-way conflict over possession of his body between the churches of Penally, Llandeilo, and Llandaff, which was resolved by its miraculous multiplication into three bodies -- though the author of the life clearly regarded the one preserved at Llandaff as the original! 
The information about the saint contained in this life has been coloured by the interests of Llandaff to such an extent that its reliability as a source for hagiographical (never mind historical) information about the original Teilo, patron of Llandeilo Fawr, is uncertain. However, evidence for the earlier history, or at least the existence, of his cult and episcopal church has been preserved in the marginalia entered into the so-called Lichfield gospels during the eighth and ninth centuries, when the manuscript was still housed at Llandeilo. These include land grants to 'God and St Teilo' (that is, his church) as well as manumissions and other documents witnessed by the 'bishop of Teilo'. In addition, the text in the 'Book of Llandaff' entitled 'Braint Teilo' ('The privilege of Teilo'), which was probably originally composed in the late tenth or early eleventh century, describes the privileges and immunities granted to the church of Teilo by the kings of Morgannwg (Glamorgan), and demonstrates that by that time the church of Teilo was located within the sphere of Morgannwg -- a precondition of its eventual appropriation by Llandaff. The topographic evidence for the cult of Teilo in Wales further demonstrates that the appropriation of the saint and his church by Llandaff was a late development, since it is focused on Llandeilo and not Llandaff. The dedications are therefore concentrated in western Carmarthenshire (around Llandeilo) and western Pembrokeshire (in Penally and Daugleddyf), with extensions in Glamorgan (four dedications), Monmouthshire (four), Brecknockshire (two), and also in Radnorshire and Cardiganshire (with one dedication each). The distribution closely mirrors that of St David's cult, possibly reflecting the earlier association between these two important south-west Welsh saints. According to his Llandaff life, Teilo visited Brittany and consequently it is not surprising to find dedications to him there, especially in Cornouaille, including the church and parish of Landelau and the church of Landeliau in Plevin. 


@@@@@


doc= 27105


Telfair, Charles (1778-1833), naturalist, was born at Belfast and arrived in Mauritius as a naval surgeon on one of the British blockading ships in 1810. He settled there, practised as a surgeon, and served as government secretary at Bourbon (Reunion), and private secretary to Sir Robert Farquhar at Mauritius. He also held the posts of guardian of vacant estates and secretary to the vice-admiralty court, and became something of a sugar 'baron', introducing the first horizontal roller mill at the Bel-Ombre factory in 1819. He became a correspondent of Sir William Jackson Hooker, sent plants to Kew, became honorary supervisor of the botanical garden at Pamplemousses, Mauritius, 1826-9, and established a botanical garden at Reunion. He also collected bones of an extinct bird, the solitaire, from Rodriguez, which he forwarded to the Zoological Society, London, and to the Andersonian Museum, Glasgow. From 1829 to 1833 Telfair was president of the Societe d'Histoire Naturelle at Port Louis, a society which he co-founded. In 1830 he published 'Some account of the state of slavery at Mauritius since the British occupation in 1810, in refutation of anonymous charges... against government and that colony'. 
Telfair was married to Annabella Chamberlain. He died at Port Louis, Mauritius, on 14 July 1833 following a short but painful illness, and was buried in the cemetery there. Hooker commemorated him by the African genus 'Telfairia' in the cucumber family. His wife, who died at Port Louis on 23 May 1832, also communicated specimens of Mauritius algae to W. J. Hooker and drawings to 'Curtis's Botanical Magazine' (1826-30). 


@@@@@


doc= 27106


Telfer, James (1800-1862), poet and novelist, was born on 3 December 1800 in Southdean, Roxburghshire, the son of John Telfer and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Taylor, a domestic servant. His father was a shepherd, and Telfer at first supported himself in the same line of work, but through a process of self-education he eventually gained a post as schoolmaster at Castleton, Roxburghshire; after 1834, he was auxiliary schoolmaster at a small country school at Saughtrees, Liddesdale, Roxburghshire, where he remained until his death. Never earning more than $20 a year, he none the less married Janet Beattie, supported a family, and from time to time continued to write. 
Telfer's interest in writing was spurred on by a youthful acquaintance with James Hogg, who befriended and encouraged him. His first book was 'Border Ballads and other Miscellaneous Pieces' (1824), dedicated to Hogg, and to some degree imitative of him. Some of the poems are marred by conventionalized sentimental diction, but the poems that make use of Scots dialect are often remarkable for their pace, intensity, and humour. Of these, several combine folkloric subjects with a wit and charm reminiscent of Burns: 'The Gloamyne Buchte' deals with a young couple's tryst being interrupted by the appearance of a bizarre supernatural creature who sings a fantastic song about stealing children, and 'The Kerlyn's Brocke' is a wild and delightful evocation of a witches' sabbath. Though forgotten today, these are minor gems that, along with lyrics like 'Love has stown my wits away', deserve a place in anthologies of the period. 
Telfer also published a novel, 'Barbara Gray, or, The Widow's Daughter' (1835), which was popular enough to be reprinted in a collection of his work in 1852. Though uneven and sometimes prolix, 'Barbara Gray' is still worth reading, being animated primarily by angry social protest against rapacious landowners in rural Scotland -- a stronger theme than the mature Telfer was comfortable with, for he wrote in the preface to the reprinted edition that he hoped he would not be accused of a 'design to promote discontent'. (This may have been politic, for the 1852 volume is dedicated to the duke of Northumberland.) The novel's bleak conclusion emphasizes the helplessness of the poor, a condition with which Telfer was quite familiar. The vicious landowner's persecution and seduction of Barbara Gray seems inspired by the novels of Richardson, as does her slow descent into misery and death thereafter. But despite its melodrama and its darkness, 'Barbara Gray' is also a skilful tale of love and loss set amid an often beautifully evoked highland landscape. It suggests that Telfer might have developed into a capable and original novelist, but he published no other books of fiction. He died of apoplexy on 18 January 1862 at his home in Saughtrees. 


@@@@@


doc= 27107


Telford, Thomas (1757-1834), civil engineer, was born on 9 August 1757 at Glendinning sheep farm in the parish of Westerkirk, Eskdale, Dumfriesshire, the second son, the first of the same name having died in infancy, of John Telford, an Eskdale shepherd, and his wife, Janet Jackson (died 1794). Four months later his father died and Telford was brought up by his mother. 
The close knit Eskdale community, in particular Telford's mother's brother Thomas, believed to have been factor to Sir James Johnstone of Westerhall, helped to support the family. Although brought up in poverty, Telford is said to have been so full of fun and humour that he was known as 'Laughing Tam' (Smiles, 296). He gained a good basic education at Westerkirk parish school, interspersed with occasional farm work. At school he met the younger generation of leading local families, and formed a close friendship with Andrew Little, later a schoolmaster in Langholm, his subsequent correspondence with whom until 1803 represents the main source of information on his early life. 
On leaving school about 1772 Telford was at first apprenticed to a stonemason at Lochmaben, from whom he is believed to have run away after being badly used, and then to Andrew Thomson at Langholm, working on the simple buildings of that remote locality. Langholm Bridge, probably built about 1778, is said to bear Telford's mason's mark, and he is reputed to have carved the Pasley family memorial and headstone to his father's grave which still exist in Westerkirk churchyard. Whenever an opportunity arose, Telford diligently gleaned knowledge from books borrowed from Eskdale's scanty shelves, for example, on literature and poetry from the elderly Miss Pasley of Craig, who befriended him. In 1780, having mastered such mason-work as Eskdale could provide, he went to Edinburgh to improve his prospects and presumably worked on its New Town or possibly at Ramsey Lane where his reputed mason's mark was found during demolition of a building in 1973. While there, in his spare time, he learned to draw and studied the architecture of the locality, sketching and admiring the Gothic splendour of Melrose Abbey and Roslin Chapel, a style which later influenced much of his own work. 
In February 1782 Telford's restless ambition drove him to seek more challenging and better paid work in London where, through John Pasley, an eminent merchant and relative of Miss Pasley, he met architects Robert Adam and Sir William Chambers and obtained employment as a stonemason on the building of Somerset House. The following year he seriously considered, but decided against, entering into business with a fellow stonemason, Mr Hatton, to contract for work at Somerset House. While in London Telford was consulted by Sir James Johnstone of Westerhall about alterations to his house in Eskdale and was instructed in the matter by his brother, William Pulteney (1729-1805). Pulteney, who had changed his name on marrying the heiress of the earl of Bath, was impressed by Telford's work and personality and employed him on the restoration of Sudborough rectory, Northamptonshire, in 1783-4. Other commissions followed and within a decade a close friendship had developed between them to the extent that Telford was known in Shrewsbury as 'young Pulteney'. His career owed much to Pulteney's powerful patronage. 
In 1784 the funding for building Somerset House stalled and Telford obtained employment in Portsmouth, working on the dockyard commissioner's house and chapel designed by Samuel Wyatt. Before long he was superintending the contract, his first important position of independence and responsibility. While at Portsmouth he widened his knowledge by observing harbour and dock work under construction, and studying limes and mortars from copies of the lectures of Joseph Black and Antoine Francois de Fourcroy, adding to the compilation of useful data which became his vade-mecum. Telford was a freemason and in a letter of February 1786 wrote that he was about to direct the fitting up of a lodge room to his plans at The George inn. On completion of the dockyard buildings later in the year Telford went to Shropshire at Pulteney's invitation (he was then an MP for Shrewsbury) to undertake the restoration of Shrewsbury Castle as an occasional residence. In July 1787, with a reference from Robert Adam, he became clerk of works for the new county gaol at a salary of $60 per annum. Soon afterwards he was operating as county surveyor of public works, a post which he held for life, later through his able deputy, Thomas Stanton, at Ellesmere, directing work on public buildings including at least forty-two bridges. 
Telford lived in and practised as an architect from Shrewsbury Castle during and after restoring it in the Gothic style. Other work upon which he was engaged in 1787-93 included the county infirmary, private houses, street improvements, drainage, and the following church work: restoration of St Mary's, Shrewsbury, and All Saints', Baschurch, the new churches of St Mary Magdalen, Bridgnorth, which Pevsner calls 'a remarkable design, of great gravity inside and out, and apparently done in full awareness of recent developments in France' ('Pevsner, 'Shropshire''), St Michael's, Madeley, and, almost certainly, the basic plan for St Leonard's, Malinslee. In 1788 at Pulteney's request Telford advised on St Chad's, Shrewsbury, accurately predicting its fall just before the event actually occurred. He also superintended the excavation of the ruins of the Roman city of Uriconium, on Pulteney's estate near Wroxeter, the plan and sections for which, in 'Archaeologia', 1789, represent his earliest-known published drawings. In 1793 he added greatly to his knowledge of architecture and antiquities from a study tour of Bath, Oxford, London, and other cities. 
In 1790, at Pulteney's instigation as a director of the British Fisheries Society, Telford's lifelong connection with the society began. He advised on the improvement of numerous harbours and settlements in northern Scotland including Lochbay, Tobermory, Ullapool, Keise, Staxigo, Broad Haven, Wick, Sarclet, Clyth, Lybster, Forse, Dunbeath, Helmsdale, Brora, and Portmahomack. The largest, Pulteneytown, at Wick, executed to his designs over several decades, with its impressive Argyll Square, still survives as a fine testimonial to his architectural and planning skills. In 1796 Telford tested and soon after used at Lochbay pier a newly patented aluminous hydraulic cement, later known as Roman cement, which set very quickly. His support for and extensive use of the cement influenced its nationwide adoption for many years in facing, pointing, and brick-jointing mortars. Telford's work for the society led to his involvement in governmental surveys of the highlands in 1801-2 and to his wide-ranging recommendations for improvement which resulted in the setting up of commissions for making the Caledonian Canal and highland roads and bridges. In 1834 the society made Telford a present of inscribed silverware 'in grateful acknowledgement of the numerous and valuable professional services gratuitously rendered during a long course of years' (Dunlop, 59). 
Telford's engineering career developed from 1793 on his appointment as 'General Agent, Surveyor, Engineer, Architect and Overlooker' (Gibb, 28) to the important 68 mile Ellesmere Canal, joining the rivers Mersey, Dee, and Severn. The canal, now a thriving leisure facility, still makes use of many buildings and structures designed and built under Telford's direction. The most remarkable is Pontcysyllte cast-iron aqueduct over the Dee, based on his embryo sketch design of March 1794, except for the piers, but not developed until after the iron trough concept had been proved operationally at Longdon-on-Tern aqueduct on the Shrewsbury Canal in 1795-6. At Pontcysyllte, with the support and approval of William Jessop, Telford deviated from traditional bulky masonry construction by building eighteen upright masonry piers and forming nineteen arches with cast-iron ribs supporting an iron trough with 1 in. thick sides, 1007 ft long and 126 ft high. The ironwork was made and erected by William Hazledine, the masonry was built by John Simpson, and the whole supervised by Matthew Davidson. The result, the supreme engineering achievement of the canal age, was still in service in 2003. Sir Walter Scott thought it 'the most impressive work of art he had ever seen' (ibid., 35). A misleading attempt by Hadfield in 1993 to question the traditional attribution of the concept and design of the aqueduct to Telford is incompatible with authoritative early evidence. 
The 60 mile Caledonian Canal constructed across the highlands of Scotland in 1804-22 was engineered by Telford and Jessop jointly until 1812, afterwards solely by Telford, basically with the same team that built Chirk and Pontcysyllte aqueducts. Davidson superintended work at the eastern end and John Telford, succeeded by Alexander Easton, at the western end. Simpson was the main contractor, with John Wilson and John Cargill working as his foremen masons. In engineering terms the 100 ft wide ship canal, with its twenty-eight huge locks and deep summit cutting at Laggan, was then the most advanced in the world. In making it, innovation abounded in the use of iron railways, machinery, equipment, steam engines for pumping and dredging, and in lock construction, notably at Beauly where a 55 ft depth of mud was preconsolidated before excavating the lock-pit. 
Despite its hard-won achievement and provision of much-needed work (in 1811, 1385 men were employed), the Caledonian Canal was in other respects one of Telford's less successful projects. Costs escalated with high inflation and unforeseen difficulties, additional funding was in short supply, and some workmanship, for example at Banavie and Fort Augustus locks, proved defective. A. E. Penfold attributed the latter to a lack of close site supervision arising from a management structure favouring the contractors. The canal, which eventually opened in 1822, had a depth of 12 ft instead of 20 ft, had cost about twice the estimate, and had taken eighteen years instead of seven to cut. By then, through no fault of Telford's, the reasons for creating it had largely evaporated and, relative to its capacity, the canal, although important locally, has never been much used, except in 1918 when there were 6254 passages associated with mine-laying in the North Sea. The canal is now a major tourist attraction. 
In Sweden the Trollhatte Canal, comprising the western end of the Gotha Canal, had been completed in 1800 under the direction of its promoter, Count von Platen, and engineer, Samuel Bagge. From 1808 Telford, at the invitation of the king of Sweden, acted as consulting engineer for its 114 mile eastwards extension from Lake Vanern to the Baltic at Soderkoping, with at first Bagge and later Lagerheim superintending operations in Sweden. In 1808, with his assistants William Hughes and Hamilton Fulton, Telford met and surveyed the line with von Platen, provisionally fixing lock sites, sizes, and other details. It was the start of a close friendship which lasted until von Platen's death in 1829. Construction commenced in 1809 and four years later 7000 men were employed, including John Wilson and James Simpson from 1813, but there were delays and the canal was not completed until 1832. Telford's guidance was transmitted to von Platen in a voluminous correspondence. In 1809 Telford was made a knight of the Swedish royal order of Vasa in recognition of his valuable services, his letters from Sweden afterwards being addressed to 'Sir Thomas Telford'. His international reputation was now such that he was also consulted by the Russian government on canal navigation schemes. 
Telford worked in various capacities on at least thirty-three canal projects in Great Britain and on the Welland Canal in Canada and the Panama Canal, and was involved with eleven river navigation projects. He also investigated the development of fast canal boats and in 1832-3 hundreds of experiments were made at the Adelaide Gallery, London, by his chief assistant, John Macneill, in an unsuccessful attempt to compete with steam locomotion on railways. 
Telford was the last of the great canal engineers of the industrial revolution. Of his later projects, Harecastle Tunnel, on the Trent and Mersey Canal, was one of the most remarkable feats in tunnelling history. More than 2920 yards long, it was constructed, in exact accordance with his plans under the supervision of resident engineer, James Potter, in less than three years from fifteen shafts. The Birmingham Canal improvement, engineered to his characteristically direct line and level by means of the best practice and a prodigious cutting at Smethwick, saved 8 miles in length and offered maximum benefit to its users in other ways. This, too, ranks as one of the finest canal engineering projects. Similarly, the Birmingham and Liverpool Junction Canal effected a 12 mile saving in length, but required long cuttings up to 90 ft deep in what turned out to be slip-susceptible marl, and a diversion at Shelmore to avoid Lord Anson's game preserves which involved a mile-long embankment up to 60 ft high. Both features presented Telford with great problems as his health declined, problems which were eventually overcome under William Cubitt's direction. To the north, Telford's canal-seaport warehouse interchange at Ellesmere Port, greatly used for over a century, represented a peak of efficiency for the time. 
Telford's main achievements in road making were the London to Holyhead and Bangor to Chester roads as engineer to the Holyhead road commissioners from 1815, and the Glasgow to Carlisle, Lanarkshire, and highlands of Scotland roads as engineer to the highland roads commissioners from 1803. These long-distance arteries of the heyday of coaching declined in use from the 1840s as the railway network developed, to be resurrected in the twentieth century as Telford's vision of mechanical propulsion was fulfilled by the motor vehicle. Abroad, for Tsar Alexander I, Telford advised on the 100 mile Warsaw to Brzesc major road towards Moscow, completed in 1825. Unexecuted or partially executed improvements on roads which he surveyed for the government or others included the Carlisle to Portpatrick, Birmingham to Liverpool, Carlisle to Edinburgh, London to Milford Haven and south Wales, and the Great North Road from London via York and Edinburgh to Inverness. 
Between 1803 and 1821, with the valuable assistance of John Rickman, James Hope, and John Mitchell, respectively, secretary, agent, and chief inspector to the highland road commissioners, Telford was responsible for the provision of about 1200 miles of new or improved roads in the highlands, with 1100 bridges. These works opened up Scotland west and north of the Great Glen, in Telford's own words, 'advancing the country at least a century' (Smiles, 389). His connection with the Holyhead and Scottish roads continued through inspections for the rest of his life. In terms of construction his major roads were commodious, well-drained and incorporated a hand-pitched stone foundation beneath a layer of conventional road metal. Unlike J. L. McAdam's roads, they were properly engineered to improved lines and gentle gradients, and, although more expensive initially, facilitated traction and reduced maintenance costs. Sir Henry Parnell considered the Holyhead Road to be 'a model of the most perfect road making that has ever been attempted in any country' (Parnell, 35). Much of it is still in use and considered 'a long-lasting memorial to Telford's skill and vision' (Penfold, 'Engineer', 58). 
Throughout his lifetime Telford designed, built, or advised on, thousands of masonry bridges, including 1100 to a standard specification on highland roads alone in 1803-21. His bridges ranged from simple culverts to the sophisticated 150 ft elliptical span of Over bridge, Gloucester (1826-30). His first major bridge was erected over the Severn at Montford in 1790-92 using convict labour. Six years later it was followed by Bewdley Bridge, which, with its segmental arches and classical balustrades in a gentle arc, is considered 'one of the most elegant bridges in England' (Ruddock, 154). Telford's finest Scottish bridges include Dunkeld (1805-9), also with its extrados on the arc of a great circle, and his 'ne plus ultra' of architectural experimentation and excellence of construction, Dean bridge, Edinburgh (1829-32), with its intricately achieved slenderness. Gibb considered the bridges at Broomielaw, Glasgow (1833-5), and Dean, 'a fitting crown to Telford's creative life' (Gibb, 261). Both were constructed by John Gibb under the competent supervision of resident engineer Charles Atherton. In construction terms, from 1790 Telford developed, and by example widely influenced, the beneficial adoption of hollow piers and spandrels in large-span bridges, which resulted in a stronger structure, facilitated internal inspection, and reduced weight on foundations. Telford's architectural experience enabled him to impart grace and beauty to the appearance of many of his bridges. 
Telford's innovative practice was also most effectively applied to cast-iron road bridges. Buildwas Bridge (1796), probably the second major iron bridge to be completed in Britain, differed considerably in concept from Coalbrookdale iron bridge in that Telford modelled it on the principles of timber rather than masonry construction. In applying this more appropriate concept, particularly if its iron was as ductile as that which he used later, he achieved a bridge of half the weight of that at Coalbrookdale with a considerably increased span. Four years later Telford, with a young associate, James Douglass, made a very bold proposal for a 600 ft cast-iron arch over the Thames to replace London Bridge. From 1800 it was promoted in a superb Malton aquatint, later issues of which were dedicated by Telford to George III. Expert opinion on the practicability of the proposal, widely canvassed under Telford's direction by a parliamentary committee, varied greatly and although the project was seriously considered for many years it was not implemented, in Skempton's opinion because of 'the unprecedented scale of the project, coupled with lack of knowledge of and agreement on the technical factors involved' (Penfold, 'Engineer', 79). 
In 1810 Telford, drawing on his previous experience and experiments, designed an economical prefabricated, lozenge-lattice spandrel arch for use at locations where it would be more expensive or impracticable to construct in masonry. At least nine arches with standardized spans of 105 or 150 ft were cast and erected by Hazledine in 1812-30, of which those at Craigellachie, Chester (Eaton Hall), Holt Fleet, and Birmingham (Galton) are still in use, as is another at Tewkesbury of larger span. The prototype at Bonar Bridge over Dornoch Firth, erected in 1812, lasted until 1891. Of Telford's cast-iron bridges, Rolt aptly commented, 'No other man has ever handled cast iron with such complete assurance and understanding, his exact knowledge... enabling him to achieve that perfection of proportion which gives strength the deceptive semblance of fragility' (Rolt, xiii). 
Telford's creation on the Holyhead Road of the elegant Menai wrought-iron suspension bridge, with an unprecedented span of nearly 580 ft, was his greatest work and the most outstanding bridge development of the early nineteenth century. Its final form evolved from his experimentally based proposal of 1814-18 for Runcorn Bridge, further experimental work, and an almost continuous design process, to its triumphal opening in 1826. In 1814 Telford had correctly anticipated modern practice in envisaging parallel wire main cables, but eventually opted for flat chain-bar links as being more practicable to achieve and maintain at that time. The masonry, which is of exceptional quality, was executed by John Wilson. Hazledine manufactured the ironwork, the testing and fixing of which under the supervision of resident engineer William Provis, his brother John Provis, and Thomas Rhodes, was at the forefront of technology. Nearly 36,000 bars and plates, including all those used in the bridge, were tested to about twice their design load. A relatively minor but significant drawback of the bridge, which gave Telford an anxious time in 1825-6, was that its deck undulated in strong winds, but fortunately only moderately during his lifetime. (This was adequately remedied at moderate cost under Provis's direction in 1839.) 
Telford's experimental results were widely propagated in leading textbooks and in 1828 Provis published a magnificently illustrated account of the Menai Bridge project dedicated to Telford. In 2003 the Institution of Civil Engineers and American Society of Civil Engineers recognized both bridges as 'international civil engineering landmarks'. The project led to a surge in suspension bridge building and exercised a fundamental influence on the practice and development of I. K. Brunel, J. L. Clark, J. M. Rendel, and others between 1818 and 1840, establishing this type of bridge in its true role as the most economic means of achieving the largest spans. From about 1840, according to J. A. Roebling in 1867, because suspension bridges were not considered rigid enough for railway use, Telford's great achievement was mistakenly left unappreciated and greatly undervalued. The Menai Bridge was tastefully reconditioned in 1940. Conwy suspension bridge, created by means of the identical technology, also opened in 1826, still has its original ironwork. Telford's other suspension bridge projects included his controversial Clifton Bridge proposal of 1830, in which he envisaged possible deck undulation being inhibited by means of smaller spans, at the same time offering an opportunity for two splendid Gothic revival towers rising dramatically from the floor of the gorge. The design is understood to have received general approval, but it failed to attract sufficient funding. 
Telford believed that a fundamental disadvantage of carriage by railway, as distinct from canals and tramways, was that all traffic would have to be handled by the company owning the line, thus creating monopolies to the disadvantage of the user. He considered that steam power could best be applied to land transport in the form, not of railways, but of self-propelled vehicles operating on roads. He supported the setting up of and gave evidence to a parliamentary select committee in 1831, which reported that steam carriages were practicable and safe and should be protected from high tolls. By 1833 Telford was a leading promoter in a steam carriage company intended to operate on the London to Holyhead road and took part in an experimental journey on the London to Birmingham section in Dance's steam carriage. The size of the engine proved to be insufficient and the carriage only reached Stoney Stratford, 57 miles from London, at an average speed of 7 m.p.h. High tolls, opposition from vested interests, mechanical shortcomings, and Telford's death in the following year, all contributed to the demise of this initiative. 
Railway projects on which Telford acted as engineer or advised included the Stratford and Moreton line (1821-6), operated with horse traction, and the Clarence (1828-9), Newcastle and Carlisle (1829), and Liverpool and Manchester (1827-9) railways; the latter's directors had offered him the post of engineer in 1825 but he declined, possibly out of loyalty to some of the canal companies by whom he was employed. During construction, following some difficulties, he inspected this work with George Stephenson in connection with a $100,000 exchequer loan and was instrumental in persuading the company to abandon the idea of fixed engines and inclined planes in favour of a level line suitable for locomotive haulage. Important railway proposals which he planned, but which were not executed, included the Glasgow to Berwick line (1810), to be operated with horse traction and steam-powered inclined planes; the London to Dover (1824), locomotive operated; East and West India docks (1828); and the Glasgow, Forth, and Clyde Canal to Broomielaw (1829), which was mainly in tunnel. 
Telford made an important contribution to the drainage of the English fens. In 1818-21, jointly with the elder John Rennie, he advised on the execution of the Eau Brinck Cut which bypassed the meandering Ouse above King's Lynn. The cut, the width of which had been specified by Joseph Huddart, proved to be insufficient and soon afterwards it was widened at Telford's instigation with most beneficial effects. Telford also worked on the Nene outfall cut from Wisbeach to Crab Hole in the Wash, executed in 1827-30 for about $200,000. It was on this work, while visiting Crab Hole with the younger John Rennie, that he was soaked to the skin in a storm and caught a severe chill. On his way back to London, Telford was taken with a violent diarrhoea at Cambridge, where he was confined for a fortnight and nearly died. His health never fully recovered and the complaint returned from time to time with increasing severity until his death. Rennie found Telford 'a most agreeable facetious companion' (Rennie, 201). Telford's most important achievement in this field, made possible by the Nene outfall cut, was the drainage of about 48,000 acres of the North Level. For this work, carried out in 1830-34 for about $150,000, he was the sole engineer. 
Telford advised on or acted as engineer for the improvement of more than 100 harbours, docks, or piers, including many in Scotland for the highland road commissioners using forfeited estates funds. In addition to the British Fisheries Society harbours already mentioned, these included, between 1801 and his death, those at Aberdeen, Peterhead, Ardrossan, Glasgow, Fraserburgh, Dundee, Leith, Belfast, Holyhead, Howth and Dunmore, Greenock, and Dover. At St Katharine's Dock in the Port of London, on a restricted and awkwardly shaped site which had required the demolition of more than 1250 houses and the excavation of 27 acres, in 1826-8 Telford designed an entrance lock giving access to a basin interconnecting two irregular-shaped docks. This arrangement enabled each dock to be cleaned out separately without interrupting shipping operations. The loss of water through lockage was compensated for by an ingenious arrangement of pumps which delivered water from the river into either the lock or basin as required. The work, which was the most advanced of its kind, was executed under the diligent supervision of Rhodes as resident engineer. 
Telford advised on numerous water supply schemes, one of the earliest, in 1799-1802, being a piped supply to Liverpool pumped by steam engines from springs at Bootle. In 1806 he was appointed engineer of the Glasgow waterworks and, in association with James Watt, completely reorganized its defective and impure supply. An innovative feature was a cast-iron main with flexible joints specially invented by Watt to enable water to cross the Clyde. In 1810-22 Telford was consulted on Edinburgh water supply and in association with local engineer James Jardine was involved in the construction of Glencorse Reservoir, with what was then one of the tallest earth dams in Britain. With characteristic attention to detail, all the pipes in the main leading into the city were proved at a pressure equal to that of a column of water from 300 to 800 ft high; they are still in service. 'The Scotsman' in 1825 considered these works 'the most extensive, perfect and complete ever executed in modern times' (Paxton, 17). In 1827-34 Telford, with assistants John Macneill and James Mills, was engaged on his largest water supply project, to supply London with much-needed pure water. In 1834 Telford proposed to bring it in from the Verulam near Watford and the Wandle at Beddington at an estimated cost of $1.177 million. Although not implemented, according to Smiles, these proposals strongly stimulated the water companies and eventually led to great improvements. 
Between 1823 and 1830 Telford superintended the design and provision of highland churches and manses at many sites from Islay northwards to the Shetland Islands. In 1823-4, as superintending surveyor to the highland churches commission, he prepared plans, specifications, and estimates for standardized structures based on the proposals of his three surveyors, of which those of William Thomson for the churches were closest to the form finally adopted. The basically austere structures, most of which still exist, are often enlivened by a touch of Telford's architectural artistry. He estimated that the churches were capable of containing 22,000 persons without inconvenience. 
After Waterloo severe economic depression spread over Britain and in 1817 the exchequer bill loan commission was created to assist the financing of worthwhile public works projects in order to provide employment. Telford was appointed its adviser on all works requiring the information of a civil engineer and during the first ten years of the commission's existence he recommended nearly $1 million of assistance which was duly authorized. It was a time-consuming and important task. At least twenty projects had come under his review by 1829, those receiving more than $20,000 being the Regent's Canal (part), Rennie's Southwark Bridge, the Gloucester and Berkeley Canal, Portsmouth and Arundel Canal, the Tay ferry at Dundee, Portleven harbour in Cornwall, Kingston Bridge, the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, and the Ulster Canal. James Mills frequently acted as his surveyor. 
Telford's publications consisted mainly of engineering reports, but he wrote authoritative articles for the 'Edinburgh Encyclopaedia', of which he was a leading shareholder. These were 'Bridge', with co-author Alexander Nimmo (first published 1812), 'Civil architecture' (1813), 'Navigation inland', also with Nimmo (1821, partly written in 1814), and almost certainly 'Jessop' (1817); altogether they amounted to over 300 pages with eighty-two plates and were particularly influential before 1830 when the whole encyclopaedia was issued. Telford's early technical publications included his 'Experiments... on Mr. James Parker's Cement' (1796), articles in the 'Philosophical Magazine' on the proposed iron arch replacement for London Bridge (1801), canals (1803), and his highlands report (1803), and 'Canals' in J. Plymley's 'General View of the Agriculture of Shropshire' (1803). Telford's novel proposal to suspend arch bridge centering by means of radiating iron stays in 'A Journal of Natural Philosophy' (1813) encouraged the design of catenarian and stay suspension bridges. His compilation, 'General Rules for Repairing Roads', widely circulated from 1819, and from 1833, Parnell's 'Treatise on Roads', propagating the road-making practice applied on the Holyhead Road, together exercised a fundamental influence for over a century. 
Telford's most important publication, despite its shortcomings as a personal narrative, was his autobiographical 'Life' (1838), edited by John Rickman; it was written from 1831 as his health, hearing, and new commitments declined. Although its magnificent atlas of engraved plates and its appendices constituted an invaluable record of his practice and achievement, the book was not very successful commercially at a price of 8 guineas. By the time it was eventually published, four years after his death, the nation was in the grip of railway expansion and it was to some extent outdated as a working manual. The unsold stock was bought by James Walker, who succeeded Telford as president of the Institution of Civil Engineers, and copies were awarded as Telford premium prizes for many years. 
Telford's enjoyment of the books lent to him by Miss Pasley marked the start of his lifelong love of poetry and an almost excessive admiration for literary ability. This interest led to his friendship with the Revd Archibald Alison, author of an essay 'Taste' in 1790, whom he had met at Sudborough rectory about 1783, and who had introduced him to Thomas Campbell. Rickman introduced him to Robert Southey. All became his close friends. His earliest-known printed poetical work was an eight-verse poem in W. Ruddiman's 'Weekly Magazine, or, Edinburgh Amusement' on 5 May 1779, which ended: '
Lang may ye sing, weel may ye phrase, 

Hae routh and plenty a' your days; 

And I shall gar a' our green braes 

Ken weel your name, 

I'm sure ye still sall hae the praise 

O'ESKDALE TAM. 

' This poem was closely followed by 'Eskdale', first published separately at London in 1781, probably for the Pasleys, prefaced by his introduction as a 'stonemason... a young man of no education but common reading, assisted by some books lent him by neighbouring gentlemen'. It was reprinted on several occasions and was well thought of by Southey. At least twelve poems are known to have been written by Telford during his lifetime, many of which are mentioned by Samuel Smiles. The last known was a tribute to some verses by his fellow Eskdaleman, Sir John Malcolm, in 1831. Telford sometimes initialled his writings TT, but his usual signature was Thos. Telford. From about 1806 he did not join the letters o and s. The most widely circulated was a manuscript poem to Robert Burns, which Dr Currie considered of 'superior merit' to other poems found among the poet's papers: he printed twenty-six verses of it in many editions of Burns's works from 1801. 
Telford was the first president of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1820-34. Soon after taking office he established the valuable tradition of recording the proceedings and discussions of meetings and the substance of papers read. His diligent and invaluable fostering of the institution as a forum for engineering knowledge included such activities as encouraging membership, provision of a library of books and drawings, urging members to present papers, and even chasing up and making good the subscriptions of Gotha Canal engineers Lagerheim, Edstrom, and others. His position as parliament's engineer gave him considerable influence with the political establishment and he was the driving force behind the obtaining of the institution's royal charter in 1828. In his will he left the institution his largest bequest, of more than $3000, and his books, drawings, and papers. His next two largest bequests were to the parish libraries at Westerkirk and Langholm. Telford's contribution to the institution was fundamental to its early development. He was elected to fellowship of the Royal societies of Edinburgh and London in 1803 and 1827 respectively. 
Telford never married and according to John Rickman 'lived life as a soldier always in active service' ('Life of Thomas Telford', 283). From 1800 he needed a permanent base in London and lived in rooms at the Salopian Coffee House, Charing Cross, until taking possession in 1821 of 24 Abingdon Street, where he lived until his death. From 1800, for more than thirty years, Telford's contact with the Revd Archibald Alison and his family was probably the nearest approach to home life that he ever enjoyed. Little of Telford's character is to be gleaned from his publications, but the opinions of some of his contemporaries are informative. Rickman stated that Telford's most distinguishing character trait was a benevolence which made him accessible to all who came to him for information. His pupil, Joseph Mitchell, recounted his master's 'great delight in his work. The perfect good faith and honour of all his transactions, his clear conscience, and his cheerful temper cast a halo of happiness throughout our establishment' (Mitchell, 102). In 1793 Catherine Plymley wrote after meeting Telford that he was 'an excellent architect and a most intelligent and enlightened man. His knowledge is general, his conversation very animated, his look full of intelligence and vivacity' (Penfold, 'Engineer', 2). She also praised the liberality and cheerfulness of his charitable donations. 
Southey wrote of Telford, 'there is so much intelligence in his countenance, so much frankness, kindness and hilarity about him flowing from the never-failing well spring of a happy nature, that I was upon cordial terms with him in five minutes' (Southey, 7). Telford was not a lover of concert music: he wrote, 'the melody of sounds is thrown away upon me, one look, one sentence from Mrs. Jordan has more effect upon me than all the fiddlers in England' (Gibb, 294). Sir David Brewster wrote of Telford's apparent sternness of manner which created difficulties at times in his relationships, and belied the genuine benevolence and kindness of his nature. His comment was that Telford's 'quick perception of character, his honesty of purpose, and his contempt for all other acquirements, save that of practical knowledge and experience which was best fitted... have enabled him to leave behind him works of inestimable value... which have not been surpassed either in Britain or in Europe. (Brewster, 46)' Telford died on 2 September 1834 at 24 Abingdon Street, of a bilious derangement. He was buried in Westminster Abbey. 
With hindsight, a more theoretical approach would have benefited Telford's structural design practice, but his reliance on experimental and practical procedures was the best available means of achieving the desired result at the time. An essential factor in his immense achievement was his sound judgement in selecting capable and reliable assistants and contractors, to whom he was able to devolve responsibility without losing control. Under his direction they translated his designs into effect often at, and even extending, the frontiers of engineering technology and knowledge. Telford's beneficial influence is most alive today through his many surviving works, modern contract procedures, and the Institution of Civil Engineers as a forum of engineering excellence. Of Telford's surviving works, although leisure interest in his canals is increasing, his roads and bridges, for which he was aptly dubbed by Southey 'Colossus of Roads' and 'Pontifex Maximus' (Smiles, 476), now make the greatest contribution to society. L. T. C. Rolt, who was also the biographer of George Stephenson and Isambard Brunel, believed that Telford's 'achievement was as great as theirs and of equal historical significance' (Rolt, xi). Smiles, Rolt, Penfold, and others have all helped to restore his reputation from its low ebb during the 'railway mania' era. He has a lasting modern memorial in the new town, Telford, which was created in Shropshire in the 1950s. Telford was undoubtedly one of the greatest civil engineers of all time. 


@@@@@


doc= 27108


Tempest, Pierce (1653-1717), printseller, was the sixth son of Henry Tempest of Tong in Yorkshire and his wife, Mary Bushall; his eldest brother, John, was the first baronet. This background gave him the entree to the circles of virtuosi in London where he spent his entire career, although he maintained his link with York, and was particularly close to Francis Place and William Lodge, both of whose work he published. 
Tempest was in London by November 1678, when he established himself in the Strand as a publisher of prints, one of the most important of his day. The range of his production, which still awaits full investigation, was very varied; the mezzotints he published are all datable to between about 1683 and 1688. Tempest seems never to have put an address on his plates, and his advertisements and letters give such a motley collection of addresses as to suggest that he preferred dealing from home to keeping a shop. His most important publications were the six sets of bird and animal designs engraved by Place and Griffier from 1686 onwards from newly commissioned drawings by Francis Barlow, and the famous series entitled 'The Cries of London' drawn by Marcellus Laroon and engraved by John Savage; this began with forty plates in 1687 and expanded to seventy-four by the summer of 1689. After 1700 Tempest published fewer plates, though he kept his older ones in print. He now turned his attention to dealing in old master prints and drawings, and became a friend and supplier to such important collectors as the Talmans. In 1709 he published a translation of Cesare Ripa's 'Iconologia' (1593) illustrated by Isaac Fuller the younger. 
Tempest died on 1 April 1717 and was buried in St Paul's, Covent Garden. In his will he asked his brother Nicholas to supervise the education of his illegitimate only child, George (a task that his brother refused). The will was proved on 24 April by Hannah Williams, the mother and guardian of George. 


@@@@@


doc= 27109


Osborne, Dorothy (1627-1695), letter writer, was the youngest daughter and tenth child of Sir Peter Osborne (1584/5-1653) ['see under 'Osborne, Peter (1521-1592)], royalist lieutenant-governor of Guernsey, and Dorothy, 'nee' Danvers (1590-1650/51) of Dauntsey, Wiltshire. With the outbreak of the civil war Dorothy's mother took the children from the family home of Chicksands Abbey, Bedfordshire, to stay in Chelsea, perhaps with her brother, the parliamentarian (and future regicide) Sir John Danvers. From there, about 1642 or early 1643, the family travelled to St Malo, France, to be near to their father, and Lady Osborne got into debt sending provisions to her besieged husband in Castle Cornet, Guernsey. In 1644, when Dorothy was seventeen, they finally returned to Chelsea (Chicksands had been sequestrated). Two of Dorothy's brothers were killed during the civil war: Henry at Naseby (1645); Charles at Hartland, Devon (1646). 
Sir Peter held Castle Cornet until August 1646, when he was forced into retreat and exile in St Malo. Dorothy and a brother (probably Robin) set out to meet their father there. 'En route' they met Sir William Temple (1628-1699) who was just embarking on a tour of the continent. They set off for St Malo together and their lengthy courtship began. There were oppositions on both sides. In part Dorothy's father objected to her marrying the son of Sir John Temple, master of the rolls in Ireland, seen by some as willing to serve irrespective of the politics of the administration. But her father had also hoped for a more lucrative match for Dorothy to restore the family finances which had been much depleted after the heavy fines imposed by the parliamentary government. Dorothy's brother Henry (1618-1675), who was one of the small group of peers who escorted Charles II back to England, also strongly objected to the match, and kept a diary, partly in code, detailing his opposition to Temple. 
Temple left for Paris about summer 1648 and was abroad for most of the following five years. He and Dorothy met briefly in London in winter 1650-51, before she was taken back to Chicksands. In December 1652 Dorothy received a letter from Temple announcing his return from the Netherlands and asking whether he owed her the $10 that he had once promised to pay her on her marriage. Their famous correspondence began with her reply: 'But for the ten pounde hee [Temple] Claimes it is not yett due, and I think you may doe well... to putt it in the Number of his desperate debts, for 'tis a very uncertaine one' ('Letters', ed. Moore Smith, 3). 
Osborne's letters to Temple record her family's opposition to their engagement, and their careful surveillance of her, mostly on Henry's part. At Chicksands she was introduced to suitor after suitor; the letters provide an itemized assessment of their shortcomings, and describe how each new one was sent on his way. The letters were smuggled out of Chicksands to Temple, who kept them in a cabinet that is still on display at Moor Park, Surrey. Only one of his letters to her survived from their courtship, the rest were destroyed as soon as she had read them. 
In November 1654 Osborne suffered from a severe attack of smallpox which nearly killed her, and left her permanently scarred. One month later, on Christmas day, Dorothy and William were married before a justice of the peace according to the vows promulgated in the previous year by Barebone's Parliament. The details are recorded in the marriage register in St Giles-in-the-Fields, London. The marriage did not end her problems with her family, and in February she and Temple brought a suit against her brother in chancery for refusing to pay her portion. The dispute was settled that June. 
Initially Dorothy and her husband lived with his maternal uncle, Robert Hammond, in Reading, where their first son, John, was born, on 18 December 1655. In May 1656 they moved to Ireland where they had eight or possibly nine children, six of whom died in infancy. (In 1679 their fourteen-year-old daughter Diana died of smallpox, and their son John drowned himself in April 1689.) They returned to London in 1663. From the relative penury of the early years of their marriage they found themselves in much grander surroundings when Temple was made ambassador in the Netherlands in June 1665. He was recalled in 1670, and Dorothy returned in September 1671. With her husband she later played a part in arranging the marriage of William of Orange and Mary, daughter of James, duke of York, acting as go-between, and remained her confidante until Mary's death a few months before her own. She and Temple retired to Moor Park, near Farnham, Surrey, an estate bought by Temple in 1680. 
Dorothy died at Moor Park on 7 February 1695 and was buried in Westminster Abbey, the place marked by a plaque on the wall of the south aisle, and stone set in the floor. Her fame was secured by the publication of her letters -- first in extracts in Courtenay's biography of her husband in 1836, and then in various editions through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. While Temple's biographers have tended to pay tribute to her as a helpmeet, recent rereadings of the letters (held in the British Library, Add. MS 33975) emphasize Osborne's wider range. In her letters she comments on political events (the ejection of Algernon Sidney from the Commons; or the plot against Cromwell); on religious controversies (on the sermons of Stephen Marshall and William Erbury, for example; or declaring herself a 'devote' of Jeremy Taylor); and on the art of writing, as well as on her own wide range of reading (from the French romances she read in the original, to her dismissal of Margaret Cavendish's writing). Nevertheless, it is for the elegance and wit of the letters that Osborne will be remembered, and for the sparkling personality that shines through her writing. 


@@@@@


doc= 27110


Temple, Henry, first Viscount Palmerston (1676-1757), politician, was born on 26 August 1676, according to the entry in his father's account book. He was the second but eldest surviving son of Sir John Temple (1632-1705), speaker of the Irish House of Commons, and his wife, Jane (died 1708), the daughter of Sir Abraham Yarner, muster-master general of Ireland. On 21 September 1680, when he was four years old, he was appointed, jointly with Luke King, chief remembrancer of the court of exchequer in Ireland. Later, on King's death, the grant was renewed to Temple and his son Henry for life (6 June 1716); it was then worth nearly $2000 per annum. 
About 1689 Temple entered Eton College, and in 1693 he progressed to King's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated as a fellow-commoner that Easter. He married, probably on 10 June 1703, Anne (died 1735), the daughter of Abraham Houblon, a founding director of the Bank of England. The couple had three sons and two daughters. 
As the principal representative of the Irish Temples, Henry Temple was created an Irish peer as Baron Temple and Viscount Palmerston on 12 March 1723. A supporter of the Walpole administration and its successors, he was successively MP for East Grinstead, Sussex, from 1727 to 1734, for Bossiney, Cornwall, from 1734 to 1741, and for Weobly, Herefordshire, from 1741 to 1747. Palmerston did not hold formal office other than his Irish sinecure, but in 1730 was among the members of parliament whom Walpole consulted during the debates on Dunkirk, when the ministry's majority was threatened, and in 1734, on the government's behalf, he offered Dr William Webster a crown pension of $300 per annum if he would turn the 'Weekly Miscellany' into a ministerial paper. Sir Charles Hanbury Williams wrote several skits upon 'Little Broadbottom Palmerston', while William Oliver, in his 'Practical Essay on Warm Bathing' (1751), claimed Palmerston's cure at Bath in 1736 of a severe illness as proof of the efficacy of the water. 
Over two years after the death of his first wife, Palmerston remarried, on 11 May 1738. His new wife was Isabella (died 1762), the widow of Sir John Fryer, bt, and the daughter of Sir Francis Gerard, bt. There were no children from the marriage. Palmerston's eldest son and heir, Henry ('c'.1704-1740), was by this time himself widowed, having married Elizabeth Lee on 18 June 1735. Elizabeth had died at Montpellier in October 1736. She was the stepdaughter of the poet Edward Young, and the couple were probably alluded to as Philander and Narcissa in Young's 'Night Thoughts' (1742). The younger Henry Temple died on 18 August 1740, leaving a son, also Henry Temple (1739-1802), by his second wife, Jane (died 1789), the daughter of Sir John Barnard. This Henry Temple was father of Henry Temple, third Viscount Palmerston, the prime minister. 
Palmerston displayed the common interest of his aristocratic generation in cultural affairs. With regard to his own property, he added the garden front to his house at East Sheen, and greatly improved the mansion of Broadlands, near Romsey, Hampshire. The volume of 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1736) by Stephen Duck includes 'A Journey to Marlborough, Bath', inscribed to Palmerston. Part of the poem describes a feast given by the peer annually on 30 June to the threshers of the village of Charlton, between Pewsey and Amesbury, Wiltshire, in honour of Duck, a native of that place. Palmerston's bequest of a piece of land continued to help support the dinner. 
Among his other activities, Palmerston was a correspondent of the duchess of Marlborough, and some angry letters passed between him and Swift in January 1726, as Swift resented the treatment he and his friends had received from the Temple family. He helped Bishop Berkeley in his scheme concerning the island of St Kitts, and he presented to Eton College in 1750 four large volumes on heraldry, which had been painted for Henry VIII by John Tirol. He died at Chelsea on 10 June 1757, and was succeeded by his grandson Henry. 


@@@@@


doc= 27111


Temple, Henry, second Viscount Palmerston (1739-1802), politician and traveller, was born on 4 December 1739, the only son of Henry Temple ('c'.1704-1740), joint chief remembrancer of the Irish court of exchequer, and his second wife, Jane Barnard (died 1789), daughter of Sir John Barnard (c.1685-1764), lord mayor of London in 1738. He inherited the viscountcy from his grandfather, Henry Temple, first Viscount Palmerston, in 1757. He was educated at Clare College, Cambridge, from 1757 to 1759 and embarked on three tours in England before he was twenty-one, visiting several aristocratic houses as well as Birmingham, Newcastle, Leeds, and other commercial centres, and thereby established a taste for travel which stayed with him all his life. On coming of age he acquired an income of $7000 per annum from his family properties, half the sum coming from Irish estates in co. Sligo and a few properties in Dublin. He was a typical English absentee landlord, disliked the country and saw it as a land of bogs and barren mountains -- 'the most dreary waste I ever yet beheld', he wrote (Connell, 352). His income from Ireland rose to $6000 per annum out of a total of $12,000 after his mother's death on 28 January 1789. 
Palmerston took his seat in the Irish House of Lords on 22 October 1761 but he never spoke there. His political ambitions, such as they were, were centred on England and on 28 May 1762 he was elected for the Cornish pocket borough of East Looe, then the property of John Buller, through the good offices of Henry Bilson Legge, who was chancellor of the exchequer in the duke of Newcastle's administration. He was a desultory attender and a very occasional speaker in the house, preferring the delights of foreign travel to the boring duty of political life. He supported the preliminaries of the treaty of Paris in December 1762 and his neighbour Hans Stanley, member for Southampton, recommended him to George Grenville on 9 December 1764 as a man 'highly worth your seeking' (Grenville MSS). Palmerston nevertheless spoke against Grenville on the issue of general warrants on 29 January 1765, and Horace Walpole remarked with approval that he was 'a young man of sense' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 2.45). Rockingham, who was on the lookout for talent, offered him a seat at the Board of Trade in December 1765 with a salary of $1000 per annum, and he accepted despite his declaration that 'My views... have never been directed towards the attainment of any public employment' (Rockingham MSS). He remained in office in the subsequent ministry of Chatham, being transferred to the Admiralty board in September 1766. He retained that office under Grafton and North until December 1777, and was then promoted to the Treasury board where he stayed until the fall of North in March 1782. 
Despite Palmerston's early promise, his political career took second place to his travels. He visited Paris in 1762 and was presented to the French royal family at Versailles, and in 1763 embarked on a grand tour of Europe which lasted eighteen months, visiting France, Switzerland, Rome, Naples, and northern Italy. He met John Wilkes in Paris, called on Voltaire at Ferney, and was introduced by Sir William Hamilton to classical antiquities at Naples. He returned to his house, Broadlands, in Hampshire, with a collection of antique marbles and sculptures. He had met his future first wife at Spa and they were married on 6 October 1767. She was Frances Poole (1733-1769), daughter of Sir Francis Poole, second baronet, who had died in 1763, and his wife, Frances Pelham, who was a granddaughter of Sir John Pelham. Their marriage was happy, but on 1 June 1769 Frances died after giving birth to a stillborn daughter. 
Palmerston had lost his seat at East Looe at the general election of 1768. His former patron Bilson Legge was dead and Buller had other plans for the borough, but his friend Hans Stanley invited him to become his colleague at Southampton, a more populous constituency. He was elected without undue expense, but at the next election in 1774 he found a safer refuge in the government borough of Hastings through the favour of Lord North. He supported North's American policy but spoke rarely: he was hampered by a stammer. On seventeen occasions between 1768 and 1774 he had intervened briefly in debates in parliament, but only one speech is recorded in the years 1774 to 1780, one between 1784 and 1790, and none thereafter. He had become a spectator rather than a participant. 
Palmerston's reaction to his wife's death was to embark on his foreign travels once more. He spent five months in the autumn of 1770 mainly in Switzerland and he also continued his social life at home. He had been elected to Almack's in 1765 and the Society of Dilettanti in 1766, and he became a member of the Catch Club in 1771, where he enjoyed singing rounds and catches in the evenings. He also became intimate with Garrick, Reynolds, and Gibbon, and with Sir Joseph Banks, the president of the Royal Society, to which he was elected in 1776. He was a pallbearer at the funerals of the two former. He was not a gambler, except for small, nominal stakes at cards, but he spent large sums on the refurbishment and rebuilding of Broadlands by Capability Brown after 1768 and by Henry Holland after 1788. He remarried on 7 January 1783. His second wife was Mary Mee (1752-1805), daughter of Benjamin Mee of Bath, who was a substantial city merchant in Fenchurch Street. He was not, however, financially successful and ended dependent on Palmerston's financial assistance. 
Palmerston's second marriage was a love match like his first. His wife was a sociable, witty, and affectionate woman and they had two sons and three daughters. They carried on an extensive social life at their London houses at Sheen and Hanover Square. A contemporary remarked that no schoolboy was 'so fond of a breaking-up as Lord Palmerston is of a junket and pleasuring. [Their life is made a] toil of pleasure' (C. Burney, 'Memoirs of Doctor Burney', ed. F. d'Arblay, 3 vols., 1832, 3.271-2). After 1790 they dined occasionally with the prince of Wales at Brighton and also with his estranged wife, Caroline, at Blackheath, and after they met Emma Hamilton in Paris in 1791 she became a frequent visitor and companion. 
Palmerston drifted away from his former partisanship with Fox after the French Revolution. He had supported the Fox-North coalition in 1783 against Shelburne, and voted against Pitt on the Regency question in 1788-9 and over the Ochakov affair in 1792, but his travels in France in 1791 made him aware of the violent tendencies of the revolution. The Palmerstons arrived in Paris two weeks after the flight to Varennes and stayed three months, during which time he attended most of the debates in the constituent assembly, witnessing the increasingly hostile tone against the royal family. He saw the riot at the Champ de Mars on 17 July and with his wife waited on Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette at Versailles five days before the mob broke in and massacred the Swiss guards. They left Paris soon afterwards and retreated to Naples, where they spent twenty-six 'idyllic' months before returning home. 
Palmerston supported Pitt thereafter. He deplored the failure of Lord Fitzwilliam's viceroyalty of Ireland in 1795 but shared the view of his wife that the 'feebleness of character, duplicity and I may add treachery' of the duke of Portland was to blame (Connell, 373). When the Irish rising led to expectations of a union with Britain, Palmerston, foreseeing the abolition of the Irish House of Lords, and apparently fearing that as an Irish peer he would be disqualified from sitting in the Commons, solicited a British peerage, but he was unsuccessful, Pitt no doubt regarding him as too recent a convert to his policies. 
Palmerston's attitude was also influenced by the falling off of his income from his Irish estates during the troubles of the 1790s. By 1799 his total debts exceeded $30,000 and he had to sell two English properties and mortgage Broadlands. He had sustained his membership of the House of Commons after 1784 by purchase, Treasury support being no longer forthcoming under Pitt. In 1784 he bought a seat at Boroughbridge from the duke of Newcastle for $2685 -- substantially below the normal market price -- but in 1790 Newcastle refused to return him again because of his support of the opposition and he moved to Newport, Isle of Wight, for $4200. In 1796 he secured his return at Winchester through the duke of Portland's good offices, but by the end of that parliament he had decided to give up any further search. On 3 November 1801, he wrote to his wife: 'I have sat in seven Parliaments and do not now find myself desirous of throwing away a great sum of money for the satisfaction of continuing any longer, nor in the situation in which I now stand would it be either proper or even justifiable for me to do so. (Connell, 448)' He resolved to make a further attempt to secure a British peerage. In his draft letter to Addington he reminded him of this point and stated that he had always acted as 'an independent man and a zealous supporter of our constitution as it at present exists.... Favours of a lucrative kind I have not solicited' (ibid., 448). Again, however, he was disappointed and five months later he died of an 'ossification of the throat' on 16 April 1802 at Hanover Square, London. His wife survived him less than three years, dying of cancer on 20 January 1805 at Broadlands. She was buried alongside him in a vault in Romsey Abbey, where there is a monument to them by Flaxman. Their eldest son was Henry John Temple, third Viscount Palmerston (1784-1865), the prime minister. 


@@@@@


doc= 27112


Temple, Henry John, third Viscount Palmerston (1784-1865), prime minister, was born on 20 October 1784 at 4 Park Street (later 20 Queen Anne's Gate), Westminster; he was the eldest of the five children of Henry Temple, second viscount (1739-1802), and his second wife, Mary (1754-1805), daughter of Benjamin Mee, a London merchant later resident in Bath. He had one brother, William (1788-1856), British minister at Naples for twenty-three years, and two surviving sisters, Elizabeth (1790-1837), wife of Laurence Sulivan, and Frances (1786-1838), who married admiral of the fleet Sir William Bowles. His father, a follower of Charles James Fox, was an English MP for forty years. Although this amiable dilettante devoted himself chiefly to society and travel, his friendships, especially with the diplomat James Harris, first earl of Malmesbury, were important for his elder son. Mary, Viscountess Palmerston, is a rather colourless figure beside her much older husband -- equally well meaning, but never quite at ease among the aristocracy. 
From childhood Henry John Temple displayed an enviable degree of emotional security; relations with both parents were warmly affectionate, self-sufficiency and good humour lifelong characteristics. Always close to his siblings, he furthered his brother's career and the careers of his sisters' husbands. The children accompanied their parents on an extended continental tour in 1792-4; an Italian tutor succeeded a French governess. The foundations were laid of excellent French and good Italian; later he added good Spanish and some knowledge of German. On the family's return, he was sent to Harrow School (1795-1800), where a school song commemorates 'Temple's frame of iron': he flourished in what was in many ways a schoolboy republic -- no place for weaklings -- became a monitor, and was chosen to 'declaim', that is, to deliver orations in Latin and English. 
The next stage in Temple's education was not unusual for young men of good abilities from aristocratic families: three years at Edinburgh University (1800-03), lodging and studying with the political economist Dugald Stewart. The mental and moral philosophy, exalting common sense, and simplified Smithian economics that his host taught made an indelible impression. In the 'Autobiographical sketch' of his middle age, composed for his mistress and future wife, he ascribed 'whatever useful knowledge and habits of mind I possess' to his time in Scotland (Bulwer, 1.367). Temple's Edinburgh companions were mainly Englishmen of his own sort; they devoted some of their leisure to a largely English volunteer corps. 
If the Scottish universities offered more relevant instruction than Oxford and Cambridge could provide, the English universities' social superiority was unshaken. Temple, from 1802 Lord Palmerston, went up to St John's, Cambridge, in October 1803, where he formed his closest friendships. He chose the college himself for its 'remarkably good society... the best in the university', listing the peers' sons ('Letters', ed. Bourne, 5-6). His letters to one friend, Laurence Sulivan, who married his sister Elizabeth, are a valuable source. Although his Cambridge studies were less demanding, the tutors at St John's, like Dugald Stewart, rated him highly; he took his MA (27 January 1806) without examination, a nobleman's privilege. Palmerston's university life centred on clubs in which he was a leading light: the Speculative, a forerunner of the Cambridge Union, with a membership drawn exclusively from St John's and Trinity, and an even smaller Saturday Club of Johnians which met weekly to dine and talk. He also enrolled in his college's own volunteer corps; afterwards his participation in amateur soldiering continued with the command of the South-West Hampshire militia for some years. The main purpose of his eighteen months at Cambridge was to launch his career as a supporter of William Pitt the younger. The influence of Burke, sustained by the course of recent history, was paramount: the young Palmerston awarded him 'the palm of political prophecy' (ibid., 97). His Cambridge contemporaries were mostly Pittites; he did not consider joining his father's political friends. While still an undergraduate, he stood (February 1806) for the university seat vacated by Pitt's death, finishing close behind two other youthful aristocrats, Lord Henry Petty and Viscount Althorp, later the third Earl Spencer. 
Lord Malmesbury, Palmerston's guardian until his majority, was instrumental in finding him a constituency. Elected for Horsham in November 1806 and unseated on petition (20 January 1807), he narrowly failed (May 1807) to secure one of the Cambridge University seats at the general election and was returned the next day for Newport, a pocket borough on the Isle of Wight. Malmesbury's influence had already brought his protege minor office as a lord of the Admiralty (3 April 1807) when in October 1809 it presented him with the opportunity of entering Spencer Perceval's cabinet. Perceval gave him three choices: chancellor of the exchequer or secretary at war in the cabinet, with the option of a junior lordship of the Treasury until he had proved himself in parliament and felt able to take the chancellorship. Palmerston had been identified as a coming man, although not on the strength of his first undistinguished contributions to debate (he made his maiden speech on 3 February 1808). A salutary caution, an enduring trait, held him back. Unready for such rapid promotion, he pleaded a fear of failing in the house. He accepted the secretaryship at war and retained it under five prime ministers, outside the cabinet until 1827. He entered upon his duties at the War Office on 27 October 1809 and was sworn of the privy council on 1 November 1809. 
Predictions of a great future were quickly forgotten; Palmerston's reputation was that of a competent administrator and adequate performer on the treasury bench. He revealed an appetite for hard work, improving departmental organization and accounts, and made Sulivan permanent head of the office. He showed courage and humanity when an unbalanced half-pay officer, Lieutenant Davies, shot at and slightly wounded him (8 April 1818), paying for the man's legal defence. Like many Pittites, now labelled tories, he was a good whig at heart. In confrontations with successive commanders-in-chief, he insisted on the rights of a minister accountable to the Commons. Claims to be acting in the spirit of the constitution since the revolution of 1688 were really prompted by the growing pressure of public opinion on the unreformed parliament. 
In the political vocabulary of the day, Palmerston was a 'Catholic', and supported Catholic emancipation from 1812 after finally winning one of his university's seats on 27 March 1811, which he held until 1831. On another front, he kept a low profile as Liverpool's ministry passed the repressive legislation of the troubled years 1816-20. He dated his emergence as a Liberal from the mid-1820s, talking by then of the 'stupid old Tory party' (Bourne, 'Palmerston', 248). He was not an adherent of Canning, who on becoming prime minister offered him the governorship of Jamaica, hardly complimentary to someone whom Liverpool had invited to govern India. Promotion to the cabinet as postmaster-general with an English peerage had also been turned down. There were personal reasons for declining India but, clearly, he thought better of his political prospects at home than others did. Canning put him into the cabinet (April 1827), where he remained, still secretary at war, until 1828. Promised the Home Office or the exchequer in Canning's ministry, he got neither; the need to accommodate others kept him in his old post. George IV, who disliked Palmerston's independence at the War Office, suggested Jamaica, and denied him the exchequer under Goderich (August 1827). Canning gave him another chance of ruling India, again declined. 
Breaking with the 'pig-tails' or 'illiberals' -- names he applied to conservative tories -- Palmerston resigned (May 1828) with the Canningites from Wellington's government over its refusal to sanction an instalment of parliamentary reform, the transfer of East Retford's representation to Manchester. He had yet to show the promise that carried him to the Foreign Office. Canning noticed his reluctance to speak in cabinet on business not directly related to his own department, but discerned his potential. The house was surprised on 1 June 1829 by Palmerston's eloquent and persuasive attack on the government for deferring to the Holy Alliance in Portugal and Greece. At the same time he acknowledged the necessity of more or less friendly relations with its component powers. His advocacy of constitutionalism and nationalism was always subject to the retention of 'an influence both with the free and the despot' ('Letters', ed. Bourne, 232). Canning's policy before it was his, it took account of political and military facts. Virtually all British politicians were liberals by continental standards; parliamentary monarchy rested on an unshakeable consensus. On the other hand, Britain's military weakness, a consequence of the pervasive libertarianism that ruled out conscription, obliged her to work with continental powers. 
This speech and others on foreign policy over the following years impressed the whig leader, Lord Grey: Palmerston is a classical instance of the late developer in politics. Wellington twice attempted to win him back. The duke's enemies on the far right also approached Palmerston; they sounded him about joining an eccentric coalition of ultras and the bolder whigs. His cautious, unspecific commitment to parliamentary reform and his dislike of the government's stance abroad stopped him from rejoining Wellington; he treated the ultras' overtures as 'comical'. If the latter perceived that he was a man for coalitions, he saw himself as a decided Liberal. 
For many years Palmerston was best known as a man about town, living in London at 12 and then 9 Stanhope Street from 1811 until his marriage. Men and women found it difficult to resist the charm of this handsome man -- a lively, amusing talker, much in demand. Well read, he was faithful to eighteenth-century tastes in the arts. A considerable womanizer, nicknamed Cupid, he took mistresses from society and women from the 'demi-monde'; they co-existed with a liaison ending, after thirty years, in matrimony. Proud of his virility, he recorded sexual successes and failures in his pocket diaries, methodical in this as in other matters. To a woman calling herself Emma Murray, later Mrs Mills (died 1860), he paid a regular allowance for two decades. One of her children by aristocratic lovers bore the names Henry John Temple Murray (1816-1894); Palmerston helped to educate him and several of her natural or foster children. Murray served uneventfully in the consular service, where his putative father had placed him. 
A similar tolerance marked Palmerston's relationship, which began between 1807 and 1809, with Emily, 'nee' Lamb ['see 'Temple, Emily (1787-1869)], Lord Melbourne's sister, wife of the fifth Earl Cowper. He is credited with the paternity of three of her five surviving children supposedly by Cowper: William Francis Cowper-Temple (1811-1888), created Baron Mount-Temple, to whom Palmerston left his estates with the stated wish that he should assume the name and arms of Temple; Emily (1810-1872), Palmerston's favourite, wife of Anthony Ashley-Cooper, seventh earl of Shaftesbury (1801-1885), whose second son, Evelyn Ashley (1836-1907), succeeded his childless uncle in the Temple property, again in accordance with Palmerston's wishes; and Frances (1820-1880), who married Viscount Jocelyn, the third earl of Roden's heir. In addition, Palmerston believed he had fathered Lady Cowper's stillborn boy in 1818. If she was, in Creevey's words, one of the 'most... profligate women in London', her first husband's complaisance protected her; Palmerston was sometimes jealous of other lovers. After a short widowhood she married him on 16 December 1839; if their vows were not strictly observed, at least on his side, they were nevertheless a devoted couple. Under Melbourne's genial influence even Queen Victoria thought the union good for both parties. Her physical beauty wore well. Irrepressible spirits and the sense of fun preserved in her letters made her popular. Not particularly clever, she helped Palmerston with her social gifts. For more than half a century she was a leading hostess; those who deplored her morals seldom declined her invitations. 
Womanizing, until desire outran performance, was only one of Palmerston's recreations. As late as 1863 a shady Irish journalist, O'Kane, cited the then prime minister as co-respondent in his divorce. The case was dismissed, and with it a claim for $20,000 damages, for want of proof that the O'Kanes were married. The greatest prizes in racing eluded a patron of the turf whose enthusiasm was the subject of friendly caricature. He hunted into old age, turning out in the rain with Napoleon III's staghounds in his seventies. 'Rien ne perce un habit rouge', he joked (Earl of Malmesbury, 'Memoirs of an ex-Minister', new edn, 1885, 455). The pleasantly barbed jest to traditional foes evokes the man. He provided good sport, too. Declining, as premier, to gratify an aspirant to the peerage, he directed his secretary to 'gild the pill' with an invitation to a day's shooting. The Palmerstons' hospitality -- in London, at 94 Piccadilly from 1855, at Broadlands in Hampshire, and Brocket in Hertfordshire (Emily's property) -- was politically important. 
This lifestyle was expensive. Palmerston inherited substantial debt; his net income from all sources except government stock was about $8000. Well over half his acreage then lay in Ireland: valuable properties in Dublin and more than 10,000 acres on the coast of Sligo, populated with small tenants largely reliant on harvest labour in England to pay their rents. Palmerston set himself to improve their condition and his rental amid difficulties that were often too much for west of Ireland landlords. Borrowing to build a harbour, roads, and schools, and to drain boglands, he nearly doubled his Irish income by 1840 to over $11,000. When the great famine of 1845-9 struck, the estate shipped destitute families to North America; he and his agent incurred severe criticism for taking this course, to which there was, in their view, no economic alternative. Holdings, enlarged by emigration, were still small as the receipts climbed back towards pre-famine levels. From prudence and humanity he respected the tenant right, which he famously denounced as 'landlords' wrong' ('Hansard 3', 177, 27 Feb 1865, 823). Subject to the agent's approval, tenants were permitted to sell, or bequeath, the occupancy of holdings; an almost universal custom in Ireland that effectively limited rent. 
On coming into his inheritance Palmerston prepared an ambitious development plan for each of his four estates in England and Ireland, and always practised the 'progressive improvement' at which, as a statesman, he exhorted people to aim. In Hampshire and Yorkshire he spent $100,000 in twenty years on buying land, besides the outlay on improvements. Debt swollen by this expenditure absorbed a large slice of his income in the 1820s. If not a necessity, an official salary eased his position until late in life. He lost heavily in the stock exchange crash of 1825, although one venture, in Welsh slate quarrying, eventually repaid him handsomely with an annual return of nearly $10,000 in the 1860s. 
Evicted by the Cambridge tories in May 1831, Palmerston took refuge at Bletchingley, Surrey (18 July 1831), a seat which disappeared in the 'Reform Act'. He was returned for South Hampshire on 15 December 1832, but lost the seat in 1834; elected for Tiverton on 1 June 1835, he held that seat until his death. As foreign secretary (22 November 1830) he was the most successful and popular of whig ministers under Grey and Melbourne. Yet his methods, and his manner, made colleagues and chiefs nervous: his reappointment on 18 April 1835 was probably due to Melbourne's concern for his small majority. In November 1830 he expected to be chancellor of the exchequer and leader in the Commons in the coalition out of which the nineteenth-century Liberal Party grew. But the whigs preferred Althorp, and Palmerston went to the Foreign Office which Lansdowne had refused. By liberalism he understood the development of liberties with deep roots in most of Europe: 'equitable laws', security of property and person, and 'something to say in the management of their community'. Naturally, countries differed in the evolution of their 'social habits' and institutions, yet not so as to preclude the application of 'similar formulae... with slight variations' (7 May 1832, Beauvale MS 60463). He was as much a man of ideas as Gladstone or Salisbury. His political philosophy, in and after 1830, allowed for growth. 
During the 'Reform Bill's' passage, Palmerston agreed that ''Divide et impera' should be the maxim of government for these times', with extremists isolated by 'fair concessions', and was inclined to think the $10 household franchise too high, if anything (30 June 1832, Beauvale MS 60463). The tories exasperated him by their stupidity: reactionaries at court and in the Lords risked alienating public opinion permanently from monarchy and aristocracy. This fear overcame his reluctance to support a large creation of peers if the Lords did not give way. Subsequently, he held up a triumph of evolutionary change to other states. He considered household suffrage and shorter parliaments possible in his lifetime, and found the Chartist demand for one man one vote harmless because it ignored realities. 'The word constitution all over Europe means a parliament', he reminded a foreign ambassador in the 1860s, looking as ever for the adoption of the British model. By his death parliamentary institutions had been established almost everywhere on the continent outside Russia and Turkey. Their existence was a tribute to Britain's envied stability and the flexible political settlement she enjoyed from 1832: ''All' countries', wrote Palmerston next year, '... are, and always have been in a state of transition' (Bourne, 'Palmerston', 372). 
Between Britain and Russia Palmerston saw at work 'the same principle of repulsion... that there was between us and Buonaparte'; the political systems were mutually antagonistic (28 Feb 1834, Bligh MSS). The Anglo-Russian co-operation, sought wherever British interests made it advisable, could never remove that underlying hostility. Ideological considerations, however, ranked below the prosperity on which everything depended. From that angle, it did not matter whether the powers were 'despotical... or constitutional', he said at the 1857 election. 'That which concerns us... is that... whether they be free or enslaved, commercial intercourse shall not be interrupted but... as free... as the prejudices of... different nations permit' ('The Times', 28 March 1857). What was 'miscalled protection' had no place in his scheme of things. Example and persuasion were the best means of diffusing British liberalism, political and economic, in Europe: 'generous sympathy' did not justify interference in the internal affairs of another state, so long as its people acquiesced in the existing order. 
Palmerston's foreign policy relied on playing off rival powers against one another to secure Britain's freedom of action, with the aim of deploying her 'moral weight' on the side of peoples struggling for liberty, meaning 'rational government' in his sense (21 March 1839, Beauvale MS 60466). No other course was open to a liberal Britain in Europe. As he had to tell his countrymen after the sharpest reverse that his diplomacy met (over the Schleswig-Holstein question): 'Ships sailing on the sea cannot stop armies on land' ('The Times', 24 Aug 1864). In the wider world, the British mission was to 'extend, as far and as fast as possible, civilization', forcibly if treaties proved ineffectual. 
Palmerston built his policy in Europe and further afield round an uneasy relationship with France: 'the best ally for us', he held. France alone constituted a potential danger to his country's insular security, but educated Frenchmen measured the regimes of Louis Philippe and Napoleon III against Britain's standards of freedom and self-discipline. Strategy and political kinship aligned Britain with France. It was often felt that he leant too far towards the old enemy. He had to begin by warning British envoys, whose mental habits reflected the long French wars, how important it was not only to be on good terms with her 'but to appear to all Europe to be so'. British economic and maritime strength joined to France's military capability commanded the conservative powers' respect. 
In practice, British diplomacy was much less straightforward than Palmerston contrived to make it seem. With the France of Louis Philippe, he exploited situations that favoured their intervention, from Greece to the Low Countries. In doing so, he endeavoured to avoid a breakdown in relations with the conservative powers. During the suppression of the 1830-31 rising in Poland he wanted the tsar to regard their differences as occurring between friends, and to know that Britain was not bound to revolutionary France. This attitude helped him to continue Canning's work and establish an independent Greece guaranteed by Russia as well as the Western allies. To that achievement he added a leading part in the arduous negotiations that erected the Belgian kingdom. French troops drove out the Dutch; British and French warships blockaded the coast of the Netherlands, and Palmerston displayed extraordinary patience and resource at the London conference (1830-31) in obtaining international recognition for the new state. Austria, Prussia, and Russia gave a reluctant consent to the outcome of a popular revolution. They could take comfort from the tone in which he informed the French that the Belgians' initial choice of a king, a son of Louis Philippe, meant war. French feelings were soothed by the arrangement that a substitute with British royal connections, Leopold of Coburg, should marry the excluded prince's sister. 
With these successes behind him, Palmerston promoted the constitutional cause boldly in the Iberian peninsula; France was a collaborator, but also a rival. Instrumental in expelling the reactionary Don Miguel from Portugal, Britain assisted with the defeat of the first Carlist rebellion in Spain. Diplomacy was backed up by British sea power and volunteers, who were aided by their government. Palmerston was the moving spirit in the Quadruple Alliance (1834) between Britain, France, and the two peninsular monarchies, conceived as 'a Western Confederacy of free states... a political and moral power'. 
At the other end of the Mediterranean, Britain and France came close to war over the future of the Ottoman empire. Palmerston worsted the French in the Near East by enlisting the other powers against her Egyptian protege, Mehmet Ali. Turkey's survival was a British and European interest. Egyptian forces retreated before the amphibious operations of British and Austrian squadrons and the revolt they raised in occupied territory. Rear-Admiral Charles Napier's threat to bombard Alexandria (November 1840) completed Mehmet Ali's rout; he renounced the conquests of years. Some in the cabinet objected to combining with the conservative powers: Palmerston countered by intimating his readiness to resign. His belief that Louis Philippe would not incur the risks of war was vindicated: 'Governments', he said, 'seldom take the first step in war unless they have either right or might on their side', and the French had neither. He dominated his colleagues, prepared ''with all my heart and soul'' to accept responsibility for armed conflict, if it came to that. The Straits convention (1841) committed the great powers to preserving the Ottoman empire: 'We have been waging war... without burning priming', he commented (20 Sept 1840, 24 Nov 1840, Beauvale MS 60467). Closure of the straits to foreign warships in peacetime underpinned the commitment. The isolation of France had given Russia an inducement to relax pressure on a supposedly moribund empire. Yet Palmerston's fundamental distrust of Russia remained; nor did he think France had any alternative whenever Britain chose to invoke the liberal alliance. 
The First Opium War (1839-42), always associated with him, further enhanced Palmerston's reputation, and brought Britain Hong Kong. He handled the Chinese question with notable success in domestic politics. The tories criticized him for being drawn into war by traders in opium, legal under the British flag but illegal in China. The vision of a huge oriental market vanquished their scruples when they took office in 1841. Palmerston was understandably gratified by this conversion, attributed to the prevailing depression at home, and sure that 'These Asiatic triumphs... will relieve embarrassment of all kinds' ('Letters', ed. Bourne, 275). His second term at the Foreign Office left him widely admired in and out of parliament. 
Palmerston was glad of an interval in his departmental labours; he drove himself hard. The small Foreign Office staff complained bitterly of his demands; before his marriage he often worked into the early hours. His behaviour in opposition did nothing to reassure colleagues, whose reservations he had increasingly disregarded in making policy, although at home he moved with his party towards free trade and voted for the 'Maynooth Bill' in 1845. He attacked the tories for being too conciliatory towards France, and employed strong language about the surrender of territory to America in the Ashburton treaty (1842). This outspokenness revealed his impatience to take foreign affairs out of the hands of 'a set of geese'; he assailed his successor, Lord Aberdeen, in leading articles written for the 'Morning Chronicle'. 'Palmerston and War' were linked in men's minds as Peel's ministry neared its end. Loath to form a government in December 1845, Lord John Russell discovered an excuse in objections to Palmerston as foreign secretary, voiced by the third Earl Grey, and in his refusal to take another post. There was no keeping Palmerston from the Foreign Office when Russell succeeded Peel in July 1846. He replied to charges that his policy had 'a 'tendency' to produce war' by pointing out that it had advanced British interests without a major conflict, if not quite peacefully ('Letters of Queen Victoria', ed. A. C. Benson and Lord Esher, and G. E. Buckle, 1st ser., 1907, 2.69). 
The contrast between Palmerston's vocal championship of European liberalism and a realistic appreciation of where Britain's advantage lay was sharper than ever. Anglo-French relations, improved under Aberdeen, deteriorated again with the affair of the Spanish marriages. Britain accused her ally of breaking a promise not to marry a French prince to the young Queen Isabella II, or to her sister and heir, until the queen had married and borne children. Isabella's union to a Spanish cousin assumed to be impotent was celebrated simultaneously with her sister's to the duc de Montpensier (October 1846). Nevertheless, Britain and France co-operated in the forcible restoration of constitutionalism in Portugal in 1847 under the provisions of the Quadruple Alliance, an episode that repaired some of the damage done by the Spanish marriages. Palmerston followed it up with an initiative to exploit the liberal tide flowing in Europe. A cabinet minister, Lord Minto, was sent to Switzerland and Italy with instructions to encourage the 'progressive system of internal improvement' exemplified by the reforming pope, Pius IX. The liberals' victory in the Swiss civil war that year was made possible by the absence of foreign intervention, averted largely by Palmerston's tactics in holding off collective action by the powers until the Catholic cantons had been defeated. To Austrian protests at what looked like gratuitous interference in Italy, he replied: 'Prince Metternich thinks he is a conservative in clinging obstinately to the 'status quo'... We think ourselves conservatives in preaching and advising everywhere concessions, reforms and improvements, where public opinion demands them' (A. J. P. Taylor, 'The Italian Problem in European Diplomacy', 1934, 32). 
The revolutions of 1848 demonstrated the intelligence of whig foreign and domestic policies. But the failure of continental liberalism to consolidate its gains ensured the success of reaction, which in France took the form of a Bonapartist revival. Palmerston's response to the democratic republic that displaced the monarchy in February 1848, and to Louis Napoleon Bonaparte's election as its president in December, was pragmatic. He stayed close to the power that was potentially more dangerous and more helpful to Britain than any other. 'What business is it of ours', he enquired, 'whether the French nation thinks proper to be governed by a King, an emperor, a president or a consul?' ('Hansard 3', 102, 2 Feb 1849, 206-7). The prince president proved easier to work with than Louis Philippe. He was an Anglophile, which had an important bearing on Palmerston's future. Russell and other colleagues were slower to realize that this Bonaparte was very different from his uncle Napoleon I. Palmerston was dismissed on 19 December 1851 for having approved, in conversation with the French ambassador, of the coup that made Louis Napoleon dictator. 
Palmerston's removal had been discussed at intervals for several years. Queen Victoria and her husband did not share his view that revolutions might be judged on their merits. They complained of the dispatches sent off before he had received royal comments that were often full and pointed. The cabinet admired and resented Palmerston's mastery of his portfolio and his independence. His growing populism disconcerted them. Though for him property and education qualified a man to vote, he considered 'no set of men... too ignorant to understand their own interests and... manage their own affairs... the knowledge requisite... is speedily acquired by... taking part in them' (Webster, 1.272). His language in reproving governments for their slowness to change imperilled the practical co-operation integral to his policy. Attacked in parliament in July 1849, he had argued that encouragement of liberals entitled Britain to the gratitude of a future Europe, while the preservation of normal relations with states opposed to liberalism safeguarded the peace so necessary to his country. 
If sometimes provocative towards great powers, Palmerston was overbearing when small states offended. On 17 June 1850 the Lords condemned his employment of the Mediterranean Fleet to collect relatively modest compensation due to, among others, a Gibraltarian Jew of dubious repute, David Pacifico. The Commons upheld him after he had delivered the most famous of his speeches (25 June 1850), 'extraordinary and masterly', admitted W. E. Gladstone, one of his sternest critics in the debate. Speaking for four and a half hours, with scarcely a note, Palmerston rose to parliamentary heights no one had thought him capable of scaling, and with a conclusion which became one of the best-known flights of parliamentary oratory in that century: 'I therefore fearlessly challenge the verdict which this House... is to give... as the Roman, in days of old, held himself free from indignity, when he could say 'Civis Romanus sum'; so also a British subject, in whatever land he may be, shall feel confident that the watchful eye and the strong arm of England will protect him against injustice and wrong. ('Hansard 3', 112, 25 June 1850, 444)' The claim had no basis in international law, and was patently unenforceable against powerful countries. It was a declaration of equality with nations strong enough to behave in the same way towards inferiors; as such it went down very well with the public. His colleagues' misgivings were an open secret. But Palmerston had been prudent where it mattered. Britain's moral support did not save Sardinia from being crushed by Austria in 1849, when she tried to set up the constitutional kingdom of Northern Italy that Palmerston wanted to see. He urgently advised the Sardinians against war. Nor was the British fleet ordered to prevent the Neapolitan Bourbons from reconquering Sicily, where the revolutions of 1848 began, although Britain and France insisted on a delay for negotiations. By the end of 1849 reaction had prevailed in Italy, the German lands, and Hungary; in the last Russian intervention was decisive. Sending British and French warships to stiffen Turkey in her refusal to surrender Hungarian refugees pleased domestic opinion, but did not disguise the abandonment of Hungary. 
Russell could no longer tolerate the contradictions of Palmerstonian policy. After, as before, the Greek debate Palmerston would not be shifted from the Foreign Office to another post, with or without the lead in the house. A few weeks ahead of his dismissal, he flaunted his antagonism to authoritarian regimes. Stopped by the cabinet from meeting the exiled Hungarian patriot Kossuth, he received a London radical deputation and failed to rebuke them for violently hostile references to the Austrian and Russian emperors. This was the occasion on which he said that Britain's role called for 'a good deal of judicious bottle-holding'; a sporting metaphor made famous in 'Punch' (6 December 1851). Russell's hesitancy is explained by his awareness of the esteem in which Palmerston was held by tories and radicals on the back benches: 'both would be ready to receive him as leader', the premier had told the queen. 
The expulsion of Palmerston, who refused to exchange the Foreign Office for the Irish viceroyalty, had the predicted effect of upsetting the government (20 February 1852). He led the attack on its 'Militia Bill', voted down as an inadequate response to public anxiety about national defences against a Bonapartist France. This display of patriotic vigilance was not needed for his popularity, which had grown with his fall. The tories had always hoped he might be persuaded to return to them: Lord Derby made repeated offers, which did not include his old department, during the minority government formed on the resignation of the divided whigs. Prepared to enter a coalition, Palmerston would not join a tory administration as such; ties of two decades to the whigs were reinforced by the prospective partners' reluctance to give up agricultural protection and by his distaste for their bigots. He thought the leadership of his own party was within his grasp, surmising that on a secret vote they would prefer him to Russell. On reflection, he accepted the Home Office (28 December 1852) in the whig and Peelite ministry that replaced Derby's. Busying himself with prison reform, factory legislation, and public health in a spirit of humanitarianism and efficiency, he carried his objections to Russell's plans for a wider franchise to the length of resigning on 16 December 1853. It was too soon to strengthen the 'democratic element' in the state; the question had failed to arouse much interest. He did not persist with his resignation; nor did he again oppose parliamentary reform openly. Russell's bill was dropped after its introduction. 
Kept out of the Foreign Office, Palmerston advocated resistance to fresh Russian pressure on Turkey, and continued to insist that war (March 1854) could have been averted by more resolute diplomacy and a better understanding with France. The Turkish fleet's destruction at Sinope the previous December excited such indignation that the cabinet feared his resignation on an unrelated question would bring them down. Helped by his hints to newspapers, the public identified him with their desire to stand up to Russia. His realism did not desert him: the imminent struggle 'must as far as we are concerned have a very limited range' ('Letters', ed. Bourne, 308). That did not prevent him from conceiving a grand design for the 'circumvallation' of Russia, her borderlands distributed between neighbouring countries and independent Poland. The aim was to make the world a safer place for liberalism, and the sultan. Lord Aberdeen commented that the plan would mean a thirty years' war. Official British war aims were restricted to keeping Russia out of Turkey. When Palmerston took over, he did not ask the cabinet to reconsider his visionary project, although he adverted to it with selected individuals. 
The revelation of military weakness in the Crimea made Palmerston prime minister. Losses inflicted by the enemy were much smaller than the mortality from exposure and disease, for which incompetence and neglect were blamed. The home secretary escaped the censure visited upon Aberdeen and others. At the end of 1854 Russell questioned Aberdeen's leadership, and proposed Palmerston for the War Office. Personal ambition rather than concern for the country were thought to have prompted him: Palmerston spoke contemptuously in cabinet of such opportunism. Appreciation of this solidarity made him their choice to lead the Commons when Russell resigned in January 1855, unable to withstand J. A. Roebuck's motion for an inquiry into the conduct of the war. After a majority of 157 had swept Aberdeen aside, the two party chiefs, Russell and Derby, could not induce Palmerston, for whom press and public were clamouring, to serve under either. Warned not to show herself unwilling to send for him, the queen lamented that he would redraw the map of Europe. 
The circumstances of his accession to power (6 February 1855) at seventy set the tone of Palmerston's premiership. The outcry that greeted the plight of the Crimean army seemed, briefly, to have undermined the position of the aristocracy. Palmerston followed Aberdeen because his reputation qualified him to restore confidence in the ability of his class to rule an ever more urban, industrial, and imperially minded state. He had much radical goodwill: A. H. Layard of the Administrative Reform Association declared that if anyone could change the existing system of government for the better, it was Palmerston, who had been deterred from making Layard a junior minister only by strenuous representations from, among others, Gladstone. Radicals, argued Palmerston, often mistook the whole trend of contemporary Britain. The social process was one of levelling up: 'it is an aristocratic movement. I am delighted to see the humbler classes raising themselves in the scale of society' ('Hansard 3', 136, 1 March 1855, 2165). It was sound policy to proclaim the openness of his class and its diminishing distance from those below. A start on civil service reform furnished proof of the ministry's intentions; at the same time he reassured parliament, more nervous than he was of the Administrative Reform Association, by opposing Layard's attempt to force the pace. The latter's motion of 15 June 1855 was lost by a huge margin. 
The pressing requirement was for a leader who could hold his own in the Commons and bring to the higher direction of the war qualities which the peace-loving Aberdeen did not possess. The foreign secretary, Lord Clarendon, was as nearly a technocrat as was possible at that period; he owed a great deal to Palmerston, whose subordinate he had been as minister to Spain, and never lost the habit of looking for instructions. The new war minister, Lord Panmure, was uninspired and slow to act; successive British commanders in the Crimea disappointed. Palmerston's experience enabled him to infuse unwonted energy into the military machine: the logistics of the campaign were soon at least adequate. Strategy was determined by the need to capture Sevastopol before launching any further large-scale attacks, though he was ready with ideas for widening the invasion. He had public opinion with him, but, his cabinet colleague Sir George Cornewall Lewis noted, the Commons did not believe there was 'a real national interest in supporting Turkey' (G. C. Lewis, diary, 20 July 1855, NL Wales, Harpton Court collection, 3569). Gladstone and two other Peelites left the cabinet almost at once, ostensibly in protest at proceeding with the inquiry into the war, in reality because their enthusiasm for the war did not match Palmerston's. In May the tories decided to turn the ministry out. Aided by Peelites and radicals, they got its majority down to three on the loan urgently needed to keep Turkey fighting (20 July 1855). Tory cross-voting rescued Palmerston and the bill. The public registered its disapproval of his treatment so strongly that the second reading ten days later went unopposed. Even before Sevastopol fell, in September, he was likened to a dictator, controlling the house through his hold on opinion outside. 
Doubts about the war in cabinet and parliament obliged Palmerston to persist with inherited peace negotiations at Vienna while operations continued. Russell, the British plenipotentiary, virtually gave away the allied case, and then criticized in the house terms to which he had agreed. He was forced to resign in July. A people who exaggerated the British part in its fall rejoiced at the taking of Sevastopol; the French assault carried the fortress. When Napoleon III tired of the war, Palmerston had no option: it was all he could do to hold the emperor to proposals drafted without consulting Britain. In the treaty of Paris (30 March 1856) the allies settled for the containment of Russia on terms little changed since the combatants had been close to agreement before the war. The cost of the war to Russia and the internal reconstruction on which she embarked left Napoleon free to pursue his aims in Italy, with Palmerston's discriminating assistance. 
Initially, the cabinet comprised five Peelites and nine whigs, or Liberals, as they now tended to call themselves. After the rapid departure of some Peelites (21 February 1855) and the absorption of the rest, it was a Liberal government. M. T. Baines's elevation to the cabinet in December 1855, representing the provincial middle class, was one step to advertise the administration's broad outlook. Palmerston went too far for many when he unsuccessfully tried to modernize the Lords by introducing life peers. His colleagues were dubious; tories and Peelites denounced the innovation. There was also criticism of Palmerston's religious policy, designed to conciliate the rising power of nonconformity and improve relations between church and chapel. Advised by the leading evangelical layman, his stepdaughter's husband, Lord Shaftesbury, he favoured evangelicals for preferment -- men congenial to nonconformists. Privately, he explained this bias as a ''political' duty' (Steele, 167); his own inclinations ran to broad-churchmen like A. C. Tait, whom he appointed bishop of London in 1856. That year ministers endorsed a 'Church Rates Bill' to exempt nonconformists, which passed its second reading. It did not go on to the Lords and certain defeat, but indicated a wish to please the moderate majority in the chapels. He rejected suggestions that he was not a reformer: 'Failure, at first, is an unavoidable incident to free discussion' ('Hansard 3', 143, 25 July 1856, 1465). The unbroken prosperity of the war years underwrote his policies. The 'war ninepence' on income tax did not lift it above 1's'. 4died in the pound, and Lewis at the Treasury borrowed extensively at low rates. Only its economic well-being, Palmerston observed, had made the country 'stick to the war'. 
The opposition to Palmerston, like his support, cut across parties. Russell resented his exile from the cabinet, which the prime minister was in no hurry to end. These assorted enemies banded together to defeat the government on 3 March 1857 on Richard Cobden's motion censuring the resort to force against China. Palmerston defended the controversial decisions of Sir John Bowring, governor of Hong Kong, in accordance with his practice of standing by the man on the spot. Recent consultations between Britain, France, and the United States about their posture in the Far East had prepared the ground. The three envisaged armed negotiation with China and Japan. Seizure at Canton (Guangzhou) of the 'Arrow' (October 1856), a vessel flying the British flag although its Hong Kong registration had expired, afforded a pretext, reinforced by other instances of Chinese disregard for the letter and spirit of the treaty signed in 1842. Palmerston depicted Bowring, 'essentially a man of the people', as an example of middle-class achievement and the victim of factional politics. He met the opposition victory with a dissolution. The polls bore out immediate reactions in the City and the main provincial towns. A number of tory candidates protested their regard for Palmerston, and tendered him 'a general support'. At one stage 'The Times' listed returns as for or against the prime minister rather than Liberal or Conservative. The election was a personal triumph. 
Palmerston's national standing had already allowed him to carry off set-backs elsewhere. Ferdinand II of Naples, whose methods the British used the congress of Paris to deplore, defied an Anglo-French note and joint naval demonstration, making the allies look mildly ridiculous. Palmerston fared no better in disputes with the United States that arose from Crimean War recruiting inside her borders, and from conflicting interests in Central America. Britain submitted to the dismissal of her minister in Washington and three consuls; the navy in Central American waters was instructed to avoid an incident. The Commons approved this caution decisively (30 June 1856); no one wanted disruption of the vital transatlantic trade. There was much less concern about war with Persia in 1856-7, largely at the Indian taxpayers' expense. Russia was in no condition to help Persia, whose encroachment upon Afghanistan, the buffer against the arrival of Russian expansion at the Indian frontier, elicited the successful British action. 
Except in India, where he favoured the annexation of princely states before the mutiny, Palmerston preferred influence to territory. He was not tempted by Napoleon III's idea that Britain should take Egypt and France Morocco. British interests and Western civilization were best served by maintaining local regimes and opening their lands to trade: 'Let us try to improve all these countries by the general influence of our commerce', he commented, 'but let us all abstain from a crusade of conquest which would call down... the condemnation of... other civilized nations' (H. E. Maxwell, 'The Life and Letters of... [the] Fourth Earl of Clarendon', 1913, 2.300-01). The Anglo-Moroccan treaty of 1856 exemplified the desired arrangement: abolition of most restrictions on imports; tariffs fixed at 10 per cent, for revenue, not protection; and the benefits of extraterritoriality for British residents. In the era of 'informal empire', this was the pattern of agreements with China, Japan, and other states where guarantees of most favoured nation status did not suffice. 
If economic penetration sometimes called for the employment of force, the extirpation of the slave trade depended upon it. Few doubted Palmerston's sincerity in declaring that its suppression was one of the 'great objects always before him in life' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 5.495). At the Foreign Office he constructed a network of treaties with European governments that permitted the Royal Navy to intercept suspected slavers wearing foreign colours, and deliver them for adjudication in their own courts or before mixed commissions representing both signatories. When Portugal held out against the imposition of this control, Palmerston secured an act of parliament (1839) providing for unilateral enforcement; Brazil was similarly coerced. Along the west and east African coasts treaties outlawing the traffic were pressed on local rulers; the effect was to establish British paramountcy in those regions. It was Palmerston who gave substance to the international declaration of intent to abolish the slave trade (1815). The United States' attitude left ample scope for its perpetuation, and in the 1850s France revived it under another name. Not until after the outbreak of the civil war did Washington bring America into line. Protracted negotiations were necessary before the French halted 'free emigration' in black Africa in exchange for access to indentured labour from India for their sugar colonies. 
Britain's inability to coerce the United States and France was a reminder of her limitations. So was Palmerston's discomfiture when France and Russia overcame Anglo-Turkish resistance to uniting the Romanian principalities, Ottoman tributary states. At Osborne (August 1857) the emperor and Palmerston devised a formula to cover the latter's retreat. Napoleon did not want to lower the prime minister in the eyes of his countrymen at an awkward moment: British weakness had again been exposed, this time in India. Palmerston welcomed the news of the mutiny: 'distressing by reason of... individual sufferings... but not really alarming... it may tend to our establishing our power upon... a firmer basis'. The recapture of Delhi within four months seemed to indicate that the British were not facing a 'real war' ('Panmure Papers', 2.399, 466). He did not foresee the partisan war that prolonged the insurrection. 
The rapid growth of newspaper circulations after 1855 added to the pressure of public opinion on MPs. While Palmerston made the most of this development, he considered that newspapers finished by reflecting opinion, however hard they tried to mould it. He could not ride the storm that blew up on the 'Conspiracy to Murder Bill' and turned him out on 19 February 1858. The attempted assassination of Napoleon in January by conspirators based in Britain had produced strongly worded French demands, diplomatic and military, for changes in her law. Palmerston found French anger 'perfectly natural'. If war resulted, France would have 'a plausible... cause which all Europe will admit to be just' (Broadlands MS, CAB/89). The cabinet baulked at his proposal to deport aliens suspected of plotting against foreign governments: the bill making conspiracy to commit murder outside the jurisdiction a felony instead of a misdemeanour was only a gesture, but on its second reading the same combination that had beaten Palmerston in 1857 carried the motion, which convicted him of going beyond conciliation to appeasement. Bystanders jeered as he went home. The political price of the French alliance had risen too high for a nation sensitive to any hint of dictation by another power. His resignation appeared to terminate Palmerston's political life. 

'The Times' attributed Palmerston's overthrow to underlying discontent at his failure to broaden the ministry's composition in line with the shift towards a more popular Liberalism. There was evidence of a reforming administration: besides the 'Divorce Act' (1857), a landmark in social legislation of which Palmerston was proud, a cabinet committee under his chairmanship outlined a reform bill lowering the $10 franchise to $6 or $8. Parliament endorsed, overwhelmingly, ministers' handling of the banking crisis in November 1857. On the debit side, filling a cabinet vacancy in December with a friend, Lord Clanricarde, discredited by allegations about his personal character, suggested indifference to the respectable voter. It offended Liberals who were neither old-style whigs nor radicals -- often businessmen and lawyers from midland and northern seats, not hostile to aristocratic leadership, only disappointed in their expectations of Palmerston. 
No one supposed Derby's incoming minority government would last long. Palmerston confounded those who had written him off by taking readily to opposition. Too sanguine of ousting Derby at first, he realized that the road back lay through the Liberal members who had seen in him something more than a 'traditional politician' ('The Times', 1 March 1858). He promised them that his next ministry would be more representative of a changing party. Tory misjudgements assisted his recovery. The government's 'Reform Bill' united Liberals of all shades by leaving the $10 franchise untouched and removing urban 40 shilling freeholders from the counties, where the party relied on them. The election which Derby called in the spring of 1859 after being beaten on these points was overshadowed by the war between France, allied to Sardinia, and Austria, impending for months, which raised the prospect of a European struggle. Tory policy appeared likely to align Britain with Austria when technological advances had jeopardized naval superiority over France. Fear of war worked to Palmerston's advantage. He had maintained contact with Napoleon, paying him a well-publicized visit in November 1858. Earlier, in Paris, the emperor assured him that in modernizing her fleet France did not mean to overtake her neighbour. As war approached, Palmerston strove to calm the distrust of Napoleon, although he shared it, and overrode the friends of Austria in his party. He countered the government's Austrian leanings, which caused panic on the stock exchange, with a pro-French neutrality. Freeing Italy from Austrian hegemony, attractive though that was, had a lower priority than peace. 
With the navy in transition, Palmerston pointed out, the country was in no state to take on France. A Palmerston government offered an assurance of peace. Reconstruction of the Liberal Party after an election which it won, with a reduced majority, proceeded on the basis of continued neutrality, parliamentary reform, and a more broadly based ministry than his last. Liberal MPs meeting at Willis's Rooms on 6 June 1859 sealed the accord. Palmerston and Russell pledged themselves to serve under each other if sent for: like most of those present, Russell privately conceded that the international situation required Palmerston at the helm, but recognition of his standing placated the former leader. When a vote of confidence had disposed of the tories (10 June 1859), Austrian sympathies inspired a royal attempt to impose Lord Granville as premier, easily and politely frustrated by other leading Liberals. In forming a ministry (he took office on 12 June 1859), Palmerston cast his net widely: the old whig element in the cabinet fell from twelve out of fifteen in February 1858 to eight out of sixteen; there were half a dozen former Peelites and, a novelty, two radicals. As advised, he enlisted the ablest men he could -- hence the Peelite representation. He justified his exclusion of old friends by the necessity of putting together a comprehensive Liberal administration. It was understood that the proximity of war had handed Palmerston 'a power no one dreamed he would have again' (Sir E. Bulwer-Lytton, quoted in Steele, 30). 
Ironically, Cobden and John Bright now looked on Palmerston as their best hope for peace. Refusing his invitation to enter 'the citadel of power', Cobden undertook to support the government so long as his close associate, Milner Gibson, sat in cabinet. Gladstone, who voted with the tories in June, could not bear to be left out. Palmerston was persuaded to substitute the exchequer for the India Office, where he had meant to marginalize a formidable opponent. The relationship of Palmerston and Gladstone was central to this ministry; the elder proved the stronger of two strong men. Gibson and Gladstone backed Palmerston and his foreign secretary, Russell, when the cabinet opposed a defensive pact between Britain, France, and Sardinia to safeguard the last's territorial gains in 1859. The premier and his supporters fell back on the Anglo-French commercial treaty which Cobden helped to negotiate. Afraid of France, government and public were eager to share the credit for events in Italy. 
France confined Austria to Venetia; Sardinia turned a blind eye to Garibaldi's expedition to Sicily in May 1860, and her troops completed the conquest of the Papal States and Naples. Britain's contribution to uniting Italy was almost entirely diplomatic. The exception was her refusal to join France in preventing Garibaldi from crossing the Straits of Messina, where Napoleon did not like to act alone. Fearful of a continental coalition, he was always anxious to have Britain with him; her friendship was, too, confirmation of his claim to be a liberal. 'I cannot see', remarked Palmerston, 'the use of representing the... emperor as a deep deceiver... an inveterate enemy... he professes the fixed desire of being our faithful ally' (Steele, 250). Taking Napoleon at his word, he urged France to refrain from intervening when nationalists ignored the terms of the Franco-Austrian armistice (July 1859) in handing over the central Italian duchies and the Romagna to Sardinia. This supporting role made Palmerston an apologist for the emperor. He sought to mitigate the offence in the French appropriation of Savoy and Nice: Napoleon's 'noble enterprise' beyond the Alps was substantially intact. The government kept up diplomatic pressure for the evacuation of Rome, where France had protected the papacy since 1849. Palmerston's Italian policy embraced 'English and Protestant interests' (Palmerston to Russell, 17 Sept 1861, ibid., 266), and envisaged shrinking the pope's residual territory to its modern dimensions. For that Napoleon was not prepared, although he withdrew his garrison. 
Anglo-French co-operation extended round the world. The Second Opium War, begun in 1856, ended with the British and French occupation of Peking (Beijing) (1860); British marines landed with the French in Mexico in 1861; and French warships participated in the British-led bombardment of Japanese defences in 1864. Disliking these 'combined operations' with rivals, Palmerston saw them as unavoidable if international jealousy of Britain's global presence was to be contained. Distrust of France remained strong: the volunteer movement was a spontaneous reaction to deep-seated fears; if of small military value, in Palmerston's view, it provided a useful indication of the national mood. Public opinion upheld him in spending millions to confirm naval superiority; he maintained that the mutual respect essential to the successful working of the French, or any comparable, alliance, required Britain to be safe from attack. It took France's attitude to the 'Trent' incident, all that an ally could wish, to relax British suspicions. 
Washington's surrender of Confederate emissaries taken off a British ship encouraged Napoleon and a cross-section of British opinion to press for joint mediation in the American Civil War. Palmerston was torn between lifelong opposition to slavery and the attraction of a permanently divided United States, the probable outcome of a brokered settlement. He resisted Gladstone's bid to pre-empt a cabinet decision by his Newcastle speech of October 1862, hailing the Confederacy as an emergent nation: but spoke and voted with Russell and Gladstone when mediation was rejected in November. Gladstone had the impression that this result did not displease the premier, much less eager to intervene than the emperor. The tide had turned against the Confederacy, and the North was amassing a formidable power, military and naval. 
Differences over Poland and Schleswig-Holstein strained the French alliance in 1863-4. Napoleon's suggested European congress to consider the Polish question in the context of a wholesale revision of the Viennese treaties alarmed other powers; it seemed to imply further French expansion. Short of war, it was the only way to help the rebels in Russian Poland, whose sufferings excited Western compassion. Russell's language in replying to the French proposal gave considerable offence. The emperor derived understandable satisfaction from the humiliation of British diplomacy in the next European crisis, over Schleswig-Holstein. Despite a verbal intimation ('Hansard 3', 172, 24 July 1863, 1252) that the Danes might count on Britain, Palmerston was critical of them, saying afterwards: 'They were wrong in the beginning, and have been wrong in the end' (Guedalla, 'Gladstone and Palmerston', 290). If the Baltic kingdom, with its strategic location, was a significant British interest, the treatment of the German element in Schleswig and the duchy's incorporation in Denmark were undeniable breaches of treaty obligations. But both parties in Britain condemned Austrian and Prussian occupation of the duchies on Germany's behalf. The Danes' obduracy -- 'they are not an intelligent race' said Palmerston (Connell, 383) -- and German awareness that there was nothing to fear from anyone entailed the failure of Britain's efforts at the London Conference of 1864. The cabinet's resolution, by a single vote, on physical intervention only if the Danish capital were threatened, underlined British helplessness. 
Yet the public did not hold this signal reverse against Palmerston: the crowd cheered as he left the Commons after answering the tory censure of his policy. He had done what was expected of him. He had spoken, undiplomatically, of Russia's 'inheritance of triumphant wrong' in Poland ('Hansard 3', 169, 27 Feb 1863, 935), and informed the Austrian and Prussian envoys that their governments were guilty of the bloodshed over the duchies. Britain's circumstances and her policy excluded 'great sacrifices... of men and money', he told his constituents ('The Times', 24 Aug 1864). Even if the French had been ready to move, Palmerston was apprehensive of a demand for payment in German territory. As a substitute for force, he urged 'The Times' to sustain a warlike tone in its editorials: Bismarck was unimpressed. There was no question, however, of withdrawing from Europe: the alliance with France survived. At times Palmerston had felt that war between these uneasy allies might be near: but, like Louis Philippe and Napoleon, he exerted himself to control national feeling. Gladstone's tribute should be remembered: 'he [Palmerston]... was entirely above flattering... the most vulgar appetites and propensities of the people' (Ramm, 'Political Correspondence, 1876-1886', 2.1). His reward, and Britain's, was a greater say in Europe than would otherwise have been theirs. 
The British headed the contemporary expansion of Europe and America into other continents. Dealings with 'weaker and less civilized' countries went through stages outlined by Palmerston in 1864: initial willingness to sign a trade treaty, followed by breaches of faith, violence, Western protests and reprisals until the eventual 'display of superior strength' (5 Oct 1864, Broadlands MS, PM/J/1). Force, and its intimation, were not absent from the striking growth of British trade and investment in Latin America, which outstripped progress in the Pacific. Suppression of the mutiny secured the accelerating profitability of India. On a political plane, Palmerston won the domestic argument about his country's methods in the East: critics were 'doing their best to take the bread out of the mouths of our working classes' ('Hansard 3', 175, 31 May 1864, 973). But empire brought an obligation to improve the lot of subject peoples. Palmerston contrasted his colleague Sir Charles Wood's oversight of Indian administration with the Russian record in Poland: 'The result... makes England a bright example for other countries' (19 April 1864, Hickleton MS A4/63/146). He seems to have accepted without question the establishment of responsible government in the settler colonies, but did not look for the severance of their remaining, and voluntary, ties with Britain; they were the fullest expression of a liberal empire. 
Those colonies were not far ahead in their adoption of democracy. Cobden's reference to the prime ministerial Palmerston as 'the Feargus O'Connor of the middle classes' (J. Morley, 'The Life of Richard Cobden', 1881, 2.416) was near the mark. Palmerston pioneered the kind of politics often associated with Gladstone and Joseph Chamberlain. At intervals he went on the stump, and in the 1860s made speeches aimed specifically at a working class whose self-respect and respect for other classes were qualifying more of them for membership of the political nation. He amused a Glaswegian audience by claiming to be a working man himself; at Lambeth he talked of social mobility and was criticized in the press for overstating it. He preached a popular capitalism: increasing wages and returns on capital went hand in hand; employers should not treat the workforce as 'machines... to produce so much profit... but... rational beings' ('The Times', 7 Nov 1856). There is an obvious contrast here with his position on parliamentary reform after the 1860 bill, on which he and Russell agreed before coming into office. Lack of interest outside Westminster compelled them to abandon the measure in an unfriendly house. Although Palmerston saw no reason to repeat the attempt until opinion had ripened, he promoted 'bit by bit reform', which gave four new constituencies to the industrial north of England in 1861. The evolving political system to which he imparted its distinctive character was well described as 'an aristocratico-democratic representative constitution' (G. C. Lewis, 'A Dialogue on the Best Form of Government', 1863, 82). 
The Palmerston of these years voted for the Liberation Society's church rate bills, and expressed sympathy with nonconformist complaints of the Anglican monopoly in university government. In deference to Peelite high-churchmen in the cabinet, he made fewer evangelical appointments while pointing to their reception by church people and nonconformists. Baronetcies for parliamentary representatives of nonconformity proclaimed their acceptability in the party he led. An essentially political investment in nonconformist goodwill paid: the most militant of nonconformists found it hard to depict Palmerston as an enemy; greater harmony between church and chapel helped the Liberals at the 1865 election. The familiar tory cry of 'the Church in danger' sounded unconvincing in that atmosphere; even E. B. Pusey urged his adherents to vote for a minister who had done much to strengthen the establishment. 
Religion divided Palmerston and Gladstone more than anything else. 'There was a greater storm in the cabinet... than I ever heard before' (15 Nov 1862, Glynne-Gladstone MS 29/1), wrote Gladstone when the premier stood firm on denying Samuel Wilberforce the archbishopric of York. Their published correspondence suggests that their better-known disagreements were not caused by serious policy differences. Palmerston believed the chancellor was using his financial responsibility to become 'master of the cabinet' (Connell, 291), and asserted his own authority as first lord of the Treasury. Gladstone's acceptance from the outset that modernization of the fleet was imperative foreshadowed the outcome of their repeated arguments over the naval estimates, in particular. Palmerston joked about the many contemplated resignations of his colleague, who came closest to leaving on the fortifications loan (1860). Sure of the cabinet, he faced his challenger with lasting relegation to the back benches beside radicals whose opinions on most subjects, defence included, were not his. That summer he quietly welcomed the Lords' action in throwing out repeal of the paper duties: he disliked the sacrifice of revenue, and contrived to prevent the ensuing controversy about the Lords' power from developing into an unwanted crisis. Gladstone got his way the next year, by inserting the repeal in a unified finance bill which the peers could not reject. Cutting expenditure, once defence spending reached its peak, had Palmerston's blessing. In all his long experience, keeping taxes low was vital to political health. The two men compromised on direct versus indirect taxation: Palmerston was for halting the decline in income tax at 5died in the pound, not the 4died reached by 1865, since it was levied upon those who could comfortably afford to pay, and concentrating reductions upon the fiscal burdens of the vast majority. 
'Progressive improvement' had many aspects. Palmerston befriended the extension of the 'Factory Acts', and obliged pressure groups with royal commissions on a variety of social problems. But his constructive influence did not owe a great deal to legislation. Gladstone linked Palmerston with the Liberals' goal in declaring that they had set themselves to remove 'any occasion... of conflict between classes' ('The Times', 2 June 1865). In saying of Palmerston 'he devoted more time and ability to... understanding the people than any democratic politician of his age', the 'Daily News' (25 Oct 1865) recognized that his ministries were a conscious introduction to a new era. If not a good party man, he fashioned the instrument which served Gladstone well: a Liberalism whose unifying idea and function -- social harmony in the pursuit of ordered change -- he had redefined and emphasized. Disraeli and, with more success, Lord Salisbury tried to acquire this Palmerstonian inheritance. 
The last months of Palmerston's life saw an electoral victory in July 1865 which considerably increased his majority. In Ireland Fenianism confronted him: no surprise to someone who had insisted on stationing there, at a quiet time, 'a sufficient Saxon force to make any movement on the part of the Celts perfectly hopeless, and sure to bring immediate destruction on those who take part' ('Panmure Papers', 2.446). If the harshness is unexpected, he may be said to have taken a more realistic view of Irish unrest than was usual then. He did not live to meet the new parliament. A robust constitution, which had withstood gout and lesser ailments, was perceptibly weakening during 1865; he died from pneumonia at Brocket on 18 October of that year. 'Die, my dear Doctor, that's the last thing I shall do!' were said to be his last words (E. Latham, 'Famous Sayings', 1904, 12). Given a state funeral, he was buried at Westminster Abbey, the last of many honours -- dying a knight of the Garter (1856), lord warden of the Cinque Ports (1862), and rector of Glasgow University (1863). His Irish peerage became extinct. 
There is a wide measure of disagreement about Palmerston. The official life begun by his friend Sir Henry Bulwer was completed and revised by Evelyn Ashley, Shaftesbury's son. They presented him as an authentic Liberal, without doing justice to his perception of change and adaptation to it. Shorter nineteenth-century studies drew on Bulwer and Ashley. The publication of Morley's 'Gladstone' in 1903 lent authority to the contention of diverse critics in his lifetime that the real Palmerston was distinctly conservative in domestic politics, if a liberal in Europe. Variations on that theme prevailed until lately. In the 1960s one scholar summed him up as an 'ill-considered Tory hack, rising by unorthodox methods, in association with... but not by the will of Whiggery... [to] a sort of Caesarian supremacy' (D. Southgate, 'The Passing of the Whigs', 1962, 295). Another, in an influential book, wrote that Palmerston's policies 'involved crude belligerence abroad, and class fear at home' (J. Vincent, 'The Formation of the Liberal Party, 1857-1868', 1966, 146). A different Palmerston appeared in Webster's classic account of his diplomacy and Bourne's exhaustively researched biography, neither of which got beyond 1841. A recent study of the two administrations (E. D. Steele, 'Palmerston and Liberalism, 1855-1865', 1991) has argued that they reflected the thinking of a statesman who was not merely liberal but genuinely progressive by contemporary standards. 


@@@@@


doc= 27113


Temple, James (1606-c.1674), regicide, was the only surviving son of Sir Alexander Temple ('c'.1582-1629) of Etchingham in Sussex, and his first wife, Mary Penyston, daughter of John Somer of Kent. Alexander Temple was MP for Sussex in 1625-6. James Temple was educated at Lincoln's Inn from 1622, although his attendance was irregular, and he was not called to the bar. His absence may have been caused, in part, by his participation in the duke of Buckingham's fateful military campaign to the island of Re in 1627, during which his elder brother was killed. Before April 1629 he married his stepsister Mary, daughter of John Busbridge of Etchingham, Sussex. They had five sons and a daughter. In the years following the death of his father in 1629 Temple forged friendships with many future parliamentarians, such as Sir Thomas Pelham, one of the most prominent puritan grandees in Sussex, with whom Temple and his family lived in the early 1640s. Upon the outbreak of civil war, Temple was made captain of a troop of horse under his uncle, William Fiennes, Viscount Saye and Sele, and subsequently served as captain of Tilbury Fort, a position which his father had earlier held. His most significant military contribution, however, occurred in Sussex, where he served on parliament's county committee, and where, as governor of Bramber Castle, he played a prominent part in the defence of the town against royalist troops. After the introduction of the New Model Army in 1645, he served as governor of Arundel Castle. 
Temple was returned to parliament as a recruiter MP for Bramber in September 1645, and quickly emerged as a supporter of the political independents. He was among the members who fled to the safety of the army in the wake of the presbyterian disturbances in the summer of 1647, and thereafter played a prominent part in attempts to undermine the work of the presbyterians, not least in terms of policy in Ireland. He was nominated as a parliamentary commissioner for Munster in late 1647, although he may never have left England, where his services were certainly valuable in 1648 when Tilbury Fort assumed a position of strategic importance during the second civil war in Essex. 
After Pride's Purge in December 1648 Temple quickly emerged as an opponent of negotiated settlement with the king, and was named to the high court of justice to try Charles I. He attended every day of the trial and signed the death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. In the months after the execution of the king he played an active part in the work of parliament, not least on the committee for plundered ministers, although he also remained occupied by his work as governor of Tilbury. During late 1649 and early 1650, however, suspicions began to emerge regarding his financial propriety, as well as his work as guardian of the Catholic Sir Charles Shelley, heir to one of Sussex's most prominent recusant families. His fall from favour eventually resulted in his removal as governor of Tilbury, in September 1650, following allegations of mismanagement, and thereafter he played little part in Westminster affairs. He sat in none of the parliaments of the protectorate, and probably opposed the Cromwellian regime. When he returned to Westminster during the brief restoration of the Rump in 1659, it was as a republican sympathizer, albeit one opposed to the army. 
Temple probably absented himself from parliament after the readmission of those members who had been removed at Pride's Purge, and as a regicide almost certainly feared for his safety after the return of Charles II. He fled from London, travelling under an alias, but was arrested in Warwickshire in mid-June 1660. He was held prisoner in the Tower until being tried along with the other regicides in the following October. At his trial he acknowledged having signed the death warrant, but claimed to have played little part in the deliberations, and even the prosecuting counsel admitted that 'there are some worse than he', although he also added that 'he is bad enough' ('State trials', 5.1217). Having surrendered himself according to the proclamation of 4 June, however, Temple was able to plead for his life, and so avoided execution. Subsequently, in 1662 when a bill was prepared to allow the remaining regicides to be executed he appeared before the House of Lords and submitted a petition in which he offered an elaborate excuse for his role in the death of Charles I. He claimed that he had been urged by two royalists, Stephen Goffe and Henry Hammond, not to refuse to participate in the trial, in order that he could gain intelligence on the work of the commissioners and 'from time to time to give them an account'. He also claimed to have 'often applied himself to that cruel tyrant and usurper Cromwell with tears in his eyes, begging of him not to bring such a blot of bloody stain upon the Protestants as to execute his sacred majesty' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 156). Temple further suggested that his favour to the royal cause was the reason for his fall from power in the early 1650s. Although an implausible tale, he nevertheless received support from a number of royalists, but to no avail. He was transferred to a prison on Jersey in 1662, and probably died there some time around 1674. 


@@@@@


doc= 27114


Temple, Sir John (1600-1677), judge and historian, was born in Ireland, the eldest son of Sir William Temple (1554/5-1627), provost of Trinity College, Dublin, and Martha (died in or after 1627), daughter of Robert Harrison of Derbyshire. His father was knighted by Viscount Grandison in 1622. After graduating BA (1617) and MA (1620) from Trinity College, Dublin, John Temple entered Lincoln's Inn in 1620 and then spent some time travelling abroad. On 22 June 1627 he married Mary (died 1638), daughter of Dr John Hammond (c.1555-1617) of Chertsey, Surrey, and his wife, Mary Harrison (died 1650). They had four sons and three daughters before Mary's death at Penshurst, Kent, in November 1638. 
Temple was a gentleman pensioner by the time he was knighted during the king's coronation visit to Scotland in 1633. At court in England, Temple was the friendly associate of Robert Sidney, second earl of Leicester, on whose behalf he lobbied assertively for the post of secretary of state during the earl's absence on embassy to France. Later he conducted Leicester's end of negotiations for appointment as lord lieutenant of Ireland. Temple was in the north of England with the king in the spring of 1639; he wrote several accounts of developments there to the earl. He was consistently solicitous of Leicester's often straitened financial situation. In the teeth of some opposition in the Irish parliament, Temple was created master of the rolls of Ireland on 31 January 1641, in succession to Sir Christopher Wandesford, having purchased the office. He did not leave to take up his appointment until August. On his arrival he was admitted a privy councillor at Dublin Castle. 
When the Irish rising broke out in October 1641 Temple was of the greatest service to government in provisioning the city of Dublin. On 23 July 1642 he was returned MP for Meath, and resided at Staplestown, co. Carlow. In the struggle between crown and parliament Temple's inclinations drew him to the side of the latter, and, in consequence of the vehement resistance he offered to the cessation, he was in August 1643 suspended from his office by the lords justices Borlase and Tichborne, acting on instructions from Charles I, and, with Sir William Parsons, Sir Adam Loftus, and Sir Robert Meredith, imprisoned in Dublin Castle. He was charged with having written in May and June two scandalous letters against the king, which had been used to allege that Charles favoured the rebels. His imprisonment lasted nearly a year; he was then exchanged for Sir Thomas Malet, who was being held by parliament. In 1646 he was recruited to a vacant seat for Chichester in the English House of Commons, receiving at the same time its special thanks for his services to the English interest in Ireland at the beginning of the rising. Shortly afterwards he joined the Westminster committee responsible for overseeing Irish affairs. 
Also that year, Temple published his 'History of the Irish Rebellion' which made an immediate and great sensation. As the work of a professed eye-witness, and one whose position entitled him to speak with authority, its statements were received with unquestioning confidence, and the work did much to inflame popular indignation in England against the Irish, and to justify the severe treatment afterwards meted out to them by Cromwell. But its deliberate exaggeration of the blood-letting which took place in 1641 was just one aspect of the book's partisan intent. Temple was an important member of an 'Irish independent' interest which aimed to prevent any reconciliation between parliament and the marquess of Ormond, the lord lieutenant who had negotiated a truce with the rebels in September 1643. By stoking the fires of retributive rage against Catholic atrocity, Temple probably hoped to implicate Ormond as an accessory to massacre after the fact (an undertaking made more explicit with the publication of Adam Meredith's 'Ormonds Curtains Drawn', in which Temple may well have had a hand). Temple also saw the manipulation of opinion in England for a war of imperial conquest in Ireland as a way of undermining the principal rival to the Irish independents for dominance in planter affairs in the south, Murrough O'Brian, Lord Inchequin, who was an ally of leading Westminster presbyterians. 
Publication of Temple's history of the rebellion coincided with the appointment of Philip Sidney, Lord Lisle, eldest son of the second earl of Leicester, as the new lord lieutenant of Ireland in January 1646. This appointment was part of a strategy which also involved the disavowal of a joint Anglo-Scottish solution to the continuing Irish question. Inasmuch as it also encouraged the adoption of a scorched earth policy of total conquest, Temple's tract accorded well with the desires of the adventurers who had a substantial stake in the complete subjugation of the Irish. Temple was appointed to Lisle's privy council, accompanying him to Ireland in 1647. When Lisle's commission ended in April 1647, Temple returned with him to England. Resuming his place at Westminster, Temple proceeded to harry Inchequin's agent, Sir Philip Perceval, recently returned as a recruiter member, in a campaign of vilification which coincided with the impeachment of the eleven members by independents in the lower house friendly to the interests of the army. 
In 1647, after the conclusion of the peace between Ormond and the English parliament, Temple was appointed a commissioner for the government of Munster, and on 16 October the following year he was made joint commissioner with Sir William Parsons for the administration of the great seal of Ireland. But, having supported the majority in favour of pursuing further the peace talks with the king then being held at Newport on the Isle of Wight, Temple was purged from the House of Commons in December 1648. He appears to have held aloof from the Commonwealth regime until 21 November 1653, when he was appointed as a commissioner for the settlement of the estates belonging to delinquents in Ireland. In 1655 he went to Ireland with a highly commendatory letter from Cromwell to Lord Deputy Fleetwood and his council of state in a successful bid to regain the office of master of the rolls. In September that year he and Sir Robert King, Benjamin Worsley, and others were appointed to a commission for letting and setting of houses and lands belonging to the state in the counties of Dublin, Kildare, and Carlow; on 13 June 1656 Temple was appointed a commissioner for determining disputes over the land settlement arising among the adventurers. For these services, so it is said, he received on 6 July 1658 a grant of two leases for twenty-one years: one comprised the town and lands of Moyle, Castletown, and Park, adjoining the town of Carlow, amounting to about 1490 acres, in part afterwards confirmed to him under the 'Act of Settlement' on 18 June 1666; the other was made up of certain lands in the barony of Balrothery West, co. Dublin, to which were added those of Lispoble in the same county on 30 March 1659 for a similar term of years. He obtained license to go to England for a whole year or more on 21 April 1659. 
At the Restoration, Temple was confirmed in his office of master of the rolls, sworn a member of the privy council, and appointed a trustee for the army officers who had remained loyal to Ormond and the Stuarts in 1649. On 4 May 1661 he and his eldest son, William Temple (1628-1699), were elected to represent co. Carlow in the Irish parliament. On 6 May he obtained, for the payment of a fine of $540, a reversionary lease from the queen mother, Henrietta Maria, of the park of Blandesby or Blansby, Pickering, Yorkshire, for a term of forty years. That summer he wrote several letters to the earl of Leicester describing his fears for a renewed outbreak by the Irish Catholics, encouraged as they were, in Temple's estimation, by the king's repeated interventions on their behalf for the restoration of property they claimed they had been deprived of wrongfully. Temple himself received a confirmation in perpetuity of his lands in co. Dublin, including those of Palmerstown, under the 'Act of Settlement' in 1666; to these were added on 20 May 1669 others in counties Kilkenny, Meath, Westmeath, and Dublin. Other grants followed. On 3 May 1672 he received 144 acres formerly part of Phoenix Park, and on 16 November 1675 certain lands, fishings, and so on, in and near Chapelizod. He was appointed vice-treasurer of Ireland in 1673, but died on 12 November 1677. He was buried beside his father in Trinity College near the campanile, having that year donated $100 to the college for building works. He was survived by two sons, William and John Temple (1632-1705), and two daughters. Temple's 'History' was reprinted in 1679, helping once more to fan the flames of partisan politics in England. A decade later, James II's Irish parliament of 1689 ordered the book to be burnt by the hand of the public hangman. 


@@@@@


doc= 27115


Temple, Sir John (1632-1705), lawyer and politician, was born on 25 March 1632, the second son of Sir John Temple (1600-1677) of Dublin and Ballycrath, co. Carlow, master of the rolls in Ireland, and his wife, Mary (died 1638), daughter of Dr John Hammond. He was probably educated at Bishop's Stortford grammar school and then entered Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 30 January 1647, and Gray's Inn on 4 May 1650. He returned to Ireland in 1653 and from 1654 he practised in the Irish court of chancery. In 1657 he spent over three months in England, during which time he was called to the bar, on 17 November 1657. Following the Restoration, on 10 July 1660, he was appointed solicitor-general for Ireland. In the elections to the Irish parliament in 1661 Temple was returned for the borough of Carlow, and on 6 September 1661 he was chosen temporary speaker of the Irish House of Commons in the absence of Sir Audley Mervin. 
Temple married, on 4 August 1663, Jane (died 1708), daughter of Sir Abraham Yarner of Dublin, the muster-master general. They had four sons and seven daughters. He was knighted on 15 August 1663 and in January 1664 Lord Lieutenant Ormond wrote that he was a young man of 'extraordinary parts' ('CSP Ire.', '1663-5', 349). His legal career was now well established, and after 1664 his combined earnings from chancery and the solicitor-general's office did not fall below $1000 p.a. until 1687. In 1666-9 his income benefited from work generated by the Irish land settlement. Temple was now settled in Ireland as the confidante of Irish politicians like Ormond. He rented a house near the King's Inns and built a house at Palmerston, near to the lord lieutenant's residence. Temple was rarely away from Ireland, visiting England in winter 1670-71 and summer 1675. In 1678 Ormond wrote that Sir John 'gives us very usefully very much of his pains, and I think must afford us more in the quality of Speaker' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 4.167), should the Irish parliament be summoned, but that he was reluctant to take on the office. Lord Orrery described him in July 1679 as 'one of the ablest and honestest lawyers in his majesties dominions' (MacLysaght, 218). Temple was again in England in August-October 1679 when there were rumours that he would be appointed attorney-general in England 'at the mediation of my Lord of Essex' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 5.225). This appointment fell through, according to one account, because Charles II 'would never trust any of the blood of a rebel' (Thompson, 198-9), a reference to his father. 
In 1680 Lord Chamberlain Arlington reportedly feared that Temple's links with whig politicians such as the earl of Essex, and his failure to obtain the attorney's post would make him obstructive. Judging from his correspondence with Ormond this does not seem to have been the case. Temple was reappointed solicitor-general following the accession of James II, but the gradual introduction of more Roman Catholics into legal office saw him isolated. The appointment of a more vigorous attorney-general, Sir Richard Nagle, also cut into his employment. With an annual rent roll of $1960 Temple was now in a position to enjoy the fruits of astutely invested profits from his legal career. In late July 1687 he left for England and did not return until May 1688. The revolution saw him back in England as a key adviser on Irish policy to William III. Temple was attainted by the Irish parliament of James II, but on 30 October 1690 he was named attorney-general in Ireland. He did not resume his Irish practice, but he was resident in Ireland in 1691-2. Ill health and business apparently made him return to England in autumn 1692, although others thought this a ruse to avoid involvement in the new Irish parliament. Temple continued in office until he was removed in summer 1695. 
Despite rumours to the contrary, Temple did not become master of the rolls in Ireland, an office which his brother, Sir William, held under a life patent. Sir William instead surrendered the office in 1696 and it was granted to William Berkeley, the future fourth Lord Berkeley of Stratton, who that same year married Sir John's youngest daughter. One of her elder sisters married the third Baron Berkeley of Stratton and then the first earl of Portland, while another married Sir Basil Dixwell, second baronet. In retirement Temple lived at East Sheen, Surrey, where he died on 10 March 1705. He was buried at Mortlake, Surrey, on 16 March. He was survived by his wife, who died on 25 June 1708, two sons, and four daughters. Most of his estates in England and Ireland were settled on his two sons, the elder of whom, Henry Temple, was created Viscount Palmerston on 12 March 1723. 


@@@@@


doc= 27116


Temple, Sir Peter, second baronet (bap. 1592, d. 1653), politician, was baptized at Stowe, Buckinghamshire, on 15 October 1592, the eldest of four sons of Sir Thomas Temple, first baronet (1567-1637), of Stowe, and his wife, Hester (died 1656), daughter of Miles Sandys. Sir Peter's grandfather John Temple, who also had lands in Leicestershire and Warwickshire, acquired the freehold of Stowe in 1590; Sir Thomas purchased the baronetcy in 1611. Peter Temple bought a knighthood in February 1609 and inherited both baronetcy and estates on the death of his father in February 1637. He was already twice married. He married his first wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Arthur Throckmorton of Northamptonshire, on 5 July 1614; the couple had two sons who died in infancy and two daughters, Anne and Martha, at whose birth Anne Temple died in January 1620. Their daughter Anne later married Thomas Roper, second Viscount Baltinglass, and her inheritance became an important source of Sir Peter's financial difficulties. His second marriage, on 20 May 1630, was to Christian ('b'. in or before 1596, died 1655), daughter and coheir of Sir John Leveson of Staffordshire; they had three sons, including Sir Richard Temple, third baronet (1634-1697), of Stowe, and at least seven daughters. 
Temple held a number of posts in Buckinghamshire: he was high sheriff in 1634-5; JP for the town of Buckingham and its MP in the Short and the Long parliaments; and a member of the county committee in 1643. As sheriff he had the misfortune to be responsible for the assessment and collection of ship money from a particularly recalcitrant county. Arrears were still outstanding in July 1636 despite several summons by the privy council, though the final shortfall was small. Although he was not very active in the Long Parliament, Temple supported the parliamentarian cause, but was probably inhibited by the divided allegiance of his family; his wife and some of her relatives were royalists. However, he used his influence to help his relations, including recusants threatened with sequestration. He served as colonel of a parliamentarian regiment but was no republican. He was appointed to the high court of justice to try the king but did not appear, and resigned his commission after Charles was executed. In 1652 an informant alleged that Temple had said he hoped to see the king in England soon and that the Commons had murdered the late king. He denied the charge and seemingly no proceedings were taken against him. 
Another reason for Temple's political inactivity may have been his financial problems. For several generations the Temple family had incurred debts, partly to acquire land. Sir Peter was permanently short of money despite an income of $700 a year from the dowry lands of his first wife, a dowry of $3000 from his second, and $800 annually from his father. His father, with whom he shared a mutual hostility, accused him of wasting money in gambling, drinking, and other extravagances; Sir Peter claimed he never received the full marriage settlement promised in 1614. His reduced rental income as his tenants' and his own property were pillaged added to his problems. By 1647 his creditors launched a joint legal suit which continued for six years. For much of the time he was unable to travel openly for fear of being seized for debt; in 1650 he thwarted an attempt in parliament to have his whole estate sold, arguing that 'selling my whole estate and the utter undoing of me and my posterity after me' was 'contrary to right' (Gay, 'Debt settlement', 257). Finally, in August 1653, an agreement was reached that a group of his creditors should administer the estate except Stowe Manor House and some of its lands for ten years, or longer if Temple still lived. The income, apart from an allowance for his widow and son, would repay his debts of $24,000. The agreement was nullified by Temple's sudden death on 12 September 1653; he was buried at Stowe. Despite his financial problems he was well regarded by some: his brother-in-law Sir John Lenthall said, 'he was in his lifetime accounted a person of great credit and integrity, and enjoyed a plentiful estate both real and personal' (ibid., 256). He left a number of papers, including personal correspondence and two account books, covering the years 1625-6 and 1642-53, now in the Huntington Library, San Marino, California. 


@@@@@


doc= 27117


Temple, Peter (bap. 1599, d. 1663), regicide, was baptized at St Botolph, Sibson, Leicestershire, on 14 October 1599, the third son of Edmund Temple (died 1616) of Temple Hall, Sibson, and his wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of Robert Burgoine of Wroxhall, Warwickshire. As a younger son he was apprenticed as a linen draper, but inherited the Temple Hall estate when his older brothers, Paul and Jonathan, died. He married Phoebe, the daughter of Edmund Gayring of London and they had three sons, all baptized at St Botolph, Sibson: John on 21 March 1625, Edmund on 3 November 1638, and Peter on 10 June 1635. 
In 1642 Temple was chosen as a member of the committee for the short-lived east midland association of Leicestershire, Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, Rutland, Northamptonshire, Bedfordshire, and Huntingdon under Thomas, Lord Grey of Groby. He was a captain of a troop of horse and was chosen as a member of the county's militia committee in January 1643. He became sheriff of Leicestershire on 19 January 1644, and in this capacity he acted against the Baptists. In 1645 he was involved in raising funds to supply the Scottish army in Leicester and its vicinity, but he had an undistinguished career as a military man. He was accused of cowardice and of trying to dissuade Lord Grey from fortifying Leicester, and was absent from the city when it was besieged, leaving for London immediately prior to the arrival of the royalist forces (29 May 1645). He also served as governor of Cole Orton in the county. He was elected to parliament as a recruiter MP for Leicester borough on 17 November 1645 following the disablement of the previous member, Thomas Cooke, and, in order to take up the seat, was created a burgess. On election he took the oaths of supremacy and allegiance. 
There was a considerable presence from Leicestershire in the organization and membership of the high court of justice to try Charles I. Temple was named as a commissioner of the court, and attended regularly. He was absent from only two of the sessions and signed the king's death warrant on 29 January 1649 ['see also 'Regicides]. He was subsequently chosen to sit on the committee for compounding at Goldsmiths' Hall on 13 June 1649 and a month later was voted $1500 from the sequestrations from Leicestershire in reparation for war expenses. By January 1650 he had received $1200 of this and despite information from the county commissioners that they could not pay the remainder it was ordered to be paid from the Michaelmas rents. In December 1650 the council of state called on him to return to his duties as militia commissioner for Leicestershire. The gifts registered to Temple from the mayor and corporation in 1650 describe him as a colonel. 
Little overt evidence is available about Temple's religious profession, though he seems to have suppressed the supporters of adult baptism. In October 1649, as a JP in Leicestershire, he convicted Samuel Oates of the heresy of baptizing adults, contrary to the parliamentary ordinance of 2 May 1648. In February 1650 the mayor and aldermen of the corporation of Leicester requested his advice in coping with the publications and activities of Ranters in the city -- Jacob Bauthumley was a Leicestershire shoemaker and Abiezer Coppe's 'Fiery Flying Roll' was being distributed. Temple was sent one of the Ranters' publications 'of a very dangerous consequence [which] lets open a very wide dore to Atheism and profanes' (Leics. RO, Hall MSS, xii, no. 642, 18 Feb 1650). 
At the recall of the Rump Parliament in 1659 Temple returned to power in London and was given lodgings in Whitehall. At the Restoration he was excluded from pardon by the 'Act of Oblivion' and subsequently from the 'Indemnity Bill' of 29 August 1660. He surrendered on 12 June 1660 and was one of the nineteen regicides named by Ludlow whose future would be decided by parliament. He was prepared to admit his part in the execution of Charles I, but denied that this was a confession of 'guilt', a variation on the argument whereby the regicides denied the clause in the indictment which accused them of acting from self-interest and malice. He was convicted and condemned to be hanged, but pleaded the benefit of the king's proclamation. He was imprisoned in the Tower and died there of dropsy on 20 December 1663. His estate of Temple Hall was bestowed on James, duke of York. 


@@@@@


doc= 27118


Temple, Sir Richard, third baronet (1634-1697), politician, was born on 28 March 1634, the only son of Sir Peter Temple, second baronet (bap. 1592, d. 1653), of Stowe, Buckinghamshire, and his second wife, Christian ('b'. in or before 1596, died 1655), daughter and coheir of Sir John Leveson (1555-1615), of Trentham, Staffordshire. Temple entered Gray's Inn on 6 November 1648 and was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, a few weeks later on 23 December. 
In 1653 Temple succeeded to a substantial, but heavily indebted estate, with a rent roll estimated at $3029, but with over $1500 absorbed by fixed charges. Despite being under age Temple was returned to parliament for Warwickshire in 1654, served as a justice of the peace, and soon acquired household office as carver to the protector. In April 1655 he contracted smallpox and at one point was 'in extremity of sickness and likely to die' (Gay, 289). In October 1656 he made a settlement with his father's creditors, paying $7000 for a debt of $19,468. He sat for Buckingham in Richard Cromwell's parliament, making his first recorded speech on 2 February 1659. Temple was indignant when the army expelled the Rump in October 1659 and he welcomed George Monck's intervention from Scotland. On 26 January 1660 he visited the army, then at Stony Stratford, and quarrelled with some of its republican elements. He was ordered into the custody of the Rump for suggesting the county petition for a free parliament, being released upon the return of the secluded members. He sat in the Convention of 1660 for Buckingham, where he was perceived by Lord Wharton as a 'friend', and possibly as a supporter of modified episcopacy. In August 1660 he applied for preferment to the secretary of state, William Morrice, only to receive a discouraging reply. Worse still, following the lapse of parliamentary privilege, he was committed to a debtors' prison at the suit of his half-sister, Lady Baltinglas. 
Despite this drawback Temple retained his seat in the parliamentary elections of April 1661, earning the nickname Sir Timber Temple for his promise of wood for a new town hall in his constituency. Temple was created a knight of the Bath on 18 April 1661, mainly as an attempt to demonstrate royal favour to his relative Sir Richard Leveson, and hence obtain the Trentham estate from the childless knight. Temple was very active in the Commons as both a speaker and committee man, and as early as 1661 was probably an opponent of the court. At first he joined the opposition to the earl of Clarendon headed by the earl of Bristol and was clearly in sympathy with Bristol's support for the declaration of indulgence, as a consistent proponent of moderation in church matters. However, Temple's attempt in 1663, through Bristol, to offer his services to Charles II as a parliamentary undertaker, floundered upon his oppositionist stance and an angry Charles II reported his actions to the Commons. Temple survived this setback, but at the cost of his local offices. In 1664 he opposed repeal of the coercive clause in the 'Triennial Act' and, following Bristol's disgrace, he joined the opposition grouping headed by the duke of Buckingham. He supported such measures as the ban on the import of Irish cattle and the attack on Clarendon. In 1668 he promoted a triennial bill and seems to have supported an anti-Clarendon ministry which would adopt a moderate religious policy. On 9 May 1668 Temple received leave of the house to go to France for the recovery of his health. He spent much of his time in Montpellier, taking the waters, and did not return to England until October 1669. 
In 1669 Buckingham engaged Temple to support the court, and on 28 November 1670 Andrew Marvell reported that Temple was one of a group of MPs who 'openly took leave of their former party, and fell to head the King's business' ('Poems and Letters', 1.305). Contemporaries accounted for his new stance by reference to his financial difficulties and his desire to atone for his service to the protector. He still defended nonconformists, but his court stance led him to join the political faction headed by the earl of Arlington. This connection led to his appointment as a commissioner for plantations on 19 June 1671 and then as a commissioner of customs on 23 March 1672, a post worth $2000 p.a. During the next three years Temple paid off most of the money he had borrowed between 1656 and 1667. His improved financial position may also account for his marriage, on 25 August 1675, to Mary ('b'. after 1640, died 1727), daughter of Henry Knapp of Rawlins, Oxfordshire. Temple received a portion of $4000 and possession of Woodcote. Their first child, Richard Temple, the future first Viscount Cobham, was born on 24 October 1675. They had three other sons and six daughters. With his mistress, Anne Charleton, daughter of the physician and natural philosopher William Charleton, Temple had another child, Penelope Aubin, about 1679. 
Temple spent the next few years as a spokesman for the court, but although he spoke often he was described in 1673 as one of 'the worst heard that can be in the House' (Airy, 1.132). In 1676 Wiseman noted to Lord Treasurer Thomas Osborne, first earl of Danby, that 'your Lordship every day speaks with him. I hope he will spoil no more votes' (Browning, 3.98), and in 1677-8 his salary at the customs of $1200 was augmented by a pension from the excise. In 1678 he defended Danby from the charges which led to his impeachment, and as a result of his adherence to the court, and the personal intervention of his erstwhile patron, Buckingham, he lost his seat at Buckingham in the election of February 1679. In the election of August 1679 he was returned with Danby's son, Lord Latimer. In this parliament he spoke in favour of the bill uniting protestants, but his stance on the 'Exclusion Bill' was unclear, and possibly designed to weaken the bill. In September 1679 John Verney reported that Temple had been accused of being a Catholic; the accusation evidently persisted because in 1681 Temple took the matter before the courts, and one of his accusers, William Burton, was sentenced to the pillory. In 1683-4 Temple was able to secure a new charter for Buckingham which named him as steward. 
Temple retained his customs post until the accession of James II, when he objected to the new monarch collecting the customs duties without parliamentary sanction and was dismissed. As a consequence his finances were hit and he borrowed more, but in April 1686 he was granted a pension of $1200 p.a. for 'good services to the late and present king' ('Calendar of Treasury Books', 8.697). However, this latest spell of royal favour did not survive his negative response to the three questions and his consequent loss of local office including the stewardship of Buckingham. 
Temple was a late adherent to the cause of William of Orange, joining the prince on 12 December 1688 after James II had fled, 'but those as goes in now signifies little but are rather laughed at' (Verney and Verney, 2.469). Having been returned to the convention for Buckingham on 9 January 1689 Temple again showed himself to be an active speaker from his 'uppermost seat' (Schwoerer, 172), and he supported the abdication and vacancy resolutions and the declaration of rights. In early February 1689 it was reported that Temple and his Buckinghamshire neighbour, Richard Hampden, were 'for a Commonwealth and against kingly government' (Hunt. L., Stowe MSS, STT 410), but in fact Temple had renewed his connection with Danby and was soon to be recognized as a court tory. He was appointed to the customs commission in April, prompting one correspondent to opine: 'I find he will be vicar of Bray still, let who will reign, and though all hates him yet he gets what he aims at' (Verney and Verney, 2.471). In debate he supported the ministry's attempts to obtain adequate war supplies and defended the privileges of the Commons from encroachment by the Lords. In 1693 he published 'An Essay on Taxes' in which he argued against the monthly assessment or land tax as destructive of the estates of the peers and gentry, and against a general excise. Having recovered from a serious illness in April 1694 he lost his customs place in the following August. Shrewsbury condemned him for 'corruption, disaffection, neglect, and in short being good for nothing' ('CSP dom.', '1694-5', 181), but he was a victim of a change in court managers away from Danby (now marquess of Carmarthen) and towards the emerging whig Junto. Temple moved into opposition and in 1696 contributed to the debates on the price of guineas and Fenwick's attainder, which he opposed. Temple died on 10 May 1697 at Stowe and was buried there on the 15th. 


@@@@@


doc= 27119


Temple, Richard, first Viscount Cobham (1675-1749), politician and landowner, was born on 24 October 1675, the first child of Sir Richard Temple, third baronet (1634-1697), of Stowe, Buckinghamshire, and MP for Buckingham, and his wife and first cousin, Mary ('b'. after 1640, died 1726), the daughter of Henry Knapp of Rawlins, Oxfordshire. He was baptized at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 1 November 1675. His father had inherited substantial debts on his accession to the title and Buckinghamshire estates in 1653. Consequently the young Temple was directed towards a career that could help to maintain the family's status in their home county without further burdening their landed resources. On 30 June 1685, when not yet ten years old, he was commissioned as an ensign in Prince George of Denmark's regiment. Despite his youth he was court-martialled (with Lord Churchill, later the duke of Marlborough, as presiding officer) on 21 June 1686 at Hounslow for refusing to obey a superior officer. He was dismissed from the regiment, but was recommissioned on 1 May 1687, and was promoted captain in 1689. He was probably the 'Temple major' attending Eton College in 1687; 'Temple minor' was probably his younger brother Purbeck (1676-1698). 
Temple entered Christ's College, Cambridge, on 31 October 1694 as a fellow-commoner. He did not take a degree and his military career seems to have taken precedence, as he was listed as a captain in Captain Ventris Columbine's regiment of foot in the Flanders army list of 1695. He served with them at the siege of Namur. Sir Richard Temple died on 10 May 1697, and his son succeeded to the baronetcy and estates. The pressures of maintaining a growing family, among other demands, had prevented the debts of the second baronet from being fully redeemed and, although income from the estates has been estimated at an average of $2200 per annum for the first ten years of Temple's ownership, average outgoings stood at 87 per cent of this sum. Temple was returned to the Commons for Buckingham in the by-election following his father's death. In the Commons he was a whig and a supporter of the court of William III, and in August 1701 was foreman of the grand jury at the Buckinghamshire assizes that petitioned the king to pursue war with France over the Spanish succession, and call a new parliament. When war came Temple returned to his military career, and on 10 February 1702 he was appointed colonel of his own regiment of foot. 
While he was initially stationed in Ireland, Temple's war was fought mainly in the Netherlands. He was promoted to the rank of major-general in 1706 and played a leading role at the siege of Lille in 1708, for which he was rewarded with the task of presenting news of the capture of the town to Queen Anne. 
Temple was also recognized as a loyal political ally by Marlborough and Lord Godolphin. He had been unable to stand for election at Buckingham in 1702 as he was serving with the army, and Marlborough gave him leave to campaign in person for the Buckinghamshire by-election in November 1704. Temple represented Buckinghamshire until the election of 1708, and then returned to his former seat of Buckingham, where he remained until 1713. He maintained a whig stance, voting for the naturalization of the Palatines in 1709, and for the impeachment of Henry Sacheverell in 1710. 
Temple continued to receive promotions in the army: his rank of major-general was confirmed on 1 January 1709, and he was promoted lieutenant-general a year later. On 24 April 1709 he received the colonelcy of the Earl of Essex's regiment of dragoons. After the formation of Robert Harley's ministry Temple's position weakened. On 7 December 1711 he voted in the Commons for 'No Peace without Spain', and in April 1712 was omitted from the list of general officers intended for service in that summer's campaign in Flanders. In 1713 he was cashiered and stripped of his regiment. He was defeated at Buckinghamshire in the 1713 election and failed to be returned on petition. He retired to his estate at Stowe, where he initiated the remodelling of the three garden terraces south of the house into a single parterre according to French taste. Charles Bridgeman was employed to design the garden, but Temple himself (or his foreman John Lee) was probably responsible for the innovation of the ha-ha, a trench that marked the boundary of the garden without the rural vista's being interrupted by a wall, and similar to the trenches which Temple employed during warfare. 
The accession of George I brought Temple's rehabilitation. On 19 October 1714 he was appointed envoy-extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the imperial court at Vienna and created Baron Cobham. The title enhanced his status by emphasizing his collateral descent from the medieval English nobility, although the new Lord Cobham was not the lineal representative of any previous holder of the title. He seems not to have been expected to undertake a lengthy diplomatic posting and returned during 1715. In September that year he married Anne Halsey (died 1760), whose father was Edmund Halsey, proprietor of the Anchor Brewery in Southwark. Anne Halsey brought her husband a $20,000 settlement and family connections with London business interests. 
Cobham continued to be in favour with the ministries of George I. He was appointed constable of Windsor Castle in 1716, and on 6 July that year he was sworn of the privy council. On 23 May 1718 he was created Viscount and Baron Cobham, with a special remainder in both titles to two of his younger sisters and the heirs male of their bodies, first his second surviving sister Hester, who had married Richard Grenville of Wooton, neighbouring Stowe; and then his third surviving sister Christian, the wife of Sir Thomas Lyttleton of Hagley in Worcestershire. Similar arrangements were made for the estates, accepting that Lady Cobham would have no children and expressing Cobham's desire to found a dynasty based on the amalgamated Temple and Grenville estates in Buckinghamshire. His decision to exclude his elder sister Maria and her sons Gilbert West and Temple West from the succession to the titles and estates has been attributed to Maria's marriage to Richard West, a clergyman, which allegedly offended Cobham's anticlerical sympathies; a younger sister, Penelope, who married a merchant and was the mother of the equestrian Richard Berenger, was also excluded, perhaps suggesting that the relative wealth of his brothers-in-law also contributed to Cobham's decision. 
In 1719 Cobham was appointed leader of the British expedition against Spain, co-ordinated with that of the French forces under the duke of Berwick, which sailed from Spithead on 21 September. Cobham's original plan was to attack Corunna, but rather than face the town's defences he sailed instead into Vigo Bay, taking the town of Vigo and destroying the Spanish military stores there. Although Robert Walpole's ministry presented few opportunities for military adventures Cobham remained in favour. In 1721 he was appointed colonel of the King's Own Horse and in 1722 comptroller of accounts for the army, and from 1723 he was governor of Jersey for life. The post was not entirely a sinecure as some correspondence survives relating to his duties, although he never visited the island. 
Cobham was devoting an increasing amount of energy to developing the gardens and house at Stowe. In 1717 he opened the New Inn on the outskirts of the grounds to accommodate tourists. Bridgeman extended the gardens further south, adding an octagonal lake, while Sir John Vanbrugh contributed ornamental buildings. As was intended by Cobham the gardens began to attract visitors: the antiquarian Sir John Evelyn described them in 1725 as 'very noble'. A further phase of expansion in the second half of the 1720s enclosed and remodelled the land to the west of the house. 
Cobham's ambitions for Stowe and his family may have contributed to his break with Walpole in 1733. Recognized by Vanbrugh as a good judge of poetry Cobham had been a friend of Alexander Pope since 1725, and so had some connections with the literary opposition to Walpole. His wife's family brought him extensive connections with mercantile interests which felt Walpole's ministry insufficiently active in protecting British trading interests. His decision to oppose Walpole's 'Excise Bill' in 1733 remains unexplained, but, like his support that year for a report on the purposes to which the government had put the estates forfeited by the directors of the South Sea Company, probably arose from a belief that Walpole's ministry was now mired in corruption and acting contrary to whig principle. Perhaps Cobham's wish to promote his family coincided with a belief that they would better serve their country by distancing themselves from the ministry and working to renew whig politics from outside. Whatever his motivation, on 14 June, the day after parliament was prorogued, Cobham was dismissed from the colonelcy of the King's Own Horse. From then on reconciliation with Walpole was impossible. 
Stowe gradually became a centre for Walpole's opponents, with an emphasis on Cobham's young relatives. At the 1734 election Cobham brought his nephew and eventual heir, Richard Grenville (later Grenville-Temple), into the Commons as member for Buckingham. In 1735 another nephew, George Lyttelton, became MP for Okehampton alongside the sitting member, Thomas Pitt (Lyttelton's brother-in-law); William Pitt (the brother of Thomas and eventual brother-in-law of Richard Grenville) came in for Old Sarum that year. Cobham and his kinsmen gradually evolved a strategy by which 'Cobham's Cubs' would claim the role of representatives of the patriot whig tradition, attacking Walpole as the centre of corruption in the body politic. From 1735 Cobham began courting Frederick, prince of Wales, and was rewarded in 1737 when Frederick visited Stowe and began to co-ordinate his political activity with that of Cobham's proteges. 
During this period Cobham further expanded the gardens at Stowe. The Elysian Fields to the east of the house were laid out during the 1730s by William Kent, who set aside Bridgeman's formal design principles. There, Cobham added ornamental buildings which iconographically set forth his political creed. Chief among these was the Temple of Ancient Virtue, which included busts of four Greek heroes of liberty to contrast with the headless statue outside its ruined neighbour, the Temple of Modern Virtue, popularly believed to represent Walpole. 
Cobham's political strategy involved alliances with whomsoever opposed Walpole. These included disaffected whigs who, like the earl of Chesterfield, disliked long-standing opposition leaders such as Lord Carteret and William Pulteney, and eventually also tory leaders such as Sir William Wyndham, who was trusted by Lyttelton, William Pitt, and the prince of Wales. Cobham's literary connections extended through Pope to Lord Bolingbroke, whose ideas were current in opposition circles and successfully articulated the idealized form of government that patriots hoped the post-Walpole age would bring. This alliance of interests helped strengthen Cobham's campaign for more assertive action against Spanish incursions on English trade, which was always a theme of his opposition in the 1730s and was redoubled in January 1739 when Cobham opposed Walpole's Spanish Convention, which accepted $95,000 in compensation for British merchants whose goods had been seized by Spanish ships without guaranteeing that the payment would actually be made. Although Cobham's negotiations with the disaffected duke of Argyll failed to create the united patriot opposition he hoped for, enough talents were ranged against Walpole to weaken the credibility of the ministry. 
The fall of Walpole brought Cobham some of the rewards he sought. He was restored to his regiment and promoted in rank. For many of his supporters, however, his accepting restoration to the army conflicted with his refusal to allow them into the ministry. Cobham's continued opposition was based on his personal antipathy to Carteret, his opposition to Carteret's support for British subsidy for Hanoverian troops, and reluctance to make common cause against the man and his policy with Walpole's allies -- Henry Pelham and Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle. Furthermore, the reconciliation between the prince of Wales and his father, George II, ended the alliance with the reversionary interest. A party that had been able to portray itself as the combination of traditional whiggery and a reinvigorated patriotism was soon unable to show itself as anything other than another family connection whose support could be bought by concessions from the ministry. 
The growing respect for the debating and administrative skills of William Pitt shown by Cobham's party gradually changed the nature of Cobham's patronage. Discussions among the opposition in 1743 and 1744 showed that Pitt, Lyttelton, and others placed more emphasis upon winning office than on campaigning for the reduction of British military involvement in Europe, as Cobham wished. Cobham took part in the negotiations that led to the foundation of the broad-bottom ministry in 1744 and won a new regimental command and a Treasury place for his nephew George Grenville. However, from 1744 onwards Cobham was increasingly viewed as Pitt's representative rather than his party leader. Henry Pelham's priority was to obtain the skills and following of Pitt, and, as George II would not at this stage employ Pitt, taking Cobham's nominee into the ministry was a means to an end. Cobham's decisions over policy reflected his age and his reluctance to take great political risks. While for some years his 'cubs' still took their lead from him, it was Pitt's manoeuvring in and out of opposition as much as Cobham's decision to support the Pelhams in or out of office that won the Cobham connection their share in the Pelham ministry as reconstituted in 1746. Cobham's politics, since 1733 founded to some extent on nostalgia, were now overtaken by practicalities, and he effectively retired from national concerns. 
Cobham devoted his remaining political energies to Buckinghamshire affairs. His palace and gardens at Stowe were further enlarged and beautified under Lancelot 'Capability' Brown, head gardener from 1741 and then clerk of works. Cobham became sponsor of the second and subsequent editions of the guide to Stowe first published by Benton Seeley in 1744, recognizing that it helped maintain the fame of the gardens. Cobham's scheme for the amalgamation of the Temple and Grenville estates was assured by managing both Stowe and his political interest in Buckinghamshire in consultation with and through his nephew Richard Grenville. 
Cobham died at Stowe on 13 September 1749 and was buried there five days later. He was succeeded in the peerages created in 1718 by his sister Hester Grenville, and in the baronetcy by a distant cousin, William Temple, who had earlier agreed not to contest the breaking of the entail on Stowe in return for his debts being paid. Cobham's widow, Anne, survived him until 20 March 1760. Through his own military and political career, careful financial management, the development of the Stowe estate, and latterly the adoption of a younger generation of politicians, Cobham successfully founded a dynasty whose influence would be felt in British politics for the rest of the eighteenth century. Although much altered, the landscape gardens of Stowe remain a monument to the aspirations and ideology of Cobham and his proteges in their heyday of the 1730s. 


@@@@@


doc= 27120


Temple, Sir Thomas, first baronet (bap. 1614, d. 1674), colonial governor, was born at Stowe, Buckinghamshire, and baptized there on 10 January 1614, the second son of Sir John Temple of Stanton Bury, Buckinghamshire, and his first wife, Dorothy Lee (died 1625). A member of a prestigious but chronically indebted gentry family, he fought as an officer on the parliamentary side during the civil war, although he claimed after the Restoration that he disapproved of the imprisonment of Charles I and had participated in efforts to set the king free. 
During the interregnum a family connection with William Fiennes, Viscount Saye and Sele, was crucial in gaining for Temple and two partners a Cromwellian grant of 'the Contrie and Territories called Laccady and that part of the Country Called Nova Scotia', recently captured from the French, by patent dated 9 August 1656 (TNA: PRO, CO 1/13, no. 11). Temple was named to govern Nova Scotia and set out in 1657 for Boston, where he would in fact reside for most of the rest of his life, with only occasional visits to Nova Scotia, as in the spring and summer of 1659, and London. The seeming grandeur of his position and pretensions was, in reality, a poor disguise for the fragility of his circumstances, and he faced serious rivals for both the contested territory and the trade of Acadia, or Nova Scotia. The fiction of English control was based on a superficial conquest of Acadian settlements in 1654, and the population remained overwhelmingly American Indian, while the small colonial presence consisted mainly of Acadian French. French military and diplomatic rejoinders, while intermittent, always posed a threat, while rivals also existed in England, especially during the two years immediately following the Restoration. Temple had returned to London by February 1662 to defend his interests, and there secured elevation to the rank of baronet on 7 July 1662 and a new proprietary grant with a royal commission as governor of the notional colony. 
Temple then returned to Boston to enjoy for a few more years whatever proceeds he could realize from the Acadian fur trade, offset by an annual payment of $600 by which a powerful English rival had to be bought off. Trading arrangements had depended on English investors, for whom he initially acted as a glorified agent. In New England, however, his commercial naivety contrasted with the acumen of the Boston merchants, who were glad to use his English connections for their own profit. Advancing him loans, the merchants used their status as his creditors to lay claim to consignments of furs, the principal commodity yielded by the Nova Scotia trade. By about 1667 a succinct contemporary verdict of his position was that 'T. Temple dwells idly at Boston and is fooled by them' (TNA: PRO, CO 1/21, no. 174). 
Temple also bore the expense of defending Nova Scotia during the Anglo-French war of 1666-7, and suffered a disastrous blow when the crown agreed by the treaty of Breda 1667 to restore the territory to France. He delayed the hand-over effectively enough that he was reportedly described by Charles II, to a French diplomat, as 'un coquin', a rogue (Colbert de Terron to Louis XIV, 24 Jan 1669, Archives du Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres, correspondance politique, Angleterre, 94, fols. 28-9), but surrendered his interests in 1670. In Boston he had become a substantial property owner and a prominent member of the Congregational North Church. For the puritan divine Cotton Mather, Temple was 'as fine a Gentleman as ever set foot on the American strand' (Mather, 103). Now, however, he was harassed by creditors and had to sell off his properties. He eventually returned to London, where he died on 27 March 1674, leaving an insolvent estate. He was buried the next day at Ealing, Middlesex. Temple's efforts to rescue his persistently chaotic financial affairs had seemed to be verging on success by 1666, but ultimately fell victim to the characteristic uncertainties of imperial enterprise in the disputed territories of north-eastern North America. 


@@@@@


doc= 27121


Temple, Sir William (1554/5-1627), college head, was a son of Anthony Temple (died 1581) and grandson of Peter Temple of Derset and Butlers Marston, Warwickshire. He was educated at Eton College, and at King's College, Cambridge, where he gained a scholarship. After entering King's in 1573 he was elected a fellow by 1576 and graduated BA in the following year, receiving his MA by 1581. Temple supplicated for incorporation as MA at Oxford on 11 July 1581. 
Temple quickly made a name for himself as a follower of the logical teachings of Petrus Ramus (Pierre de la Ramee), and his adherence to the controversial Ramist 'method' soon led him into a polemical battle with Everard Digby, a fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, who published a defence of Aristotelianism, the 'Theoria analytica', in 1579. Digby followed this treatise by an even more contentious work of 1580, 'De duplici methodo', which attacked the Ramist revision of dialectical method. It proved the first in a pamphlet war and was quickly followed by Temple's 'Ad Everardum Digbeium Anglum admonitio de unica P. Rami methodo reiectis ceteris retinendis' (1580), written under the pseudonym of Franciscus Mildapettus of Navarre -- in reference to Ramus's connection with the College de Navarre. The third pamphlet in 1580 was a rejoinder by Digby: 'Everardi Digbei Cantabrigiensis admonitioni Francisci Mildapetti', entered in the Stationers' register for 3 November. This in turn occasioned Temple's 'Pro Mildapetti de unica methodo defensione contra diplodophilum commentatio' (1581), which ended the correspondence between the two. 
The core of the debate lay in the Ramist redefinition of dialectic in the sixteenth century. Ramus transferred two parts of Ciceronian rhetoric -- invention and disposition -- to dialectic. By thus placing the finding and arrangement of arguments in dialectic, rather than rhetoric, Ramus and his followers undermined current trends in Aristotelian logic. Likewise their emphasis on a single method, applicable to all subjects, which was based on division into dichotomies, challenged the Aristotelian double method. Digby spent much of his initial pamphlet on the various types of double method one could find in a repetitious critique of the Ramist single method. Temple was quick in his 'Admonitio' to demonstrate how deeply indebted Digby was to the scholastic method. In his dedicatory epistle to his patron, Philip Howard, first earl of Arundel, he decried the decline of dialectic and in typical humanist fashion outlined the history of the decline with copious reference to Aristotelian commentators, rather than Aristotle himself -- a favourite humanist argument. In his view, dialectic should no longer be thought of as a subject solely of use in the schools but rather its true application to everyday life beyond the ivory towers was lauded. Since Ramist dialectic, with its rhetorical semblance, was essentially concerned with persuasion, Temple argued that it would be vitally useful in all areas of political and social life. 
The acrimony of the dispute was not only engendered by the generational conflict involved (Temple was younger than Digby), but was also exacerbated by the differing religious affiliations of the main protagonists. Temple, as his later career demonstrates, was very much a moderate puritan. Digby, on the other hand, became embroiled in a controversy concerning his religious outlook in the later 1580s, when William Whitaker, master of St John's College, argued for his deprivation from his fellowship on the grounds that he was a suspected Catholic and eventually won, forcing Digby to leave St John's. Though it seems unlikely that Digby was indeed Catholic his interpretation of theological doctrines of predestination was in direct conflict with those of the puritan wing of the Church of England. 
In his 'Pro Mildapetti' Temple was not content to attack Digby but produced a thoroughgoing defence of Ramism. An English translation of the title of this work demonstrates its scope: 'A dissertation of William Temple of King's College, Cambridge, on behalf of a defense of Mildapet concerning the unipartite method, directed against the lover of the double way, to which is added an explanation of some questions in physics and ethics, along with a letter concerning the dialectic of Ramus, addressed to Johannes Piscator of Strasbourg'. His section on physics, primarily concerned with its relationship with logic, was directed against George Liebler, a professor of natural philosophy at Tubingen, who advocated the Aristotelian method. More extensive attacks were launched on Theodore Zwinger's interpretations of Aristotelian ethics and Johann Piscator's logical investigations, thus extending the debate to include authors who tried to hold the middle ground in the war between Ramus and Aristotle. However, the main target was the German theologian and teacher Piscator, who was Calvinist and based in Strasbourg, but also had links with Herborn and Wittenberg. Temple's debate with Piscator proved lucrative for a number of printers. The Wechel press in particular played a part in bringing it to a wider audience by publishing in 1582 an edition of Piscator's 'Animadversiones' (republished by them in 1583, 1586, 1587, and 1593). In the same year the Wechels also produced an edition of Temple's 'Epistola de dialectica'. The Wechel press also published other works connected with Temple's interventions in the Ramist debate. He continued his critique of Aristotelian physics in 1584 by writing a preface for a pro-Ramist work by James Martin of Dunkeld, Perthshire, whose book 'De prima simplicium et concretorum corporum generatione disputatio', first published in England at Cambridge in 1584, was republished by the Wechels in 1589. Again, Temple in fact demonstrated more interest in logic than in physics itself, contenting himself with a denunciation of Aristotelian physics and a strong recommendation of Ramist-style contemporary commentators. Both treatise and preface elicited a response from Andreas Libavius who, like Piscator, attempted to take a moderate stance in the current Aristotelian-Ramist conflict. 
Temple continued his debate with Piscator in an important work of 1584: 'P. Rami dialecticae libri duo, scholiis G. Tempelli Cantabrigiensis illustrati', published at Cambridge and later at Frankfurt in 1591. Along with this extensive commentary on the Latin text of Ramus's 'Dialecticae libri duo', the work contained not only Temple's condemnation of Piscator's theories grouped under twenty-nine heads, but also an attack on Porphyry, the author of the 'Isagoge', a well-known introductory text to Aristotelian logic. The themes of the pamphlets were continued in this work which, yet again, advocated the Ramist single method in no uncertain terms. James Mullinger exaggerated the importance of this work, the first English edition of the Latin text for eight years, by claiming that it was 'probably in the possession of every Cambridge scholar' -- an assertion not supported by the findings of the university inventory lists (Mullinger, 406). The consequences of Temple's decision to address the dedication to Sir Philip Sidney were to radically transform his life, leading him away from his former educational appointments at King's (where he ceased to be fellow in 1583) and as headmaster of the Lincoln free school (from the early 1580s), to become secretary to a number of extremely influential men in late Elizabethan England. 
Sidney's contacts with the Wechels may have made him an even more attractive potential patron to Temple. In November 1585 Temple was appointed Sidney's secretary. He travelled with him to the Low Countries following Sidney's appointment as governor of Flushing. This pleasant working relationship was terminated only on 17 October 1586, when Sidney died in Temple's arms as a result of injuries received at the battle of Zutphen on 22 September. He left his secretary $30 a year in his will. Temple, in his turn, wrote a number of elegies in the Cambridge memorial volume for Sidney. A more fitting tribute to Sidney was Temple's unpublished Ramist commentary on the former's 'An Apologie for Poetrie' (1595) -- the 'Analysis tractationis de poesi contextae a nobilissimo viro Philippo Sidneio equite aurato'. Internal evidence suggests that this work was written prior to Sidney's death, possibly early in Temple's employment. Described by a modern commentator as 'an outstanding example of Tudor practical criticism' (Webster, 11), it demonstrates how texts were read using a Ramist schema. 
On Sidney's death Temple found employment with William Davison, principal secretary, and then with Sir Thomas Smith, clerk of the privy council. From 1594 to 1601 he was secretary to Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, and through his influence was elected as MP for Tamworth, Warwickshire, in 1597. Though previously it has been suggested that he may have travelled to Ireland with Essex in 1599, comments in a later work indicate that he did not accompany the earl. His association with Essex proved a liability following the earl's plot to overthrow Elizabeth I in 1601, and though Temple protested his innocence he failed to convince Sir Robert Cecil, principal secretary. For some years Temple was cast out into a political wilderness and despite his dedication of his 1605 work on the 'Psalms' to Henry, prince of Wales, he remained in obscurity until his elevation as provost of Trinity College, Dublin, in November 1609. Some time before 1600 he married Martha (died in or after 1627), daughter of Robert Harrison of Derbyshire; they had two sons, including Sir John Temple (1600-1677), and three daughters. 
Temple's appointment as provost may well have been on the strength of his 'Logicall Analysis of Twentye Select Psalmes Performed by W. Temple' (1605), which, with the more extensive Latin version of 1611, 'Analysis logica triginta psalmorum', proved to be the last of his published works. The vice-chancellor of Trinity, Luke Challoner, with James Ussher, professor of theological controversies, may well have felt that the application of Ramist themes to theology accorded well with what they were attempting to do in the Dublin college. Inherent in the work, and indeed in the 1611 edition, which Temple judiciously dedicated to the first earl of Salisbury (Cecil), was his theological leaning towards a moderate puritan position, which would also have recommended him to the establishment at Trinity. His puritan stance was equally evident in his dealings with George Abbot, archbishop of Canterbury, when the latter remonstrated with Temple in 1613 over the self-evident puritanism at Trinity. Temple's defence of Trinity at this point, coupled with his obvious dislike of the use of surplices within the college, strengthens today's perception of him as a moderate puritan. In memoranda on the subject he asserted repeatedly his conformist nature but it is equally clear that his view of the matter differed markedly from that of Abbot. 
As provost Temple proved an effective administrator, at least in his first years in the post, travelling to England in 1616 on college business. He produced the first set of statutes, now unfortunately only partially extant, and responded to the increasing growth of the college by regulating the position of officers. His decision to divide the fellows into two groups -- senior fellows, with voting rights, and junior fellows, who had no say in the election of the provost -- was to prove controversial, as indeed was his tendency to appoint family members to lucrative posts. By the last year of his provostship there was widespread discontent within the college, particularly with his policy concerning the disposal of college lands in Ulster, and following his death attempts were made to recover college revenues from his widow. Given that as a layman Temple could not avail himself of the preaching positions that usually helped finance the office of provost, he was forced to augment his salary by taking political positions. By 1610 he had been made a master in chancery and in the 1614 parliament he held the seat for Dublin University. He was knighted on 4 May 1622 by the lord deputy, Sir Oliver St John, for his activity in Irish politics. Temple wrote his will on 21 December 1626, and died at Trinity College on 15 January 1627, aged seventy-two; he was buried in the old chapel near the provost's seat. His long reign as provost proved a crucial period in the consolidation of the new colonial college in Ireland and as the author of the first extant set of statutes his decisions proved influential for centuries to come. 


@@@@@


doc= 27122


Temple, Sir William, baronet (1628-1699), diplomat and author, was born in London on 25 April 1628 at the Blackfriars home of his father, Sir John Temple (1600-1677), lawyer and master of the rolls in Ireland, and his wife, Mary Hammond (died 1638); he was baptized at St Anne Blackfriars on 30 April. Temple spent much of his childhood living with his uncle, the Laudian theologian Dr Henry Hammond, at Penshurst, Kent. He subsequently attended Bishop's Stortford School, probably from about 1639 to 1643, and was admitted a fellow-commoner of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 31 August 1644. There he became a pupil of the Platonist Ralph Cudworth. Temple left Cambridge, probably in 1647, without taking his degree, but having used his time at university to become a moderately accomplished tennis player. 
In 1648 Temple set out for the continent to complete his education. On the Isle of Wight, during a break in his journey, he met Dorothy Osborne (1627-1695), daughter of Sir Peter Osborne of Chicksands (1584-1653), and her brother, who were travelling to St Malo to meet their father, then the royalist governor of Guernsey. Temple seems to have immediately fallen in love with the spirited Dorothy, especially when she took the blame for some graffiti scrawled on a window pane by her brother, and they began a lengthy courtship, much of it conducted by correspondence. One half of it -- Dorothy's letters to him -- survived, their unaffected charm ensuring their abiding popularity after being first published in 1888. In reality the obstacles in the couple's way were considerable. Temple was abroad for most of the following five years: he was in France, where he learned the language, from 1648 until winter 1651, and after a brief return to England he travelled for much of 1652 in Germany, the Netherlands, and Flanders, developing a particular liking for Brussels and forming an ambition to become English resident there if Charles II were to be restored. During this journey Temple began his literary output, producing his earliest essays (heavily influenced by Montaigne) and romances. Moreover, his travels gave him a tolerant, cosmopolitan mentality (and a good grasp of languages) that were both to influence his diplomatic career and to shape his later writings. He was in Ireland briefly in 1654 before returning to London, where he engaged 'in the usual entertainment of young and idle men' (Moore Smith, 6). Both families, too, opposed any marriage between William and Dorothy, each believing that more prestigious matches could be found. Although they probably became engaged in February 1652 the marriage did not take place until Christmas day 1654, and in the interval Dorothy was permanently scarred by an attack of smallpox that briefly threatened her life. They lived initially with Hammond relatives at Reading, where their first son, John, was born on 18 December 1655, but moved in May 1656 to Ireland, living alternately in Sir John Temple's house in Dublin and on an estate that William acquired in co. Carlow. 
Temple's opposition to the Commonwealth led to a deliberate decision not to seek public office until the Restoration. His political career therefore began in earnest in March 1660 when he was elected to the Irish Convention for Carlow; he was returned for the seat once more in the legitimate parliament of May 1661. Later that summer he went to England as part of a parliamentary delegation to the king, not returning to Ireland until late in 1662. Probably in September 1663 Temple took his family back to London to stay, and at some point in the first half of 1665 he purchased a house on the site of the old priory at Sheen, in Surrey, developing a garden praised extravagantly by John Evelyn. By then his household had acquired another permanent member, his sister Martha (1638-1722), who had been widowed after thirteen days of marriage to Sir Thomas Giffard in April 1662; she became the earliest chronicler of her brother's life and character. To her, 'he was rather tall than low, his shape when he was young very exact. His hair a dark brown curl'd naturally, & while that was esteemed a beauty nobody had it in more perfection. His eyes grey but very lively... His humour naturally gay, but a great deal unequal, sometimes by cruel fits of spleen and melancholy, often upon great damps in the weather, but most from the cross & surprising turns in his business, & cruel disappointments he met with so often in... the contributing to the honour and service of his country... He grew lazy, & easier in his humour as he grew older, though it had been observed to be a part of his character never to seem busy in his greatest employments. (Moore Smith, 27-8)' A lover of music, art, good wine, and conversation, his one excess, according to Lady Giffard, was an over-indulgence in fruit; hence the orangery that Evelyn commented upon, and the occasion when he gorged so many peaches at Brussels that he tactfully had to refuse the opportunity to go to Antwerp by boat. He lived off about $500 a year for much of his life, giving him cause to regret, at least implicitly, his father's longevity: in 1675 he informed the earl of Danby that he was worried about the cost of keeping his family at The Hague, because 'if I had money of my own to make use I should not lie in any pain, but that cannot be expected of [a] man whose father still keeps the estate of the family' (Egerton MS 3325, fol. 33). Although Lady Giffard claimed that his religion was firmly Anglican, his reputation for scepticism was sometimes interpreted as atheism (indeed, Gilbert Burnet regarded him as a Confucian), and this caused him some difficulties with a hostile bishop of Ely when he stood for election at Cambridge in 1679. 
On the outbreak of the Second Anglo-Dutch war in 1665 Temple made overtures to the secretary of state, Arlington, for a diplomatic position, and was supported by the recommendation of the lord lieutenant of Ireland, the duke of Ormond, whose initial coldness towards him had been rapidly overcome. On 22 June he was appointed special ambassador to the prince-bishop of Munster, Christopher-Bernard von Galen, England's sole ally in the war, and undertook three days of successful negotiations (in Latin) with the militaristic prelate which led to the briefly threatening invasion of Gelderland by Munster forces in the autumn. Having canvassed Arlington shamelessly for it Temple was given the position that he had long craved -- the residency at Brussels -- on 8 October 1665, and was created a baronet on 31 January 1666. In April he went back to Munster in a futile attempt to prevent von Galen withdrawing from the war. Temple's three days with the bishop in the previous year had given him a misplaced confidence in von Galen's sincerity (although he knew all too well that the bishop's promised English subsidies had fallen well into arrears), and despite being liberally wined and dined Temple's anger at being duped and concern that he might be detained culminated in a hair-raising horseback escape to Dusseldorf. 
When the French invaded the Spanish Netherlands in May 1667, at the outbreak of the war of devolution, Temple hastily dispatched Dorothy to England but stayed on in Brussels himself. He visited Breda briefly during the peace negotiations of July 1667 that ended the Anglo-Dutch War, but had no influence on the treaty signed there. In September 1667 he visited The Hague, where he met Johan de Witt, grand pensionary of Holland. Almost immediately the two men were greatly impressed with each other. Temple, who had been convinced for some time that England's rightful diplomatic alignment should be an alliance with the Netherlands against French expansionism, shared de Witt's natural concern about the potential French threat to his country, and strongly advocated a pro-Dutch policy in his reports to Arlington. Temple's stance coincided with a change in attitude at Charles II's court, where alarm about French intentions in Flanders were supplanting the king's innate francophilia. 
In these circumstances Temple was appointed special ambassador to the Netherlands, serving there from 17 to 28 December 1667 and (after a brief return to England for discussions) again from 3 January to 13 February 1668. His instructions empowered him to sound de Witt on a military alliance between England and the United Provinces for the defence of the Spanish Netherlands and to broker an agreement between France and Spain. In reality Temple was preaching to the converted, for de Witt had already secured the agreement of the states of Holland to such a scheme, and on 9 January he also had a favourable hearing from the states general. Moreover, the adherence of the Swedes was also virtually guaranteed beforehand. Temple's real successes were the speed with which he conducted his negotiations, his ability to convince de Witt of the trustworthiness of Charles II and Arlington, his winning over Castel Rodrigo, the governor of the Spanish Netherlands, and his insistence on signing the treaty without waiting for London to discuss the potentially problematic commercial clauses. His willingness to speak frankly and effectively to postpone discussion of contentious issues, along with unheard-of speed within the byzantine Dutch system of government, ensured that the treaty was completed within five days. The speed of Temple's actions disconcerted the French and, seemingly, Charles II too, but Temple's policy was followed through, and the ratifications of the treaty were exchanged on 8 February. Temple's reward from the states general was a gold chain and medal valued at 6000 guilders. Temple returned briefly to Brussels before going as English ambassador-extraordinary to the congress of Aix-la-Chapelle, officially from 2 April to 2 July 1668, although he did not arrive at Aix until 18 April. 
On 12 June 1668 Temple arrived in London, and shortly afterwards was appointed the first resident ambassador in the Netherlands since 1627, landing at Rotterdam on 16 August to take up his post, which carried a salary of $7 a day. By now his relationship with de Witt was a strong personal friendship as well as a diplomatic duty, but Temple also spent an increasing amount of time with William of Orange. He had no inkling of the changes of attitude in England, where almost from the very first Charles II had been seeking to rebuild relations with the French, a process that culminated in the secret treaty of Dover (1670). 
Temple's time at The Hague was taken up primarily by a succession of negotiations with the Dutch over difficult colonial and commercial issues, with the Spanish over their payment of subsidies to Swedish troops (as set out in the triple alliance), and with the Treasury commission in London over attempts to increase his allowance; Dorothy had to make a trip in person to secure the latter, from $7 to $10 a day. Arlington's letter to him of 1 September 1670, recalling him to London, came as a complete shock to Temple, but was a clear sign of the change of policy that had been implemented at Dover. He landed at Great Yarmouth on 16 September, and on his return to London he found the attitude towards him of the king and the ministers, even Arlington, noticeably cold. He retained the title of ambassador in name only; given the public perception of him as the leading advocate of the triple alliance his dismissal would have been a clear indication of the abandonment of that policy. In the event it was his wife's return home, of all things, that precipitated the public breach with the Netherlands and the destruction of the alliance. In August 1671, in an incident deliberately engineered by Charles and the French, the yacht 'Merlin' that had been sent to bring Dorothy and her family home demanded that an entire Dutch fleet should dip its topsails to salute it. When Charles II praised her courage (she had insisted that the 'Merlin''s captain should attempt to enforce the salute) Temple philosophically replied that '[although] I had made the alliance with Holland... my wife was like to have the honour of making the war' ('Works', 3.502-3). 
From 1670 to 1674 Temple lived in retirement at Sheen, spending much time and effort in attempting to extract back pay and expenses from the Treasury. He also returned to his writing. Probably his most enduring and famous work, 'Observations upon the United Provinces of the Netherlands', was written in autumn 1672 and published in London in the following year. Despite its unapologetic advocacy of his discarded alliance policy the work is a lively, detailed survey of the nature of the country, particularly strong on the workings of its complex system of government, and also reveals many of Temple's strengths and weaknesses as a writer. Lively and perceptive observations, many drawn from his own recollections, give the piece its attractiveness: his tendencies to digress, and to emphasize his own correctness and expertise, still grate. At much the same time Temple wrote his 'Essay upon the Original and Nature of Government', which ignored the fashionable theory of social compact, argued that society was founded on the family, that climate accounted for differences between nations, and that laws were merely customs sanctioned by lengthy usage. 'An Essay upon the Advancement of Trade in Ireland' was published in 1673, having been written some years earlier for the ministry, and in October 1673 he made another attempt to revive the triple alliance policy in the paper 'Upon the Conjuncture of Affairs in October 1673'. 
When the war policy, in turn, was abandoned -- along with the ministers who had supported it, like his erstwhile patron, Arlington -- Temple was the obvious choice to attempt to rebuild Charles II's relations with the Dutch. In February 1674 Temple returned to the Netherlands as ambassador to finalize the peace treaty ending the Third Anglo-Dutch War. Shortly afterwards he turned down the position of ambassador-extraordinary to Spain, and on 27 May was appointed ambassador-extraordinary to The Hague, where he arrived in July. On 13 December 1675 he was additionally appointed one of the English plenipotentiaries to the congress to Nijmegen, and was in attendance there between June 1678 to March 1679. Temple's continued prominence in this period can be attributed largely to his successful transition from the patronage of the fallen Arlington to that of the new chief minister, the earl of Danby, whose attempt to build a foreign policy more acceptable to a sensitive and recalcitrant parliament could only benefit from the support of the leading English champion of Dutch interests. The transition was made easier by the fact that Danby, the former Thomas Osborne, was a friend from his youth (despite having been a relation and former suitor of Dorothy). 
Temple was partly responsible for arranging the marriage between William of Orange and Mary, daughter of James, duke of York. He had always been impressed by William, seeking ways in which he could help restore him to his family's offices since as early as 1666, and in 1674 he claimed that William 'by his personal qualities cannot fail if he lives of making a great figure in the world' (BL, Add. MS 70948, fol. 84). A close friendship developed between the two men, supplanting that between Temple and the murdered de Witt, and Sir William's dispatches from 1674 to 1679 are full of praise for the prince. The relationship proved its worth as the idea of the marriage developed, and three years of delicate negotiation (Dorothy sometimes acting as go-between) finally culminated in the ceremony on 4 November 1677. Ten days later Temple's father died, and he succeeded to his office of master of the rolls in Ireland (having held the reversion since 1664), thereby almost trebling his annual income. 
In July 1678 Temple was hastily sent to The Hague once more. Despite the fact that the Nijmegen treaties were about to be signed the French had suddenly announced that they did not intend to return any of the towns they had conquered in the Low Countries. Temple and the states general hastily contrived a new treaty, signed on 25 July, by which the Dutch and English pledged joint action unless the French withdrew. The French eventually complied, and Temple went on to Nijmegen, where the final treaty was concluded -- a treaty that he called 'the hardest pinch of business that ever befell me in my life' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 4.174), and one that he disapproved of, believing that it was too generous to the French. 
During this period Temple twice refused the position of secretary of state. It was first offered in 1677 when it was thought that Henry Coventry would resign, then for a second time in January 1679. On the latter occasion Temple pleaded ill health and turned it down, saying that he was 'so honest a man as never to make so ill a bargain for so good a master, which would be like selling him very dear, a horse that I knew to be old and resty' ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 400). In reality Temple's unwillingness to work alongside the other secretary, Sir Joseph Williamson, seems to have been at least equally responsible. Early in 1679 he proposed restructuring the privy council to Charles II and became a member of the new body (which contained equal numbers of court and country members) on 21 April. In reality this proved a sop to public opinion: Charles effectively ignored the new council, to Temple's disappointment. Temple was elected MP for Cambridge University in October 1679, a parliamentary seat being seen as essential if he was to be a candidate for secretary of state. Personal tragedy also struck the Temples in 1679, with the death of their daughter Diana of smallpox at the age of fourteen: 'an incurable wound', Temple called it, 'which I will hope I may live sometimes to forget but never to remember without the most sensible trouble and grief' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 5.376). 
In summer 1680 it was proposed that Sir William should go to Spain as ambassador-extraordinary. Despite initial reluctance he agreed to go, partly because he saw it as a way of escaping the political turmoil in England (or so he told Ormond). In the meantime he was a regular speaker for the court in the second Exclusion Parliament, but his inexperience and irregular attendance ensured that he was generally regarded as an ineffectual parliamentarian. The first part of his 'Miscellanea' was published in the same year. The dramatic political realignments of January 1681, the culmination of the rise to pre-eminence of Temple's political opponent (but personal friend) Halifax, led to his removal from the privy council (on the 24th), and he also lost the Spanish embassy. His only subsequent political appointment came on 14 March 1683, when he became a commissioner for the remedy of defective titles in Ireland. Although James II was polite enough to Temple after his accession his long-standing suspicion of Sir William's close friendship with William of Orange militated against any return to office during James's reign. 
In 1680 Temple bought an estate near Farnham, Surrey, for $2000, and on its completion in 1686 he renamed it Moor Park (after the countess of Bedford's seat in Hertfordshire, whose gardens he had long admired) and made Sheen over to his eldest son, John. Temple played no part in the events of 1688, despite being known to be closer to William of Orange than almost anyone in England, and again turned down an offer of a secretaryship of state. His son John was a more enthusiastic advocate of the change of regime, but in reality, it proved to be his nemesis: in April 1689 John filled his pockets with stones and drowned himself at London Bridge within a week of being appointed secretary-at-war by William III. According to a much later account from a family member, John had been ill for some time with 'a tetter on his hand which stuck in and is thought to have disordered his senses' ('Egmont Diary', 3.311-12). He believed he was not up to the job of secretary, but William had insisted on it, and the final straw came when Major-General Hamilton, whom he had recommended as an intermediary to the Jacobite lord lieutenant of Ireland, Tyrconnell, promptly defected. Therefore it was into a gloom-ridden Temple household, later in 1689, that the young Jonathan Swift arrived as a new secretary. Relations between Temple and Swift were initially strained, but gradually improved, and Temple helped his young protege with the revision of the 'Tale of a Tub'. Partly thanks to Swift's support several of Temple's important works were published in the 1690s, notably the second parts of his 'Miscellanea' (1690; including his essay 'Ancient and modern learning') and 'Memoirs of what Past in Christendom, from... 1672 to... 1679' (1691), as well as his 'Introduction to the History of England' (1695), which was riddled with factual inaccuracies and interpretative distortions. He also returned to poetry, producing translations and imitations of Virgil and Horace. 
Although William III occasionally visited Moor Park to consult him informally (as in 1692-3 over the 'Triennial Bill'), Temple effectively remained withdrawn from public affairs in the 1690s. As Lady Giffard noted, his health had deteriorated since the 1670s, with frequent attacks of gout (he had been troubled by fevers and eye problems even earlier than this, during his residency at The Hague) but he was determined not to consult doctors, hoping 'to die without them and trusted to the advice but chiefly to the care of his friends' (Moore Smith, 29-30). He was seriously ill in 1693, and Dorothy's death on 7 February 1695 also seems to have affected him deeply. He resigned his post as master of the rolls in Ireland on 29 May 1696, although he had always discharged this office through a deputy. He died at Moor Park at 1 a.m. on 27 January 1699, according to Swift, and was buried on 1 February alongside Dorothy and Diana at Westminster Abbey, although his heart was buried beneath a sundial at Moor Park. By his will, dated 8 March 1695, he left some of his Irish lands to Esther Johnson, Lady Giffard's servant and Swift's Stella, and by a codicil dated 2 April 1697 he left $100 to Swift himself. Temple was survived by his two granddaughters, Elizabeth and Dorothy, the children of John, the suicide, and his French widow Marie Duplessis; the baronetcy became extinct with his death. 
As both a statesman and a writer Temple's posthumous reputation enjoyed more than a century of almost unchallenged acclaim followed by a dramatic decline from which it has never really recovered. Contemporaries had been divided in their assessment: Burnet was damning, calling him 'a vain man, much blown up in his conceit, which he showed too indecently on all occasions... he was a corrupter of all that came near him, and he delivered himself up wholly to study ease and pleasure' ('Burnet's History', 2.70). Temple's subsequent literary standing owed much to Swift, who published many of his letters, memoirs, and miscellanea in 1700-09 and immortalized Temple as the hero of 'The Battle of the Books'. He gained further plaudits from Dr Johnson, the combined efforts of two such literary giants seeming to immortalize Temple as one of the great pioneers of English prose style, despite occasional negative voices (notably that of Hume). T. P. Courtenay's equally positive 'Memoirs of the Life, Works and Correspondence of Sir William Temple, Bart.' (1836) prompted Macaulay's devastating critique which condemned Temple as a second-rate thinker, writer, and statesman -- hence his famously acid remark that Temple was almost universally famous without anybody knowing very much about him. An edition of his early essays and romances by G. C. Moore Smith (1933) and a magisterial but rather dull biography by H. E. Woodbridge (1940) only partly rehabilitated Temple's literary reputation, and as late as 1970 R. C. Steensma could claim that Temple was still generally seen as 'a bumbling amateur scholar and an unfortunate diplomat' (Steensma, 137). The enduring popularity of Dorothy's letters to him ensured that to many general readers of the twentieth century Temple was known only as a distant and somewhat lightweight object of affection, to whom Dorothy had been initially attracted by his innate gullibility. The likes of Steensma and Samuel Holt Monk (1963) at least partly restored Temple to a position as an important, but not particularly seminal, figure in the tradition of the English essay, his particular contribution being the development of the apposite use of the paragraph. Monk and Cynthia Marburg (1932) also set Temple in the context of the seventeenth century 'libertin' tradition, stressing the impact of his early visits to France, the influence of the likes of Montaigne and the Epicureans, and the powerful streak of scepticism that these influences imparted to his writings and his public life. 
Temple's reputation as a statesman undoubtedly benefited from hindsight's casting him as a forward thinking advocate of alliance with the Dutch and opposition to France -- the policy that England finally adopted twenty years after his failed triple alliance. The centrality of francophobia to foreign policy making until Waterloo and beyond ensured that Macaulay, for example, could praise Temple's policy, regardless of his limited opinion of him as both a writer and a statesman. Sir Keith Feiling was less critical and less overtly whiggish in his treatment; even so he eulogized Temple as 'candid and courageous, human and humane', whose boldness and 'sanguine pressure' had brought about the triple alliance (Feiling, 153, 254). Then, in 1982 A. C. Elias damagingly suggested that Temple had deliberately altered the text of many of his manuscript letters before their eventual publication by Swift, his suggested purpose being to downplay Arlington's part in creating the triple alliance and to exaggerate his own. Elias also suggested that far from eulogizing Temple, Swift secretly despised him. Elias presented a picture of Temple as a thoroughly second-rate diplomat and writer that was, in essence, not too far removed from Macaulay's verdict. Shortly afterwards, K. H. D. Haley at least partly redressed the balance, stressing Temple's position as a diplomat rather than a statesman, and the relatively limited room for manoeuvre that the former position entailed: 'he had to remain fundamentally an agent, not a deviser of policy' (Haley, 314), but even in such an essentially reactive position his achievements were considerable. As Haley rightly pointed out, possessing the confidence of de Witt and William of Orange simultaneously was no mean feat, even if it meant that Temple was inevitably (and ultimately fatally) seen by some of his colleagues, and above all by Charles II, as a man who was too friendly to the Dutch, whoever happened to control their state. Haley also challenged Elias's attack on Temple's 'modification' of his letters, noting that a diplomat writing many dispatches under heavy pressure of time would naturally wish to tidy them up before they appeared in print, and that many of the supposedly suspicious omissions or insertions detected by Elias were entirely explicable when set in context. 
Most critics of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries were irritated by Temple's overt vanity both as statesman and writer. In his letters and works he constantly presented himself as an honest plain speaker, albeit one who could be excessively fawning towards those whom he wished to impress -- Arlington had to reprimand him for the extravagance of his compliments, which extended on hearing of his appointment to Brussels to likening the secretary of state to 'some saint, to whom they [the Flemish] profess a more particular devotion' (TNA: PRO, SP 77/33, fol. 293). His attempts at self-deprecation, as in the dedication of the second part of his 'Miscellanea' -- 'has qualescunque nugas' ('these trifles, such as they are') -- have tended to leave exactly the opposite impression. He can appear somewhat authoritarian, as in his statement, reported by his sister, 'that no body should make love after forty, nor be in business after fifty' (Moore Smith, 29) -- his own retirement from diplomacy at almost exactly that age therefore seemingly part of some predetermined master plan. Conversely, his love of leisure, and determination not to let his work dominate his life, hardly fits well with the obsessive work ethic prevalent in government service since such terms as 'professionalization' and 'meritocracy' became fashionable. He could certainly be wildly over-optimistic and over-reliant on first impressions, as in his hopelessly mistaken opinion of bishop von Galen, was often less well informed than he would have liked or than he claimed to be (as in the case of the abandonment of the triple alliance), and was too inclined to the dramatic gesture (his sudden bursts of action, madcap journeys, and dramatic last-minute treaties perhaps compensating for the seeming indolence that Lady Giffard noted). On the other hand, his attitude to public life was characterized as much by what he was not as by what he was. Above all he was not corrupt, either by contemporary or later standards -- although typically for Temple he was loud and self-righteous in proclaiming the fact. In both his political and literary careers, he showed himself a keen and perceptive student of human nature, and this, perhaps, shaped both his strengths and his weaknesses: as a statesman he was a capable and reliable subordinate for the likes of Arlington and Danby, rather than an independent power broker; as a writer he was readable, intelligent, and stylish, rather than deeply profound. As a participant in one of the greatest love stories of the seventeenth century, however, Temple is always likely to retain a kind of immortality. 


@@@@@


doc= 27123


Temple, William Johnson (bap. 1739, d. 1796), Church of England clergyman and essayist, was baptized on 20 December 1739 in Berwick upon Tweed, the eldest of the five children of William Temple (1710-1774), collector of customs for Berwick upon Tweed, merchant, and mayor of Berwick (1749-50 and 1753-4), and his wife, Sarah (died 1747), younger daughter of Alexander Johnston, merchant, of Newcastle upon Tyne. She brought to the marriage, along with other property, the farmed estate of Allerdean, some 4 miles south-west of Berwick, which Temple inherited. 
About 1751 Temple seems to have begun attending the free grammar school established by the Berwick corporation. He left Berwick in autumn 1755 for the University of Edinburgh, where he struck up the lifelong friendship with his fellow student James Boswell which is his main claim to fame. He next went to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, on 22 May 1758. As early as 2 May 1759 he was admitted to the Middle Temple and took his name off the books at Trinity Hall on 20 November 1761. He seems to have spent the next eighteen months mainly in London. His father had become bankrupt by the end of 1762 and Temple had drawn on his own (Johnston) funds to give the creditors 5's'. in the pound. Now considerably impoverished, when he was readmitted to Trinity Hall as a fellow-commoner on 22 June 1763 he had the church rather than the bar in mind. At Cambridge he made the acquaintance of Thomas Gray and a circle of the poet's young admirers. 
On 28 June 1765 Temple graduated LLB. He was ordained priest on 21 September 1766 and on the following day was instituted to the rectory of Mamhead, about 10 miles from Exeter, on the presentation of his cousin once removed Wilmot Vaughan, fourth Viscount Lisburne. On 6 August 1767 Temple married Anne Stow ('bap'. 1741, died 1793), youngest daughter of William Stow (1692?-1753), like Temple's father twice mayor of Berwick, and his first wife, Anne Blake, sister of Sir Francis Blake FRS of Twisell Castle, some 9 miles south-west of Berwick. The Temples had eight children, of whom one, Francis (1770-1863), ended up as an admiral, and another, Octavius (1784-1834), became lieutenant-governor of Sierra Leone. 
When the Temples settled at Mamhead in October 1767, the living was worth only $80 a year. There were quarrels with the Lisburnes, as well as marital friction and money troubles, all of which made Temple so depressed that he seemed suicidal to Norton Nicholls in 1771. Nevertheless, Temple read the proofs of Boswell's 'Account of Corsica' in 1767, visited Edinburgh in 1770 and 1773, when he met some of the literati, and received visits from Boswell at Mamhead in 1769 and 1775. In 1774 his 100-page 'Essay on the Clergy' was published, which highlighted the social role of the clergy, defining a clergyman as 'a private and public teacher of religion and virtue' (p. 18), which drew from David Hume, who had seen the book in proof, the insulting counter-definition of 'a person appropriated to teach hypocrisy & inculcate vice' (Temple to Boswell, 15 Feb 1774, 'Correspondence', 1.340). In 1775 he made a new friend, the poet and dramatist Edward Jerningham, and began a rather tepid correspondence with him which lasted until 1793. 
In Boswell's opinion, Temple excelled in writing 'characters' of men and books, such as the well-known portrait of Gray, which first appeared in Temple's letter to Boswell of 3 September 1771, a month after Gray's death. Boswell sent it to the 'London Magazine' where it was published anonymously and without authority in March 1772 (41.140) before being incorporated by William Mason with slight alterations in his life of Gray (1775) and then used by Johnson in his account of Gray in the 'Lives of the Poets' (1779-81). The character of Gray seems to have been typical of the remarks on authors which Temple wrote down in his 'green book', unfortunately lost, which impressed Boswell so much that it induced Temple to plan a volume of letters on literary and moral subjects addressed to Boswell. The work never materialized. A much longer and later sketch cuts a hero down to size -- 'The character of Dr Johnson, with illustrations from Mrs Piozzi, Sir John Hawkins, and Mr Boswell', published anonymously by Dilly in 1792. Though Temple asserts that Johnson's learning and talents have been overrated by his partial admirers, he cannot avoid praising the 'piety and good sense' of the 'Rambler' essays, and the 'noble' dictionary. 
On 9 September 1776 Temple was collated to the vicarage of St Gluvias near Penryn in Cornwall, a living worth over $300 a year, but in the long run this advancement did little to curb his inveterate complaining about his lot. In 1779 he published anonymously 'Moral and Historical Memoirs', a 424-page book of eleven essays, staunchly whig and critical of absolute monarchy, but in the years that followed he was never able to complete the several works on Italian and church history he had planned. In the early 1780s he did much to further in Cornwall the movement for more equal representation in parliament, corresponding with the Yorkshire reformer Christopher Wyvill on the matter, and in the early 1790s he took the lead in founding the Cornwall County Library. He travelled to London in May 1790 with his daughter Nancy, paying a strained visit to Boswell and his daughter Veronica, and in August-September 1792 Boswell, Veronica, and her younger sister Euphemia visited the Temples in Cornwall. In 1789 Temple had welcomed the storming of the Bastille, but in December 1790 he was converted to the anti-French position after reading Burke's 'Reflections on the Revolution in France'. By the end of 1791 even parliamentary reform was suspect, and by 1794 France had become for him a country whose 'inhabitors ought to be wiped from the face of the Earth' (Temple to Boswell, 6 Dec 1791 and 30 Jan 1794, MSS Yale C2915, C2954). 
During a visit of nearly two months to St Gluvias in 1794 Norton Nicholls secured Temple's consent to the marriage of his daughter Nancy to the Revd Charles Powlett, which Temple had previously opposed. Despite earlier friction, father and daughter spent three apparently enjoyable months in Suffolk as Nicholls's guests in 1795. Temple died at St Gluvias on 13 August 1796 of a severe abdominal complaint similar to that which had carried off his wife in 1793, whose age then is given as forty-six in the St Gluvias burial register and on the family gravestone in the churchyard, where Temple too was buried. Though both believed this, the evidence points to her having died aged fifty-two ('Correspondence', 1.132, n. 4). Temple bequeathed all his property, including the estate of Allerdean when sold, to be divided equally among his children, apart from a legacy of $20 a year to his widowed sister Sarah Forster. Nancy was to be given $1000 of her share at the time of her marriage. 
Boswell's role in his correspondence with Temple became known in 1856, when the majority (97) of his surviving letters to Temple were published. But it was not until the twentieth century that the letters from Temple to Boswell were discovered, 338 in all. Temple told Boswell as much about his family, professional, and financial troubles as Boswell told him about his own, and was equally frank about his sexual needs and difficulties, as when, after his wife's death, he revealed his attraction to Susan Frood, the vicarage housekeeper, and the unsavoury attempts of Charles Powlett and Nancy to destroy Susan's reputation (Temple to Boswell, various letters June 1793 to 3 Nov 1794, MSS Yale University). 
In the religious sphere his letters show Temple deserting his Socinian and almost sceptical stance of 1763 for the orthodoxy of his middle and later years, while in the political dialogue he moved from his initial whig republicanism to the conviction that 'our own present Government' was 'the wisest and best that mankind in any age or any country in the world were ever blessed with' (Temple to Boswell, 11 Dec 1792, MS Yale C2930). The correspondence as a whole provides 'an extraordinarily vivid and comprehensive picture of literary, professional, domestic, and intellectual life over a period of almost forty years. That period saw its share of differences and debates, long separations and less than successful reunions, grief, disappointment and disillusion; but what survived, indeed triumphed over, every vicissitude, is finally a friendship that held firm against all the tests time sent its way. ('Correspondence', 1.lix)' 



@@@@@


doc= 27124


Templeman, Peter (1711-1769), physician and secretary of the Society of Arts, the eldest son of Peter Templeman (died 1749), a solicitor in Dorchester, Dorset, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Robert Haynes, was born on 17 March 1711, probably in Dorchester and educated at the Charterhouse. Proceeding to Trinity College, Cambridge, in June 1728, he graduated BA with distinction in 1731, and then planned to take holy orders -- perhaps with a scholarly career in mind. Deciding on a medical career instead, he took himself off to the Netherlands in June 1735, and the next year enrolled in the University of Leiden, where he attended the lectures of Hermann Boerhaave, but is not listed as having taken a degree. Unless he obtained an MD elsewhere by purchase, 'Dr Templeman', as he was subsequently styled, would seem to have been merely a courtesy usage. 
Going to London in 1739 with the intention of building a medical practice, Templeman soon had that intention subverted by his insistent scholarly leanings and preference for the company of men of learning, which combined with a generous allowance from his father to reinforce a disinclination for the active socializing in fashionable circles that was the standard way of securing a remunerative clientele. Much more in character was his joining with a number of fellow spirits in 1741 to form a small medical club, which held its meetings once a fortnight at an inn. Among its members were John Fothergill and a friend whom Templeman had made at Leiden, Matthew Maty. It was to the influential Fothergill that Templeman chose in 1750 to put the idea of starting a society to obtain for its members advance news from all over Europe of improvements in medical practice and knowledge -- what would later be known as an abstracts service. Though that suggestion came to nothing, in 1753-4 Templeman published an example of what he had had in mind in the form of translations from French (a language of which he had a complete command) of select papers on matters relating to medicine read before the Academie Royale des Sciences in Paris. Further translating and editing work, not confined to medicine, followed. 
In June 1756 Maty was appointed to the inaugural staff of the British Museum as keeper of its department of printed books. Doubtless with his friend's encouragement, Templeman also applied for a post in the museum, and was rewarded in December 1758 with the keepership of the reading-room. But in contrast to Maty's position, this proved to be not nearly as congenial as he had imagined, requiring him to spend six hours of each working day cooped up in a dark and damp room at the beck and call of readers and with next to no opportunities of pursuing any scholarly work of his own. Worse, the promised apartment within the museum, into which he had looked forward to moving his wife, Frances (died 1762), and their daughter, he found unacceptably sub-standard, and the outside lodgings allowance that replaced it was not nearly adequate. After his repeated protests had left the trustees quite unmoved, he felt compelled to seek a supplementary means of livelihood and in March 1760 competed successfully for the post of secretary of the recently founded Society of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce. The museum did not require its staff to work for it exclusively and one of the unsuccessful candidates had in fact been Maty, whose lighter museum duties would have made it easy for him to hold the two posts in tandem. The different character of Templeman's post, however, permitted much less leeway; the trustees soon took exception to the lengthy absences from it which his new post entailed and after seven months terminated his employment. 
The Society of Arts proved a haven by comparison, and during the nine years Templeman worked for it his abilities were at last fittingly harnessed and to good effect. His most concrete achievement was a projected 'historical register' which, though he failed to complete it, became in later hands the first two volumes of the society's 'Transactions'. He was still hard at work on this in May 1769 when deteriorating health made it necessary for him to be relieved of his duties and sent on indefinite leave. For at least two years would-be successors had been covetously eyeing his post and waiting for it to fall vacant, and on 22 September 1769 their hopes were at last realized when Templeman succumbed to a particularly acute attack of the asthma that had troubled him for most of his life. He was buried on 28 September in St Martin-in-the-Fields, alongside his wife, who had predeceased him in 1762 -- and 'without pomp', as he had specially requested in his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 27125


Templeton, John (1766-1825), naturalist, was born at Bridge Street, Belfast, co. Antrim, Ireland, the son of James Templeton (died 1790), a wholesale merchant, and Mary Eleanor, daughter of Benjamin Legg of Malone. He was a 'delicate' boy: 'my experience was... for many years very precarious during some of the infantile diseases. I have heard that the lamp of life was so nearly extinguished that final hope was exhausted, and I was left until a coffin should be prepared. (Deane, 33)' He was educated at the school established by David Manson (1726-1792), an innovative schoolmaster and brewer, whose pupils were taught 'to read and understand the English tongue, without the discipline of the rod, by intermixing pleasurable and healthy exercise with their instruction' (Manson, 3). 
The Templetons' business evidently prospered, and John Templeton may be described as a man of independent means; if he had any role in running the family business, the fact is never mentioned by biographers. After his father's death he lived in the family's country house, Orange Grove, about 2 miles from Belfast, renaming it Cranmore ('crann mor', great tree) after the sweet chestnut ('Castanea sativa') trees that still survive two centuries later. He had become a keen gardener about 1786, and in 1793 laid out an elaborate garden at Cranmore. Templeton's interest in botany arose in 1790, according to Thomas Dix Hincks, from a need to eradicate weeds from Cranmore. He became an extraordinary plantsman, growing exotic and native plants, raising trees from seeds, and experimenting by cultivating tender plants outdoors; he was probably the first to grow 'Camellia' and 'Fuchsia' in the open air in Ireland. Hincks stated that Templeton contributed information to Thomas Martyn's edition of Philip Miller's 'The Gardener's and Botanist's Dictionary' (1807). 
Templeton's political views were liberal. He supported parliamentary reform, Catholic emancipation, and the ideals of the United Irishmen although he did not agree with their methods. Among his close friends was a founder of the Society of United Irishmen, Thomas Russell, who was executed on 10 October 1803 at Downpatrick. A. Wilson wrote that 'among the little group [of Belfast citizens] whose liberal interest raised the whole outlook of the community none was a more remarkable personality than John Templeton' (Wilson, 104). He was a co-founder of the 'Belfast Monthly Magazine' (1808-14), and regularly contributed articles on natural history and meteorology. An active supporter of learned societies as well as philanthropic organizations, Templeton was one of the promoters of the Belfast Academical Institution and a member of its first board of visitors. He joined the Belfast Society for Promoting Knowledge (founded in 1788 as the Belfast Reading Society) and helped compile catalogues (1793 and 1818) of its library, later the Linen Hall Library. Templeton was appointed curator of the society's museum which was handed over in 1833 to the Belfast Natural History Society; he was made an honorary member of that society soon after its formation in 1821. He was a member of the Irish Harp Society, vice-president of the Belfast Literary Society (1803), and an associate of the Linnean Society of London (1794). 
Templeton was a careful observer and a painstaking and accurate artist; he was interested in all aspects of the natural world. As a young man he went fowling but gave it up after observing the suffering of a wounded bird. He was also keen on fishing and his illustration of the extinct Lough Neagh char is a unique record. His extant diaries (1806-25, in the Ulster Museum, Belfast) record the general weather and temperature at 8 a.m. daily, the flowering of plants, the planting of crops, and the calling of birds. While Templeton rarely ventured outside Ulster, he made frequent excursions by himself and with fellow naturalists around the north of Ireland to collect plants; among those known to have accompanied him are Robert Brown (1773-1858) and Dr William Jackson Hooker (1785-1865). Brown chose an Australian shrub belonging to the bean family (Fabaceae) to name 'Templetonia' after his friend. 
Templeton visited London on several occasions and, according to Hincks, following his second visit to London, Sir Joseph Banks offered him a grant of land and salary if he would go to New Holland. Templeton declined because of his 'attachment to his aunt and sisters... as well as to his native country' (Hincks, 406). On 21 December 1799 he married Katherine Johnson ('c'.1773-1868), daughter of another Belfast merchant, Robert Johnson. The couple had five children; their only son, Robert (1802-1892), studied medicine and became an expert entomologist and conchologist. Templeton died in Belfast on 15 December 1825 and was buried in Clifton Street burying-ground. 
Templeton's most memorable discovery was the hybrid Irish rose, which he named 'Rosa x hibernica', at Holywood, co. Down, about 1795, yet this rose is only one of many plants and animals he recorded. He published papers on peat bogs, bird migration, and acclimatizing plants, but his observations remain essentially unpublished, incorporated in the copious manuscripts, often beautifully illustrated with sketches and watercolour paintings of native plants and animals, that are extant. Robert Lloyd Praeger described him as 'the most eminent naturalist Ireland has produced' (Praeger, 165) but added that little is known about him. Templeton was certainly influential during his lifetime, especially in his native city within scientific, literary, and social circles. He was a painstaking, comprehensive observer of a diverse range of plants and animals, and an accomplished all-round naturalist, but published little of substance. 


@@@@@


doc= 27126


Templeton, John (1802-1886), singer, was born on 30 July 1802, at Riccarton, near Kilmarnock, Ayrshire, the son of Robert Templeton. He had a fine voice as a boy and took part in concerts in Edinburgh with his eldest brother, a singer and teacher. In 1822 he became precentor to the Rose Street Secession church, then under John Brown. Intending to become a professional singer, he went to London and studied under Jonathan Blewitt, Thomas Welsh, De Pinna, and Tom Cooke. 
In July 1828 Templeton made his stage debut at Worthing, Sussex, as Dermot in 'The Poor Soldier', and, after some appearances in the provinces, made his London debut on 13 October 1831 as Belville in William Shield's 'Rosina' at Drury Lane. This was followed, on 20 February 1832, by his portrayal of Raimbaut in the first performance in England of Meyerbeer's 'Robert le diable'. In 1833 he took the part of Don Ottavio in Mozart's 'Don Giovanni' at Covent Garden at five days' notice. That same year Maria Malibran chose him as her tenor for Bellini's 'La sonnambula', at Covent Garden, and he continued to be her leading tenor until her premature death in 1836. After their final performance together on 16 July 1836 Malibran gave him the jewelled betrothal ring which she always wore as Amina. Bellini was so pleased with Templeton's performance of the part of Elvino that he once embraced him and promised to write a part that would immortalize him. Templeton played the leading tenor roles in the first performances in English of Rossini's 'Le siege de Corinthe' (1836), Mozart's 'Die Zauberflote' (1838), and Donizetti's 'La favorite' (1843). He visited Paris in 1842 with Balfe, and met Auber. The following year he started touring the provinces giving lecture recitals on Scottish, English, and Irish folk-songs, and in 1845-6 he went on a tour of America with his 'Templeton Entertainment'. He retired to New Hampton, near London, in 1852, and died there at his home, Tempe Villa, on 2 July 1886. He had four brothers, all of whom were singers. 
Templeton's voice was of very fine quality and exceptional compass. Cooke called him 'the tenor with the additional keys'. His chest voice ranged over two octaves, and he could sustain A and B[flat] in alt with ease. His weakness was an occasional tendency to sing flat. He had a repertory of thirty-five operas, in many of which he created the chief parts. He also wrote a few songs, one, 'Put off! Put off!' on the subject of Queen Mary's escape from Lochleven. 'A Musical Entertainment', his reminiscences and commentaries, was published in Boston in 1845. 


