@@@@@


doc= 27127


Tench, Watkin (bap. 1758, d. 1833), marine officer and author, was baptized on 10 November 1758 in the parish of St Mary on the Hill, Chester, probably the fifth of five children of Fisher Tench (died 1784?) who 'between the years 1760 and 1770... kept an academy for dancing, and a most respectable boarding-school' in Bridge Street (Hemingway, 'History of Chester', 1831, 33), and his wife, Margaret (died 'c'.1794). The range of Tench's knowledge -- Latin and French language and literature, English literature (especially Shakespeare and Milton), travel writing, and social theory -- suggests a grammar school education and a socially and culturally ambitious home life. Time spent over the border in Wales possibly influenced his subsequent interest in cross-cultural relations. One of his books is dedicated to Welsh magnate Sir Watkin Williams Wynn (1772-1840), in 'gratitude to a family, from whom I have received the deepest obligations' (Tench, 'First Four Years', 126). These obligations may have included his commission as a second lieutenant of marines in 1776. He was promoted first lieutenant in 1778, captain in 1782, major in the army in 1794, and lieutenant-colonel in 1798. 
Tench served in the American War of Independence from 1777 to 1783 (he was a prisoner of the French in Maryland for part of 1778). At some point in the 1780s he lived in the West Indies. On 13 May 1787 he sailed for New Holland on the convict transport 'Charlotte', arriving at Botany Bay on 7 January 1788. He left the colony on 18 December 1791, reaching Spithead on 19 June 1792. On 22 October 1792 he married Anna Maria Sargent (1766-1847), daughter of Robert Sargent and his wife, Hannah Hill, of Stoke Damerel, near Plymouth. After the outbreak of war (February 1793) between Britain and revolutionary France, Tench joined the Channel Fleet. His ship, the 'Alexander', was captured on 6 November 1794 and he spent six months as a prisoner, first on French ships in Brest harbour, then in the town of Quimper in Brittany. From 1802, after further service with the Channel Fleet, he was on shore duties. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Marines in 1804, colonel in the army in 1808, colonel-commandant en second in the Royal Marines in 1809, major-general in 1811, and lieutenant-general in 1821, and from 1819 was commandant of the Plymouth division of Royal Marines. He retired in 1827 and died on 7 May 1833 at the home of his brother-in-law Daniel Little at Devonport, Devon; he was buried at Devonport. 
Tench's first two books -- 'A Narrative of the Expedition to Botany Bay' (1789) and 'An Account of the Settlement at Port Jackson' (1793) -- together provided an astute and lively narrative of the first four years of the colony of New South Wales. His third book, 'Letters written in France to a friend in London between the month of November 1794 and the month of May 1795' (1796), reported on the volatile circumstances which followed the fall of Robespierre. Tench may also have had a hand in the composition of an imaginary-voyage narrative, 'Fragmens ['sic'] du dernier voyage de La Perouse' (Quimper, 1797). 
Anglican in religion and liberal whig in politics, Tench was a man of strong convictions but -- within gentlemanly limits -- an enquiring mind. 'Enlightened' was a favourite word, and he was proud to serve a Britain defined by its limited monarchy, protestant religion, the rule of law, ideals of public service, and commercial and intellectual innovation. He wished to see these values spread, those of 'despotism' (and 'democracy') resisted: 'had I been a Frenchman I should have struggled as hard for the Revolution of 1789, as I should have resisted with all my might that of 1792' (Tench, 'Letters from Revolutionary France', 100). His commitment to the spread of enlightened British principles was, however, matched by a feeling for the distinct strengths of other peoples and systems which frequently led him to doubt the practicability or propriety of British policy in practice. He was passionately opposed to slavery in the West Indies, conscious in certain respects of the destructive impact of colonization on the Aboriginal people of New South Wales, and keen that Britain should accept the post-Jacobin French Republic of 1795. 


@@@@@


doc= 27128


Tenison, Edward (bap. 1673, d. 1735), bishop of Ossory, baptized at Norwich on 3 April 1673, was the only surviving child of Joseph Tenison of Norwich, and Margaret Mileham. After attending St Paul's School, London, under Dr Gale he entered Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, as a scholar on 19 February 1691. He graduated BA in 1695, and proceeded LLB (1697) and DD (1731), the last two at Lambeth. He was apprenticed to his uncle, Charles Mileham, an attorney at Great Yarmouth, but soon abandoned the law for the church. In 1697 he was ordained deacon and priest, and was presented to the rectory of Wittersham, Kent, which he resigned a year later on being presented to the rectory of Sundridge in the diocese of Rochester; this he held jointly with the adjacent rectory of Chiddingstone. 
On 24 March 1705 Tenison was made a prebendary of Lichfield, resigning in 1708 on being appointed archdeacon of Carmarthen. On 19 March of the following year he became a prebendary of Canterbury. His first publication, a paper on 'The husbandry of canary seed', appeared in 'Philosophical Transactions' for 1713. In 1715 he acted as executor to his cousin Archbishop Thomas Tenison (1636-1715) and became involved in litigation concerning dilapidations, about which he commented in 'The True Copies of some Letters' (1716). The inheritor, in 1714, of a considerable estate from his uncle Edward Tenison of Lambeth, he was to lose heavily as an investor in the South Sea Company six years later. 
In 1730 Tenison became chaplain to the duke of Dorset, lord lieutenant of Ireland, who in 1731 nominated him to the bishopric of Ossory. In the following year he published an edition of two books of Lucius Columella's 'De re rustica', which, together with several sermons on the necessity of public spirit and the Bangorian controversy, comprise his principal literary endeavour. He married a second cousin, Ann (died 1750), daughter and coheir of Nicholas Sayer of Pulham St Mary, Norfolk, and niece of Archbishop Tenison. The couple had five daughters and one son, Thomas (1702-1742), who became a prebendary of Canterbury in 1739. 
Tenison died in Dublin on 29 November 1735 and was buried in the city's St Mary's Church. He bequeathed money for the education of the poor, the promotion of Irish agriculture, and, in a codicil of 23 January 1735, a sum of $200 to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 27129


Tenison, Richard (1642-1705), Church of Ireland bishop of Meath, was born at Carrickfergus, co. Antrim, the eldest son of Major Thomas Tenison. His father, who apparently was second cousin to Dr Thomas Tenison, archbishop of Canterbury, seems to have settled in Ulster shortly before the Irish rising and was bailiff or sheriff of Carrickfergus in 1645. Richard Tenison attended a local school in Carrickfergus before he was sent into the care of Francis Radcliffe at St Bees School, Cumberland. He was admitted to Trinity College, Dublin, on 2 November 1659 at seventeen. There is no record of Tenison receiving any degree in the college registers but he was referred to as MA in some contemporary documents. He was appointed to the mastership of Trim Diocesan School, where he taught with considerable success before taking holy orders. By 1666 he had married a woman whose name is unknown, his eldest surviving son, Henry, being born in that year. 
Tenison was appointed chaplain to Arthur Capel, earl of Essex, shortly after Essex had been appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland in 1672. Essex awarded him the sinecures of the rectories of Laracor and Augher, the vicarages of Donaghmore and St Peter's, Drogheda, and the deanery of Clogher. In February 1682 Tenison was consecrated at Christ Church, Dublin, as bishop of Killala, and during the same year was awarded a DD by Trinity College. He had married Anne (died 1696), daughter of John Norbury, by 1684, the year in which Richard, the first of their five sons, was born. By 1688 Tenison and John Vesey, archbishop of Tuam, were the only prelates in the province of Connaught. Along with Vesey he gave 'encouragement to the Protestants as long as they remained without imminent danger of their own lives' (Mant, 1.697) before they were finally forced to remove to England in that year. Tenison settled in London, where he was employed as lecturer alongside Henry Hesketh in the parish of St Helen, Bishopsgate. He was probably placed in this position with the aid of Thomas Tenison, who was at that time rector of St Martin-in-the-Fields and St James's, Piccadilly. 
After the Williamite victory Tenison returned to Ireland, where he was presented to the see of Clogher on 26 February 1691. Hesketh was nominated to replace him as bishop of Killala but was never consecrated. Tenison was among the group of Church of Ireland reforming bishops in the 1690s associated with William King and Nathaniel Foy. While bishop of Clogher he completed substantial repairs to the bishop's palace at his own expense, and obtained a reputation for preaching 'by which he reduced many dissenters to the church' and in one visitation confirmed about 2500 people (Harris, 2.191). In June 1697 he was translated to the bishopric of Meath. During the following year he became vice-chancellor of Trinity College, Dublin, and was later elected a privy councillor. He died probably in co. Meath on 29 July 1705 and was buried in the chapel of Trinity College. Tenison did not publish any major scholarly work save for five of his sermons. His will benefited the poor of Navan and Kells and bequeathed $200 to set up a fund for the support of orphans and widows of clergymen, an example that he desired others would emulate. He was survived by his six sons, two of whom, Henry and Richard, sat as MPs in Irish parliaments; his sons Norbury and Thomas were named as beneficiaries of Archbishop Tenison's will. His offspring were the forerunners of the Hanbury-Tenison family of Lough Bawn, co. Monaghan. 


@@@@@


doc= 27130


Tenison, Thomas (1636-1715), archbishop of Canterbury, was born at Cottenham, Cambridgeshire, on 29 September 1636 and baptized there on 2 October, the son of John Tenison (1599-1671), curate of the parish, and Mercy, eldest daughter of Thomas Dowsing of Cottenham. 
In 1637 John Tenison became rector of Mundesley, Norfolk, and in 1641 of Topcroft, Norfolk, but, as a royalist, he was ejected from Mundesley during the interregnum, while retaining the latter. A kinsman of Sir Thomas Browne of Norwich, the future archbishop was educated at Norwich School, where at the age of twelve he was reportedly deeply shocked by Charles I's execution, later calling it 'an execrable murther' (Tenison, 'Argument', 25). In April 1653 he entered Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, as a Parker scholar. Here he was probably influenced by the Cambridge Platonists, who sought to lift religion from a dispute over theological niceties to a set of universal principles. A particular influence among them was Ralph Cudworth, who refuted Thomas Hobbes's 'Leviathan'. Among Tenison's fellow students were his future episcopal colleagues John Tillotson, Richard Kidder, Robert Grove, Simon Patrick, and James Gardiner. Tenison graduated BA in 1657, but with Anglican prospects so uncertain he, like others, briefly studied physick instead of seeking orders. In 1659, however, the deprived Bishop Brian Duppa of Salisbury secretly ordained him at Richmond upon Thames: Anglican ordinations were still forbidden. Reportedly meticulous rather than brilliant as a student, Tenison proceeded MA in 1660 (incorporated at Oxford in June 1664), became a fellow of Corpus in March 1662, and proceeded BD in 1667 and DD in 1680. 
Briefly rector of Bracon Ash (1661-2), near Norwich, Tenison resigned it in favour of his father in 1662, when Francis Wilford, the new dean of Ely and master of Corpus, presented him to the prestigious parish of St Andrew the Great, Cambridge (1662-7). Here he made an impact on both town and university. In particular he won considerable reputation during the plague for being the only college fellow to remain in residence, and at great personal risk, but fortified by 'a preservative powder... administered in wine' ('Masters' History', 191), he constantly cared for his stricken parish throughout the crisis; when he resigned in 1667 his parishioners gave him a handsome commemorative silver tankard. 
The year 1667 was significant for Tenison. He married Anne (died 1714), daughter of Richard Love (died 1661), the former dean of Ely and master of Corpus Christi. He also became rector of Holywell with Needingworth, Huntingdonshire, a parish in the gift of the earl of Manchester, whose chaplain he had been for some years. Methodical as ever, Tenison drew up a terrier of land belonging to the church and established a charity for the poor. Meanwhile he became chaplain to the king, but, more important, he was also making his name as a writer. In 1670 he published 'The Creed of Mr Hobbes examin'd', dedicated to Manchester. Reportedly a more succinct critique of Thomas Hobbes than Cudworth's, it was a popular work, perhaps partly instrumental in Oxford University's condemnation of 'Leviathan' in 1683. He followed this with 'A Discourse on Idolatry' (1677), the first of many contentious pamphlets attacking Rome, and 'Baconia' (1678), an academic work praising Bacon's work and placing him ahead of Copernicus, Galileo, and Harvey. In 1673 it may have been his kinship with Sir Thomas Browne that led to his becoming upper minister at St Peter Mancroft, Norwich, the centre of religious life in the city, a post he held for only eighteen months. After Browne's death Tenison edited his papers, which he published in 1685. 
Tenison's reputation as parish priest in Cambridge and Huntingdonshire and as a controversialist led to further promotion; he was recommended to the lord chancellor, Heneage Finch, first earl of Nottingham, for the living of St Martin-in-the-Fields in October 1680. Here Tenison was joining Nottingham's distinguished London circle of churchmen, including John Tillotson, John Sharp, Edward Stillingfleet, Simon Patrick, and Richard Kidder. St Martin's itself was a large, prestigious parish at the centre of the capital's life. As pastor he was also extremely busy -- in a randomly chosen month there were seventy-seven baptisms, 144 burials, and four marriages; communions were at least monthly. The diarist John Evelyn was concerned about his busy life. After applauding his preaching and his 'most holy conversation' he feared for his health: 'the insuperable pains he takes and care of his parish will I fear wear him out' (Evelyn, 4.307). 
Tenison remained in this key parish for eleven years, years of considerable turbulence, and contributed significantly to London's vibrant ecclesiastical life. For instance, in 1681 'devout young men' of the parish formed a society for a life of regular prayer meetings and strict rules as to behaviour (Spurr, 133). His own parishioners included many leading national figures. Those he attended at their deaths included Edward Turberville, the informer, and in 1687 Nell Gwyn. He was heavily criticized for preaching at the latter's funeral and, at the height of anxieties about the advance of popery under James II, for distributing in her name charity money among poor papists. Most significant of all was the duke of Monmouth, a regular worshipper at St Martin's. During his confinement at the Tower after his rebellion it was to Tenison that he turned for spiritual counsel. In July 1685 Tenison joined bishops Thomas Ken and Francis Turner, and George Hooper, rector of Lambeth, for the duke's last hours before execution. Though reportedly speaking more gently than the others, he failed, as they did, to persuade him to be reconciled to his wife and to admit his guilt as a rebel. He too had to refuse Monmouth the sacrament, and with them attended him on the scaffold. Hostile though he was to popery, Tenison would not countenance open rebellion. 
Tenison's incumbency of St Martin's coincided with a phenomenal increase in its population, rising from 19,000 in 1660 to 38,000 ten years later and 69,000 in 1685. Little wonder that he concurred with parliament's further division of the parish in establishing St James-in-the-Fields, now St James's, Piccadilly. (St Anne-in-the-Fields, now St Anne's, Soho, had already been hived off in 1678.) Tenison retained both St Martin's and St James's until his preferment to the bishopric of Lincoln. He also set up a chapel of ease in Swallow Street (now Regent Street), and later moved a wooden former Catholic chapel from Hounslow Heath to Conduit Street for Anglican use; this later became St George's, Hanover Square. A bibliophile himself, he recognized that clergy and tutors for the nobility in his parish needed free access to books; in 1684, at his own expense and advised by John Evelyn and Christopher Wren, he built a library, the first public library in London, in which he deposited many books and manuscripts. With education as another lifelong interest, he was an early pioneer of charity schools, establishing St Martin's free school for the poor in 1683, and another in St James's parish a few years later. With a Renaissance spirit he took personal care in searching out efficient teachers and intelligent, needy pupils whom he encouraged to enter university. Near the end of his life he founded a school for poor girls in Lambeth, in which his wife showed 'constant and prudent care' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/550, sig. 3), and a charity school in Croydon in 1714. 
As vicar of St Martin's, Tenison was at the epicentre of the increasingly heated Romanist debates and convulsions of the 1680s. Suited to the role, he entered fully into the constant pamphleteering. He may have remembered the interregnum with horror, but the increasing identification of the monarchy with Romanism, subtle under Charles II, overt under James II, propelled Tenison energetically into the fray. Catholics came to recognize him as a leading opponent; this was so much the case that his colleague, Simon Patrick, had to warn him of the danger he was courting. As early as 1678 he had published 'A Discourse on Idolatry', anti-papist in substance, though academic in style. Once at St Martin's, however, time for scholarship was shorter, and his later pamphlets were less well researched and increasingly contentious. His sermon at St Sepulchre's, London (1681), entitled 'Concerning discretion in giving alms', degenerated into a vituperative attack on Catholic institutions, in particular charities, and caused much animosity. This was followed by 'A Discourse Concerning a Guide on Matters of Faith' (1683), a work on the question of authority, on where a true basis for religious truth could be found; this he republished in 1687. With James II's accession in 1685 the controversy intensified, and St Martin's became more than ever the Anglican bastion. When James tried to silence John Sharp, rector of St Giles-in-the-Fields, in 1686, Tenison threw himself into the struggle, and possibly played a major part in his restoration. In 1687 he published 'The Difference betwixt Protestant and Socinian Methods', defending Anglicanism against false Catholic claims, and with William Claggett he published a bibliography of the controversy, 'The Present State of the Controversie between the Church of England and the Church of Rome'. In the same year he contributed 'The Tenth Note, on Holiness' in a reply, with other leading churchmen, to Bellarmine's century-old fifteen notes of the true church. Even more significant was his impassioned public debate the following September with Andrew Pulton, master of the Jesuit College at the Savoy. In this high-profile encounter Tenison led the Anglican side. He was now noted as an effective and potent protagonist of the Anglican church, a dangerous role at the time, and again contributed to the increasing flood of pamphlets. Converts too became highly prized: Tenison, for instance, constructed a special liturgy at St Martin's for receiving John Taffe, a former Irish Capuchin, into the Anglican church. 
Tenison was a leader of the London agitation following the second declaration of indulgence (27 April 1688). After a gathering of London clergy Archbishop William Sancroft invited him to attend the bishops' meetings at Lambeth on 11 May, and again more crucially on 18 May, when they decided to petition the king. On the following Sunday, 20 May, like many others, Tenison refused to read the declaration. Throughout the crisis until the bishops' acquittal he was the vital link between them and the clergy. Though Tenison was thus a potent force as leader of the London clergy, little is known of his part in the discussions which later led to James's abject capitulation to the Anglican bishops in what has become known as 'the Anglican Revolution' (Goldie, 108). Tensions rose. On 30 September, when a Jesuit preacher at the Savoy, probably Pulton, attacked Anglicanism, the crowds publicly dragged him from his pulpit. Tenison, as a leading Anglican apologist, preached his reply at a crowded service at St Martin's. 
After James's departure Tenison, fully backing the new regime, was still at the heart of affairs. Though the revolution ended the controversy's intensity Tenison edited and published, as editor, 'Popery not Founded on Scripture' and a translation of La Placette's 'Of the Incurable Scepticism of the Church of Rome'. In the weeks before the Convention, which eventually offered William and Mary the throne, he was closely in touch with political and church leaders. 
With the incoming regime ecclesiastical affairs took a new turn with a revived attempt by Daniel Finch, second earl of Nottingham, secretary of state, and senior moderate clergy to effect a rapprochement between the established church and dissenters. On 14 January 1689 Tenison was one of several moderates, including John Tillotson, Simon Patrick, and William Lloyd, who met at the house of the dean of St Paul's, Edward Stillingfleet, to discuss the possibility of making concessions. A twin package was proposed: a comprehension bill to bring most dissenters, principally presbyterians, back into the church, and a toleration bill to allow the rest to worship elsewhere. Finch introduced these in the Lords in February 1689. When the comprehension bill failed the following May, Tenison joined the commission appointed by William III to review the liturgy, canons, and ecclesiastical courts with comprehension in mind. His earlier work, 'An Argument for Union' (1683), had already identified him as a leading protagonist for comprehension and protestant union, and now in 1689 he published anonymously 'A Discourse Concerning the Ecclesiastical Commission Opened in the Jerusalem Chamber' to promote its cause. Typically conscientious, he attended seventeen of the eighteen sessions, and was on the eventual informal subcommittee, suggesting suitable alterations to the prayer book; meticulous as usual, he set about collecting words in the liturgy that gave most offence. Tenison's eagerness for comprehension, and, in particular, his reported lack of support for episcopal reordination of dissenting ministers, antagonized many. 
The commission's debates were on the whole dignified, but convocation, meeting on 21 November to discuss its proposals, was not. All attempts by Tenison and others to persuade members to agree on comprehension were met with hostility, and the proposals came to nothing. Convocation was adjourned in December and later dissolved with parliament without passing any judgment on the commission's proposals. Tenison was acutely disappointed. Though he briefly considered raising the issue again in the mid-1690s he never tried to challenge the verdict. The bid for comprehension had failed. Like others, he, however, accepted occasional conformity as a suitable, though unsatisfactory, compromise, much to the hostility of tories and high-churchmen. 
Already Tenison was highly respected for his work in Cambridge and at St Martin's, and for his leadership of the London clergy in James's reign, so it was not surprising that Gilbert Burnet recommended him, with nine others, to William III for early preferment. Consequently the crown, using its prerogative, appointed him archdeacon of London; Bishop Henry Compton of London instituted him on 26 October 1689. Tenison retained his incumbencies at St Martin's and St James's. Apart from his annual visitations, there is little evidence of his personal activities in his brief spell as archdeacon. 
Further preferment followed late in 1691, when William nominated Tenison to the important see of Lincoln; Tillotson, with the bishops of London, Worcester, and Ely assisting, consecrated him in Lambeth Palace chapel on 19 January 1692. Lincoln was a huge diocese of five archdeaconries and fifty deaneries, sadly neglected by his scholarly predecessor, Thomas Barlow. Tenison, with his usual energy and zeal, at once sought to restore order, root out slackness, and keep a firm eye on the clergy. His first visitation between April and June lasted at least five weeks, during which he travelled over 400 miles. His spell at Lincoln was brief. Though further preferment came too soon for him to achieve notable results, he laid solid foundations for his successor, James Gardiner. 
In 1693 Tenison was offered the archbishopric of Dublin, but despite pressure from the Irish episcopate he refused, possibly on his wife's advice. Tillotson died on 22 November 1694, recommending Tenison as his successor at Canterbury. Though other names were suggested, principally Edward Stillingfleet and John Hall, others pressed for Tenison 'as less high in his notions and temper' (Carpenter, 132), and William appointed him on 6 December. In many ways he was an admirable compromise. Already respected for his previous work he had been helped by the first earl of Nottingham, worked closely with the second over comprehension, and was now adviser to the Sunderland family. Naturally opinions were divided. To some he was recognized as a person of great learning, piety, and moderation, who had already been marked out by Romish priests and Jesuits. Tories, like Thomas Hearne, however, noted that he lacked sense and judgement, and that he would be a tool of the whigs. Formally elected on 15 January 1695 he was enthroned at Canterbury in person on 16 May, the first primate since the Reformation to be thus installed. Meanwhile he had been in constant attendance at the bedside of Queen Mary prior to her death on 28 December 1694. Subsequently he gave spiritual counsel to the bereft king, and probably persuaded him to put aside his mistress Elizabeth Villiers. Tenison preached at Queen Mary's funeral on 5 March 1695. 
Tenison became primate at the end of fifty years of political and ecclesiastical turmoil. He immediately set out to improve the reputation of the clergy, which in an age of cynicism and immorality was low. In 1695 he revived the archbishop's court, summoned Thomas Watson, bishop of St David's, to answer charges of simony, and deprived him of his see. His predecessor, Tillotson, and Queen Mary had already planned in 1694 the issue of eighteen royal injunctions for the strict enforcement of the canons of 1604, which their deaths late that year had prevented. Tenison continued the policy and persuaded King William to issue the injunctions, which he amplified with his own 'Rules and Orders'. He aimed to establish a well-educated, competent, and loyal clergy, and to keep pluralities within the bounds of the law. To achieve the first he reinforced ordination procedures, laid down by canons 34 and 35, to ensure that candidates were men of integrity and of sufficient educational standard. He himself was reportedly tough examining his own Canterbury ordinands and in interrogating future incumbents before institution. He also tackled the problem of pluralities and non-residence, then a major church abuse. In the Canterbury diocese he insisted on strict adherence to canon law, but he was equally exacting elsewhere. He used his special primatial authority for issuing dispensations, and with the help of his chaplain, Edmund Gibson, he meticulously investigated each petition for plurality. Apart from demanding a certificate of consent from relevant diocesan bishops he often made his own additional enquiries. On one occasion in January 1712 he was in conflict with the queen herself. When she legitimately used the royal prerogative to issue a dispensation for plurality Tenison protested. In a long, respectful, but vehement letter of criticism he dubbed her 'the nursing mother' of the church and himself its 'watchman or shepherd' (Carpenter, 164). Significantly, the archbishop had his way. 
Like earlier primates Tenison was eager to make Canterbury a model for other dioceses. Immediately after installation he carried out his primary visitation during which he confirmed almost 4000 candidates. This was unusual, for few archbishops visited and confirmed in the Canterbury diocese. Some, like Sancroft, sent other prelates to deputize every few years, but others, such as Gilbert Sheldon and John Tillotson, failed to do even this. One incumbent, Thomas Brett, tory though he was, was appreciative. Tenison, he wrote, 'has done more than any other of his predecessors for these hundred years' (Brett, 245). Not only did he visit and confirm 'very frequently', he made sure the ceremonies were not 'in a hurry or huddle' (ibid., 244) as elsewhere, but administered with decorum in small groups at a time with questions and answers made audible. 'Nothing could be more solemn, decent and regular' (ibid., 245). Similarly he broke with tradition by personally conferring priests' and deacons' orders five times in twenty years. This was rare then for archbishops, who normally conferred only episcopal orders. In his last years, when confined to Lambeth through ill health, he continued to show concern for the Canterbury clergy's welfare. In 1706 he gave the cathedral a handsome throne carved by Grinling Gibbons. 
As archbishop Tenison was also visitor of All Souls College, Oxford, a role he took seriously. In 1698 he ended a long-running dispute over the election as warden of Leopold Finch (son of the second earl of Winchilsea and a kinsman of Nottingham's) by declaring the wardenship vacant and personally reappointing Finch to the post. Four years later he was at odds with Finch's reforming tory successor, Bernard Gardiner, over the warden's right of veto in fellows' elections, especially in cases of non-residence. Tenison again acted decisively. Through his vicar-general he carried out, in 1710, a rare formal visitation of the college -- performed by only archbishops Cranmer and Whitgift before -- and annulled the warden's right of veto. 
As archbishop Tenison eventually gave energetic support to the movement which sprang up in the 1690s to combat the flood of vice seen as engulfing society. He knew Restoration London only too well. Unlike some bishops, however, he had initial misgivings over supporting the growing number of interdenominational societies for the reformation of manners, principally because they gave the lead in combating sin to civil magistrates rather than to the clergy. His circular letter to the bishops in April 1699, following the king's proclamation on the subject, emphasized the duty of the clergy to catechize parishioners thoroughly and thus imbue them with the faith. Only thus would true moral reformation take place, and other methods would be rendered unnecessary. 
Tenison campaigned in other ways for moral reform. He hoped to tighten the lax procedures concerning marriage. In the 1690s he was partly responsible for drafting two acts designed to help eradicate clandestine marriages by insisting on marriage only by banns or licence. Both by letter and by injunction he requested the bishops' support, especially in preventing the common abuse whereby officials issued blank marriage licences. The press and stage were also in his sights. In 1698 he unsuccessfully introduced a bill to outlaw blasphemous and scandalous publications, and he hoped for strict government surveillance of the theatre; though unsuccessful in this he and Dean Thomas Sherlock of St Paul's managed to get one playhouse closed. As late as 1711 the queen herself was still appalled by the 'looseness and corruption of manners' and 'the neglect of wholesome discipline' (Brown, 338), and in August 1711 she wrote to Tenison requesting the bishops' support. 
On becoming primate Tenison strove to continue the moderate consensus achieved thus far by Nottingham and Tillotson, 'a dogged rearguard action to prevent the church... from becoming the battlefield of political faction', as it, in fact, did under Queen Anne (Bennett, 'William III', 105). Tenison himself tried to project impartial churchmanship, even taking care to use Caroline ceremonies and devotions in his chapel at Lambeth. After Queen Mary's death William III set up a commission of the two archbishops and four other prelates to recommend preferments. With his presence essential for a quorum and holding the casting vote Tenison's authority was paramount. Despite his earlier London friendship with John Sharp, now archbishop of York, differences in personality and Tenison's suspicion of him as a high-churchman created friction between the two men: decisions were often made in Lambeth without Sharp's participation. By 1698, with William's political situation deteriorating, the preferments commission hardly met, and Tenison soon found himself in the eye of a political storm. Whigs and tories both entered the fray. Whigs, for instance, pressed the archbishop for the preferment of William Talbot to Worcester, only to find that he went to the poor see of Oxford. Tory ecclesiastics, led by three discontented prelates, Henry Compton, Jonathan Trelawny, and Thomas Sprat, and the mercurial Francis Atterbury, pressed for a sitting convocation, still in abeyance since 1689. This Tillotson and Tenison had consistently advised William to avoid, but now the old policy of moderation was in ruins. Late in 1700 William bowed to pressure and allowed convocation to sit and debate. 
Now Tenison was at the centre of conflict, exposed to every shaft of tory venom. Predictably the lower house, energized by Atterbury and led by its prolocutor for 1701, George Hooper, was in no mood for courtesies. Apart from discussion of the book 'Christianity not Mysterious' by the deist John Toland, much heated debate centred on the lower house's claim to independence, especially its right to continue sitting and debating beyond the primate's formal notice of prorogation. From the first Hooper consistently ignored Tenison's order to adjourn, and the house often continued sitting, eventually adjourning itself. On one occasion, when Tenison summoned Hooper to appear in the upper house, Tenison, ironically, adopted high-church tones in lecturing him on episcopal authority over lower clergy. They took little notice. Frequent angry verbal altercations followed between the two men until convocation's final session in June. Parliament was soon prorogued and then dissolved, and with it convocation. Tenison had remained firm against a hostile and bitter lower house, but not without being appalled by the vehemence of tory attacks, even being branded in 1702 as a servile party hack bullying his fellow ministers of the gospel for whig ends. 
With William III's death Tenison's fortunes and influence diminished noticeably, for Queen Anne already distrusted whigs. In seeking ecclesiastical advice Anne turned not to Tenison, but to the moderate tories Nottingham and Sharp. Though Tenison perforce crowned her, it was Sharp who she insisted preach at the coronation. Nevertheless Tenison remained politically active until beset by illness. At least until September 1710 Anne invited him, when fit enough, to join ministers at weekly meetings of the formal cabinet council. Until mid-1709, when his health declined further, he was frequently in the Lords; in 1703 and 1704, for instance, he led ten prelates vigorously into opposition against the occasional conformity bills of 1703 and 1704, which, largely owing to him, were rejected. Later he spoke fervently in favour of the Anglo-Scottish union. 
As to patronage, however, Tenison was marginalized; only in 1705, with Lord Treasurer Godolphin's support, did he manage to get his protege William Wake appointed to Lincoln. Until then all appointments went to high-churchmen, such as Hooper and William Beveridge. Even during the whig ascendancy after 1708, and despite personal approaches to the queen, his influence was negligible; even whig ministers in their temporary supremacy could not deliver the appointments that Tenison wanted, with the one exception of Charles Trimnell to Norwich (1709). Indeed in 1708 Anne appointed two tories, Sir William Dawes and Offspring Blackall, secretly in her closet, without either prelates or whig ministers knowing. Tenison broke with tradition the following February by absenting himself from their consecration at Lambeth, supposedly on grounds of ill health. 
Throughout both reigns Tenison was a passionate supporter of the new regime and a continuing protestant succession. He attended both Mary and William at their deaths, and crowned Anne. His sermon at Mary's funeral provoked the bitter criticism of the non-juror Thomas Ken for failing to persuade her to confess her shortcomings in supplanting her father. Tenison maintained a dignified silence. When Anne's only surviving child died in 1700 Tenison strongly supported the passage of the 'Act of Settlement' (1701), thus ensuring the Hanoverian succession. From then onwards, as perhaps its leading protagonist, he frequently corresponded with Electress Sophia of Hanover, even sending her a chaplain and Anglican prayer books. His support for a protestant succession was but part of his passionate vendetta against Catholicism. Under William III he had already been involved in government surveillance of suspicious messages from abroad, and, unusually for a bishop, he had voted for the attainder of Sir John Fenwick in 1696. In 1706, using royal authority, he requested bishops to list all advowsons and schools in Catholic hands. Tenison maintained his vigorous anti-papist pursuit into his last years. 
Meanwhile, running battles in convocation continued. Autocratic again and now sick and impatient, when a new convocation met in 1708 he instantly prorogued it without even allowing prayers. In the tory years that followed (1710-14) the tables turned. The firebrand Atterbury won election as prolocutor in 1711, and secured the exclusion of the archbishop from automatic presidency of convocation. For Tenison, already marginalized, this was another calculated slight. Perhaps he lacked sufficient leadership, imagination, and even sense of humour to make the lower house amenable, but with convocation as a focus of the reign's running political and ecclesiastical battle, the gulf was unbridgeable. 
During this tory spell the phalanx of whig prelates maintained a defiant front against the ministry, benevolently but firmly disciplined by Tenison, though himself too sick to attend. All new episcopal appointments went to the tories, but Tenison need not have worried over the succession. The extremism of the 'Occasional Conformity Act' (1711) and 'Schism Act' (1714), placing further restrictions on nonconformists, mostly whig in their politics, ensured that most new prelates joined the Hanover tories, thus ensuring with the whigs the Hanoverian succession. 
Remembering Cromwellian dissensions Tenison, as archbishop, was eager to keep theological peace while religious and political passions raged so fiercely. He dealt autocratically with any hint of heterodoxy; private thinking must not become public. Socinianism had recently revived in the writings of Stephen Nye and Thomas Firmin. In 1695 he drew up 'Directions... for the preserving unity in the church and the purity of the Christian faith concerning the Holy Trinity', which he persuaded the king to issue under royal seal; judges again were to assist. Later still in 1711 he noted that a new Dutch translation of the 'Book of Common Prayer' had been printed by a Dutch Socinian and lacked a trinitarian ascription. He ordered its total suppression and a new edition to be printed. 
With William Whiston, the eccentric Lucasian professor of mathematics at Cambridge, Tenison was equally autocratic. Whiston was banished from the university in 1710 and deprived of his chair for his anti-trinitarian essay 'De trinitate' in his 'Sermons and Essays' (1709), the book being condemned by convocation. He appealed to Tenison, who promptly laid it before convocation, this time formally, which infuriated Whiston, honest and well intentioned as he was. Whiston again appealed to Tenison after being refused communion in London; the archbishop again dealt with this curtly and formally without quiet sympathy, which might have yielded better results. In 1710, however, in a dispute over the possible rebaptism of dissenters, Tenison refused to condemn lay conduct of the rite. Though in this he followed traditional church teaching, his attitude incurred the hostility of high-church bishops and clergy of the lower house. 
Tenison had little time for the nonjurors, who refused to swear allegiance to William and Mary. He failed to understand them. A youthful Stuart supporter in Cromwellian times, he, however, had no difficulty at all in owing allegiance to William and Mary rather than James II. Later experience had made him firmly whig. For him having a protestant sovereign was the church's only security. His lengthy correspondence with the nonjuror Robert Nelson over a possible rapprochement came to nothing. While Jacobitism was still a potent force, he was too convinced a whig and too cautious a prelate to risk negotiations with so small a group. 
Tenison was the first archbishop to take sustained personal interest in the church's mission overseas, and positively encouraged Thomas Bray in founding the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (1701). Once called 'the prime instrument for energetic Imperial Anglicanism' (Schlenther, 131), the society initially aimed to win American colonists of dissenting stock back to the church, and only then to convert native Americans. Tenison himself presided over its first meeting at Lambeth Palace and, annually re-elected as president, he chaired many of its later meetings at St Martin-in-the-Fields. He was often directly involved in its activities. When four Iroquois native American sachems (princes) went to London in April 1710, he showed particular interest, presiding over a special committee concerning them. Two years later he wrote warmly to them addressing them as 'My Lords', and provided money out of his own purse for the mission that followed (Tenison to sachems, 29 May 1712, BL, Stowe MS 119, fol. 73). 
Though it was the bishop of London who officially licensed missionaries Tenison, even as late as 1710, insisted on vetting their credentials himself and meeting them before departure. He encouraged missionaries to send him reports and messages from as far afield as America, St Helena, and Tenerife. Always an educational enthusiast he was elected vice-chancellor of William and Mary College, Virginia, and later bequeathed books to a proposed college in Barbados. 
Tenison was much concerned with the lack of episcopal oversight in the American colonies. Earlier attempts to supply bishops by William Laud and at the Restoration had failed. In 1705 Tenison brought the matter to the queen's attention. Possible candidates were named, a bishop's house bought in New Jersey, and a draft bill (1712) presented to parliament, but progress was too slow. Anne's death brought the scheme to a halt, and no more was done for decades. Tenison, however, bequeathed $1000 for two protestant bishoprics. Certainly his work for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel was substantial; a contemporary spoke of his practical wisdom as president, putting 'a stop to many indirect motions and steps made to put us out of the way' (Kennett, 123). 
Nor was Tenison's overseas concern confined to Anglicans. In March 1698 he welcomed Tsar Peter of Russia with his priests to hold discussions and to witness an ordination; in 1701 he entertained a Greek patriarch at Lambeth. King Frederick I of Prussia's request for advice about introducing the Anglican liturgy and episcopacy into his kingdom, however, met with a lukewarm response. 
The Irish church interested Tenison. In November 1690 he served on William III's commission to eradicate its considerable abuses, and in 1693 he was pressed to accept the archbishopric of Dublin, which he refused. Later the Irish episcopate asked him, once installed at Lambeth, to keep informal oversight over their church, which he did, especially during William's reign. Though Tenison left no obvious impression on the Irish church, his close contact with it was beneficial. He was instrumental in having conscientious men appointed to bishoprics, and his frequent contact by letter with most Irish prelates, especially Narcissus Marsh, archbishop of Dublin, did much to raise morale at a difficult time. Simultaneously he kept English government officials in Ireland sympathetic to the church's needs, while his influence at Whitehall helped curb the illegal activities of Irish presbyterians, then increasing in strength with the influx of French Huguenots and Scottish immigrants. 
Scottish episcopalians after the revolution of 1688 felt beleaguered by, and indeed suffered from, the presbyterian nature of the religious settlement in that country. Tenison took his duty seriously and stoutly supported them by presenting William III with a detailed memorandum of grievances and by writing to Scottish ministers about their poverty. He also took an active part in the commission negotiating for Anglo-Scottish union (1702-5). He regularly attended its meetings, gladly approved the outcome, and led crucial episcopal support for the bill in the Lords. He fended off tory taunts that he, as archbishop, was voting for presbyterian government of the Scottish church. He viewed the matter pragmatically: to him the Church of Scotland was 'as true a protestant church as the Church of England, though he could not say it was so perfect' (McCormick, 759-60). Nevertheless, as part of the Union package in February 1707 Tenison introduced a bill for the security of the Church of England to safeguard its doctrine and liturgy, as a parallel to the 'Kirk Act' for Scotland. Largely through his efforts -- though he was too ill to attend the debates -- the United Kingdom parliament went further in 1712, passing a 'Toleration Act' for Scotland, thus ensuring the Scottish episcopalian church a definite legal basis. 
In later years Tenison's friends affectionately dubbed him Old Totius, a nickname derived from his official title Totius Angliae Primas. Even so, after George I's accession Tenison still felt isolated and impotent, for Charles Townshend needed tory support for his ministry. Tenison disapproved not only of the new royal court, but the church too with its 'motley bench and motley synod' (Sykes, 'William Wake', 2.99). 'All our Church matters are at sixes and sevens', he expostulated (ibid., 100). Though John Wynne and Richard Willes, both whigs, were raised to the episcopate, Tenison took no part in choosing them. In fact, in his last years he had little contact with his fellow bishops, except formally through chaplains. His relations with them were now poor, as they adjusted to the new regime. 
For years Tenison had suffered from gout. As early as 1704 he had missed some meetings of the cabinet council. Early in 1707, rudely cajoled by Lord Somers, the leading whig, over episcopal appointments and in great pain, he visited the queen, only to be rebuffed. In June that year he complained of being 'very lame' and unable to 'go abroad' (Sykes, 'Queen Anne', 441). He last attended a normal session of the Lords in March 1709, and presided over his last consecration of bishops (Philip Bisse and John Robinson) on 19 November 1710; at the five remaining consecrations of his life other bishops presided in his place. Even so, with remarkable resilience he had a firm grip on life. His health was precarious enough in 1711 for tory circles to suggest the apparently imminent succession to Canterbury of the tory John Robinson. At Christmas 1713 the end was again reported near, but, cheating the tories, his tenacious grip on life lasted long enough for him to see the Hanoverians safely installed. Meanwhile his mind was still sharp to the end. Even as late as 1711 to 1714 he was often writing to William Wake over pastoral minutiae in the diocese of Lincoln. He rallied to take centre stage among the fourteen men appointed as regency commissioners in the Lords on 5 August 1714 when George was declared king. Sick though he was he actually crowned the new monarch on 20 October, and ironically it was his antagonist, Atterbury, who bore the crown from the altar for him. In 1715 with other prelates he issued a condemnation of the Jacobite rising. Eventually Old Totius died at Lambeth Palace on 14 December 1715 and was buried simply, as he wished, in the chancel of Lambeth parish church in the following week. Wake was rapidly appointed his successor two days later. Tenison's wife, Anne, had died a year earlier. They had no surviving children. 
Tenison was vilified in his lifetime, by James II as 'that dull man' with 'languid oration' (Carpenter, 405) and by Jonathan Swift as 'the dullest good for nothing man I ever knew' (Forster, 1.180n.). Yet his friend Evelyn wrote that he had not met 'a man of a more universal and generous spirit, with so much modesty, prudence and piety' (Evelyn, 5.66). His underlying qualities were already apparent before becoming primate. Meticulous both academically and administratively he was a devoted, courageous, and conscientious pastor in Cambridge, Holywell, and St Martin's. An effective preacher who drew crowds of listeners and a potent and marked controversialist against Catholics in the 1680s, he was an enthusiast for comprehension in 1689. A bibliophile, he opened libraries and founded schools, three of which, in Kennington, Croydon, and Lambeth, still bear his name. He was a dynamic bishop of Lincoln. 
Once Tenison became primate these underlying qualities were still apparent, though they were soon to be obscured. Even in his last years he still concerned himself with the details of pastoral care in his own see and in the wider church. He worked to improve the quality of the clergy and the moral standards of the nation. He supported episcopalians in Scotland and Ireland, and cultivated a deep interest in the church's mission overseas, both as first president of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and in promoting the need for bishops in the American colonies. Theologically he would brook no public debate of apparently wayward theological ideas, and remained hostile towards Catholicism. 
Though at first, while he tried to keep tempers cool, the future promised well, Tenison quickly fell victim to the hideous religious and political passions that soon flared up. Thereafter, weakened by illness, often in acute pain, and drained of energy by the political and religious kaleidoscope of Anne's reign, he cut a beleaguered, lonely, almost dreary, figure in the confusing, battering world around him. Marginalized by the queen and court, even harassed by whigs for supposed inactivity in promoting their men and cause, he was later ignored by George I's administration. The vigorous activist of the 1680s had become the enfeebled, almost solitary figure of the 1700s. Nevertheless, despite his sickness he remained active in mind, and maintained a vigorous correspondence in pursuit of his objectives. It was as late as 2 December 1715, a few days before his death, that he made the important codicil to his will bequeathing funds for American bishoprics. A generous man with a reportedly strong Fenland country accent, he made numerous legacies at his death. Devoted to the 1688 revolution and the Hanoverian succession, he experienced his participation in George I's coronation as indeed a crowning moment. Old Totius may have been to some 'a dull and prosaic man'; he was also 'by any account... a great primate' (Bennett, 'Tory Crisis', 20), even if his true greatness was partly obscured. 


@@@@@


doc= 27131


Tennant, Charles (1768-1838), chemical manufacturer, born on 3 May 1768 at Laigh Corton Farm, near Ayr, Ayrshire, was the sixth of thirteen children of John ('Auld Glen') Tennant (1726-1810), a farmer, and his second wife, Margaret McClure (1738-1784). The Tennants moved to Ochiltree, and after his education at home and Ochiltree parish school, Charles was apprenticed to a hand-loom weaver at Kilbarchan. After he had studied bleaching methods at Wellmeadow, he started his own bleachfield at Darnley about 1788 with a friend from Paisley. Bleaching then consisted of boiling or 'bucking' the cloth in weak alkali and finally 'crofting' or exposing it in the open air for some days. This second process was gradually replaced by using chlorine dissolved in water; later dilute potash ley was used in place of the water, the resulting liquid being known as 'eau de Javelle'. 
On 17 October 1795 Tennant married Margaret Wilson (1765-1843) at Paisley Abbey; there were nine children of this marriage. In 1798 he took out a patent to make strong bleaching solution cheaply by passing chlorine into a well-agitated mixture of lime and water. Certain Lancashire bleachers infringed his patent and Tennant took legal proceedings against them. The proceedings revealed, however, that this method had been in use for some years before the patent had been granted and it was consequently declared void. In 1799 Tennant took out another patent to manufacture bleaching powder by passing chlorine over slaked lime, a process probably largely developed by his partner, Charles Macintosh. He then moved to St Rollox, near Glasgow, where with his partners he established a factory to produce the powder commercially. Soda ash and other alkali products were also made, and St Rollox eventually grew into one of Europe's largest chemical works. 
Outside business, Tennant was politically active and a strong supporter of free trade and the 'Reform Bill'. He managed to improve Glasgow's water supply and also encouraged railway development, becoming chief promoter of the Garnkirk and Glasgow Railway, which opened in 1831. Charles Tennant was a handsome man with a determined mouth and chin, deep-set eyes, and bushy eyebrows. He was hard-working, shrewd, kind, and quiet. Modestly he refused to be considered for a knighthood just a few months before his death from erysipelas at his home, 195 West George Street, Glasgow, on 1 October 1838. He was buried at Glasgow necropolis on 8 October. His estate was valued at more than $94,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 27132


Tennant, Sir James (1789-1854), army officer in the East India Company, second son of William Tennant, merchant, of Ayr, and his wife, Wilhelmina Ramsay, daughter of Dr William Dalrymple, was born at Ayr on 21 April 1789. He was educated at the Royal Military College, Marlow, and at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich (1804-5), and sailed as cadet of the East India Company on 31 August 1805 in the East India fleet which accompanied the expedition of Sir David Baird and Sir Home Popham to the Cape of Good Hope. The company cadets and recruits, under Lieutenant-Colonel Wellesley, Bengal establishment, took part in the capture of Cape Town. Tennant arrived in India on 21 August 1806, and was commissioned lieutenant, Bengal artillery, antedated to 29 March for his Cape service. 
In 1810 Tennant commanded a detachment of artillery on service on the 'vizier's dominions'. On 1 January 1812 he was appointed acting adjutant and quartermaster to Major G. Fuller's detachment of artillery, and on 15 January marched from Bauda with the force under Colonel Gabriel Martindell to attack Kalinjar, a formidable fort on a large isolated hill 900 feet above the surrounding level. Kalinjar was reached on 19 January; by 28 January the batteries opened, and on 2 February, the breaches being practicable, an unsuccessful attempt was made to storm. On 3 February the fort surrendered. Tennant was employed throughout this and the following year in various minor operations in the districts bordering on Bundelkhand. 
On 27 December 1814, with two 18-pounders and four mountain guns of the 3rd division, Tennant joined Sir David Ochterlony at Nahr, on the north-north-east side of the Ramgarh Ridge, to take part in the operations against Nepal. In March 1815 Tennant ascended the Ramgarh Ridge, with the force under Lieutenant-Colonel Cooper, and, bringing up his 18-pounders with great labour, opened fire on Ramgarh, which soon surrendered, Jorjori capitulating at the same time. Taragarh (11 March) and Chamha (16 March) were reached and taken. All the posts on this ridge having been successively reduced, the detachment took up the position assigned to it before Malaun on 1 April. Malaun was captured by assault on 15 April before the 18-pounders, which were dragged by hand over the hills at the rate of 1 or 2 miles a day, had arrived; these guns were eventually left in the fort. 
Tennant was promoted second captain in the regiment and captain in the army on 1 October 1816, and first captain in the Bengal artillery on 1 September 1818. His next active service was in the Pindari and Anglo-Maratha wars of 1817-19. He joined the centre division under Major-General T. Brown of the marquess of Hastings's grand army at Sikandra in the Cawnpore district, but as it was moving forward to Mahewas on the River Sind in November 1817, it was attacked by cholera. He took part in some of the operations, as captain and brigade major of the 2nd division of artillery, and received a share of the Deccan prize-money for general captures. He was brigade major of artillery in the field in 1819 and 1820. He was selected to command the artillery at Agra on 23 December 1823, and on 31 December was nominated first assistant secretary to the military board. 
On 28 May 1824 Tennant was appointed assistant adjutant-general of artillery. In November 1825 he accompanied the commandant of artillery, Brigadier-General Alexander Macleod, to Agra; there, and at Mathura, the commander-in-chief, Lord Combermere, assembled his army for the siege of Bharatpur. The siege began in the middle of December; on 24 December the batteries opened fire, breaches were found practicable on 18 January 1826, and this formidable place was carried by assault. Tennant, who, as assistant adjutant-general of artillery, had managed the artillery, was thanked by the commandant in regimental orders (21 January 1826). Tennant's 'methodical habits and mathematical talent rendered labour easy to him which would have been difficult to others'. In February he accompanied Combermere to Cawnpore and to the presidency. Tennant married on 7 April 1828 Elizabeth Louisa (1803-1882), eldest daughter of Charles Pattenson, Bengal civil service. Lieutenant-General James Francis Tennant CIE FRS (1829-1915), Royal Engineers, was their son. 
Tennant was promoted major on 3 March 1831. He was appointed agent for the manufacture of gunpowder at Ishapur on 28 April 1835 (confirmed on 28 July) and he ceased to be assistant adjutant-general of artillery. On 11 April 1836 he became a member of the special committee of artillery officers. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 18 January 1837, and in consequence vacated the agency for gunpowder. 
For his services on the committee of artillery officers Tennant received the thanks of the government of India. On 21 March 1837 he was posted to command the 4th battalion of artillery. On 28 November 1842 he was given the command of the Cawnpore division of artillery. On 17 November 1843 he was appointed to command, with the rank of brigadier-general, the foot artillery attached to the army of exercise assembled at Agra under Sir Hugh (afterwards Lord) Gough. This force left Agra for the Gwalior campaign on 16 December, crossing the River Chambal on 21 December. In spite of great exertions, Tennant and the heavy ordnance got considerably behind. Gough did not wait for his heavy guns, and the battle of Maharajpur (29 December) was rather riskily fought without them (see Gough's dispatch, 'LondG', 8 March 1844). 
On 10 February 1844 Tennant was again appointed commandant of the artillery at Cawnpore. On 3 July 1845 he was promoted colonel in the army, and was sent report on field magazines of the upper provinces. He, however, resigned this appointment, to the regret of the government, and resumed his command at Cawnpore. In 1846-7 Tennant was associated with Colonel George Brooke, Bengal artillery, on a committee at Simla, on the equipment of mountain batteries. Their experience of the Nepal war, 1814-16, led to valuable minutes. On 2 September 1848 Tennant was appointed brigadier-general to command the Marwar field force. He was then attached to the army of the Punjab to command the artillery with the rank of brigadier-general. He commanded it at the battle of Chilianwala (13 January 1849) and was mentioned in dispatches. He also commanded it at the battle of Gujrat (21 February 1849), mentioned in dispatches. He received the thanks of parliament, of the government of India, and of the court of directors of the East India Company. He was made a CB on 5 June 1849. 
On 13 March 1849 Tennant resumed his appointment at Cawnpore, and on 19 December was transferred to Lahore as brigadier-general commanding. On 30 January 1852 he was given command of the cis-Jhelum division of the army. He was made a KCB on 8 October 1852. He died at Mian Mir, Lahore, on 6 March 1854. His wife survived him. Tennant's attainments were of a very high order, and in Stubbs's view 'he was better acquainted with the details of his profession than perhaps any officer in the regiment'. 


@@@@@


doc= 27133


Tennant, James (1808-1881), mineralogist and mineral and shell dealer, was born on 8 February 1808 at Upton, near Southwell, Nottinghamshire, the third child of John Tennant, excise officer, and his wife, Eleanor ('nee' Kitchen). By 1819 his parents had moved to Mansfield, and he was educated at schools both there and at Derby. In October 1824 he was apprenticed as shop assistant to John Mawe, mineral dealer, of 149 Strand, London. Mawe had been a great traveller and his shop was a resort for men of science from all over the world. Here Tennant gained his acquaintance with minerals. Mawe also sold turned ornamental marbles worked in Derbyshire, business which Tennant continued after Mawe's death. 
Tennant attended lectures at his mechanics' institute and, later, those given by Michael Faraday at the Royal Institution. Faraday was a Mawe customer; he bought minerals there for use in his experiments. When Mawe died in 1829 his widow, Sarah, maintained the business, with Tennant now as resident manager. In 1838 Tennant was elected a fellow of the Geological Society, and was appointed to assist John Phillips (1800-1874) as lecturer in geological mineralogy at King's College, London, on Faraday's recommendation. 'His class here [became] the largest in the kingdom' ('ILN', 12 March 1881). 
Sarah Mawe had been created mineralogist to Queen Victoria on her accession. In February 1840 Tennant purchased the Mawe business and, on 15 October 1840, he inherited this title. The business lay only three doors from Somerset House, home of the Geological Society of London from 1828 to 1860, which helped to extend his circle of customers. By 1844 Tennant's shop was already 'too well known to require comment' (G. A. Mantell, 'Medals of Creation', 2.987). 
From 1850 to 1867 Tennant was also lecturer on mineralogy and geology to the gentlemen cadets in the practical class of the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. In 1852-3 he was paid $2 a day to arrange and catalogue minerals in the British Museum. In 1853 he was made professor of geology at King's, but he resigned in 1869 on becoming keeper of the extensive collection of minerals of Angela, Baroness Burdett-Coutts (1814-1906). However, he retained his mineralogy lectureship at King's until his death. His pupil John Ruskin later said that Tennant's classes were 'the best practical teaching I know of' ('Works', 26.451). In 1848 Tennant had purchased the 6000 specimens of the Stowe collection of minerals and fossils, made by the duke of Buckingham, for $68 5's'. He disposed of many of the best specimens before trying to sell the remainder. These were bought by Ruskin in 1867 for $3000. But Ruskin considered he had been swindled and sued Tennant. After he had paid legal fees of $1000, Ruskin received $1000 back and further specimens to the value of $500 in an out-of-court settlement. 
Tennant's practical knowledge of minerals was extensive. By 1849 he possessed the finest collection of diamonds as crystals in England. He exhibited minerals and fossils for educational purposes at the Great Exhibition of 1851. In 1852 he encouraged emigrants to new countries to look for minerals other than gold, especially diamonds, and he superintended the recutting of the Koh-i-noor diamond and other crown jewels. When there was debate over the first diamonds found in South Africa in 1867, he correctly maintained their genuineness. By 1860 he was selling models of Waterhouse Hawkins's reconstructions of extinct animals, including dinosaurs. Collections to illustrate Lyell's 'Elements of Geology' were offered by 1866. 
Tennant was an early member of the Geologists' Association, helping with its first field excursions in 1860. He was elected its third president (1862-4). He was an enthusiast for technical education, which he supported by giving liberally from his own resources. In 1869 he was elected freeman of the Turners' Company and, in May 1873, master. He persuaded the company to offer annual prizes for excellence in turning. Tennant's private collection of fossils was offered for sale in 1875. He died, unmarried, on 23 February 1881 at his home at 149 Strand, London. He was buried at Camberwell old cemetery, London, on 28 February. After his death an extensive selection from his private collection was purchased by the British Museum. His vast stocks were sold off in a series of auctions which lasted from 1881 to 1972. He was author of a number of educational works and also active as publisher, bookseller, and as a popular lecturer encouraging his favourite science. 


@@@@@


doc= 27134


Tennant, Smithson (1761-1815), chemist, was born on 30 November 1761 at Selby, Yorkshire and baptized there in the abbey church on 3 December. He was the only child of the Revd Calvert Tennant, absentee rector of Great Warley in Essex and fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, and his wife, Mary, daughter of William Daunt, a Selby surgeon-apothecary. Tennant's father died in 1772 and his mother in 1781, leaving him with sufficient inheritance to live his life as he wished. After passing through grammar schools at Scorton, Tadcaster, and Beverley, Tennant attended the chemistry lectures of Joseph Black at the University of Edinburgh in 1781. In October 1782 he entered Christ's College, Cambridge, to study chemistry and botany, first as pensioner and later as fellow-commoner. 
In the summer of 1784 Tennant travelled to Denmark and Sweden, where he met the chemist Karl Scheele, and two years later he toured France and the Low Countries. On 13 January 1785, with the support of his Cambridge colleagues, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and in 1786 he transferred with his friend Busick Harwood to Emmanuel College. During this period Tennant was befriended by William Hyde Wollaston, a medical student at Gonville and Caius College, who was to become his business associate in 1800. 
Shortly after receiving his MB degree in 1788, Tennant took up residence at 4 Garden Court, Temple, in London and indulged his interests in natural philosophy. His first scientific paper, on the decomposition of fixed air, which confirmed by analysis the presence of carbon in the gas, was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' for 1791. In 1792-3 he toured the continent again, and on his return to England attended the London hospitals prior to taking his Cambridge MD degree in 1796. With no interest in pursuing a medical practice, Tennant settled instead into a career as a gentleman chemist. He published an important paper in 1797 which demonstrated that diamond has the same chemical composition as charcoal. About this time he purchased 500 acres of newly enclosed land near Shipham in Somerset, where he carried out experiments in agricultural chemistry during the few months each year he resided there. 
In 1800 Tennant entered into a business partnership with Wollaston, who had then recently abandoned his London medical practice to establish a chemical business. The two men agreed to share expenses and profits from the purification of alluvial platinum ore and the manufacture of various organic substances important to the textile industry. Owing principally to Wollaston's discovery of a method for the production of malleable platinum, and profitable sales of the pure metal, the business flourished and Tennant's accumulated profit at the time of his death was about $3000. From the residues of the platinum purification process, Tennant isolated and characterized the two new metals osmium and iridium. Publication of these discoveries, which established Tennant's fame as a chemist, earned for him the Royal Society's Copley medal for 1804. Thereafter Tennant's contribution to the business became almost negligible as he became more interested in political economy and discourse with the Whig political figures connected with John Whishaw and Holland House. 
In 1812 Tennant gave a short series of informal lectures on mineralogy to his friends in his home; in 1813 he was elected professor of chemistry at Cambridge, and the following year he delivered a course of lectures. In September 1814 he set out on a tour of the southern provinces of France. He was killed in an accident on 22 February 1815 near Boulogne, when a bridge over which he was riding collapsed; he was buried a few days later in the public cemetery at Boulogne. 
Tennant never married, and left an estate valued at $5000. He published a total of nine scientific papers (seven of which are listed in the Royal Society's 'Catalogue of Scientific Papers'), mostly on topics in chemical analysis, and was an early member (1799) of London's Askesian Society. His biographer described him as 'tall and slender, with a thin face and light complexion, of striking and agreeable appearance, with expressive features and strong marks of intelligence' (Whishaw, 91). 


@@@@@


doc= 27135


Tennant, William (1784-1848), scholar of oriental languages and poet, son of Alexander Tennant, merchant and farmer, and Anna Watson, was born in Anstruther, Fife, on 16 May 1784. He lost the use of both feet in childhood, and used crutches throughout his life. After receiving his elementary education at the burgh school in Anstruther, where he was a contemporary of Thomas Chalmers (1780-1847), he studied at St Andrews University for two years (1799-1801), but he was forced to leave early for financial reasons. On returning to his parental home in 1801 Tennant steadily pursued his literary studies. For a time he acted as clerk to his brother Alexander, a corn factor, first in Glasgow and then at Anstruther. Owing to a crisis in business his brother disappeared, and Tennant suffered a short period of imprisonment for his brother's debts at the instance of the creditors. He began the study of Hebrew about this time, while continuing to increase his knowledge of classical languages. 
While at St Andrews, Tennant made some respectable verse translations and a Scottish ballad, 'The Anster Concert' (1811): although a piece of light verse, based on the medieval poem 'Christ's kirk on the green', it demonstrates his interest in native verse traditions. With 'Anster Fair', published anonymously in 1812 by William Cockburn in Anstruther, Tennant instantly achieved greatness. Based on the Fife folk-song 'Maggie Lauder', it combines local folk tradition with Italian elements drawn principally from Tasso's 'Orlando Furioso', and is composed in the style of a mock epic. Following publication Tennant received the praise of Alexander Fraser Tytler, Lord Woodhouselee, and a revised edition, published at Tennant's own expense, was issued in 1814 and won from Lord Jeffrey a warm reception in the 'Edinburgh Review'; he described it there both as 'eminently original' and 'bold and vigorous' and referred to Tennant as a 'kind of prodigy' (Jeffrey). Six editions of the poem appeared in the author's lifetime. 
Tennant's father's house had long been a centre of literary activity -- a focal point for gatherings of visitors and townsfolk with literary interests and a desire for self-improvement -- and Tennant's own literary aspirations were encouraged by this atmosphere. In 1813 he formed, along with Captain Charles Gray, Matthew Conolly (his biographer), and others, the Anstruther Musomanik Society, the members of which, according to their code of admission, assembled to enjoy 'the coruscations of their own festive minds' (Conolly, 'Memoir', 213). The main purpose of the society was to recite verse, much of which was composed expressly for the meetings. Honorary members of proved poetic worth, including James Hogg, were admitted, Sir Walter Scott assuring the members, on receipt of his diploma in 1815, of the pleasure the award gave him, and of his best wishes for their healthy indulgence in 'weel-timed daffing' (ibid.). 
In 1813 Tennant was appointed parish schoolmaster of Dunino, 5 miles from St Andrews. The close proximity of the university and its library gave him the opportunity not only to develop his Hebrew scholarship, but also to gain a knowledge of Arabic, Syriac, and Persian, and here he also became acquainted with scholars such as Hugh Cleghorn. In 1816, through the influence of Burns's friend George Thomson and others, Tennant became schoolmaster at Lasswade, Midlothian. In 1819, the year in which his edition of Allan Ramsay's poems was published, he was elected teacher of classical and oriental languages at the Dollar Academy, Clackmannanshire, and held the post with distinction until 1834, when Jeffrey, then lord advocate for Scotland, appointed him professor of Hebrew and oriental languages in St Mary's College, St Andrews, where Tennant established a reputation for being a talented and well-liked lecturer. 
None of Tennant's later literary work, however, lived up to the initial promise of 'Anster Fair'. In 1822 he published 'The Thane of Fife', a serious attempt at epic poetry concerning the Danish invasion of the ninth century. The first part of the poem was so poorly received that he never completed it. In 1823 appeared 'Cardinal Beaton', a tragedy in five acts, and in 1825 'John Baliol', a historical drama. Tennant returned to the formula of the mock epic in 1827, with his 'Papistry Storm'd, or, The Dingin Doon o' the Cathedral'. Written entirely in Scots, it concerned the destruction of St Andrews Cathedral at the Reformation, and is another example of his local patriotism, which combined comic elements with an indebtedness to the verse style of Sir David Lindsay. He published a number of works which reflected his interest in oriental languages, including five 'Hebrew Idylls', contributed to the 'Scottish Christian Herald' in 1836-7, and a 'Syriac and Chaldee Grammar', which became a popular textbook. In 1830 Tennant became a contributor to the 'Edinburgh Literary Journal', publishing prose translations from Greek and German, and discussing with Hogg the value of issuing a new metrical version of the 'Psalms', in a correspondence which was published in 1830. 
William Tennant retired, owing to ill health, in 1848, but continued to write and to research. He died, unmarried, at Devon Grove, Clackmannanshire, on 14 October 1848, and was buried at Anstruther, where an obelisk monument with a Latin inscription was raised to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 27136


Tennent, Sir James Emerson, first baronet (1804-1869), traveller and politician, third son of William Emerson (died 1821), merchant, of Belfast, and Sarah, youngest daughter of William Arbuthnot, of Rockville, co. Down, was born at Belfast on 7 April 1804 and was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, which awarded him an honorary degree of LLD in 1861. In 1824 he travelled abroad. An enthusiast in the cause of Greek freedom, he visited Greece and met Lord Byron. His impressions of the country appeared in 1826 in 'A Picture of Greece in 1825', 'Letters from the Aegean' (2 vols., 1829), and 'The History of Modern Greece' (2 vols., 1830). These works received mixed notices. 
On 28 January 1831 Emerson (as he was then known) was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn, where he had become a student on the advice of Jeremy Bentham, but it is doubtful if he ever practised his profession. On 24 June 1831 he married Laetitia, only daughter and heir of William Tennent, a wealthy banker at Belfast, of Tempo Manor, co. Fermanagh. In 1832 when his father-in-law died he assumed his name and arms, in addition to his own, by royal licence, and succeeded to estates in counties Sligo and Fermanagh. 
Tennent was elected member of parliament for Belfast on 21 December 1832. He supported Lord Grey's administration until 1834 when he joined Lord Stanley's and Sir James Graham's followers, and with them afterwards supported Peel. He favoured free trade and thought that some of the burdens of agriculture should be relieved and that tenants should be legally entitled to security of tenure if they made improvements. 
At the election in 1837 Tennent was defeated at Belfast, but on petition was seated in 1838. In 1841 he was re-elected, but was unseated on petition. In 1842 he regained his seat, and that year performed the most important service of his parliamentary career as the chief promoter of the 'Copyright of Designs Bill', which extended protection against copying to those who had devised designs, such as those for wallpapers and textiles, to complement that accorded to inventors under the patent legislation. This was of very considerable importance to manufacturers and helped to ensure the success of the Great Exhibition of 1851, since manufacturers could safely put their products on display. He was secretary to the India board in 1841-3, and remained a member of the House of Commons until July 1845, when he was knighted. 
From 1845 to 1850 Tennent was civil secretary to the colonial government of Ceylon. On 31 December 1850 he was gazetted governor of St Helena, but he never took up the appointment. After his return home he again sat in parliament as member for Lisburn from 10 January to December 1852. In 1852 he was permanent secretary to the poor-law board and that year was made secretary to the Board of Trade. On his retirement on 2 February 1867 he was created a baronet. 
Tennent described his stay in Ceylon in 'Ceylon: an Account of the Island' (2 vols., 1859), a work which went through five editions in eight months. It contained a vast amount of information arranged with clarity and precision, and received generally good reviews. In 1861 he republished part of it as 'Sketches of the Natural History of Ceylon'. He published two other works on the country, in 1860 and, in 1867, 'The Wild Elephant and the Method of Capturing and Taming it in Ceylon'. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 5 June 1862. He died suddenly at his home, 66 Warwick Square, Belgrave Road, London, on 6 March 1869, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 12 March. His widow died on 21 April 1883; they had two daughters, Ethel Sarah and Edith Laetitia Anna, and a son, Sir William Emerson Tennent, second baronet, who was born on 14 May 1835. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple on 26 January 1859, became a clerk in the Board of Trade in 1855, accompanied Sir William Hutt to Vienna in 1865 to negotiate a treaty of commerce, and was secretary to Sir Stephen Cave in the mixed commission to Paris (1866-7) for revising the fishery convention. He died at Tempo Manor, co. Fermanagh, on 16 November 1876 and the baronetcy became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 27137


Tennyson, Alfred, first Baron Tennyson (1809-1892), poet, was born on 6 August 1809 at Somersby rectory, Lincolnshire, the fourth child (there were to be eight sons and four daughters in fourteen years) of the Revd Dr George Clayton Tennyson (1778-1831), rector of Somersby, and his wife, Elizabeth ('bap'. 1780, died 1865), daughter of the Revd Stephen Fytche, vicar of Louth, Lincolnshire. 
Tennyson's father, though not strictly disinherited, had been reduced in favour and fortune much below his younger brother, and Tennyson's youth was overshadowed by this family feud between the Tennysons of Somersby and the grandparents, of Bayons Manor (16 miles away), with their favoured son (later Charles Tennyson-D'Eyncourt; 1784-1861). Tennyson's wife, Emily, was to write, in her reminiscences for her two sons, of this 'caprice on the part of your great-grandfather', whereby Dr Tennyson 'was deprived of a station which he would so greatly have adorned and put into the Church for whose duties he felt no call. This preyed upon his nerves and his health and caused much sorrow in his house. Many a time has your father [the poet] gone out in the dark and cast himself on a grave in the little churchyard near wishing to be beneath it.(Lincoln MS; compare H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 1.15)' The black blood of the Tennysons was all too familiar. The oldest surviving brother (George had died in infancy) was Frederick Tennyson (1807-1898); irascible, he was to live, mostly in Italy, in expatriate eccentricity. The next senior was Charles (later, from 1835, as the condition of an uncle's bequest, Charles Turner, often known as Charles Tennyson Turner (1808-1879), an exquisite poet, praised by Coleridge); he was for many years addicted to opium and vulnerable to alcohol (it was long before he arrived at his serenity). A younger brother, Edward, succumbed in 1832 to insanity, which proved incurable throughout his long life (he died in 1890, only two years before his famous brother). Arthur for a while in the 1840s collapsed into alcoholism. Then there was the brother who rose from the hearthrug and introduced himself, 'I am Septimus, the most morbid of the Tennysons' (C. Tennyson, 'Alfred Tennyson', 199). Of him, Tennyson wrote to his uncle Charles in 1834: 'At present his symptoms are not unlike those with which poor Edward's unhappy derangement began -- he is subject to fits of the most gloomy despondency accompanied with tears -- or rather, he spends whole days in this manner, complaining that he is neglected by all his relations, and blindly resigning himself to every morbid influence. (Received 15 Jan 1834, 'Letters', 1.106)' Morbid influence, not blindly resigned to but contemplated with creative courage, informs much of Tennyson's deepest work, unhappiness current or unforgettable, misery unutterable that yet found itself uttered. 'In my youth I knew much greater unhappiness than I have known in later life. When I was about twenty, I used to feel moods of misery unutterable! I remember once in London the realization coming over me, of the 'whole' of its inhabitants lying horizontal a hundred years hence. The smallness and emptiness of life sometimes overwhelmed me.(Lincoln MS, 'Talks and Walks'; H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 1.40)' 

In 1815 Tennyson left the village school and -- staying with his grandmother in Louth -- became a pupil at Louth grammar school, where his elder brothers Frederick and Charles had started in 1814. Tennyson: 'How I did hate that school! The only good I ever got from it was the memory of the words, 'sonus desilientis aquae', and of an old wall covered with wild weeds opposite the school windows' (H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 1.7). In 1820 he left Louth, to be educated at home by his learned, violent, and often drunken father -- who believed in him. 'My father who was a sort of Poet himself thought so highly of my first essay that he prophesied I should be the greatest Poet of the Time' (Trinity Notebook, 34). 
Tennyson was to recall ruefully his youthful ambitions and poetical models. It was the mouthability of poetry, the urge to roll it aloud, that drew him. 'The first poetry that moved me was my own at five years old. When I was eight, I remember making a line I thought grander than Campbell, or Byron, or Scott. I rolled it out, it was this: 'With slaughterous sons of thunder rolled the flood' -- great nonsense of course, but I thought it fine. (H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 2.93)' He was much moved by the death of Byron in 1824: 'I was fourteen when I heard of his death. It seemed an awful calamity; I remember I rushed out of doors, sat down by myself, shouted aloud, and wrote on the sandstone: ''Byron' 'is dead!''' (ibid., 69). 'Before I could read, I was in the habit on a stormy day of spreading my arms to the wind, and crying out 'I hear a voice that's speaking in the wind', and the words 'far, far away' had always a strange charm for me.' Tennyson spoke of the three-book epic ('a la Scott') written in his 'very earliest teens'. 'I never felt so inspired -- I used to compose 60 or 70 lines in a breath. I used to shout them about the silent fields, leaping over the hedges in my excitement' (Trinity Notebook, 34; H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 1.11-12). 
Tennyson's prodigious excitement is evidenced in the play he wrote (1823-4) in imitation of Elizabethan comedy, 'The Devil and the Lady', a wondrous pastiche, alive in its ambivalent erotic deploring, its vistas of space, its anatomizing of old age, and its grim humour. Duller, placatingly conventional, there was published in April 1827, by J. and J. Jackson, booksellers of Louth, 'Poems by Two Brothers' (three brothers, since Frederick supplied four poems for this volume by Charles and Alfred); it earned them $20 (more than half in books) and courteous flat notices in the 'Literary Chronicle' (19 May 1827) and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (June). Tennyson's unoriginal contributions were written 'between 15 and 17' (1893 reissue of 1827, quoting Tennyson). Wisely, he did not include any of them in later editions of his works. 
But the Lincolnshire of Tennyson's young days was alive in his late poems, notably those in dialect, 'wonderful studies in English vernacular life' as Richard Holt Hutton called them (Hutton, 380). Tennyson's gruff gnarled humour here found its local habitation and intonation, audible in his own recorded reading of the best of them, 'Northern Farmer: New Style', 'founded', as Tennyson said, on a single sentence: 'When I canters my 'erse along the ramper [highway] I 'ears 'proputty, proputty, proputty'' ('Poems', 2.688). 
In November 1827 Tennyson entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where Charles had just joined Frederick. He was unhappy there at first (and often subsequently -- see the bitter sonnet that he chose not to publish, 'Lines on Cambridge of 1830'): 'The country is so disgustingly level, the revelry of the place so monotonous, the studies of the University so uninteresting, so much matter of fact -- none but dryheaded calculating angular little gentlemen can take much delight' in algebraic formulae (18 April 1828, 'Letters', 1.23). But fortunately he came to know some well-rounded larger gentlemen, foremost among them Arthur Henry Hallam (1811-1833) ['see under 'Hallam, Henry (1777-1859)], whom Tennyson met about April 1829. Hallam had entered Trinity College the previous October. The friendship, deepening into love, of Hallam and Tennyson was to be one of the most important experiences of Hallam's short life and of Tennyson's long one. 
A further flowering at Cambridge: in October 1829 Tennyson was elected a member of the Apostles, an informal debating society to which most of his Cambridge friends belonged (such eminent, though not pre-eminent, Victorians as John Kemble, Richard Chenevix Trench, Richard Monckton Milnes, and James Spedding). Then in June 1829 he won the chancellor's gold medal with his prize poem on the set subject 'Timbuctoo'. Reworking an earlier poem (as he was so often to do with consummate re-creative imagination), this on Armageddon, 'altering the beginning and the end' to bend it on Timbuctoo, 'I was never so surprised as when I got the prize' (Lincoln MS, 'Materials for a Life of A. T.'; H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 2.355). The surprise was the greater in that the winning poem was, unprecedentedly, not in heroic couplets but in blank verse. At the heart of the poem is a mystical trance such as fascinated Tennyson lifelong. Hallam, happily worsted, wrote with characteristic generosity and acumen: 'The splendid imaginative power that pervades it will be seen through all hindrances. I consider Tennyson as promising fair to be the greatest poet of our generation, perhaps of our century' (A. H. Hallam to Gladstone, 14 Sept 1829, 'Letters of Arthur Henry Hallam', 319). 
Then in December 1829 (or, it may be, April 1830), Hallam met Tennyson's sister Emily, with whom he was soon to fall in love. In the summer of 1830 Tennyson visited the Pyrenees with Hallam. (More than thirty years later, in June 1861, Tennyson was to return there with his family and to write 'In the Valley of Cauteretz', in lasting love of Hallam.) Hallam and Tennyson were to visit the Rhine country in the summer of 1832. In the autumn of 1832 the engagement of Hallam to Tennyson's sister was to be reluctantly recognized by Hallam's family. 

'Poems, Chiefly Lyrical' was published by Effingham Wilson in June 1830; some of Tennyson's most enduring notes, elegiacally lyrical, with his riven sensibility ('Supposed Confessions of a Second-Rate Sensitive Mind Not at Unity with Itself'), are especially manifest in the volume's most remarkable achievements, 'Mariana', 'A spirit haunts the year's last hours', and 'The Kraken'. 
Tennyson's father, after marital separation and then a return to protracted illness and weakness, died in March 1831. Tennyson left Cambridge without taking a degree. His choice of life? His uncle Charles wrote on 18 May 1831 to Tennyson's grandfather, the Old Man of the Wolds: 'We discussed what was to be done with the Children. Alfred is at home, but wishes to return to Cambridge to take a degree. I told him it was a useless expense unless he meant to go into the Church. He said he would. I did not think he seemed much to like it. I then suggested Physic or some other Profession. He seemed to think the Church the best and has I think finally made up his mind to it. The Tealby Living was mentioned and understood to be intended for him.' Then, reverting to the matter: 'Alfred seems quite ready to go into the Church although I think his mind is fixed on the idea of deriving his great distinction and greatest means from the exercise of his poetic talents' ('Letters', 1.59-61). 
Poetic talents needed the support of financial talents. Fortunately, from his aunt Russell he received $100 a year (this continued into the 1850s), and when his grandfather died in 1835, there came to Tennyson about $6000. Even though most of this was lost in a bad investment, there was to be the civil-list pension of $200 a year that began in 1845 (he drew it until he died), and his straits were never as dire as he liked to maintain. 
The poetic talents were Arthur Hallam's focus in the 'Englishman's Magazine', in August 1831: 'On Some of the Characteristics of Modern Poetry, and on the Lyrical Poems of Alfred Tennyson'. W. B. Yeats was to praise this essay as 'criticism which is of the best and rarest sort. If one set aside Shelley's essay on poetry and Browning's essay on Shelley, one does not know where to turn in modern English criticism for anything so philosophic -- anything so fundamental and radical -- as the first half' of Hallam's piece ('The Speaker', 22 July 1893; Yeats, 277). Of Tennyson's art, Hallam's essay remains the most compactly telling evocation, prescient too. Hallam limned five characteristics: 'First, his luxuriance of imagination, and at the same time his control over it. Secondly his power of embodying himself in ideal characters, or rather moods of character, with such extreme accuracy of adjustment, that the circumstances of the narration seem to have a natural correspondence with the predominant feeling, and, as it were, to be evolved from it by assimilative force. Thirdly his vivid, picturesque delineation of objects, and the peculiar skill with which he holds all of them 'fused', to borrow a metaphor from science, in a medium of strong emotion. Fourthly, the variety of his lyrical measures, and exquisite modulation of harmonious words and cadences to the swell and fall of the feelings expressed. Fifthly, the elevated habits of thought, implied in these compositions, and imparting a mellow soberness of tone, more impressive, to our minds, than if the author had drawn up a set of opinions in verse, and sought to instruct the understanding rather than to communicate the love of beauty to the heart. (Jump, 42)' Hallam's acute praise was welcome but not to everybody -- Tennyson was already becoming 'the Pet of a Coterie', according to Christopher North (John Wilson) in 'Blackwood's Magazine' in May 1832 (Jump, 50). In February 1832 the notoriously scathing Christopher North had praised Tennyson highly, albeit with caveats, in 'Blackwood's', but then in May he followed this with a wittily severe -- not indiscriminate -- review of the 1830 volume, this to 'save him from his worst enemies, his friends' (Jump, 51). Tennyson, pricked though not bridled by such reviewers, was exacerbatedly thin-skinned and always self-critical, often revising talent into genius -- or expunging: the volume of 1830 included twenty-three poems that he did not subsequently reprint, as well as seven not collected in his two-volume 'Poems' (1842) though reprinted later. The poems of 1830 that he did reprint, he -- unusually -- grouped as 'Juvenilia', justly in some cases, unjustly (protectively) for such a great poem as 'Mariana'. 
Fertile, Tennyson issued in December 1832 'Poems' (published by Edward Moxon, the title-page dated 1833). Among its feats were 'The Lady of Shalott', 'Mariana in the South', 'OEnone', 'The Palace of Art', 'The Lotos-Eaters', and 'A Dream of Fair Women'. There were some failures subsequently acknowledged: seven poems never reprinted, and seven not collected in 'Poems' (1842) though reprinted later. A venomous review by J. W. Croker ('Quarterly Review', April 1833) drew blood but was a spur: the best of the poems were to be made even better, duly revised for republication, ten years later, but the painful rewording process began at once. As his Cambridge friend Edward FitzGerald wrote on 25 October 1833: 'Tennyson has been in town for some time: he has been making fresh poems, which are finer, they say, than any he has done. But I believe he is chiefly meditating on the purging and subliming of what he has already done: and repents that he has published at all yet. It is fine to see how in each succeeding poem the smaller ornaments and fancies drop away, and leave the grand ideas single. ('Letters of Edward FitzGerald', 1.140)' It is heartening that in October 1833 Tennyson could be so actively creative in new and newly improved poems. For it was on 1 October that there was sent to him the news of the sudden death of Arthur Hallam, stricken on 15 September by apoplexy while visiting Vienna. His body was brought back by sea to Clevedon, on the Bristol Channel, 'Among familiar names to rest', 'And in the hearing of the wave' ('In Memoriam', XVIII and XIX). 
The blow, not to Tennyson alone, but to his sister Emily, to both families, and to Hallam's many friends and admirers, was profound, 'a loud and terrible stroke' (reported the Cambridge friend Charles Merivale) 'from the reality of things upon the faery building of our youth' (from H. Alford, 11 Nov 1833, Merivale, 135). The sense of the Tennyson family loss is audible in a letter by Frederick of 18 December 1833: 'We all looked forward to his society and support through life in sorrow and in joy, with the fondest hopes, for never was there a human being better calculated to sympathize with and make allowance for those peculiarities of temperament and those failings to which we are liable. ('Letters', 1.104)' Yet in the first stricken month, Tennyson set to write poems that later became some of the finest sections of 'In Memoriam' (the earliest is dated 6 October 1833, none being published until seventeen years after Hallam's death), as well as soon drafting 'Ulysses', 'Morte d'Arthur', and 'Tithonus' (this last not published until 1860, the other two 1842) -- three great poems prompted by the death of his Arthur, and all finding extraordinarily compelling correlatives, in ancient worlds, for his feelings personal and universal, ancient and modern. 
'The Two Voices' belongs to 1833, and was said by Tennyson's son to have been 'begun under the cloud of this overwhelming sorrow, which, as my father told me, for a while blotted out all joy from his life, and made him long for death' (H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 1.109). But Tennyson had longed for death before Hallam died, and a draft of 'The Two Voices' was in existence three months earlier, in June 1833, when his friend J. M. Kemble wrote to W. B. Donne: 'Next Sir are some superb meditations on Self destruction called 'Thoughts of a Suicide' wherein he argues the point with his soul and is thoroughly floored. These are amazingly fine and deep, and show a mighty stride in intellect since the 'Second-Rate Sensitive Mind'. ('Poems', 1.570)' Suicide appears, often enacted and sometimes discussed, in an extraordinary number of Tennyson's poems over the years, where it is complemented not only by suicidal risks but by martyrs and by the military (as in 'The Charge of the Light Brigade'). Mary Gladstone was to record 'a plan he had of writing a satire called 'A suicide supper'', and that Tennyson 'would commit suicide' if he believed that death were annihilation ('Mary Gladstone', 8 June 1879, 160). 
On 14 February 1834 Tennyson replied to a request from Hallam's father to contribute to a memorial volume: 'I attempted to draw up a memoir of his life and character, but I failed to do him justice. I failed even to please myself. I could scarcely have pleased you. I hope to be able at a future period to concentrate whatever powers I may possess on the construction of some tribute to those high speculative endowments and comprehensive sympathies which I ever loved to contemplate; but at present, though somewhat ashamed at my own weakness, I find the object yet is too near me to permit of any very accurate delineation. You, with your clear insight into human nature, may perhaps not wonder that in the dearest service I could have been employed in, I should be found most deficient. ('Letters', 1.108)' 
'In Memoriam A.H.H.' (1850) was duly to render such dearest service -- to Hallam, to Tennyson himself, and to all his readers then and since, to all those who, like Queen Victoria and whatever their beliefs, have found, in its mourning and in its recovery, lasting consolation. 
Tennyson, afraid (with good cause) of the spite which -- like Keats before him, and similarly with some class animus -- he precipitated in reviewers, tried in 1834 to placate Christopher North, and tried in early March 1835 to discourage John Stuart Mill from writing about the poems. 'I do not wish to be dragged forward again in any shape before the reading public at present, particularly on the score of my old poems most of which I have so corrected (particularly 'OEnone') as to make them much less imperfect. (To James Spedding, 'Letters', 1.130)' Fortunately, Mill went ahead, and discerningly praised in Tennyson 'the power of 'creating' scenery, in keeping with some state of human feeling; so fitted to it as to be the embodied symbol of it, and to summon up the state of feeling itself, with a force not to be surpassed by anything but reality.('London Review', July 1835; Jump, 86)' 

It was in 1834 that Tennyson fell in love with Rosa Baring, of Harington Hall, 2 miles from Somersby. It was to be a brief and frustrated love (she was rich, she was a Baring, she was -- it seems -- a coquette), but it was never to fade from his memory. It was less the joys of this young romance than the pains of disillusionment, following promptly in 1835-6, that had a lastingly valuable presence within his writing, for the pressures of social snobbery -- long known from the Tennyson v. Tennyson-D'Eyncourt feud -- and of 'The rentroll Cupid of our rainy isles' ('Edwin Morris'), 'This filthy marriage-hindering Mammon' ('Aylmer's Field'), are acidly etched in 'Locksley Hall', 'Edwin Morris', and 'Maud', all written or inaugurated between 1837 and 1839. Tennyson was the better able to gauge this amatory excitement of his because of his soon coming to love, deeply, Emily Sellwood ['see 'Tennyson, Emily Sarah (1813-1896)]. He had first met her in 1830, the daughter of a solicitor in Horncastle (5 miles from Somersby). In May 1836 Emily's sister Louisa married Tennyson's older brother Charles (now curate of Tealby in Lincolnshire), and Tennyson was to date his love for Emily from this wedding, where he glimpsed the happy bridesmaid as his future happy bride. In 1838 the engagement was recognized by her family and his, but was broken off in 1840, partly because of financial insecurity ('owing to want of funds', their son was to write (H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 1.150)), but also because of Tennyson's religious unorthodoxy and spiritual perturbation. It was not until 1849 that his correspondence with Emily was renewed. Then the honest faith and the honest doubt evinced within 'In Memoriam' (to be published in May 1850) played a large part in overcoming Emily's doubts, and she and the poet were wed on 13 June 1850. The service was at Shiplake-on-Thames where Tennyson's friend Drummond Rawnsley was vicar. 
This was to be a happy marriage, clearly seen in 'The Daisy', about Tennyson's visit to Italy with Emily in 1851 (a delayed honeymoon), and in the lovely late tribute, 'June Bracken and Heather', written in 1891, the year before he died, and constituting the dedication of his final and posthumous volume. Equably hierarchical and reciprocally loving, warmly embracing the double duty of family claims and the claims of art, their life together was a joy. It was sadly darkened by the stillbirth of their first child on 20 April 1851, and by the grievous loss of their son Lionel ('b'. 16 March 1854), dead in his thirties (April 1886), but it was blessed with the lifelong self-abnegating dedication of their son Hallam Tennyson (1852-1928). Their home was at first Chapel House, Montpelier Row, Twickenham. In November 1853 they moved to Farringford (Freshwater, Isle of Wight), which Tennyson bought in 1856. Among the many notable visitors to Farringford was Garibaldi, in April 1864. In April 1868 the foundation stone was laid of Tennyson's second home, Aldworth, near Haslemere. 
Emily Tennyson was judged incomparable by Edward Lear: 'I should think, computing moderately, that 15 angels, several hundreds of ordinary women, many philosophers, a heap of truly wise & kind mothers, 3 or 4 minor prophets, & a lot of doctors and school-mistresses, might all be boiled down, & yet their combined essence fall short of what Emily Tennyson really is. (2 June 1859, Noakes, 167)' More two-edgedly, FitzGerald granted that she was 'a Lady of a Shakespearian type, as I think AT once said of her: that is, of the Imogen sort, far more agreeable to me than the sharp-witted Beatrices, Rosalinds, etc. I do not think she has been (on this very account perhaps) as good a helpmate to AT's Poetry as to himself. (7 Dec 1869, 'Letters of Edward FitzGerald', 3.177)' Benjamin Jowett praised her: 'overflowing with kindness -- but also in a certain way very strong', 'his friend, his servant, his guide, his critic'. 'It was a wonderful life -- an effaced life like that of so many women' (Harvard MS, Catalogue, 19-20). 'One of the most beautiful, the purest, the most innocent, the most disinterested persons whom I have ever known': 'she was probably her husband's best critic, and certainly the one whose authority he would most willingly have recognized' (H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 2.466-7). 
His wife was of unique importance to Tennyson's religious self. She trusted Charles Kingsley, who in September 1850 described 'In Memoriam' as 'altogether rivalling the sonnets of Shakespeare. -- Why should we not say boldly, surpassing -- for the sake of the superior faith into which it rises, for the sake of the proem at the opening of the volume -- in our eyes, the noblest English Christian poem which several centuries have seen?('Fraser's Magazine'; Jump, 183)' Aubrey de Vere characterized Emily, a few months after the marriage: 'Her great and constant desire is to make her husband more religious, or at least to conduce, as far as she may, to his growth in the spiritual life. In this she will doubtless succeed, for piety like hers is infectious, especially where there is an atmosphere of affection to serve as a conducting medium. Indeed I already observe a great improvement in Alfred. His nature is a religious one, and he is remarkably free from vanity and sciolism. Such a nature gravitates towards Christianity, especially when it is in harmony with itself. (14 Oct 1850, Ward, 158-9)' Gruffer, there are Tennyson's words to Gladstone's daughter Mary (4 June 1879): 'We shall all turn into pigs if we lose Christianity and God' ('Mary Gladstone', 157). 'T. loves the spirit of Christianity, hates many of the dogmas', reported William Allingham in January 1867 (Allingham, 149). He respected the breadth and latitude of F. D. Maurice. In October 1853 Maurice was forced to resign from his professorship in London for arguing that the popular belief in the endlessness of future punishment was superstitious. Tennyson abominated the belief in eternal torment, and he had recently asked Maurice (who had agreed) to be godfather to Hallam Tennyson. 'To the Rev. F. D. Maurice' is a verse invitation that glowingly revives the Horatian epistle, and bears comparison with such classics of the kind as Ben Jonson's 'Inviting a Friend to Supper'. 
In April 1869 Tennyson attended the meeting to organize the Metaphysical Society, which he joined and which flourished until 1879. In his seventies he said to Allingham, in July 1884: 'You're not orthodox, and I can't call myself orthodox. Two things however I have always been firmly convinced of -- God, -- and that death will not end my existence' (Allingham, 329). The very late poems, 'The Ancient Sage' (1885), on Lao-Tse, and 'Akbar's Dream' (1892), on what was then called Mohammedanism, seek to realize -- under the influence of Benjamin Jowett -- 'The religions of all good men', in support of the conviction that 'All religions are one'. 
Two months before he died, Tennyson talked with John Addington Symonds: 'He told me he was going to write a poem on Bruno, and asked what I thought about his [Bruno's] attitude toward Christianity. I tried to express my views, and Hallam got up and showed me that they were reading up the chapter of my 'Renaissance in Italy' on Bruno. Tennyson observed that the great thing in Bruno was his perception of an Infinite Universe, filled with solar systems like our own, and all penetrated with the Soul of God. 'That conception must react destructively on Christianity -- I mean its creed and dogma -- its morality will always remain.' Somebody had told him that astronomers could count 550 million solar systems. He observed that there was no reason why each should not have planets peopled with living and intelligent beings. 'Then,' he added, 'see what becomes of the second person of the Deity, and the sacrifice of a God for fallen man upon this little earth!' (29 Aug 1892, 'Letters of John Addington Symonds', 3.744)' 

Between 1832 and 1842 Tennyson published no volume-length work. The span has been mildly melodramatized into 'the ten years' silence', but he wrote much during this period, founding and building 'In Memoriam', creating his exquisite 'English Idyls' (most notably, 'Edwin Morris' and 'The Golden Year'), and he rewrote with depth and passion. At the urging of his friend Richard Monckton Milnes, he reluctantly sent to 'The Tribute' (September 1837) a true though as yet unperfected poem, 'Oh! that 'twere possible', which was to be 'the germ' of the amazing monodrama of madness, 'Maud' (1855). 
Life was taxing. On the death of Dr Tennyson in 1831 the family had been allowed by the incoming rector to continue to live in the rectory at Somersby, but then, in 1837, they had to move to High Beech, Epping Forest. 'His two elder brothers being away' (Frederick in Corfu and then Florence -- for good; and Charles settled at Grasby, Lincolnshire), it was on Alfred that there 'devolved the care of the family and of choosing a new home' (H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 1.149-50; 'My mother is afraid if I go to town even for a night; how could they get on without me for months?', to Emily Sellwood, 10 July 1839, 'Letters', 1.171). Then in 1840 they had to move to Tunbridge Wells, and in 1841 to Boxley, near Maidstone. The engagement to Emily Sellwood was broken off in 1840. Then there was the investing by Tennyson in 1840-41 of his invaluable small fortune (about $3000) in a scheme for wood-carving by machinery, which had collapsed by 1843. These were among the things that made much of life a misery. 'I have drunk one of those most bitter draughts out of the cup of life, which go near to make men hate the world they move in' (H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 1.221). FitzGerald reported of Tennyson, to Tennyson's brother Frederick, on 10 December 1843 that he had 'never seen him so hopeless' ('Letters of Edward FitzGerald', 1.408). In 1843-4 Tennyson received treatment. 'The perpetual panic and horror of the last two years has steeped my nerves in poison: now I am left a beggar but I am or shall be shortly somewhat better off in nerves. I am in a Hydropathy Establishment near Cheltenham (the only one in England conducted on pure Priessnitzan principles)... Much poison has come out of me, which no physic ever would have brought to light. (To FitzGerald, 2 Feb 1844, 'Letters', 1.222-3)' The hydropathy was endured near Cheltenham; Tennyson then lived, first, at 6 Bellevue Place, and then at 10 St James's Square, Cheltenham. 
In an unpublished poem ('Wherefore, in these dark ages of the Press'), Tennyson spoke of 'this Art-Conscience', a surety which, along with courage, steadied and secured him. This, with more than a little help from his friends, who encouraged him, pressed him. On 3 March 1838: 'Do you ever see Tennyson? and if so, could you not urge him to take the field?' (R. C. Trench to R. M. Milnes, Reid, 1.208). 'Tennyson composes every day, but nothing will persuade him to print, or even write it down' (Milnes, 1838, Reid, 1.220). Another Cambridge friend, G. S. Venables, urged him in August/September 1838: 'Do not continue to be so careless of fame and of influence. You have abundant materials ready for a new publication, and you start as a well-known man with the certainty that you can not be overlooked, and that by many you will be appreciated. If you do not publish now when will you publish? ('Letters', 1.163-4)' On 25 November 1839 FitzGerald all but gave up: 'I want A. T. to publish another volume: as all his friends do: especially Moxon, who has been calling on him for the last two years for a new edition of his old volume: but he is too lazy and wayward to put his hand to the business. ('Letters of Edward FitzGerald', 1.239)' Then there was the American threat. To the importunate FitzGerald Tennyson wrote 'c'.22 February 1841: 'You bore me about my book: so does a letter just received from America, threatening, though in the civilest terms that if I will not publish in England they will do it for me in that land of freemen' ('Letters', 1.188). Long after, to Allingham, Tennyson recalled this provocation: 'I hate publishing! The Americans forced me into it again. I had my things nice and right, but when I found they were going to publish the old forms I said, By Jove, that won't do! -- My whole living is from the sale of my books. (Allingham, 168, 27 Dec 1867)' So at last, in May 1842, Tennyson issued 'Poems' (Moxon). The first volume selected the best of 1830 and 1832, together with a few poems written 'c'.1833; the second volume consisted of new poems, some soon famous, such as 'Locksley Hall', and some among his greatest: 'Morte d'Arthur', 'Ulysses', 'Break, break, break', and 'St Simeon Stylites'. 
By June 1845 Tennyson had set to work on his long poem about university education for women, 'The Princess'. The plan had formed in 1839, at a time when there was in Cambridge and elsewhere a renewed sympathy with women's claims, one that remembered Mary Wollstonecraft's 'Vindication of the Rights of Woman' (1792) and gained a new impetus from Anna Jameson's 'Characteristics of Women' (1832), later known as 'Shakespeare's Heroines'. Jameson herself acknowledged many of the old ideals of womanhood. What marriage would be, once women's intellectual rights were respected: this was then the central woman question. Tennyson's poem, ever apt, is a vivid reflection of the age's humanely troubled concern. Like Tennyson himself, it is liberal in spirit, conservative in upshot. Progressive, perhaps, for as T. S. Eliot said of Whitman and Tennyson, 'Both were conservative, rather than reactionary or revolutionary; that is to say, they believed explicitly in progress, and believed implicitly that progress consists in things remaining much as they are' (T. S. Eliot, 'Whitman and Tennyson'). 
FitzGerald divined that this new poem was both a symptom and a cause of Tennyson's improved state of mind. In September 1845, through the good offices of (among others) Henry Hallam, Tennyson was granted by Sir Robert Peel a civil-list pension of $200 a year, for life. The following year, with his publisher Edward Moxon, he visited Switzerland (August 1846), 'the stateliest bits of landskip I ever saw' (A. Tennyson to FitzGerald, 12 Nov 1846, 'Letters', 1.264). The mountainscape was soon to rise within 'The Princess' (published December 1847). 
FitzGerald thought 'The Princess' 'a wretched waste of power at a time of life when a man ought to be doing his best' (FitzGerald to Frederick Tennyson, 4 May 1848, 'Letters of Edward FitzGerald', 1.604). Carlyle was even less sympathetic: 'very gorgeous, fervid, luxuriant, but indolent, somnolent, almost imbecil' (25 Dec 1847, 'Collected Letters', 22.183). Yet here are three of Tennyson's finest lyrics -- 'Tears, idle tears', 'Now sleeps the crimson petal, now the white', and 'Come down, O maid, from yonder mountain height'. The 'Prologue' presents a group of young friends at a country-house fete; they speak of women's rights, and then tell, each in turn ('a sevenfold story'; 'Prologue', 198), the tale of a princess who founds a university for women; her plans are broken by an irruption of men and then by an eruption of love. Tennyson's subtitle, 'A Medley', is truthful, and defensive. The poem, locally fine, is happy not to have to be a whole, whether politically or personally. It was for the poet a relief and a release from the pains of his 1840s. He duly felt obliged to recast it more substantially than any other of his long poems. 
In 1848 Tennyson visited Ireland and Cornwall, taking up again a projected Arthurian enterprise, and in 1849 the correspondence with Emily Sellwood was renewed. Tennyson now was granted his 'annus mirabilis'. For 1850 was to see, first, the publication of 'In Memoriam' (anonymously, in the last week of May); next, his wedding, in June; and then in November his appointment as poet laureate. 
Hereafter Tennyson was to be, though he enjoyed denying it, secure. Secure in reputation, though the passing judgements were sometimes harsh -- 'that fierce light which beats upon a throne' (Dedication to 'Idylls of the King') beats too upon the poet's throne. Secure, too, in finances: with strong sales and with publishers of integrity (Moxon through to Macmillan, with Ticknor doing the distinctly unusual thing for an American publisher of the time and honourably paying up), he stayed the course and stayed in print. In the last year of his life he earned more than $10,000, and he left an estate worth more than $57,000 (Martin, 578). 
In 1842 Tennyson's sister Emily, after eight years of quasi-widowed fidelity to Arthur Hallam, had married Captain Richard Jesse RN. Comments on this were harshly unjust, but Tennyson was not, and he gave his sister in marriage. He must, though, have been aware that the changed relation of the Tennysons to the Hallams might cast a shadow on the poem that was becoming 'In Memoriam', which he chose not to publish until 1850, when it closed with the wedding of a different sister of Tennyson's (Cecilia) to a family friend (Edmund Lushington) who could not but call up Arthur Hallam. 
Tennyson had written what became sections of 'In Memoriam' within a month of Hallam's death (September 1833). 'The sections were written at many different places, and as the phases of our intercourse came to my memory and suggested them. I did not write them with any view of weaving them into a whole, or for publication, until I found that I had written so many. (H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 1.304)' On 30 November 1844 Tennyson wrote to his aunt Russell: 'With respect to the non-publication of those poems which you mention, it is partly occasioned by the considerations you speak of, and partly by my sense of their present imperfectness: perhaps they will not see the light till I have ceased to be. I cannot tell, but I have no wish to send them out yet. ('Letters', 1.231)' On 29 January 1845 FitzGerald wrote to W. B. Donne: 'A. T. has near a volume of poems -- elegiac -- in memory of Arthur Hallam. Don't you think the world wants other notes than elegiac now? 'Lycidas' is the utmost length an elegiac should reach. But Spedding [their Cambridge friend] praises: and I suppose the elegiacs will see daylight -- public daylight -- one day. ('Letters of Edward FitzGerald', 1.478)' The day dawned: it was in part the loving respect in which the poem (passed on to her, in manuscript or in proof, by her cousin) was held by Emily Sellwood, soon to be Emily Tennyson, in April 1850 that fortified Tennyson's confidence in the poem that he published (anonymously) next month, and that was to win him, immediately and despite the mild fiction of anonymity, the laureateship and incontestable fame. 
Tennyson had used the octosyllabic quatrain rhyming 'abba' in his patriotic poems of 1832-3. 'As for the metre of 'In Memoriam' I had no notion till 1880 that Lord Herbert of Cherbury had written his occasional verses in the same metre. I believed myself the originator of the metre, until after 'In Memoriam' came out, when some one told me that Ben Jonson and Sir Philip Sidney had used it. (H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 1.305-6)' (For 1880, read 1870; see letter of 8 August 1870, 'Letters', 2.553-4.) 'It is rather the cry of the whole human race than mine. In the poem altogether private grief swells out into thought of, and hope for, the whole world. It begins with a funeral and ends with a marriage -- begins with death and ends in promise of a new life -- a sort of Divine Comedy, cheerful at the close. It is a very impersonal poem as well as personal. (Knowles, 182)' George Eliot saw the poem under a different aspect: 'Whatever was the immediate prompting of 'In Memoriam', whatever the form under which the author represented his aim to himself, the deepest significance of the poem is the sanctification of human love as a religion' ('Westminster Review', Oct 1855; G. Eliot, 191). 
Both human love and divine love faced the challenge not only of the ages but of the aeons. In 'Parnassus', written three years before he died, Tennyson was to imagine the two powers that were now seen to tower over all poetic aspirations: 'These are Astronomy and Geology, terrible Muses!' 'In Memoriam' did not stand in need of or in dread of Darwin's 'Origin of Species', for the poem preceded the work of science by nine years. Moreover Tennyson owed much not only to Charles Lyell and his 'Principles of Geology' (1830-33), which he mentioned to Milnes in 1836 ('c'.1 Nov, 'Letters', 1.145), but to William Buckland and his school of thought. Yet 'In Memoriam' became imaginatively central to the Darwinian evolutionary controversy, in a world where the Victorians feared that the ape in the zoo might suddenly ask 'Am I my keeper's brother?' Tennyson threw off epigrams that he did not publish, one being 'Darwin's Gemmule', and another 'By a Darwinian' (both 1868), and he published 'By an Evolutionist' in 1889. 
By January 1851 'In Memoriam' was already in its fourth edition. Tennyson never issued an edition with his name on the title-page, but from 1870 it appeared in collected editions of his works. The poem was to be on everyone's lips and in most hearts, validating not only honest doubt but honest faith, a consolation of philosophy for the age. In March 1889 F. W. H. Myers acknowledged what the poem had effected: 'It is hardly too much to say that 'In Memoriam' is the only speculative book of that epoch -- epoch of the 'Tractarian movement', and much similar 'up-in-the-air balloon-work' -- which retains a serious interest now. Its brief cantos contain the germs of many a subsequent treatise, the indication of channels along which many a wave of opinion has flowed, down to that last 'Philosophie der Erlosung', or Gospel of a sad Redemption -- 'To drop head foremost in the jaws / Of vacant darkness, and to cease' -- which tacitly or openly is possessing itself of so many a modern mind.('Nineteenth Century'; Jump, 399)' 

In November 1850 Tennyson was appointed poet laureate, Wordsworth having died in April (and Samuel Rogers having declined). 'The night before I was asked to take the Laureateship, which was offered to me through Prince Albert's liking for my 'In Memoriam', I dreamed that he came to me and kissed me on the cheek. I said, in my dream, 'Very kind, but very German'. In the morning the letter about the Laureateship was brought to me and laid upon my bed. I thought about it through the day, but could not make up my mind whether to take it or refuse it, and at the last I wrote two letters, one accepting and one declining, and threw them on the table, and settled to decide which I would send after my dinner and bottle of port. (Knowles, 167)' Tennyson's character and his convictions (political and national), as well as his versatility, enabled him to be imaginatively duteous in the exercise of his responsibilities, the most felicitous of the poets laureate. The next year, there followed his first such publication (dated March 1851), his deftly loving dedication, 'To the Queen', heading the seventh edition of his 'Poems'. 
Aware that the poet laureate should express his convictions but should also be careful not to harness his office to his own party political judgements, Tennyson on occasion published pseudonymously -- for instance a run of patriotic poems during the invasion scare from France in early 1852. 'Among the most enthusiastic national defenders are Alfred Tennyson and Mrs. A. T.', wrote their friend Franklin Lushington on 8 February 1852: 'At least they have been induced by Coventry Patmore to subscribe five pounds apiece for the purchase of rifles to teach the world to shoot -- which appears to me a rather exaggerated quota for the laureate to contribute out of his official income, his duty being clearly confined to the howling of patriotic staves. ('Letters', 2.26)' Tennyson differentiated such staves from his first independent publication as laureate later the same year: his 'Ode on the Death of the Duke of Wellington' (published on the day of the funeral, 18 November 1852) is a noble four-square paean, much called on in later years when a great national loss has been felt, as at the death of Winston Churchill. Written, Tennyson insisted, from genuine admiration of the man, it was a true laureate ode, though not requested by the queen. 
In January 1862 Tennyson published the verse dedication to open a new edition of 'Idylls of the King', in memory of Albert, prince consort, who had died in December 1861. (Tennyson was to conclude 'Idylls of the King', in the 'Imperial Library' edition of 1873, with a complementary or married tribute, 'To the Queen', beginning 'O loyal to the royal in thyself'.) There followed, in April 1862, his first audience with Queen Victoria, at Osborne, Isle of Wight: 'I went down to see Tennyson who is very peculiar looking, tall, dark, with a fine head, long black flowing hair and a beard -- oddly dressed, but there is no affectation about him. I told him how much I admired his glorious lines to my precious Albert and how much comfort I found in his 'In Memoriam'. He was full of unbounded appreciation of beloved Albert. When he spoke of my own loss, of that to the Nation, his eyes quite filled with tears. (Queen Victoria's journal, 14 April 1862, Dyson and Tennyson, 69)' There was humour, too, in their relation. 'She was praising my poetry; I said 'Every one writes verses now. I daresay Your Majesty does.' She smiled and said, 'No! I never could bring two lines together!'' (Allingham, 150, 18 Feb 1867). A later audience, in August 1883 when Tennyson was in his seventies, was movingly set down by the queen: 'After luncheon saw the great Poet 'Tennyson' in dearest Albert's room for nearly an hour; -- and most interesting it was. He is grown very old -- his eyesight much impaired 'and he is very shaky on his legs'. But he was very kind. Asked him to sit down... When I took leave of him, I thanked him for his kindness and said I needed it, for I had gone through so much -- and he said you are so alone on that 'terrible height, it is Terrible. I've only a year or two to live but I'll be happy to do anything for you I can. Send for me whenever you like.' I thanked him warmly. (Queen Victoria's journal, 7 Aug 1883, Dyson and Tennyson, 102)' 'Asked him to sit down': for a sardonic rendering of such an audience, see Max Beerbohm's caricature, 'Mr. Tennyson reading 'In Memoriam' to his Sovereign' (Beerbohm). There, it is less the poet's vigorous left arm than his splayed legs that should establish his taking his liberty. But two royal profiles face his singular one. 
In July 1855 Tennyson published 'Maud, and Other Poems'. Notable among the other poems was 'The Charge of the Light Brigade'. The charge, at Balaklava in the Crimea, had taken place on 25 October. Tennyson's periodical publication in 'The Examiner' (9 Dec 1854) had stirred not only the nation but the troops to whom copies were sent. 
'This poem of 'Maud or the Madness' is a little 'Hamlet', the history of a morbid, poetic soul, under the blighting influence of a recklessly speculative age'; 'The peculiarity of this poem is that different phases of passion in one person take the place of different characters' ('Poems', 2.517-18). 
Tennyson's acquaintance with Dr Matthew Allen, the wood-carving financial speculator who was also a mad-doctor (the poet John Clare was in his care for a while), was one experiential base for the poem -- Tennyson visited his asylum near High Beech. What also courses through the poem is the black blood of the Tennysons. The poem aroused controversy, some of it low: 'Sir, I used to worship you, but now I hate you. I loathe and detest you. You beast! So you've taken to imitating Longfellow. Yours in aversion' (reported in letter of 8 Jan 1856, 'Letters of Dante Gabriel Rossetti', 1.281-2). George Eliot reviewed it anonymously: 'its tone is throughout morbid; it opens to us the self revelations of a morbid mind, and what it presents as the cure for this mental disease is itself only a morbid conception of human relations' ('Westminster Review', Oct 1855; G. Eliot, 192). The poem was accused of craving war (the protagonist leaves at the end for the Crimea) and of fomenting sin. 'If an author pipe of adultery, fornication, murder and suicide, set him down as the practiser of those crimes'. Tennyson: 'Adulterer I may be, fornicator I may be, murderer I may be, suicide I am not yet' (Lincoln MS, draft 'Materials for a Life of A. T.'; C. Tennyson, 'Alfred Tennyson', 286). It remained one of the poems that Tennyson was most moved to read aloud. Its sense of all that may impede marriage, or darken it, lived on in the two long narrative poems, of sombre power, that Tennyson published together in 1864: 'Enoch Arden' and 'Aylmer's Field'. 
Tennyson's Arthurian interests were lifelong: from the early lyrical poems, 'The Lady of Shalott', 'Sir Galahad', and 'Sir Launcelot and Queen Guinevere', through the deeply contemplative 'Morte d'Arthur', to the elongated linking of narratives that became 'Idylls of the King'. (A long 'I' in 'Idylls'; no article, not 'The Idylls of the King'; and an intimation that the series did not, though Hallam Tennyson uses the word, constitute an epic.) 'From his earliest years he had written out in prose various histories of Arthur... On Malory, on Layamon's 'Brut', on Lady Charlotte Guest's translation of the 'Mabinogion', on the old Chronicles, on old French Romance, on Celtic folklore, and largely on his own imagination, my father founded his epic. ('Poems', 3.255)' In 1848 Tennyson visited Ireland and Cornwall, taking up again his projected Arthurian enterprise. It was not until 1855 that he decided the shaping, and in 1859 the first four 'Idylls' were published, 'Enid' (later 'The Marriage of Geraint' and 'Geraint and Enid'), 'Vivien' (later 'Merlin and Vivien'), 'Elaine' (later 'Lancelot and Elaine'), and 'Guinevere'. A revision and expansion of 'Morte d'Arthur', as 'The Passing of Arthur', was published in 1869, with a note: 'This last, the earliest written of the Poems, is here connected with the rest in accordance with an early project of the author's' ('The Holy Grail and Other Poems', '1870'). 'Gareth and Lynette' was published in October 1872, and the 'Imperial Library' edition of Tennyson's 'Works' (1872-3) then brought together the series (with a new epilogue: 'To the Queen'), virtually complete except for 'Balin and Balan' (written 1874, published 1885). 
Victorian Arthurianism was sometimes moral, sometimes romantic, sometimes both. In 'The Return to Camelot: Chivalry and the English Gentleman', Mark Girouard noted that after the 1830s Tennyson's dealings with Arthurian material changed. 'The 1850s were, indeed, studded with Arthurian projects', and Tennyson more and more shaped inspiring models for 'modern members of the ruling class' (Girouard, 180, 184). But Tennyson had aspirations larger than the political, the passing. 'As for the many meanings of the poem my father would affirm 'Poetry is like shot-silk with many glancing colours''. On his eightieth birthday, he said: 'My meaning... was spiritual. I took the legendary stories of the Round Table as illustrations. I intended Arthur to represent the Ideal Soul of Man coming into contact with the warring elements of the flesh' ('Poems', 3.258-9). 
Tennyson's mother died in February 1865. There is no recovering just what she meant to her son, though she is to be glimpsed, as a gracious silence, in the record of early life, her piety being praised in 'Isabel': 'The queen of marriage, a most perfect wife'. Then in April 1879 came the death of Charles, the brother whom Tennyson loved best ('altogether loveable, a second George Herbert in his utter faith', Tennyson wrote to James Russell Lowell, on 18 November 1880; 'Letters', 3.199), and whom he hauntingly commemorated in 'Frater Ave atque Vale' and in 'Prefatory Poem to My Brother's Sonnets' (1879, opening Charles's 'Collected Sonnets', 1880). 
But the immitigable grief was the grievous loss of Tennyson's son Lionel ('b'. 1854). In February 1878 Lionel had married Eleanor Locker. As is clear from a notebook of Lionel's, of 1874-6, in which he set down epigrams, observations, squibs, and light verse, he had a levity light-years away from the gravity of his elder brother, Hallam. Lionel made fretful his protective parents, with his dashing ways, his nattiness of garb, and his very unTennysonian stammer or stutter. 
Lionel Tennyson's work for the India Office took him to India in 1885, where he contracted fever, 'hung between life and death for three months and a half' (H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 2.323), and then, in April 1886, died in the Red Sea on his way home. Tennyson was desolate, but he strove to share his wife's Christian fortitude -- in her words, 'The loss to us is indeed unspeakable but infinite Love and Wisdom have ordained it' (26 Oct 1886, 'Letters', 3.343). Tennyson was to realize such family tragedy, both personal and everywhere, in one of his finest poems of saddened gratitude: 'To the Marquis of Dufferin and Ava'. His love of Lionel lived on in his love of his grandsons: first, Eleanor's and Lionel's Alfred B. S. Tennyson ('b'. 1878 -- see the endearing playfulness of the dedication to 'Ballads and Other Poems', 1880, and 'To Alfred Tennyson My Grandson'); and then their Charles Tennyson ('b'. 1879) who lived to a great age, nearly 100, to honour his grandfather in works biographical and editorial. 
Honours came to Tennyson with and following the laureateship. In June 1855 he received an honorary DCL at Oxford; the occasion was graced by the affectionate impudence of the cry (adapting the opening of 'The May Queen'), 'Did your mother call you early, dear?' In 1869 he became an honorary fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge (where neither he in the past nor his son Hallam in the immediate future proceeded to a degree). In March 1880 he was invited to stand for the lord rectorship of Glasgow University, but withdrew when he learned that the election was conducted along party lines. He had in 1865 refused the offer of a baronetcy, and again in 1873, 1874, and 1880. Then in September 1883 he accepted a barony, acknowledging to the queen 'This public mark of your Majesty's esteem which recognizes in my person the power of literature in this age of the world' ('c'.1 Oct 1883, 'Letters', 3.265). 
As well as the honour to literature and to Tennyson, and the affectionate respect in which he held the queen, he would have been moved by this chance to score, with dignity, off the rival branch of the family, who -- half a century earlier -- had elevated themselves to the name Tennyson-D'Eyncourt. 'I am very glad we have changed our name, as it gives us a good position', had written Edwin Tennyson-D'Eyncourt: 'Besides which it will keep us in a great measure clear of the Somersby Family who really are quite hogs' (1 Aug 1835, 'Letters', 1.135). 
Closer to home, Tennyson and his wife justly saw the peerage as a bequest to their self-abnegating son. In 1873 and again in 1880, Tennyson had even put to Gladstone a proposal (as to the baronetcy then offered) that breached all precedent: 'I am still much of the same mind -- except that many of my friends having reproached me as for a wrong done to my family in declining the Baronetcy for myself, I feel still more than I did that I would fain see it bestowed on my son Hallam 'during my lifetime', if that could be done without embarrassment to you. (3 Nov 1880, 'Letters', 3.198)' In 1883 Emily said of the accepted barony: 'That Hallam should inherit the duties belonging to this distinction is a cause of deep thankfulness to me' (27 Sept 1883, ibid., 3.264). She declared herself thankful 'that he should have an honourable career marked out for him when his work for his father has ceased' (C. Tennyson, 'Alfred Tennyson', 472). It would be to underrate Hallam Tennyson to say that he owed his becoming governor-general of Australia to his father's peerage, but presumably the title was no hindrance. Three months after his father took his seat in the House of Lords (March 1884), Hallam married Audrey Boyle; the couple duly lived with his parents, and continued the life of loving service. 
Tennyson and Edward FitzGerald had been friends since their Cambridge days, and the two rather enjoyed their amiable friction. 'He spoke of Edward FitzGerald -- had not seen him for years before his death; FitzGerald could not be got to visit. 'But no sort of quarrel?' 'O no! fancy my quarrelling with dear old Fitz!'' (Allingham, 320, 1883). One of Tennyson's finest late poems, 'To E. FitzGerald', alive throughout its 56-line single sentence, recalls the last visit by Tennyson and his son Hallam to FitzGerald in 1876. The poem breathes friendship, and it generously delights in FitzGerald's great translation imitation, 'The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam'. FitzGerald's affectionate scepticism had its bracing side. Of the elegies that became 'In Memoriam', he wrote to W. B. Donne on 27 February 1845: 'We have surely had enough of men reporting their sorrows: especially when one is aware all the time that the poet wilfully protracts what he complains of, magnifies it in the Imagination, puts it into all the shapes of Fancy: and yet we are to condole with him, and be taught to ruminate our losses and sorrows in the same way. I felt that if Tennyson had got on a horse and ridden twenty miles, instead of moaning over his pipe, he would have been cured of his sorrows in half the time. As it is, it is about three years before the Poetic Soul walks itself out of darkness and Despair into Common Sense. ('Letters of Edward FitzGerald', 1.486)' Tennyson's exquisite verse epistle 'To E. L., on His Travels in Greece' (published 1853) is a tribute to Edward Lear's artistic pencil and writer's pen. Lear set Tennyson's poems to music, and he worked lifelong on illustrations of the poems; on 19 February 1886, two years before he died, he wrote to Ruskin that although 'nearly always in bed' he could 'even go on working at my 200 Tennyson illustrations begun in 1849' (Lear, 276). These appeared posthumously in 'Poems by Tennyson Illustrated by Lear' (1889). In person, there had been increasing tensions. 'AT was most disagreeably querulous and irritating and would return, chiefly because he saw people approaching', Lear wrote in his diary of June 1860, but Frank Lushington 'would not go back, and led zigzagwise toward the sea -- AT snubby & cross always. After a time he would not go on -- but led me back by muddy paths (over our shoes,) a short cut home -- hardly, even at last avoiding his horror, -- the villagers coming from church... I... believe that this is my last visit to Farringford: -- nor can I wish it otherwise all things considered. (Noakes, 176)' It was Emily Tennyson in whom Lear delighted. 
Tennyson's friendship with F. T. Palgrave, with whom he visited Portugal in August 1859 (and Derbyshire and Yorkshire in 1862), led to his assisting Palgrave in selecting poems for the most famous, most influential, and best of anthologies, 'The Golden Treasury' (1861). Palgrave dedicated it to Tennyson, and -- faced with Tennyson's refusal to have his own poems in it -- included no living poets. The particular advice and recommendations of Tennyson survive and are of enduring interest -- not least because, of the great English poets, Tennyson is the one who was least willing to expatiate as a literary critic. His summary judgements are shrewdly content to remain pith and gist: 'One plods over Wordsworth's long dreary plains of prose -- one knows there's a mountain somewhere' (Allingham, 294, 2 Sept 1880). 
W. E. Gladstone had played a part in securing a pension for Tennyson in 1845: 'it appears established that, though a true and even a great poet, he can hardly become a popular, and is much more likely to be a starving one' (24 Feb 1845, Parker, 3.441). Gladstone showed his historical and critical acumen in 1859: 'Mr. Tennyson is too intimately and essentially the poet of the nineteenth century to separate himself from its leading characteristics, the progress of physical science and a vast commercial, mechanical, and industrial development. Whatever he may say or do in an occasional fit, he cannot long either cross or lose its sympathies.('Quarterly Review', Oct 1859; Jump, 248)' Gladstone published in the 'Nineteenth Century' (January 1887) an important reply to Tennyson's onslaught (dramatized, but...) on the age in 'Locksley Hall Sixty Years After'. Tennyson and Gladstone had long enjoyed a wary but genuine friendship. They agreed in loving Arthur Hallam and his memory; they agreed that Tennyson was a true poet; and they agreed to a cruise together to Norway and Denmark in September 1883, during which the offer of a barony was prompted and precipitated. But they disagreed about Gladstone's politics, which were both Liberal and liberal, and particularly about Ireland. Four months before Tennyson died, he sent someone a letter: 'Sir, I love Mr. Gladstone but hate his present Irish policy' (28 June 1892, 'Letters', 3.446). Nor was it only Ireland, for the 'Franchise Bill' of 1884 seemed to Tennyson a grave mistake. He fired a warning sonnet across Gladstone's bows. 'Statesman, be not precipitate in thine act', he boomed, or so the first unauthorized printing ran -- and then perhaps decided that he had himself been precipitate in according to Gladstone the tribute of the word Statesman, for the poem as printed in the 'Memoir' reads 'Steersman...', which better fits not only the navigating metaphor of the poem but Tennyson's reservations as to Gladstone's statesmanship. 
Tennyson's admiration for Benjamin Jowett is best articulated in 'To the Master of Balliol' (written 1890, published 1892). Jowett had long been a close friend of the family. Both men were robust; the anecdote that is either Benjamin Jowett or 'ben trovato' has Jowett saying of a new poem that Tennyson recited, 'I think I wouldn't publish that, if I were you, Tennyson'; whereupon the poet retorted, 'If it comes to that, Master, the sherry you gave us at luncheon was beastly' (Martin, 433). Jowett's 'Notes on Characteristics of Tennyson' cannot be bettered for their sympathetic acumen (Ricks, 'Tennyson and His Friends', 186-7): '

Absolute truthfulness, absolutely himself, never played tricks. 
Never got himself puffed in the newspapers. 
A friend of liberty and truth. 
Extraordinary vitality. 
Great common sense and a strong will. 
The instinct of common sense at the bottom of all he did. 
Not a man of the world (in the ordinary sense) but a man who had the greatest insight into the world, and often in a word or a sentence would flash a light. 
Intensely needed sympathy. 
A great and deep strength. 
He mastered circumstances, but he was also partly mastered by them, 'e.g.' the old calamity of the disinheritance of his father and his treatment by rogues [Dr Allen and the wood-carving scheme] in the days of his youth. 
Very fair towards other poets, including those who were not popular, such as Crabbe. 
He had the high-bred manners not only of a gentleman but of a great man. 
He would have wished that, like Shakespeare, his life might be unknown to posterity. 
In the commonest conversation he showed himself a man of genius. He had abundance of fire, never talked poorly, never for effect. As Socrates described Plato, 'Like no one whom I ever knew before'. 
The three subjects of which he most often spoke were 'God,' 'Free-Will,' and 'Immortality,' yet always seeming to find an (apparent) contradiction between the 'imperfect world,' and 'the perfect attributes of God.' 
Great charm of his ordinary conversation, sitting by a very ordinary person and telling stories with the most high-bred courtesy, endless stories, not too high or too low for ordinary conversation. 
The persons and incidents of his childhood very vivid to him, and the Lincolnshire dialect and the ways of life. 
Loved telling a good story, which he did admirably, and also hearing one. 
He told very accurately, almost in the same words, his old stories, though, having a powerful memory, he was impatient of a friend who told him a twice-repeated tale. 
His jests were very amusing. 
At good things he would sit laughing away -- laughter often interrupted by fits of sadness. 
His absolute sincerity, or habit of saying all things to all kinds of persons.' 

Thackeray stated, in the early summer of 1841: 'Perhaps it is Alfred Tennyson's great big yellow face and growling voice that has had an impression on me. Manliness and simplicity of manner go a great way with me, I fancy' ('Letters and Private Papers', 2.26). In his readings, the poet himself evoked 'the poet' who 'Read, mouthing out his hollow oes and aes, / Deep-chested music' ('The Epic'). Thrillingly chanting 'Maud', 'The Charge of the Light Brigade', 'Northern Farmer: New Style', a song from 'Idylls of the King', and other verses, Tennyson's voice has been preserved for posterity thanks to an emissary of Thomas Edison's in May 1890. Allingham relished Tennyson and 'his own sonorous manner, lingering with solemn sweetness on every vowel sound -- a peculiar 'incomplete' cadence at the end. He modulates his cadences with notable subtlety' (Allingham, 158, 25 Aug 1867). FitzGerald exulted in the harsher music, reporting of 'St Simeon Stylites': 'this is one of the Poems A. T. would read with grotesque Grimness, especially at such passages as 'Coughs, Aches, Stitches, etc.', laughing aloud at times' (FitzGerald's notes at Trinity College, Cambridge). 
Tennyson's eminent contemporaries paid affectionate tribute not only to his voice but to his character, appearance, and garb. FitzGerald noted on 23 May 1835: 'I will say no more of Tennyson than that the more I have seen of him, the more cause I have to think him great. His little humours and grumpinesses were so droll, that I was always laughing' ('Letters of Edward FitzGerald', 1.162). 
Carlyle described Tennyson to Emerson in August 1844, as 'One of the finest looking men in the world. A great shock of rough dusty-dark hair; bright-laughing hazel eyes; massive aquiline face, most massive yet most delicate, of sallow-brown complexion, almost Indian-looking; clothes cynically loose, free-and-easy; -- smokes infinite tobacco. His voice is musical metallic, -- fit for loud laughter and piercing wail, and all that may lie between; speech and speculation free and plenteous: I do not meet, in these late decades, such company over a pipe! ('Collected Letters', 18.169)' Six months later Jane Welsh Carlyle remarked that 'Alfred is dreadfully embarrassed with women alone -- for he entertains at one and the same moment a feeling of almost adoration for them and an ineffable contempt! Adoration I suppose for what they 'might be' -- contempt for what they 'are!' The only chance of my getting any right good of him was to make him forget my 'womanness'... he smoked on all the same -- for 'three' mortal hours! -- talking like an angel -- only exactly as if he were talking with a clever 'man' -- which -- being a thing I am not used to -- men always 'adapting' their conversation to what they 'take to be' a womans taste -- strained me to a terrible pitch of intellectuality. (31 Jan 1845, 'Collected Letters', 19.16-17)' Arthur Hugh Clough said: 'I like him personally better than I do his manner in his verses; personally he is the most unmannerly simple big child of a man that you can find' (13 Nov 1856, 'Correspondence of Arthur Hugh Clough', 2.522). 
Nathaniel Hawthorne gave a detailed account of his impressions of the poet on 30 July 1857: 'Tennyson is the most picturesque figure, without affectation, that I ever saw; of middle-size, rather slouching, dressed entirely in black, and with nothing white about him except the collar of his shirt, which methought might have been clean the day before. He had on a black wide-awake hat, with round crown and wide, irregular brim, beneath which came down his long black hair, looking terribly tangled; he had a long, pointed beard, too, a little browner than the hair, and not so abundant as to encumber any of the expression of his face. His frock coat was buttoned across the breast, though the afternoon was warm. His face was very dark, and not exactly a smooth face, but worn, and expressing great sensitiveness, though not, at that moment, the pain and sorrow which is seen in his bust... I heard his voice; a bass voice, but not of a resounding depth; a voice rather broken, as it were, and ragged about the edges, but pleasant to the ear. His manner, while conversing with these people, was not in the least that of an awkward man, unaccustomed to society; but he shook hands and parted with them, evidently as soon as he courteously could, and shuffled away quicker than before. He betrayed his shy and secluded habits more in this, than in anything else that I observed; though, indeed in his whole presence, I was indescribably sensible of a morbid painfulness in him, a something not to be meddled with. Very soon, he left the saloon, shuffling along the floor with short irregular steps, a very queer gait, as if he were walking in slippers too loose for him. (Hawthorne, 351-3)' Julia Margaret Cameron, in 1862, caught Tennyson's prescience as well as the comedy of his so loathing celebrity-invading, a loathing strong in such poems as 'To --, After Reading a Life and Letters' and 'The Dead Prophet' (1885), pieces dealing with what Tennyson saw as the invasion of the Carlyles' privacy by the biographer James Anthony Froude. 'He was very violent with the girls on the subject of the rage for autographs. He said he believed every crime and every vice in the world were connected with the passion for autographs and anecdotes and records, -- that the desiring anecdotes and acquaintance with the lives of great men was treating them like pigs to be ripped open for the public; that he knew he himself should be ripped open like a pig; that he thanked God Almighty with his whole heart and soul that he knew nothing, and that the world knew nothing, of Shakespeare but his writings; and that he thanked God Almighty that he knew nothing of Jane Austen, and that there were no letters preserved either of Shakespeare's or of Jane Austen's, that they had not been ripped open like pigs. Then he said that the post for two days had brought 'him' no letters, and that he thought there was a sort of syncope in the world as to him and to his fame. (J. M. Cameron letter, Taylor, 2.193)' Henry James described Tennyson for William James some seventeen years later, on 29 March 1877: 'He is very swarthy & scraggy & strikes one at first as much less handsome than his photos.: but gradually you see that it's a face of genius. He had I know not what simplicity, speaks with a strange rustic accent & seemed altogether like a creature of some primordial English stock, a 1000 miles away from American manufacture. (James and James, 1.283)' And finally, Thomas Hardy, in 1880, 'often said that he was surprised to find such an expression of humour in the Poet-Laureate's face, the corners of his mouth twitching with that mood when he talked; 'it was a genial human face, which all his portraits belied'; and it was enhanced by a beard and hair straggling like briars, a shirt with a large loose collar, and old steel spectacles. (Hardy, 178)' Tennyson had the good fortune to be the neighbour on the Isle of Wight, and then the friend, of the greatest of Victorian portrait photographers, Julia Margaret Cameron. He valued her photographs of him, liking best the one he dubbed 'The Dirty Monk' (1865). As to portraits: FitzGerald, on 5 June 1871, wrote to Emily Tennyson, of Samuel Laurence's, painted about 1840: 'Very imperfect as it is, it is nevertheless the 'best' painted Portrait I have seen; and certainly the 'only' one of old Days. 'Blubber-lipt' I remember Alfred once called it; so it is; but still the only one of old Days, and still -- the best of all, to my thinking. I like to go back to Days before the Beard, which makes rather a Dickens of A. T. in the Photographs -- to my mind. ('Letters of Edward FitzGerald', 3.290-91)' On this portrait see 'Letters', 3.290n. For the representations by Cameron (photographs), by Thomas Woolner (medallion and busts), by James Spedding and D. G. Rossetti (drawings), by G. F. Watts (paintings), and the statue by Hamo Thornycroft, see David Piper, 'The Image of the Poet: British Poets and their Portraits' (pp. 166-80). 
Tennyson wrote to Allingham on 29 July 1865: 'To own a ship, a large steam-yacht... and go round the world -- that's my notion of glory' (Allingham, 118-19). In his old age he enjoyed a series of cruises delightful and calmative: in 1883, a fortnight on the 'Pembroke Castle' (Scotland, Norway, and Denmark); in 1887, to Devon and Cornwall; in 1888, on Lord Brassey's yacht in and about the channel; and in the last two years of his life, 1891 and 1892, to Jersey. He had travelled in 1880 to Venice, Bavaria, and the Tyrol, with Hallam Tennyson. The sacred elegiac poem 'Crossing the Bar' was written in October 1889 while crossing the Solent. According to his son, when Tennyson showed him this poem, 'I said 'That is the crown of your life's work.' He answered, 'It came in a moment''. A few days before his death Tennyson said to his son, 'Mind you put my 'Crossing the Bar' at the end of all editions of my poems' (H. Tennyson, 'Memoir', 2.366-7). 
Extraordinary fecundity, energy, and variety continued to characterize Tennyson. He returned to earlier accomplishments: nearing seventy, in May 1879 he published, after repeated piracies, 'The Lover's Tale', which had been omitted from 'Poems' (1832) despite Arthur Hallam's protests: 'You must be pointblank mad... Pray -- pray -- pray -- change your mind again' (20 Nov 1832, 'Letters of Arthur Henry Hallam', 688). He also created anew: in December 1880, 'Ballads and Other Poems'; in November 1885, 'Tiresias, and Other Poems'; in December 1886, 'Locksley Hall Sixty Years After'; and in December 1889, 'Demeter and Other Poems'. 
Tennyson's youthful dramatic extravaganza, 'The Devil and the Lady', and his mature masterpiece in monodrama, 'Maud', had given no notice that he would embark as a playwright during the last two decades of his life. Back in the 1830s his art in the dramatic monologue had been assuredly inaugurative and diverse, with the impassioned utterances of Ulysses, Tithonus, and St Simeon Stylites rivalling the simultaneous feats of Browning in different veins -- but the stage, the Victorian stage? 
It was in June 1875 that Tennyson published 'Queen Mary', initiating this new misguided phase. Henry James, no great hand at the stage himself, noted that 'Great surprise, great hopes, and great fears had been called into being by the announcement that the author of so many finely musical lyrics and finished, chiselled specimens of narrative verse, had tempted fortune in the perilous field of the drama.' James saw that Tennyson 'has not so much refuted as evaded the charge that he is not a dramatic poet. To produce his drama he has had to cease to be himself' ('The Galaxy', Sept 1875; H. James, 165-6). A production followed in April 1876, and then in December 1876 ('1877') the publication of his second historical drama, 'Harold'. Henry Irving and Ellen Terry did their best for 'The Cup' in July 1881. 'The Promise of May', his only published work in prose, was produced in November 1882. As though anticipating T. S. Eliot's 'Murder in the Cathedral', he wrote 'Becket'. 'I gave Irving my 'Thomas a Becket'', Tennyson said in 1880, and he meant 'gave': 'He said it was magnificent, but it would cost $3000 to mount it, -- 'he' couldn't afford the risk. If well put on the stage, it would act for a time, and it would bring me credit -- but it wouldn't pay. The success of a piece doesn't depend on its literary merit or even on its stage effect, but on its 'hitting' somehow. (Allingham, 287, 5 Aug 1880)' Irving procrastinated for years, but six months before Tennyson's death he agreed to produce it, and did so in February 1893. 
Strong of constitution, Tennyson lived to a great age. In his nerve-shattered thirties (the 1840s) he had despairingly resorted to water cures, and intermittently throughout his life he had a fear of blindness, but it was not until a few years before he died that ill health came upon him. In 1888 he suffered severe rheumatic illness, from which he did not recover until May 1889; in 1890-91 there was perilous influenza; and then in July 1892 he entered what was to be his last illness, bronchitis, influenza, neuralgia. 
On 6 October 1892, having recently reached his eighty-fourth year, Tennyson died at Aldworth. That day, Queen Victoria recorded: 'A fine morning -- I heard that dear old Ld Tennyson had breathed his last, a great national loss. He was a great poet, and his ideas were ever grand, noble, elevating. He was very loyal and always very kind and sympathising to me, quite remarkably so. What beautiful lines he wrote to me for my darling Albert, and for my children and Eddy [her grandson the duke of Clarence and Avondale]. He died with his hand on his Shakespeare, and the moon shining full into the window, and over him. A worthy end to such a remarkable man. (Queen Victoria's journal, Dyson and Tennyson, 140)' Tennyson was buried in Westminster Abbey on 12 October. The grave is next to that of Browning, and in front of the monument to Chaucer. On 28 October 1892 there was posthumously published 'The Death of OEnone, Akbar's Dream, and Other Poems'. He left $57,206 13's'. 9died -- this, and royalties to come, from poems that have lasted. 
Such was the sense of national loss that the abolition of the office of poet laureate was solemnly mooted when Tennyson died. It was not until 1 January 1896, more than three years later, that a successor was announced: Alfred Austin, poetaster laureate. 
Emily Tennyson died on 10 August 1896. In October 1897 Hallam Tennyson published, in two volumes, 'Alfred Lord Tennyson: A Memoir'. To this he had devoted the five years since the poet's death, amassing, cutting, and (on occasion) shielding, towards the classic Victorian form, a life and letters. Indispensable, the 'Memoir' is capacious and honourable, at its best in breathing a sense of what it was like in the immediate vicinity of Tennyson during the second half of his life, a memoir quite as much duly as unduly reticent. 
In due course there came the expected 'reaction against Tennyson'. Samuel Butler, his grim comic nose in the wind, had started to jeer as soon as the breath was out of Tennyson's body: 'I see they packed the volume of Shakespeare that he had near him when he died in a little tin box and buried it with him. If they had to bury it they should have either not packed it at all, or, at the least, in a box of silver-gilt. But his friends should have taken it out of the bed when they saw the end was near. It was not necessary to emphasize the fact that the ruling passion for posing was strong with him in death.' A little later he went on, 'It seems that it was not the copy actually in bed with Tennyson when he died that was buried with him, but another copy, let us hope of the same edition, and equally well bound, was substituted for it' (Butler, 254, 257). 
Imminent Edwardians ousted eminent Victorians. Some lovers of Tennyson tried to reform things from within: Harold Nicolson in 1923 brilliantly rescued many of the true poems by conceding that much of Tennyson must go -- while insisting that the essential Tennyson, 'a morbid and unhappy mystic', could and would stay. Here, of all things, was an English 'poete maudit', more, a 'poete laureat maudit'. French symbolism, in the person of Verlaine, had judged 'In Memoriam' harshly: 'When he should have been broken-hearted, he had many reminiscences' -- for all the world as if reminiscences were not one deep and honourable way of attending to a broken heart. It was W. B. Yeats who enjoyed giving English currency to Verlaine's gibe ('The Oxford Book of Modern Verse', 1936, ix). 
It was left to T. S. Eliot, who warmed wittily and deeply to Tennyson, to insist in 1936 on the needed obvious: 'Tennyson is a great poet, for reasons that are perfectly clear. He has three qualities which are seldom found together except in the greatest poets: abundance, variety, and complete competence' (T. S. Eliot, 'In Memoriam', 328). 
Pressed by an anthologist for a biographical paragraph in 1837, Tennyson had sent only the 'dry dates': 'I have no life to give -- for mine has been one of feelings not of actions -- can he not miss me out altogether?' (13 July 1837, 'Letters', 1.154). But the life that truly he gave was one that realized feelings, his own and ours. The qualities of his poetry are most vividly commemorated, appreciated, and placed in the criticism by his contemporaries: by Matthew Arnold, Walter Bagehot, Arthur Hallam, Gerard M. Hopkins, and R. H. Hutton. Supremely, by Walt Whitman ('The Critic', 1 Jan 1887; Jump, 349-50): 'To me, Tennyson shows more than any poet I know (perhaps has been a warning to me) how much there is in finest verbalism. There is such a latent charm in mere words, cunning collocutions, and in the voice ringing them, which he has caught and brought out, beyond all others -- as in the line 'And hollow, hollow, hollow, all delight', in 'The Passing of Arthur'.' 



@@@@@


doc= 27138


Tennyson, Frederick (1807-1898), poet, was born at Louth in Lincolnshire on 5 June 1807, the second son of George Clayton Tennyson (1778-1831), rector of Bag Enderby and Somersby, and his wife, Elizabeth Fytche ('bap'. 1780, died 1865). Frederick grew up in the Somersby rectory, together with his brothers Alfred Tennyson (1809-1892) and Charles (1808-1879) ['see 'Turner, Charles], four other brothers, and four sisters. While his younger brothers received much of their early education at home, Frederick, as the oldest surviving son (the Tennysons' first child had died in early infancy), was sent away to school: first to the grammar school in Louth in 1814, and then from 1818 to 1826 to Eton College, where he was captain of the school. 
From Eton Frederick went first to St John's, then to Trinity College, Cambridge, closely followed by his younger brothers Charles and Alfred. His university career was interrupted in 1828 when he was rusticated for three terms. Having failed to attend chapel, he superciliously accused the chancellor, Christopher Wordsworth (brother of William), of hypocrisy at the disciplinary hearing. Frederick's punishment for this act of insolence set him at odds with a father whose health had been seriously undermined by heavy drinking. The two came to blows on 20 February 1829 -- in an incident that required the presence of the village constable; the constable was the Tennysons' next-door neighbour, a fact often not mentioned in accounts of this incident. After gaining his BA degree in 1832 and spending a few footloose years in and around Somersby, Frederick went to live in Florence, managing to support a comfortable lifestyle with income from inherited property in Grimsby. In 1839 he married Maria Giuliotti (died 1884), daughter of the chief magistrate of Siena. 
The confusingly titled 'Poems by Two Brothers' (1827) had contained a handful of poems by Frederick, in addition to those by Alfred and Charles. Frederick continued to write poetry, but his collection 'Days and Hours' (1854) was so little noticed that he published no more poetry until an old man. The greater part of his life was dedicated to pursuing his love of music -- in Florence he frequently invited a small orchestra to play at his home -- and mysticism. Like his sister Mary he was a keen reader of Swedenborg. After leaving Italy in 1859 and moving to St Ewold's, Jersey, he helped to edit and promote an arcane and astrological book about masonry -- 'Veritas' (1874) -- by his friend Henry Melville. 
The work produced in Tennyson's last years -- 'The Isles of Greece' (1890), an epic based on fragments of Sappho and Alcaeus, 'Daphne' (1891), and 'Poems of the Day and Year' (1895) -- was no more noticed than the earlier volume (part of which was contained in the 1895 title). Four lyrics included in the second edition of Palgrave's 'Golden Treasury' showed Frederick at his best, but did not encourage discovery of his other work. He outlived both Alfred and Charles, and spent his final years in South Kensington, London, at 14 Holland Villas Road, the home of his oldest child, Julius, by then a captain in the army, and reputed to be the strongest man in uniform. Frederick Tennyson died at home on 26 February 1898. 
Edward FitzGerald's opinion of his friend Frederick's poetry, as expressed in a letter to E. B. Cowell in 1871, has been borne out by posterity: 'There is a monotony and total want of dramatic faculty in the stories (for stories mostly the book consists of) which will confine them to very few readers, and to those few readers' shelves.' 


@@@@@


doc= 27139


Teonge, Henry (1621-1690), Church of England clergyman and diarist, was born at Wolverton, Warwickshire, on 18 March 1621, the son of George Teonge (died 1662), rector of Wolverton, and his wife, Dorothy Nicholls. He was educated at Warwick School before entering Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1639, graduating BA in 1643. He served as rector of Alcester between about 1650 and 1670, when he moved to Spernall. Financial difficulties compelled him to seek additional employment in the navy, and in May 1675 he became chaplain of the frigate 'Assistance' (under Captain William Houlding), ordered to join Sir John Narbrough's fleet in the Mediterranean. He served on her until she paid off in November 1676. A period ashore in London and Spernall only encouraged Teonge's creditors, and he judiciously returned to sea in April 1678, joining Captain Anthony Langston's 'Bristol' for another voyage to the Mediterranean, where he transferred to the 'Royal Oak' on 16 January 1679. After his return to England in June of the same year Teonge never returned to sea, and he lived in comparative obscurity at Spernall until his death. He married first Jane, and they had three sons and a daughter; following her death in 1682, he married Penelope Hunt at Spernall on 21 October 1686. Teonge died at Spernall, where he was buried on 21 March 1690; he was survived by his second wife. 
Teonge's posthumous fame rests solely on his diary of his two naval voyages. Full of interest in his surroundings and lively good humour, the diary is one of the most important descriptions of seagoing life in the seventeenth century. It frequently displays rather greater concern for the wardroom meals than for the spiritual well-being of the crew, together with a remarkably self-deprecating honesty on Teonge's part. On his first going to sea he admitted that all his possessions were in 'an old sack' ('Diary', 26 May 1675) and that he was only able to obtain the essentials for his voyage by pawning his cloak and selling his horse. The social aspects of naval life proved irresistible to the impoverished, ageing chaplain, and the rituals of toasting, songs, and party games were recorded in exhaustive detail. Teonge noted with relish the officers' dinner on 29 May 1678, the king's birthday: 'an excellent salad and eggs, a fillet of veal roasted, a grand dish of mackerel, and a large lobster -- so hard is our fare at sea: and all washed down with good Margate ale, March beer, and, last of all, a good bowl of punch. (ibid., 29 May 1678)' The nature of Teonge's diary, and the disappearance of the manuscript for almost a century after its first publication in 1825, led to persistent suggestions that it might have been a forgery. Confirmation both of Teonge's existence and of the sequences of events which he recorded came from the Admiralty records in the Public Record Office, and the re-emergence of the manuscript itself at a Sothebys sale in 1918 put the matter conclusively to rest. 


@@@@@


doc= 27140


Ternan (fl. 6th-7th cent.), holy man, was an obscure saint venerated mainly in north-east Scotland. His feast day, 12 June, is the same as that of the (equally obscure) Irish St Torannan. The two may well be identical, since the Irish martyrologies describe him as living 'across the sea', linking him with 'Alba', Scotland, and specifically with Banchory-Ternan, while at least one Scottish source calls Ternan 'archbishop of Ireland'. His dedications are mostly in Mearns (Kincardineshire) and Aberdeenshire, notably at Arbuthnott, Slains, and Banchory-Ternan, but with a scattering in the Western Isles as well. His bell and some corporeal relics were preserved at Banchory-Ternan until the Reformation. 
The main source for legends concerning Ternan is the early sixteenth-century 'Breviarium Aberdonense'. The lessons for his feast day locate his birthplace in Mearns (perhaps at Arbuthnott), and associate him with St Palladius (patron of Fordoun, a few miles west of Arbuthnott) and St Machar of Aberdeen. They also connect him with an otherwise unknown king or nobleman called Convecturius (perhaps from Gaelic 'coinmedoir', collector of tribute), a heathen whom he allegedly converted. Ternan's baptism by St Palladius ('fl'. 431) is told in the lessons for the latter's feast day, and is also mentioned by the chronicler John Fordun. However, he is also said to have studied under Pope Gregory the Great ('r'. 590-604), to have been ordained by him, and then to have brought back to Scotland a bell given to him by the pope; this was the bell preserved at Banchory-Ternan. A fragmentary foundation legend of Laurencekirk (also in Mearns), preserved in a late eleventh-century Canterbury source, calls St Ternan 'archipontifex Hiberniae', knows that he is said to have resuscitated three dead men, and describes how he had a disputation with Archbishop Laurence, Augustine's successor at Canterbury, on the paschal question at or near Fordoun, in which he accepted Laurence's arguments. 
None of this helps to establish Ternan as a historical figure separate from the Irish Torannan; he is probably a legendary transposition of the latter, introduced into eastern Scotland after the Gaelic conquest of the Picts in the ninth century. His cult became important and popular, causing him to be associated with other saints with dedications in the same area. 


@@@@@


doc= 27141


Terne, Christopher (1620/21-1673), physician, son of Nathaniel Terne of Chatham, Kent, was born at Rochester, Kent. After schooling at Rochester he was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 4 April 1636, aged fifteen, graduating BA in 1640 and MA in 1643. He entered the University of Leiden on 22 July 1647, and there graduated MD. In May 1650 he was incorporated first at Cambridge and then at Oxford. Terne was examined as a candidate at the College of Physicians on 10 May 1650, and was elected a fellow on 15 November 1655. He was elected assistant physician to St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, on 13 May 1653 and held office until 1669. He married Susan, daughter of Henry Borne. 
Terne was appointed lecturer on anatomy to the Barber-Surgeons' Company in 1656, and in 1663 Samuel Pepys heard him lecture 'upon the Kidnys, urethers, and yard, which was very fine' (Pepys, 4.59). Terne's 'Praelectio prima ad chirurgos' and his other lectures (nos. 1917-21), written in a beautiful hand, are preserved in the Sloane collection in the British Library. The lectures, dated 1656, begin with an account of the skin, going on to the deeper parts, and were delivered contemporaneously with the dissection of a body on the table. Several volumes of notes of his extensive medical reading are preserved in the same collection (nos. 1887, 1890, and 1897), together with an important essay entitled 'An respiratio inserviat nutritioni?'. He delivered the Harveian oration (1662-3?) at the College of Physicians, in which, as in his lectures, he spoke with the utmost reverence of William Harvey. The oration exists in manuscript (Sloane MS 1903). Terne also wrote some Latin verses on Christopher Bennet, which were placed below his portrait in the 'Theatrum Tabidorum'. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 8 October 1662. Terne died at his house in Lime Street, London, on 1 December 1673, and was buried in St Andrew Undershaft. 
Terne's daughter Henrietta (died 1712) married the physician Edward Browne. Terne's library was sold on 12 April 1686 with that of Dr Thomas Allen. See 'Bibliothecae medicae, sive, Catalogus libolum... Christ. Terne' (1686). 


@@@@@


doc= 27142


Terrick, Richard (1710-1777), bishop of London, was born probably at York and was baptized in York Minster on 20 July of that year. He was the eldest son of Samuel Terrick (died 1719), prebendary of York, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Gibson (died 1764), widow of Nathaniel Arlush of Kedlington, Yorkshire. Although his early schooling is apparently unrecorded he matriculated as pensioner at Clare College, Cambridge, on 30 May 1726; he graduated BA in 1729 and MA in 1733. He was a fellow of the college from 1731 to 1738; the latter year, in which he resigned his fellowship, was probably the date of his marriage to Tabitha (1712/13-1790), daughter of William Stainforth, rector of Simonburn, Northumberland. Terrick was ordained deacon in the diocese of Ely on 24 December 1732 and priest two years later. Of a clerical family, it is probable that he was from an early age destined for a career in the church; his younger brother Samuel (died 1761) followed him to Cambridge and was subsequently a prebendary of Durham. 
Terrick quickly acquired valuable connections. He was preacher at the Rolls Chapel from 1736 to 1757, and from 1739 to 1742 he served as chaplain to the speaker of the House of Commons, Arthur Onslow. He was a canon of Windsor from 1742 to 1749 and chaplain to George II from 1745 to 1757. He became vicar of Twickenham on 30 June 1749 and on 7 October of the same year he was installed as prebendary of Ealdland and canon-residentiary at St Paul's Cathedral. 
Partly through the influence of William Cavendish, fourth duke of Devonshire, but more particularly due to the personal decision of George II, Terrick was nominated to the bishopric of Peterborough on 7 June 1757 and consecrated at Lambeth on 3 July. At this point he relinquished his preferments, with the exception of Twickenham. One of his first acts as bishop was to issue a letter to his clergy urging a more devout observance of Good Friday. According to Horace Walpole, who despised Terrick as a time-server and on one occasion reportedly insulted him by addressing him, after his elevation to the bench, as plain 'Mr Terrick' ('N&Q'), Terrick deserted the duke of Devonshire and transferred his allegiance to John Stuart, third earl of Bute, in expectation of preferment on the accession of Bute's affectionate pupil the future George III. If so he was not disappointed. The death of Richard Osbaldeston on 13 May 1764 created a vacancy for the see of London. The prime minister, George Grenville, was solicited for the vacancy by William Warburton, bishop of Gloucester, and Thomas Newton, bishop of Bristol. However, as Grenville tactfully explained to Warburton, George III had intended that Terrick should succeed Osbaldeston ever since the latter's appointment in 1762 (Smith, 2.314). On his translation Terrick informed Grenville that he had increased the income of Peterborough from 1000 guineas to 'eleven hundred pounds clear' (ibid., 2.313). He was confirmed as bishop on 6 June 1764 and resigned the vicarage of Twickenham, which he estimated as '$200, clear about $140' (ibid.). On 11 July 1764 he was sworn of the privy council. 
There was never any doubt but that Terrick would be a loyal ministerial adherent in the House of Lords. In February 1764 he pledged his support to the ministry of George Grenville (Tomlinson, 88-9). As bishop of London his pastoral responsibilities included the North American colonies, and he strongly supported the work of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in those areas; he preached the annual sermon before the society in 1764. He gave general support to the policy of taxing the American colonies and, ultimately, of using force to suppress the rebellion. Terrick was not one of the opponents of the repeal of the 'Stamp Act' in 1766 and he seems to have shared the view of several of his fellow bishops that repeal, by allaying colonial discontent, would render more acceptable the long-standing Anglican aspiration to establish a resident bishop in the colonies. He was listed as a supporter of North's administration in 1774 and 1775 (Debrett, 7.17; 'London Evening-Post', 7 Oct 1775). 
He shared much of the anti-Catholicism of his time, forbidding the intrusion of mural paintings into St Paul's Cathedral on the grounds that such a practice was 'Popish' (Sykes, 236) and instituting diocesan inquiries into the alleged growth of Catholic numbers. In 1765 Horace Walpole noted, 'I see by the papers that the Bishop of London is suppressing Mass-houses' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 30.209). However, he did not oppose the 'Quebec Act', which granted limited toleration and legal rights to Francophone Catholics in Canada, in 1774. By contrast he spoke and voted in the House of Lords against the 'Dissenters Relief Bill' on 19 May 1772 and appears to have colluded with several dissenting critics of the bill to help to secure its rejection in the upper house (Ditchfield, 54, 76). He devoted considerable time and money to the refurbishment of the chapel of Fulham Palace and was a generous benefactor of Clare College, Cambridge. Though never a distinguished scholar he published six separate sermons and acquired a reputation as a conscientious, if not a particularly inspiring, diocesan. There is also evidence that he was a more than competent preacher; Alexander Carlyle, for instance, heaped praise upon his preaching and his reading of prayers. It was probably for these reasons that he remained on close terms with George III, who, according to Walpole, consulted him about the surreptitious marriages of the dukes of Cumberland and Gloucester (Walpole, 'Corr.', 23.483). On the death of Archbishop Drummond of York in 1776 the king offered the vacancy to Terrick, who declined it on grounds of age and ill health. 
Terrick died at Fulham Palace on 31 March 1777 and was buried on 8 April in All Saints' churchyard, Fulham. The monument to him in that church was probably more accurate than many eulogies to the dead when it singled out his 'great experience and sound judgment, his candour, moderation and benevolence' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 9.584). There was nothing in the exercise of his benevolence that challenged either Anglican doctrinal orthodoxy or Anglican hegemony in the state. It is a measure of the success of his career that his daughter Elizabeth (died 1804) married Nathaniel Ryder ['see under 'Ryder, Sir Dudley], who became the first Baron Harrowby, and that his widow was reported to have bequeathed a fortune of $30,000 on her death in 1790 ('GM', 1st ser., 60/1, 1790, 186). 


@@@@@


doc= 27143


Terrien De Lacouperie, Albert Etienne Jean Baptiste (d. 1894), philologist, born in Normandy, was a descendant of the Cornish family of Terrien, which emigrated to France in the seventeenth century during the civil war, and acquired the property of La Couperie in Normandy. His father was a silk merchant and Terrien De Lacouperie, after accompanying him to Hong Kong, followed his father into the silk trade. After almost all of his property was destroyed in a typhoon, he returned to Europe. Opposition to the republic made him decide to settle permanently in England rather than his native France, and he eventually became a British subject. He turned his attention entirely to the study of oriental languages, in which he had become interested in Hong Kong, where he had acquired an intimate knowledge of the Chinese language. In 1867 he published in Paris a philological work, entitled 'Du langage: essai sur la nature et l'etude des mots et des langues', which attracted considerable attention. He became interested in the progress made in deciphering Babylonian inscriptions, and by the resemblance between the Chinese characters and the early Akkadian hieroglyphics. The comparative philology of the two languages occupied most of his later life, and he was able to show an early affinity between them. 
In 1879 Terrien De Lacouperie went to London, and in the same year was elected a fellow of the Royal Asiatic Society. In 1884 he became professor of Indo-Chinese philology, as applied to the languages of south-eastern Asia, at University College, London. He took a particular interest in the derivations of the languages of Chinese indigenous groups, and collected materials on their vocabulary and grammar, including those of the Lolos people of western China. He published his findings in 'The Languages of China before the Chinese' in London in 1887. The Lolos material had originally been collected by Edward Baber of the British consular service, who was a close friend. Lacouperie also wrote extensively for the 'Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society' and other publications on the relationship between Babylonian and Chinese characters, the origins of Asiatic languages, other related philological subjects, and Buddhism. From 1886 he edited the 'Babylonian and Oriental Record'. His last years were largely occupied by a study of the 'I Ching (Yi Jing)' ('Book of changes'), the oldest work in the Chinese language. Its meaning had long proved a puzzle both to native and to foreign scholars. Lacouperie demonstrated that the basis of the work consisted of fragmentary notes, chiefly lexical in character, and noticed that they bore a close resemblance to the syllabaries of Chaldea. In 1892 he published the first part of an explanatory treatise entitled 'The Oldest Book of the Chinese', in which he stated his theory of the nature of the 'I Ching' and gave translations of passages from it. The treatise, however, was not completed before his death. 
Terrien De Lacouperie's services to oriental study were recognized by an honorary LittD from the University of Louvain and, for a time, a small pension from the French government. When that was withdrawn his friends tried, unsuccessfully, to obtain him an equivalent from the English ministry. He was twice awarded the prix Julien by the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres for his services to oriental philology. Terrien De Lacouperie died of typhoid fever at his home, 136 Bishop's Road, Fulham, on 11 October 1894, leaving a widow, Antoinette de la Brunetiere. He also edited the 'Babylonian and Oriental Record' from 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 27144


Terriss, William (1847-1897), actor, was born on 20 February 1847 at 7 Circus Road, St John's Wood, London, the youngest of the three sons of George Herbert Lewin, a barrister (a connection of Mrs Grote, the wife of the historian of ancient Greece, and a grandson of Thomas Lewin, private secretary to Warren Jenkins), and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Friend. He began his formal education at Christ's Hospital in April 1854, and remained there for two years before transferring successively to a school at Littlehampton, Windermere College, and Bruce Castle School, Tottenham, from the last of which he ran away. At the age of sixteen he embarked on a career in the merchant navy, the duration of which, though greatly expanded in his recollections in later life, was only a fortnight. He did, however, retain his uniform, and was thus attired when he arrived aboard a private carriage at Weston-super-Mare Station on the last day of February 1865. The manner of his arrival, combined with his appearance and bearing, resulted in Lewin being mistaken for Queen Victoria's second son, Prince Alfred. Alert to the advantages of the error, Lewin sustained his role until he left the town to the cries of 'Long live Prince Alfred!' Brief though they both were, Lewin's experiences at sea and 'role-playing' as Prince Alfred prefigured his career as an actor specializing in nautical melodrama. 
Lewin, who had been only ten when his father died, swiftly disposed of his small inheritance; his elder brothers set about finding a career for him, and he tried tea planting in Assam, where Thomas Lewin was deputy commissioner of Chittagong, and medicine at St Mary's Hospital, where Friend Lewin was a houseman. Neither career lasted, but at St Mary's he took part in a programme of amateur dramatics held at the Royal Gallery of Illustration in Regent Street (27 April 1867). Encouraged by this experience, he secured engagements in Birmingham, the first -- unpaid -- as a necessarily acrobatic double for the leading man in Boucicault's 'Arrah-na-pogue' and the second -- paid -- as Chowser in the same author's 'The Flying Scud'. Now intent on a theatrical career, Lewin -- in consultation with his brother Friend and a London street directory -- lighted upon Terriss as his stage name and set about securing an engagement with the Bancrofts, opposite whom the Lewins had lived in St John's Wood. Not for the first -- or last -- time Terriss used his disarmingly frank manner to good effect, and emerged with the part of Lord Cloudwrays in the forthcoming revival of T. W. Robertson's 'Society' at the Prince of Wales Theatre (21 September 1868). The Bancrofts did not retain Terriss's services for the next production (Robertson's 'School'), and the actor took the only offer available to him, at Astley's Amphitheatre, to which his accomplishment as a horseman made him well-suited. It was at Margate that Terriss's prowess as a swimmer so impressed the young Isabel Lewis (died 1898), who acted under the stage name of Amy Fellowes, that she effected an introduction, as a consequence of which the couple were married, at Holy Trinity Church by Portland Road Station on 15 September 1870. The sparsity of representatives from both families may have been indicative of their lack of enthusiasm for the match, but, undiscouraged, the newly-weds set off for their honeymoon -- a bus ride to Richmond. 
Before long Terriss took his young bride on a far more ambitious expedition, to the Falkland Islands via Montevideo, which was in a state of revolution. The final leg of the journey to the Falklands was fraught with difficulties (a water-logged vessel, 200 miles off course, without operational pumps) and might have ended in disaster but for Terriss's remarkable powers of leadership in a crisis. During a sojourn of only five months in the Falkland Isles, Terriss busied himself with sheep farming, breaking in horses, and building and sailing a raft, and became a father -- to a daughter, Ellaline Terriss, who began her long life at the Ship Hotel, Stanley, on 13 April 1871. The return voyage aboard a whaler was not lacking in incident, with the crew mutinying and electing Terriss as captain. 
In the summer of 1871 the Terriss family settled into a house on Barnes Common, which was to be their base for the next twelve years. Terriss resumed his stage career at Drury Lane, where his roles included Silvius in Adelaide Neilson's benefit performance of 'As You Like It', but the wanderlust reclaimed him, and he took his family to Lexington, Kentucky, where he was involved in a short-lived horse-breeding venture. By the autumn of 1872 the Terriss family was back in Barnes, where Tom was born on 28 September, his father having begun his third assault on the stage a week earlier at Drury Lane as Master Graeme -- resplendent in tartan kilt -- in Andrew Halliday's 'The Lady of the Lake', in which Clement Scott commended his natural and manly declamation. Other successes during the 1870s included Doricourt in 'The Belle's Stratagem' (at the Strand Theatre, 29 November 1873, for 250 performances), Captain Molyneux in Boucicault's 'The Shaughraun' (at Drury Lane, 4 September 1875, and the Adelphi, 18 November 1876), and Squire Thornhill in 'Olivia', W. G. Wills's adaptation of Goldsmith's 'The Vicar of Wakefield' (at the Court Theatre, 28 March 1878), with Ellen Terry in the title role. 
The connection with Ellen Terry was maintained when Terriss joined Henry Irving's Lyceum company to play M. de Chateau Renaud in 'The Corsican Brothers' (20 September 1880). During his first engagement Terriss's roles included Sinnatus in Tennyson's 'The Cup', Cassio, Mercutio, and Don Pedro (in 'Much Ado about Nothing'). At the Lyceum, Terriss, who ranked second only to Ellen Terry, enjoyed a unique relationship with Irving, who would countenance remarks and agree to suggestions 'to put the lime[light] on me' (Rowell, 27) which would have been unthinkable from any other actor. Well proportioned, his face blessed with handsomely regular features, gallant of bearing, and forthright, if sometimes uncomprehending, in his delivery of Shakespearian verse, Terriss was the perfect foil and contrast to Irving. In 1883-4 he accompanied Irving on his American tour, but in 1884-5 he remained at the Lyceum Theatre during Mary Anderson's tenure. As Romeo, whom he had already played to the Juliet of both Ellen Wallis (Drury Lane, 1874) and Adelaide Neilson (Haymarket, 1879), Terriss was again the perfect physical embodiment, though judges seeking the soul and the poetry of the young Montague found him wanting. On 27 May 1885 Terriss and Ellen Terry, with Irving now playing Dr Primrose, appeared in a revival of 'Olivia'. 
At the end of 1885 Terriss entered into a new phase of his career, when he moved to the Adelphi Theatre to play Lieutenant David Kingsley in 'Harbour Lights', by G. R. Sims and Henry Pettitt, which enjoyed an uninterrupted run of 513 nights. His performance was hailed as the most perfect impersonation of a British sailor since T. P. Cooke -- an achievement which must have been enriched by Terriss's own adventures at sea. There followed a succession of roles -- Frank Beresford in 'The Bells of Haslemere' (25 July 1887), Jack Medway in 'The Union Jack' (19 July 1888), and Eric Normanhurst in 'The Silver Falls' (29 December 1888) -- in which Terriss could display his personal accomplishments to advantage, sometimes in scenes which paralleled episodes in his own life. In 1889 he toured the United States with Jessie Millward (1861-1932), his leading lady and constant companion since the mid-1880s. Their repertory included 'Othello' and a Shakespeare recital, as well as contemporary works. 
After a revival of 'Harbour Lights' at the Adelphi Theatre, Terriss returned to Irving's Lyceum company, where his most important roles were Claudio in 'Much Ado about Nothing' (5 January 1891), the King in 'Henry VIII' (5 January 1892), Edgar in 'King Lear' (10 November 1892), and Henry II in Tennyson's 'Becket' (6 February 1893). During 1893-4, together with Jessie Millward, who had joined the Lyceum company (where she too had served an apprenticeship), he accompanied Irving on a lengthy North American tour. 
Terriss and Jessie Millward returned to the Adelphi Theatre on 6 September 1894, when he was the original Gerald Austen in 'The Fatal Card', by Haddon Chambers and B. C. Stephenson. The English premiere of 'The Girl I Left behind Me', by Franklin Fyles and David Belasco, was staged on 13 April 1895, to be followed by 'One of the Best', by George Edwardes and Terriss's son-in-law, Seymour Hicks, on 21 December 1895. G. B. Shaw, whose review was headed 'One of the worst', wrote: 'Mr Terriss continues to retain his fascination even in tartan trousers; and he rises fully to such heights as there are in the trial scene and the degradation scene' ('Saturday Review', 28 Dec 1895). Shortly afterwards, Shaw wrote 'The Devil's Disciple' as a vehicle for Terriss, who, having dozed during Shaw's reading of his work, dismissed it as unsuited to Miss Millward and himself. Instead, on 23 December 1896 Terriss and Jessie Millward appeared to great acclaim in a revival of Douglas Jerrold's prototypical nautical melodrama 'Black-Eyed Susan'. The Adelphi Theatre then played host to William Gillette's 'Secret Service', initially with an American company, then with an English cast including Terriss as Lewis Dumont, a northern spy in the Confederate capital of Richmond, and Jessie Millward as a loving and protective, though not completely unsuspicious, southern belle. 
Jessie Millward could not protect Terriss from the fate which awaited him at the stage door of the Adelphi Theatre on the evening of 16 December 1897. For some time she had been troubled by nightmares, in particular one in which Terriss was calling out 'Sis! Sis!' from a locked room, the door of which she burst open to catch him as he fell. On the ill-fated night Terriss and John Henry Graves left her flat for the theatre where, just before seven o'clock, Terriss was stabbed three times by an out-of-work actor, Richard Archer Prince. Jessie Millward arrived in time to witness the dreadful scene and to hear Terriss's last words: 'Sis! Sis!'. Terriss's death was as sensational as melodrama; at the ensuing trial, Prince, who had harboured a long-standing sense of grievance against Terriss, was pronounced insane and committed to Broadmoor Criminal Lunatic Asylum. Terriss's death left behind the traditional figure of the bereft heroine, except that in his case there were two: his wife and Jessie Millward. It was Jessie Millward who, in defiance of the custom of the day, whereby women attended funerals only most exceptionally, was present at the funeral service on 21 December at Brompton cemetery, accompanied by Sir Henry Irving. Her wreath was inscribed 'To my dear comrade'. Mrs Terriss remained at the family home, The Cottage, 2 Bedford Road, Bedford Park. In his death, as in his life, Terriss's loved ones displayed a generosity of spirit to each other. Mrs Terriss did not outlive her husband long, and died the following year; after a period of intense desolation. Jessie Millward resumed her career, and eventually (in 1907) married the Scots actor John Glendinning. Of Terriss's three children, his daughter Ellaline survived her one hundredth birthday on 13 April 1971 by three months. 
Terriss was accorded an unusual memorial in the form of a new lifeboat house on the Grand Parade, Eastbourne, built by subscriptions raised by the 'Daily Telegraph'; he also had a theatre at Rotherhithe briefly named after him. On the centenary of his death, a memorial plaque to Terris was unveiled by Sir Donald Sinden at the Adelphi Theatre, where Terriss's ghost is said to haunt the scene of his death. A good-looking and athletic man, gallant in bearing, his performances in Shakespeare were creditable though not outstanding, but in a succession of melodramatic (often nautical) roles he was unsurpassed, the last and probably the finest flowering of a tradition which the theatre was about to cede to the cinema. Whether there would have been a place for Terriss in that new world will remain an unanswerable question. 


@@@@@


doc= 27145


Terrot, Charles (1758-1839), army officer, was born at Berwick upon Tweed on 1 May 1758, eldest son of Charles Terrot, captain of invalids and commander of the garrison, and Elizabeth Pratt, of an established local family. He entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, on 15 March 1771. He was commissioned second lieutenant on 1 March 1774 and in 1776 volunteered for service in North America; he first saw action at Three Rivers on 8 June when the Americans were forced to withdraw to Ticonderoga. In June 1777 he joined General Burgoyne's army on its advance from Canada. After the taking of Ticonderoga on 6 July, he took command of the artillery there, and helped beat off an American attack in September. 
After Burgoyne's surrender at Saratoga, Terrot returned to Canada. On 7 July 1779 he was promoted first lieutenant and in 1780 went to Niagara where he remained for nearly four years and was employed chiefly as an assistant military engineer. The defences of the place were fully repaired under his supervision. In 1782 he surveyed the country between lakes Erie and Ontario with a view to its purchase by the government from the Native Americans. He conducted the subsequent negotiations with the indigenous peoples to their satisfaction and to the considerable advantage of the government. On 8 March 1784 he was promoted captain-lieutenant and returned to England. In 1791 he volunteered for service in India and arrived at Madras on 10 October as quartermaster to a force of two artillery companies. He subsequently joined Lord Cornwallis's army and in February 1792 took part in the siege of Seringapatam until peace terms were agreed with Tipu Sultan. On 26 March he moved with the army marching to Madras which was reached in May. 
On the opening of the war with France, Terrot, still acting as quartermaster, took part in the attack on Pondicherry which, after a brief bombardment, was successfully concluded on 23 August 1793. On 25 September he was promoted to captain and returned to England to command no. 3 company, 1st battalion Royal Artillery, at Portsmouth. On 1 March 1794 he was made brevet major for his services and became commander of the artillery at Portsmouth and of the south-west district. He married Eleanor Bell on 29 April 1795 at Berwick upon Tweed; they had three children. He was made a brevet lieutenant-colonel on 1 January 1798. The following year he served during the Helder expedition, landing on 27 August, and joining in the action at Bergen on 19 September under the duke of York, at Alkmaar on 2 October, and at Beverwijk on the 6th. On the conclusion of hostilities he returned to England in November only to be shipwrecked off Yarmouth in company with Anthony Farrington and, like him, lost all his baggage. 
Terrot was promoted major in the regiment on 12 November 1800 and lieutenant-colonel on 14 October 1801. After a period of regimental duty he was promoted colonel, Royal Artillery, on 1 June 1806. In July 1809 he joined the expedition to the Scheldt and directed the artillery at the siege of Flushing which surrendered on 15 August. He was briefly involved in a demand for the city's church bells, or cash in lieu, as outdated tradition required. This was refused both by the city and by the British government and was never attempted again. 
Terrot became a major-general on 4 June 1811 and in 1814 was sent to command the artillery at Gibraltar in succession to Major-General John Smith. The latter, however, owing to the death of the governor, had succeeded to the command of the fortress, and refused to be relieved. Having vainly awaited developments, after three months Terrot successfully sought permission to return to England. He resigned his appointment and retired on 23 September 1815 on a pension of $700 a year backdated to 25 June 1814. He was promoted to lieutenant-general on the retired list on 12 August 1819 and to full general on 10 January 1837. He died in Newcastle upon Tyne on 23 September 1839. 


@@@@@


doc= 27146


Terrot, Charles Hughes (1790-1872), Scottish Episcopal bishop of Edinburgh, born at Cuddalore, India, on 19 September 1790, was a descendant of a Huguenot family. His father, Elias Terrot, a captain in the Indian army, was killed at the siege of Bangalore within weeks of his son's birth. His mother, whose maiden name was Mary Fonteneau, returned to England and settled with her son at Berwick upon Tweed. From the age of nine he was educated at the home of the Revd John Fawcett of Carlisle, and later attended Carlisle grammar school. In 1808 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, and graduated BA in 1812. He was elected a fellow of his college in 1813 and in the same year was ordained deacon. 
Ordained priest in 1814 by the bishop of Chester, Terrot became minister of the episcopal congregation at Haddington, a position formerly held by his uncle, the Revd William Terrot. This was a 'qualified chapel' of Scottish episcopalians who had conformed to the Hanoverian dynasty in the early eighteenth century and thus qualified for legal toleration. They were not in communion with the bishops of the Scottish Episcopal church, having adopted the English 'Book of Common Prayer' and being staffed by clergymen ordained in the Church of England. Terrot led this congregation into union with the Scottish Episcopal church in 1815, a union made possible by the Scottish episcopalians' renunciation of Jacobitism in 1788 and their adoption of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' in 1804. While at Haddington, Terrot devoted his leisure to poetry, winning the Cambridge University Seatonian prize in 1816 for his poem 'Hezekiah and Sennacherib'. In 1817 he went to Edinburgh as colleague to James Walker (later bishop of Edinburgh), with whom he shared the charge of St Peter's, Roxburgh Place. Terrot was married in 1818 to Sarah Ingram (died 1855), daughter of Captain Samuel Wood of Minlands, near Berwick upon Tweed. They had fourteen children, six of whom predeceased Terrot. His eldest daughter, Sarah Anne Terrot, was the third woman to join the Sisterhood of the Holy Cross (Park Village Sisterhood), founded by Edward Pusey in 1845. She nursed British forces in the Crimea with Florence Nightingale, and was afterwards awarded the Royal Red Cross. From 1829 to 1833 Terrot was in sole charge of St Peter's, and in 1833 he became one of three clergy at St Paul's, York Place, Edinburgh. In 1837 he was appointed dean of Edinburgh and Fife, in 1839 rector of St Paul's, and in 1841 bishop of Edinburgh and Pantonian professor at the theological college (while retaining the charge of St Paul's). 
On the death of William Skinner (1778-1857), bishop of Aberdeen, Terrot was elected primus of the Scottish Episcopal church. As primus he found it difficult to sympathize with the former non-juring tradition in Scottish Episcopacy, preferring the southern high-church tradition that looked to the Church of England. But he was a force for unity when the tensions between the Anglicizing and the formerly non-juring traditions of Scottish Episcopalianism, together with Anglo-Catholicism, erupted in controversies over the eucharist and the Scottish communion office in the late 1850s and 1860s. In 1859 he married a widow, Charlotte Madden (died 1862). Terrot remained primus until a paralytic stroke compelled his resignation in 1862. An excellent mathematician, he was for fourteen years a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He was also a member of the Architectural Society of Scotland. Besides numerous charges and sermons, Terrot edited the Greek text of the epistle to the 'Romans', with an introduction, paraphrase, and notes (published 1828), and translated the Lutheran Johann Ernesti's 'Institutio interpretis novi testamenti' (1761) in two volumes entitled 'Principles of Biblical Interpretation' (1832-3). Terrot died on 2 April 1872 at Edinburgh, and was buried in the city's Calton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 27147


Terry, Daniel (1789-1829), actor and playwright, was born in Bath and educated first at Bath grammar school and then at a private school at Wingfield, Wiltshire, under Revd Edward Spencer. For five years he was a pupil of the architect Samuel Wyatt, but, after acting the part of Heartwell in 'The Prize' at Bath, Terry left him to join the company at Sheffield under the management of the elder Macready. His first appearance was as Tressel in 'Richard III', and he went on to play Cromwell in 'Henry VIII' and Edmund in 'King Lear'. Towards the close of 1805 he joined Stephen Kemble in the north of England. When Kemble's company broke up in 1806 he went to Liverpool. His success there recommended him to Henry Siddons, who brought him out in Edinburgh (29 November 1809) as Bertrand in William Dimond's 'The Foundling of the Forest'. 
At that period Terry's figure is said to have been well formed and graceful, his countenance powerfully expressive, and his voice strong, full, and clear, though not melodious. He is also credited with stage knowledge, energetic and appropriate action, good judgement, and an active mind. On 12 December 1809 he was Antigonus in 'The Winter's Tale', on 8 January 1810 Prospero, and on 29 January Argyle in Joanna Baillie's 'The Family Legend'. Scott, who contributed a prologue which Terry delivered, spoke well of this performance. On 22 November Terry played Falstaff in 'Henry IV'. On 15 January 1811 he was the first Roderick Dhu in 'The Lady of the Lake', adapted by Edmund John Eyre; on 6 March he played Polonius; on the 18th he repeated Roderick Dhu in 'The Knight of Snowdoun', a second version, by Thomas Morton, of 'The Lady of the Lake', not much more prosperous than the former; and on the 23rd, for his benefit, was Falstaff in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'. He was Lord Ogleby in 'The Clandestine Marriage' on 18 November 1811. 
Terry made his first appearance in London in this part, at the Haymarket, on 20 May 1812. During that season he played Shylock, Job Thornberry, Sir Anthony Absolute, Major Sturgeon in 'The Major of Garratt', Dr Pangloss in 'The Heir-at-Law', Don Caesar in 'A Bold Stroke for a Husband', Megrim in 'Blue Devils', Harmony in 'Everyone has his Fault', Sir Edward Mortimer in 'The Iron Chest', Leon in 'Rule a Wife and have a Wife', Gradus in 'Who's the Dupe?', Romaldi in 'The Tale of Mystery', Barford in 'Who Wants a Guinea?', Selico in 'The Africans', Heartall in 'The Soldier's Daughter', Bustleton in 'Manager in Distress', Octavian, and Iago -- a remarkable list for a first season. He created some original characters in unimportant plays, the only part of note being Count Salerno in Eyre's 'Look at Home' (15 August 1812), founded on Moore's 'Zeluco'. Terry was announced to reopen, on 14 November, the Edinburgh theatre as Lord Ogleby, but was ill and did not appear until the 23rd. The following day he played Shylock. 
On 8 September 1813, as Leon in 'Rule a Wife and have a Wife', Terry made his first appearance at Covent Garden, where, except for frequent migrations to Edinburgh and summer seasons at the Haymarket, he remained until 1822. Among the parts he played in his first season were Sir Robert Bramble in 'The Poor Gentleman', Dornton in 'The Road to Ruin', Ford, Sir Adam Contest in 'The Wedding Day', Ventidius in 'Antony and Cleopatra', Shylock, Churlton, an original part in James Kenney's 'Debtor and Creditor' (26 April 1814), and Sir Oliver in 'The School for Scandal'. 
On 12 March 1816 'Guy Mannering', a musical adaptation by Terry of Scott's novel, was seen for the first time; this appears to have been the first of Terry's adaptations from Scott. At the Haymarket he appeared as Periwinkle in 'A Bold Stroke for a Wife', Hardcastle, Hotspur, Sir George Thunder, Sir Pertinax McSycophant, Sir Fretful Plagiary, Eustace de Saint-Pierre, Lord Scratch in 'The Dramatist', and in many other parts. In 1815, meanwhile, he had, by permission of the Covent Garden management, supported Sarah Siddons in Edinburgh, where he played Macbeth, Wolsey, King John, and the Earl of Warwick. 
On 2 October 1817 his acting at Covent Garden of Frederick William, king of Prussia, in Abbott's 'The Youthful Days of Frederick the Great' raised Terry's reputation to the highest point it attained, and on 22 April 1818 he was the first Salerno in Shiel's 'Bellamira'. In Jameson's 'Nine Points of the Law', at the Haymarket on 17 July, he was Mr Precise, and in 'The Green Man', on 15 August, he exhibited what was called a perfect piece of acting as Mr Green. At Covent Garden on 17 April 1819 he was the first David Deans in his own adaptation of 'The Heart of Midlothian'. Later that season he played Sir Sampson Legend in 'Love for Love', Buckingham in 'Richard III', Prospero, Sir Amias Paulet in 'Mary Stuart' (adapted from Schiller), and Lord Glenallan. He was announced for Jonathan Oldbuck in his own and Pocock's adaptation of 'The Antiquary' on 25 January 1820, but illness seems to have prevented his playing the part, which was assigned to John Liston. On 17 May Terry was the first Dentatus in Sheridan Knowles's 'Virginius'. At the Haymarket during the summer seasons he played a great round of comic and other characters, including Hardy in 'The Belle's Stratagem', Peachum in 'The Beggar's Opera', Falstaff in '1 Henry IV', Old Hardcastle, Sir Peter Teazle, Dr Pangloss, Polonius, Lear, Sir Anthony Absolute, Pierre in 'Venice Preserv'd', and Rob Roy. Among many original parts, in pieces by Kenney, T. J. Dibdin, and others, Terry was Sir Christopher Cranberry in 'Exchange No Robbery', by his friend Theodore Hook, on 12 August 1820. 
Having quarrelled with the management of Covent Garden on a question of terms, Terry made his first appearance at Drury Lane on 16 October 1822, when he spoke an occasional address by Colman and played Sir Peter. He afterwards acted Crabtree, John Dory in 'Wild Oats', Cassio, Belarius in 'Cymbeline', Kent in 'King Lear', Dougal in 'Rob Roy', Solomon in 'The Stranger', and Grumio, and on 4 January 1823 was the first Simpson in John Poole's 'Simpson and Co'. At the Haymarket on 7 July he was the first Admiral Franklin in Kenney's 'Sweethearts and Wives', and on 27 September the first Dr Primrose in a new adaptation by T. J. Dibdin of 'The Vicar of Wakefield'. The season 1823-4 at Drury Lane saw him as Bartolo in 'Fazio', Lord Sands, Menenius in 'Coriolanus', and the first Antony Foster in a version of 'Kenilworth' (5 January 1824). The following season he appeared as Orozembo in 'Pizarro', Justice Woodcock in 'Love in a Village', Adam in 'As You Like It', Moustache in 'Henri Quatre', Hubert in 'King John', and Rochfort in an adaptation of 'The Fatal Dowry'. Among his original roles were Zamet in 'Massaniello' (17 February 1825) and Mephistopheles in 'Faustus' (16 May), the latter one of his best parts. In 1825, in association with his friend Frederick Henry Yates, he became manager of the Adelphi, and opened on 10 October in a piece called 'Killigrew'. This was followed on the 31st by Edward Fitzball's successful adaptation of 'The Pilot', in which Terry was the Pilot. He also appeared in other parts. 
Terry's financial affairs had meanwhile become so involved that he had to retire from management. Under the strain of the collapse which followed, his mental and physical powers gave way. After leaving the Adelphi he retired temporarily to the continent, and was then re-engaged at Drury Lane to play Polonius and Simpson. Finding himself unable to act, and his memory quite gone, he threw up his engagement. On 12 June 1829 he suffered a stroke, and died later that month. 
Terry married his first wife in Liverpool and on 25 June 1815 married Elizabeth Wemyss Nasmyth (1793-1862) ['see under 'Nasmyth family], the daughter of the painter Alexander Nasmyth. Mrs Terry -- who, after Terry's death, married the lexicographer Charles Richardson -- was herself an artist, and took some share in the decoration of Scott's home, Abbotsford. Terry left, by his second marriage, a son named Walter, after Scott (who promised to look after the boys' fortunes), and a daughter, Jane. 
Terry, who was almost as well known in Edinburgh as in London, was highly respected in both places. His friend Sir Walter Scott thought highly of his acting in tragedy, comedy, pantomine, and farce. While escaping from the charge of ranting, he was best in scenes of vehemence, and was wise enough not to attempt parts of tender emotion. In comedy he excelled in old men, and in characters of amorous dotage, such as Sir Francis Gripe, Don Manuel, or Sir Adam Contest, he was excellent. His Falstaff was good. His chief fault was uneasiness. He disapproved of the starring system, and was conscientious enough not to pose as a star. 
Terry's idolatry of Scott led him to imitate both his manner and his calligraphy. Scott, who corresponded freely with him on most subjects, declared that, were he called upon to swear to any document, the most he could do was to attest it was his own writing or Terry's. Terry had caught, according to Lockhart, the very trick of Scott's meditative frown, and imitated his method of speech so as almost to pass for a Scot. Scott lent him money for his theatrical speculations, and gave him excellent advice. Being intimate with the Ballantynes, Terry had a financial stake in their printing and publishing business, and when the firm became bankrupt Scott was saddled with his liability of $1750. Terry's architectural knowledge was of great use to Scott, who consulted him while building Abbotsford; he also consulted Terry on many literary questions, especially in regard to plays, and seems to have trusted him with revising 'The Doom of Devorgoil' for the stage. It seems likely that Terry was responsible for many of the numerous adaptations of Scott that saw the light between the appearance of 'Waverley' and the actor's death. He also compiled 'The British Theatrical Gallery' (1825), a collection of full-length portraits with biographical notes. 


@@@@@


doc= 27148


Terry, Edward (1589/90-1660), travel writer, was born at Leigh, Kent, possibly the son of Richard Terry (died 1647), landowner. He attended Rochester School before matriculating from Christ Church, Oxford, on 1 July 1608, aged eighteen. He graduated BA on 26 November 1611 and proceeded MA on 6 July 1614. The East India Company engaged him as a chaplain and in February 1616 he sailed in the flagship of the fleet. Having taken in the Cape of Good Hope and seen its Khoi-Khoi (Hottentot) inhabitants, near the Comoro Islands they overtook a Portuguese carrack which fired on the leading ship and refused to parley. In the ensuing fight at close quarters with the flagship, the English commander was killed and the disabled carrack was run ashore and burnt by her crew. After arriving at Surat in September Terry accepted an engagement as chaplain to Sir Thomas Roe, and the next February he joined the ambassador near Ujjain, Malwa (Madhya Pradesh). They followed the emperor, Jahangir, and his vast entourage to Mandu some 60 miles further south. Here Terry shared a room with Thomas Coryate and later a tent when, in October, Jahangir moved again towards Ahmadabad, Gujarat. At Ahmadabad in May 1618 Terry survived an epidemic which killed several of Roe's suite; in September Roe, mission accomplished, and the survivors (one in four according to Terry) left for Surat. They sailed for home in February 1619, arriving in The Downs that September. 
Terry had spent slightly over twenty-seven months in India, seeing only parts of Gujarat and Malwa, but an enquiring mind and linguistic ability enabled him to compile a historically valuable account of the entire Mughal dominions and their varied inhabitants. He learned some Persian, the language of the court, and some Arabic, that of the learned. He found Hindustani 'a smooth tongue and easie to be pronounced' (Purchas, 1905, 1474). Mutually ignoring political and religious differences, he and the Jesuit in charge of Portuguese affairs at court conversed in Latin: Father Corsi was 'a very great intelligencer, knowing all news that might be had' (Terry, 444). In 1622 Terry presented a manuscript account to Charles, prince of Wales, which was transmitted to Samuel Purchas who published an edited version in part two of the 1625 edition of 'Purchas his Pilgrimes'. Terry's own 'A Voyage to East India' (1655) is a revision of this manuscript, expanded probably at least seven times, mainly by religious disquisition. It contains a full-length engraving of Jahangir, and some copies include a version of the important map (BL, K115/22) drawn by William Baffin and engraved by Renold Elstrack from information accumulated by Roe, whose sources included Terry. 
Terry returned for a period to Christ Church and was afternoon lecturer at Carfax, Oxford, in 1621 and 1622. Anthony Wood asserts that he then obtained a 'small cure' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.505-7), and by 1625 or 1626, when his son James was born, Terry had married. Whether this was to Elizabeth, his wife in 1660, is not clear; it is possible he was the Edward Terry who married Elizabeth Bland on 17 January 1630 at St Margaret Moyses, London. On 26 August the previous year he had become rector of Great Greenford, Middlesex. A second son, Edward, was born in the early 1630s. Terry remained at Great Greenford during the 1640s and 1650s, apparently acceptable to the authorities. His 'Pseudeleutheria, or, Lawlesse Liberty' (1646) was a sermon preached before the lord mayor at St Paul's on 16 August that year, while 'The Merchants and Mariners Preservation and Thanksgiving' (1649) was a sermon preached to his old employers, the East India Company, at St Andrew Undershaft. Following the Restoration he published 'A Character of His Most Sacred Majesty King Charles the IId' (1660) in the hope, Wood claimed to have heard from James Terry, of obtaining the deanery of Windsor, but he died at Greenford on 8 October that year. He was buried in the chancel of his church on 10 October. His wife, Elizabeth, died in 1661, and was buried at Greenford on 22 August. Terry was briefly succeeded as rector by his second son and namesake, who had been a fellow of University College, Oxford, and rector of Amersham, but he was ejected in 1662. James Terry was also ejected from his rectory of Michelmersh, Hampshire. Both brothers were subsequently licensed as nonconformist ministers. Edward Terry's account of his voyage continued to receive attention: his narrative was appended to 'The Travels of Pietro della Vale' (1665); a French translation appeared in 1663 and was reissued in 1696; and there were two Dutch translations in 1707 and 1727. 


@@@@@


doc= 27149


Terry, John (c.1555-1625), Church of England clergyman, was born at Long Sutton, Hampshire. He entered Winchester College in 1572, when his age was given as fourteen, and matriculated from New College, Oxford, on 10 January 1575, when he was said to be aged nineteen. He was elected a fellow in 1576, graduated BA on 12 November 1578, and proceeded MA on 15 June 1582. Having been ordained by John Piers, bishop of Salisbury, he resigned his fellowship on being presented to the living of Stockton, Wiltshire, by Bishop Thomas Cooper of Winchester in 1590. At about this time Terry married Mary White of Stanton St John, sister to John White, the noted puritan rector of Dorchester; the baptism of their eldest son, Stephen, was recorded on 20 August 1592. 
Terry was strongly antipathetic to Roman Catholicism. His book 'The Triall of Truth' (1600) violently attacked from a Calvinistic standpoint such 'anti-Christian' doctrines as transubstantiation and justification by works. Special venom was reserved for the reverencing of images, bogus miracles, and the papal supremacy. A second part of this work was published in 1602, and a third in 1625. In his will, dated 25 April 1625, Terry asked for burial in the churchyard of Stockton, as near as possible to the parsonage. He made bequests to five sons, and to the poor of Stockton and of his birthplace, Long Sutton, and he also left money to finance religious instruction for the young people of Stockton. He died on 10 May and was buried three days later, when his funeral sermon was preached by John Antram, the parson of neighbouring Langford. He is commemorated by a memorial in Stockton church, which gives his age at death as seventy. 


@@@@@


doc= 27150


Tesdale, Thomas (bap. 1547, d. 1610), benefactor, was baptized on 13 October 1547 at Stanford Dingley, Berkshire, the son of Thomas Tesdale (1507-1556), farmer and trader, and his second wife, Joan (died 1548), daughter of William Knapp of Harcourt, Berkshire, and widow of Richard Foster of Stanford Dingley. Following his father's death Tesdale was brought up by his uncle Richard Tesdale, a saddler of Abingdon, Berkshire, and was the first scholar admitted to John Roysse's reconstituted free school there in 1563. By the age of twenty he had taken over the malt-making side of the family business and in June 1567 married Maud (1545-1616), the daughter of Reginald Stone of Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, and widow of Edward Little of Abingdon. None of their children survived infancy. 
Tesdale was active in the public life of Abingdon and in 1580 became both a principal burgess and master of Christ's Hospital. He was elected mayor in 1581 but declined to serve as he had left the borough on moving to Ludwell Manor near Kidlington, Oxfordshire. Soon after 1586 he moved to Glympton near Woodstock, Oxfordshire, where he rented the manor house and successfully engaged in the production of woad for dyeing, in addition to other agricultural enterprises. He became a wealthy man. He died at Glympton on 13 June 1610 and was buried at Glympton church, where he was commemorated by a black marble tombstone with a brass figure and inscription. Following his widow's death in 1616 a fine alabaster monument to husband and wife was erected close by his original tombstone. 
Tesdale's will dated 31 May 1610 made generous provision for his widow and other relatives as well as a number of bequests to Abingdon charities; he also left $5000 to establish places at any Oxford college for six scholars and seven fellows from Abingdon School. He stated a preference for Balliol, but although the six scholars eventually took their places there it was not for long. There were similar connections between other schools and foundations at other Oxford colleges, like that between Reading and St John's College according to Sir Thomas White's bequest. Tesdale's generosity was part of a wider pattern of collegiate expansion during the early seventeenth century. There were protracted delays in finalizing the arrangements and when in 1623 Richard Wightwick, rector of East Illsley, Berkshire, offered to supplement Tesdale's bequest, the Abingdon corporation petitioned James I to allow its transfer from Balliol to found a new college. With the assistance of George Abbot, archbishop of Canterbury, one of Tesdale's three feoffees to uses, and the approval of the chancellor of the university, William Herbert, third earl of Pembroke, whose name it took, Broadgates Hall was refounded as Pembroke College on 29 June 1624. 


@@@@@


doc= 27151


Tesimond, Oswald (1563-1636), Jesuit, was born in Northumberland, or possibly York, in 1563 and was educated in York in 'Le Horse Fayre' free school along with Guy Fawkes and John and Christopher Wright. He entered the English College, Rome, on 9 September 1580 but joined the Society of Jesus on 13 April 1584 by leave of the cardinal protector, Moroni. After studying theology at Messina he taught philosophy there and at Palermo. It is not known when he was ordained but he was sent to the Madrid seminary, leaving in November 1597 to go on the English mission. He landed at Gravesend on 9 March 1598. He assisted Edward Oldcorne in Worcestershire and Warwickshire for eight years. On 28 October 1603 he was professed of the four vows. 
Tesimond is chiefly remembered for his role in the Gunpowder Plot. It seems certain that Robert Catesby revealed the plot to Tesimond, and Tesimond revealed it to the Jesuit superior, Henry Garnet, under the seal of confession about 23 July 1605 with the object of seeking his advice. Tesimond went to the conspirators on 6 November 1605 at Huddington (Worcestershire), after their flight from London, to give the usual consolations of religion to the conspirators seen as a group of Catholics in dire spiritual need. Thomas Wintour at his execution cleared the Jesuits and particularly Tesimond from any charge of counselling or advising in the plot. Although in his hand, Tesimond's so-called narrative of the Gunpowder Plot -- in poor Italian but one of the two most complete accounts (both are at Stonyhurst College) -- was probably based on the work in Latin of a secular priest. It was sent to Rome for the better information of the Jesuit authorities. 
The proclamation for Tesimond's arrest on 15 January 1606 described him as 'of a reasonable stature, black hair, a brown beard cut close on the cheeks and left broad on the chin, somewhat long-visaged, lean in the face but of a good red complexion, his nose somewhat long and sharp at the end, his hands slender and long fingers, his body slender, his legs of a good proportion, his feet somewhat long and slender. (Morris, 1.144)' Successfully handing off an attempt by a pursuivant to arrest him in London he holed up in papist houses in Essex and Suffolk until he was able to take a small boat to Calais with a cargo of dead pigs, of which he passed as the owner. After some time at St Omer he moved south. Sir Edwin Rich reported his recent arrival in Naples in a letter to James I of 5 October 1610 warning him against accepting a gift of poisoned clothing which Tesimond was supposed to be sending him. 
Tesimond became prefect of studies and consultor at Messina from 1617, a post he held for some years, with a spell at Rome from 10 January until 10 December 1621, when he returned to Messina. In 1626 he was in the professed house at Naples as confessor in the church. After holding other offices in the province he died in Naples on 23 August 1636 and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 27152


Thackeray, Francis (1793-1842), author, was the sixth son of William Makepeace Thackeray (1749-1813), of the Bengal civil service, and his wife, Amelia (died 1810), third daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Richmond Webb. He entered Cambridge in 1810, graduated BA from Pembroke College in 1814 and MA in 1817. He became curate of Broxbourne in Hertfordshire. In 1829 he married Mary Ann Shakespear (died 1851). He died at Broxbourne on 18 February 1842, leaving two sons, the Revd Francis St John Thackeray and Colonel Edward Talbot Thackeray, VC, and one daughter, Mary. He enjoyed a good relationship with his nephew William Makepeace Thackeray, the novelist, whom he saved from gambling debts on more than one occasion and who called his uncle 'saintly Francis, lying at rest under the turf' (Ray, 166). 
Thackeray was famous in the family for his invention and narration of fairy tales. Of his published works, the most interesting is 'A History of William Pitt, Earl of Chatham' (1827). Macaulay, in reviewing the work in the 'Edinburgh Review' for 1834, criticized the author for his extravagant praise of his hero. The life, however, was painstaking, and contained a good deal of fresh information from the state paper office. He also wrote 'A Defence of the Clergy of the Church of England' (1822), and, in 1831, 'Order Against Anarchy' as a reply to Paine's 'Rights of Man'. His 'Researches into the ecclesiastical and political state of ancient Britain under the Roman emperors' was published posthumously in 1843. 


@@@@@


doc= 27153


Thackeray, Frederick Rennell (1775-1860), army officer, the third son of Frederick Thackeray (1737-1782), physician, of Windsor, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1816), daughter of Abel Aldridge of Uxbridge, was born in Windsor, Berkshire, and baptized on 16 November 1775. His father's sister was the wife of Major James Rennell of the Bengal Engineers, the geographer. George Thackeray was his younger brother, and William Makepeace Thackeray, the novelist, his first cousin once removed. 
After attending the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, Thackeray was commissioned second lieutenant, Royal Artillery, on 18 September 1793, and was transferred to the Royal Engineers on 1 January 1794. He served at Gibraltar from 1793 until 1797, when he went to the West Indies, having been promoted first lieutenant on 18 June 1796. He took part, on 20 August 1799, in the capture of Surinam under Sir Thomas Trigge. In 1801 he was aide-de-camp to Trigge at the capture of the Swedish West Indian island of St Bartholomew on 21 March, the Dutch island of St Martin on 24 March, the Danish islands of St Thomas and St John on 28 March, and Santa Cruz on 31 March. 
On 18 April 1801 Thackeray was promoted second captain. He returned to England in 1802, and in 1803 went again to Gibraltar. He was promoted first captain on 1 March 1805, and again returned to England. In February 1807 he was sent to Sicily, and joined the expedition under Major-General McKenzie Fraser to Egypt; he returned to Sicily in September. In 1809 Thackeray was commanding royal engineer with the force under Lieutenant-Colonel Haviland Smith detached by Sir John Stuart (when he made his expedition to the Bay of Naples) from Messina on 11 June to make a diversion by an attack on the castle of Scylla. The siege was directed by Thackeray with such skill that, although raised by a superior force of French, the castle was untenable, and had to be blown up. 
In March 1810 Thackeray was sent from Messina by Sir John Stuart with an ample supply of engineer and artillery stores to join Colonel John Oswald in the Ionian Islands, to besiege the fortress of Santa Maura. Its position on a long narrow isthmus of sand made it difficult of approach, and it was well supplied and contained casemated barracks sufficient for its garrison of 800 men under General Camus. Oswald landed on 23 March. No enfilading batteries could be erected; but after the British direct batteries had opened fire the siege works were pushed gradually forwards, until on 15 April Thackeray pointed out the necessity for carrying by assault an advanced trench held by the enemy which would enable him to reconnoitre the approach to, and the position for, the breaching battery, and he proposed to turn the trench, when taken, into an advanced parallel of the attack. The operation was carried out successfully; the enemy were driven out of the trench at the point of the bayonet by Lieutenant-Colonel Moore of the 35th regiment; large working parties were at once sent in, and, by Thackeray's judicious and indefatigable exertion, the trench on the morning of 16 April 1810 was converted into a lodgement from which the attackers could not be driven by the fire of the enemy, while the British infantry and sharpshooters were able so greatly to harry the artillery of the place that in the course of the day it surrendered. Thackeray was mentioned in dispatches. Oswald also wrote to thank him. Thackeray received on 19 May 1810 a brevet majority in special recognition of his services. 
Thackeray sailed in July 1812 with the Anglo-Sicilian army under Lieutenant-General Frederick Maitland, and landed at Alicante in August. He took part in the operations of this army, which, after Maitland's resignation in October, was successively commanded by Generals Mackenzie, William Clinton, Campbell, and Sir John Murray, who arrived in February 1813. On 6 March Thackeray marched with the allied army from Alicante to attack Suchet, and was at the capture of Alcoy. He took part in the battle of Castalla on 13 April, when Suchet was defeated. On 31 May he embarked with the 14,000 strong army, which carried a powerful siege train and ample engineer stores, for Tarragona, where they disembarked on 3 June. Thackeray directed the siege operations, and on 8 June a practicable breach was made in Fort Royal, an outwork. Thackeray objected to an assault on this work before everything was ready for the construction of a parallel and advance from it. All was prepared on 11 June, and instructions were given for an assault after a vigorous bombardment. But Murray, having received intelligence of a French advance, counter-ordered the assault and raised the siege. For this he was court-martialled at Winchester, and found guilty of an error of judgement. Murray seems at the time of the siege to have blamed Thackeray for delaying the attack, for on the arrival of Lieutenant-General Lord William Bentinck to take command on 18 June, Thackeray wrote to him indicating that an attempt had been made to attach blame to him for the termination of the siege of Tarragona, and requesting Lord William as an act of justice to investigate his conduct before Sir John Murray left, and while all the relevant persons were still present. This letter was sent to Murray, who exonerated Thackeray (reply of Murray, dated Alicante, 22 June). 
Thackeray was promoted lieutenant-colonel, Royal Engineers, on 21 July 1813. He had moved, at the end of June, with Lord William Bentinck's army to Alicante, and was at the occupation of Valencia on 9 July, and at the investment of Tarragona on 30 July. He took part in the other operations of the army under Bentinck and his successor, Sir William Clinton. During October and November Thackeray was employed in rendering Tarragona once more defensible. In April 1814, by Wellington's orders, Clinton's army was broken up, and Thackeray returned to England in ill health. 
At the beginning of 1815 Thackeray was appointed commanding royal engineer at Plymouth; in May 1817 he was transferred to Gravesend, and on 26 November 1824 he went to Edinburgh as commanding royal engineer of Scotland. He was promoted colonel in the Royal Engineers on 2 June 1825, and was made a CB, military division, on 26 September 1831. In 1833 he was appointed commanding royal engineer in Ireland. He was promoted major-general on 10 January 1837, when he ceased to be employed. He had married at Rosehill, Hampshire, on 21 November 1825, Elizabeth Margaret Carnegie, third daughter of William Carnegie, seventh earl of Northesk; they had three sons and five daughters. 
Thackeray was made a colonel-commandant of the corps of Royal Engineers on 29 April 1846, was promoted lieutenant-general on 9 November 1846, and general on 20 June 1854. He died at his residence, The Cedars, Windlesham, Bagshot, Surrey, on 19 September 1860, and was buried at York Town, Farnborough, Hampshire. Thackeray's wife and children survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 27154


Thackeray, George (1777-1850), college head, was born at Windsor on 10 October 1777 and baptized at the parish church on 23 November 1777. He was the fourth and youngest son of Frederick Thackeray (1737-1782), a physician of Windsor, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1816), daughter of Abel Aldridge of Uxbridge. Frederick Rennell Thackeray was his elder brother. George became a king's scholar at Eton College in 1792, and a scholar of King's College, Cambridge, in 1796, where he graduated BA in 1802, MA in 1805, and BD in 1813. He was a fellow of King's from 1800 to 1803, when he married (9 November 1803) a Miss Carbonell. He was ordained, and in 1801 was appointed assistant master at Eton, becoming lower master in 1809. On 4 April 1814 he was elected provost of King's College, and in the same year obtained the degree of DD by royal mandate. 
Following the death of his first wife, Thackeray married, in 1816, Mary Ann, eldest daughter of Alexander Cottin of Cheverells, Hertfordshire. Her death, in 1818, cast a gloom over Thackeray's subsequent life. He devoted much of his time to collecting rare books, and 'there was not a vendor of literary curiosities in London who had not some reason for knowing the provost of King's'. He directed the finances of the college with great ability, and during his provostship an extensive building programme was carried out. But he was chiefly remembered as an obstinate opponent of reform, invoking his sole right, under the founder's statutes, to initiate business at college meetings to prevent the abolition of the privilege whereby Kingsmen could graduate without examination. He held the appointment of chaplain-in-ordinary to George III and to the three succeeding sovereigns. 
Thackeray died in Wimpole Street, London, on 21 October 1850, and he was buried in a vault in the ante-chapel of King's College. His daughter, Mary Ann Elizabeth, bequeathed Thackeray's library to King's College on her death. 


@@@@@


doc= 27155


Thackeray, William Makepeace (1811-1863), novelist, was born on 18 July 1811 at Calcutta, the only child of Richmond Thackeray (1781-1815), secretary to the board of revenue in the East India Company at Calcutta, and Anne Becher (1792-1864), second daughter of John Harman Becher, a writer for the East India Company, and his wife, Harriet. 
Harriet Becher, after the birth of Anne's younger sister (also Harriet), appears to have abandoned husband and children to elope with Captain Charles Christie under whose 'protection' she lived until his death in 1805. She then married Captain Edward William Butler of the Bengal artillery in October 1806, John Becher, her legal husband, having died in 1800. The novelist got to know his grandmother as Mrs Butler when he stayed with her in Paris in 1834-5, and when she lived with him in 1840-41 and again in 1847, the year she died. She is said to have been the model for Miss Crawley in 'Vanity Fair'. Anne Becher was brought up by her paternal grandmother, also Anne Becher, whose severe evangelical beliefs did not preclude ambition for a marriage of wealth and position for Anne. When Anne fell in love with Henry Carmichael-Smyth (1780-1861), an ensign of the Bengal Engineers, her grandmother intervened, finally persuading Anne that the young man had died and sending the bereaved girl to India in April 1809 in the company of her sister Harriet, their mother, and Captain Butler. Anne was a beautiful woman and very successful in Calcutta social circles where Richmond Thackeray joined many others suitors, prevailing and marrying her on 13 October 1810. Her sister Harriet had married Captain Allan Graham eight months earlier. 
The novelist's father, Richmond, second son of William and Amelia Thackeray, was born at South Mimms on 1 September 1781 and went to India at the age of sixteen to assume his duties as writer. By 1804 he had fathered a daughter by a native mistress, the mother and daughter being named in his will. Such liaisons being common among gentlemen of the East India Company, it formed no bar to his courting and marrying Anne Becher. The novelist's great-grandfather Thomas Thackeray (1693-1760), headmaster of Harrow School, chaplain to Frederick, prince of Wales, and, from 1753, archdeacon of Surrey, had sixteen children. Thomas's fourth son, also Thomas (1736-1806), was a surgeon at Cambridge, and one of his sons, William Makepeace (1770-1849), was a physician at Chester. The youngest son of Thomas the archdeacon, also named William Makepeace (1749-1813), married Amelia Richmond and fathered Richmond, the novelist's father. Amelia was third daughter of Colonel Richmond Webb, who was related to General John Richmond Webb, of Wijnendale fame, described in 'Henry Esmond'. The novelist chose the Webb crest of arms as his own because it 'was prettier and more ancient' ('Letters and Private Papers', 3.446); and he is said to have credited the Webbs with introducing 'wits... into the family' which was otherwise a 'simple, serious' one (F. Bradley-Birt, ''Sylhet' Thackeray', 1911, 16). 
Five months after William Makepeace Thackeray's birth, Richmond was promoted to the post of collector of the house tax at Calcutta and of the Twenty-four Pergunnahs, a district south of Calcutta. The family may have set up house at the collector's residence at Alipore, though Richmond's will refers to 'the house in Chowringhee in which I reside' (Ray, 'Uses of Adversity', 61). Some time in 1812 Richmond invited a new acquaintance home to dine: Captain Henry Carmichael-Smyth, Anne's supposedly deceased lover. He had been informed by Mrs Becher, who had returned all his letters, that Anne no longer cared for him. Mrs Fuller (the novelist's granddaughter) wrote, 'After a while the situation became so impossible that Richmond Thackeray had to be told; he listened gravely, said little, but was never the same to Anne again' ('Letters and Private Papers', 1.cxiv; Ray, 'Uses of Adversity', 63). Thackeray's fiction is dotted with accounts of parental interference in young love. 
Richmond Thackeray died on 13 September 1815 leaving an estate worth $17,000. His will directed annuities drawn from the estate of $450 to his wife, $100 each to his sister, Augusta, his son, William Makepeace, and his illegitimate daughter, Sarah, and about $30 in total to Sarah's mother and an old servant. Young William Makepeace was sent at the age of five to England in December 1816, while his mother Anne remained to marry Henry Carmichael-Smyth in the winter of 1817-18. The couple returned to England in 1819. 
Thackeray was accompanied on his journey to England by a former colleague of his father, by his cousin Richmond Shakespeare, and by a native servant, Lawrence Barlow. When the ship stopped at St Helena, Barlow took Thackeray to see a man walking in a garden; 'that is Bonaparte!' said the servant. 'He eats three sheep every day, and all the little children he can lay hands on!' (Ray, 'Uses of Adversity', 66). William was taken in very briefly by his aunt Charlotte Sarah (Richmond's sister) and her husband, John Ritchie. 
In the winter of 1817-18 Thackeray attended a school at Southampton 'of which our deluded parents had heard a favourable report, but which was governed by a horrible little tyrant, who made our young lives so miserable that I remember kneeling by my little bed of a night, and saying, 'Pray God, I may dream of my mother!' (Ray, 'Uses of Adversity', 70)' In the following year he entered a school at Chiswick where he remained until December 1821, after which he was enrolled at Charterhouse School. Summers he spent with the Bechers at Fareham until the return of his mother and Major Carmichael-Smyth in 1819. Though he never returned to India, the India connections of the families that made up the Fareham circle are evident in many accounts of returned East India men, including Jos in 'Vanity Fair' and Colonel Newcome in 'The Newcomes'. Only one work, 'The Tremendous Adventures of Major Gahagan' (1838), is set in India. Thackeray's treatment in the Chiswick school and at Charterhouse, which he attended from 1822 to 1828, may have been better than at the first school at Southampton, but his recollections of school tyrannies and the terrors of school boyhood show up repeatedly in his fiction. His portraits of Miss Tickletoby, Dr Birch, and Dr Swishtail and his descriptions of Slaughterhouse and Blackfriars schools suggest that flogging and fagging were the primary agents of instruction. His recollections were that he had been 'licked into indolence', 'abused into sulkiness', and 'bullied into despair' (ibid., 97). He must have felt keenly the difference between his treatment in England, even among his well-intentioned relatives, and what he had known in India where he was attended by numerous servants and played with by his mother and aunt. Among Thackeray's most convincing fictional portraits are those of young or misfit boys in school, like Dobbin in 'Vanity Fair', and of the loneliness of boys like Henry Esmond. However, the few surviving letters from Southampton and Chiswick, written under the censoring eyes of schoolmasters, do not betray the pain and misery portrayed in Thackeray's fiction. 
Thackeray's academic achievements at Charterhouse were not outstanding, though his natural abilities caused him to rise through the ranks respectably (Ray, 'Uses of Adversity', 84-6). He was quite near-sighted and, having no spectacles, was unable to take a very active role in games -- though, apparently for the amusement of older boys, he and a schoolmate, George Venables, were put to a fight in which the latter flattened the future novelist's nose ('Letters and Private Papers', 2.256). 
Thackeray spent the summers with his mother and Major Carmichael-Smyth at Addiscombe, near Croydon, until 1825, when they moved to a house named Larkbeare near Ottery St Mary and Exeter, the setting for much of 'Pendennis'. The rector of nearby Clyst Hydon, the Revd Francis Huyshe, became a close family friend and was probably the model for Pendennis's would-be mentor, Dr Portman. In his final two years at Charterhouse Thackeray was a member of the first form and received 'instruction' directly from Dr Russell, who, Thackeray complained, refused to acknowledge any of his efforts or achievements and singled him out for put-downs. Thackeray's parodies of Russell began while in school and show up in much of his fiction. In the end Thackeray's formal education was weak, including little if any mathematics and involving a rote approach to classics that did little for the understanding. But Thackeray was a voracious reader and a keen observer of his surroundings. Perhaps the most ingrained notion Thackeray carried away from Charterhouse was a sense of class distinctions; for though the public schools mixed the sons of the very wealthy with those of lesser families, there was a keen sense of community that separated those at public schools from all others. There is more than a little truth in the notion that the 'Book of Snobs' was 'written by one of them'; for though Thackeray was able to see and depict pretension and overreaching English snobbism, he never 'forgot his place' or the codes learned in public school that separated him from less privileged men. 
Thackeray's aunt Harriet Graham and her husband both died, leaving a daughter, Mary Graham, who from 1820 lived with the Carmichael-Smyths and as a younger sister to William. She played a Laura Bell to Thackeray's Pendennis and eventually married Colonel Charles Carmichael, the major's brother. Mary and her husband lent Thackeray $500 when hard times struck in 1841, a debt that hung as heavily over him as Pen's debt to Laura in 'Pendennis'. 
Illness in his last year at Charterhouse, during which he reportedly grew to his full 6 feet 3 inches, postponed Thackeray's matriculation at Trinity College, Cambridge, until February 1829. Thackeray was 'coached' for college by the well-intentioned Major Carmichael-Smyth. It was appropriate to William Thackeray's paternal family background that he should try to think of himself as a potential scholar. The Thackeray side of the family was well known for its scholars, from the archdeacon, his great-grandfather, to his great-uncles and cousins the physicians, to his cousin Elias, a vicar, and two of his cousins, the provost and vice-provost of King's College, and his cousin by marriage, a professor of political economy. Though Thackeray entered late, he was determined, perhaps under some pressure from his mother's expectations, to read for an honours rather than a pass degree. Thackeray apparently saw little of his tutor, William Whewell, but his private tutor, Henry Fawcett, found Thackeray a ready enough scholar at first. Like Pendennis, he seems to have applied himself with some enthusiasm, studying from eight in the morning to three every day, but before long he decided that private reading would suit his ends better than assiduous attendance at lectures. 
Cambridge distractions soon eroded study time and energy, but it was not all wine parties and debates and outings. Thackeray read widely: histories (Gibbon, Hume, Smollett), modern novels and poems -- making a special effort with Shelley, whose 'Revolt of Islam' impressed him. And he began to write. He had published a couple of poems and a translation the year before in the 'Western Luminary', a Devon newspaper, but at Cambridge his contributions to 'The Snob' and, after the long vacation, to its replacement, 'The Gownsman', began to develop his talents in parody and humour. Having arrived in late February, his first contribution to 'The Snob' was his famous 'Timbuctoo', a parody (not submitted, of course) of the prize competition, which Tennyson won that year. By mid-May he was working closely with 'The Snob''s editor, William Williams, contributing six more pieces by the end of term in June. 
Thackeray's relatives in Cambridge welcomed him with open arms, but he found their company staid. When he applied to his cousin the vice-provost for advice about his progress toward the end of his first term, it was suggested he hold over and not take the first-year examinations. In the end he did take them -- five days of eight-hour exams on mathematics and classical authors. He had been sick before the exams and yet made it to the top of the fourth class 'where clever 'non-reading' men were put, as in a limbo' ('Letters and Private Papers', 1.76). 
In the company of William Williams, just graduated and serving supposedly as Thackeray's mathematics coach for the summer, Thackeray went to Paris to learn French and extend his education with continental experience. Williams soon abandoned Thackeray, who discovered for himself museums, artists' studios, and Frascati's gambling opportunities. By the account he sent home, the first visit to Frascati's was a brush with evil that taught him the lesson to avoid gambling, whereas in truth it seems to have whetted his taste for play, which by the end of his second year at Cambridge landed him some $1500 in debt. Thackeray returned to Cambridge in October, where distractions continued to outweigh the honours curriculum in maths and classics. It is not known exactly when Thackeray decided that further pursuit of an honours degree was a waste of time, but the decision formed a part of his break for independence from his mother, to whom he wrote the next year: 'You seem to take it so much to heart, that I gave up trying for Academical honours -- perhaps Mother I was too young to form opinions but I did form them -- & these told me that there was little use in studying what could after a certain point be of no earthly use to me... that three years of industrious waste of time might obtain for me mediocre honours wh. I did not value at a straw[. I]s it because I have unfortunately fallen into this state of thinking that you are so dissatisfied with me[?] ('Letters and Private Papers', 1.138)' Only four contributions to 'The Snob's' successor 'The Gownsman' and two letters home offer evidence of Thackeray's second-year activities at Cambridge. But his circle of acquaintance included important friendships with Henry Alford, John Allen, Henry Nicholson Burrows, Charles Christie, William Hepworth Thompson, and John Hailstone -- all members of a debating society formed in imitation of the Apostles (Ray, 'Uses of Adversity', 128). His other friends included James Spedding, John Mitchell Kemble, A. W. Kinglake, William Brookfield, Richard Monckton Milnes, and Alfred Tennyson. His best friends in the autumn term were John Allen, who influenced him to affirm his religious beliefs, and Edward Fitzgerald, a shy man who shared Thackeray's love of literature and who influenced him to doubt his beliefs. Fitzgerald graduated in December, leaving the field to Allen, who lost out to faster men, including Harry Matthews, the prototype of Bloundel in 'Pendennis', who seems to have led Thackeray into gambling dissipation in the Lent and Easter terms. 
At the examinations that year Thackeray ended in the second class, dashing any hopes of an honours degree. At the Easter break he announced he would spend the vacation with a friend named Slingsby in Huntingdonshire, but instead went to Paris with Edward Fitzgerald, an outing about which, he years later remarked, 'my benighted parents never knew anything' (Ray, 'Uses of Adversity', 126). There is some evidence to believe that Thackeray contracted a venereal disease at this time. In October 1859 he wrote in a familiar strain, 'My old enemy gives me rather serious cause for disquiet -- not the spasms -- the hydraulics -- a constant accompaniment of those disorders is disordered spirits' ('Letters and Private Papers', 4.154; C. M. Jones, 'The medical history of William Makepeace Thackeray', ibid., 4.453-59). It is clear that he spent time in Paris with a woman ten or twelve years his senior whom he met at a masquerade ball. The experience may have been the inspiration for Pendennis's infatuation with both Emily Fotheringay, who was ten years his senior, and with Fanny Bolton -- with the sexual element reduced to resisted temptation. Another apparently sanitized account of the meeting with Mlle Pauline appeared in 'Britannia' on 5 June 1841. Thackeray left Cambridge without a degree in June 1830. 
Thackeray's bid for independence at the age of nineteen still entailed getting permission from his mother for his next venture: an extended stay in Germany, learning the language, reading, and getting to know societies other than his own. Intending to join the English society of Dresden, he ended at Weimar for six months, dressed in the uniform of a cornetcy of Devon yeomanry obtained for him by Major Carmichael-Smyth. He reported home on falling in love with two young ladies who abandoned him for better prospects; on meeting Goethe and the intellectual circle presided over by his daughter-in-law, Ottilie von Goethe; on studying German and things in general with Dr Friedrich August Wilhelm Wiessenborn; and on reading and translating Schiller's poetry. He undertook several writing projects but placed none. 
Thackeray illustrated Schiller's poem about Pegasus in harness, drawing the winged horse with a cart, an image to which he returned repeatedly as indicative of his own relationship to high art. In Germany, Thackeray was, for the first time in his life, free to follow his own bent, and he cut a relatively successful figure of some grace and significance. Though German philosophy may have been too heavy for him, he was already imbibing the wisdom, scepticism, tolerance, and suspended judgement of Weimar's rather relaxed society. Though still a somewhat self-centred would-be English rake, he was already showing the tendencies of mind that led him to Victor Cousin's philosophy of uncertainty, which he read in 1832 (Colby, 27) and Montaigne's amused, detached observations of life in the 'Essays', which Thackeray read and reread throughout his life. On his return to England in the early summer of 1831, Thackeray spent a few weeks at Larkbeare before taking up law studies at the Middle Temple in June. He read law, clerked, attended dinners, and disparaged his work in letters home and to Edward Fitzgerald who occasionally came up to London to roam the streets and go to plays with him. He remained in this routine for nearly a year, during which his passion for the theatre and for reading fiction and history were developed more assiduously than the law. Losing any real ambition for the law, and without entree to the circles of society which his expected fortune and his public school education led him to expect, he spent the year of his maturity in a variety of 'ungentlemanly' pursuits as bill discounter, desultory journalist, and artist. His friendship with Harry Kemble that year provided more dissipation, gambling, raucous nights -- resulting in repeated entries in his diary vowing reform. His friendship with the editor of 'Fraser's Magazine', William Maginn, dates from 1832, when Maginn took him to a 'common brothel where I left him, very much disgusted & sickened' (Ray, 'Uses of Adversity', 156), but it is not clear that he was always to react so. 
On coming of age on 18 July 1832 Thackeray's first business was to pay old gambling debts, a painful act which did not cure his craving for cards and dice. Nevertheless, with a fortune remaining at between $15,000 and $20,000, there was no reason for him to apply himself seriously to any profession that did not completely appeal to him. With the passage of the 'Reform Bill' Thackeray joined Charles Buller in the campaign for a seat in parliament from Cornwall, which he undertook in spite of his allegiance to the tories and Wellington. Thackeray next spent several months in Paris, enjoying the independence of his inheritance, casting about pleasurably but without purpose, recording feelings of guilt and unhappiness in his diary. 
Early in 1833 Thackeray purchased the 'National Standard' for which he and James Hume, as sub-editor, provided the bulk of copy. After ten months the venture ended in failure, but Thackeray had joined the Garrick Club and got to know the London literati to whom he would return after yet another venture into France to take up his next 'real' profession: painting. His first attempt to study painting in Paris came in 1833, while he styled himself Paris correspondent for the 'National Standard', but it appears that his literary and artistic careers were both undertaken as fulfilments of pleasure by a man of some fortune. However, by December 1833 a series of bank failures in India wiped out the bulk of Thackeray's inheritance, leaving him without income. The 'Standard' failed early in 1834, and Thackeray's second opportunity to study art materialized in September when his grandmother Butler moved to Paris and gave him a room. Embarking on what was supposed to be a three-year apprenticeship in the ateliers of a French artist, and thanking God for making him poor, Thackeray appears to have applied himself happily and seriously to his studies only to discover, within a year, that his talent for comic drawings would never develop into satisfactory art. This was a bitter disappointment to a man who had sacrificed a great deal of social pretension to follow a trade generally considered no better than 'a hair-dresser or a pastry-cook, by gad', as Major Pendennis remarks of Clive Newcome's parallel decision in 'The Newcomes'. By the summer of 1835, virtually penniless, disgusted with his talent, with the vulgarity of his artist friends, with the moral degradation of his gambling cronies, one of whom committed suicide, and with his own repeated failures to reform or succeed, Thackeray's bohemian sojourn reached a nadir of depression. 
But then Thackeray met Isabella Gethin Shawe (1816-1893), second daughter of Matthew Shawe, a colonel, who had died after extraordinary service, primarily in India, and his wife, Isabella Creagh. Isabella was living with her mother and sister on a pension in Paris. It was unlikely that any mother would encourage such a suitor as Thackeray, who, having moved from Mrs Butler's to a dingy den, consorted with painters and gamblers, without profession or expectations. Yet his love for Isabella appears to have focused Thackeray's attention on his condition and given him a purpose and drive that had hitherto been lacking. Through a sudden new industry Thackeray determined to win and wear Isabella as his wife. With the backing of his friend John Bowes Bowes, Thackeray published his first book -- 'Flore et Zephyr', a collection of captioned lithographs -- which gained neither attention nor money. Then his stepfather became a major underwriter for a new journal of radical politics, the 'Constitutional and Public Ledger'; this enabled Thackeray, as Paris correspondent, with an income of 8 guineas a week, to propose to Isabella in April 1836, and marry on 20 August. 
The marriage was, from all accounts, a very happy one, though beset by problems. The mother-in-law, never happy about losing her daughter, especially to Thackeray, proved a virago, serving amply as prototype for the gallery of horrid mothers-in-law in Thackeray's fiction. Then the 'Constitutional' failed, leaving the future novelist -- now responsible for a small family -- without support except what could be gained by freelance writing. He took his bride to London and began ten years of heavy hack work, living from hand to mouth and suffering one domestic and financial disaster after another. Three daughters were born, Anne Isabella, later Lady Ritchie (1837-1919), a novelist in her own right, in 1837, Jane (who died at eight months) in 1838, and Harriet Marian ('Minnie', later the wife of Leslie Stephen) ['see 'Stephen, Harriet Marian] in 1840. Jane's death, Minnie's birth, and an apparent genetic tendency brought on serious depression in Isabella. This was compounded by feelings of worthlessness as mother, wife, and housekeeper and by neglect from Thackeray; finding he could get no work done at home, he spent more and more time away, researching for his travel narratives and writing essays and stories, primarily for 'Fraser's Magazine'. From the demise of the 'Constitutional' in July 1837 to the end of 1840 Thackeray published ninety magazine pieces and his first book, 'The Paris Sketch Book'; he also signed a contract for a book in two volumes on Ireland. During the same time two books of reprints were published, though without benefit to his purse ('The Yellowplush Correspondence' in Philadelphia and a pamphlet on George Cruikshank). Perhaps this frantic activity kept Thackeray from noticing anything special about his shy wife's condition, but in mid-August 1840, on his return from a two-week trip in the Low Countries gathering materials for a guidebook never written, he was alarmed by his wife's languor and depression. 
Two radical changes then affected Thackeray's life: he turned his attention from his work to his ailing wife, and his sense of guilt appears finally to have produced a profound effect on his personality and behaviour well beyond repeated self-recriminations in a diary. His attention to Isabella and his daughters and his acceptance of his part in creating their condition and his responsibility for their future raised his consciousness about their restraints and vulnerabilities, their worth and potential, and about the self-important self-centredness of his own life as well as that of ordinary men, his peers, whose birthright was to enjoy life and use wives and other women kinsfolk as superior servants. Beginning with 'The History of Samuel Titmarsh and the Great Hoggarty Diamond' (serialized from September 1841), his narratives of young men pursuing normal courses of self-fulfilment depict more and more accurately the women who suffered and supported them. Sam Titmarsh's fortunes flare and funk, leaving him chastened and dependent on his resourceful, strong, and loving wife, whose economic contribution to the family equals her husband's. Mary Titmarsh may be based in part on Isabella, but unlike the novelist's wife she proved more resilient and sensible than her husband. Arthur Pendennis, the 'hero' of Thackeray's second major work and the narrator of most of his subsequent books, constitutes a major study of masculine self-absorption, learning and relearning and then forgetting to understand the cruelties to women that passed as ordinary behaviour for sons, lovers, husbands, and fathers. 
In September Thackeray took the ailing Isabella to Ireland, hoping that the company of her mother and sister Jane would help restore her spirits. During the crossing Isabella threw herself from a water-closet into the sea, from which she was eventually rescued; it was no longer possible to avoid recognition of her mental breakdown. The Irish sojourn, originally planned as a research trip for 'The Irish Sketch-Book', turned into a domestic battle with the mother-in-law from which Thackeray and Isabella fled after four weeks. In debt to his grandmother and indebted in incalculable ways to his children's nurse, Brodie, who gave up wedding plans to continue caring for the distressed family, Thackeray was also in receipt of an advance from Chapman and Hall for an Irish book which he had been unable to research or write. He returned to his parents in Paris, where he managed, over the next six months, to write ten magazine pieces, a small book ('The Second Funeral of Napoleon'), a serial novelette ('The History of Samuel Titmarsh'), and several chapters of a novel never finished ('The Knights of Borsellen'). From November 1840 to February 1842 Isabella was in and out of professional care, her condition waxing and waning, but in the long run deteriorating until she was placed with Dr Puzin at Chaillot, where she lapsed into a stable, detached condition, unaware of the world around her. 
The experience of his mother-in-law's cruelties in contrast to the support of Brodie, his own mother, and Mary Graham Carmichael created in Thackeray deep understanding of women's capacities for cruelty, devotion, generosity, and demands. These insights are apparent in his complex portraits of women such as Amelia Sedley and Helen Pendennis, who exact dreadful tolls from the men they control through helpless love; of women like Blanche Amory, Becky Sharp, and Beatrix Esmond, who exercise control through imperious sexuality; and of women such as Ethel Newcome and Laura Pendennis, whose native intelligence and humour are the objects of male repression and societal control. All these women have secret depths, intelligence, and emotional complexities that Thackeray reveals in ways that some readers have taken to be inconsistency of characterization. 
In the six years from the manifestation of Isabella's insanity at the end of 1840 to the start of the serial publication of 'Vanity Fair' in January 1847, Thackeray published 386 magazine pieces and three books, all under pseudonyms. There are over twenty known pseudonyms, the most famous and clearly differentiated being George Savage Fitzboodle, Michael Angelo Titmarsh, Major Gahagan, Ikey Solomons, and Charles James Yellowplush. Thackeray's use of pseudonyms allowed him to develop a remarkable range of ventriloquist voices and a habit of presentation which dominated the later works, written in the person of Pendennis, an admitted 'alter ego' who undergoes subtle analysis and complex criticism by the 'author' whose defences of Pendennis are full of apparently deliberate holes. Some would argue that this is a clumsy and inept narrative technique, allowing readers to equate Pendennis with his creator and to conclude, therefore, that Pen's false starts and contradictions represent Thackeray's lack of control over his medium. To those who hold a more charitable view, that Thackeray presents an ironic vision above and beyond that of his narrator, the effect is a sense of ever-increasing narrative complexity and subtlety, a finer and sharper criticism of social conventions. 
Having placed his wife in the care of Dr Puzin in 1842 Thackeray returned to London, leaving his daughters for the next four years with his mother in Paris. London was where he could earn by writing what was needed to support his family and make his way in the world. At first he lived in the family house at 13 Great Coram Street, which he shared uneasily with his cousin Mary and Charles Carmichael. His first contribution to 'Punch' appeared, but almost immediately he undertook the long deferred research trip to Ireland, spending five months there. Though he had reviewed the Irish novelist Charles Lever rather roughly, their meeting was cordial and their friendship lasted for life. Thackeray dedicated 'The Irish sketch-book' to Lever, who reviewed it admiringly in the 'Dublin Review', though he obviously had reservations about the portrait of Ireland, and he later caricatured Thackeray as Elias Howle in 'Roland Cashel'. Willingness to tilt irreverently at older, better-known novelists had already landed Thackeray in hot water with Edward Bulwer, later Lord Lytton; for in 'Yellowplush' (1837) he lampooned Bulwer's inflated literary style and attributed to him grossly inflated self-aggrandizement. When the 'Yellowplush' papers were reprinted in New York in 1852, Thackeray wrote a preface apologizing for the unfairness of the portrait and wrote Bulwer a letter at the same time. In 1855 a collection of Thackeray's 'Miscellanies' published both in London and on the continent of course included the Bulwer lampoons again. Apologies aside, Thackeray never actually recanted his attitude toward Bulwer's style. 
On his return to London Thackeray gave up the house, moving first to a hotel and then to fourth-floor lodgings in Jermyn Street. He next undertook travel in Belgium to revive the project abandoned in 1839 when he returned to find his wife in deep depression, but again the guide to the Low Countries failed to emerge. During this time Thackeray lived the life of an ineligible bachelor, frequently invited to dinners, but always on the verge of loneliness, and he revived the theatregoing, club-haunting, late-night life of his days before marriage. The only real difference was that now he was writing for his life, seriously committed to the grind of 'odious magazinery', driven by want and ambition. 
Thackeray had written a short novel, 'Catherine', in 1838, published a collection of 'Comic Tales' in 1840 and another novelette, 'The history of Samuel Titmarsh', in 1841, but he wanted to write a full-length novel. It had to be serialized, however, since he could not afford the time to write it all before being paid, and he had not yet convinced publishers to provide significant advances. 

'Barry Lyndon', begun in January 1844 in 'Fraser's Magazine', was a potential novel always in danger of being discontinued. Written in the style of Fielding's 'Jonathan Wild', it represents a major advance over his early fiction in characterization, narrative technique, plot construction, and complexity of themes, but readers of 'Fraser's Magazine' were apparently unprepared to distinguish easily between a ruffian's bragging autobiographical voice and that of a satirical author exposing both the egoism of the character and the chicanery of the society in which he bilked and was bilked. The narrative voice in the novel represents a brilliant ventriloquist act, demonstrating the skills Thackeray had been honing in earlier works through using a variety of well-defined pseudonyms. In writing both 'Catherine' and 'Barry Lyndon' Thackeray was also trying to upstage the popular Newgate or crime fiction that he thought unrealistically and perhaps dangerously glamourized the lives of the criminal heroes. He particularly disapproved of Bulwer's exploitation of false sentiment on behalf of noble highwaymen. 'Barry Lyndon' was to have exposed the real unlikeable greed, cruelty, lack of conscience, and vulgarity of the criminal mind. Readers' understandable dislike of the narrator, Barry himself, extended inappropriately to the author, and the magazine's editors asked Thackeray to shut the story down after ten instalments. 'Barry Lyndon' remains, however, a critically acclaimed and highly regarded first novel. It is the story of an Irish lad who grows up with a colossal ego and quick temper, who fights duels, cheats at cards, suffers repeated well-deserved set-backs in the English and then the Prussian army, and rises to wealth through a fortune-hunter's marriage, after which his cruelties to his wife and his stepson are not redeemed by his maudlin sorrow for the death of his own son. Ending in prison, he pens his memories, appealing without self-consciousness for sympathy and admiration. 
One reason why Thackeray was willing to shut 'Barry Lyndon' down was that in August, at three days' notice, he undertook a three-month trip to the Mediterranean with stops in Spain, Greece, Turkey, the Holy Land, and Egypt, recounted in frequent essays 'From our fat contributor' in 'Punch' and more meditatively in 'Notes of a Journey from Cornhill to Grand Cairo' (1846). Comical recollections survive of Thackeray's severe difficulties in writing 'Barry Lyndon', 'Fat contributor', and 'Cornhill to Cairo' while fighting bedbugs and seasickness. The cockney's view of the world, a chief element in his Paris and Irish travel books, dominates the writing; for Thackeray acknowledged to himself that visitors bring as much of their view of the world with them as they find on their travels, and he eschewed pontification. Back in London, in April 1845 he moved to slightly better bachelor quarters in St James's Street, where he was visited by his mother and children in June. And in October he had Isabella, now thought to be incurable, installed in Camberwell with a Mrs Bakewell, in whose care she remained for the rest of her life. One more move, in June 1846, to Young Street, put Thackeray in a house to which he invited his parents and to which he brought his daughters to stay. His parents, however, chose to remain in Paris out of the reach of the major's London creditors, though Thackeray paid the debts in 1848, clearing the way for their return to England when they chose. 
Although Thackeray continued to contribute heavily to 'Fraser's Magazine' and regularly to the 'Foreign Quarterly Review' and the 'Morning Chronicle', 'Punch' was increasingly in the 1840s his periodical affiliation. The magazine's weekly staff dinners were important in his life until he resigned in December 1851 over differences with the editors and with his chief staff rival, Douglas Jerrold, about editorial policy in treating political issues, particularly Catholic emancipation and the character of Louis Philippe. 'Punch' published his next two major works, which gained him genuine first-class popular standing and prepared the way thematically for 'Vanity Fair'. The first was a comprehensive and exhaustive analysis of 'The Snobs of England. By one of themselves' (March 1846 to February 1847); the other was a series of parodies of the novelists G. P. R. James, Charles Lever, Mrs Gore, Edward Bulwer, Benjamin Disraeli, and James Fenimore Cooper, entitled 'Punch's Prize Novelists' (April to October 1847). 
Nothing Thackeray had written thus far, however, quite prepared readers for the panoramic scope, protean voice, or seriousness of comic vision incorporated in 'Vanity Fair', begun in January 1847 and running for nineteen months as the first publication to bear the name William Makepeace Thackeray on the title-page. Of all Thackeray's works 'Vanity Fair' is the one that has been most discussed and most frequently adapted for stage and film. It is almost always cited as his best work, though some readers and critics give 'Henry Esmond' that honour. 

'Vanity Fair' chronicles the rise and fall of Becky Sharp's fortunes, the fall and rise of Amelia Sedley's fortunes, and the roles played in their lives by a variety of men. George Osborne, a young 'padded booby', as Becky says, who loses his inheritance by marrying Amelia, but then wishes to run away with Becky, is killed at the battle of Waterloo and mourned for fifty chapters by the silly Amelia. Rawdon Crawley, a not too bright but basically good-hearted soldier who loses his inheritance by marrying Becky, ends by reluctantly accepting the governorship of an island in exchange for his wife's honour. In the wings is William Dobbin, awkward, devoted, and the only true gentleman in the book who finally 'wins and wears' Amelia, though he seems aware that the pay-off is not worth the effort. The subtitle, 'A Novel without a Hero', gives ample warning that there are no very intelligent, very elegant, very noble, or very admirable characters in the book; it does not, however, advertise the brilliance, dexterity, humour, skill, or intelligence of the narrator -- or, rather, narrators. Although Thackeray does not use the first-person form with a named narrator, the presence of a story-teller with a chameleon's colouring and a showman's skills is inescapable. Unlike many Victorian novelists with palpable narrators who frequently intrude in the story to make sure the reader is 'getting it', the narrator of 'Vanity Fair' appears to toy with the reader, offering obviously erroneous and contradictory directions; the reader must therefore accept responsibility for pointing morals, if any, independently of the comic untrustworthy narrator. 
Thackeray's primary publishers in the 1840s had been Chapman and Hall who, besides the Irish and Mediterranean travel books, published four Christmas volumes. It is rumoured that 'Vanity Fair' was turned down by five or more publishers before Bradbury and Evans, the proprietors of 'Punch', agreed to publish it in the same format and style that they used for their star author, Charles Dickens. Though the novel's initial print run and sales were under 5000 copies, and though Thackeray complained that popularity did not match critical success, 1847 proved a watershed year, separating Thackeray's struggling hack work from the success that brought publishers begging to his door. He made $1200 plus a share of profits from 'Vanity Fair', and each novel thereafter earned him more than the previous one until the last years of his life when his income exceeded $7000 a year. Bradbury and Evans subsequently published Thackeray's three other major serial novels: 'Pendennis' (1848-50), 'The Newcomes' (1853-5), and 'The Virginians' (1857-9). 

'Pendennis', a twenty-three-month serial, begun in August 1848 but interrupted for three months at the end of 1849 because of Thackeray's nearly fatal illness (most probably cholera or typhoid), chronicles the youth, education, and launched writing career of Arthur Pendennis, son of a country squire, formerly an apothecary. Four major episodes in Arthur's life drive the plot: his first innocent, passionate, hopelessly absurd passion for an actress, the Fotheringay, much older than himself; a second, somewhat cold-blooded play-acted love passage with Blanche Amory, more suitable by education and social status but artificial in manners and character; there follows Arthur's briefly glorious and ultimately ignominious career as a college student at Oxbridge; and then a third, tawdry and nearly tragic liaison with a porter's daughter, Fanny Bolton. In 'Pendennis' Thackeray used a limited omniscient narrator who plays very few of the narrative games employed in 'Vanity Fair'. And though many critics have found easy parallels between Arthur's biography and that of the author, it seems clear that Pendennis, who in the main has a love of truth and hatred of lies, is yet the world's worst at remembering lessons learned. Though Pendennis is rewarded at the end by marriage to his childhood playmate, Laura Bell, there is much to suggest that Thackeray is already shifting his satirical and critical mode and gaze from the obvious vanities and hypocrisies of society to the subconscious, more habitual injustices and cruelties of conventional behaviour, particularly as played out in domestic circles between husbands and wives, parents and children, and among siblings. Pendennis, who lacks the ability to see such subtleties, is chosen narrator for two later novels ('The Newcomes' and 'The Adventures of Philip'), in which he plays the role of wise, observant arbiter of intelligent common sense and good intentions; time and again, however, Thackeray exposes the narrator, Pendennis, for the insensitive boor that he is. Thackeray's apprenticeship in this type of narration began with the pseudonymous works of his youth. The only difference between Barry Lyndon and Arthur Pendennis is that Pendennis is well mannered, polite, educated, and conventionally married to a conventional woman. But he is just as egotistical, self-centred, self-satisfied, and content in his male-dominated world as was Barry. 
The major force in Thackeray's writing career was his third publisher, George Smith. In his first approach in 1849 Smith offered Thackeray $1000 for his next book, sight unseen, but Thackeray was already committed and counter-offered a Christmas book, 'The Kickleburys on the Rhine'. In 1852 Smith signed the novelist to a contract for a novel in three volumes, stipulating that he could publish nothing else in the six months before or after publication. Smith, known as the prince of publishers, was generous with his money and ruthless in his control. Thackeray, who from 1847 to 1851 had averaged fifty-nine magazine publications a year in addition to two major serials, in 1852 had but one publication, 'The History of Henry Esmond'. 
It is on 'Esmond' that Thackeray's fame as a historical novelist primarily rests. The first, three-volume edition was printed in an antique typeface and with antique spelling. Set during the reign of Queen Anne, the novel focuses attention on the English revolution and on the conflicts over succession caused by William III and Anne having no surviving children. Like Barry Lyndon, who writes his life's history while in prison at the end of his life, the narrator and main character, Henry Esmond, writes his memoirs in the twilight of his years on his estate in Virginia, a property he came to after all the events worth telling about his life have taken place. Orphaned, one might say, three times, Henry grows up vulnerable and sensitive to slights and grateful for attention. He adores his first spiritual leader, the Jesuit Father Holt; but his allegiances turn protestant under the priest's successor, Rachel Castlewood, who for at least the first quarter of the novel plays the role of mother in his life. A man of loyalties, Henry waxes political in college, goes to war, and serves the Jacobite cause, not so much because of personal convictions, readers are led to believe, but in order to impress Rachel's daughter Beatrix. The novel is both controversial and psychologically subtle and complex because it is clear that Rachel Castlewood, though married to Lord Castlewood and playing the mother role, is in love with Henry by the end of the first volume. Clearly Henry does not know that, and, perhaps as clearly, Rachel is in denial, even after the death of Lord Castlewood. But after spending all of volume two and most of volume three in love with Rachel's daughter Beatrix, Henry finally recognizes the daughter for the vixen that she is and declares for and marries the mother, retiring to Virginia. Perhaps the most intriguing thing about Henry's life is his successive discoveries that what he thought was true, wonderful, and good proves to be false, disappointing, and even evil. Truth, he seems to conclude, is very elusive and naught but grief comes from accepting the truths of others. However, even the truth of self-reliance seems uncertain in this novel, where Thackeray once again plays off the narrator's insights against the reader's suspicions, giving readers one of the most thought-provoking and unsettling among Victorian novels. Thackeray's amateur knowledge of the period was so extensive that he contemplated writing a history in the style of Macaulay's 'History of England', and he was asked by a publisher to edit a multi-volume correspondence of Horace Walpole. 
However restrictive, the contract with Smith for 'Esmond' said nothing about delivering lectures, and Thackeray had already planned a series on eighteenth-century English humorists, which he began delivering in London and other major cities in England and Scotland, making more money from them than from his occasional writings in previous years. On publication of 'Esmond' he took his lecture tour to America for five months, visiting New York, Boston, Providence, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington (where he dined with outgoing President Millard Fillmore and incoming President Franklin Pierce and lobbied on behalf of international copyright), Richmond, Charleston, and Savannah. The lectures were published in England as soon as the contractual time of silence expired. On a second tour of America two and a half years later he lectured on the four Georges, adding Albany and Buffalo to the itinerary in the north and Mobile, New Orleans, St Louis, and Cincinnati in the south and west. Thackeray's wealth was accumulating, and he invested in railways on both sides of the Atlantic and in the transatlantic cable, demonstrations of which were thought promising in the 1850s, though the first success came three years after Thackeray's death. 
Thackeray's encounters with American publishers, who had republished his early work at will, were remarkably different from those by Charles Dickens and later Anthony Trollope who both lost their tempers over their lack of control of American publications. Thackeray, acknowledging that half a loaf was better than no loaf, laughed and befriended James Fields in Boston, George Putnam in Philadelphia, and, in New York, the Appletons and the biggest pirates of them all, the Harper Brothers -- negotiating courtesy contracts and recording his unpleasant thoughts on the matter of authors' rights only in letters home. 
Under their previous contract Bradbury and Evans published 'The Newcomes', another twenty-three-month serial that began in July 1854. It chronicles the affairs of a 'most respectable family' of merchants, bankers, and petty aristocrats. The respectability is primarily one of manners and appearances, and the novel reveals in great detail intense intra-family jealousies, rivalries, fights, and outward politeness. The central character is, ostensibly, Clive Newcome, who plays at becoming an artist and plays at aspiring to the hand of his very elegant cousin Ethel Newcome, but whose pliable nature and lack of ambition nearly destroy his attractiveness as a handsome, well-intentioned, charming young man. A major role is also played by Clive's father, Thomas, the East Indian merchant and half-brother to the establishment Newcomes. Thomas, indulgent of Clive to a fault, presses his son to marry Rosie McKenzie (who brings along her termagant mother), though Clive is never in love with her. Thomas is, however, in love with Rosie and appears to live out his own youthful failure to marry the girl he loved through the marriage he arranges for his son. Although the novel is on its surface about the men, it is easy to see that 'The Newcomes' is a major exploration of the marriage market (particularly through Lady Kew's efforts to find an appropriately wealthy buyer for her niece, Ethel) and of the cruelties and injustice of the role of women in Victorian society. One reaches this conclusion, for the most part, by ignoring the opinions expressed by Pendennis, the narrator, and seeing the reality of the situations described. Thackeray paints a remarkably sympathetic portrait of Clara, who marries the tyrannical and abusive Barnes Newcome and then runs away with Jack Belsize. That the decision to break her marriage vows is a traumatic experience for Clara is abundantly clear, but that she is fully justified in taking her situation into her own hands in a country with no laws to protect her is equally clear. 
The result of Isabella's illness was that Thackeray lived the rest of his life as a 'de facto' widower, though unable to remarry or have any 'normal' relationship with a woman. His letters show that he developed an extraordinary number of confidential relations with women who were emotional supports to him. Most remarkable among his relationships were two which threatened or promised to be more than friendships: the first with Jane Octavia, the wife of his close college friend William Brookfield; the second with Sally Baxter, an American girl twenty years his junior. The first relationship had all the potential for a serious affair, but was kept under a strict restraint that exacerbated the emotional pressures. Having given up hope of a cure for Isabella, Thackeray and Jane -- a partial invalid apparently troubled by doubts about her husband eleven years her senior -- began a friendship that could have been innocent enough. Though much of their correspondence was destroyed or snipped, it is clear that the 'brother sister' love under which they conducted their relations threatened to boil over in 1851, when William Brookfield finally barred Thackeray from further visits to or correspondence with Jane. Thackeray, declaring his aggrieved innocence, nursed his bruised ego vicariously in 'The History of Henry Esmond', which he had just begun, chronicling the demise of the loveless marriage of Frank and Rachel Castlewood and the latter's suppressed and initially unacknowledged love for Esmond. Thackeray may have indulged a modicum of revenge in having Esmond displace his love for Rachel on to her daughter Beatrix, a 'betrayal' Rachel perforce suffered in silence. Be that as it may, the emotional trauma of the Brookfield relationship, like that of his wife's mental breakdown, left Thackeray not only more melancholy but wiser and tenderer in his understanding of both men and women and of thwarted desires. 
The second relationship -- with Sally Baxter, whom he met while visiting Mr and Mrs Baxter during his stay in New York in 1852 -- was far more playful, though Thackeray wrote to his mother, of all people, about his surprise and pleasure in discovering, at his age, that the foolish emotions of young love were still available to him. Though again in New York in 1855, when Sally married Frank Wade Hampton of South Carolina, Thackeray declined to attend, apparently because of real though of course unjustified feelings of jealousy. 
Thackeray's confidantes included Mrs Anne Procter, who had been a principal support to him in his troubles with Isabella and to whose husband, Bryan Procter (Barry Cornwall), he dedicated 'Vanity Fair'. More important were Jane Elliot and her unmarried sister Kate Perry, whom Thackeray met while writing 'Vanity Fair' in 1846. Their friendship, by Kate's account, sprang up 'like Jack's bean stalk in a pantomime, which rushed up sky high without culture; and, thank God, so remained till his most sad and sudden end' ('Letters and Private Papers', 1.cxxv). These two ladies were true confidantes, bolstering Thackeray during his emotional involvement with Jane Brookfield and in the trials and challenges of single parenting. With many other women, to whom less intimate letters survive, Thackeray developed social friendships that apparently thrived on his charming, gallant, but utterly safe status as a 'single man' who was married. The condition lent piquancy and restraint to relationships that supplied his genuine need for and interest in feminine companionship. 
While 'The Newcomes' was being written Thackeray and his daughters moved to Onslow Square, Brompton, in May 1854, after nine years at Young Street. Thackeray's plan to provide his parents with a home in his own house was abandoned after a four-month experimental visit in 1857, and another house was found for them two years later. Henry Carmichael-Smyth was a complex, energetic, somewhat eccentric, and erratic character, constantly developing schemes for investments and inventions, which Thackeray found irritating. And his mother, whose love always entailed a demand for some control and for conformity to her religious views, was easier to deal with in small doses and at a distance. A remarkable exchange of letters with his mother and daughter includes stern reproaches to the grandmother for attempting to indoctrinate Anne and Minnie in her strict beliefs during Thackeray's visit to America in 1852 (see 'Letters and Private Papers', 3.85-7, 93-6, 140-41, 4.168-70). Anne was fifteen by then, shared many of Thackeray's liberal ideas, and was highly critical of the 'Old Testament' -- or at least of the prevailing interpretations of an angry avenging God. But Thackeray wished to live at peace with his mother, and most biographers claim that he never really achieved full independence from her influence, though it exerted itself only in her presence and in her relatively narrow sphere. 
Thackeray doted on his daughters and had a special affinity with Anne, who, he was afraid, was 'going to be a man of genius' ('Letters and Private Papers', 2.240). His fears did not prevent his employing her as a secretary, her handwriting appearing in the manuscripts from 'The Newcomes' onwards. Nor did he stand in the way, though he did not take a positive hand, when Anne submitted a story anonymously to Smith for the 'Cornhill', and he failed utterly to conceal his pride when it was accepted. He both feared that Anne and Minnie would be unable to secure husbands and feared that they would. They focused his energies from their birth to his own death, for he frequently said that all his work was aimed at restoring his lost patrimony. In March 1860 Thackeray purchased 2 Palace Green, Kensington, and after having it completely rebuilt, the family moved in during March 1862. When his house, furnishings, wine, books, and copyrights were sold in 1864 after his death, each girl received nearly $10,000. Major Carmichael-Smyth died in 1861; Mrs Carmichael-Smyth died in 1864. 
From the time Thackeray joined the Garrick Club in 1833, clubs featured prominently in his social life. Even when he was hardest at work, he seldom wrote in the evening, when he usually dined out in the home of friends or at a club. Talk was a necessary ingredient of Thackeray's 'research' for his writing, and he made acquaintances wherever he travelled. The Garrick and the Reform were his favourite clubs, though he belonged to the Athenaeum, the Century (in New York), and to several debating societies like the Eccentric, the Shakespeare, and the Rationals. Of Thackeray's writing friends Francis Sylvester Mahoney (Father Prout), Bryan Procter (Barry Cornwall), Jack Sheehan, and Jacob Omnium figure most pleasantly in his letters. He worked closely with illustrators George Cruikshank, John Leech (a friend since Charterhouse days), Richard Doyle, and Frederick Walker. 
Thackeray's relationship with Charles Dickens has been controversial among critics since the 1840s, no critic able to refrain from championing one side or the other. Although in an often repeated lecture for charities Thackeray praised Dickens in fulsome terms for four pages, he could not stop himself from adding 'I may quarrel with Mr. Dickens's art a thousand and a thousand times, I delight and wonder at his genius' ('Charity and humour', 'Harper's New Monthly Magazine', 7, June 1853, 88). Privately he objected to Dickens's overblown writing style, and he remarked once that Dickens was cool to him because he had 'found him out' as a poseur. And though Dickens wrote a moving memorial full of praise for Thackeray, published in the 'Cornhill Magazine' just a month after Thackeray's death, he could not refrain from saying that 'We had our differences of opinion. I thought that he too much feigned a want of earnestness, and that he made a pretence of under-valuing his art, which was not good for the art that he held in trust' (February 1864, 130). They were too different and too similar to ever really like each other. 
At first Thackeray got on fairly well with Dickens's chief supporter, John Forster, though he caricatured him in his letters to friends -- a circumstance that became known to Forster, who of course objected, with Dickens acting as his second. In 1847 club gossip led to a flare-up over Forster's supposed remark that Thackeray was 'false as Hell', but after a reconciliation it was Forster who brought Dr Elliotson to Thackeray when he fell seriously ill in 1849. A remark three months later in 'Pendennis', however, opened the famous 'dignity of literature' controversy that revealed the deep rifts in thought, temperament, and -- one would have said at the time -- breeding that separated Thackeray from Dickens and Forster, whose claims to social status rested entirely upon their literary efforts. Thackeray, on the other hand, had family ties that bestowed status apart from his literary reputation. Comments by Forster on the desirability of state support for artists and against the passage in 'Pendennis', which Forster said disparaged the profession of writing, led to a response by Thackeray and counters by Forster (the relevant documents are reprinted in the 'Garland' edition of 'The History of Pendennis', New York, 1991). Another reconciliation ensued, but soreness remained. Then in May 1858 rumours spread about Dickens's separation from his wife, Kate, and Thackeray contradicted one rumour about Dickens's having an affair with his sister-in-law Georgina by blurting out 'no such thing -- its with an actress' ('Letters and Private Papers', 4.86). Dickens, when he heard the story, thought Thackeray was spreading a tale of him and an actress -- which, though true, was not his business to discuss. This episode was still rankling in each author's thoughts when the famous 'Yates affair' broke out a month later. Young Edmund Yates published an unflattering description of Thackeray, questioning his honour and veracity, to which Thackeray objected. Dickens and Forster stood by Yates, who was nevertheless deprived of his club membership at the Garrick and subsequently lost appeals to the club membership and in court. No further connection was made between the two novelists until, the week before he died, Thackeray approached Dickens on the steps of the Reform Club and shook his hand. 
Thackeray's normal relations with his writing colleagues were cordial, but the differences with Douglas Jerrold over the virulence of 'Punch' satire did not end with Thackeray's resignation from the staff in 1851: in an 1855 'Quarterly Review' essay on the drawings of his old friend John Leech, Thackeray remarked off-handedly that 'Punch' without Leech would be worthless. The remark, meant to praise Leech, naturally offended the rest of the staff. Thackeray's success led to renewals of school friendships with members of the aristocracy such as Lord Houghton (Richard Monckton Milnes), and he made many new friends among the social elite. These have fuelled the notion that he disparaged his profession to curry favour with the upper classes, an idea he denied and which, though still widely accepted, withstands little scrutiny. 
Though Smith made offers for the remaining large serials, Thackeray remained with Bradbury and Evans for one more novel. 'The Virginians' (1857-9) is a sequel to 'Esmond', and recounts the adventures of Henry Esmond's grandsons in the period of the American War of Independence. But then 'The Virginians' failed to earn expected profits (it is not true that the publisher lost any money), and Thackeray felt free to switch publishers. Early in his career Thackeray had made a bid to be editor of the 'Westminster Review', and in the mid-1850s he had proposed a periodical to George Smith and then withdrawn; so it is not very surprising that Thackeray readily agreed to edit Smith's 'Cornhill Magazine', which began publication in January 1860, or that he took his duties seriously -- agreeing to read all submissions, writing prospectuses and letters of acceptance and rejection, though drawing the line at reading proofs for any but his own writings. Thackeray did much of the work at home with the help of an amanuensis and a courier for messages to and from Smith's office and home. The work was onerous and demanding enough to occasion friction between editor and publisher, but the letters show a deep personal regard and respect between the two. Thackeray sponsored Smith's nomination to the Reform Club, and the families exchanged social visits, particularly after Smith's marriage. 
Smith's contract with Thackeray to edit the 'Cornhill Magazine' was tied to others under which Thackeray contributed fiction -- 'Lovel the Widower' (1860), 'The Adventures of Philip' (1861-2), and 'Denis Duval' (1864) -- and editorial essays ('The Roundabout Papers'). This prevented him from writing for any other publisher the rest of his life; Smith even prevented Thackeray from offering a short piece to 'Punch' as a conciliatory move. 
Thackeray's later fiction is seldom written about and less often admired. 'The Adventures of Philip' adopts again Arthur Pendennis as narrator to chronicle the story of a not terribly brilliant, not terribly industrious, not terribly sensitive young man's struggle through adversity, including a corrupt and sycophantic father, to success in a writing career and in love. Philip's story follows a trajectory similar to Thackeray's own life, but the interest of the story must lie in finding Pendennis to be an unreliable narrator whose expressed values and approbation of characters is frequently insensitive in ways of which Thackeray must have expected readers to disapprove. Many readers, unwilling to grant this view, find the later novels weak, bland, and tedious in spite of the smooth dexterity of Thackeray's writing style. 'Lovel the Widower' is a fictional reworking of a play, 'The Wolves and the Lamb', and is frequently seen as a filler that Thackeray produced to fulfil his contract with George Smith. Returning to historical fiction with 'Denis Duval', which was truncated at his death, Thackeray set his last novel among the French Huguenots in England in the latter half of the eighteenth century. Both 'Esmond' and 'Duval' are first-person narrations requiring what would appear to be a first-hand knowledge of current events at the time. The first editor of 'Denis Duval', appending comments to the unfinished book, remarked on the care with which Thackeray prepared his work, referring to his 'many most careful notes, and memoranda of inquiry into minute matters of detail to make the story true. How many young novelists are there who haven't much genius to fall back upon, who yet, if they desired to set their hero down in Winchelsea a hundred years ago for instance, would take the trouble to learn how the town was built, and what gate led to Rye (if the hero happened to have any dealings with that place), and who were its local magnates, and how it was governed? And yet this is what Mr. Thackeray did though his investigation added not twenty lines to the story and no 'interest' whatever: it was simply so much conscientious effort to keep as near truth in feigning as he could. ('Cornhill Magazine', 9, June 1864, 656)' Thackeray was a large man, 6 feet 3 inches, and weighing over 15 stone. His height kept him from looking rotund, but his round face with its flattened nose, near-sighted squint, and high forehead lent itself to self-caricature. As a young man he affected a monocle and later signed many of his drawings with a pair of spectacles with crossed temples. By the age of forty he had white hair, parted on the left and worn over his ears and collar. The fullest recorded description of his appearance occurs in Edmund Yates's unpleasant lampoon, but a number of photographs and drawings show him in the typical unsmiling Victorian dignity which was required by long exposure times and which belied the constant humour of his writings from beginning to end. His health worsened during the 1850s and he was plagued by the recurring stricture of the urethra that laid him up for days at a time. He worsened matters by over-eating and drinking and avoiding exercise, though he enjoyed horseback riding and kept a horse. 
On 23 December 1863, after returning from dining out and before dressing for bed, Thackeray suffered a stroke and was found dead on his bed in the morning. His death at the age of fifty-two was entirely unexpected by his family, friends, and reading public. An estimated 7000 people attended his funeral at Kensington Gardens. He was buried on 29 December at Kensal Green cemetery. 
From the publication of 'Vanity Fair' in 1847-8 to the First World War Thackeray's reputation grew steadily. Never the best-seller that Dickens was, he was more highly regarded than Dickens by readers such as Charlotte Bronte and Jane Welsh Carlyle and by reviewers like Robert Bell and Lady Eastlake. From the beginning, however, there were detractors who preferred writers whose characters were less ambiguous and whose grasp of moral conventions was more comfortable. 
Charles Dickens and other critics such as John Forster (Dickens's first biographer), Michael Sadleir (in his biography of Bulwer-Lytton, 1931) and, more recently, John Carey ('Thackeray: Prodigal Genius', 1977) have thought that Thackeray had a thin skin, being able to dish out but not receive criticism, and that this characteristic revealed itself significantly as an uneasy social position in English society, which, after 'Vanity Fair', lionized him as a writer but distrusted him as an outsider with bohemian connections. The result, such critics aver, was to tone down his satire against the upper classes, with whom in his later years he allegedly curried favour. 
A very different view cites evidence that Thackeray's pedigree, particularly on his father's side -- a family of professionals, doctors, academics, and clergy as well as East India officials with sufficient family wealth to pay for public school and a Cambridge education -- ushered him with some grace and comfort into the manners of the upper classes. It is a view that acknowledges Thackeray as a thinker whose experiences and philosophy led to a profound change of heart and mode of thinking from an ordinary privileged young man to a sensitive and hurt but keen-eyed observer of social and domestic injustices. It was less the success of 'Vanity Fair' and the responsibilities of single parenthood and much more the thoughtful incorporation of Comte's positivism and Victor Cousin's tolerance and eclecticism that informed the subtle exposure of ordinary greed and insensitivity in the male-dominated society and legal system that was England in the 1850s. 
Thackeray was capable of exposing the hypocrisy of conventional socially acceptable behaviour, but he had an unusual capacity to distrust his own and other people's best views. His ability to create detailed realistic images combined with an ability to detect sham or self-deception in the best-intentioned acts led one reviewer to compare Thackeray to a fly settling on a good dinner. Readers of a more philosophical bent appreciated his reluctance to impose a moral imperative. He was a man of principles and honour whose sense of guilt about his self-indulgences was balanced by a sense of honesty in acknowledging his appetites. His own and his characters' moral dilemmas and self-directed humour have endeared and repelled readers, according to their tastes, from the beginning. 
Biographers accounting for Thackeray's development as a writer, whether they think of the later works as a decline or as more subtle and complex narratives and social criticism, generally point to major turning points: Thackeray's marriage and loss of one child and then of his wife (1836-44), the success of 'Vanity Fair' (1847-8), the nearly fatal illness during the writing of 'Pendennis' (1849), and the break with the Brookfields (1852). Without a doubt Thackeray was changed by these events, but it is not obvious that he increasingly became the complacent toothless lion and bland purveyor of harmless fiction -- as argued by critics who prefer the biting, rollicking satire of the early works culminating in 'Vanity Fair'. It has been argued that with time he became a shrewder, more subtle, and more philosophical exposer of the ordinary treacheries of conventional society. 
Thackeray stands alone among male Victorian novelists in the estimation of feminist critics in the last quarter of the twentieth century who delighted in reading against the grain of Victorian conventions on gender and found Thackeray subtly in harmony with their criticism of those conventions. 
There is no comprehensive bibliography: the longest listing of periodical and book materials -- Lewis Melville's in 'Thackeray: a Biography', volume 2 (1910) -- is augmented and corrected by E. Harden, 'A checklist of contributions by William Makepeace Thackeray to newspapers, periodicals, books, and serial part issues, 1828-1864' (1996), while the most detailed description of Thackeray's separately published books is Henry S. Van Duzer's 'A Thackeray Library' (1919). Gordon Ray's four-volume collection of Thackeray's letters in the 1940s ('William Makepeace Thackeray: Letters and Private Papers') and his two-volume biography in the mid-1950s ('The Uses of Adversity' and 'The Age of Wisdom') brought Thackeray a burst of attention and new appreciation. Ray's remains the standard biography, while his study of the living prototypes for Thackeray's fiction, 'The Buried Life' (1952), adds significantly to knowledge of Thackeray's circle of acquaintance. The economics and logistics of Thackeray's professional affairs with publishers are detailed in Peter Shillingsburg's 'Pegasus in Harness' (1992) and his methods of composition are described in Edgar Harden's 'The Emergence of Thackeray's Serial Fiction' (1979) and his 'Thackeray's English Humourists and Four Georges' (1985). The record of Thackeray's meticulous attention to detail is continued in 'Annotations for selected works of William Makepeace Thackeray', edited by Edgar Harden (1990); Harden's two-volume 'Thackeray the Writer' (1998-2000); and R. D. McMaster's 'Thackeray's Cultural Frame of Reference' (1991). Evidence of Thackeray's interest in historical details about London in the second and third decades of the nineteenth century, the period of 'Vanity Fair', is traced by Joan Stevens in ''Vanity Fair'' and the London skyline ('Costerus', new ser., 2, 1974, 13-41). Stevens shows the historical and geographical accuracy of the novel, though it is notoriously and deliberately anachronistic in its description of dress. Thackeray's carelessness and capacity for error are recorded by John Sutherland in 'Victorian Fiction: Writers, Publishers, Readers' (1995). Two supplementary volumes of letters were compiled by Harden (1994). 
Thackeray's novels have been the subject of a number of film adaptations, beginning with 'Vanity Fair' in 1911. A version of 1935 entitled 'Becky Sharp' (or 'Lady of Fortune' in the United States) starred Miriam Hopkins, Cedric Hardwicke, and Nigel Bruce. In 1975 Stanley Kubrick made a highly acclaimed motion picture of 'Barry Lyndon', employing cutting-edge cinematography but apparently completely missing the point that Thackeray intended readers to see through Barry's self-aggrandizement to the criminal heart. However beautiful and innovative as a film, Kubrick's Barry is rather romanticized, like the fictional criminals Thackeray was writing against. 
By the end of the twentieth century Thackeray was overshadowed by much more successful resurgences of interest in Anthony Trollope, the Brontes, George Eliot, and even more so, Charles Dickens. In spite of Hollywood and BBC adaptations and new biographies -- 'Thackeray' by D. J. Taylor (1999) and 'William Makepeace Thackeray: a Literary Life' by P. Shillingsburg (2001) -- Thackeray's works do not now attract the public they deserve. Except for 'Vanity Fair' they are not often taught in schools. Thackeray's realism, detached tolerance, and failure to assert expected Victorian moral imperatives may explain some of this neglect. The historical weight of his later novels may have alienated some modern readers, yet his skill in speech, his vivid characters, and his philosophical stance deserve more appreciation. 


@@@@@


doc= 27156


Thackwell, Sir Joseph (1781-1859), army officer, born on 1 February 1781 at Rye Court, Worcestershire, was the fourth son of John Thackwell JP (died 1808), of Rye Court and Moreton Court, Worcestershire, and his wife, Judith, daughter of J. Daffy of Maysington, descended from the Egyoke family. Apparently educated mostly at Worcester, he was commissioned cornet in the Worcester provisional (later fencible) cavalry in June 1798, became lieutenant in September 1799, and served with it in Ireland until it was disbanded in April 1800. On 23 April 1800 he became cornet by purchase in the 15th light dragoons, and lieutenant, on 13 June 1801. After the peace of Amiens (March 1802) he was placed on half pay, but was brought back to the regiment on its augmentation in April 1804 prior to the resumption of war; he became captain on 9 April 1807. The 15th, converted to hussars in 1806, formed part of Lord Paget's hussar brigade in 1807, and was sent to the Peninsula in 1808, under Sir John Moore. It played the principal part in Paget's brilliant cavalry action at Sahagun (21 December 1808), helped cover the retreat to Corunna, and with the rest of the army was evacuated in January 1809. It then served in England, largely in support of the civil power. In April 1810 it served against Sir Francis Burdett's supporters, and escorted him to the Tower. In 1811 and 1812 it served against Luddites and other disaffected people in Nottinghamshire, Lancashire, and Yorkshire. 
In January 1813 Thackwell embarked with the 15th for the Peninsula, landing at Lisbon in February. It formed part of the hussar brigade attached to Graham's corps and at the passage of the Esla, on 31 May, Thackwell commanded the leading squadron which surprised a French cavalry picket and took thirty prisoners. He took part in the battle of Vitoria (21 June 1813) -- when he was wounded in the right shoulder -- and in the subsequent pursuit, in the battle of the Pyrenees at the end of July, and in the blockade of Pamplona (October 1813). He was also present at Orthes, Tarbes, and Toulouse. On 1 March 1814, after passing the Adour, he was in command of the leading squadron of his regiment, and had a creditable encounter with the French light cavalry, for which he was recommended by Sir Stapleton Cotton, though in vain, for a brevet majority. He served with the 15th in the 1815 campaign. It was in Grant's brigade which was on the right of the line at Waterloo (18 June). Its share in the battle was described by Thackwell himself (see H. T. Sibthorne, 'Waterloo Letters', 1891). After several engagements with the French cavalry, it suffered severely in charging an infantry square towards the end of the day. Thackwell had two horses shot under him and was wounded in the left arm. He lay all night where he fell, was found next day and taken to hospital, and had his arm amputated close to the shoulder. He obtained his majority in the regiment on the day of Waterloo. 
In 1816 the 15th returned to England and was stationed in the north, again serving in support of the civil power. In October 1816, at a riot in Birmingham, Thackwell was hit on the head by a stone or brickbat, and knocked unconscious for several hours. On 21 June 1817 he was made brevet lieutenant-colonel. On 16 August 1819 at St Peter's Field, Manchester (the Peterloo massacre), the 15th charged and dispersed the crowd. Thackwell succeeded to the command of the 15th on 15 June 1820. In October 1831 the 15th suppressed reform riots in Nottingham and its vicinity, and were thanked by the county magistrates. He was an efficient and humane commander, and in the 15th courts martial and floggings were rare. In November 1831 he arranged to exchange to half pay with Lord Brudenell, who reportedly paid between $35,000 and $40,000 for command of the 15th. After holding his command for twelve years, and having served thirty-two years in the regiment, Thackwell was placed on half pay on 16 March 1832. He was made KH in January 1834. 
Thackwell married, on 29 July 1825, Maria Andriah (died 21 June 1874), eldest daughter of Francis Roche of Rochemount, co. Cork (uncle of Lord Fermoy); they had four sons and three daughters. 
On 10 January 1837 Thackwell became colonel in the army, and on 19 May he obtained, by exchange, command of the 3rd (King's Own) light dragoons. He went with it to India, reaching Calcutta in November 1837, but soon left it to command, with the local rank of major-general, the cavalry of the army of the Indus in the Afghan campaign of 1838-9. He was present at the siege and capture of Ghazni, and he commanded the second column of that part of the army which returned to India from Kabul in the autumn of 1839. He was made CB in July 1838, and KCB on 20 December 1839. He commanded the cavalry division of Sir Hugh Gough's army in the short campaign against the Marathas of Gwalior at the end of 1843, and was mentioned in Gough's dispatch after the battle of Maharajpur. In the First Anglo-Sikh War he commanded the cavalry at Sobraon (10 February 1846), and led it in file over the entrenchments on the right, doing work (as Gough said) usually left to infantry and artillery. He was promoted major-general on 9 November 1846. 
When the Second Anglo-Sikh War began Thackwell was appointed to command the 3rd division of infantry; but on the death of Brigadier Cureton in the action at Ramnagar on 22 November 1848 he was transferred to the cavalry division. After Ramnagar the Sikhs crossed to the right bank of the Chenab. To enable his own army to follow them Gough sent a force of about 8000 men under Thackwell to pass the river higher up, and help to dislodge the Sikhs from their position by moving on their left flank and rear. Thackwell found the nearer fords impracticable, but crossed at Wazirabad and on the morning of 3 December camped near Sadulapur. He had orders not to attack until he was joined by an additional brigade; but he was himself attacked towards midday by about half the Sikh army. The Sikhs drove the British pickets out of three villages and some large plantations of sugar cane, and so secured for themselves a strong position. Their artillery kept up a heavy fire until sunset, and they made some feeble attempts to turn the British flanks, but there was very little fighting at close quarters. In the course of the afternoon Thackwell received authority to attack if he thought proper; but as the enemy was strongly posted, he considered it safer to wait until next morning. By morning the Sikhs had disappeared, and it is doubtful whether they had any other object in their attack than that of gaining time for a retreat. Gough expressed his 'warm approval' of Thackwell's conduct, but there were some signs of dissatisfaction in his dispatch of 5 December. An officer of fifty years' service is apt to be over-cautious. This was not the case with Gough himself, but Chilianwala (13 January 1849) went far to justify Thackwell. He commanded the cavalry at Chilianwala, but actually directed only the left brigade. At Gujrat (21 February 1849) he was also on the left, and kept in check the enemy's cavalry when it tried to turn that flank. After the battle was won he led a vigorous pursuit until nightfall. In his dispatch of 26 February 1849 Gough said: 'I am also greatly indebted to this tried and gallant officer for his valuable assistance and untiring exertions throughout the present and previous operations as second in command with this force'. He received the thanks of parliament and, on Wellington's recommendation, the GCB (5 June 1849). 
In November 1849 Thackwell was appointed colonel of the 16th lancers. In 1854, with war against Russia apparently imminent, Thackwell tried unsuccessfully to gain employment on active service with the cavalry. Instead he was temporary inspecting general of cavalry from April 1854 to February 1855, during the absence of the duke of Cambridge. On 20 June 1854 Thackwell was promoted lieutenant-general. In 1853 he bought Aghada Hall and estate, co. Cork, and he spent most of his last years shooting and improving his property. In early 1856 Lord Hardinge recommended him for a baronetcy but Palmerston refused, claiming it would create 'an inconvenient precedent' (Wylly, 356). He died on 8 April 1859 at Aghada Hall. His wife survived him. 
All Thackwell's sons became army officers. His second son, Major-General William de Wilton Roche Thackwell (1834-1910), commissioned in 1853, served in the Crimea and the 1882 Egyptian campaign. Thackwell's third son, 
Thackwell's youngest son, Francis John Roche Thackwell, captain, Royal Irish Lancers, died in 1869 from wounds received from a tiger. 


@@@@@


doc= 27157


Osbert Dabitot Thackwell (1837-1858), was commissioned ensign on 25 June 1855 and became lieutenant on 23 November 1856. He was lieutenant in the 15th Bengal native infantry when it mutinied at Nasirabad on 28 May 1857. He became interpreter to the 83rd foot, was in several engagements, and distinguished himself in the defence of Neemuch. He was at the siege of Lucknow and, after its capture, was killed in the street on 20 March 1858. 


@@@@@


doc= 27158


Thane, John (1747?-1818), dealer in prints, medals, and manuscripts, may have been the child born in Westminster on 12 August 1747, the son of Peter and Susan Thane. His elder sister, Susanna, survived him. Thane collected the writings of the numismatist and printseller Thomas Snelling (1712-1773) and published them as 'Snelling on the coins of Great Britain, France and Ireland... containing seventy copper plates' (1762-74) with an excellent portrait drawn and engraved by himself. On 25 November 1770 Thane married Snelling's daughter Mary Lord ('b'. 1739). Her death may have ended this brief marriage, for about 1776 he married Elizabeth Seymour Flack (died 1824). She, with four sons, Thomas, William, Charles, and John, and three daughters, Ann Charlotte, Elizabeth, and Maria, outlived him. 
In 1772-5 Thane was living at 24 Gerrard Street, Soho, London, and from here he published regular catalogues of his retail stock of prints. He was a friend of Joseph Strutt, engraver and antiquary, who lived for a time in Thane's household; Thane published Strutt's 'Regal and Ecclesiastical Antiquities of England' in 1773. By 1781 Thane had moved to Rupert Street near by, where he dealt in manuscripts, coins, and medals, becoming well known for his expert knowledge of these, besides pictures, and other objects of virtu as well as prints. In 1781 he took on a second shop with the printseller Anthony Torre: they insured the contents of this 'shop and the Warerooms communicating in the brick dwelling of Mr Greenwood auctioneer situate no. 28 Haymarket' for $1000. The new outlet was probably dedicated to modern prints, for from about this time Thane became a significant publisher of contemporary pictures in stipple. He guided the formation of several notable print collections including that of the banker William Esdaile. He himself was particularly interested in antique portraits and autographs. The collection of some 2000 portraits assembled by John Nickolls and sold at his death to Dr John Fothergill were sold at Fothergill's death in 1780 to Thane for either $150 or 200 guineas (sources differ); he broke up the volumes and disposed of the portraits to the principal collectors of the time. 
Thane edited and published 'British autography: a collection of facsimiles of the handwriting of royal and illustrious personages, with their authentic portraits', issued in three volumes, probably in 1788-93. A memorial portrait of Thane by John Ogborne after William Redmore Bigg was used as a frontispiece to the second edition. Thane died in May 1818, probably at his home, Spur Street, Leicester Fields, London; he was buried on 10 May at St Anne, Soho. Between November 1818 and May 1821 his extensive stock of prints, coins, and medals, diverse items, and lastly his copperplates, went through the salerooms in London and Paris, contributing to an estate valued at nearly $14,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 27159


Thayre, Thomas (fl. 1603-1625), medical practitioner, about whom little is known, describes himself as a 'chirurgian' in July 1603, but as his name does not occur among the members of the Barber-Surgeons' Company, and as he uses no such description in 1625, he was probably one of the numerous irregular practitioners of the period, and no sworn surgeon. He published in London in 1603 'Treatise of the Pestilence', dedicated to Sir Robert Lee, lord mayor 1602-3. The cause of the disease, the regimen, drugs, and diet proper for its treatment are discussed. Ten diagnostic symptoms are described, and some theology is intermixed. The general plan differs little from that of Thomas Phaer's 'A Treatise on the Plague', and identical sentences occur in several places. These passages have suggested the untenable view that the works are identical, and Thayre a misprint for Phayre. A similar resemblance of passages is to be detected in English books of the sixteenth century on other medical subjects, and is usually to be traced to several writers independently adopting and slightly altering some admired passage in a common source. Thayre published a second edition in 1625 entitled 'An Excellent and Best Approved Treatise of the Plague', dedicated to John Gore, lord mayor 1624-5. The work shows little medical knowledge, but preserves some interesting particulars of domestic life, and, though inferior in style to the writings of Christopher Langton and even of William Clowes, contains a few well put and idiomatic expressions. 


@@@@@


doc= 27160


Theakston, Joseph (1772-1842), sculptor, was born in Spurriergate, York, and was baptized on either 14 December 1772 or 21 December 1772 in St Michael's, Spurriergate, the son of John and Sarah Theakston of York. His father having died while he was still a child, his mother apprenticed him in 1786 to John Fisher the elder, a local sculptor. In 1794 he completed his apprenticeship, moved to London, and became a pupil of John Bacon the elder, whose work exerted upon him a formative stylistic influence. He then spent several years working as an assistant to John Flaxman and Edward Hodges Baily. From 1818 until his death twenty-four years later he was employed by Francis Chantrey to carve the draperies and other accessories of the latter's statues and groups. 
Although his individual contributions to Chantrey's works are mostly unrecorded, Theakston's dominant role in the execution of two colossal stone statues of George Granville Leveson-Gower, first duke of Sutherland, from small models by Chantrey, is actually recorded: the first (1834-6) stands on the duke's estate at Trentham Park, Staffordshire, and the second (1836-8), height (including base) 'c'.106 ft, is on Ben Bragghie, Golspie, Sutherland. (The one in Scotland is signed 'Theakston Fab. Chantrey Auct.'.) Theakston's contemporary reputation is well summed up in his obituary in 'The Times': 'He was perhaps the ablest drapery and ornamental carver of his time, as he was certainly the most rapid... few could imagine the rapidity of his execution from his quiet manner of handling his tools... When he began to carve a statue, he knew perfectly well what was required of him, and cut away the superfluous marble at once. He had not to try again and again, like most other artists... he may be said never to have struck the chisel with the hammer in vain. (25 April 1842)' As Peter Cunningham, the son of Chantrey's foreman and secretary Allan Cunningham, put it: 'He was a consummate master in making marble convey the qualities and surfaces of silks and satins, velvets and ermines' ('The Builder', 14 Feb 1863). Besides assisting Chantrey, he produced busts and monumental and ornamental works of his own, and exhibited occasionally at the Royal Academy from 1809 to 1837. In 1829 he was paid $1000 for a sculptured marble chimney-piece and clock-frame for the grand hall in Buckingham Palace. Joseph Theakston died where he had lived at 9 Belgrave Place, London, on 14 April 1842, aged sixty-nine, and was buried on the 21st alongside his wife at Kensal Green cemetery in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 27161


William Theed the elder (1764-1817) and his wife, Frances. William Theed the elder entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1786 and began his career as a painter showing classical subjects and portraits at the Royal Academy exhibitions from 1789. In 1790 he went to Italy, and from 1791 he was working in Rome, where his close friends were the artists John Frearson and Henry Howard. He is said to have married a French woman, Mlle Rougeot, in Naples which he visited in 1795. After returning to England in 1796 he worked as a modeller for the Staffordshire firm of Wedgwood (1800-1804) and afterwards as a designer for the silversmiths Rundell and Bridge (1804-17). His sculptures include 'Thetis Returning from Vulcan with Arms for Achilles' (exh. RA, 1812; Royal Collection) and the relief on the monument to Thomas Westfaling (1817) in St Mary's Church, Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire. He was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1811 and Royal Academician in 1813. 


@@@@@


doc= 27162


Theed, William, the younger (1804-1891), sculptor, was born at Trentham, Staffordshire, on 21 March 1804, the son of the sculptor and painter 
After receiving some instruction in art from his father, the younger Theed worked for several years in the studio of the sculptor E. H. Baily. On 15 January 1820 he was admitted as a student to the Royal Academy Schools, where he won a silver medal in 1822. He also won a silver palette from the Society of Arts in 1820 for a figure of Hercules, and two years later he gained its silver Isis medal. In 1826 Theed went to Rome, where he is said to have studied under the Danish sculptor Bertel Thorvaldsen and the Italian Pietro Tenerani, as well as with John Gibson and R. J. Wyatt. He developed a close friendship with Gibson and later acted as a contact between Gibson and some of his patrons in England. Theed worked in a studio at 9 via degli Incurabili, near the piazza del Popolo, where he executed some classicizing ideal works -- such as 'A Nymph Preparing her Bow for the Chase' (marble, 1837; priv. coll.) -- and many portrait busts, including those of the duke of Lucca and the prince and princess of Capua (all exh. RA, 1839). In 1844-5, after nearly twenty years in Rome, he received the commission which marked a turning point in his career, when Prince Albert, the prince consort, asked Gibson to send designs by sculptors working in Rome for statues to be placed in Osborne House, Isle of Wight. Two designs by Theed were accepted, 'Narcissus at the Fountain' and 'Psyche Lamenting the Loss of Cupid' (both marble, 1847; Royal Collection). 
Theed returned to London in 1848 and soon established a highly successful professional practice. He had married, in London in 1839, Mary Ann Arnett (1814-1894), with whom he had at least three sons and two daughters. At the Great Exhibition of 1851 he showed three works, the 'Narcissus', 'Prometheus' (marble, 1851; priv. coll.), and 'The Prodigal's Return' (marble version, 1850; Usher Gallery, Lincoln), the last a life-size elaborately carved narrative group, which heralded Theed's mature style as a sculptor of naturalistic set pieces. He made further works for the prince consort, notably 'Sappho' (marble, 1851; Royal Collection), some busts after the antique, and a series of mythological reliefs for the reception rooms of Buckingham Palace. His 'The Bard' (marble, 1858; Mansion House, London), a subject from Thomas Gray's poem of the same name, was one of sixteen statues by leading sculptors commissioned by the corporation of London for the Egyptian Hall in the Mansion House. In the mid-1850s Theed made a series of twelve bas-reliefs illustrating scenes from Tudor history (bronze, cast by Elkingtons, 'c'.1852-8) for the prince's chamber in the Palace of Westminster. 
The mainstay of Theed's production, however, lay in the field of portraiture, and he received commissions for many major commemorative statues during his career. They included James Watt (bronze, 1857; Piccadilly Gardens, Manchester, after Chantrey), Sir Isaac Newton (bronze, 1858; St Peter's Hill, Grantham), and Edmund Burke (marble, 1858; St Stephen's Hall, Palace of Westminster, London). For St George's Hall, Liverpool, he made the statues of Edward Stanley, fourteenth earl of Derby (marble, 1869) and Henry Booth (marble, 'c'.1874), and for Manchester town hall Charles Pelham Villiers (marble, 1876), John Bright (marble, 1878), and William Ewart Gladstone (marble, 1879). His principal church monuments were those to Sir James Mackintosh (marble, 1855) and Sir Herbert Benjamin Edwardes (marble, 1868) in Westminster Abbey and to Henry Hallam (marble, 1862) in St Paul's Cathedral, and the memorial to the seventeenth-century benefactor Humphrey Chetham (marble, 1853) in Manchester Cathedral. This last, a richly carved seated figure, portraying the subject in Jacobean dress, was reproduced in Parian ware ceramics with several other designs by the sculptor. Theed's portrait busts included those of John Gibson (marble, 1852; Conwy parish church, north Wales; replicas, 'c'.1868, RA and NPG), Sir Henry Holland (marble, 1873; NPG), Victoria Mary Louisa, duchess of Kent (marble, 1861), Queen Victoria (bronze, 1864), and Prince Albert (marble, 1862) (the last three all Royal Collection, several versions). 
As Theed was one of the sculptors most favoured by the prince consort, it was appropriate that he should be chosen by Queen Victoria in 1861 to take the death mask of the prince. In the following years Theed executed several notable memorial statues of Prince Albert, including those at Balmoral Castle (marble, 1863; bronze replica, 1867) and Coburg, Bavaria (bronze, 1865), and replicas for Sydney, Australia (bronze, 1866), Grimsby (bronze, 1879), and Bishop's Waltham (Royal Albert Infirmary) (terracotta replica made by J. M. Blashfield, 1865; destroyed). In 1868 he completed for the queen a romantic double portrait statue representing the royal couple in Anglo-Saxon costume (marble, 1863-7; Royal Collection). Also known as 'The Parting', the group, which symbolizes Anglo-German ties and the royal couple's future reunion, again displays the bravura handling of historical costume in which Theed came to excel. The sculptor's crowning achievement was his group 'Africa' (marble, 1865-71), one of four colossal allegories of continents placed on the outer corners of the Albert Memorial in Hyde Park. Centred on a figure of an Egyptian queen seated on a camel, the work consists of a variety of figures representing the different African peoples together with symbols of African culture and history. 
Despite his early immersion in the studios of the neo-classical sculptors in Rome, Theed developed into a versatile and eclectic sculptor who was equally at ease with classicizing ideal works, historical realism, and modern life portraiture. His successful practice and large output -- he showed more than eighty works at the Royal Academy between 1824 and 1885 -- was underpinned by the extensive patronage of the English royal family. He died of old age on 9 September 1891, at his home, Campden Lodge, Campden Hill, Kensington, London, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 27163


Theinred (fl. c.1150), music theorist, has been plausibly identified with the Tenredus mentioned by John of Salisbury in his 'Metalogicon' as a grammarian. He was, apparently, an ecclesiastic, though no biographical data have been discovered. His name suggests an Old Norse or Anglo-Saxon origin. His only known work, 'De legitimis ordinibus pentachordorum et tetrachordorum', survives in a single copy (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 842, fols. 1-44'v'); it remains unedited. Theinred's name, life, date, and treatise (title, content, and incipit) have long been the victims of numerous errors, distortions, and fictions -- a plague of misinformation that has haunted even very recent publications. 
The treatise, which displays an intimate knowledge of plainchant, is addressed to Alveredus of Canterbury (otherwise unknown), and is divided into three books, with a prooemium. Book 1 treats primarily intervals and their proportions; following Boethius, the discussion is notable only for its thoroughness. Book 2 deals principally with issues of consonance and dissonance; in it Theinred discusses the admissibility of thirds and sixths in organum, and compares the relative consonance of the pure thirds (5:4, 6:5) to the ditonus and semiditonus (81:64, 32:27). In this, he anticipates the work of Walter of Odingham. Book 3 is an extended and original discussion of the problem of chromatically altered tones (beyond the B[flat] accepted by Guidonian theory) in plainsong. Tacitly rejecting modal theory altogether, Theinred completely reworks species theory. He recognizes no pre-existing scale or gamut -- though he assumes the diatonic system -- and defines species strictly in terms of internal intervallic arrangement. Through various permutations Theinred derives complexes that include the seven diatonic pitches and also B[flat], E[flat], and Fsharp. This material is presented not in music notation, but in letter notation, modified for the chromatic tones. Some thirty items from Gregorian chant are cited, classified by their usage of these altered tones. 
Although the historical significance of his work cannot be fully assessed until it is better known, it is clear that Theinred's approach, views, and criticism of then prevailing thought are unique in medieval music theory, throwing fresh light on several issues crucial to the development of Western music. 


@@@@@


doc= 27164


Thellusson, Peter (1737-1797), merchant, was born in Paris on 27 June 1737, the third son of Isaac de Thellusson (1690-1755), banker in Paris and minister of Geneva at the court of France (1730-44), and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Abraham Le Boullenger, of Leiden. The family of Thellusson was of French origin, but took refuge at Geneva during the French wars of religion. Isaac's second son, George (1728-1776), and his partner, Jacques Necker, the future minister of Louis XVI, built up in Paris a first-class banking house. 
On 6 January 1761 Thellusson married Ann, second daughter of Matthew Woodford of Southampton, and sister of an MP; they had three sons and three daughters. His eldest son, Peter Isaac Thellusson (1761-1808), MP from 1795, was on 1 February 1806 created Baron Rendelsham in the Irish peerage. 
Peter Thellusson was sent to England to complete his education in 1761 and was naturalized by act of parliament in the same year. He set up as a merchant banker in London, with help from his brother George and from Pierre Naville, a London merchant from Geneva, who had married his sister. He was agent for his brother's Paris house, as well as for Vandenyver & Cie and other great houses of Paris, Geneva, and Amsterdam. He insured in London French ships sailing to the East Indies; in 1779 he helped to invest $100,000 from Geneva in the Irish tontine. He thus was a typical member of the 'Huguenot International'. He also engaged in business on his own account, trading chiefly with the West Indies, and speculated on the stock exchange. In the early years of the French Revolution, he was the chief London correspondent of Greffulhe and Montz, who had taken over the Thellusson-Necker bank. In connection with them, he speculated on specie and on assignats, and he received large sums which were exported from France by or for the emigres. He thus amassed a considerable fortune, and, among other landed property, purchased the estate of Brodsworth in Yorkshire. 
Thellusson died on 21 July 1797 at his seat at Plaistow, near Bromley in Kent. By his will, dated 2 April 1796, he left $100,000 to his wife and children. The remainder of his fortune, valued at $600,000 or $800,000, he assigned to trustees to accumulate during the lives of his sons and his sons' sons, and of their issue existing at the time of his death. On the death of the last survivor the estate was to be divided equally among the three eldest male lineal descendants of his three sons then living. If there were no heir, the property was to go to the extinction of the national debt. At the time of Thellusson's death he had no great-grandchildren, and in consequence the trust was limited to the life of two generations. The will was generally seen as absurd, and the family endeavoured to get it set aside. On 20 April 1799 the lord chancellor, Alexander Wedderburn, Lord Loughborough, pronounced the will valid, and his decision was confirmed by the House of Lords on 25 June 1805. As it was calculated that the accumulation might reach $140 million, the will was regarded by some as a peril to the country, and an act -- often called the 'Thellusson Act' -- was passed in 1800 prohibiting similar schemes of bequest. A second lawsuit arose in 1856, when Charles Thellusson, the last grandson, died. It was decided in the House of Lords on 9 June 1859. As George Woodford Thellusson, Peter's second son, had no issue, the estate was divided between Frederick William Brook Thellusson, fifth Baron Rendlesham (1840-1911), and Charles Sabine Augustus Thellusson (1822-1885), grandson of Charles, Peter's third son. In consequence of mismanagement and the costs of litigation, they succeeded to only a comparatively moderate fortune. 


@@@@@


doc= 27165


Thelwall, Algernon Sydney (1795-1863), Church of England clergyman and teacher of elocution, was born in Cowes, Isle of Wight, the eldest son of John Thelwall (1764-1834), the political reformer, and his wife, Susan Vellum (died 1816). Educated by private tuition, he was admitted a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1813 and, having been elected a scholar in 1816, graduated BA as eighteenth wrangler in 1818. He was admitted at the Middle Temple in 1816, but was ordained priest in 1819, becoming English chaplain and missionary to the Jews in Amsterdam from 1819 to 1826. Returning to England he became curate of Blackford, Somerset, in 1828, marrying on 11 November 1828, at Islington, Georgiana Anne, eldest daughter of a Mr Tahourdin. 
Thelwall was a prominent evangelical, whose published 'Sermons' (1833) revealed a greater awareness of the importance of the church in its corporate capacity than had been common among evangelicals of the preceding generation. His polemical works included a scriptural refutation of Irvingism (1834) and an exposure of the iniquity of the opium trade with China (1839). He was a founder of the Trinitarian Bible Society, of which he was secretary from 1836 to 1847 and again in 1855. During 1842-3 he was minister of the Bedford Chapel, Bloomsbury, and was curate of St Matthew's, Pell Street, from 1848 to 1850 and again during 1852-3, but he never held a benefice. A determined anti-Catholic, he contributed attacks on Tractarianism to the series of 'Brighton Protestant Tracts', and came to wider notice as reporter of the proceedings of the protestant committee convened in 1845 to oppose a state grant to the Catholic seminary at Maynooth. 
From 1850 until his death Thelwall was lecturer in elocution and public reading at the theological department of King's College, London. His 'The Reading Desk and the Pulpit' (1861) argued for the importance to clergymen of his subject. Thelwall died at his home, 43 Torrington Square, London, on 30 November 1863. Three of his sons were admitted at Trinity College, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 27166


Thelwall, Sir Eubule (c.1557-1630), lawyer, was the fifth son of John Wyn Thelwall ('c'.1528-1586) of Bathafarn Park, Llanbedr, Denbighshire, and Jane (1525-1585), daughter of Thomas Griffith of Pant-y-llondu, Llanasa, Flintshire. 
Thelwall was educated at Westminster School and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1577. He was incorporated at Oxford, where he proceeded MA in 1580, and looked set for an academic career until his enrolment at Gray's Inn in 1590, when he must have been over thirty. Thanks to leases of lands from his family's patron, the countess of Warwick, he was already a man of some means when called to the bar in 1599, and he gradually built up an extensive estate in the lordship of Ruthin, Denbighshire, of which he became recorder in 1604. Appointed an associate bencher of Gray's Inn in 1612, master in chancery and clerk of the alienations office in 1617, and a full bencher at his inn in 1623, he may have owed much of his preferment to his Gray's Inn colleague Francis Bacon. He was knighted on 29 June 1619. 
One of Thelwall's first acts as a chancery master was to secure an increase in the fees his department was allowed to charge, buying Bacon's support with a gratuity of $1200. This bribe came to light during Bacon's impeachment in 1621, when both Thelwall's actions and the remit of his office were attacked in parliament by Sir Edward Coke. Presumably as a result of this mauling, Thelwall took care to secure himself a Commons seat (for Denbighshire) in 1624, when he attempted to procure the abolition of the subpoena office, whose fees would have reverted to the chancery masters. He was noticeably slower to leap to the defence of his superior, Lord Keeper John Williams, when the latter faced impeachment charges, which may explain why Williams supported a rival candidate for the Denbighshire election in 1625. 
Denied a seat on this occasion, Thelwall was returned for Denbighshire again in 1626, when he filed a petition against Lewis Bayly, bishop of Bangor, in whose diocese he lived, accusing the latter of simony, embezzlement, assault, and fornication, and of nominating unqualified men 'and others... that understand not the [Welsh] language' to benefices (Bidwell and Jansson, 3.5); the investigating committee did not report before the dissolution, at which time one of his enemies reported a rumour that Thelwall had been arrested. He played a more constructive role in the Commons during the sessions of 1628 and 1629, seeking to smooth the passage of the subsidy bill and the petition of right, steering the Denbighshire copyholders' bill through committee, and making an impassioned speech for a better preaching ministry: 'I think it is time to complain of ministers when I, that have a dozen or fourteen of them within ten mile of me round about, the least of their benefices to the value of $50 'per annum', may ride my horse a month and not hear a sermon. I believe they are not busied as they should be, and therefore it is time to think of a reformation. (Cole, 3.436)' If somewhat ruthless in his professional dealings, Thelwall was also noted for his charitable works. At Gray's Inn he supervised the building of the chapel and paving of the courts, while at Jesus College, Oxford, of which he became president in 1621, he secured the first proper set of statutes for the college, and was said to have invested nearly $5000 of his own money in the chapel and library, in addition to donations he solicited from other Welsh alumni. 
Thelwall never married, and at his death on 8 October 1630 his estate was divided between his financier brother Sir Bevis Thelwall and several nephews. He was buried in the chapel of Jesus College, which still owns a portrait of him as a child. 


@@@@@


doc= 27167


Thelwall, John (1764-1834), political reformer and lecturer, was born on 27 July 1764 at Chandos Street, Covent Garden, the son of Joseph Thelwall (1731-1772), a silk mercer. He was a sickly child, suffering from asthma and a tendency to stammer. After his father's death his mother continued the silk business, and in 1777 John left his boarding-school at Highgate to work for the family firm. He found this irksome, and preferred to continue his education by self-tuition through wide reading, for which he was frequently reproached by his mother. Personal dissatisfaction and uncongenial family life (his elder brother drank heavily, and may have been mentally ill) was reflected in his restless and short-lived attempts to find a career. John tried to become a painter, then made a fruitless attempt to 'get upon the stage'. He was apprenticed to a master tailor, but quickly abandoned the trade to make a further attempt to study as a painter. In 1782 he was articled as clerk to the attorney John Impey of Inner Temple Lane. Once again, however, he found himself more attracted to a literary life than to the duties required of him by the legal profession. After three and a half years studying for the bar, his articles were cancelled and in 1786 he 'launched into the world as a literary adventurer' (J. Thelwall, xviii). He had already published in journals during the early 1780s. In 1787 his 'Poems on Various Subjects' appeared to some praise from the 'Critical Review', and he also became editor and principal contributor to the 'Biographical and Imperial Magazine'. With other journalism, and some private tuition, he managed to support himself and his mother (whose silk business had by now failed). 
Thelwall began his career as a political lecturer by speaking at public debating societies, especially the Society for Free Debate, which met in Coachmakers' Hall. All shades of political opinion were canvassed at debates: Thelwall was at first 'decidedly ministerial' in his sympathies, but the early progress of the French Revolution encouraged a more critical and reformist attitude to the establishment. In 1790 he was a poll clerk at the Westminster election, and in this capacity met and impressed the veteran reformist John Horne Tooke, whom Thelwall subsequently regarded as his 'intellectual and political father' (C. B. Thelwall, 76). On his birthday, 27 July 1791, he married Susan Vellum, whom he had met in 1789, while convalescing in Rutland. He settled with her near Guy's and St Thomas's hospitals. Here he attended the anatomical lectures given by Henry Cline (whom he had known since 1787), William Babington, and others. At this time he was a close friend of the surgeon and republican Astley Cooper. Between October 1791 and 1793 he was a 'most conspicuous' member of the Physical Society at Guy's Hospital, a distinguished group that met for lectures on and discussion of advanced medical and scientific issues. On 26 January 1793 he presented to the society a lecture entitled 'Animal vitality', which speculated on the vital principle of life, and 'controverted' John Hunter's theory that this principle was inherent in the blood. The lecture was a great success: it was discussed at five subsequent meetings of the Physical Society, and published as 'An Essay towards a Definition of Animal Vitality' (1793). 
From 1792 Thelwall had divided his time between scientific interests and his commitment to the rapidly expanding movement for parliamentary reform. When in November 1792 government agents closed the Society for Free Debate, Thelwall resolved to 'assert and vindicate' the right to political discussion (C. B. Thelwall, 98). He offered a reward in hope of finding a room for debate and, from November 1793, commenced his political lectures at Compton Street and subsequently at the large meeting-room at Beaufort Buildings, Strand. His central place in metropolitan reformist circles is suggested by his affiliations with various reformist groups. He attended the Society of the Friends of the Liberty of the Press and joined the moderate Friends of the People at Southwark. He was acquainted with members of the long-established Society for Constitutional Information, and in October 1793 Joseph Gerrald introduced him to the more broadly based, working-class reform movement in the London Corresponding Society, founded in January 1792 by the shoemaker Thomas Hardy. 'Citizen' Thelwall quickly became the most prominent and articulate member of the reform movement, calling in his speeches for universal suffrage and an end to the war with France. His witty, upbeat presence as a public speaker is evoked by his 'libel of the Bantum Cock', which (implicitly) compared George III to a cock on a farmyard dunghill. The radical publisher Daniel Isaac Eaton was charged with seditious libel for publishing Thelwall's satire in 'Politics for the People', but he was acquitted and the prosecution ridiculed for glossing Thelwall's remarks about the cock with the phrase 'meaning our lord the king'. Thelwall claimed that audiences of 750 people attended his lectures, but his outspoken opinions and his popularity also brought the attentions of government agents and informers (including James Walsh, who in August 1797 would spy on Samuel Taylor Coleridge and William Wordsworth at Nether Stowey). Thelwall could be self-dramatizing and given to exaggeration, but he responded to a genuine threat of violence when he decided to make his hat 'cudgel proof', and deliberately walked down the middle of the street to avoid attack. 
In the belief that the London Corresponding Society was about to call a general convention (similar to the French revolutionary administration), the British government arrested the leaders of the reform movement. On hearing of Thomas Hardy's arrest, on 12 May 1794, Thelwall observed to a friend: 'Affairs are at a sad crisis, citizen' (C. B. Thelwall, 153). The following day Thelwall was arrested at Beaufort Buildings; his papers and books were confiscated, and he was imprisoned in the Tower of London. He remained in the Tower over the summer months until, on 6 October, he was indicted with the others on a capital charge of treason and moved to the 'Common Charnel House' of Newgate gaol (J. Thelwall, xxviii). After the trials of Hardy and Horne Tooke, Thelwall was tried at the Old Bailey from 1 to 5 December and -- like his two friends -- acquitted. This outcome 'electrified' the court room, and brought loud applause from the crowd gathered outside. The charges against the other reformists were dropped, and the prisoners were released. 
While Thelwall emerged as a hero of the reform movement, he also continued his literary career. In 1793 he published 'The Peripatetic', a 'political-sentimental' compendium of prose and verse that he later claimed was Wordsworth's pattern for his dramatic poem 'The Excursion' (1814). During his imprisonment in 1794, he wrote the verses published in 'Poems Written in Close Confinement' (1795). After a brief respite following his trial, Thelwall resumed his political activities and published his lectures in his own journal, 'The Tribune' (1795-6). His prolific output of pamphlets included 'The Natural and Constitutional Rights of Britons' (1795), 'Peaceful Discussion' (1795), 'The Rights of Nature' (1796), and 'Sober reflections on the seditious and inflammatory letter of the Right Hon. Edmund Burke to a noble lord' (1796). Although in 1795 he had retired from the London Corresponding Society, he maintained his support for the society's principles and, on 26 October and 12 November 1795, spoke at the mass meetings called by the society in Copenhagen Fields, Islington. His stature as a leader of the reformists is suggested by James Gillray's satirical cartoon of him in 'Copenhagen House', and by Edmund Burke's wry observation that the mass gatherings of reformists constituted 'the Thelwall festival'. 
On 29 October 1795 the king's carriage was attacked at the opening of parliament, an incident used by the government as a pretext for the introduction of the 'two bills' or ''Gagging Acts''. The 'Seditious Meetings' Bill', passed into law on 18 December 1795, suppressed public meetings and effectively prevented Thelwall's lectures at Beaufort Buildings. Undeterred, and at considerable personal risk, he continued his political career under the guise of lectures on classical history. During 1796 he made a lecture tour of East Anglia, speaking at Norwich, Yarmouth, Wisbech, and King's Lynn. He was nearly captured by a press-gang at Yarmouth, and was 'successively attacked' on other occasions when he tried to speak. 'Such was the conclusion of [my] political career', Thelwall wrote in 1801 (J. Thelwall, xxx). 
Like Thelwall in London, Coleridge had delivered numerous political lectures at Bristol during 1795. The two had corresponded since April 1796, and in the summer of 1797 Thelwall's walking tour through the west country of England brought him to Nether Stowey, where he arrived on 17 July. For ten days Thelwall, Coleridge, and William and Dorothy Wordsworth (recently settled at Alfoxden House) formed a 'most philosophical party' walking in the Quantock coombes. They read Wordsworth's play 'The Borderers' in Alfoxden Park, and enjoyed a high-spirited dinner at which an informer, the servant Thomas Jones, was also present. The conversation was reported and, within a few days, Thelwall's old adversary James Walsh -- Coleridge's 'Spy Nosy' -- arrived at Stowey, only to find that Thelwall had already left. 
Thelwall, impressed by Coleridge's and Wordsworth's life of literary retirement, hoped to settle at Stowey too. But, like the poets, he had not forgotten politics entirely: in Coleridge's well-known anecdote, Thelwall claimed that the Quantocks was 'a place to make a man forget that there is any necessity for treason!' (S. T. Coleridge, 'Table Talk', 1, 24 July 1830, 181). Seemingly embarrassed by Thelwall's notoriety, and anxious to consolidate his friendship with the Wordsworths, Coleridge put him off. Thelwall eventually settled with his family at a farm in Llys-wen, on the banks of the River Wye, near Brecon. Here the one-time champion of the reform movement commenced a life of farming and literary composition, describing himself as the 'new Recluse'. 
In 1801 Thelwall published his 'Poems Chiefly Written in Retirement'. 'To the Infant Hampden' and 'Lines Written at Bridgwater' deserve comparison with Coleridge's blank verse 'conversation poems' of the later 1790s. After failing as a farmer, he resumed his lecturing career in November 1801, speaking now about elocution and the 'Science of human speech'. At Edinburgh in 1804 he responded to critical remarks by Francis Jeffrey in the 'Edinburgh Review' by opening a pamphlet war with his 'Letter to Francis Jeffrey on Certain Calumnies and Misrepresentations in the 'Edinburgh Review''. Soon afterwards he settled at Bedford Place, where he taught speech therapy and elocution, and in 1809 he established an institute in Lincoln's Inn Fields, where he continued to practise as an elocutionist. His 'Letter to Henry Cline' (1810) alluded to his early friendship with the surgeon, to 'treasured remembrances of anatomical and physiological facts', and outlined his system and some successful cases he had treated. In seeking the 'enfranchisement of fettered organs' through speech therapy, Thelwall merged the scientific and political ideals that had formed two aspects of his career in the 1790s; as he wrote in his 'Letter to Henry Cline', 'the medical man and the philanthropist will not be insensible to the value of this new science'. 
In 1816 his first wife, Susan, died, leaving him four children to support, the eldest of whom was Algernon Sydney Thelwall. His Institute of Elocution flourished until 1818, when, following the end of the Napoleonic wars, the call for a parliamentary reform movement had revived. Thelwall returned to the cause, purchasing and editing a journal, 'The Champion', in which he published a series of powerful denunciations of the Peterloo massacre (16 August 1819). He married, about 1819, Henrietta Cecil Boyle and reopened his elocution school at Brixton. From now on Thelwall resumed his career as an itinerant lecturer, appearing at literary and philosophical societies throughout the country. His subjects included 'elocution, history, the classics, polite literature, impediments of speech &c.' (Britton, 1.185); a representative course, dated 16 August 1832, comprised ten 'Lectures, Elocutionary & Critical, on Milton in Particular, & the English Poets in General'. On 25 January 1834 Thelwall wrote cheerfully from Bristol, saying he was 'as animate as ever' on the platform. He also mentioned, however, an 'unpleasant symptom of the chest', that he was 'less & less able to bear the exertion of walking', and that he still endured his 'astmha ['sic'], or whatever it is'. Three weeks later, on 17 February 1834, Thelwall died at Bath. His second wife survived him. 
Coleridge's sense that 'Citizen John Thelwell had something good about him' (24 July 1830, 'Table Talk', 1.180) was echoed in other nineteenth-century memoirs. Thelwall's reputation was enhanced from the 1960s by the work of E. P. Thompson, and the bicentenary in 1994 of his trial for treason occasioned widespread interest in his political, scientific, literary, and medical careers. 


@@@@@


doc= 27168


Theobald (c.1090-1161), archbishop of Canterbury, was born at Thierville (Eure) in Normandy, some 5 kilometres north of the abbey of Le Bec-Hellouin, in the valley of the Risle and within the lordship of Brionne. 
Theobald's father was reputed to have been a knight, presumably in the service of the count; and, accordingly, was of a similar social standing to Herluin, the founder of Bec. The author of a brief life of Theobald, perhaps Miles Crispin, the precentor of Bec who died about 1150, considered his lineage distinguished, but does not name his parents. Robert de Torigni describes Theobald as noble and honourable. Theobald's father was a neighbour, and perhaps a kinsman, of Gilbert Beket, the father of Theobald's successor at Canterbury. He had several children. One of the younger sons, Walter, was made by Theobald his second-in-command at Canterbury. Four of Theobald's nephews, Guillaume, Gilbert, Roger, and Lechard, together with their tutor, the clerk Thomas d'Evreux, witness a charter of his from 1150-53. The first of these, named as Guillaume de Thierville, is found as a clerk in Bishop Bartholomew of Exeter's household about 1172. 
A date for Theobald's birth about 1090, when Robert Curthose was duke of Normandy, would suit the information that he was very old when he died and also produce a likely chronology. The author of his life states that he was very well educated in the liberal arts, but does not claim him as an alumnus of the abbey. He entered the monastery of Bec when the noble Guillaume de Montfort of Montfort-sur-Risle was abbot (1093-1124), the 266th of his 346 admissions, and so, perhaps, about 1117, when he would be about twenty-seven. The biographer adds that Theobald spent many years as a claustral monk, ten years as prior, and was elected abbot on the death of Boso in June 1136. But he obtained the office only with difficulty. Archbishop Hugh of Rouen first withheld consent because he had not been consulted, then the benediction because Theobald, like his predecessors, would not make a profession of canonical obedience. In the end Peter the Venerable, abbot of Cluny, who was on a visit to Normandy, secured a compromise, a verbal profession. According to the life, the archbishop thereafter loved him dearly. But it seems as though the abbey, perhaps because Theobald soon deserted it, was not so indulgent. 
William de Corbeil, archbishop of Canterbury, died on 21 November 1136, at a time when King Stephen's authority was crumbling in both England and Normandy under attacks from Scotland and Anjou and internal rebels, mostly in support of his rival to the throne, Henry I's daughter, the empress Matilda, widow of the emperor Heinrich V and the wife of Geoffrey, count of Anjou. By November 1138, however, Stephen had weathered the storm and could spare time for Canterbury. His younger brother, Henry de Blois, bishop of Winchester, who was administering the vacant diocese and coveted the arch-see, had been negotiating with Pope Innocent II for permission to be translated. In June 1138 a papal legate, Alberic, cardinal-bishop of Ostia, arrived in England; and after a visitation of the dioceses he summoned a general council to Westminster for 11 December. In his mandate to the diocese of Canterbury he listed the appointment of a new archbishop among the business to be transacted. He recognized the right of the monks to elect, but also mentioned the interest of the bishops and the king in the matter. 
Stephen had in fact clearly decided to thwart his brother's vaulting ambition; and with the pope's and the legate's connivance -- and, presumably, the support of some of the leading bishops -- staged a 'coup de theatre'. Theobald went to London on the invitation of the king and queen; and at the very end of the council, on 24 December, when Henry of Winchester had absented himself for some business at St Paul's, Theobald was elected archbishop. The procedure is variously described and the parts played by the several constituent actors are uncertain. But there seems to have been no overt opposition to the abbot's election. It could be that Theobald's relative obscurity served him well. On 8 January 1139 the legate, assisted by most of the provincial bishops, consecrated him archbishop at Canterbury. Meanwhile the pope had summoned the English prelates to a general council (the Second Lateran Council) to be held at Rome in Lent; and Theobald set off with four of his suffragans and four abbots. Before August he returned with a pallium. But Innocent had found a novel way of checking Canterbury's pretensions to a primacy: on 1 March he named Henry de Blois, bishop of Winchester, his standing legate in the kingdom. He was also offering an olive branch. But Henry never forgave his brother for his treachery; and his ambition to create a third ecclesiastical province in England, based on Winchester, became an additional threat to Theobald. 
Theobald was not only an ambitious man but also a brave one. The almost inevitable civil war in England and Normandy, which was about to begin, ensured a tense political situation and an insoluble problem of loyalty. Henry of Winchester's legation (1139-43) and ambitions were a recipe for a similar anarchy in the English church. And the monks of Christ Church, Canterbury, who had been feuding with William de Corbeil over how the collegiate church of St Martin at Dover should be reformed, and continued to behave unlawfully in the two years' vacancy after his death, offered an immediate challenge to Theobald's authority. Although the incomer was, like his illustrious predecessors, Lanfranc and Anselm, a monk of Bec, he was also a man of a new age. He appointed his brother Walter as archdeacon of Canterbury at the earliest opportunity, brought over his nephews ('nipoti'), and recruited a household of clerks, which, distinguished though it might be, was not the traditional family of a monk-bishop. Indeed, its brilliance must have been an unexpected outcome of the arrival of a hitherto obscure abbot. Among the stars of this alma mater of three future archbishops and six bishops were Roger de Pont l'Eveque, Thomas Becket of London, John of Canterbury (later archbishop of Lyons), Bartholomew, the future bishop of Exeter, William of Northolt, John of Pagham, and William de Vere. Most of these were masters of arts; by 1145 Theobald had also attracted the Italian master of laws, Vacarius, and by 1147-8 John of Salisbury, both in their different disciplines scholars and figures of European importance. 
Although the purpose of the household was utilitarian -- to protect and exercise Theobald's rights as an ordinary, metropolitan, primate, landowner, and first minister of the king -- and was not intended to form a public school, it soon became, backed by Canterbury's fine library, one of the most distinguished academies that the English church ever produced. Several of its members remembered fondly the idyllic days they had passed there. It was a stimulating and also a competitive society. The archbishop worked hard to advance his clerks; and he had his favourites. When he promoted his brother Walter from the archdeaconry to the suffragan see of Rochester early in 1148, he gave Roger de Pont l'Eveque the vacant office. And, probably in 1152, he and some of Roger's friends, led by Thomas Becket, smothered a serious homosexual scandal in which the archdeacon was involved. In 1154 Theobald obtained for Roger a great prize, the archbishopric of York. After that Theobald doted on Becket, while John of Salisbury became his devoted confidential secretary. 
There is every reason to think that Theobald's administration was efficient and progressive. With one of the greatest stylists of the age, John of Salisbury, drafting his diplomatic and legal correspondence, and humbler chancellors and scribes producing his charters, the literary and business documents produced were much influenced by the practices of the papal curia and the English royal court. Moreover, this household of bright young men was in general out of sympathy with 'musty' monastic culture; and its recruitment indicates how the once insubordinate abbot was changing into an authoritarian bishop. Theobald took a sincerely benevolent interest in all monastic and canonical communities within his diocese and province; but he opposed their exemption from episcopal control and deplored, and sometimes withstood, even disregarded, the growing habit of 'undisciplined' monks appealing to the pope against episcopal authority. The prior of the cathedral chapter, Christ Church, in 1138 was Jeremiah, who, as sub-prior, had been a thorn in William de Corbeil's flesh, and had been promoted illegally 'sede vacante'. Theobald, at first impressed by this firebrand, allowed the monks to recolonize St Martin's, Dover, and used Jeremiah as his agent in the reform of the diocese. But by 1143 he had had enough, deposed him, and, although forced to reinstate him by Innocent II and his legate, Henry of Winchester, made life so uncomfortable for him that, with the solace of 100 marks to acquit the debts he had incurred by his appeal, Jeremiah resigned and retired to St Augustine's. When his replacement, Walter Durdent, a pious and learned monk, was elected bishop of Coventry in 1149, Theobald made a bad mistake by promoting his chaplain, Walter Parvus, to be prior of Christ Church. This man's mismanagement created so much havoc that Theobald, the son of a knight, had to use military force to restore order. He captured and imprisoned monks engaged in appealing to Rome, confiscated the priory's archives, and in 1152 arrested Walter at Lambeth and had him imprisoned at Gloucester. In his place he promoted the sub-prior Wibert, with whom he collaborated in reforming the chapter's administration. 
As Theobald was abbot of Christ Church, he suffered few restraints on his inherent authority. St Augustine's, however, was far from domestic. Dedicated to the apostle of the English and the founder of the see, the burial place of the saint and of the first ten archbishops, it was not only the standing rival of Christ Church, but also claimed total exemption from the archbishop's jurisdiction. It had, moreover, in 1120 and 1139 obtained papal confirmation of its portfolio of forged papal bulls granting it independence and much besides. It was only with difficulty that William de Corbeil had obtained a profession of obedience from Hugh of Trottiscliffe, elected abbot in 1126; and a rebel group of monks, led by Hugh's nephew, the sacrist, William -- William the Devil to Christ Church monks -- and supported by the prior, Silvester, quarrelled with Theobald over a number of matters, mainly financial and administrative. 
In 1144 Pope Lucius II decided most of the points at issue in the archbishop's favour. And in September 1149, when the prior and sacrist refused to observe the interdict placed on England by Eugenius III and Theobald, the archbishop, supported by the pope, excommunicated the two by name and had them publicly flogged at the door of Northfleet church before releasing them from his sentence. When Abbot Hugh died in 1151, Silvester, who paid the king 500 marks for custody of the abbey and a free election, secured the promotion and was succeeded as prior by William. Theobald, alleging simony, naturally withheld confirmation and benediction for as long as possible from his old enemy. But on 28 August 1152 he bowed to Eugenius's mandate, and, while reserving his rights, blessed Silvester without receiving a profession. But he did not let go. At Henry II's great council on 17 July 1157 at Northampton, Theobald proved that Abbot Hugh had made a profession to William de Corbeil. Whereupon Silvester, in the presence of six bishops, submitted. 
Theobald had restored order to his own see, city, and diocese. In his province, however, his metropolitan rights were at first largely nullified by Henry of Winchester's legation. Until the end of 1143 Theobald had to accept second place in the English church, and, although both he and Henry were monks, and had a common belief in the freedom of the church, their individual interests were often in conflict. Theobald's subordination did, however, shield him from having to take a leading part in dealing with Stephen's arrest of Roger, bishop of Salisbury, and the latter's episcopal kin in June 1139, and in contesting the king's traditional interference in the appointment to bishoprics and abbeys. The efforts made by Stephen and Henry to appoint first their nephew Waldef, and then William fitz Herbert (consecrated by Henry at Winchester in 1143), to the see of York, in the latter case provoking bitter opposition from the Cistercian order and its candidate, Henry Murdac, and extending the disorder in the church, also spared Theobald a powerful rival in the north. 
After his legation lapsed on the death of Innocent II on 24 September 1143, Henry failed to get its renewal from Celestine II or his three successors, who employed legates 'a latere'; nor could Theobald, despite repeated attempts, obtain one until Eugenius III rewarded him for his loyalty early in 1150. To judge by the terms of its renewal by Adrian IV in 1155, Theobald, on account of his prudence, steadfastness, probity, knowledge, and virtue, was granted a delegation of papal powers throughout the kingdom, including the right to convene councils, and, should he think fit, correct all errors and make ordinances. Theobald wasted no time. In March 1151 he held a legatine council in London, attended by the king, his eldest son, Eustace, and the nobility, which promulgated eight canons condemning the present ills in the kingdom, in particular, attacks on church property and illegal imposts on the clergy. The guilty were to be punished by anathema. 
Until his own legation lapsed with the death of Adrian IV on 1 September 1159 and the subsequent papal schism, Theobald rebuilt and defended his metropolitan authority, even if only with powers delegated from Rome. He defeated, aided by some luck, Henry of Winchester's attempt to compensate for his lost legation by creating a province of 'western England', with Winchester as his metropolitan see. Eugenius III disliked Henry and favoured Theobald. The archbishop also successfully withstood the attempts of the Welsh bishops, led by Bernard of St David's, to create an independent province. Bernard's successor, David fitz Gerald, in 1148, at the start of his long tenure of the see, made an elaborate profession of obedience to Canterbury. Ireland, however, was removed from Canterbury's sphere of influence. Theobald consecrated Patrick to Limerick in 1140. But in 1152 the papal legate, Giovanni Paparo, completed the reform of the Irish church into four provinces, with the primacy going to Armagh. 
As for Canterbury's primacy within Britain, in 1143-4 Theobald, during a visit to Pope Celestine II, obtained with the help of the papal chancellor, the Englishman Robert Pullen, some sort of a confirmation, although in 1148 at Rheims, Eugenius III indicated that it did not cover York. Uncertainty over its extent is shown between 1143 and 1155 by Theobald's secretariat's styling the archbishop, seemingly indifferently, 'primate of the whole of Britain', 'primate of the whole of England', 'primate of England', and 'primate of the English'. And in 1154, on the death of Archbishop William of York, Theobald, presumably acting as papal legate, consecrated his archdeacon, Roger de Pont l'Eveque, to the see without requiring a written profession. This evasion ensured that he and Roger remained on good terms. 
Theobald was no less successful in his dealings with the English rulers and the civil war. The attempts made first by Henry I's daughter, Matilda, and her husband, and then by their son, Henry, to drive Stephen out of Normandy and England, which began seriously in 1139, caused problems for the nobles and prelates in both dominions. On his election to Canterbury in 1138 Theobald had done homage and sworn fealty to Stephen, who had been crowned by his predecessor in 1135. The church, hostile to hereditary claims in its own polity, usually accepted 'de facto' kings, and judged all types of ruler according to how they treated ecclesiastical rights. But it may be presumed that the church had a prejudice against female rulers, especially if, as with the empress, they were imperious. Theobald as a pure Norman was committed to the continuing unity of the duchy and kingdom, but would have regarded the Angevins as hereditary enemies. Basically, however, the church was self-interested and opportunistic. Hence, although Theobald was sensible of a primary allegiance to Stephen, whom he knew the papacy had recognized, he did not consider that those factors overrode all other considerations, or that they extended to Stephen's sons. 
A month after Stephen was captured by Matilda's supporters at Lincoln on 2 February 1141, Henry of Winchester recognized the empress as his lady, and swore fealty conditional on her acceptance of him as her principal adviser. Theobald, however, more principled -- as even William of Malmesbury acknowledged -- insisted that he must first obtain Stephen's permission; and, when he visited him in his prison at Bristol, Stephen allowed him to bow to necessity. In the next six months the archbishop was regularly, but probably not constantly, in Matilda's company. He was there on midsummer day, when the Londoners ejected her and her entourage from the city before she could be crowned. He remained after the legate had changed sides and adhered to Stephen's queen. And he was with her in September when she attacked Henry in Winchester and was then herself beset by the queen and her troops. Theobald, like Matilda, escaped only with difficulty, and suffered the indignity of being manhandled and robbed, while Earl Robert of Gloucester, Matilda's half-brother and the real leader of her party, was captured by the royalists. Whereupon, both Henry of Winchester and Theobald started the negotiations that led in November to the exchange of Stephen for Robert. Theobald was at the legatine council at Westminster on 7 December when Stephen was reinstated. And at Christmas he crowned Stephen and the queen at Canterbury. The civil war continued until 1149; but after Matilda returned to Normandy in 1148, never to return, the fighting and disorder gradually subsided. 
Stephen, a kindly man, apparently showed no resentment for Theobald's temporary apostasy: he had yielded to 'force majeure' in the interests of the church; and Theobald accepted that Stephen was the legitimate monarch with the traditional rights in the English church. The archbishop's frequent meetings with the popes, together with the proliferation of appeals from English ecclesiastical courts to the papal curia, did, however, make the papacy for a time the effective head of the English church. This was, inevitably, unwelcome to Stephen, and made life difficult for Theobald. When the king refused to allow the archbishop to attend Eugenius's general council at Rheims on 21 March 1148 and sent three 'safe' bishops instead, Theobald -- making his way there by swimming rather than sailing, as the admiring pope exclaimed -- was punished for his defiance by the confiscation of his temporalities. In return, Eugenius suspended all those English prelates who had not attended, and, except for Henry of Winchester, delegated their absolution to Theobald. Moreover, at the end of the council the pope was about to excommunicate Stephen when Theobald begged for him to be spared. 
In April 1148 the archbishop returned to England, was expelled by the king, and sojourned in Flanders. There he added to his offences by consecrating at St Omer his friend, Gilbert Foliot, abbot of Gloucester, to the bishopric of Hereford after securing the consent of Geoffrey, count of Anjou, whose adherents were in control of those parts. Eugenius supported Theobald by putting an interdict on England, and the archbishop, never daunted, returned again to the kingdom and was reconciled to the king. Gilbert Foliot, on Theobald's instruction, then swore fealty to Stephen. Adroitness was almost becoming double-dealing. In 1150 Theobald was rewarded with a papal legation. 
By this time Stephen, in imitation of the Capetians in France, wanted to have his elder son, Eustace, crowned king and thus have the dynasty confirmed. He met, however, with determined opposition from Eugenius and Theobald, who, while remaining outwardly correct, had become sympathetic to the Angevin cause, and, while waiting on events, insisted on the maintenance of the 'status quo'. Theobald refused Stephen's demand at the Council of London in April 1152 for the coronation, escaped again to Flanders when threatened with violence by royalists, but made his peace with the king in August. In January 1153 Henry, Matilda's and Geoffrey's son, by then duke of Normandy and, in the right of his wife, duke of Aquitaine, invaded England; and the death first of the queen and then of Eustace robbed Stephen of the will to continue the struggle. It had become obvious to most involved that some settlement would have to be made. Theobald and his clerks were active in the negotiations that led at Winchester on 6 November to Stephen's recognition of Henry as his associate ruler and heir. Stephen died on 25 October 1154 while Henry was abroad. The church and the barons respected the treaty, and on 19 December Theobald crowned Henry king. 
The old archbishop of Canterbury was accepted and at first honoured by the new young king. Theobald baptized his second son, Henry, born on 28 February 1155. But his attempt to repeat the success he had had in the church, when he contrived the election of his archdeacon to the archbishopric of York on 28 February 1154, by procuring for his next archdeacon, Thomas Becket, the royal chancellorship in January 1155, was less rewarding. Becket had acquired a grander master and eagerly entered a new world, and if Theobald had hoped to use him as a means of exerting influence within the king's government, he was to be disappointed. Nevertheless, relations between the old primate (whose health was beginning to fail, causing him to be increasingly reliant on John of Salisbury for the conducting of routine business) and the new king were generally good. Occasional friction, arising from the two men's concern to protect their respective interests, was offset by a matching willingness to minimize differences. 
Although Theobald was in poor health when Pope Adrian IV died on 1 September 1159, he took an active part in the recognition of Alexander III by the kings of France and England in the schism that followed. To his Council of London in June 1160, which considered the matter and advised the king, he was carried in a litter. His last days were clouded by the failure of both the king and his chancellor, who were together in Normandy, to visit him. And he complained bitterly of his former clerk's ingratitude. He died in his palace at Canterbury on 18 April 1161, comforted by John of Salisbury, and was buried shortly afterwards in his cathedral in the chapel of the Holy Trinity, behind the altar on the north side, with Archbishop Lanfranc's tomb on the south. While the cathedral was being repaired in 1180, after the great fire of 1174, Theobald's tomb was discovered and opened. Although a little shrunken, the archbishop's body was intact and rigid, so that some people hailed him as a saint. He was reburied in a lead chest in the nave before the altar of St Mary, and the old marble tomb was replaced above him. 
For a tyro Norman abbot of relatively humble background, with, apparently, no experience of English conditions and without influential patrons, whether ecclesiastical or secular, Theobald's achievements are remarkable. Once he had escaped from the authority of Henry of Winchester, he led the English church adroitly through a most difficult period while defending Canterbury resourcefully against all its rivals. He provided a nursery for the church's future leaders; and he also worked consistently to preserve the unity of the kingdom and to restore the Anglo-Norman empire. Despite these successes, his character remains elusive. Gervase, with his treatment of Christ Church priors in mind, calls him impetuous. Adventurous and resolute would be kinder. A scholar and a patron of scholars and able clerks, a friend of monks and religious communities, a brave and ambitious performer, yet flexible and skilful in avoiding danger, he had, perhaps, a set of qualities that did not make either for greatness or for popularity. But Henry of Huntingdon, a contemporary who had seen him in action, thought him, unlike his predecessor at Canterbury, entirely praiseworthy. Theobald's misfortune was to be overshadowed by the grandeur of his own creation, his successor, Thomas Becket. 


@@@@@


doc= 27169


Theobald, Lewis (bap. 1688, d. 1744), literary editor and writer, the son of Peter Theobald (died 1690), an attorney, and his second wife, Mary, was born in Sittingbourne, Kent, and baptized there on 2 April 1688. 
His godfather was Lewis Watson, third Baron Rockingham, and when Peter Theobald died in September 1690 Lewis was taken into the Rockingham household and educated with the sons of the family, chiefly by the Revd James Ellis, 'a very able schoolmaster', who ran a highly respected school in Isleworth, Middlesex, 'purely for grounding young Gentlemen, noblemen's sons or Gentlemen of some Rank, in Classick Learning, & fitting them for the University' ('Reliquiae', 'Remarks', 11.341; 2.9). Ellis gave Theobald a thorough grounding in Greek and Latin and, equally important, instilled in him a lifelong love of the scholarship that made classical literature accessible to modern readers. Theobald did not, however, attend university; he was apprenticed to an attorney, which contributed significantly to his skills as an editor of Shakespeare. His clerkship was before the act of 1729 regulating the training and practice of attorneys (2 Geo. II c. 23), when attorneys' bills were still written in court hand and clerks required the ability to read and write secretary script. 
As an attorney Theobald might have prospered, but, as he acknowledged to Rockingham's daughter Lady Monson, 'If I have not made all the Advantages, which might have accrued from so favourable a Situation in Life, it is, that Nature had not done her Part, and all Soils are not equally susceptible of Improvement' (dedication, 'The Happy Captive: an English Opera', 1741, sig. A2'r'). Instead he set up as a man of letters while maintaining a desultory practice at law, settling in London, where he married and had a son, Lewis (the date of his marriage and his wife's name are unknown), and lived in Wyan's Court, Great Russell Street, in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields. In 1707, when he may still have been an apprentice-clerk, he published 'A Pindaric Ode on the Union of Scotland and England' and 'Naufragium Britannicum', a poem dedicated to the memory of Admiral Sir Cloudesley Shovell. The following year his 'Persian Princess, or, The Royal Villain', a tragedy written 'before I was full Nineteen Years Old' (dedication, 'Persian Princess', 1715, sig. A5'v'), was performed at Drury Lane. There were two performances, and the theatre managers granted him an unusual second night's benefit. 
Theobald became a writer for Bernard Lintot, and his first production, 'The Life and Character of Marcus Cato of Utica' (1713), drew upon the success of Joseph Addison's 'Cato' (1713) and was followed by a translation of Plato's 'Phaedo' (1713), which Cato is said to have read on the last night of his life. These works probably initiated his friendship with Addison and were followed by another translation, 'Monsieur Le Clerc's Observations upon Mr. Addison's Travels through Italy' (1715). Anticipation of Alexander Pope's translation of Homer produced 'A Critical Discourse upon the Iliad of Homer... by Monsieur de la Motte' (1714). Theobald also contracted with Lintot to translate the seven tragedies of Aeschylus, but the translation was never published. In April 1714 he undertook to translate into blank verse with annotations Homer's 'Odyssey' (book 1, 1717), Sophocles' 'Electra' (1714), 'Oedipus tyrannus' (1715), 'Oedipus Coloneus', 'Trachiniae', and the satires and epistles of Horace (all unpublished). After breaking with Lintot he continued with Aristophanes' 'The Clouds' (1715) and 'Plutus, or, The World's Idol' (1715), translated into colloquial prose and printed for Jonas Brown. Although he failed to establish himself with the public by these translations, those from Greek drama were 'highly esteemed' by Richard Porson ('Reliquiae', 3.137 n. 1). 
Theobald also published more poetry: 'The Mausoleum, a Poem: Sacred to the Memory of her Late Majesty Queen Anne' (1714) was dedicated to Charles Boyle, fourth earl of Orrery, his most consistently generous patron (and, in the 1690s, the antagonist of Richard Bentley in the Phalaris controversy). Apart from passing tributes to Addison and Pope, both of whom Theobald admired at this time, the poem is unremarkable. On the other hand, 'The Cave of Poverty, a Poem: Written in Imitation of Shakespeare' (1715) is interesting for its use of the stanza of 'Venus and Adonis' at a time when Shakespeare's poems were generally neglected. Theobald also launched 'The Censor', a tri-weekly periodical that ran from 11 April to 17 June 1715 (no. 30), ceased publication, and then resumed 1 January to 30 May 1717 (no. 96), with a second, collected edition in three volumes (1717). 
The Shakespearian literary criticism found in 'The Censor' is important for its emphasis on language and character at the expense of neo-Aristotelian concerns with plot and poetic justice. No. 7 (25 April 1715) is the first examination of 'King Lear' in relation to its source in Holinshed's 'Chronicles' (1577). Succeeding essays address the affective power of Shakespeare's language, psychology and motive of characters in relation to the moral significance of their actions, and the idea of poetic justice in relation to 'hamartia' and the tragic emotions of pity and fear. 'The Censor''s radical independence from neo-Aristotelianism, anticipating the shift of critical focus in the late eighteenth century and beyond, is evident in no. 70 (2 April 1717): 'it is not to be expected that a Genius like 'Shakespear''s is to be judg'd by the Laws of 'Aristotle', and the other Prescribers to the Stage; it will be sufficient to fix a Character of Excellence to his Performances, if there are in them a Number of beautiful Incidents, true and exquisite Turns of Nature and Passion, fine and delicate Sentiments, uncommon Images, and great Boldnesses of Expression.' Such enthusiasm for figurative language, unusual for its time, is desirable in an editor of Shakespeare and fundamental to Theobald's later success with conjectural emendation. 
About 1715 Theobald began an association with John Rich's theatre in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and in February 1716 'The Perfidious Brother' was produced. The play involved Theobald in controversy, because a watchmaker, Henry Mestayer, had given him a preliminary version of the play and then claimed that Theobald had plagiarized his work. Theobald believed that he had 'created [the play] anew: For even where the Original Matter is continued, I have brought it to Light, and drawn it as from a 'Chaos'' (preface, 'Perfidious Brother', 1715, sig. A3'r'). Mestayer subsequently published a version of the play (1716), ironically dedicated to Theobald. Although Theobald evidently proceeded in good faith, the controversy is regrettable. His association with Rich's theatre had two benefits: he became assistant (and lifelong friend) to John Stede, Rich's prompter, and librettist for a series of operatic pantomimes, often loosely based on classical themes, in which Rich played the leading role of Harlequin. 
As assistant to Stede, Theobald acquired precise knowledge of theatrical production and of dramatic manuscripts, especially prompt books, which led eventually to speculation about the nature of manuscript copy for Shakespearian quarto and folio texts. His activities as librettist gave him irregular but significant income in a life of fleeting affluence and financial crisis. Rich himself acknowledged that his 'Theatre has of late ow'd its Support in great Measure' to pantomime ('Rape of Proserpine, or, The Birth and Adventures of Harlequin', 1727, dedication, v-vi), and, indeed, the first two nights of 'The Rape of Proserpine' brought in a staggering $420 11's'. The popular appeal of pantomime may well have suggested alternative principles of dramatic art to those rules prescribed by neo-Aristotelianism, or at least have reinforced Theobald's readiness to accept Shakespeare's neglect of them. Theobald had revised 'Richard II' in 1719 as a neo-Aristotelian experiment, believing that its 'Beauties... would have stronger Charms if they were interwoven in a regular Fable... maintaining the 'Unity' of 'Action', or supporting the 'Dignity' of the 'Characters'' ('Richard II', 1720, preface, sig. Aa'r'), but the play's minimal success in the theatre gave no support to this theory. 
Theobald's interest in Shakespeare was ultimately centred not on adaptation but on the recovery and explication of his 'genuine' text, and when Pope's 'Shakespear' (1725) appeared with a declaration that he had 'discharg'd the dull duty of an Editor' to his 'best judgment' (1.xxii), Theobald was prompted to publish 'Shakespeare restored, or, A specimen of the many errors as well committed, as unamended, by Mr. Pope in his late edition of this poet' (1726), the first critical book devoted to Shakespeare and evidently the product of much previous study. Apart from his title, Theobald is polite to Pope and, despite 'a Veneration, almost rising to Idolatry, for the Writings' of Shakespeare, declares that he 'would be very loth even to do 'him' Justice at the Expence of 'that other' Gentleman's Character' (Theobald, 'Restored', iii). He insists, however, that it is the duty of an editor, 'Wherever he finds the Reading suspected, manifestly corrupted, deficient in Sense, and unintelligible... to exert every Power and Faculty of the Mind to supply such a Defect, to give Light and restore Sense to the Passage, and, by a reasonable Emendation, to make that satisfactory and consistent with the Context, which before was so absurd, unintelligible and intricate. (ibid., v)' 
'Shakespeare Restored' devotes 132 pages to cruces in 'Hamlet' and an appendix of 62 compressed pages to other plays. Theobald recognizes that successive editions were generally printed from their immediate predecessors, with the consequence that 'the more the Editions of any Book multiply, the more the Errors multiply too' (Theobald, 'Restored', ii-iii). He inaugurates scholarly study of Shakespearian grammar and usage by means of parallel passages. Because he had the plays by heart, he was familiar with recurring patterns of imagery. His belief that Shakespeare wrote secretary script, 'the universal Character in our Author's Time' (Theobald, 'Shakespeare', 5.273n.), and his own 'Acquaintance with Stage-Books' (Theobald, 'Restored', 138) allowed him precisely to visualize manuscript copy and the kinds of misreading such copy might induce in a printed text. A principal test of conjectural emendation was that a proposed reading should be consistent with 'the Traces of the Letters' (that is, with the 'ductus litterarum') of secretary script and Elizabethan orthography (ibid.). These considerations are brought to bear on his famous emendation of the first folio's (1623) 'and a Table of greene fields' found in the Hostess's description of the death of Falstaff ('Henry V', II.iii.16-17) ' -- for his Nose was as sharp as a Pen, and 'a' babled' of green Fields' (Theobald, 'Restored', 138). 

'Shakespeare Restored' establishes many of the editorial principles and techniques found in Theobald's 'Shakespeare' (1733). It also fully exposed the inadequacies of Pope's 'Shakespear'. Pope's initial printed response was in 'Fragment of a Satire' (1728), where he gave Theobald the sobriquet 'pidling 'Tibbalds'' (l. 14). He also included him among the swallows and eels in 'Peri Bathous' (1728), but his most sustained ridicule occurs in 'The Dunciad Variorum' (1729). Pope's caricatures of Theobald are often self-portraits deriving from Pope's own experience as a translator and editor (Seary, 87-97), but the thrust of his attack is on Theobald's attention to the minutiae of texts, which he attempts to represent as proof of dullness. He sought also to represent Theobald's antiquarianism as evidence of lack of taste, because 'he laboured to prove 'Shakespear'... conversant in such authors as 'Caxton' and 'Wynkin', rather than in 'Homer'' (A. Pope, 'Dunciad', 1.162-3n.). Theobald's commentary does, of course, make full use of 'The Classicks of an Age that heard of none' (ibid., 1.128), but his concern in his explication of Shakespeare with 'all such reading as was never read' (ibid., 1.166) marks the beginning of modern scholarship devoted to Renaissance English literature. 
Theobald responded good-humouredly to Pope's satire, declaring 'I ought to be very well satisfied with my Share of 'Honours' in his Kingdom of 'Dullness'' and resolving to assert 'the Legality of my Master's Title to those Dominions, in which he exercises so free a Sway, and from whence he so unsparingly dispenses his 'Promotions'' ('Daily Journal', 17 April 1729). This he accomplished with further corrections of Pope's second edition of 'Shakespear' (1728). He also began an extended commentary in the manner of 'Shakespeare Restored'. During this work he was solicited by William Warburton to engage in a lengthy correspondence devoted to textual criticism as part of Warburton's manoeuvres to raise himself from his obscurity as a clergyman in the provinces. Meanwhile, a noble patron, probably the earl of Orrery, had presented Theobald with a manuscript of 'Cardenio' by Shakespeare and Fletcher. Theobald acquired another two manuscripts and revised the play as 'Double Falshood, or, The Distrest Lovers' (1728). Although enemies suggested that the play was a forgery, it was successful on stage, earning Theobald much-needed benefit nights. (Modern consensus is that 'Double Falshood' is based on a lost play by Shakespeare and Fletcher.) 
Public demand for an edition of Shakespeare by the author of 'Shakespeare Restored' was now mounting. After the death of the poet laureate, Laurence Eusden, in 1730, an attempt was made to assist Theobald financially, when he 'would fain sit down to my little studies with an easy competency'. Sir Robert Walpole, Lord Gage, and Frederick, prince of Wales, recommended him for the laureateship, although 'after standing fair for the post at least three weeks' he finally 'had the mortification to be supplanted by Keyber' (letter, December 1730, Nichols, 'Illustrations', 2.617). At a time when 'the Severity of a rich Creditor' had stripped him 'so bare, that I never was acquainted with such Wants, since I knew the Use of Money' (letter, November 1731, Jones, 280), Jacob Tonson, the chief proprietor of Shakespearian copyrights, signed a contract (26 October 1731, Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D. 729), and in January 1734 Theobald's edition was published in seven volumes, and, with profits in excess of 1100 guineas, made Theobald the best paid of the early editors of Shakespeare. Among the subscribers were the prince and princess of Wales and most of the principal nobility. Theobald was vindicated from the aspersions of Pope. Even the 'Grub-Street Journal', which had been hostile, granted him 'the title, he so incontestably possesses, of the best English critic' ('Grub-Street Journal', 229, 16 May 1734). His text, with 1356 explanatory notes, was the most popular in the eighteenth century and reached nine editions by 1773. 
The years immediately following publication of his 'Shakespeare' were the apex of Theobald's career. However, by 1737 his financial situation was again precarious, when Hogarth published his engraving of 'The Distrest Poet' with the poet writing verses with a title alluding to Theobald's early poem, 'The Cave of Poverty', and Pope's verse portrait in 'The Dunciad' as a motto. (There is no known portrait of Theobald, but George Steevens speculated that Hogarth had caught his likeness (see Richardson).) In 1741 he was again appealing to the public for support at a benefit night of 'Double Falshood'. His last scholarly project was an edition of Beaumont and Fletcher in collaboration with Thomas Seward and John Sympson, published posthumously in 1750. He had continued to support a life of scholarship with a series of plays, adaptations, operas, and entertainments, of which the most successful was 'Orpheus and Eurydice (with the Metamorphoses of Harlequin)' (1740). 
Theobald died of jaundice at his house in Wyan's Court on 18 September 1744, attended by John Stede. According to Stede, 'He was of a generous spirit, too generous for his circumstances; and none knew how to do a handsome thing, or confer a benefit, when in his power, with a better grace than himself. He was my antient friend of near 30 years acquaintance. Interred at Pancras the 20th, 6 o'clock P.M. I only attended him. (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 2.745n.)' There is no record of Theobald's burial in the parish registers. Beginning on 23 October, his library, which included the first folio (1623) and 29 pre-1623 quartos, was sold by auction over four nights in 631 lots, of which perhaps lot 460 is the most tantalizing: 'One hundred ninety-five old English Plays in Quarto, some of them so scarce as not to be had at any Price, 'to many of which are Manuscript Notes and Remarks of' 'Mr. Theobald's', all done up neatly in Boards, in single Plays. ('Catalogue of the Library of Lewis Theobald, esq. Deceas'd' [1744])' 

Theobald made fundamental contributions to English scholarship and print culture. Although he adapted plays for the stage, his edition of Shakespeare marks a profound revolution in attitudes: first, Shakespeare clearly becomes an author to be studied, in addition to being heard on the stage; second, what Shakespeare wrote takes precedence over the taste of his editor, literary fashions, grammar, usage, and predilections of later readers. Recovery of Shakespeare's 'genuine' text is established in Theobald's preface and notes for the first time as a specifically scholarly activity, separated as far as possible from literary criticism, which, in his then novel opinion, could only be practised when the text was reliable: 'The Science of Criticism, as far as it affects an Editor, seems to be reduced to these three Classes; the Emendation of corrupt Passages; the Explanation of obscure and difficult ones; and an Inquiry into the Beauties and Defects of Composition. This Work is principally confin'd to the two former Parts... the proper Objects of the Editor's Labour. The third lies open for every willing Undertaker. (preface, Theobald, 'Shakespeare', 1.xl-xli)' Separation of textual scholarship from literary criticism was essential not only for cultural history but for cultural continuity, which could only be effected by a reliable text with notes explaining obscurities of thought, allusions, and figurative language in the context of its times.Theobald's work was not always fully appreciated by his successors, and Johnson's denigration of him in his preface to 'Shakespeare' (1765) is to be regretted by all but the most uncritical of Johnson's adulators. Even Malone corrected Shakespeare's anachronisms, which Theobald refused to do. The chief fault of his edition is that it is based on Pope's, although he knew that the first quarto or folio texts were the basis of all succeeding editions. His choice of copy was, however, owing to legal regulation of copyright and required by Jacob Tonson. The range of his scholarship and the acumen and tact with which he applied it to the recovery and illumination of Shakespeare's texts have led modern critics and editors to characterize Theobald as 'the best all-round editor of Shakespeare in [his] period or any other' (Vickers, 1) and 'one of the finest editors of the last three centuries' (G. Taylor, in Wells, 54). 


@@@@@


doc= 27170


Theodore of Tarsus (602-690), archbishop of Canterbury and biblical scholar, was a figure of exceptional importance for the establishment and growth of the church in early England; as Bede said of his archbishopric, 'Never had there been such happy times since the English first came to Britain' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 4.2). Bede is the principal source for Theodore's later career, from the time he was first approached about the archbishopric of Canterbury in 667; many details of his earlier career can be gleaned from the corpus of biblical commentaries which record his teaching at the school of Canterbury. 
Theodore was born in Tarsus (now Gozlu Kule in south-eastern Turkey) in 602, in the Greek-speaking province of Cilicia. Nothing is known of his earliest education, nor of Tarsus itself, which lies buried far beneath the present-day Turkish city. Antioch on the Orontes (then in Syria, now Antakya in south-eastern Turkey) was the largest city in the vicinity of Tarsus: a flourishing Christian city, which from the fourth century onwards housed a distinctive school of Christian exegetes, including Diodorus of Tarsus, and his two influential pupils, Theodore of Mopsuestia (died 428) and John Chrysostom (died 407). The biblical exegesis of this Antiochene school was characteristically literal (as opposed, that is, to the allegorical approach of Alexandrine exegetes such as Origen): its approach was historical and philological and had resort to such disciplines as grammar, rhetoric, philosophy, and medicine in its attempt to elucidate the sacred text. The fact that the biblical exegesis of the Canterbury commentaries is wholly Antiochene in character, especially in its resort to the disciplines of rhetoric, philosophy, and medicine, and that John Chrysostom is the patristic authority most frequently quoted in the Canterbury commentaries, suggests that Theodore received his early training at Antioch. Furthermore, Antioch was at that time a city bilingual in Greek and Syriac, so it may be presumed that Theodore first came into contact with Syriac Christianity in Antioch. At several points in the biblical commentaries, Syriac words are quoted; particularly interesting is the fact that the commentaries, in explaining the 'cucumbers and melons' of 'Numbers' 11: 5, contain the observation that 'cucumbers are called 'pepones' when they grow large... in the city of Edessa they grow so large that a camel can scarcely carry two of them' (Bischoff and Lapidge, 1.413). This observation implies that Theodore had travelled at some stage to Edessa, which lies about 150 miles north-east of Antioch (it is now Sanliurfa in south-eastern Turkey). Edessa was the principal centre of Syriac-speaking Christianity from the second century onwards; the great exegete Ephrem (died 373) taught in Edessa, and Theodore's younger contemporary, Jacob of Edessa (died 708), won renown as a biblical scholar and exegete. It is not certain how much experience the young Theodore had acquired of Syriac Christianity: Ephrem is once quoted by name in the Canterbury commentaries (although the text in question was also available in Greek translation); and the commentaries contain various explanations which have striking parallels with Syriac texts such a the 'Book of the cave of treasures' (which is not known to have been translated into Greek). These parallels can best be explained on the assumption that Theodore had some (perhaps rudimentary, probably only spoken) knowledge of Syriac, and that he had spent time in Edessa in contact with Syriac exegetes. In any case, Syria was twice invaded during the early seventh century: in 613 by Persian armies (who were subsequently defeated by the armies of the Byzantine emperor Heraclius), and in 637 by the Arabs. Theodore's presence is next attested in Constantinople, and it is possible that he went there as a refugee from one of these invasions. The Canterbury commentaries contain various remarks on the habits of the Persians, which implies that Theodore had the opportunity of observing them close at hand. 
Theodore's presence in Constantinople is confirmed by a statement in the Canterbury biblical commentaries to the effect that 'Theodore reports that in Constantinople he saw the Twelve Baskets woven from palm-branches and preserved as relics' (Bischoff and Lapidge, 42). From other sources it is known that these relics were housed in a shrine at the foot of the famous Porphyry Column which stood at the centre of the Forum of Constantine (the column is still standing in present-day Istanbul, where it is known as the Cemberlitas, though the shrine has disappeared). Constantinople in the time of the emperor Heraclius ('r'. 610-41) was an imperial city of culture and learning, which attracted scholars from all parts of the empire; in particular, it housed a university and several famous libraries. Heraclius had invited to Constantinople the great polymath Stephen of Alexandria, who gave lectures on philosophy and medicine and was known to be teaching there in 619 or 620; but in Heraclius's time Constantinople was also home to the historian Theophylact Simocatta, the poet George of Pisidia, and the anonymous author of the 'Chronicon Paschale'. The intellectual complexion of the Canterbury commentaries suggests that Theodore's scholarly orientation was derived from his period of study in Constantinople, particularly his interest in philosophy, rhetoric, medicine, computus, astronomy, and astrology. Stephen of Alexandria was expert in all these fields, and it is striking that several medical explanations in the Canterbury commentaries have precise parallels in Stephen's 'scholia' or lecture notes, which may suggest that the young Theodore attended the lectures of the great polymath. 
Theodore's presence is next attested in Rome, where he was living as a Greek monk at the time he came to the notice of the pope who appointed him to the vacant archbishopric of Canterbury. The circumstances which took Theodore from Constantinople to Rome are unknown. There were at that time a number of communities of oriental monks living in Rome, many of them refugees from the Arab invasions of Syria and north Africa. One of these communities housed Greek-speaking monks from Cilicia; it was located 'ad aquas Salvias' (now the Tre Fontane, outside the southern gate of Porto San Paolo) and dedicated to St Anastasius, a soldier who had been martyred by the Persians in 628. It is highly likely that Theodore belonged to this monastery: he was Cilician in origin and the earliest attestations of the cult of St Anastasius in England can be linked with him. During the 640s the community of Cilician monks was actively engaged, on the pope's behalf, in the monothelete controversy. In an effort to end several centuries of theological wrangling, the emperor Heraclius and the patriarch of Constantinople issued in 633 a formulation to the effect that there was only 'one will' in Christ, and this formulation was made a matter of imperial policy in 638. Although Pope Honorius I ('r'. 625-38) expressed initial support, subsequent popes were adamant in their opposition to the imperial policy. Their opposition was articulated at Rome by the Greek theologian Maximus the Confessor and was promulgated by the Lateran Council of 649 under the presidency of Pope Martin ('r'. 649-53). The 'acta' of the Lateran Council were drawn up by various communities of Greek monks resident in Rome, including the Cilician monks of St Anastasius. It is likely that Theodore participated in the drafting of these 'acta' (indeed the list of witnesses to them includes the name of one 'Theodous monachus', who is arguably identical with the later archbishop of Canterbury). In any event, the consequences of the Lateran Council were dire. Because the promulgation of its 'acta' was in opposition to imperial policy, Pope Martin was arrested, taken to Constantinople, and tried and condemned for treason, as was Maximus the Confessor, the principal architect of the Lateran 'acta', who was condemned, mutilated, and exiled to the Black Sea, where he died in 662. The theological differences between pope and emperor were not settled until the Sixth Ecumenical Council of 680. 
In 664 the archbishopric of Canterbury fell vacant through the death of Deusdedit; his successor, one Wigheard, went to Rome to collect the pallium, but died there of the plague in 667. At this point, Pope Vitalian ('r'. 657-72) sought the advice of one of his trusted counsellors, Hadrian, then abbot of a small monastery near Naples, concerning the vacancy. After declining the post himself, Hadrian suggested the name of Theodore, who (as Bede recounts) was then living as a monk in Rome. Vitalian was hesitant about appointing Theodore (his hesitancy becomes comprehensible in light of Theodore's involvement with the Lateran Council of 649 for the death of Maximus had taken place only a few years before Wigheard's arrival in Rome). However, this hesitancy was overcome on the condition that Theodore should be tonsured after the manner of western monks (Greek monks shaved their heads completely) and that Hadrian should accompany him to England. When Theodore's hair had grown and been tonsured in the shape of a crown, he was consecrated by Vitalian on 26 March 668, and set out for England on 27 May of the same year. He arrived in England on 27 May the following year (669) to begin his archbishopric. He was then aged sixty-seven. 
Theodore set about his administrative responsibilities with the urgency of an old man in a hurry. As soon as Hadrian arrived in England in 670, the two of them undertook a comprehensive tour of the archdiocese. The archbishopric itself had been vacant for five years before Theodore's arrival and a number of other bishoprics were similarly vacant (there were only three English bishops in office when he arrived). He moved swiftly to fill the vacancies, making appointments to Rochester, Dunwich, and Winchester. Because the bishop of York, Ceadda, had been appointed uncanonically, he was deposed by Theodore, and Wilfrid appointed in his stead; Theodore subsequently appointed Ceadda to the see of Lichfield. With the English episcopate thus restored to strength, Theodore summoned a national synod, which met under his presidency at Hertford in September 672 or 673. This synod (the 'acta' of which are fully reported by Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 4.5) made certain provisions which had a long-lasting effect on the structure of the English church: for example, that national synods should be convoked twice-yearly at a place called 'Clofesho', and that the number of dioceses should expand as the number of the faithful increased. The intention behind this last stipulation was that very large (and wealthy) dioceses, such as that of Bishop Wilfrid in Northumbria, should be broken up into smaller, more manageable units. This intention inevitably brought Theodore into conflict with Wilfrid; but on this particular issue, Theodore's will prevailed. On the pretext of a quarrel with King Ecgfrith of Northumbria, Theodore in 677 deposed Wilfrid; the vast Northumbrian see was broken up into three dioceses: Deira (with its see at York), Bernicia (with its see at either Lindisfarne or Hexham), and Lindsey. Wilfrid went to Rome to appeal to the pope; his grievance was heard by a synod of Italian bishops in October 679. After the death of King Ecgfrith in 685, Theodore effected a reconciliation with Wilfrid by appointing him to the Deiran see. The reconciliation was announced in a letter sent from Theodore to various authorities in England; in his life of Bishop Wilfrid, Stephen of Ripon preserves the text of Theodore's letter to AEthelred, king of the Mercians ('r'. 675-704). This letter is one of the few surviving texts composed by Theodore himself. 
One of Theodore's principal administrative concerns was with orthodox belief. This concern is seen in his response to the initiative taken by Pope Agatho ('r'. 678-81) to effect a reconciliation between the papacy and the Byzantine emperor on the monothelete controversy. Pope Agatho decided to canvass the opinion of the western churches; to this end he sent to England a legate named John, precentor of St Peter's in Rome. Theodore in turn summoned an English synod which met at Hatfield on 17 September 679 (the Hatfield in question is arguably that in Yorkshire). The synod was asked to endorse the 'acta' or stipulations of the Lateran Council of 649; as Bede (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 4.17 [15]) reports the 'acta' of the Synod of Hatfield, their wording was closely based on the wording of the earlier council, particularly in respect of their credal statement. It is an intriguing irony that Theodore (and his English church) was being asked by the papal legate to endorse the 'acta' of an earlier council in which he himself had participated. His participation is adverted to by Pope Agatho in a letter to the Byzantine emperor (Constantine IV), dated 27 March 680, in which Agatho explains that it had been his intention to invite Theodore 'the philosopher and archbishop of Great Britain' to join the papal party at the ecumenical council which was to convene in Constantinople in the attempt to resolve the controversy (Lapidge, 'Theodore', 23). The pope evidently knew that Theodore was one of the few living theologians who had participated in drafting the 'acta' of the Lateran Council of 649 and that he would have had an unrivalled knowledge of the doctrinal complexities; but by then Theodore was seventy-eight years old and too tired to make the journey to Rome and on to Constantinople. After so much hatred and bloodshed, the Sixth Ecumenical Council, which met at the emperor's palace in Constantinople in 680, formally condemned the imperial policy of monotheletism. 
Theodore was also deeply concerned with matters of canon law and ecclesiastical legislation. Bede reports that many of the 'acta' promulgated by Theodore's first synod at Hertford were drawn by him from a 'liber canonum'; and various evidence indicates that this book was a copy (modified) of the second recension of the collection of conciliar canons and papal decretals compiled by Dionysius Exiguus ('fl'. 525). The same collection of canons also formed the basis of teaching in canon law at the school of Theodore and Hadrian in Canterbury; excerpts from it also constitute the second book of the 'Judicia' which have been transmitted under Theodore's name. In their present form, these 'Judicia' present the responses given 'viva voce' by Theodore to various questions put to him by one Eoda (otherwise unknown) on matters of private penance; the answers were subsequently edited by an unidentified 'disciple of the [North]umbrians' ('discipulus Umbrensium'). The first book of the 'Judicia' is concerned with private penance, the second with canon law. It is interesting that many of Theodore's judgements on matters of penance were informed by his experience as a Greek monk; in particular, St Basil is quoted by name five times (the text in question being the three canonical letters to Amphilochius of Iconium), but other Greek authorities such as Gregory of Nazianzus and the pseudo-Dionysius are quoted as well. Theodore's opinions on private penance as collected in the 'Judicia' were widely influential, not only in England, but in Ireland and on the continent. Theodore here played a pivotal role in the transmission of eastern ideas to the Latin west. 
Another sphere in which Theodore played a role of this sort is that of liturgy -- in particular, in the widespread use of the litany of the saints in public and private worship. Although the form of the litany, with its Greek invocation to the Lord to have mercy ('Kyrie eleison'), followed by petitions to individual saints to pray for the petitioner, is wholly familiar today, it is not attested in the Latin west before the eighth century. In fact the earliest Latin version of such a prayer is found in a prayerbook written probably at Worcester in the later eighth century (now BL, Royal MS 2 A.XX); but it is clear that this Latin litany is a translation of a Greek litany of the saints in a form found in another (but later) Anglo-Saxon manuscript (BL, Cotton MS Galba A.xviii). Because the form of the litany of the saints, with its characteristic long list of petitions to individual saints, is first found in Greek and Syriac manuscripts from the patriarchate of Antioch, the most reasonable hypothesis is that Archbishop Theodore brought with him to England a small prayerbook containing (among other Greek prayers) a litany of this sort, which was subsequently copied into the Galba manuscript, but also translated into the Latin form found in the Royal manuscript. In any event, the form soon spread from England to Ireland and the continent, and had become commonplace by the Carolingian period. 
It was perhaps in the field of scholarship that Theodore made his most important contribution to Anglo-Saxon culture. Bede reports that, because Theodore and Hadrian were extremely learned in sacred and secular literature, 'they attracted a crowd of students into whose minds they daily poured the streams of wholesome learning' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 4.2); he goes on to specify instruction not only in scripture but also in metre, astronomy, and computus, and adds that in his own day (731) some of their students survived who were as fluent in Greek and Latin as in their native English. One of these students was Aldhelm; among others Bede names Albinus (Hadrian's successor as abbot of St Peter's and St Paul's in Canterbury), Tobias (bishop of Rochester), and Oftfor (bishop of Worcester). With the exception of Aldhelm, none of these students has left any writings. In any event, the nature of the instruction given by Theodore and Hadrian is revealed in a substantial corpus of biblical commentaries and glosses which can be shown to have originated in their Canterbury school as notes taken by the English students from the 'viva voce' instruction of the two great Mediterranean masters. In particular, a set of commentaries on the 'Pentateuch' and gospels reveals the extraordinary range of learning which they brought to bear on the biblical text. It would appear that the teaching was conducted by comparing the Latin text of the 'Vulgate Bible' with that of the Greek 'Septuagint' and Greek 'New Testament' (various comments point to meanings in the Greek text which are misrepresented in Jerome's Latin), and then illustrated by reference to a huge range of patristic authorities. These authorities are for the most part Greek ones. Although reference was made on occasion to a few Latin fathers, such as Augustine, Jerome, and Isidore, the majority of these references are to Greek exegetes: Basil of Caesarea, Clement of Alexandria, Cosmas Indicopleustes, Ephrem (in Greek), Epiphanius of Salamis, John Chrysostom, and Flavius Josephus. (Various other Greek fathers were borrowed from but not quoted by name and reference is occasionally made to patristic texts which have not survived.) The underlying intention of these commentaries was to extract the literal meaning of the biblical text: to explain the flora and fauna mentioned in the 'Bible', minerals and precious stones, the customs of the Jews, the topography of the Holy Land, and the paraphernalia of everyday life in biblical times. This method of interpretation is usually characterized as 'Antiochene'; its deployment in the Canterbury commentaries is wholly unusual in western medieval exegesis, but is explicable in light of Theodore's background. As in earlier Antiochene exegesis, reference is frequently made to scholarly disciplines such as philosophy, rhetoric, and medicine and it is clear that Theodore had unusual expertise in these fields. 
In addition to these commentaries on the 'Pentateuch' and gospels, there is a huge (but as yet unprinted) corpus of glosses on the remaining books of the 'Bible' preserved in numerous medieval manuscripts, which, when printed, will reveal how Theodore (and Hadrian) approached the remainder of the sacred text. In addition, a substantial corpus of medieval manuscripts preserves glosses to other patristic texts (notably Sulpicius Severus, Rufinus, Gildas, Isidore, Jerome, Cassian, Orosius, Gregory the Great, as well as various canons and papal decretals, and the rule of St Benedict) which manifestly derive from the teaching of Theodore and Hadrian at the Canterbury school. In their most accessible form, these glosses are preserved in the famous Leiden glossary, a manuscript copied 'c'.800 at St Gallen from batches of glosses derived from the Canterbury school, and now in Leiden (Bibliotheek der Rijksuniversiteit, Voss. lat. Q. 69); but related materials are preserved in a large number of (unprinted) manuscript glossaries. 
The biblical commentaries and glosses are the record of Theodore's (and Hadrian's) oral teaching. A small corpus of writings composed by Theodore himself survives. There is, for example, a brief poem in octosyllables ('Te nunc, sancte speculator') addressed by Theodore to Haedde, bishop of Winchester. The trochaic rhythm of these octosyllables is wholly distinct from that of other octosyllables composed in Ireland and England (for example by Aldhelm), and would appear to have been modelled by Theodore on that of Greek anacreontic hymns (also octosyllabic in form) with which he was familiar in his youth. So unusual is this form in surviving Anglo-Latin literature that three such hymns preserved in the ninth-century 'Book of Cerne' (including the well-known hymn 'Sancte sator suffragator') can confidently be attributed to Theodore as well. Another work which is very probably by Theodore is an unprinted Latin 'Passio sancti Anastasii', an account of the Persian martyr Anastasius, who was the patron saint of the monastery of Cilician monks 'ad aquas Salvias' in Rome. It has been shown that this Latin translation was produced from a copy of the Greek 'passio' which had an interlinear, word-by-word gloss. Its Latin is not coherent, therefore, and it was probably this incoherent 'passio' of St Anastasius which Bede 'corrected as best he could' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 5.24). Finally, Theodore was almost certainly the author of the 'Laterculus Malalianus', a Latin work based partly on the Greek 'Chronographia' of John Malalas (died 578) and partly consisting of original exegesis of the life of Christ, from conception to death. The work draws on many of the same Greek fathers cited in the Canterbury biblical commentaries (notably Epiphanius and Ephrem the Syrian), and shares much of their scholarly orientation, particularly an interest in medicine and chronology. 
Given that Theodore was some sixty-seven years old when he arrived in England, his scholarly output is astonishing. Knowledge of this output will be considerably refined when more of the works attributable to him (particularly the biblical glosses and the 'Passio sancti Anastasii') are available in print. But it may be no exaggeration to say that the school of Canterbury, under his direction between 670 and 690, represents the apogee of biblical scholarship in the Latin west between late antiquity and the twelfth century and that he was one of the greatest scholars ever to adorn the see of Canterbury. 
Theodore died on 19 September 690, aged eighty-eight. He was buried in the cathedral at Canterbury and his tomb was inscribed with a metrical epitaph consisting of nineteen elegiac distichs, composed -- to judge from its diction -- by Aldhelm. The tomb and the inscription have been destroyed by successive reconstruction at Canterbury; the epitaph is known because Bede preserved eight lines of it in his 'Historia ecclesiastica' (5.8). An unprinted life of Theodore by the eleventh-century hagiographer, Goscelin, is preserved in two contemporary manuscripts; but the historical information contained in this life is derived wholly from Bede and adds nothing to our understanding. 


@@@@@


doc= 27171


Neuhoff, Theodor Stefan von, Baron von Neuhoff (1694-1756), king of Corsica, was born in Cologne on 24 August 1694, second child and only son of Anton, Baron von Neuhoff (died 1695), of a Westphalian family, and Amelia, the daughter of a draper of Viseu near Liege. The origin of the family's baronial title has not been found. Finding himself 'declasse' by this match, Anton had given up an appointment in the service of the bishop of Munster and moved away from his ancestral area of the county of Mark. Shortly after his son's birth he died, leaving a modest estate of 11,000 florins; his widow then married a customs official at Metz called Marneau and had another daughter, who was later the wife of a parliamentary counsel at Metz called Gome-Delagrange. 
Theodor von Neuhoff seems to have been brought up at first by a relation on his father's side before being sent at the age of ten to the Jesuit school in Munster. After some years there, in 1709 or before, he became a page to Elisabeth Charlotte of the Palatinate, duchess of Orleans (known generally as Madame), at Versailles. On her recommendation he was later commissioned in the army of the elector of Bavaria; contracting heavy gambling debts, however, he evaded his creditors and went to Paris to lodge with his sister, now countess de Trevoux. According to a report relayed by Madame, his stay there was abruptly terminated by an argument in which he tried to kill his brother-in-law, and he again fled, this time to London. The other sources on Neuhoff's early life are silent on this affair, ascribing his departure to the pressure of further debts. 
By 1716 Neuhoff had entered the service of the Swedish minister in the Netherlands, Baron Goertz. When Goertz was executed in March 1719, Neuhoff was on a mission for him to Cardinal Alberoni in Spain, and chose to remain there, obtaining a commission in a Spanish regiment through the influence of the powerful minister Ripperda. 
It was at about this time that Neuhoff is stated to have married 'Lady Sarsfield', the daughter of an Irish peer at the Spanish court, 'Lord Kilmallock'. This would most naturally mean a daughter of David Sarsfield (killed 1710), titular Viscount Sarsfield of Kilmallock (the title had in fact been forfeit since 1691), a colonel of dragoons in the Spanish service and governor of Badajoz. However, Ruvigny, in his 'Jacobite Peerage', suggested that she was a daughter of Patrick Sarsfield, who was created earl of Lucan by the exiled James II in 1691; his son James Sarsfield, Jacobite second earl of Lucan (1693-1719), was also in Spanish service. The marriage did not last long, as in 1720 Neuhoff abandoned his pregnant wife in the Escorial (in some accounts, taking her jewels with him) and went to Paris. His wife may have followed him there; a manifesto issued (apparently by Neuhoff himself) in Cologne in 1740 states that she died in Paris in 1724, in childbed of a daughter who also died. Whether there is any truth in this, and if so whether the daughter was Neuhoff's, is unclear, as the sources imply that he stayed only a brief while in Paris. According to the letters of the duchess of Orleans, he once again absconded from his sister's house, this time with 200,000 livres of her husband's money. 
Between 1720 and 1732 Neuhoff is said to have travelled a great deal, being at least twice in London and several times in Italy, occasionally using the pseudonym Etienne Romberg. In 1732 he was in Genoa, at a time of great tension between that republic and its recalcitrant possession Corsica. According to one account he achieved a semi-official status as intermediary between the Corsican agents at Leghorn and the Genoese authorities. This undoubtedly exaggerates his role, although he was certainly known to the leaders of the Corsican party from this date. Corsican sources state that Neuhoff presented himself at this stage as an English nobleman, and encouraged inferences that he was acting on behalf of the British authorities. His only connections with Britain at this time were his occasional letters to George II recounting Jacobite activity and his own strenuous efforts to prevent it. 
It is unclear at what point Neuhoff saw an opening for himself in Corsica. In early 1736, however, he was in Tunis, where his associates included two alchemically inclined monks who claimed to have developed a 'universal medicine' and a Sicilian doctor called Buongiorno. With their assistance he obtained arms, munitions, and other supplies on credit, and loaded them aboard a British vessel commanded by a Captain Dick, who may have been under the impression that the enterprise had official British support. They sailed for Corsica, with two redeemed slaves and some hangers-on, and on 12 March 1736 arrived at Aleria. In a letter to the rebel leaders Neuhoff offered himself as their king, requiring only that they guarantee religious freedom to non-Roman Catholics. 
The offer was accepted. Corsica had long been regarded as a kingdom within the dominions of the kings of Aragon and then the doges of Genoa, and the rebels had already granted the title 'royal highness' to their three leaders, the 'primates' of the kingdom, Giacinto Paoli, Andrea Ceccaldi, and Luigi Giafferi. According to contemporary observers, these three found it a useful publicity-winning device to complete the picture with a king, however unsuitable the individual chosen. Neuhoff was installed in the episcopal palace in Aleria and crowned on 14 April, under a constitution which decreed his title hereditary by male primogeniture. 
King Theodor's rule in Corsica manifested itself largely in the making of appointments (not all agreeable to the three primates) and the liberal distribution of titles, some of which were nobiliary while others were grades within the order of Deliverance (or Redemption). A silver and copper coinage was issued, struck from very poorly cut dies, the silver showing on one side the Virgin and, on the other, a shield with the arms of the Neuhoffs (three links of a chain) impaling those of the island (a Moor's head). Apart from a brief campaign in June, Neuhoff left military activities against the Genoese to the rebel commanders who had led them before. His own main assault on the Genoese was a robust reply to a long denunciation they had published of him and his dubious antecedents. But his rhetoric could not hide the disappointing lack of the supplies, munitions, and money that he had promised since the outset. As far as the rebel leaders were concerned he had served his purpose, and by the autumn his position in the island was perilously weak. On 4 November he published an edict creating a system of regency and, with Costa, his secretary of state, left for the coast. Disguised as a priest, he landed at Leghorn on 14 November. 
In the five years that followed, Neuhoff travelled as ceaselessly as before, and was as frequently in debt, but managed with backing from a small group of Dutch merchants to mount two more abortive missions to Corsica. Among his followers were two nephews, both called Frederic de Neuhoff, who both spent considerably more time and suffered much greater hardship in active support of the rebels in the island than he. Neuhoff now viewed Corsica as a family matter; in a letter of 1740 to his brother-in-law, Gome-Delagrange, he claimed that his rights there derived not only from popular election as king, but also by inheritance from a Neuhoff ancestor who had been viceroy of the island and feudal lord of its southern part in the early tenth century. 
In 1742 Neuhoff seems, briefly, to have gained rather more powerful support. Having been for an unknown period in London, he sailed in November for Leghorn, and thence, at the end of January 1743, for Corsica, with two British men-of-war and 400 Austrian deserters and Corsican exiles. His arrival had been announced in an edict drafted for him by General Braitwitz (commander of the Austrian army in Tuscany), Count de Richecourt (French minister to Florence), and Burrington Goldsworthy (British consul at Leghorn). On reaching Corsica he received the compliments of the rebel leaders and sailed around the coast distributing small amounts of arms, powder, and ammunition. But there was now a Genoese-sponsored, 5000-strong, French expeditionary force in the island; on a second journey towards the end of February, aware of the weakness of his position, he did not even disembark. In fact the British had not agreed to support him: Horace Mann, minister to Tuscany (and Goldsworthy's superior), had from the outset renounced any involvement or responsibility in the enterprise, and in April orders were addressed to the commander of the Mediterranean Fleet expressly forbidding it. Having achieved little, Neuhoff travelled incognito to Florence where he had a long interview with Mann, in the course of which he apparently claimed to be the uncle of Amalie Sophie van Wallmoden, countess of Yarmouth, George II's mistress. (Lady Yarmouth's family, the Wendts, were certainly related to the Neuhoffs.) Mann continued to advise that Britain do nothing to assist Neuhoff. His requests for support from other quarters were rebuffed, although Corsica remained the centre of much international interest, and another plan to sail for Corsica in 1745 was scotched by Mann. In September 1747 Neuhoff was expelled from Tuscany. 
After a period in Germany and the Netherlands, Neuhoff moved to London in January 1749. Using the name Baron Stein, he stayed at first with the Dutch envoy, Hendrik Hop, who with the Hanoverian minister Baron Munchhausen presented him to London society. In March 1749, at the house of the diplomat Sir Luke Schaub, he met Horace Walpole. But by the following December he was again seriously in debt, and shortly before Christmas he was arrested and imprisoned in the king's bench prison for a specific sum of $400. 
Much visited in gaol over the ensuing three years by sightseers and well-wishers, Neuhoff appointed many of them to the order of Deliverance. Among those so honoured was Colonel Frederick ['see 'Frederick, Felice], who later claimed to be his son. According to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', while a prisoner Neuhoff married on 25 July 1751 Miss Edmonston of Panton Square, 'a lady of beauty and fortune' ('GM', 1st ser., 21, 1751, 332), but the marriage is not mentioned by any other source. His financial plight did not visibly alter, and the public interest in him waned somewhat. A subscription inaugurated by Walpole in 'The World' in February 1753 raised only $50. Walpole attributed this to the notoriously bad character of the beneficiary, and complained that so far from being grateful, Neuhoff had threatened to sue the publisher of 'The World' for misnaming him; but the satirical style of the announcement and its title 'Date obolum Belisario' were unlikely to have earned his approval, or encouraged donations. 
Neuhoff's release was eventually secured, with Walpole's help, under the 'Insolvency Act' of 1755. Registering his claim to the kingdom of Corsica as his only asset, and assigning it to his creditors (in a document later acquired by Walpole and exhibited at Strawberry Hill), he left gaol on 5 or 6 December 1756 and took up residence with a tailor in Little Chapel Street, Soho. But exhausted by his long imprisonment he fell ill immediately, and died there a few days later, on 11 December 1756. He was buried in an unmarked grave in the churchyard of St Anne's, Soho; a monumental inscription composed and paid for by Walpole was placed on the exterior of the church, and survives to this day. A neighbouring public house is still called the King of Corsica. A different form of immortality was bestowed by Voltaire, who included Theodore among the deposed monarchs depicted in chapter 26 of 'Candide'. This scene was the basis for the opera 'Il re Teodoro in Venezia' by Giovanni Paisiello and Giambattista Casti, which Walpole saw in London in December 1787. He thought it of poor quality, but reported that the emperor Joseph II was delighted with it, believing it to be a satire on the king of Sweden. 
Theodore was frequently caricatured, but two engravings are known that may derive from reliable portraits. One, signed J. V. Schley and dated 1737, shows him fully wigged, moustachioed, and dressed in vaguely oriental garb, standing on the coast as if just arrived in Corsica. Another, more idealized, is signed I. I. Haid, and shows him clean-shaven in a short wig and rich, courtly dress. A third engraving sometimes reproduced as a portrait of Neuhoff is in fact from a painting by Van Dyck of the seventeenth-century Parisian collector Everard Jabach. Walpole's plan of sending William Hogarth to the king's bench prison to portray Neuhoff there, as related to Horace Mann in a letter of 25 July 1750, does not seem to have borne fruit. 


@@@@@


doc= 27172


Therry, John Joseph (1790-1864), Roman Catholic priest, son of John Therry and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Connolly, was born at Cork. He was educated privately and at St Patrick's College, Carlow, under Dr Doyle. Ordained priest in 1815, he was assigned to parochial work in Dublin, and then in Cork, where he became secretary to the bishop, Dr Murphy. His interest in Australia was aroused by the transportation of Irish convicts. 
Therry was one of the two official Catholic chaplains sent out by the Colonial Office to New South Wales in December 1819 under the pressure of radical demand, the increasing influence of the Irish hierarchy, and the somewhat diffident promptings of Bishop Poynter, vicar apostolic of the London district. He reached Sydney in May 1820 on the convict ship 'Janus'. At first he ministered in a temporary chapel in Pitt Street, and at Parramatta often in the open air. His colleague Philip Conolly proceeded to Van Diemen's Land, and for five seminal years Therry was the only Roman Catholic priest on the mainland: thus he earned the sobriquet the Patriarch of the Roman Catholic church in New South Wales. On 29 October 1821 Governor Macquarie laid the foundation-stone of St Mary's Chapel in Hyde Park, the first church on the site of Sydney's Roman Catholic cathedral. Therry was a devoted pastor, popular, energetic, and restless, who travelled great distances to serve his scattered people. He was respectful of authority, but impatient at any curtailment of what he considered to be his legal or social rights as a priest. Pious, zealous, and obstinate, he could be quarrelsome and difficult, particularly in matters concerning the considerable property he managed to accumulate in order to ensure the future of his church. He came into collision with the governor, Sir Ralph Darling, in 1827 and was for a time deprived of his salary as chaplain, but his pastoral and educational work continued with unabated vigour. In 1833 he became subordinate to the first Catholic vicar-general in the colony, the English Benedictine William Bernard Ullathorne, and then in 1835 to the first bishop, John Bede Polding, who sent him in 1838 as vicar-general to Van Diemen's Land (which became Tasmania during his ministry). There his long residence was characterized by a complex dispute on financial matters with the first bishop, Robert Willson. 
Therry returned to live in Sydney during 1856 and became priest at St Augustine's, Balmain, where he died rather suddenly on 25 May 1864; he was buried in the crypt of St Mary's Cathedral, Sydney. 


@@@@@


doc= 27173


Therry, Sir Roger (1800-1874), judge in Australia, was born on 22 April 1800 at Cork, Ireland, the third son of John Therry, a barrister and excise commissioner, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Keating. The landed prosperity of the Terry (later Therry) family of Cork had declined since the seventeenth century. 
After schooling at Clongowes College, Therry entered Trinity College, Dublin, in December 1818. He did not complete his degree but read law, and was called to the bar in Ireland (1824), though he did not practise. Having been admitted to Gray's Inn in November 1822, he was called to the English bar in 1827. He practised little there, but was a law reporter and, in 1827, private secretary to George Canning, whose published speeches he edited. Favourably noticed by William Huskisson, Therry accepted his offer to become commissioner of the court of requests (a small debts court) in New South Wales. 
With his wife, Anne (died 1874), the daughter of P. Carley (or Corley) of Clones, co. Monaghan, and the widow of John Reilly of Dublin, whom he had married on 9 August 1827, Therry reached Sydney in November 1829. His permitted private practice in the supreme court was spectacularly successful. He was well regarded by Governor Bourke, and was made a crown grants commissioner (1833) and acting attorney-general (1839). 
Committed to Roman Catholic causes, and known as an Irish supporter of O'Connell's Catholic emancipation efforts, Therry found advancement to higher public office difficult in a colony where religious intolerance flourished. His successful defence of a newspaper publisher, in defamation proceedings by the influential landowner James Mudie, was another handicap. Mudie's 'Felonry of New South Wales' (1837) unreasonably attacked Therry and his religious sympathies. Injured by the publication, Therry complained at being passed over for judicial appointments. 
Having been drawn to politics, in 1835 Therry stood unsuccessfully for election as chairman of quarter sessions. He was seen as Bourke's protege, and the defeat embarrassed him and the governor equally. As acting attorney-general, Therry was 'ex officio' a legislative councillor, and his speeches were commended. On the introduction, in 1843, of a limited franchise, Therry had a narrow victory in the seat of Camden after a campaign marred by sectarian rancour. He was a self-styled 'liberal', and his political views so prevaricated that one journalist dubbed him an 'Anythingarian'. 
In 1845 Therry went to Melbourne as resident judge for Port Phillip, where he was received by a hostile press and a suspicious bar. Maintaining his composure, he disarmed critics by his judicial stature. He was promoted to the supreme court at Sydney in 1846, and at first found his colleagues unfriendly; however, his urbanity overcame their reserve, and his soundness as a lawyer strengthened the bench. He excelled as primary judge in equity, no decree of his ever being reversed. On responsible government (1856) the judges took 'ex officio' places in the legislative council, a duty Therry relished. In February 1859, wearied by judicial overwork, he resigned on a pension, and the following month, after a huge public farewell dinner, he and his wife left Australia. 
In England, Therry published his 'Reminiscences' (1863), a useful account of early colonial Australia. The first edition sold out in England, but much of a second edition, printed just as Australian criticisms of the book's personalities became known, was withdrawn. Finding their native Ireland unappealing, the Therrys, in failing health, spent much time at French spas. Therry was knighted in 1869, and became a valetudinarian at Bath. He died on 17 May 1874 at his London home, 21A Hanover Square, and was buried in the Roman Catholic cemetery at Kensal Green. One son and two daughters survived him, as did Lady Therry by ten days. 


@@@@@


doc= 27174


Thesiger, Alfred Henry (1838-1880), judge, was born on 15 July 1838, the fourth and youngest son of Frederick Thesiger, first Baron Chelmsford (1794-1878), the lord chancellor, and his wife, Anna Maria (died 1875), youngest daughter of William Tinling of Southampton. His brothers included Frederic Augustus Thesiger, second Baron Chelmsford (1827-1905). He was educated at Eton College before matriculating on 15 May 1856 at Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1860 and MA in 1861. Both at school and at college he excelled at cricket and rowing, while battling against ill health. He became a student of the Inner Temple and was called to the bar in 1862. On 31 December 1862 he married Henrietta, the second daughter of the Hon. George Handcock, fourth son of the second earl of Castlemaine; they had no children. 
Thesiger joined the home circuit, and quickly built up a large London practice. For a time he was postman of the court of exchequer, and on 3 July 1873 he became a queen's counsel. His later practice lay chiefly in commercial and compensation cases. In January 1874 he was elected a bencher of his inn, and on 10 September 1877 attorney-general to the prince of Wales. In 1876 he was a member of the commission on the fugitive slave circular, and in 1877, on the recommendation of Lord Cairns and to public surprise, he was appointed to succeed Sir Richard Paul Amphlett as a lord justice of the Court of Appeal, at the age of thirty-nine. He was duly sworn of the privy council. During his brief time on the bench he showed industry and judicial ability, and was remembered for his slight and youthful appearance. He died at 5 South Eaton Place, Eaton Square, London of blood poisoning on 20 October 1880 and was buried in Brompton cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 27175


Thesiger, Sir Frederick (d. 1805), naval officer in the British and Russian services, was the eldest son of John Andrew Thesiger (died 1783), and his wife, Miss Gibson (died 1814) of Chester. After several voyages in the service of the East India Company he entered the Royal Navy as a midshipman under Sir Samuel Marshall. In 1782 when Admiral Sir George Rodney sailed for the West Indies, Thesiger was appointed acting-lieutenant on board the 'Formidable'. Sir Charles Douglas, captain of the fleet, later recommended his appointment as aide-de-camp to Rodney. Thesiger continued in the West Indies under Admiral Hugh Pigot, Rodney's successor, and afterwards accompanied Douglas to America. After the peace of 1783 he returned to England. 
With the outbreak of war between Russia and Sweden in 1788, Thesiger obtained permission to enter Russian service. In 1789 he took command of a 74-gun ship and quickly distinguished himself in a naval engagement at Svenskund in Finland, where he obliged the Swedish admiral on board the 'Gustavus' to strike to him. In June 1790 he took part in the desperate action fought off the island of Bornholm. Although the victory went to the Russians, Thesiger was the only survivor of the six British captains in Russian service. He was rewarded with the insignia of the order of St George by the Empress Catherine herself. 
In 1796 Sir Frederick commanded a ship in the Russian squadron which came to the Downs to co-operate with the English fleet in the blockade of the Texel. After Catherine's death in 1796 Thesiger grew discontented with her successor, Paul, and tendered his resignation. He was detained in St Petersburg for a year, and finally departed without receiving his arrears of pay or his prize money. 
Thesiger arrived in England when her maritime supremacy was threatened by the armed neutrality of Russia, Denmark, and Sweden. Because of his knowledge of the Baltic and the Russian navy Thesiger was frequently consulted by Earl Spencer, the first lord of the Admiralty. When war broke out he was promoted commander and served Lord Nelson as an aide-de-camp at the battle of Copenhagen (2 April 1801). At the crisis point of the battle Thesiger volunteered to proceed to the crown prince with the flag of truce. Knowing that celerity was important, he took his boat through the Danish fire, avoiding a safer but slower route. During subsequent operations his knowledge of the Baltic coast and of the Russian language proved of great value. 
Thesiger returned to England bearing dispatches from Sir Charles Morice Pole, and received a flattering reception from Lord St Vincent. He was promoted post captain, and obtained permission to assume the rank of knighthood and to wear the order of St George. After the rupture of the peace of Amiens he served as British agent for the prisoners of war at Portsmouth. Sir Frederick died, unmarried, at Elson, near Portsmouth, on 26 August 1805. 


@@@@@


doc= 27176


Thesiger, Frederick, first Baron Chelmsford (1794-1878), lord chancellor, was born at 1 Fowkes Buildings, Tower Street, London, on 15 July 1794, the third and youngest son of Charles Thesiger (died 1831), comptroller and collector of customs in the island of St Vincent in the West Indies, and his wife, Mary Anne (died 1796), daughter of Theophilus Williams of London. His paternal grandfather, John Andrew Thesiger (died 1783), was a native of Saxony, who settled in England about the middle of the eighteenth century, and was employed as amanuensis to the marquess of Rockingham. 
Thesiger was sent at the age of seven to Dr Charles Burney's school at Greenwich. He was destined for the navy, in which his uncle, Sir Frederick Thesiger, afterwards Nelson's aide-de-camp at Copenhagen, was a distinguished officer, and went in 1806 to Gosport naval academy. After a year at Gosport he joined the frigate 'Cambrian' as a midshipman in 1807 and was present at the seizure of the fleet at Copenhagen; but shortly afterwards left the navy on becoming heir to his father's West Indian estates by the death of his last surviving brother, George. He was sent to school for two more years and then in 1811 went out to join his father at St Vincent. A volcanic eruption on 30 April 1812 entirely destroyed his father's estate and considerably impoverished his family. It was then decided that he should practise as a barrister in the West Indies. 
Thesiger entered Gray's Inn on 5 November 1813, and read successively in the chambers of a conveyancer, an equity draughtsman, and of Godfrey Sykes, a well-known special pleader. Sykes thought his talents would be thrown away in the West Indies, and on his advice, though without family connections there, Thesiger resolved to try his fortune in England. On 18 November 1818 he was called to the bar, joining the home circuit and Surrey sessions. In two or three years, after the removal of his chief competitors, Turton and Broderic, he attained the leadership of these sessions. He also became by purchase one of the four counsel of the palace court of Westminster. The legal experience which he gained through a succession of small civil and criminal cases gave him a good deal of useful knowledge, and his defence in 1824 of Hunt, the accomplice of the famous murderer John Thurtell, brought him to public attention. An action of ejection, which was tried three times in Chelmsford in 1832, was so important in further enhancing his reputation that when he was eventually raised to the peerage, he chose as his title the name of that circuit town. 
On 9 March 1822 Thesiger married Anna Maria Tinling (died 9 April 1875); they had three daughters and four sons, including Frederic Augustus Thesiger and Alfred Henry Thesiger. 
In 1834 Thesiger became a king's counsel and was leader of his circuit for the next ten years. His name became very prominent in 1835 as counsel for the petitioners before the election committee which inquired into the return of O'Connell and Ruthven for Dublin. After an unsuccessful contest in 1840 at Newark against Wilde, the solicitor-general, he was returned to parliament as Conservative member for Woodstock on 20 March. In 1844, owing to differences of opinion with the duke of Marlborough, he ceased to represent Woodstock, and was elected for Abingdon, and at the general election of 1852 he was returned for Stamford by the influence of Lord Exeter. 
On 8 June 1842 Thesiger was created DCL by the University of Oxford, and on 19 June 1845 was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. On 15 April 1844 he was appointed solicitor-general in succession to Sir William Webb Follett and was knighted. The breakdown of Follett's health left him almost all the work of both law officers, and on Follett's death he became attorney-general on 29 June 1845, retiring on the fall of the Peel administration on 3 July 1846. Had the ministry lasted another fortnight, he would have succeeded to the chief-justiceship of the common pleas (which became vacant on 6 July by the death of Sir Nicholas Tindal, and was given to Wilde). Instead, he returned to his private practice at the bar, and in parliament acted with Lord George Bentinck. 
Thesiger became attorney-general again in Lord Derby's first administration from February to December 1852. When Lord Derby formed his second administration, and Lord St Leonards refused because of his advanced age to join, Thesiger became lord chancellor on 26 February 1858 and was created Baron Chelmsford (1 March 1858) and a privy councillor. His chancellorship was short, since the government fell in June 1859. His chief speech while in office was an opposition to the removal of Jewish disabilities, on which subject he had repeatedly been the principal speaker on the Conservative side in the House of Commons. He was very much opposed to the idea of Jews in parliament, as well as to the establishment of the Roman Catholic hierarchy in England. 
After his resignation Thesiger remained active in judicial work, both in the House of Lords and the privy council. He constantly found himself in collision with Lord Westbury. The two men did not get on personally and Lord Chelmsford opposed Lord Westbury vigorously in relation to the hardship inflicted under the new 'Bankruptcy Act' of 1862 on the officials of the former insolvent court. Chelmsford resumed office again under Lord Derby in 1866, but was somewhat summarily set aside in 1868 by Disraeli when Lord Derby ceased to be prime minister. He died on 5 October 1878 at his house, 7 Eaton Square, London. 
Thesiger was, after the death of Follett, probably the most popular leading counsel of his day. As a lawyer he was ready and painstaking, and was a good cross-examiner, although not renowned for his intellectual abilities. Politically, he was right-wing and Conservative; however, as a judge he seems to have remained independent and principled on the whole. Two incidents are reported which, although dubious, did not seem to cast a shadow on his career. The first involved being sued by a client for settling a case without consultation. However, Lord Chelmsford defended himself successfully. The second concerned his purported appointment of a friend (though only barely qualified as a barrister) to the position of master in chancery. In the end he was defeated and outvoted: the friend was never appointed. On balance, he will be remembered as a sound and fair judge; and there is little evidence that these reported incidents damaged his judicial reputation in any way. 


@@@@@


doc= 27177


Robert Thew (1758-1802) was born at Patrington, Yorkshire, the son of an innkeeper. He was reportedly brought up as a cooper, although it is also said that he served in his youth as a professional soldier. In 1783 he settled in Hull and either taught himself engraving or, more probably, received some training from a local practitioner. Despite these lowly beginnings, Thew came to the notice of Boydell, and from 1790 he worked very extensively on the 'Shakspeare Gallery'. He produced twenty-one of the large-format reproductive prints. Thew, who was appointed engraver to the prince of Wales, died at Roxley, Stevenage, in July 1802. 


@@@@@


doc= 27178


Theyer, John (bap. 1598, d. 1673), antiquary, was baptized at Brockworth, Gloucestershire, on 5 November 1598, the son of John Theyer (died 1631) and his wife, Jane, and grandson of Thomas Theyer of Brockworth. He entered Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1613, but did not graduate. After three years there he practised common law at New Inn, London, where the mother of Anthony Wood, the future antiquary, proposed to send her son to qualify under him as an attorney. Although Wood did not go, he became a lifelong friend. 
In 1628, at Theyer's marriage to his wife, Susan, he was given by his father a small estate at Cooper's Hill, Brockworth. From his grandmother's brother, Richard Hart, last prior of Llanthony Secunda, Gloucestershire, Theyer had inherited a valuable library of manuscripts. The Theyers, who had a son, John, made Cooper's Hill their home, and were visited by Wood, who made use of the library. 
In 1643 Theyer was in Oxford, serving in the king's army, and presented to Charles in Merton College garden a copy of his 'Aerio mastix, or, A vindication of the apostolicall and generally received government of the church of Christ by bishops' (1643). On 6 July that year he was created MA by the king's command, on account of his literary and ecclesiastical achievement. According to Wood he became a Roman Catholic about this time, and began, but did not finish, 'A friendly debate between protestants and papists'. His estate was sequestered by parliament, and he was pronounced one of the most 'inveterate' delinquents with whom they had to deal. His family was almost destitute until his discharge was obtained on 4 November 1652. 
Theyer died at Cooper's Hill on 25 August 1673, and was buried in Brockworth churchyard on 28 August. The collection of 800 manuscripts on which his reputation was almost exclusively founded went to his grandson Charles Theyer ('b'. 1651), who had matriculated from University College, Oxford, in 1668 and who was probably the lecturer of Totteridge, Hertfordshire, who published 'A Sermon on her Majesty's Happy Anniversary' (1707). After the collection had passed to the London bookseller Robert Scott, a partial catalogue was prepared by William Beveridge, later bishop of St Asaph, and William Jane in 1678 (BL, Royal MSS appendix, 70); 312 were bought by Charles II, the last large collection to enter the royal manuscripts. 


@@@@@


doc= 27179


Thicknesse, Ann (1737-1824), writer and musician, was born on 22 February 1737 near the Temple, London, the only child of Thomas Ford (died 1768), clerk of the arraigns, and his wife, formerly Miss Champion. Her father made sure that she had an unusually extensive education, which he claimed had cost him at least $400 a year and included private lessons from singer and actor Susanna Cibber. A spirited and unconventional woman, Ford proved to be a talented musician who played several instruments and sang. In 1758 Frances Greville described her to Charles Burney as 'the most pleasing singer I ever heard... I would rather hear her than any Italian I have yet heard' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 5.365). 
At first Ford performed only within domestic settings, as was deemed suitable for a woman of her class. She gave musical entertainments in her father's house, attended by leading professional and amateur musicians, as well as playing and singing at gatherings of fashionable society in London and Bath. In 1760 she was painted by Thomas Gainsborough, a fellow enthusiast for the viola da gamba and resident of Bath. She also attracted the attention of William Villiers, third earl of Jersey, a married man who apparently offered her an annuity of $800 to be his mistress. Ford refused and, resolutely determined to be independent, left her father's house for that of a friend, Elizabeth Thicknesse, aiming to support herself by performing in public, an unacceptable step for a woman of her class. Her father had her arrested and brought back to the family home. Nothing daunted, she left again and announced a series of five subscription concerts at the Little Theatre in the Haymarket, the first of which she gave on 18 March 1760. This series raised $1500 in subscriptions, despite the efforts of the rejected earl of Jersey to detract from her enterprise. Her outraged father surrounded the theatre with runners in an attempt to prevent the first concert but Charles Bennet, third earl of Tankerville, one of Ford's aristocratic supporters, ensured that they were dispersed. 
In early 1761 Ford published 'A Letter from Miss F -- d, Addressed to a Person of Distinction', in which she attempted to clear her name of malicious rumour by making public her treatment by Jersey, who denied her accusations in his response, 'A Letter to Miss F -- d'. Ford argued that she had found 'many sensible people of the opinion, that a young woman may sing in public, or... be a public singer, with virtue and innocence' ('Letter from Miss F -- d', 17-18) and that performing in public was merely 'to repeat, for my own advantage, what I so often did, and to as large an assembly, at your house, and for your L -- d -- p's amusement' (ibid., 29). Her original letter sold 500 copies in five days and both letters gained wider distribution when they were summarized in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (January and February 1761). Despite the scandal Ford continued her public performances, playing the water-tuned musical glasses at Thomas Sheridan's lectures and, from 15 October 1761, giving a series of appearances at the Spring Gardens room, singing English airs and playing the musical glasses, English guitar, and viola da gamba. In this year of remarkable determination and achievement she also published the first known method for the musical glasses, 'Instructions for Playing on the Musical Glasses', and 'Lessons and Instructions for Playing the Guitar', which included several pieces for the guitar, almost certainly composed by Ford herself. 
In November 1761 Ford left London with Elizabeth Thicknesse for Landguard Fort in Suffolk, where Elizabeth's husband, Philip Thicknesse, was lieutenant-governor. On 27 September 1762, six months after Elizabeth's death, Ford married Philip at Felixstowe, Suffolk. The couple had two children, John and Charlotte. There is no record of Ann Thicknesse performing again in public, although the memory of her musical career is evoked in a 1790 Gillray cartoon of Philip Thicknesse ('Lieutenant Gover Gall-Stone'), in which Ann is depicted playing the musical glasses. 
The Thicknesses moved frequently, living in Hertfordshire, Monmouthshire, Hythe, and Bath, and were enthusiastic travellers. In 1775 they embarked on an eighteen-month journey (with viola da gamba, two guitars, a violin, and a parakeet); this was described in Philip Thicknesse's 'A Year's Journey through France and Part of Spain', which was published in 1777 with illustrations that are almost certainly by Ann. She herself turned to writing, publishing her 'Sketches of the Lives and Writings of the Ladies of France' in three volumes between 1778 and 1781. In 1792 Philip Thicknesse died suddenly while he and Ann were travelling through France to Italy. Ann was arrested and confined in a convent but released in July 1794, after proving that she was capable of providing for herself. Her later publications included a novel, 'The School for Fashion' (1800). When she made her will in 1818 she was living in Edgware Road in London with her close friend Sarah Cooper. She died on 20 January 1824. 


@@@@@


doc= 27180


Thicknesse, George (bap. 1714, d. 1790), schoolmaster, was baptized on 22 November 1714 at Farthingoe in Northamptonshire, one of the sons of John Thicknesse ('c'.1670-1725), rector of Farthingoe, and Joyce, daughter of the Revd Thomas Blencowe, rector of Thenford, Northamptonshire, and niece of Sir John Blencowe; Philip Thicknesse was a younger brother. George Thicknesse was admitted scholar of Winchester College in 1726 and matriculated as a fellow-commoner from King's College, Cambridge, in 1738 but did not graduate -- and presumably did not reside -- as he had already, in 1737, become chaplain (or usher) of St Paul's School, London. In 1744 he was elected surmaster, and in 1748 high master. The appointment of a nongraduate must relate to the catastrophic decline of the school under his predecessor, George Charles, who was dismissed for brutality; the school had only thirty-five boys when Thicknesse succeeded him. 
Under Thicknesse, St Paul's rapidly recovered in numbers and reputation. According to his eccentric and admiring brother Philip he relied on reasoning and never used the rod, but discouraged any tendency in the boys to poetry and declined to meet Dr Johnson, as 'he deemed him only a poet' (Thicknesse, 3.49). He certainly retained the affection of his pupils, especially Philip Francis, who called him 'the wisest learnedest, quietest and best man he ever knew' ('Memoirs of Sir Philip Francis', 2.279) and, though occasionally reprimanded, he retained also the trust of the governing body, the Mercers' Company. In 1758 Thicknesse suffered what may have been a brief mental breakdown. He retired, on a pension of 100 guineas a year, in 1769 and spent the rest of his life in Warwickshire, first in the house of a Winchester school friend at Mollington and later at Arlescote House, near Edgehill. There he died, unmarried, on 18 December 1790; he was buried, in accordance with his instructions, on the north side of Warmington churchyard, 'in a plain coffin' with 'no mound or... gravestone or monument' (Thicknesse, 3.48). His pupils, however, placed a marble bust of him by John Hickey, with an inscription by Philip Francis and Edmund Burke, in St Paul's School in 1792. 


@@@@@


doc= 27181


Thicknesse, Philip (1719-1792), travel writer, born at Farthingoe, Northamptonshire, on 10 August 1719, was the seventh son (there were also two daughters) of John Thicknesse ('c'.1670-1725), rector of Farthingoe, and grandson of Ralph Thicknesse of Balterley Hall, Staffordshire. His mother, Joyce Blencowe, was niece of Sir John Blencowe, justice of the common pleas and baron of the exchequer. Of the seven sons, three died in infancy. The surviving four all achieved positions of some influence: Thomas (1706-1742) was a clergyman, a Whitehall preacher, and a candidate for the provostship of King's College, Cambridge, in January 1742; Ralph (1709-1742) was an assistant at Eton College and published an edition of 'Phaedrus, with English Notes' in 1741, but died suddenly while playing the violin at Bath; George Thicknesse (bap. 1714, d. 1790) was, successively, chaplain, surmaster, and high master of St Paul's School. 
Philip was placed at Aynhoe School after the death of his father in 1725, but soon moved with his mother to London, where he became a gratis scholar at Westminster School through the kindly intervention of the headmaster, Dr Robert Friend, whose family were neighbours of the Thicknesses in Northamptonshire. However, Thicknesse was very unhappy at Westminster, and repeated truancy led to his removal from the school. He was then apprenticed to Marmaduke Tisdale, a London apothecary, but left fairly rapidly after becoming too fond of Tisdale's choicest cordials. Thicknesse had read an account of Georgia by General James Oglethorpe, and -- aged only sixteen -- contrived to join the general, with a group of Scots and German emigrants as well as the Wesley brothers, on board the 'Simmonds' and the 'London Merchant', which set sail for America on 20 October 1735. They reached Savannah on 2 February 1736. Despite building himself a wooden cabin on an island in a creek, and living 'a true Robinson Crusoe line of life' (Thicknesse, 'Memoirs', 31), Thicknesse abandoned life in Georgia after seeing a vision of his mother while playing the flute on the banks of the creek, and sailed back to England in 1737. He was then given a job in the offices of the Georgia colonists in Old Palace Yard, but was soon dismissed for giving too frank an account of settler life. He failed to obtain a commission in Oglethorpe's projected Georgia regiment, probably because of his tactlessness, but Sir Robert Walpole helped procure him a commission as captain in an independent company at Jamaica. There, he was involved in British attempts to quell the guerrilla activities of runaway slaves in the mountains, and encountered many hair-raising ambushes and near-fatal skirmishes. While in Jamaica he formulated his lifelong conviction that slavery, provided it involved humane treatment of the slaves, was a natural state of affairs. 
Probably because he had fallen out with his fellow officers, Thicknesse applied for a six-month leave of absence from Jamaica and returned to London at the end of 1740. Through the good offices of Thomas Townshend (a scholar of King's College, Cambridge, where Philip's brother Thomas was then a fellow), he was appointed captain-lieutenant in a marine foot regiment with headquarters at Southampton. He soon became embroiled in a tavern brawl followed by a duel with another former Jamaica officer who publicly accused Thicknesse of having fled from the enemy slaves. Also while stationed at Southampton, Thicknesse met Maria Lanove (died 1749), daughter of a prosperous Huguenot refugee and heir to $40,000. In 1742 they eloped and married after he abducted her from a protective cohort of soldiers in Southampton High Street. Once she was pregnant, Thicknesse was appointed to the seventy-gun 'Ipswich' under Admiral Medley, bound for Gibraltar. After a year in the Mediterranean, he returned to England on half pay. He fell out with his parents-in-law, and he and Maria moved to Bath. With time on his hands, Thicknesse threw himself into the social whirl of Bath, and began to enjoy gambling. However, early in 1749 Maria and their children (by now numbering three) contracted a type of diphtheria; she and two of the children died, leaving only one surviving daughter, Anna. Maria's parents died shortly thereafter, her father in his sleep, her mother by hurling herself out of a window onto some iron railings at the very spot in Southampton High Street where Thicknesse had abducted Maria. Thicknesse spent much of the rest of his life in a fruitless attempt (involving an unsuccessful appeal to the House of Lords) to get hold of the fortune to which he believed himself entitled by this unfortunate sequence of events. In the meantime, he did inherit $5000 on his father-in-law's death. A distant relative, Captain Rigg, took Thicknesse and his daughter to live with him in Queen Square, Bath. It was at this time in his life that Thicknesse began to suffer from gallstones and to assuage the pain through the liberal use of laudanum, to which he was thereafter addicted, and the praises of which he was always eager to sing, in person and in print. He especially recommended it to men over fifty, whom he urged to take ten to twenty drops of strong laudanum daily. No doubt Thicknesse's own addiction exacerbated his quarrelsome tendencies. 
A widower for less than a year, Thicknesse married on 10 November 1749 Lady Elizabeth Touchet (1725-1762), eldest daughter and heir of Lord Audley, the sixth earl of Castlehaven. Her father, whose family were long-standing Roman Catholics, raised strong objections to the marriage, but she nevertheless brought a dowry of $5000. With $1200 of this, Thicknesse in February 1753 bought the lieutenant-governorship of Landguard Fort in Suffolk, built by Charles I in 1628 at the mouth of Harwich harbour. At Landguard, Thicknesse soon became involved in wrangles about authority and precedence with various local notables and military personnel. In 1762 he began a long feud with Colonel Vernon of the Suffolk militia, later Lord Orwell. Thicknesse purchased a printing press and produced broadsheets designed to sabotage Lord Orwell's election hopes, which were distributed in Ipswich. The final straw came when Thicknesse made Lord Orwell the mocking present of a cannon-shaped piece of flotsam. Following the infamous 'affair of the wooden gun', Thicknesse was tried at Bury St Edmunds for libel in March 1763. Found guilty, he spent three months in the king's bench prison (where he made many friends), was fined $100, and had to provide security in the form of two friends for $500 each and $1000 himself, to guarantee that he would keep the peace for seven years. Amazingly, he was allowed to resume command of Landguard Fort on his release, even though he had also, as part of his campaign against Lord Orwell, attempted to blackmail Lord Bute into supporting him, by threatening to publish some papers of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu (Bute's late mother-in-law). These endeavours are inaccurately represented in 'A Narrative of what Passed between General Sir Harry Erskine and Philip Thicknesse, Esq.' (1766). 
The feud with Lord Orwell was contemporaneous with turbulent events in Thicknesse's personal life: in late March 1762 his wife Elizabeth died, having given birth to a baby boy on 29 June 1760. She had been attended in her delivery and long illness by a close friend, Ann Ford (1737-1824) ['see 'Thicknesse, Ann], an accomplished singer and viola da gamba player, who had been involved in a scandalous affair with the aged earl of Jersey in 1761. She and Thicknesse married on 27 September 1762. Their marriage was to last until his death thirty years later. Philip and Elizabeth had produced six children, two of whom died in infancy. The survivors were two girls and two boys. There is confusion over the names of the surviving girls: Charlotte ('b'. 1751) certainly survived, since Thicknesse recalls (in 'A Year's Journey', 1777) having placed her in a convent. One of the other two, Elizabeth ('b'. 1750) or Joyce ('b'. 1753), also survived. Elizabeth's surviving sons were George (1757-1818), later Lord Audley, baron of Castlehaven, and Philip ('b'. 1760). In 1784, following a very public feud with his father, George assumed the surname of Touchet. 
While he and his third wife remained at Landguard, Thicknesse continued to embellish the whimsical Felixstowe Cottage, a former fisherman's hut a few miles from Landguard, where they spent the summer months. (An account of the cottage, with a print claiming to be 'copied from one of the earliest Productions of Gainsborough', was published in the 'Harwich Guide' in 1808, and reprinted in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in November 1809.) Eventually tiring of the project, Thicknesse sold the cottage to Lady Dowager Bateman for $400 and took his family to France in April 1766. There he deposited Charlotte (Elizabeth, according to Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 9.261) in the convent at Ardres, where she seems to have spent the rest of her life, and had her looks ruined by smallpox. Thicknesse published an account of the French journey, entitled 'Observations on the Customs and Manners of the French Nation' (1766), much of which takes issue with Smollett's hostile account of France and the French in 'Travels through France and Italy' (1766). Thicknesse relates suggestively that 'an English lady of fashion who resides here [Paris], to whom I lent Smollet's Travels, says, he certainly lodged at ale-houses, and conversed with the lowest class of mechanics that frequent such houses' (Thicknesse, 'Observations', 91). Capitalizing fully on his trip, Thicknesse also published in 1768 'Useful Hints to those who Make the Tour of France', which contains more attacks on Smollett. 
On their return to Britain the Thicknesses lived briefly at Quoit, Monmouthshire, where Ann had inherited a small estate. Thicknesse erected a monument to John Wilkes on a mountain there, before they sold up and moved in 1768 to the livelier environment of Bath, 'to complete the education of his children' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 9.262). Thicknesse bought a house in the fashionable Crescent and hobnobbed with the leading lights of Bath society. He befriended but then antagonized the comic playwright Samuel Foote, who ridiculed Thicknesse as 'Dr Viper' in his play 'The Capuchin' (1776), a rewriting of Foote's earlier 'A Trip to Calais' (1775). The name stuck and was used by Thicknesse's enemies, such as James Makittrick Adair, in the years that followed. Thicknesse was also mocked as the character of Graham in Richard Graves's satirical novel 'The Spiritual Quixote' (1773). In 1774 Thicknesse sold the house in the Crescent for $2000, and based the family at his cottage at Bathampton, which he extended and landscaped in eccentric style, constructing a hermit's grotto in the garden and making ornamental use of ancient skeletons dug up on the plot. 
On the final collapse of his hopes of inheriting a substantial legacy from his first wife's mother (the House of Lords threw out his case in 1775), Thicknesse once again took his family (now comprising eight children) to the continent, spending most of the year 1776 abroad, and leaving his two youngest daughters (aged ten and thirteen) in a convent to complete their education. The travellers excited much attention in France and Spain, since their pet monkey, Jacko, insisted on riding postilion, dressed in a red jacket and boots. The family were made especially welcome by the monks at the hermitages and convent of Montserrat, where they also enjoyed the botanical richness of the landscape: Thicknesse later put the earl of Coventry in touch with Pere Pascal, one of the monks, which led to another public quarrel once Thicknesse discovered that Pere Pascal had sent the earl numerous botanical samples for which he remained unremunerated. Thicknesse produced an account of the trip in 'A Year's Journey through France, and Part of Spain' (2 vols., 1777). It was a lucrative venture, securing an advance of $580 and boasting a subscription list of 430 worthies, including the duchess of Cumberland, Henry Pelham, David Garrick, and Thomas Gainsborough. Samuel Johnson pronounced it 'entertaining' (Boswell, 3.235). It is a saner and more sentimental travelogue than his earlier exercises in the genre. 
Having returned to Bathampton, Thicknesse continued to work on the cottage (renamed the Hermitage of St Catherine in honour of Montserrat), such that it became a popular tourist attraction for people visiting Bath. A monument to Chatterton (the first in Britain) became the garden's centrepiece in 1784, and gained a further gruesome interest after Thicknesse buried his eldest daughter Anna underneath it, 'as she was virtuous, dutiful, and not void of some genius' (Thicknesse, 'Memoirs', 407). In 1778 Thicknesse published 'The New Prose Bath Guide', containing a wealth of practical information on household management and leisure pursuits at Bath: and in 1780 'The Valetudinarian's Bath Guide, or, The Means of Obtaining Long Life and Health', in which he recommends not only the Bath waters and 'Wine, and Drinking to excess' (Thicknesse, 'Valetudinarian', 45), but also frequent inhalation of 'the breath of young women' (ibid., 18) as conducive to long life and good health. This recipe earned him a few lines of mockery in Thomas Mathias's satirical poem 'The Pursuits of Literature' in 1794 (lines 167-70). In 1784 Thicknesse published 'A Year's Journey through the Pais Bas, and the Austrian Netherlands', describing a rather quarrel-ridden tour performed during the preceding months. Also during the early 1780s he consolidated his enmity with James Makittrick Adair, a Bath physician with whom he traded accusations of quackery; and contrived to fall out with Thomas Gainsborough after thirty years of friendship. Thicknesse has a fair claim to have 'discovered' Gainsborough in 1754, recognizing his talents as a local painter in Suffolk, and encouraging him to move to Bath, where he first became a successful portrait painter. In 1788 he published 'A Sketch of the Life and Paintings of Thomas Gainsborough', much of which describes their trivial quarrel (over an unfinished portrait and a viola da gamba). 
By this time Thicknesse had fallen out with his two sons from his second marriage, not least because they had recently inherited fortunes from the earl of Castlehaven. The younger, Philip, bought the Hermitage from his father, who later tried unscrupulously to swindle and defame him over the transaction. Young Philip also made an unfortunate marriage to a Bath milliner, a Miss Peacock. Meanwhile, his brother Lord Audley seduced and ruined a Miss Walkins at Bristol, who died in 1780. In 1782 Thicknesse published a bitter pamphlet denouncing his son entitled 'Queries to Lord Audley', and in the meandering and digressive 'Memoirs and anecdotes of Philip Thicknesse, late governor of Landguard Fort, and unfortunately father to George Touchet, Baron Audley' (3 vols.; 2 vols. in 1788, vol. 3 in 1791), he more extensively berates both his 'wretched and undutiful sons' (Thicknesse, 'Memoirs', 274). Volume 3, in which his vitriol is especially concentrated, is an extremely rare book since Lord Audley and Philip bought and destroyed all the copies they could find. Thicknesse inserted the following clause into his will, and published it in volume 3 of the 'Memoirs': 'I leave my right hand, to be cut off after death, to my son, Lord Audley, and desire it may be sent him in hopes that such a sight may remind him of his duty to God, after having so long abandoned the duty he owed his Father who once affectionately loved him' (Gosse, 271). 
Thicknesse's 'Memoirs' attracted a great deal of attention. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' commended its sensible approval of slavery ('GM', 1788). It prompted James Gillray (perhaps encouraged by a Captain Crookshanks with whom Thicknesse had, unsurprisingly, fallen out) to execute one of his more personally offensive cartoons, 'Lieutenant-Governor Gall-Stone Inspired by Alecto, or, The Birth of Minerva'. The rather Goya-esque scene features Thicknesse surrounded by skeletons, demons, books, and manuscripts, symbolizing his obsessions, quarrels, addictions, and literary outrages. In 1790 his old antagonist Dr Adair published 'Curious Facts and Anecdotes, not Contained in the Memoirs of Philip Thicknesse', a vituperative satire on the 'duncical' (Adair, 34) activities and deranged feuds of the 'Censor General of Great Britain' (ibid., title-page). Adair alleges that Thicknesse 'sent a letter to a person and his wife with 'human excrement', insinuating that Dr Adair was the author of the epistle and the present' (ibid., 62). The 'Memoirs' themselves are disarmingly frank about Thicknesse's opportunistic and often rather calculated showdowns. In the dedication he wrote: 'if... it be true, that I quarrel with three out of four of my friends, I find that turns up more profitable than living well with them.... I know not what I should have done to make both ends meet, in my old age, if it had not been for the 'repeated kindnesses' of my enemies.... I can at any time muster ten or a dozen knaves and fools, who will put an hundred pounds or two into my pocket, merely by holding them up to public scorn. (Gosse, 274)' 

In 1789 Thicknesse published a pamphlet entitled 'Junius Discovered', in which he claimed (erroneously) to have identified the mysterious satirist as Horne Tooke. Also in this year he and Ann moved to Sandgate, near Hythe, where they converted a barn into a house with a spectacular view of the sea. However, Ann reports that 'the daily sight of the Continent soon became 'infectious'' ('Harwich Guide'; reprinted 'GM', 1809, 1015), and, nothing daunted by the early stages of the French Revolution, they made a brief trip to Paris, from where Thicknesse sent lively accounts of political developments to the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. After a brief return to England, they departed more wholeheartedly in 1792, planning to reside in Italy; but Thicknesse died of a seizure in the carriage just outside Boulogne, on 19 November 1792. Ann Thicknesse was arrested as a foreigner and confined in a convent for eighteen months until after Robespierre's execution. Thicknesse was buried in the protestant cemetery at Boulogne, where Ann erected a monument to his memory. It bears a plangent epitaph celebrating his 'eminent virtues' and paying tribute to the 'memory of a man with whom she lived thirty years in perfect felicity' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 9.288). She lived until 1824. 
As a notorious public figure and as a private citizen, Thicknesse is an enigma. Capable of immuring his daughters in convents and quarrelling irreconcilably with his sons, he was also apparently adored by his three wives. Easily the most irascible individual within the arena of late eighteenth-century print culture, he was nevertheless celebrated by, among others, the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (to which he was a contributor of gossipy essays) as 'a man of probity and honour, whose heart and purse were always open to the unfortunate' ('GM', 1792), and 'a man of great sensibility' (ibid., 1789). His twentieth-century biographer observes that 'to anyone who has made a close study of Philip Thicknesse, there come occasions when he can but marvel that nobody ever shot him or bludgeoned him to death' (Gosse, 214). His publications were varied and peculiar, testifying to his opportunistic exploitation of the literary market place. His travel accounts (their abuse of Smollett aside) are some of his more measured publications: casual treatises on man-midwifery, deciphering, gout, and fraudulent automatons exhibited by foreigners in London represent the more bizarre range of his interests. From the early 1760s he contributed gossip paragraphs to the 'St James's Chronicle' under the pen-name of A Wanderer, and to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' under the signature Polyxena. Many of his books were reviewed by the 'Monthly Review' and the 'Critical Review' (with which latter journal he conducted a long-standing feud), in whose pages he became something of a comic celebrity. Thicknesse may be considered one of the greatest self-publicists of the eighteenth century. A correspondent to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1791 describes an encounter with him at a hotel in Boulogne, and remarks: '(when he chose) he could shew himself the Gentleman, the Philosopher, and the Man of Letters; and for eccentricity of genius few stand superior to him: as a Traveller, he will be remembered by many in Spain as one of 'monkey-driving' memory. ('GM', 1791)' 



@@@@@


doc= 27182


Thierry, Charles Philippe Hippolyte de (1793-1864), self-proclaimed sovereign chief of New Zealand, was the eldest son of Charles Antoine de Thierry and his wife, Mary Louise, the daughter of Antoine Adrien de Laville. He was born in April 1793, probably at Grave, in the Netherlands, where the family found itself having fled France. The revolution had made continued residence there impossible for his father, a French merchant mariner turned equerry at the French court. In November 1794 the family arrived in England, where his father assumed the title of baron. After a peripatetic childhood, Thierry was engaged on two diplomatic missions. He afterwards married Emily Rudge (died 1856), probably on 8 May 1819 at Gloucester; they had five children. That year, on 26 May, Thierry matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, and claimed to have then transferred to Queens' College, Cambridge, but he did not graduate. 
At Cambridge in 1820 Thierry met two Maori chiefs with the missionary Thomas Kendall, and then conceived the idea of founding an empire in New Zealand. Kendall returned to New Zealand and in 1822 purportedly bought 40,000 acres near Hokianga for Thierry, who based on this purchase a claim to all the land from Auckland to the north cape of the North Island. He applied to Earl Bathurst, then secretary of state, for confirmation of this grant, but was met with the response that New Zealand was not a British possession. He then tried the Dutch and French governments without success. 
Proceeding to form a private company to carry out his plans, Thierry returned from France in 1826, fleeing from creditors, and set up an office in London, where he slowly acquired some little support. In 1827 he went to the United States to enlarge his sphere of action, and thence by the West Indian islands to Panama, where he expressed interest in cutting a canal. In 1835 he arrived in Tahiti. Here he issued a proclamation asserting his intention to establish his authority as sovereign chief of New Zealand by force. This threat carried some weight, since, although opposed by the British consul, he had recruited a military force in Tahiti. In 1837 he arrived in New South Wales, where he recruited about sixty colonists and sailed in the 'Nimrod' to the Bay of Islands. Having summoned a meeting of chiefs at Mangunga, he explained his schemes and his title to the land he claimed; the chiefs refused to recognize his title, and showed alarm at his statement that he expected his brother to follow him with 500 persons. He also made a formal address to the white residents of New Zealand, in the course of which he announced that he came as neither an invader nor a despot, but to govern within the bounds of his own territories, and proceeded to expound a scheme of settlement and administration which showed him both communistic and paternal. He stated that he had brought with him a surgeon to attend the poor, and a tutor and governess to educate the settlers' children with his own. But, despite this solemn bravado, Thierry and his party had supplies for only two or three weeks, and his potential threat to British interest was quickly discounted. Ultimately, through the intervention of a missionary, two of the chiefs agreed to grant Thierry some land near Hokianga on condition he repudiate his larger claim. The rest of his party dispersed after rioting, and thus his grand scheme ended in failure, although he continued to send inflated accounts to France indicating success. 
New Zealand was proclaimed a British colony in the treaty of Waitangi in 1840, thus thwarting Thierry's ambitions of a French colony. In 1850 he left for the California goldfields, then spent two years on the French consulate staff in Honolulu before returning to Auckland, where his wife died in 1856. By 1860 he had begun to achieve some financial success, but he died suddenly in Auckland on 8 July 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 27183


Thirlby, Styan (bap. 1691, d. 1753), textual critic and theologian, was baptized on 7 January 1691 at St Margaret's, Leicester, the son of Thomas Thirlby (died 1701), vicar of St Margaret's, Leicester, and his wife, Mary (1663-1723), eldest daughter of Henry Styan of Kirby Frith. He was educated at the Leicester Free School, where, according to the head usher, the Revd John Kilby, 'his self-conceit was censured as very offensive. -- He thought he knew more than all the school' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 4.264). He was admitted to Jesus College, Cambridge, as a sizar on 10 April 1707 and graduated BA in 1710/11. 
In 1710 Thirlby engaged in controversy, publishing 'The University of Cambridge vindicated from the imputation of disloyalty... also, from the malicious and foul aspersions of Dr. B -- ly, late master of Trinity College', a 'violent and intemperate pamphlet' in which he 'abuses Bentley without measure or decency' (Monk, 1.289). This was followed by involvement in the renewed Arian controversy in 'An Answer to Mr. Whiston's Seventeen Suspicions Concerning Athanasius' (1712), a work generally considered (according to a correspondent of Dr Charles Ashton, the master of Jesus College) to be beyond the powers of such a young man in its knowledge of ecclesiastical history and of the church fathers, and leading Ashton's correspondent ('A. M.') to declare Thirlby 'the greatest Young Man that has appeard these many years' (Smith, 222). On 16 October 1712 he was elected to a fellowship at Jesus, taking his MA in 1714. 
Thirlby settled into the life of a fellow, and 'From his mental abilities no small degree of future eminence was presaged; but the fond hopes of his friends were unfortunately defeated, by a temper which was naturally indolent and quarrelsome, and by an unhappy addiction to drinking... being sometimes in a state of intoxication for five or six weeks together. (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 4.264, 267)' He did, however, continue his studies in divinity and published what was to be his 'magnum opus', a folio edition of Saint Justin Martyr's 'Apologiae duae et dialogus cum Tryphone Judaeo cum notis et emendationibus' (1722), with the Greek text and a Latin translation in parallel columns. In his preface he again attacks Bentley 'in so extravagant a style that he makes the reader, at the very outset of his work, doubt whether the editor was in a sane mind' (Monk, 2.167). His performance cost him the support of Ashton. 
From study of divinity Thirlby proceeded to medicine, becoming (in Johnson's phrase) 'a nominal physician'; he also lived briefly with the duke of Chandos, serving as librarian, but 'is reported to have affected a perverse and insolent independence, so as capriciously to refuse his company when it was desired' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 4.266). He then took up civil law, obtaining an LLD in 1728, and gave sporadic lectures, having Sir Edward Walpole as one of his students. This acquaintance led to a lifelong friendship and his moving to London, living in Walpole's house for a period. In May 1741 Walpole also procured him a sinecure as king's waiter in the Port of London custom house, worth about $100 a year, after which he lived in lodgings. 
From his undergraduate years Thirlby was interested in the text of Shakespeare. He bought editions of Shakespeare from Nicholas Rowe (1709) to William Warburton (1747), making extensive marginalia, most of which are acute, some intemperate. Warburton's reference in his preface to 'Shakespear' (1747) to (unpublished) letters from Pope urging him to edit Shakespeare (1.xix n.) produced: 'You might as well have said See my arse in a band box' (Folger Shakespeare Library, PR 2752 1747a c. 2). Theobald visited him in Cambridge early in 1729; their conversation included speculation about Shakespeare's 'foul papers' being manuscript copy for certain plays, as appears from Theobald's recognition, after Thirlby, that a passage in 'Love's Labour's Lost' (V. ii. 817-22) is Shakespeare's first draft of matter that receives its final version later in the scene (ll. 837-54) (Seary, 144). Thirlby also gave Theobald 'the Liberty of collating his Copy of 'Shakespeare', mark'd thro' in the Margin with his own Manuscript References and accurate Observations' ('Works of William Shakespeare', ed. Theobald, 1.lxv) and sent him (7 May 1729) a list of seventy proposed emendations, not all of which were accepted (Folger, MS W.b. 74, fols. 65'r'-67'v'). In his edition, Theobald has fifty-two references to Thirlby. Johnson also had access to Thirlby's marginalia in Warburton's 'Shakespear' (1747), when preparing his 'Shakespeare' (1765), and has forty-two citations. Thirlby never published his own projected edition of Shakespeare 'and consequently exerted only a dislocated subterranean influence upon the editorial tradition, as his orphaned conjectures were adopted (often without acknowledgement) by others' (Taylor, 54). 
Thirlby died unmarried in London on 19 December 1753, leaving a simple will (11 January 1751): 'I give all I have to the Honble Mr. Edwd. Walpole to do all I can to enable him to pay himself what I owe him' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/807). Probably his legacy consisted of books. 


@@@@@


doc= 27184


Thirlby, Thomas (c.1500-1570), bishop of Westminster and of Ely, was born in Cambridge where his father, John (died 1539), was town clerk. His mother, Joan (died 1557), was the daughter of William Campion of London. Thomas was the first of their three children, probably born a few years earlier than 1506 as claimed in his memorial at Lambeth, since by 1521 he had graduated BCL from Trinity Hall, Cambridge. As an undergraduate there he had upset his upstairs neighbour, the future martyr Thomas Bilney, by the too-frequent playing of his recorder. These musical interludes did not impede his studies, as he was duly elected a fellow of his college, and proceeded to doctorates in civil and canon law in 1528 and 1530. 
Anne Boleyn and her family were said to have been among Thirlby's early patrons, though evidence for this is lacking. The royal physician William Butts was certainly a helpful friend; but the obvious agent of Thirlby's advancement was Stephen Gardiner, the king's secretary and the master of Trinity Hall. From 1528-9 Thirlby was much engaged in legal business on behalf of Cambridge University; in 1530/31 he was its auditor. In 1532 he occurs as official to the archdeacon of Ely, and in the same year he received his first benefice, the rectory of Ribchester, Lancashire. By 1533 he had come to Thomas Cromwell's notice, and was regarded as sympathetic to Henry VIII's plans for a change of wife. The king made Thirlby his chaplain, probably at the instance of Thomas Cranmer (who had known Thirlby since Cambridge, and whose evangelical opinions Thirlby at this time shared). 
In May 1533 Thirlby was at court when the news came from Dunstable that Cranmer had put the king and queen asunder. Thirlby was then attached to the embassy sent to France to explain the king's matrimonial adjustment (28 May - 1 September). On his return he was recommended by Cromwell for further preferment; by 24 May 1534 (when Cranmer so addressed him) he was archdeacon of Ely. The archbishop wrote scornfully of Thirlby's 'ambitious mind' in some administrative concern ('Miscellaneous Writings', 292) but, according to the later testimony of Ralph Morice, 'there was no man lyvyng could more frendelie esteme any man of hymself' as did Cranmer of Thirlby, to whom his generosity was proverbial (Ellis, 26). Also in 1534 Thirlby was made provost of St Edmund's College, Salisbury. In February 1535 he became a member of Doctors' Commons, and practised in the court of arches. On 12 June 1537 he was collated to the prebend of Yetminster Prima in Salisbury Cathedral. During 1537, as a member of the council of the north, he was closely associated with the duke of Norfolk in restoring order after the Pilgrimage of Grace; he was present at the final examination of the rebel leader, Robert Aske. He was back at court in time to attend the baptism of the future Edward VI on 15 October. Five days later he was granted a canonry in the royal free chapel of St Stephen in Westminster. 
During 1537 Thirlby had been among those who advised on the drafting of the doctrinal statement called the 'Bishops' Book'. Early in the following year he was shortlisted for further diplomatic service. From April to August 1538, with Gardiner and Sir Francis Bryan, he was engaged in a mission to France to promote alliance through marriage treaties (particularly between Henry VIII's daughter Mary and the duc d'Orleans). Thirlby was embarrassed by his poor grasp of French, especially as spoken by Francois I. The embassy was totally eclipsed by a Franco-imperial concordat to which England was not a party. Thirlby and his colleagues responded sluggishly to their recall, though Gardiner would bear the brunt of Henry's displeasure. Returning through Kent in September Thirlby adroitly fielded questions about the recent destruction of Thomas Becket's shrine. On 1 October he was appointed to a heresy commission. On 23 December 1539 he was made master of St Thomas's Hospital, Southwark, which he was obliged to surrender to the crown in the following month. 
In July 1540 Thirlby was prolocutor of the lower house of the convocation of Canterbury when the king's marriage to Anne of Cleves was annulled. On this occasion he was already called 'elect' of Westminster, though it was not until 17 December following that the new diocese of Westminster was created and, by the same patent, Thirlby was appointed its bishop. He had Middlesex for his territory and Westminster Abbey for his cathedral; he was consecrated on 19 December in Henry VII's chapel there. He took his seat in the House of Lords on 16 January 1541. As the first and only bishop of Westminster Thirlby was rarely at home in the former abbot's house (now the deanery). He never conducted a visitation, and was not present in the abbey for the main state occasion held there when it was his cathedral -- the coronation of Edward VI. In the absence of its bishop the diocese functioned well enough; but the administration was in part handled by those who also served the parent diocese of London, by which Westminster was easily reabsorbed at the end of Thirlby's episcopate. 
By April 1541, if not before, Thirlby was dean of the Chapel Royal, a post he retained into Mary's reign. From June 1542 he occurs as a privy councillor. These promotions gave him status to head a mission, and he was duly sent to the emperor Charles V, then in northern Spain, as Henry VIII's mind turned again towards alliance against France. This embassy, for which Thirlby was paid from 30 June to 10 October, laid the foundations for the treaty of the following year, and the war with France that resulted. In 1543 he was appointed to negotiate a marriage between Prince Edward and Mary, queen of Scots, a union beyond even Thirlby's skill to accomplish. He played a leading part in shaping the 'King's Book' of 'Necessary Doctrine' in 1543. In July 1544 he was appointed a councillor of state during the king's absence in the French war. In 1545 Thirlby, with Sir William Petre and others, represented England at the imperial diet of Bourbourg; when these meetings ended in July, Thirlby remained as resident ambassador to the imperial court. For the next three years he followed Charles V through the climacteric of his reign, and was present at the battlefield of Muhlberg (24 April 1547) where the advance of protestantism was decisively checked. 
Meanwhile Henry VIII had died in January, pointedly excluding Thirlby and Gardiner from the council he intended to govern in Edward VI's minority. It was expected that Thirlby would be replaced as ambassador by Sir John Mason in April 1547, but he served a further year. On 14 April 1548 Edward formally notified the emperor that Thirlby had been recalled, and that Sir Philip Hoby would succeed him. Charles, writing from Augsburg on 8 June, replied that the returning ambassador had 'always acted with great modesty and discretion in the discharge of his duty' ('CSP Spain', '1547-9', 270-71). Hoby felt that Thirlby's 'politique and wise sorte for serche of intelligence' had been 'so well and wittely guided' that he was himself unworthy to take his place (BL, Harley MS 523, fols. 108-108'v'). 
Thirlby was home in time to attend discussions on liturgical reform held at Chertsey in September 1548. At the debate in the Lords in December he took exception to changes made to the eucharistic policy document agreed at Chertsey, from which he found omitted all mention of 'adoration' and 'oblation'. He was in turn criticized by Protector Somerset for breaking the common front to which the latter considered the bishops were committed. Somerset spoke to the king of his disappointment at Thirlby's conservatism, to which the young monarch allegedly replied: 'I expected... nothing else but that he, who had been so long time with the emperor as ambassador, should smell of the 'Interim'' (Robinson, 'Original Letters', 2.646). Thirlby voted against the third reading of the 'Uniformity Bill' on 15 January 1549, though he complied with the law as subsequently enacted. On 12 April he was again named to a heresy commission. 
In February 1550 the privy council, now led by Warwick, decided the diocese of Westminster should be dissolved. This was chiefly to allow more scope for the reformist Nicholas Ridley, who had been designated bishop of London. Thirlby was therefore required to surrender his see on 30 March. On 1 April Ridley became bishop of the reunited metropolitan diocese, while Thirlby was translated to Norwich. He was enthroned on 28 April; after that he rarely if ever entered his diocese. He was by no means in disgrace, for he was regularly employed in government business in the remaining years of Edward's reign. On 18 January 1551 he was appointed to a further heresy commission, in May he was sent to negotiate with the Scots, and during 1552 he was at least nominally involved in several of the financial commissions. 
On 2 April 1553 Thirlby was sent back to Brussels as resident. Audience with the emperor was delayed until early June, when Charles was reported to be frail but alert. The failing health of Thirlby's own sovereign was by this time of more concern; news of Edward's death reached Brussels on 11 July. Queen Mary retained Thirlby in post, but brought him back to attend her first parliament. On 25 October he was admitted to the privy council, and was expected to belong to its innermost circle. He returned to Brussels on 29 December, and in January 1554 he received Cardinal Pole there on his way to England as legate. Thirlby had his final audience with Charles V on 1 May, returning to England to assist at the queen's marriage with the emperor's son Philip in Winchester Cathedral on 25 July. The queen had given Thirlby the superior see of Ely, to which he was elected on 30 July, and where he was enthroned by proxy on 24 September. His appointment was ratified by papal provision on 21 June 1555, the bull being among those that Thirlby himself, along with Viscount Montagu and Sir Edward Carne, went to Rome to receive. This embassy left Calais on 27 February and, after a meeting with Henri II, proceeded south in a leisurely way, learning of the death of two successive popes and finding time to inspect a giant tortoise at Ferrara. The ambassadors were eventually received by Paul IV on 8 June, and had a final audience on the 16th. Thirlby received a gold cross from the pope; the more substantial achievement was papal confirmation of the deal that Pole had made with parliament in the previous December, the necessary financial preconditions to the reunion with Rome. Carne remained in Rome as resident; Montagu and Thirlby returned by Venice, and were back in London on 24 August. 
In his absence Thirlby had been thought likely to succeed the earl of Bedford as lord privy seal. On his return he was promoted to the 'select' group of eight privy councillors who had particular responsibility to liaise with the now absent King Philip. In October he took temporary custody of the great seal when Gardiner became ill. In November, following Gardiner's death, the queen proposed Thirlby as 'most worthy' to become lord chancellor in his place ('CSP Venice', '1555-6', 257). Philip, however, preferred Paget, and Archbishop Heath emerged as compromise candidate. It was the only time Thirlby came close to the high political office for which he would seem to have been so admirably qualified. A less welcome prominence fell to him when he was required to perform the ritual degradation of Cranmer at Oxford on 14 February 1556. There is no reason to doubt that his execution of this duty was reluctant and tearful. 
It was expected that Thirlby would return to Brussels later in 1556; in fact he remained in England and was engaged in occasional public duties. He never resided in his diocese of Ely, relying on the capable chancellor, John Fuller, who had previously served him at Norwich. But he continued to be employed as a diplomat, his final mission coming when England sought to conclude the war with France to which the queen's marriage had led. Thirlby was (with the earl of Arundel and Dr Nicholas Wotton) employed in the negotiations at Cercamp from October 1558; from there they moved to Brussels and then to Cateau Cambresis, where the treaty was concluded on 3 April 1559. Thirlby had thus been abroad yet again when his monarch died. Queen Elizabeth had issued a new commission to Thirlby and his colleagues five days after her accession, renewed in January 1559. 
Beyond the completion of this work Thirlby felt unable to adapt his conscience once more to serve a new regime. He returned to the Lords in April 1559 when parliament was already in session. He was reckoned the keenest opponent of the reformist cause. He voted against the 'Uniformity Bill', and refused the oath of supremacy which the subsequent legislation required. On or by 5 July he and the other dissenting bishops were deprived of their sees. Their open hostility to the religious settlement, and their refusal to attend prayer book services, eventually provoked harsher treatment. On 3 June 1560 Thirlby was taken to the Tower of London; in his absence there he was excommunicated on 25 February 1561. In September he and the other prominent Catholic prisoners were permitted to associate in specified groups of four. In September 1563, when plague made London unhealthy even for state prisoners, Thirlby and the former secretary John Boxall were released to house arrest in Archbishop Parker's custody. Parker's immediate concern was the risk of infection; but after a period of quarantine Thirlby (with his manservant and boy) became the archbishop's involuntary guest. Parker was the mildest of gaolers, scolded on one occasion by Sir William Cecil for allowing Thirlby and Boxall too much liberty. It seems likely, however, that this honourable and not uncongenial captivity was punctuated by return to the severer custody of the Tower during times of tension. Thirlby was nevertheless back in the archbishop's keeping at Lambeth Palace when he died on 26 August 1570. He was buried two days later in the parish church there. His coffin was opened in 1783 and the body was exhibited in a good state of preservation. 
Thirlby was of the last generation of episcopal diplomats; to his competence in his lay capacity (once he had mastered the French language) there are many testimonies. His employments abroad left him little opportunity to influence ecclesiastical affairs at home. His absence undoubtedly contributed to the failure of Westminster to survive as a diocese; it is unfortunate that Thirlby's name should principally be linked to that abortive scheme. 


@@@@@


doc= 27185


Thirlwall, (Newell) Connop (1797-1875), historian and bishop of St David's, born in Mile End Old Town, London, on 11 February 1797, was the third son of the Revd Thomas Thirlwall, and his wife, Susannah Connop (died 1842) of Mile End, the widow of an apothecary. 
The father, 
Connop Thirlwall showed such precocity that when he was only eleven years of age his father published a volume of his compositions called 'Primitiae', a work in after years so odious to the author that he destroyed every copy that he could obtain. The preface by his father says that 'at a very early period he read English so well that he was taught Latin at three years of age, and at four read Greek with an ease and fluency which astonished all who heard him. His talent for composition appeared at the age of seven.' He briefly attended Bancroft's School and from 1810 to 1813 was a day scholar at Charterhouse, where he was friendly with George Waddington, George Grote, and J. C. Hare. After leaving school he seems to have worked alone for a year, entering Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in October 1814. 
While an undergraduate Thirlwall found time to learn French and Italian, and, besides acquiring a considerable reputation as a speaker at the union, was secretary of the society when the debate was stopped by the entrance of the proctors (24 March 1817), who, by the vice-chancellor's command, ordered the members to disperse and on no account to resume their discussions. A few years later, when Thirlwall spoke at the Speculative Society, a debating society in London, John Stuart Mill recorded that he was the best speaker he had heard up to that time, and that he had not subsequently heard any one whom he could place above him (Mill, 125). In 1815 he obtained the Bell and Craven scholarships, and in 1816 was elected scholar of his own college. There he was especially friendly with, and influenced by, William Whewell. In 1818 he graduated BA. He was twenty-second senior optime in the mathematical tripos, and also obtained the first chancellor's medal for proficiency in classics. In October of the same year he was elected fellow of his college. 
Thirlwall was now able to realize what he called 'the most enchanting of my daydreams' (Stokes, 32), and spent several months on the continent. The winter of 1818-19 was passed in Rome, where he formed a close friendship with Bunsen, then secretary to the Prussian legation, at the head of which was Niebuhr; a meeting between Thirlwall and the historian cannot be definitely established. 
Thirlwall had at this time developed a dislike for the profession of a clergyman and, pressured by his family, he entered Lincoln's Inn in February 1820 in pupillage with Basevi, Disraeli's uncle. He was called to the bar in the summer of 1825 and practised for two years on the home circuit. Much of his success in later life may be traced to his legal training; but the work was always distasteful to him, though relieved by foreign tours, by intellectual society, and by a return to more congenial studies whenever he had a moment to spare. In 1824 he translated two tales by Tieck, and began his work on Schleiermacher's critical essay on St Luke's gospel. Both these were published (anonymously) in the following year, the second with a critical introduction, remarkable not only for thoroughness, but for acquaintance with modern German theology, then a field of research virtually untrodden by English students. In October 1827 Thirlwall abandoned law and returned to Cambridge. The prospect of the loss of his fellowship at Trinity College, which would have expired in 1828, probably determined the precise moment for taking a step which he had long meditated. He was ordained deacon before the end of 1827, and priest in 1828; his motivation seems to have been the opportunity for literary study. 
At Cambridge Thirlwall at once undertook his full share of college and university work. Between 1827 and 1832 he held the college offices of junior bursar, junior dean, and head lecturer; in 1828, 1829, 1832, and 1834 he examined for the classical tripos. In 1828 the first volume of the translation of Niebuhr's history of Rome appeared, the joint work of himself and Julius Charles Hare. This was attacked in the 'Quarterly Review' (January 1829), and Thirlwall contributed to Hare's elaborate reply a brief postscript which is worthy of his best days as a controversialist. In 1831 the publication of 'The Philological Museum' was started with the object of promoting 'the knowledge and the love of ancient literature'. Hare and Thirlwall were the editors, and the latter contributed to it several masterly essays. It ceased in 1833. In 1829 Thirlwall held for a short time the vicarage of Over, and in 1832, when Hare left college, he was appointed assistant tutor. His lectures were as thorough and systematic as Hare's had been desultory. 
In 1834 Thirlwall's connection with the educational staff of Trinity College was rudely severed when -- true to his liberalism -- he supported the admission of dissenters to Cambridge degrees. He replied to a pamphlet by T. Turton in a 'Letter on the Admission of Dissenters to Academical Degrees'; it argued that 'Cambridge colleges are not theological seminaries' or even 'schools of religious instruction' and he attacked college divinity lectures and compulsory chapel. This publication is dated 21 May 1834, and five days later Christopher Wordsworth, master -- perhaps influenced by H. J. Rose -- wrote to the author, calling upon him to resign his appointment as assistant tutor. Thirlwall immediately obeyed and, as the master had added that he found 'some difficulty in understanding how a person with such sentiments can reconcile it to himself to continue a member of a society founded and conducted on principles from which he differs so widely', Thirlwall addressed a circular letter to the fellows, asking each of them to send him 'a private explicit and unreserved declaration' on this point. Most desired to retain him, but several -- including Whewell with whom he quarrelled publicly on the matter -- did not acquit him of rashness; a few did not condemn the master's action. 
On Thirlwall's return, in November 1834, from a continental visit Lord Brougham offered him the valuable living of Kirby Underdale in Yorkshire. He accepted without hesitation, and went into residence in July 1835. He had had little experience of parochial work, but he proved himself both energetic and successful in this new field; he was sometimes helped by W. H. Thompson. 
He was elected to the senate of London University; when in London for meetings he met many Cambridge friends and in 1838 they formed the Sterling Club, for the exchange of (mainly liberal) ideas. At Kirby Underdale Thirlwall completed his 'History of Greece' (8 vols., 1835-44), originally published in the 'Cabinet Cyclopaedia' of Dr Dionysius Lardner. This work entailed prodigious labour. At Cambridge, where the first volume was written, he used to work all day until half-past three, when he left his rooms for a rapid walk before dinner, at that time served in hall at four; in Yorkshire he is said to have worked sixteen hours a day in his study. By a curious coincidence he and George Grote, his friend and schoolfellow, were writing on the same subject at the same time, unknown to each other. On the appearance of Grote's first two volumes in 1846 Thirlwall welcomed them with generous praise, and when the publication of the fourth volume in 1847 enabled him to form a maturer judgement, he told the author that he rejoiced to think that his own performance would 'for all highest purposes, be so superseded' (Grote, 174). Grote in the preface to his work bore testimony to Thirlwall's learning, sagacity, and candour. Portions of Thirlwall's history were translated into German by Leonhard Schmitz in 1840, and into French by A. Joanne in 1852. 
In 1840 Lord Melbourne offered the bishopric of St David's to Thirlwall. He had read his translation of Schleiermacher, and formed so high an opinion of the author that he wished to appoint him to Norwich in 1837, but was dissuaded by episcopal comment. In 1840 he took a stronger line, effectively pressing Thirlwall onto a reluctant Archbishop Howley, whose agreement to what was bound to be a controversial appointment he secured in advance. Tractarians, unsurprisingly, were scandalized, but the appointment was not challenged. 
Thirlwall brought to the larger sphere of work as a bishop the thoroughness which had made him successful as a parish clergyman. Within a year he read prayers and preached in Welsh; he later encouraged the eisteddfod. He visited every part of his large and, at that time, little-known diocese; inspected the condition of schools and churches; and by personal liberality augmented the income of small livings. It has been estimated that he spent $40,000 while bishop on charities of various kinds. After a quarter of a century of steady effort he could point to the restoration of 183 churches; to 30 parishes where new or restored churches were in progress; to many new parsonages; and to a large increase in education. Yet he was not personally popular. He was moody and unwilling to make the usual politenesses. He instituted priests without a word of encouragement. He was sarcastic with his colleagues and rude to his servants. Popular rumour had it that his dog was trained to know and bite curates. His friends were almost all in England and he relished his visits to London to stay with Monckton Milnes and visit the Metaphysical Society. His almost reclusive existence at Abergwili was lightened from 1862 by an intense but apparently platonic friendship with a spirited and talented beauty, Elizabeth Johnes of Dolau Cothi, Pumpsaint, some 20 miles from Abergwili. Their correspondence was published after Thirlwall's death in 'Letters to a Friend' (1881). 
Thirlwall took a lively interest in the events of the day, and in all questions affecting not merely his own diocese but the church at large. On such he elaborated his decision unbiased by considerations of party, of his own order, or of public opinion. His seclusion from such influences gives a special value to his eleven triennial charges, which are, in fact, an epitome of the history of the Church of England during his episcopate, narrated by a man of judicial mind, without passion or prejudice, and fearless in the expression of his views. On controversial issues he often took the opposite side to the Anglican episcopate. He supported the grant to Maynooth (1845); the abolition of the civil disabilities of the Jews (1848); and, in a powerful and memorable speech, the disestablishment of the Irish church (1869). He was the only bishop to vote for the repeal of the corn laws in 1846. But he was a strong supporter of the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Act'. Though broad church in his interest in German theology and in his support for comprehension, his theological views did not advance. He quarrelled with Rowland Williams when the latter was vice-principal at Lampeter (Thirlwall's appointment), and Thirlwall's signature made unanimous the bishops' condemnation of 'Essays and Reviews' (1860), a position Thirlwall defended in his 'Charge' (1863). But he declined to prevent Bishop Colenso from preaching in his diocese, or to urge him to resign his bishopric. 
Thirlwall was a regular attendant at convocation, a member of the royal commission on ritual (1868), and chairman of the Old Testament Revision Company. In May 1874 he resigned his bishopric and retired to Bath, blind and partially paralysed. He died unmarried at 59 Pulteney Street, Bath, on 27 July 1875. He was buried on 3 August in Westminster Abbey, in the same grave as George Grote. His funeral sermon, which was preached by Dean Stanley, formed the preface of the posthumous volume of Thirlwall's 'Letters to a Friend' (1881). In 1884 the Thirlwall prize (for the best thesis involving historical research) was instituted at Cambridge in the bishop's memory. Thirlwall's life was one of paradox: a notable scholar whose early liberalism turned to theological caution; a priest who disliked the clergy; and a broad-church bishop preaching comprehension, whose sarcasm inspired few among his flock and revulsion among the many non-Anglicans in his diocese. 


@@@@@


doc= 27186


Thomas Thirlwall (d. 1827), Church of England clergyman and author, was the son of Thomas Thirlwall (died 1808), vicar of Cottingham, near Hull, who claimed descent from the barons of Thirlwall Castle, Northumberland. The younger Thomas, after holding some small benefices in London, was presented in 1814 to the rectory of Bower's Gifford in Essex, where he died on 17 March 1827. He was a man of fervent piety, and the author of several published works, including 'Diatessaron, seu, Integra historia domini nostri Jesu Christi, ex quatuor evangeliis confecta' (1802). 


@@@@@


doc= 27187


Thirning, William (d. 1413), justice, probably came from Thirning in Huntingdonshire, where his name occurs in connection with the manor of Hemingford Grey. Thirning served on various commissions before becoming a serjeant in 1383. In 1377 he was on the commission of peace for the county of Northampton, and on 20 December of that year was a commissioner of oyer and terminer in Bedfordshire. In June 1380 he was a justice of assize for the counties of York, Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmorland. He was appointed a king's serjeant in 1388, and a justice of the common pleas on 11 April of the same year; he became chief justice of that court on 15 January 1396. In 1392 he was one of the commissioners appointed by the king to inquire into the shortcomings of the government of the city of London. In the parliament of January 1398, when the judges were asked for their opinions on the answers for which their predecessors had been condemned in 1388, Thirning replied that declaration of treason not yet declared was a matter for parliament, but that had he been a lord of parliament, if he had been asked, he would have replied in the same manner. 
Thirning's attitude on this occasion did not prevent him from taking a leading part in the process of deposing Richard II in 1399. He was one of the persons appointed to obtain Richard's renunciation of the throne on 29 September, and was one of the commissioners who on the following day pronounced the sentence of deposition in parliament. According to Walsingham, Thirning advised Henry of Lancaster to abandon his idea of claiming the throne by right of conquest, the chief justice arguing that such a claim would have made all tenure of property insecure. Although doubt has been thrown on the composition of the delegation, it seems almost certain that Thirning was one of those sent to interview Richard in the Tower of London on 29 September and obtain his renunciation of the throne; and after the estates had pronounced sentence of deposition on 30 September Thirning was one of the commissioners sent the following day to announce the sentence to Richard. According to Walsingham, when the sentence was read Richard refused to renounce the spiritual honour of king. Thirning then reminded him of the terms in which on 29 September he had confessed that he was deposed on account of his demerits. Richard demurred, saying it was simply that his government had not been acceptable to the people. Thirning, however, insisted, and Richard only smiled and asked to be treated honourably. On 3 November Thirning pronounced the judgment of the king and peers against the accusers of Thomas, duke of Gloucester. The leniency of the judgment, according to Walsingham, caused some ill feeling among the people. 
Thirning continued to be chief justice throughout the reign of Henry IV, and was reappointed on the accession of Henry V in 1413. He must have died very soon after, for his successor, Richard Norton (died 1420), was appointed on 26 June of the same year, and in Trinity term of that year Thirning's widow, Joan, brought an action of debt. 


@@@@@


doc= 27188


Thistlewood, Arthur (bap. 1774, d. 1820), radical and revolutionary, was baptized at Horsington parish church, near Horncastle, Lincolnshire, on 4 December 1774. He was the illegitimate son of William Thistlewood, a stock breeder, and Ann Burnet, a small shopkeeper. He probably attended Horncastle Free Grammar School and subsequently trained as a land surveyor. However, in 1795 he is recorded as a grazier of Tupholme, and subsequently he was an ensign in the 1st West Yorkshire militia, July 1798 to February 1799; for a similarly short period in 1803 he held a commission in the 3rd Lincolnshire militia. Claims for his first marriage differ: he may have married a Miss Bruce of Bawtry in 1791/1792, or Jane Worsley of Lincoln in January 1804. Both women are said to have been wealthy, with a fortune reverting to their family after death in childbirth within two years of marriage. A son, Julian, credited to both the 1804 marriage and an illicit liaison, was accepted by Susan Wilkinson, a Horncastle butcher's daughter whom Thistlewood married in 1808. About this time he is said to have inherited a large estate which he sold in return for an annuity, but the purchaser went bankrupt almost immediately. An attempt at farming was also a financial disaster. 
Information concerning Thistlewood's early life is confused and some picaresque details should probably be discounted, including his service as a captain with the French grenadiers. This seems to have been his own invention, of which he made much after arriving around 1810-11 in London, where he quickly made the acquaintance of leading radicals, especially the circle round the agrarian reformer Thomas Spence. There he found an ideological framework for his embittered personal experience of financial difficulty and thwarted aspirations: 'The Mammonites have swayed us too long, we must have no property mongering jugglers, they have always entailed misery on the most industrious and useful people in every nation' (J. Watson to A. Thistlewood, 24 July 1818, TNA: PRO, HO 42/178). In 1811 he was secretary to a committee for the defence of an Irish radical journalist charged with libelling Castlereagh, Peter Finnerty. In 1812-13 he was closely involved with a shadowy group that proposed to send an emissary to Paris inviting Napoleon to invade Britain and restore the Saxon constitution. Thistlewood's role was to finance the enterprise out of a rumoured windfall of $10,000 in a chancery case, but the plan folded when the money did not materialize. Ostensibly bizarre, the aim is intelligible within the context of English radicalism's long tradition of Saxon constitutionalism, and the plan was scrutinized closely by the government. Thereafter Thistlewood's activities are well documented in official papers. One spy presciently observed that he was 'quite the gentleman in manners and appearance... from his past life, his present pursuits, principles and low connections etc he seems to be a second edition of Colonel Despard' (J. Smith to J. Beckett (Home Office), 8 Feb 1813, TNA: PRO, HO 42/136). In 1814 he visited a number of Jacobin emigres in Paris, among them William McCabe, the United Irish agent. 
The peak of the Spenceans' influence came in late 1816, when they briefly secured the leadership of the parliamentary reform movement in London. Henry Hunt was invited by them to address a mass meeting at Spa Fields on 2 December, but agreed to do so only on condition that explicitly Spencean material in their address was deleted. To this the organizing committee, of which Thistlewood and Dr James Watson were leading members, agreed, primarily because it was their intention to use the occasion to foment widespread unrest in the capital that might signal the commencement of a general rising to the country at large. Ground had been laid for this by extensive agitation among taverns and barracks in the capital, and via an extensive correspondence with provincial centres where radicals held themselves in readiness. McCabe returned clandestinely for the meeting. In the event the majority of Hunt's audience remained peaceable, but a sizeable element were responsible for several hours of rioting in the City, while a small force with Thistlewood at its head marched on the Tower of London and demanded its surrender. Only at nightfall was order restored. 
There was no immediate crackdown by the government, largely because of the need to keep intact its intelligence network, but early in 1817 habeas corpus was suspended and warrants issued for the arrest of the leading Spenceans. Thistlewood remained at liberty until May, when he was arrested while preparing to leave for America with his family. Along with Watson and two other Spenceans he was charged with high treason. Watson was acquitted in June 1817, however, when the crown's chief witness was exposed as a pimp, perjurer, and plausible 'provocateur', and the case against the others was withdrawn. Throughout the remainder of 1817 their activities continued, but with Watson increasingly inclined towards open constitutionalism and Thistlewood to a 'coup d'etat' to expedite their objectives. Fresh plans were devised for destabilizing the capital, with St Bartholomew's fair on 6 September the cloak to proceedings. Emissaries were sent into the country and plans made to storm the Bank of England. The plot was real enough -- the home secretary, Sidmouth, compared it directly to the Despard conspiracy -- but it was defeated by a combination of deft official action and the over-optimism of the protagonists. 
The failure prompted Thistlewood to air the idea of an attack on the privy council 'in the manner of Despard' (J. Shegoe to N. Conant, 18 Sept 1817, TNA: PRO, HO 42/170). A further action was planned for 11 October, which dissolved in circumstances approaching farce. Fearful of police surveillance, most of the Spencean circle reverted to tavern-based agitation and publication. Thistlewood struck off on a course of his own, challenging Sidmouth to a duel over the non-return of confiscated property. The dispute had already been the subject of 'An interesting correspondence between Thistlewood and Sidmouth concerning the property detained, in consequence of an arrest, on a charge of high treason' (1817). The challenge resulted in May 1818 in a twelve-month gaol sentence for threatening a breach of the peace. This Thistlewood served, in circumstances of some severity, in Horsham gaol. 
After his release Thistlewood organized with Watson a lavish London reception for Hunt on 5 September 1819, after 'Peterloo'. Their involvement compromised Hunt's constitutional stance and this, along with a dispute about radical tactics after Peterloo, led to a damaging public dispute between them. A few days before Peterloo, Thistlewood had proposed a rising. He now began to formulate what would become known as the Cato Street conspiracy ['see 'Cato Street conspirators (act. 1820)]. He visited the provinces, while the Spenceans intensified agitation in London. Though the key conspirators included a spy, George Edwards, the wider web of those implicated in Cato Street will never be clear: the London Irish community and a number of trade societies, notably shoemakers, were prepared to lend support, while unrest and awareness of a planned rising were widespread in the industrial north and on Clydeside. 
Thistlewood intended to assassinate the cabinet at the home of the earl of Harrowby, where the cabinet was advertised as going to dine on 23 February 1820. The advertisement, however, was an official hoax. The conspirators were apprehended in a loft in Cato Street by Bow Street runners and a detachment of guards around 8.30 that night. In the struggle that followed, one police officer, Richard Smithers, was killed with a rapier by Thistlewood, who then escaped, only to be captured the following morning. In all, thirteen conspirators were arrested and charged with high treason. Two turned king's evidence, which removed the need for the crown to call Edwards as a witness. The case against one prisoner was dropped. After three days' trial, on 17, 18, and 19 April, Thistlewood was found guilty and sentenced to a traitor's death. Five conspirators were transported, while Thistlewood and four others were hanged, publicly decapitated, and buried at Newgate on 1 May 1820. 


@@@@@


doc= 27189


Thom, Alexander (1801-1879), printer and writer, was born on 18 April 1801 in Scotland (his place of birth may be Findhorn, or Bervie, or Aberdeen). His father, 
Alexander Thom went to Dublin in 1813 with his father and entered the printing business in 1816, working in the newspaper office. In 1824 he obtained, through the influence of Sir Robert Peel, the contract for printing for the Post Office of Ireland. In 1838 he obtained the contract for the printing for all royal commissions in Ireland. He took over the printing and publishing of the official 'Dublin Gazette' in 1851, and in 1876 was appointed to the post of queen's printer for Ireland. In 1844 he founded the work by which he was subsequently known, the 'Irish Almanack and Official Directory', which in a short time superseded all other publications of the kind in the Irish capital. Its superiority to its predecessors was due to its inclusion of many valuable statistics relating to Ireland. Thom continued personally to supervise its publication until 1876 when he disposed of the copyright to his son-in-law, Frederick Pilkington. In 1862 he produced a valuable related work, 'Thom's British Directory and Official Handbook of the United Kingdom', the last edition of which was published in 1873. In 1860 he published at his own expense for gratuitous distribution 'A collection of tracts and treatises illustrative of the natural history, antiquities, and the political and social state of Ireland', two volumes which contain reprints of the works of Ware, Spenser, Davis, Petty, Berkeley, and other writers on Irish affairs in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In 1848 he became a founder member of the Dublin Statistical Society (later the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland), of which he was vice-president from 1871 to his death. 
Thom, who was twice married, died at his residence, Donnycarney House, Coolock, near Dublin, on 22 December 1879. He was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery, Harold's Cross, Dublin. His second wife, Sarah Mackay ('nee' McCulloch) survived him until 1903, and bequeathed his historical library of 4000 volumes to the National Library of Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 27190


James Thom (b. c.1785), subject painter, was born in Edinburgh. He studied art in his native city, and between 1808 and 1815 exhibited in Edinburgh some thirteen pictures, of which one or two were historical, three were portraits, and the rest of domestic subjects (including two designs for vignette illustrations to Burns). In 1815 he sent two pictures to the British Institution, and about that time moved to London where he had some success. In 1825 his 'Young Recruit' was engraved by A. Duncan. 


@@@@@


doc= 27191


Thom, James (1802-1850), sculptor, was born on 17 April 1802 at Skeoch Farm near Lochlee in Tarbolton parish, Ayrshire, and baptized at Tarbolton church on 19 April, the second of three sons of James Thom, a farm worker, and his wife, Margaret Morrison. His mother had been a frequent visitor to the home of the Burns family at Mossgiel and often recalled these visits in the presence of her family. They later moved to Meadowbank in the adjoining parish of Stair, where Thom attended a small local school. With his younger brother, Robert (1805-1895), he was apprenticed to a firm of builders in Kilmarnock, Howie and Brown, where he was later employed as an ornamental carver. It was while renovating a tombstone in Crosbie kirkyard, Troon, in 1827 that he attracted the attention of David Auld, a barber in Ayr and custodian of the Burns monument at Alloway. On Auld's suggestion Thom carved a bust of Robert Burns from the copy of the portrait by Alexander Nasmyth that hung at the Burns monument. So impressed was Auld by the bust that he encouraged the sculptor to attempt a more ambitious work, and in 1828 Thom carved a life-size statue of Burns's Tam O'Shanter (Burns monument, Alloway). This was hewn without any preliminary sketches, directly from a block of rough-grained sandstone supplied from a neighbouring quarry. It was followed soon afterwards by the companion statue of Souter Johnnie (Burns monument, Alloway), for which a subscription was raised locally to meet the costs. 
Before placing the statues at the Burns monument, Auld exhibited them in Ayr in July 1828 with great success. Afterwards he took them to Edinburgh -- where they received the praise of Sir Walter Scott -- and Glasgow. In April 1829 they went to London where the critics at once hailed them as inaugurating a new era in sculpture. They were seen as works of untutored genius unconstrained by academic convention and perfectly capturing the spirit of Burns's poetry. The homely naturalism of the pair's clothing -- particularly Tam's circular cap and knitted stockings -- and their expressive attitudes and humour were much admired. Sixteen replicas of the figures were said to have been ordered as well as small-scale reproductions carved by Thom and his brother Robert. Moreover, 1 shilling admission was charged to see the works, and the net profit raised from the exhibitions was said to have been nearly $2000; this was divided equally between the sculptor, Auld, and the trustees of the Burns monument. Thom in addition received a special award of 20 guineas from the board of manufacturers in Scotland. 
Encouraged by his successes, Thom made companion statues of the Landlord and Landlady from the same poem (Burns monument, Alloway; versions at the Cottage of Souter Johnnie, Kirkoswald, Ayrshire). He also carved a group representing 'Old Mortality and his Pony' (1830) from Scott's novel, a figure based on Burns's song 'Willie brew'd a peck o' maut', and statues of Burns (1830) and Sir William Wallace (freestone, 1830; Wallace Tower, Ayr). In 1835 a second exhibition of Thom's work was organized in London though this did not meet with the success of the earlier venture. 
About 1836 Thom went to America. Some of his works had been sent there for exhibition and sale but his agent had kept the proceeds. Recovering a portion of the money, Thom decided to remain in America and he settled at Newark, New Jersey, where in the following years he executed many replicas of his best-known works. They included the Tam and Souter figures, 'Old Mortality and his Pony' (version at Laurel Hill cemetery, Philadelphia), a statue of Burns, as well as ornamental garden pieces. He is also credited with discovering the freestone quarries at Little Falls, New Jersey; these provided the materials for his architectural carvings at Trinity Church, New York. Having amassed a considerable fortune, he purchased a farm at Ramapo, Rockland county, New York, where he built a house to his own designs. He is said to have abandoned sculpture in his last years and died of consumption in his lodging house in New York city on 17 April 1850. He married and had a son, James Crawford Thom ('b'. 1835), who became an artist, and a daughter, Ada Crawford Thom. 
Thom was one of a group of Scottish so-called 'mason sculptors' (others were John Greenshields, Robert Forrest, David Anderson, and John Currie) who enjoyed a vogue in the early nineteenth century for genre works and familiar subjects from Scottish history and literature. Their direct and often humorous approach to everyday subject matter -- extending a distinct tradition in local stone carving -- significantly influenced the development of mainstream sculpture in both Britain and America during the mid-nineteenth century. 
Another artist of the same name, 


@@@@@


doc= 27192


Thom, John Hamilton (1808-1894), Unitarian minister, was born on 10 January 1808 in Newry, co. Down, where his father, John Thom (1776-1808), who had come from Scotland in 1800, was a Presbyterian minister; his mother was Martha Anne (1779-1859), daughter of Isaac Glenny of Newry. In 1823 he entered the Belfast Academical Institution. He was profoundly impressed by reading the sermons of the American minister William Ellery Channing (1780-1842), with their Unitarian theology and Romantic eloquence, but his Unitarian commitment never entirely escaped the more exalted view of Jesus characteristic of his Arian teachers in Belfast. Nor was he exposed to the rigorous necessarianism of Joseph Priestley (1733-1804) and Thomas Belsham (1750-1829), which so deeply affected many of his English colleagues, especially those trained at Manchester College, York. 
In 1828 Thom became minister of the Ancient Chapel, Toxteth Park, just outside Liverpool, but in 1831 the early death of John Hincks ('b'. 1804), minister of Renshaw Street Chapel, Liverpool -- whose brother William Hincks (1794-1871) had earlier occupied that pulpit and whose father, Thomas Dix Hincks (1767-1857), was Thom's teacher -- brought him to that important post. Congregational minutes indicate considerable opposition: John Finch (1784-1857), an Owenite iron merchant, protested against the 'aristocratical' way in which the invitation was issued by the pew owners; others worried about Thom's youth or, with John Hincks in mind, his delicate health. 
The objections were overcome, but the early years of Thom's tenure were difficult. Some members complained of his 'stile and manner', others that his sermons were too abstract and inattentive to practical, ethical questions. Many years later, Thom conceded his immaturity; but at the time he took on his critics with a startling imperiousness, pleading his ignorance of the workaday world, insisting on his entire freedom, and lecturing the congregation on the proper duties of minister and flock. With strong support from congregational leaders, among them William Rathbone (1787-1868), he survived the criticism and remained at Renshaw Street as minister -- with a three-year leave in 1854-7, during which he was replaced by William Henry Channing (1810-1884), the son of his American inspirer -- until he retired from loss of voice in 1866. On 2 January 1838 he married Hannah Mary Rathbone (1816-1872), the second daughter of William Rathbone, whose eventually futile opposition to the match was based on concern about Thom's health and its possible implications for his daughter's financial prospects. There were no children. 
The denomination in England became generally aware of Thom in 1839 when, in 'Unitarianism Defended', the Liverpool ministers -- Thom, James Martineau (1805-1900), and Henry Giles (1809-1882) -- answered one by one thirteen lectures by local Anglican ministers determined to confute Unitarianism. The brilliance of the defence made a great impression, but Thom's and Martineau's lectures contain hints of the subversion that the 'new school' -- in the leadership of which they were joined by John James Tayler (1797-1869) and Charles Wicksteed (1810-1885) -- visited on post-Priestleyan rational religion over the next thirty years, rejecting materialism and necessity, subordinating the nexus of religion and science, and questioning the authority of the 'Bible' as testimony. 
Thom's views were reinforced by Joseph Blanco White (1775-1841), the former Spanish priest and once an influential figure at Oriel College, Oxford, who lived his last years in Liverpool; in 1845 Thom published a life of Blanco White, based on White's own accounts. He had written a memoir of his predecessor, John Hincks, in an edition of his sermons (1832) and was to publish a biographical account of his friend Tayler incorporating his letters (1872). Eventually Tayler and Martineau moved to London as professors and successive principals at Manchester College, but Thom remained in Liverpool, where his relative leisure allowed him to edit the 'Christian Teacher' in 1839-44 and to take the lead in the shared editorship of its greatly influential successor, the 'Prospective Review' (1845-55). 
The conflict between the 'new school' of Thom and his friends and the 'old school' of the Priestleyans came to a head in 1866 in a conservative resolution insisting on a broadly worded commitment to historical Unitarianism as a qualification for membership in the British and Foreign Unitarian Association. Although the new school was probably in a minority among Unitarian ministers and laymen at the crucial meeting, long-standing Unitarian resistance to anything resembling a creed assured the overwhelming defeat of the resolution. Martineau and Thom were less successful in their next initiative, to submerge the Unitarian identity and name in the Free Christian movement. 
Members of the new school led a revolution in taste as well as in doctrine. Although nearly everyone in their generation had been deeply affected by Romantic poetry, and while there was general sympathy with the Gothic revival so dramatically embodied in new Unitarian churches built in mid-century, the new school carried the Romantic impulse to the very centre of their thought and into their language. The reservations of Thom's early hearers were soon swept away, and the diary of George Holt (1790-1861), one of the great Liverpool Unitarian merchants, repeatedly records his dissatisfaction with preaching elsewhere compared with Renshaw Street. L. P. Jacks (1860-1955), a later minister there, continued to regard Thom as the finest preacher of them all, though many readers a century later may find his sermons (the best-known of several collections is 'Laws of Life after the Mind of Christ', 1882, 1886) highly convoluted (yet precise) in rhetoric and too self-conscious in the deliberate, lapidary creation of verbal beauty. Although privately Thom could reveal a sly sense of humour, in public he was an awe-inspiring figure, and it was said in Liverpool that merely seeing him enter the pulpit did one as much good as hearing a sermon from anyone else. 
Thom exercised wide influence in another area of Unitarian activity where there was little disagreement. The domestic mission movement -- aimed not at proselytizing but at reclaiming the dignity and self-worth of the poorest of the poor -- was begun in Boston by the American minister Joseph Tuckerman (1778-1840). On a tour of England in 1833-4, Tuckerman made a particular impression in Liverpool, and while missions were established in almost every major town starting in London, the mission in Liverpool, established in 1836, may have been the best-known of them all. Much of this fame was owing to the death of its first missionary, the Revd John Johns ('b'. 1801), from cholera in 1847. Thom did not himself go regularly into the slums: ministers confided that task to missionaries thought to have special abilities, and their reports provided the texts on which ministers could descant in drawing support from their wealthy and comfortable hearers. The methods of the movement meshed superbly with the way in which Thom and his friends saw religion, as well as social improvement, as an intensely individual experience -- in his words, 'heart acting on heart, conscience on conscience, soul on soul, man on man' ('Religion, the Church, and the People', 1849, 25). Thom and Martineau never abandoned that view, though all about them the rage grew for collective solutions, legislative intervention, and even socialism. 
After his retirement, Thom remained in Liverpool and in regular attendance at Renshaw Street. Clad in immaculate broadcloth and conveyed in a smart brougham, he was a daunting presence for the youthful Jacks, who knew that he was constantly being judged by, and against, his distinguished predecessor: Thom once rebuked him for derogating from ministerial dignity by riding a bicycle. Thom died of old age and exhaustion at his residence, Oakfield, in Sefton Park, Liverpool, on 2 September 1894, and was interred on 7 September in the burial-ground at the Ancient Chapel, Toxteth Park. 


@@@@@


doc= 27193


Walter Thom (1770-1824), journalist and author, was born at Bervie, Kincardineshire. He moved to Aberdeen where he wrote a 'History of Aberdeen' (1811), and 'Pedestrianism' (1813) celebrating particularly the athletic feats of Captain Robert Barclay Allardice. In 1813 he went to Dublin as editor of 'The Correspondent', later becoming editor and joint proprietor of the 'Dublin Journal', a newspaper financially dependent on government patronage. Its circulation declined drastically in the 1820s to about 300 copies per issue. He was a founder member of the Association for the Suppression of Mendicity in Dublin in 1818. He also contributed to Brewster's 'Encyclopaedia', to Sinclair's 'Statistical Account of Scotland', and to Mason's 'Statistical Account of Ireland'. He died in Dublin on 16 June 1824. 


@@@@@


doc= 27194


Thom, William (1798?-1848), poet and weaver, was born in Aberdeen, probably on 12 March 1798. He hardly knew his father, who may have been a merchant or an architect. Run over by a nobleman's carriage at an early age, Thom was lamed for life; his widowed mother was offered compensation of 10's'. by the occupant of the carriage. Educated only at a dame-school, Thom became an autodidact. At the School Hill Factory in Aberdeen, he worked simultaneously as a weaver and as a student, delighting especially in Scottish songs and poems. He also became adept at this time at playing the flute. 
Thom married when he was aged about twenty, but the couple separated after only a few years. By 1837, when he briefly gave up weaving, Thom was living with Jean Whitecross, a Kirriemuir woman, with whom he had four children. A very poor man, Thom struggled to feed himself and his family by itinerant bookselling and flute playing. Jean Whitecross died in 1840, by which time the family had settled in Inverurie and Thom had returned to weaving. It was really at this point that his career as a poet began. He was already well known in his own community for songwriting, but, early in 1841, one of his poems, 'The Blind Boy's Pranks', was published in the 'Aberdeen Herald', and, soon after, in many other Scottish newspapers. The poem secured Thom a valuable patron, J. A. Gordon, a former English MP and laird of Knockespock. Gordon's English connections were extremely useful to Thom; he spent the summer of 1841 at his patron's house in London. 
In 1844 Thom brought out a short-lived journal, the 'Inverurie Gossamer', and, by subscription, 'Rhymes and Recollections of a Hand-Loom Weaver', which contained the powerful 'Whisperings for the unwashed'. One thousand copies of the book were distributed and Thom received donations from admirers amounting eventually to several hundred pounds. It was said these admirers included Scottish merchants living in Calcutta. By this time Thom had formed a relationship with Jean Stephen (1821-1848), of Inverurie, with whom he had three children. Literary success and this new relationship did not prevent Thom becoming the victim of his own personal weaknesses; he spent fewer and fewer hours at his loom and became a hard drinker. Between late 1844 and late 1847 Thom and his family lived in London. He was welcomed by Lady Blessington, Dickens, and Jerrold. Smith, Elder & Co. republished his volume of poetry and waited for another. It never came. Though Thom formed close friendships with such literary-minded working men as George Julian Harney and Thomas Cooper, he did not heed their urgings to work at his poems. Offers of publication in journals were spurned, his relationship with Gordon collapsed, and his money ran out; in poor health, Thom left for Dundee in late 1847. He died, probably of tuberculosis, on 29 February 1848, at Hawkhill, Dundee, and was buried in the western cemetery, Dundee. One month later Jean Stephen, too, was dead; a public appeal eventually raised well over $300 for their three children. Thom identified closely with the Paisley weaver-poet Robert Tannahill and, like him, was a tragic figure. Mostly he wrote in the Scottish dialect rather than standard nineteenth-century English, producing both lyrics and protest verse about the sufferings of the poor. He was undoubtedly a poet of greater talent than most of his early and mid-Victorian working-class colleagues. 


@@@@@


doc= 27195


Thomas of Lancaster, second earl of Lancaster, second earl of Leicester, and earl of Lincoln (c.1278-1322), magnate, was the eldest son of Edmund, earl of Lancaster and Leicester (1245-1296), second surviving son of Henry III, and of Blanche (died 1302), widow of Henri, king of Navarre, and daughter of Robert, count of Artois, son of Louis VIII of France. On his father's side Thomas was thus the grandson of Henry III, the nephew of Edward I, and the cousin of Edward II, and on his mother's side, the grandson of Louis VIII of France and grandnephew of Louis IX: a position close to the two royal families of England and France which does much to explain both his political role and his political pretensions. Since his parents married between 18 December 1275 and 18 January 1276, and he was still a minor in 1297, he was probably born 'c'.1278. 
Under Edward I, Thomas's place in the royal family brought him rapid promotion. He first appears in 1290, when plans were being made for his marriage to Beatrice, daughter of Hugues, son of the duke of Burgundy. But these fell through, and in 1294, by the autumn of that year, he had married Alice ['see below'], daughter and heir of Henry de Lacy, earl of Lincoln, securing part of the Lacy inheritance with the promise of the remainder on Lacy's death. It was thanks to the king that the marriage settlement excluded collateral heirs to the two Lacy earldoms of Lincoln and Salisbury, to Lancaster's advantage, and, a little later, that his own earldom of Derby was successfully defended against the claims of the disinherited John de Ferrers. Towards the end of the reign he also received numerous minor gifts from Edward and, in 1307, the valuable franchise of return of writs. In return he gave loyal service to his uncle and benefactor. He first served on the Falkirk campaign of 1297-8 (in the course of which he was knighted), fought at Falkirk in 1298, was present at Caerlaverock in 1300, and accompanied Prince Edward to Perth in 1304-5 and on campaign again in 1306-7. The king's obvious fondness for his nephew may have owed something to the unmartial ways of his own son and heir. But this did not separate Lancaster from the prince, with whom he remained on friendly terms. 
Although Edward II's accession in July 1307 rapidly led to the marshalling of baronial opposition to the new king, it marked no break in Lancaster's close relationship with his cousin. The political goodwill evident in the first few months of the reign, which allowed Edward to recall his favourite, Piers Gaveston, from exile and to secure a tax grant from parliament, was soon dissipated by the two issues which were to dominate Edward II's early years: the intolerable conduct of Gaveston, and the king's misgovernment, exemplified among much else by purveyance -- the forcible levying of foodstuffs to feed the royal household and armies. But Lancaster's alignment with the king's opponents on these issues was by no means immediate, and for the first eighteen months of the new reign he enjoyed Edward's favour and company. He was with him in the north in the weeks following the old king's death, travelled south with him after Edward's cancellation of the current Scottish campaign, dined with him fairly frequently, and benefited from numerous royal grants. Of these, the grant of the stewardship of England, made to Lancaster and his heirs in the summer of 1308, was the most important and the most portentous. Unlike his father-in-law, Henry de Lacy, he had no part in the Boulogne declaration of January 1308, which complained about 'the oppressions... committed against the people' (Phillips, 316), nor in the exiling of Gaveston, which followed in the summer. It was only in the winter of 1308-9, as the other earls made their peace with the king in the gratifying absence of Gaveston, that Lancaster began to move in the opposite direction. There was no dramatic break with Edward, nor are the causes of their separation at all clear. But from November 1308 he ceased to witness royal charters, the flow of favours to him dried up, and he moved north to his own estates. 
By the spring of 1309 Lancaster's alienation was beginning to be transformed into a more positive support for reform. In March or April he was present with a very large retinue, and in company with some of the other earls, at a tournament at Dunstable. There, complaints may have been formulated about purveyance, judicial malpractices, and other abuses, which were subsequently petitioned against in the April parliament. Redress was offered in the 'Statute of Stamford', drawn up at the Stamford parliament in July, which was the price paid by Edward for Gaveston's recall in June. Although Lancaster had previously shown the favourite no hostility, he opposed his return, unlike most of the other earls; indeed, one chronicle reports that he became the 'captain' of the dissenters. For reform, and against the king's friend, he had thus begun to identify with both the main lines of opposition to Edward. 
These now began to converge. The opprobrious behaviour of Gaveston after his return (Lancaster's nickname of 'Churl' was one of several which the favourite is said to have coined for the earls about this time), together with the military successes of the Scots and the emergence of purveyance as the overriding grievance against Edward's government, all combined to generate a virtually united demand for reform. Lancaster became its spokesman. In the parliament which opened in February 1310 he presented a petition of grievances to the king, and in March Edward agreed to appoint lords ordainer to reform the realm. The work of the twenty-one men subsequently elected bore fruit with the publication of the ordinances in August 1311 and of a second, supplementary, set, mainly directed at the royal household, in November. For most of the intervening period Edward was campaigning in the north, mainly to keep Gaveston out of harm's way. The ordaining earls, including Lancaster, refused to serve there. But it was the death of Henry de Lacy in February 1311, rather than politics, which most directly affected Lancaster at this time, for it brought him two new earldoms, an overwhelmingly dominant position among the landed aristocracy, and perhaps a reinforcement of his emerging leadership. He and the earl of Warwick, both among the more intransigent reformers, are said to have presented the second ordinances to the king, and one chronicle even spoke of 'the ordinances of the earl of Lancaster'. For the remainder of his life his adherence to these reforms was to remain his chief principle of action. 
The ordinances were in the first place a means to good government. They sought to strengthen the king's finances, to answer the complaints which, on matters such as purveyance, had often arisen from financial weakness, and to prevent future abuses by demanding 'the consent of the baronage in parliament' for a wide range of royal initiatives ('Statutes of the Realm', 1.158-60). In all this they represented both a set of restraints on Edward's kingship and a popular programme, 'a remedy for the poor and oppressed', as the bishops termed them ('Councils and Synods', 2/2.1369); though the programme was one which could not be enforced without the conciliar checks which the ordainers had failed to put in place. But the ordinances were also an indictment of Gaveston, whose activities were seen to epitomize the disregard for law and custom which lay at the heart of Edward's misrule. They therefore called once again for the favourite's exile; yet events were to show that, with Gaveston out of the way, the opposition would disintegrate. The negative principle of common hostility to a favourite that the ordinances embodied counted for more than their positive call for reform. 
In deference to the ordinances Gaveston went abroad in October 1311, but, in their defiance, he was back in England again by Christmas. At York, in January 1312, the king revoked the ordinances and restored the favourite to full power. After Gaveston had been excommunicated by Archbishop Robert Winchelsey, the leading ecclesiastical ordainer, Lancaster took the initiative in the baronial reaction which followed. He demanded from the king Gaveston's surrender and renewed exile, and when these demands were predictably ignored he and other magnates moved north in pursuit of the royal party. In early May Gaveston was captured in Scarborough Castle, after having allowed himself to become separated from Edward. A truce was then made, whose favourable terms for the prisoner probably owed much to some arrangement between the earl of Pembroke, a moderate among the ordainers, and the king. Gaveston was travelling south in Pembroke's charge to meet Edward when he was seized at Deddington in Oxfordshire by the earl of Warwick, Lancaster's close partner. He was led off to Warwick, 'tried' before a court in which Lancaster and Warwick were the chief judges and the exile of Gaveston decreed in the ordinances the main point of law, and then executed, on 19 June 1312, on Lancaster's land near Kenilworth. Lancaster had thus been the initiator of Gaveston's prosecution and a chief party to his quasi-judicial murder -- a role which demonstrated his detestation of Gaveston, his regard for the ordinances, and his willingness to use violence against the one and in defence of the other. 
Gaveston's death permanently alienated Edward from Lancaster and divided the ordainers; for in its wake Pembroke and Earl Warenne, both among the more conciliatory reformers, were drawn back towards the king. Lancaster's position was more fortuitously weakened in May 1313 by the death of his ally, Archbishop Winchelsey, after which clerical backing for the ordinances was largely withdrawn. Yet he retained considerable bargaining power, thanks to his possession of the extremely valuable jewels and horses captured during Gaveston's pursuit in the north. It was in the interests of Lancaster to present the jewels as illicitly taken from the royal treasury by Gaveston, though in fact they are more likely to have been entrusted to him in his official role as royal chamberlain. After a period in July 1312 when civil war was very close, negotiations began in September for the transfer of the king's goods. Lancaster and his followers wanted a pardon, the maintenance of the ordinances, and the condemnation of Gaveston -- which would have amounted to the ordinances' endorsement -- as 'the enemy of the king and the realm' (Stubbs, 211); the king wanted the return of the jewels and military aid against the resurgent Scots. Eventually, in February 1313, the jewels were returned, and the barons pardoned in October, though without Edward's recognition, either explicit or implicit, of the ordinances. Lancaster remained on his estates for most of this time, conducting negotiations through intermediaries, and the final royally inclined compromise reflected his own shortcomings as a leader. Possessing a programme, he lacked not only the means but also the will to enforce it. 
But Edward's feeble victory did nothing to solve his real problems, which lay in Scotland. The Scots' siege of Stirling from the summer of 1313, and the fall of other English-held castles, had committed the king to a northern campaign in 1314. Writs for the summoning of an army were issued in December 1313, but Lancaster and three other earls -- Warwick, Arundel, and Warenne -- refused to serve, arguing that the summons had not been decided on in parliament, as the ordinances decreed. This legalistic point covered both a deeper sense of disgruntlement with Edward's government and also the concealed but continuing tensions resulting from Gaveston's death. Three other ordaining earls -- Pembroke, Gloucester, and Hereford -- all joined Edward's army, highlighting Lancaster's increasingly isolated position as the ordinances' defender. But his isolation at least meant that he was not directly associated with the greatest English military disaster of the middle ages, which occurred when Edward II was defeated by Robert I at Bannockburn in June 1314. 
Edward's humiliation at Bannockburn was interpreted as a divine judgment in favour of the ordinances. The battle forced Edward into immediate dependence on Lancaster, and during the next two years his leading role in government, for the first and last time, gave him the chance to implement all that he stood for. Yet his position perhaps owed as much to his lands, wealth, and following as to the apparently providential vindication of his programme seen in the victory of the Scots. 'By the size of his patrimony', says the 'Vita Edwardi secundi', 'you may assess his power.' His actual patrimony, consisting of the three earldoms of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby, lay largely in Lancashire, in Leicestershire and Warwickshire (centred on Kenilworth Castle), and in Staffordshire and Derbyshire (centred on Tutbury Castle), with an outlying castle and estate at Dunstanburgh, in Northumberland. To these were added, on Henry de Lacy's death, the two earldoms of Lincoln and Salisbury, and extensive new lands in Yorkshire, Lancashire, Lincolnshire, and north Wales. Among the Yorkshire holdings was the castle of Pontefract, which was to become Lancaster's favourite residence. 
The significance of these estates lay partly in their contiguity. Stretching as they did across south Lancashire, south Yorkshire, and the north midlands, they gave Lancaster lordship over a wide swathe of territory which spanned almost the breadth of England. But, of course, it was their profitability that mattered most. Their total value was probably about $11,000 a year, of which about $6500 -- considerably more than half -- came from the Lacy inheritance. An income of this size made Lancaster by some way the richest of the earls and enabled him to build up the retinue on which his power came partly to depend. His following, like his estate, was abnormally large. At its maximum, in the middle years of the reign, it contained about fifty knights; but, since many of these commanded sub-retinues of their own, and since Lancaster could also array troops directly from his lands, the total military force at his command was much greater than this. Attracted by Lancaster's wealth and by the generous fees that he was able to offer, its leading members were spread across the area of his own landed dominance. As he drifted into political isolation, and even without a party behind him, his retinue made him a force to be reckoned with. 
It was Lancaster's misfortune that power became available to him at a time when its constructive use was peculiarly difficult. After Bannockburn the north lay open to Scottish attack, and Edward's financial problems, compounded by the ruinous famine of 1315-17, hindered any attempt at effective defence, or indeed at effective government. These were years of national demoralization. Lancaster's remedy, predictably, was the full enforcement of the ordinances. It was a sign of the turnaround in his political fortunes that these were confirmed by the king both at the York parliament of September 1314, the first after the battle, and at the Westminster parliament of January 1315. Then followed a purge of the royal household, the resumption of royal grants, and a wholesale change of sheriffs: all measures envisaged in the ordinances, closely associated with Lancaster, and largely designed to put the king's finances on a sound footing. If Lancaster's policies here were a means to the more effective prosecution of the Scots, he was also personally involved throughout 1315 in the formulation and execution of policy towards Scotland, taking steps to finance the keeping of the north and to consult the northern clergy and magnates to this end. In August, when Carlisle was under siege, he was appointed as 'superior captain' of the king's northern forces, and in October he was planning a large expedition to the north: a plan thwarted by the famine's depletion of the country's military resources and by a revolt on his own estates, led by his former retainer, Adam Banaster. He thus had a central role in the country's government and defence. Yet it was one qualified by his own separation from the king, both geographically (he retired from Westminster in the spring of 1315) and emotionally (for the death of Gaveston still came sharply between them). Pembroke remained Edward's more trusted confidant, and Lancaster the never quite dominant outsider. 
Formal domination Lancaster did eventually achieve, for at the Lincoln parliament of January 1316 he was appointed as the king's chief councillor. He accepted his new role in the hope that reform might continue, but he reserved his right to withdraw if Edward refused to follow his and the council's advice. His unwillingness to commit himself here was of a piece with his continuing reluctance to reside at Westminster: from April onwards he was once again on his own north midland estates. Yet he remained the champion of the ordinances. A new committee, which included Lancaster, was set up to reform the royal household, the ordinances themselves were republished in the counties in March, and a further resumption of royal grants followed in April. He continued, too, to be consulted about Scottish affairs and he was associated with Edward's plans for a new Scottish campaign in the summer of 1316. But his relationship with the king was heading for disruption. At York in August 1316 they quarrelled violently, particularly over the king's unwillingness to enforce the ordinances, and in November their differences were exacerbated by the triumph of the queen's candidate over Lancaster's in the election to the see of Durham. The almost simultaneous appointment of the earl of Arundel as captain of the northern forces, after the campaign's cancellation in October, marked Lancaster's supersession, in the king's counsels as much as in the north. 
Lancaster was now politically isolated. The earl of Warwick, his partner in the prosecution of Gaveston, had died in August 1315, and the other earls were close to the king. From this point onwards, for nearly two years, he was to remain an external critic of Edward's government, a one-man opposition whose political leverage lay almost solely in his wealth and following. His refusal to attend meetings of the council -- at Clarendon in February 1317, at Westminster in April, and at Nottingham in July -- was symptomatic of an increasingly deep alienation from Edward's regime. It was rooted in personal and constitutional grievances, both deriving primarily from the composition of the court. The years 1316-17 saw the rise of a powerful court party, headed by five barons -- the two Hugh Despensers, father and son, Hugh Audley the younger, Roger Damory, and William Montagu. Three of the five -- the younger Despenser, Audley, and Damory -- had founded their fortunes on marriage to the sisters and coheirs of the earl of Gloucester, killed at Bannockburn. But all had grown rich on royal patronage and stood to lose from the enforcement of the ordinances, whose demand for a resumption of past royal grants and the consent of the baronage in parliament to future ones would have left them dispossessed. It was in their interests as well as his own that Edward, in December 1316, unsuccessfully sought to overthrow the ordinances by seeking papal absolution from his oath to maintain them. 
Lancaster's opposition to these men was partly one of political principles: their nourishment from the king's largess was an affront to the ordinances and a drain on the king's finances, in the desperately difficult economic and military circumstances created by the famine and the Scots. They were, too, at the centre of the small council meetings which Edward was using, in place of parliament and contrary to the ordinances, to determine military policy. But his hostility -- that of an 'out' protesting against the favours enjoyed by the 'ins' -- was also bitterly personal. More personal still was his opposition to Earl Warenne, a figure on the fringes of the court, who had abducted his wife, supposedly with the support of the other courtiers, in April 1317 (see below). But Lancaster's particular objections to the court and to Edward's methods of government, voiced in a letter which he wrote to the king about July 1317, had no means of making their mark; especially since even the more moderate of Edward's friends, including former ordainers such as Pembroke and Hereford, had been retained by the king on generous terms. That was why he now began to take the law into his own hands. In October 1317 he may have supported the attack by a Northumbrian freebooter, Sir Gilbert Middleton, on the new bishop of Durham, Louis Beaumont, and his brother Henry, an unpopular courtier whom the ordainers had sought to eject, as they made their way towards Durham for Louis's consecration. At any rate, several of those in Middleton's gang are found in Lancaster's service shortly afterwards. More certainly, about the same time he used his retinue to seize castles held by Damory and Warenne. But he also called in the Scots, both against the Beaumonts and against Damory, so qualifying his claim to be taking a stand on principle. To ally with the kingdom's enemies in order to purge the court suggested a peculiar sense of priorities. 
Despite these antagonisms, there were good reasons for Edward and his friends to seek a reconciliation with Lancaster. The size of his following, a matter for public comment and criticism in 1317, added another element of instability to an already dangerously unstable political situation; the attacks on the courtiers had shown how the retinue could be used to forward by violence ends unattainable by other means; while the continuing successes of the Scots, who in the spring and summer of 1318 advanced as far as south Yorkshire, made it imperative to secure the military support of Lancaster and his private army. So it was that from November 1317 attempts began to be made to bring Lancaster and Edward together, largely through the mediation of Pembroke, Hereford, the Kentish baron Bartholomew Badlesmere, and, especially, of the bishops. Pembroke and Badlesmere had already promoted Lancaster's arguments by securing the consent of the avaricious Damory to restraints on Edward's patronage. Aired more generally, however, this issue was to prove an almost intractable stumbling-block in the negotiations with Lancaster which followed. The two sides were far apart. Lancaster wanted the full observance of the ordinances, the removal of the king's 'evil counsellors', their trial in parliament for wrongfully receiving the king's grants, and an immediate resumption of those grants. All this was anathema to the courtiers, who stood to lose everything from Lancaster's demands. The negotiations swayed backwards and forwards, but eventually bore fruit in a treaty made at Leake, in Staffordshire, in August 1318. It marked the measure of Lancaster's defeat. A new standing council was to be set up; but on it Lancaster was represented only by a banneret. The ordinances were to be maintained; but the guarantors for their maintenance included some of the leading courtiers. About the resumption of royal grants and the removal of evil councillors nothing whatever was said. 
Following the treaty of Leake, at the York parliament of October and November, a limited resumption and a limited reform of the royal household were both put in hand. But there was otherwise little movement in Lancaster's direction. Why had he conceded so much? The answer almost certainly lies in the private inducements offered to him by the king and the court to modify his demands. In November some of the leading courtiers acknowledged large debts to him, and these payments are likely to have been the price of peace. More remarkably, in the same month he came to terms with his wife's abductor, Earl Warenne, in a coercive settlement which gave him all Warenne's lands in Yorkshire and north Wales, and which was almost certainly connived at by Edward and his friends. The position of the chief courtiers had been preserved, their chief opponent satisfied, and Warenne abandoned, along with Lancaster's principles. 
In conciliating Lancaster, Edward's mediators had sought to make possible the united campaign against the Scots which was eventually launched in 1319. It was planned at the York parliament of May 1319, where Lancaster was present in a newly co-operative mood. As steward of England, he there petitioned for the right to appoint the steward of the royal household, which would have given him the power to regulate household expenditure: a prime reforming objective. To judge by the tract on the steward's office, probably drawn up under his auspices in 1321, he intended to go further and to ground on the stewardship a wider claim to a general supervisory role in government. That these claims went unrecognized, however, did not prevent his participation in the new campaign, with a very large force, though it was a mark of his continuing wish for independence that his men apparently took no pay from the king, leaving their leader free from the contractual disciplines and obligations that pay would have implied. 
Despite Lancaster's service the campaign of 1319 was a disaster. In September the English army laid siege to Berwick, but its leaders immediately fell to quarrelling. Edward's foolish promise of patronage to the younger Despenser and to Damory, once the town had been taken, alienated Lancaster, who withdrew his troops when it became known that the Scots had slipped past the besiegers and were devastating Yorkshire. Lancaster himself was rumoured, almost certainly unjustly on this occasion, to be in collusion with the Scots, with whom a truce had to be made in December, after the renewal of border raids. All the old divisions were reopened. Lancaster refused to attend a parliament at York in January 1320, and the growing strength of the courtiers, who were once again receiving generous grants from Edward, seemed to herald a return to the politics of 1316-18. In the spring of 1320 the success of a mission to the papal curia in obtaining Edward's absolution from his oath to the ordinances gave the king a degree of political emancipation which he had not known since 1311, though Pembroke's continuing influence at court seems to have nullified the effects of Edward's new-found freedom. Lancaster meanwhile remained in the north, at Pontefract, once again in isolation. 
What drew Lancaster back to the political stage was the radical realignment of forces brought about by the rise of the Despensers to supremacy at court and the consequent breakup of the old court party. During 1319 the two Despensers had come to dominate the court, controlling access to the king, monopolizing his ear, and directing the royal household. Their hold over Edward gave full play to their territorial ambitions, notably in south Wales, where the younger Despenser's share of the Clare inheritance was greatly enlarged in the last months of 1320 by the illicit take-over of Gower and other lands. This challenged the interests of the remaining marcher lords, among whom were some of the other leading members of the court, including Hereford (who also had a claim to Gower), Damory, and Audley. Hereford took the lead in resisting, and in February 1321 appealed to the one magnate with both the power and the motive to counter the Despensers: Thomas of Lancaster. Their alliance was probably sealed in a meeting between them at Pontefract. In April disturbances broke out in the marches; and in May, after Hereford's request to the king for the removal of the younger Despenser from court and his temporary surrender to Lancaster had been refused, the barons began the systematic devastation of the lands of the Despensers and their allies. 
Although Lancaster was clearly regarded as the barons' leader, he took no part in the ravaging of the Despensers' lands. He may have found some difficulty in weighing in on the side of men such as Damory who had formerly been his enemies, while he was also violently at odds with another renegade courtier, Bartholomew Badlesmere, perhaps because Badlesmere's appointment as steward of the household in 1318 usurped a position which Lancaster regarded as within his gift. His role at this stage, therefore, was a passive one, and confined to the organization of a coalition against the court. To this end he convened two meetings in the north in May and June 1321. At the first, held at Pontefract, he tried to secure the active backing of fifteen northern lords against the Despensers, but they were unwilling to do more than join with Lancaster in a league for their mutual defence. At the second, held at Sherburn in Elmet, a larger gathering assembled, in response to the request of the northerners and again under Lancaster's auspices. It included the northerners themselves, the marchers, and a substantial body of Lancastrian retainers, which outnumbered either of the other two parties. But in its main purpose the assembly was a failure. The northerners again refused to join up, and it was mainly Lancaster's own men who set their seals to an indenture of mutual alliance against the Despensers. Two other pieces of business came before the meeting. First, it was presented with a general bill of grievances, which, invoking the ordinances, enumerated both the complaints of the marchers and other more general instances of Edward's misgovernment. Second, an indictment was drafted against the Despensers, to be put before the parliament that had been summoned for July. 
These northern meetings represented an attempt by Lancaster to extend the quarrel of the marchers and to build a great coalition against the Despensers. But the northerners were too circumspect to commit themselves to a cause that was not their own, perhaps particularly since Lancaster's own commitment was more a matter of theory than practice. After the meeting he remained at Pontefract, while his marcher allies moved south, continuing to devastate the Despenser lands before they finally entered London at the start of August. With civil war near, and Pembroke pressing Edward to yield, the king rapidly conceded the Despensers' exile. But this was the most temporary of victories, for by Michaelmas the younger Despenser had once more rejoined the court. 
Edward was now well placed to take the offensive. The first move in his campaign came in October, when he laid siege to Badlesmere's castle at Leeds in Kent, on the pretext that the queen had been refused entry there. The marchers, in co-operation with Badlesmere, wished to raise the siege, but Lancaster forbade them to do so and, it seems, refused to receive the unfortunate Badlesmere when the marchers subsequently retreated to Pontefract. This willingness to elevate a private quarrel over a public cause was not the only mark of his deficiencies as a leader. They were shown, too, by the desertions from his retinue which began to multiply about this time, as men became conscious of the risks involved in what seemed likely to be an armed confrontation with the crown. Lancaster's awareness of his weakness here, and of the need to draw in more support, was indicated by a further northern meeting which he convened at Doncaster in November. To it he summoned not only the marchers and the northerners but also a large number of other men whose unimpeachable royalist record suggested how desperately wide he was now having to cast his net. The meeting produced a further petition against the Despensers, later sent to the king, and an appeal by Lancaster himself for the backing of the city of London. Shortly afterwards he sought help again from the Scots, this time going beyond the working partnership of 1317, to enter into a formal alliance with Robert I. 
By this stage Edward was moving with an army towards the marches. He was foiled for a time in his attempts to cross the Severn and had to tolerate further attacks by his opponents on Despenser manors. But in late January he was able to reach the west bank of the Severn at Shrewsbury and to secure the surrender of a large party of marchers, to whom Lancaster had offered no active help. Others of the marchers under Hereford then withdrew to Lancaster at Pontefract. Lancaster meanwhile had laid siege to the royal castle at Tickhill, in Yorkshire, whose constable had been acting as Edward's spy. The siege brought a crucial change in Edward's strategy, for he promptly turned away from the marches and towards the north. Lancaster's forces were now falling apart, and there was a general reluctance to rally to a failing cause. On 10 March, weakened further by the treacherous desertion of Robert Holland, his chief henchman and recruiting officer, he was unable to prevent the royalists crossing the Trent at Burton. Retreating northwards, probably towards his castle at Dunstanburgh, Lancaster and his small army were intercepted on the River Aire at Boroughbridge on 16 March. In the battle which followed Lancaster was captured, and on 22 March 1322, after what amounted to a show trial, he was executed at Pontefract. 
Like Simon de Montfort, whose lands he inherited and whose career superficially resembles his own, Thomas of Lancaster came to be regarded as a saint. Within six weeks of his death miracles were reported from his tomb at Pontefract and an armed guard was sent by the king to close the church where his body lay. In 1323 there were riots as crowds of people tried to gain access to the place of his execution to pray and make offerings. In 1327, after Edward II's deposition, the Commons asked the new king to press for his canonization; and, even after the political circumstances which had given rise to the cult had passed into history, popular veneration for Lancaster persisted. On the eve of the Reformation his hat and belt were still preserved at Pontefract as respective remedies for headaches and the dangers of childbirth. 
A large part of this contemporary reputation derived from Edward II's vices rather than Lancaster's virtues. As Edward's rule degenerated, first into misgovernment by the Despensers before 1322, and then into something approaching tyranny, any leader dying in opposition to the regime might have expected popular acclaim. Yet there was more than this to Lancaster's fame. From 1311 onwards he had consistently identified himself with the ordinances, though not above all else: he gave priority to private profit at the treaty of Leake in 1318 and to personal antagonism towards the Despensers in his last years. In placing the ordinances at the centre of his political life, with whatever qualifications, he came to stand, not just for constitutional restraints on the crown and its patronage, but for the redress of popular grievances and the reform of widespread abuses. On matters such as purveyance and the malpractices of royal justice, the ordinances had offered relief, not primarily to barons, but to the politically unimportant. Much of the vigour of his cult lay here. 
In many ways, however, Lancaster was an unconvincing and unaccomplished idealist. A harsh landlord, much petitioned against for his breaches of law and equity, and quick to resort to violence, he was not a man to inspire either affection or loyalty. His childless wife left him in 1317, the northerners failed to respond to his call in 1321, and even his retinue mostly broke and ran in the months before Boroughbridge. Although he partnered Archbishop Winchelsey in captaining the ordainers, in general he lacked the backing of the bishops and schoolmen which had given justice and reflected glory to Simon de Montfort's cause. This was as much a failure of political leadership as of personality. For most of his career he remained an outsider in politics, apparently by his own choice, preferring residence in his northern castles to the king's company at Westminster. In so doing he maintained his integrity at the expense of his influence, relying for his political weight more on his estates and manpower than to any engagement with government. When he turned to the Scots for help in 1317 and 1322, or disdained to receive Bartholomew Badlesmere in his final months, he showed that he lacked political judgement. Man of principle though he was, it was not only the intensely difficult circumstances of his career which set limits to his political effectiveness, but also, and perhaps primarily, his own inadequacies. 
The abduction of Lancaster's wife, 
Alice's brief fling with Warenne (if such it was) led to no lasting liaison, and by November 1324, after her release from prison, she had taken as her second husband Ebulo Lestrange of Knockin, in Shropshire, a minor baron of the Welsh marches. He had formerly sided with Lancaster in the pursuit of Gaveston, though there appears to have been no regular connection. The marriage was a sign that she had salvaged enough from the wreck of her first husband's career -- including the custody of Lincoln Castle and $20 from the earl's third penny in the county -- to make her an attractive match. His wife's property served to shift Lestrange's main interest to Lincolnshire, though he spent a large part of his later career campaigning in Scotland, where he died in September 1335. Alice was one of his executors. 
Alice did not remain husbandless for long. At the end of 1335 or the beginning of 1336 she was abducted from her ancestral castle of Bolingbroke in Lincolnshire, probably with her own connivance and despite having taken a vow of chastity in her widowhood, by Sir Hugh de Freyne, a Herefordshire knight, royal keeper of the castle and town of Cardigan, and steward of Cardiganshire since 1330. After facing down Edward III's brief anger (and orders for their imprisonment), the couple made their peace with the king and were married early in 1336. His new wife's title and lands brought Freyne a personal summons to parliament for the first and last time in November 1336. He died shortly afterwards, in December 1336 or January 1337, at Perth. Alice did not marry again and died childless in October 1348, aged sixty-six. She was buried at the side of her second husband at the Premonstratensian house of Barlings, in Lincolnshire. Her many manors and lordships, most of which she had gathered together again after the debacle of Boroughbridge, fell to the house of Lancaster, under the terms of the original marriage settlement made with her first husband some fifty-four years earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 27196


Thomas, first earl of Norfolk (1300-1338), magnate, was the fifth son of Edward I (1239-1307) and the first from Edward's second marriage, to Margaret (1279?-1318), daughter of Philippe III, king of France (died 1285); he was thus the elder of the two half-brothers of Edward II (d. 1327). 
Thomas was born, unexpectedly, at Brotherton, Yorkshire, on 1 June 1300, as his mother was travelling to Cawood, where her confinement was to occur. The chronicler Rishanger reports that the delivery was initially difficult, but that in her suffering Margaret called on St Thomas of Canterbury for aid, as was customary for pregnant women, and gave birth without difficulty. Hence the child was named Thomas of Brotherton in honour of Thomas Becket, and for his own place of birth. Rishanger goes on to demonstrate Thomas's patriotism, saying that when he was first nursed by a French woman he screamed and vomited up her milk, so that people feared for his life. When he was given an English wet-nurse, however, he immediately recovered and drew refreshment from her. But, despite Rishanger's optimism, Thomas grew to become a man of modest achievement, in his capacity as first a younger brother and then an uncle of the king. 
In 1306 Edward I promised, on behalf of himself and his eldest son, Edward, to provide Thomas with an inheritance worth 10,000 marks a year, as had been stipulated in the contract drawn up by Pope Boniface VIII when Edward married Margaret. He also promised Thomas the lands of Roger (IV) Bigod, earl of Norfolk, valued at 6000 marks, if the earl died without a direct heir, since his estate would then pass to the crown under the terms of a settlement made in 1302. Bigod did indeed die later in 1306, and his lands came into royal custody. Thomas's elder half-brother, Edward II, held the estate until 1310, when he gave Thomas and his younger brother, Edmund of Woodstock, joint custody for their support and maintenance. It was said that Edward I had hoped to bestow the earldom of Cornwall on either Thomas or Edmund, but Edward II's elevation of Piers Gaveston thwarted that intention. Instead, Thomas was created earl of Norfolk in December 1312, obtained the Bigod estate as his father had promised, and received the office of marshal. 
Edward II summoned Thomas to parliament for the first time in January 1313, though as he was only twelve years old his role in government and politics was largely honorific at this stage. Edward similarly summoned him to serve in Scotland in 1313, but remitted the service shortly afterward. Nevertheless, Thomas was called on to perform military service in Scotland and elsewhere continuously thereafter. He served with his brother Edmund as executor of their mother's will after her death on 14 February 1318. Later that year Thomas and Edmund were among the royalists witnessing the treaty of Leake. The same year the young Edward Balliol, who was later to claim the Scottish throne, was assigned to the household of Thomas and Edmund. The following year Edward II named Thomas keeper of the realm when he departed for war in Scotland. As keeper Thomas summoned the mayor of London to appear before himself, the bishop of Winchester, and the earl of Pembroke on 24 March, to hear complaints about his conduct of elections in London. Thomas ordered the disputants to resolve their conflict or appear before him at Westminster the following day; after withdrawing to talk the matter over the mayor and citizens reached an agreement. On 15 July 1319 Edward II knighted Thomas, along with many others, when they mustered at Newcastle in preparation for a campaign in Scotland. When Edward travelled to France to perform homage, from 19 June to 22 July 1320, Thomas accompanied him with a large retinue. At some point during these years Thomas married his first wife, Alice, the daughter of Roger Hales, the coroner of Norfolk. The match was a remarkably obscure one for a member of the royal family, but all the signs are that Thomas was a less than dynamic personality, who is seldom if ever recorded as acting on his own initiative. 
Thomas actively supported his half-brother during the baronial rebellion of 1321-2. In March 1321 he tried to arrange negotiations with the earl of Hereford, who had broken with the king and assembled troops to plunder the lands of the Despensers, but the attempt failed. In April Thomas sat in place of the king in judgment on the younger Hugh Audley, accused of having broken his contract of 1317 to stay in attendance on the king. In October Edward dispatched Thomas with the earls of Pembroke and Richmond to Leeds Castle, Kent, after Sir Bartholomew Badlesmere's men refused entry to the queen, thereby precipitating civil war. Thomas and his brother Edmund later joined the royal army in 1322 as it moved toward the Welsh marches to confront the baronial rebels. 
After the rebellion Thomas apparently fell out of favour temporarily. In August 1323 he surrendered the lordship of Chepstow in Wales, which formed part of the Bigod inheritance, to the king's favourite, Hugh Despenser the younger, for life for the modest rent of $200 a year. In the following year he released Despenser from the rent, as well as from any actions arising out of waste, sales, or destruction committed by Despenser, for only $800. Then Edward II temporarily confiscated the office of marshal because of Thomas's failure to have someone execute the office on his behalf in Lancashire, when royal justices arrived there to hold the king's pleas. Thomas offered a fine of $100 to recover the office, which Edward pardoned, taking the opportunity, however, to administer a verbal rebuke to his half-brother, saying that if Thomas failed to perform his duties properly, he would be punished. 
Edward's attitude towards Thomas changed in 1326. As fears of an invasion from France by Queen Isabella heightened, Edward had to rely on a close coterie of supporters. In January he gave Thomas a gift of $200 out of the issues of the bishopric of Norwich, then in royal custody. He also appointed Thomas one of the supervisors of the array in Norfolk and Suffolk, and in May amplified his authority by naming him captain and principal surveyor of the array in a broad swath of eastern counties from Lincolnshire to Essex. Edward also granted Thomas a number of favours, such as the lands of contrariants, wardships, and markets. 
Despite these incentives, Thomas deserted Edward. He may have been in communication with Isabella, Roger Mortimer, and his own brother Edmund while they were overseas, for their invasion force landed at Thomas's property of Orwell on 24 September 1326. Thomas met them there, along with Henry, earl of Lancaster, and they spent the night at Thomas's castle. At his command, his men plundered manors belonging to the younger Despenser. Thomas accompanied the queen and her army in their pursuit of Edward II and the Despensers across England, and was present at the baronial council in Bristol that on 26 October declared Prince Edward keeper of the realm. The following day Thomas and Edmund were among the nobles who sat in judgment on the elder Despenser, and they both acted as judges in the trial of the younger Despenser in November. In the summons to the first parliament of the new regime Thomas and Edmund headed the list of nobles, and both sat on the council headed by Henry of Lancaster to watch over the young king. 
At first fully supportive of Isabella and Mortimer, Thomas sat on a number of commissions of oyer and terminer, and served as an overseer of the justices of the peace in Norfolk and Suffolk during 1327. He was summoned to serve against the Scots, and participated in the ill-fated Stanhope campaign, which ended in humiliation for Edward III. His own contribution to the campaign may not have amounted to much more than the composition of a brief description of the privileges he claimed in his capacity of earl marshal. In return for his support for the regime he recovered Chepstow, received lands forfeited by the Despensers worth 1000 marks, and obtained an important wardship, as well as other favours. The high point of his involvement came in 1328, when his son Edward married Beatrice, daughter of Roger Mortimer. Edward III and his mother attended the celebrations at Hereford, which included a tournament. 
Soon after the wedding, however, Thomas participated in Henry of Lancaster's brief rebellion against the government. Although Thomas and Henry had apparently fallen out over the murder of Sir Robert Holland by Lancaster's followers in October, Thomas met with a group of dissident magnates in London at the beginning of December, and was reconciled with Lancaster when the latter arrived. The nobles and prelates, including Thomas and Edmund, entered into a sworn confederation for the stated benefit of reforming the king and realm, but Thomas and Edmund deserted the rebels and returned to the king's side, whereupon the rebellion collapsed. Nevertheless, Thomas found himself out of favour at court, and witnessed only a few charters in these years. 
By 1330, however, Thomas was again being employed by the crown. On Saturday 17 February 1330, he and Edmund accompanied Edward III's wife, Philippa, on her coronation march from London to Westminster, holding her bridle on either side of her palfrey and dressed merely as grooms. That summer Thomas travelled to Gascony on royal business, and he was a member of a delegation sent to negotiate with Philippe VI of France the following year. In June 1331 he participated in a tournament in Stepney in the King's Company. Edward placed him on several judicial commissions, and in 1332 appointed Thomas one of the keepers of the peace in Norfolk and Suffolk. Responding to unrest in Ireland, Edward in 1331-2 ordered Thomas to restore order on his own lands (pre-eminently the lordship of Carlow) or risk having them seized should a royal army be brought to Ireland, and he summoned Thomas to serve there, though the expedition never materialized. Thomas participated in the Scottish campaign which culminated in the battle of Halidon Hill on 19 July 1333, where he commanded a contingent of royal forces. In the next few years Edward showed his confidence in his uncle by calling on Thomas to serve in Scotland, to consult about the defence of the realm, and to protect Wales from invasion by the Scots. Edward also appointed him a captain of the array in England and Wales, and named him keeper of Perth (1337). 
During the 1330s, Thomas also entered into several land transactions that did not work to his advantage. In 1332 he surrendered to the king most of the Despenser manors which he had received in 1327, in part fulfilment of Edward I's promise of lands worth 10,000 marks. Edward III then regranted them to Thomas for life, on condition that on Thomas's death they would pass to William de Bohun, a royal favourite. Bohun at some point gained possession of the lands in return for a rent of $800, but in 1336, in a deal strikingly similar to the one he made with the younger Despenser over Chepstow, Thomas remitted payment of the rent. In 1333 Thomas granted to William Montagu, another royal favourite, all of his lands in Ireland and some of his English property for a period of fifteen years. This grant was made as part of a proposed marriage between Thomas's daughter Alice and William's son William, and the lands were to revert to William and Alice on the elder William's death. Alice, however, married Edward Montagu, William senior's brother. These actions do not speak well either of Thomas's financial acuity, or of his ability to protect his own interests generally, and he seems to have been taken advantage of by both his half-brother and his nephew, as they sought to provide estates for their favourites. Nor was he able to control his own household, so that in 1337 Edward found it necessary to appoint Constantine Mortimer to restore it to order, having first caused Thomas to appear before himself to hear complaints about the unruliness and destructiveness of his followers. In this, as in other matters, Thomas completely submitted himself to Edward's rule. At about the same time Thomas once again lost the office of marshal, though he recovered it before he died. 
Thomas's only son, Edward, died in 1337. He himself died the following year, probably in September, and was buried at Bury St Edmunds. His first wife had died by 1330, and Thomas married as his second wife, not much more impressively, Mary, widow of Sir Ralph Cobham and daughter of Sir Piers Brewes, who outlived him and died 'c'.1361. His eldest daughter, Margaret Brotherton, married John, Lord Seagrave, and inherited the earldom of Norfolk. Thomas's estates were divided between Margaret and Alice. Margaret, in particular, was to show a strength of character sadly lacking in her father. 


@@@@@


doc= 27197


Thomas, duke of Gloucester (1355-1397), prince, was the seventh (but fifth surviving) son of Edward III (1312-1377) and Philippa of Hainault (1310x15?-1369). He was born at Woodstock on 7 January 1355, and on 22 February Edward III celebrated his son's birth with a great feast and a tournament there. At about the same time he was baptized. Thomas Hatfield, bishop of Durham, was one of his godfathers, and raised him from the font: perhaps he was named Thomas in his godfather's honour. Another godfather was Thomas de la Mare, the abbot of St Albans. Thomas was by some way the youngest of Edward's sons: he was almost twenty-five years younger than Edward, the Black Prince, and more than twelve years younger than Edward's fifth son, Edmund of Langley. In a sense therefore he belonged to a different generation from his elder brothers, who took a leading part in politics and war during their father's reign. He was closer in age to his nephew Richard II than to Richard's father, the Black Prince, and his political and military career was to be played out mainly in Richard's reign. 
During his infancy Thomas remained with his mother, who was given an allowance for his maintenance by the king in 1358, though in the first year of his life he had a nurse -- possibly a wet-nurse -- called Alesia Vang, wife of Marmaduke Vang of Somerset. By 1366 he had his own household, but otherwise little is known of his life until the 1370s. As the king's youngest son he would of course depend on royal patronage for a suitable marriage, and for sufficient income to maintain his estate as he came to manhood. On 3 April 1374 he was granted a group of manors which formed part of the inheritance of Humphrey (IX) de Bohun, earl of Hereford and Essex, who had died in the previous year. The grant stated that he 'will take to wife' Eleanor, the elder of Humphrey's two daughters and coheirs, who was born 'c'.1365. Their marriage probably took place in the early summer of 1374: on 1 June John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, issued instructions for the delivery of a goblet and a silver ewer to 'the lady of Woodstock on the day of her marriage' ('John of Gaunt's Register', 2, no. 1431). On 10 June 1376 Thomas was appointed constable of England, an office that had been hereditary in the Bohun family, and on 24 August the king came to Pleshey, the centre of the Bohun lands in Essex, and granted his son an annuity of 1000 marks ($666 13's'. 4died) to maintain his estate as constable. The income was to be derived from several Bohun manors, including Pleshey and High Easter, which were placed in Thomas's custody until his wife came of age and could receive livery of her inheritance. Pleshey was to become Thomas's principal residence. The revenue from these manors, however, amounted to no more than $243, and the remaining $423 13's'. 4died was assigned on the exchequer until the following year, when the custody of the Bohun lordships of Brecon, Hay, Huntington, Caldicot, and Newton in the Welsh marches was granted to him during the minority of the heiresses. 
Edward III had evidently decided that the Essex lands of the Bohun family should pass to Thomas, but Eleanor's younger sister, Mary, was entitled to half the inheritance, and was thus an attractive marriage prospect. At Edward's death in 1377, however, Mary was still unmarried, and in May 1380, when the inheritance was formally partitioned and Thomas and Eleanor given livery of her share, Thomas was also granted custody of Mary's purparty. Froissart suggests that Thomas was responsible for bringing Mary up, and that he hoped to persuade her to become a member of the order of Poor Clares so that the whole Bohun inheritance would devolve upon him and Eleanor, but, while Thomas was on campaign in France in 1380, his elder brother John of Gaunt in effect abducted Mary from Pleshey, and married her to his son Henry, earl of Derby (the future Henry IV). Henry's marriage to Mary undoubtedly took place in 1380, though how much more of Froissart's story is true cannot be determined with any certainty. Mary and Henry were given livery of her share of the inheritance on 22 December 1384, and Thomas thus had to relinquish control of the estates assigned to her, including Brecon and Hay. Mary's marriage had serious long-term consequences for Thomas. It left him 'dependent on Crown grants rather than on inherited resources' for the rest of his life (Goodman, 'Loyal Conspiracy', 90), and may also have provoked a breach with Gaunt which was never fully healed. Furthermore relations between Thomas and Henry of Derby never seem to have been especially close. They disputed the partition of the Bohun inheritance throughout Richard II's reign until Thomas's death, and they were at odds over the issue of Richard's possible deposition at the end of December 1387. 
Thomas played no part in the military expeditions to France in the last years of his father's reign, and apparently he did not identify with either side in the political crisis of 1376. Thomas's lack of military and political experience in his late teenage years is surprising. His elder brother Edmund of Langley had been with his father on the Rheims campaign in 1359-60 when he was only eighteen, and was created earl of Cambridge when he was twenty-one; but there is no evidence that Edward III had an earldom in mind for Thomas in 1376, when he reached the same age. In the political climate of that year, the grant of an earldom to the king's youngest son, with its accompanying endowment in lands or annuities, might have been difficult, but his father's failure to honour him may have contributed to his belief, which was to strengthen in Richard II's reign, that he received less than his due as Edward III's son. 
However, his father knighted him at his last Garter ceremony on 23 April 1377 (though he did not receive the order itself until 1380) and, by virtue of his marriage to the heiress of the hereditary constable of England, Thomas successfully claimed the right to carry the sceptre and the dove at the coronation of Richard II on 16 July 1377. On the eve of the coronation he was created earl of Buckingham, with an income of $1000 a year to maintain his estate. This income, however, was not derived from land, but from the revenues of alien priories, which were in the king's hands during the war with France. Thomas thus had a vested interest in the continuation of the war. 
War was to be Thomas's principal preoccupation over the next three years. Like his elder brothers he was excluded from the continual councils which had responsibility for administration during Richard II's minority, though he may have had some informal influence over government. During the summer of 1377 a Franco-Castilian fleet was active in the English Channel, and, according to Froissart, Thomas and his brother Edmund prevented the fleet from landing a force at Dover. In November he put to sea with a force of about 3600 sailors and 4000 men-at-arms and archers, but his attempt to engage the Castilian fleet at Sluys ended when his own ships were dispersed by a storm. He had better luck in December, when he pursued the Castilians down the channel and captured eight of their ships off Brest. In April 1378 the duke of Brittany leased Brest to the English, and Thomas was one of the commanders appointed to receive it from the duke. 
Thomas's next expedition, the most substantial of his career, was also to Brittany, being intended to bolster the position of the pro-English duke. On 3 May 1380 he engaged to serve for one year with a force of over 5000 men, almost half of whom were members of his own retinue. His army moved overland from Calais and reached Brittany in late September, where he laid siege to Nantes. The duke, however, made peace with Charles VI of France, and Thomas had to lift the siege. After overwintering in Brittany, he returned to England, reaching Falmouth on 3 May 1381. Although the expedition achieved little, no blame could be laid at Thomas's door: as in 1375, the military commanders in the field in Brittany had to abandon their expedition in the face of a political agreement to which they were not party. He had some difficulty in obtaining payment of all the sums due to him from the exchequer for the expedition: even in 1388 the crown was still in debt to him. After his return to England, Froissart suggests that Thomas spent some time on his wife's estates in Wales, though it is also possible that he was at Pleshey during the peasants' revolt, preparing to take military action against the rebels in Essex. On 28 June he took a force to Billericay to disperse the rebels there, and he was subsequently appointed a justice of the peace in Essex and Cambridgeshire to deal judicially with the rebels in those counties. In mid-July he was in Gloucester, suppressing local disturbances there. 
Thomas's frustrating military career continued after the revolt. When the truce with Scotland expired in February 1384, Thomas and Gaunt were appointed joint leaders of an expedition to Scotland. The two lords crossed the border at Easter, and did some damage in south-east Scotland, but the expedition ran short of food and returned to England. Walsingham criticized the expedition as one of the most expensive and wasteful for many years. In 1385 Thomas brought a retinue of 400 men-at-arms and 800 archers to the king's campaign in Scotland. The expedition never engaged the enemy in battle, but on 6 August, 'at the king's first entry into Scotland', Richard created Thomas duke of Gloucester, with an annuity of $1000 in addition to his annuity as earl of Buckingham. His title and his annuity were formally confirmed in parliament in November. Apart from $60 from the fee farm of Gloucester, the whole of this new annuity was assigned on the customs of London, Boston, Hull, Lynn, Ipswich, and Yarmouth, but Thomas soon complained that he was unable to receive the full amount from these sources. Although he was now a duke, he still lacked a substantial territorial endowment: he relied for the greater part of his income, estimated at about $2500 a year, on assignments on the customs and the alien priories. His landed estate still amounted to little more than Eleanor's share of the Bohun inheritance, attenuated by her mother's dower. 
The impression of a nation united in arms, and led by its king on the verge of adulthood, which the expedition of 1385 to Scotland provided, only served to disguise for a time the growing tension between the king and some of the nobility, including Thomas. Although Thomas had some grounds for feeling that he had not received the rewards he was entitled to, his brother Edmund, now duke of York, was similarly ill-endowed, and had not been able to make as good a marriage. Edmund's character was, however, in Froissart's words, 'soft and peaceable', but neither term could be applied to Thomas, who seems to have been a much more forceful person, discontented, overbearing, and ambitious, and able to inspire fear as well as respect. To some extent, therefore, Thomas's personality explains his political stance after 1385, but none the less his grievances had substance, and his hostility to those round the king was apparently widely shared, not just by some of his fellow nobles, but also, it seems, by many of the gentry class who were represented among the Commons in parliament. 
Some hint of the growing tension between the king and Thomas came at the Salisbury parliament in April 1384, when a Carmelite friar accused Gaunt of treason. There was no truth in the accusation, but, according to Walsingham, Thomas rushed into the king's chamber and threatened to attack or kill anyone -- even the king -- who suggested that Gaunt was a traitor. The Carmelite friar may have had some connection with Robert de Vere, earl of Oxford, one of the king's leading favourites, who was becoming increasingly unpopular with some of the nobility. De Vere's favour with the king brought him substantial rewards in the form of landed property, and this must have been especially galling to Thomas, whose income still depended heavily on exchequer annuities which he could not always obtain. Furthermore, the centre of the de Vere inheritance in East Anglia was Hedingham Castle, less than 20 miles from Pleshey, and de Vere's rapid rise in the king's favour must have seemed a threat to Thomas's position in Essex. 
Thomas's hostility to the king had its roots not just in his concern for his wealth and territorial position, but also in his belief, shared by other nobles such as the earl of Arundel, that the king's wish to negotiate a peace settlement with France was misguided. John of Gaunt, however, was more sympathetic to Richard's foreign policy, and, as long as Gaunt remained in England, Thomas was perhaps unwilling to engage in open opposition to the king. In July 1386, however, Gaunt left for Castile, and Thomas now seems to have assumed the leadership of those who were opposed to the king, and who sought the removal of de Vere and other favourites from the court. When parliament met in October 1386, the Commons were faced with a demand from the chancellor, Michael de la Pole, for an unprecedentedly large grant of tax to pay for the defence of the realm against the French invasion that had been threatening since the summer. The Commons refused to consider a grant of tax until the chancellor was dismissed, but Richard declined to meet parliament and retreated to his palace at Eltham, Kent. Thomas and some of his associates may initially have been planning an attack on de Vere, but they now associated themselves with the Commons' initiative against de la Pole. At the express wish of both Commons and Lords, Thomas and the bishop of Ely, Thomas Arundel, confronted the king at Eltham. According to Henry Knighton they reminded Richard of his duty to attend parliament; they went on to complain about the damage done to the realm by the evil counsellors around the king, and they concluded by pointing out to Richard that a king who allowed himself to be alienated from his people by evil counsellors, and was unwilling to be guided by law and by the wise advice of the Lords, risked deposition. The implicit threat was enough to bring Richard round ['see 'Lords appellant]. He agreed to meet parliament and to dismiss de la Pole, who was subsequently impeached by the Commons, with Thomas acting as one of the judges appointed from among the Lords. Parliament then established a commission of government, of which Thomas was a member, to oversee the government for one year from 19 November. 
Thomas's hand can perhaps be seen in the decision of the commission in December 1386 to reject overtures for peace with France, and begin preparations for the renewal of the war. The king, however, had been deeply offended by the establishment of the commission, and in the summer of 1387 he consulted his judges about his rights. They told him that those who had imposed the commission on him against his will should be punished as traitors. This opinion served to raise the political stakes substantially, and in the autumn of 1387 Thomas, together with the earls of Arundel and Warwick, prepared a pre-emptive strike against the king. On 14 November they marched to Waltham Cross, Hertfordshire, where in the presence of a group of mediators they formally submitted an appeal (or accusation) of treason against de la Pole, de Vere, and three other associates of the king, Alexander Neville, archbishop of York, Sir Nicholas Brembre, the mayor of London, and Sir Robert Tresilian, chief justice of the king's bench. The mediators agreed to arrange a meeting with the king, and on 17 November the three lords came into the king's presence at Westminster Hall, where they repeated their intention to proceed against de la Pole, de Vere, and the others by way of an appeal. Richard agreed that the appeal should be heard in the parliament which would assemble in February 1388. 
De Vere's response to these events, however, was to raise an army in Cheshire and confront the three lords in the field. Thomas, perhaps supported by Arundel, seems to have suggested deposing Richard immediately, but was restrained by Warwick, who argued that their first concern must be to defeat de Vere. Accordingly they left London to march northwards, and were joined at Huntingdon on 12 December by the earls of Derby and Nottingham. The five lords, known as the lords appellant, routed de Vere's army at Radcot Bridge on 20 December. De Vere escaped, but the appellants marched victorious to London, and with 500 armed men at their backs they confronted Richard in the Tower on 30 December. According to the chronicle of Whalley Abbey, they deposed Richard for three days, but then reinstated him because they could not agree on a successor. This account is given some support from Thomas's confession in 1397 in which he says that the lords agreed to Richard's deposition for two or three days, but then restored him to the throne. The story may well be true: it was widely believed at the time that Thomas had designs on the crown, and he even went to the lengths of denying any such intention at the opening of parliament in February. According to the Whalley chronicler, Derby opposed Thomas's claim, as he had every reason to do. He and his father, John of Gaunt, had a better title to the throne as Richard's nearest male heirs, and it is difficult to see how Thomas could have held on to the crown in face of the superior right of the house of Lancaster. 
At the opening of the so-called Merciless Parliament, on 3 February 1388, Thomas and his co-appellants formally presented their appeal of treason against de la Pole, de Vere, and the three other accused. The essence of the charges against them was that they had accroached royal power and had used their influence over the king to persuade him to accept their unwise counsel. All were convicted and all but Neville, who was sentenced to loss of his temporalities, were condemned to death, though de la Pole, Neville, and de Vere had already escaped overseas. Thomas and his colleagues then turned their attention to a group of officials and chamber knights who had enjoyed the king's favour, notably the king's former tutor, Sir Simon Burley. These men were impeached, and most were condemned to death. The death sentence on Burley, however, divided the appellants and aroused opposition elsewhere. Thomas, together with Arundel and Warwick, was determined to have Burley executed, but Derby and Nottingham were inclined to spare him, and so was the duke of York, who had a bitter disagreement with his brother over Burley's fate. The two accused each other of lying, and were only calmed down by the king. The pleas for mercy failed, however; the Commons supported Thomas's insistence that Burley should die, and he was executed on 5 May. The dispute over Burley had exposed the fragile nature of the appellants' coalition, and had made Thomas appear an extremist, albeit one who enjoyed the support of the Commons in parliament. Richard did not forget Thomas's stance over Burley's fate. 
Thomas reaped some personal rewards from his political dominance. He and his fellow appellants voted themselves $20,000 to cover their 'expenses' in bringing the 'traitors' to justice, though the money was paid only gradually over the following years. He sought to strengthen his own territorial position by petitioning to have his annuities secured on lands forfeited by those who had been convicted in the Merciless Parliament, but although the petition was accepted nothing was done about it, and he did not manage to use his period of political dominance to diminish substantially his dependence on exchequer annuities. He did, however, succeed in obtaining $1920 of the sums still owed to him for the Breton expedition of 1380: $635 6's'. 8died of this was derived from the sale of de Vere's forfeited goods. 
The appellants' political ascendancy continued for some months after the end of the Merciless Parliament, but in foreign affairs they were largely unsuccessful. As in the autumn of 1386, Thomas and Arundel sought to implement a more vigorous policy towards France, but Arundel's naval expedition in the summer and autumn achieved little, and a Scottish invasion in August culminated in the defeat of a locally raised English force at Otterburn. After these set-backs Thomas could see some advantage in responding favourably to the peace initiatives instigated by the duke of Burgundy in December 1387, and he accepted Burgundy's proposal for a truce. None the less, the military failures of the summer damaged the appellants' standing in public opinion, and by the beginning of 1389 their influence was waning. Hostility towards Richard's favourites had brought them together in the first place, and once the favourites were removed the essential reason for their coalition disappeared. On 3 May 1389 Richard II formally resumed responsibility for government, and Thomas was removed from the council. 
Thomas's political exile did not last long. With Gaunt returning to England in November, Richard had no wish at this stage to risk a confrontation with his former opponents, and Thomas was restored to the council by 10 December 1389. He could not expect, however, to enjoy any real influence with the king, and in 1391 his thoughts turned to a crusade in north-east Europe. His nephew Henry, earl of Derby, had acquitted himself with distinction there in the previous year, and Thomas was perhaps motivated by a desire to emulate his success. Accordingly he assembled an expedition which left England for the Baltic in September 1391, but he was driven back by a storm at the entrance to the Skagerrak, and after trying to seek landfall successively in Denmark, Norway, and Scotland he eventually reached the English coast at Tynemouth: another expedition had ended in failure and frustration, and his debts for the expedition now had to be paid, though the king made him a gift of $500 towards his expenses. 
On 29 April 1392 Richard II declared that he intended to appoint Thomas lieutenant in Ireland for five years. Indentures were sealed, and Thomas began to make preparations for his departure. He received a total of $6333 6's'. 8died in advances from the exchequer, and spent almost $1250 on the purchase of artillery and on wages and rewards for his retinue. However, on 23 July his appointment was cancelled. No reason was given for its cancellation, but it is possible that the king wanted him to join Gaunt in the peace negotiations with France which were about to resume. Thomas may not have been unhappy to have his appointment countermanded, judging by the view he formed of Ireland when he went there with the king in 1394; on the other hand it was one more set-back to a career that had been notable so far for its frustrations. Much of the debt to the crown that he had incurred in preparing for the expedition was eventually remitted. 
In 1393 Thomas and Gaunt led the English delegation to a peace conference at Leulinghem, near Calais, which concluded a provisional peace treaty between England and France. Rumours that peace might be agreed contributed to an outbreak of unrest in Cheshire in 1393. Thomas held the office of justice of Chester, and the leaders of the rising believed that Thomas shared responsibility with Gaunt for the progress of the negotiations. There is no evidence, however, that Thomas sympathized with the rebels' fears that peace would put an end to their careers as soldiers: indeed, according to Walsingham he mustered his retinue and was ready if necessary to help his brother put down the rising. On the other hand both Froissart and the French author of the 'Chronicque de la traison et mort de Richart Deux roy Dengleterre' suggest that Thomas was opposed to a settlement with France. Thomas had discovered during the Merciless Parliament that he stood high in favour with the Commons, and he may have been anxious not to be identified too closely with a peace policy that, as a debate in the parliament of January 1394 showed, was not popular with the Commons. If this is true, then his inclusion as one of the English envoys at the 1393 peace conference may be explicable in terms of his status rather than his opinions: the dukes of Burgundy and Berri represented France, and thus it was necessary for Richard II to send two royal dukes to represent him. Yet there is no other evidence that he was opposed to the general tenor of the negotiations in 1393. Indeed, he may have felt he would have more room for manoeuvre at home if his brother Gaunt was to be duke of a greatly enlarged Aquitaine: Jean de Grailly and Sir Richard Stury, who spoke about Thomas to Froissart during the latter's visit to England in 1395, thought that this was true. Perhaps the evidence would permit the conclusion that Thomas was unenthusiastic about peace with France rather than openly hostile, and went along with the negotiations in which his elder brother took the lead. 
The provisional agreement of 1393 between England and France brought an end to the war for the time being, and in 1394 Richard II turned his attention to Ireland. He planned the largest royal expedition there for almost two hundred years, and Thomas was one of the nobles who agreed to accompany the king. The expedition landed at Waterford on 1 October 1394, but Thomas did not stay long in Ireland. Richard sent him back to England as his envoy at the parliament that opened in January 1395, and, according to Froissart, Thomas was unimpressed with the country. He described it as very poor, with a poor and wretched people, and he thought that military action there was futile: Ireland, he said, was a country 'neither of conquest nor of profit', and anything 'conquered in one year would be lost the next year' ('OEuvres', 16.5). The king made him a grant of part of the land in Leinster to be vacated by the O Broin family, but there is no evidence that Thomas believed the grant was anything more than nominal. 
If there is any truth in the story presented by Froissart, relations between Thomas and those around the king seem to have become strained during 1395. When Froissart visited England in that year, he spoke at length to Jean de Grailly about the duke. Grailly described Thomas in terms that were not unflattering but suggested a certain wariness on the part of the court towards him. Grailly said that he had 'a most wonderful head', but that he was proud and arrogant, though well-loved by the commons of England. His part in the execution of Sir Simon Burley had not been forgotten. Grailly also suggested that after the death of Richard II's queen in 1394 Thomas hoped that the king might marry his own daughter Anne of Woodstock, countess of Stafford (c.1382-1438), who had been widowed two years earlier, but the king had rejected the idea on the ground that she was too close a kinswoman. Later that year Robert le Mennot (Robert the Hermit) visited England, and spent two days and nights at Pleshey with the duke and his family. He too reported his impressions to Froissart. He had no doubt that Thomas was opposed to attempts to bring the war to an end, and set himself to persuade the duke to change his mind, but even his powerful advocacy of an Anglo-French crusade to save eastern Christendom from the Turks failed to move the duke. According to Froissart, Thomas held the French in contempt and his heart was hardened against peace. Froissart believes that Robert the Hermit probably related his conversation with Thomas to the king, for both Richard and the French seem to have been anxious to find out what Thomas was thinking. 
Froissart gives the impression that he was well informed about comings and goings at Pleshey, and about Thomas's opinions. He suggests that Thomas preferred to reside at Pleshey, rather than at court in the company of his two brothers, and he paints a picture of the duke as a jealous, brooding figure, ready to tell anyone who visited him what he thought of the king and those round him. It is likely that Thomas did indeed spend much time at Pleshey in 1395 and the first six months of 1396, though he also had a 'hall' in London, which was well equipped with tapestries, furnishings, plate, and other household goods at the time of his forfeiture in 1397. He must have spent some time there as well as at Pleshey. He enjoyed little real power or influence at court, however, and his lack of enthusiasm for peace with France set him apart from his brothers as well as from the king. On the other hand he still enjoyed royal patronage. In 1390 Richard II granted him the reversion of the lordship of Holderness, worth $600 a year, and when the reversion fell in at the death of Queen Anne in 1394 Thomas gained possession and his dependence on exchequer annuities was thus reduced. He was also granted the custody of the inheritance of his late son-in-law, the earl of Stafford, and he was wealthy enough in these years to endow his newly founded college of secular priests at Pleshey with manors from his inheritance. 
In the early summer of 1397 Richard II seems to have decided to launch a pre-emptive strike against Thomas and two of his co-appellants in 1387-8, the earls of Arundel and Warwick. At first he hoped to secure them by a trick, inviting them to a banquet in London on 10 July at which they would be arrested. Thomas declined the invitation on the ground that he was too ill to travel from Pleshey: only Warwick turned up, and was arrested after dinner. Arundel was persuaded by his brother the archbishop of Canterbury to surrender himself, but Richard resolved to go to Pleshey in person and arrest Thomas. According to Walsingham he assembled a large force of Londoners, household knights, and a group of nobles. They set out from London under cover of darkness and arrived at Pleshey early in the morning of 10 July. Thomas, who Walsingham says was gravely ill, was woken and came down to meet the king accompanied only by a few priests from his college. The two exchanged courtesies, and Richard then arrested the duke. He was given a short time to bid farewell to his family and household, and then left the castle under armed escort. The earl of Kent and Sir Thomas Percy took him to Calais, where he was imprisoned. The author of the continuation of the 'Eulogium historiarum sive temporis' gives a harsher account of the exchanges between Thomas and the king: Thomas apparently begged the king to spare his life, but Richard replied that he would have the same mercy he had shown to Burley -- a sentiment that has the ring of truth about it. 
Richard's motives for arresting Thomas and his fellow appellants have been variously interpreted both by contemporary chroniclers and by modern historians. Some of the former, for instance the French author of the 'Traison', maintain that Thomas was involved in a plot against the king. There is no evidence for this, but it may well be true, as Froissart suggests, that Richard felt threatened by his uncle's hostility to the 'rapprochement' with France that followed the twenty-eight-year truce between the two countries in 1396. Thomas had shared the Commons' objections to Richard's proposal in January 1397 for a joint Anglo-French expedition against Milan, and he may, as the author of the 'Traison' suggests, have felt that the return of Brest to the duke of Brittany in the previous year had been unwise and unnecessary. It is likely that Richard moved against the former appellants for fear that if he did not, they might move against him. If there was any suggestion of a plot, it existed only in Richard's mind. 
Richard intended to charge the three former appellants with treason for their 'riding against the king' in 1387. When parliament assembled, heavily guarded, at Westminster on 17 September 1397, Thomas, Arundel, and Warwick were formally appealed of treason. Arundel and Warwick both stood trial in parliament: Arundel was condemned to death and executed, while Warwick, though convicted, was reprieved and sentenced to exile in the Isle of Man. When the order was given for Thomas to be brought before parliament, however, the earl of Nottingham, who was earl marshal and captain of Calais, replied that he could not produce him because he was dead: 'By order of my most excellent lord the king, I held this duke in my custody in the lord king's prison in the town of Calais; and there, in that same prison, he died' ('RotP', 3.378). 
Both contemporaries and modern historians have accepted that Thomas was murdered in Calais. The evidence that he was seriously ill in 1397 might argue for a death by natural causes, perhaps hastened by the rigours of imprisonment, but such a suggestion flies in the face of what everybody thought at the time, and would require the assumption that the subsequent account of his murder was an invention. Thomas was almost certainly murdered on the instructions of the earl of Nottingham, who in turn must have been acting on orders from the king. In the first parliament of Henry IV's reign one of Nottingham's valets, John Hall, was charged with Thomas's murder, and his confession was read out in parliament. Hall said that Nottingham had told him he had been commanded by the king to murder Thomas; he went to a house in Calais where some of his accomplices produced the duke and took him to a side chamber in the house. Thomas was allowed to confess himself to a chaplain, and he was then told to lie on a bed. A feather bed was placed over him, and he was suffocated. Parliament was told that he had died on 25 or 26 August, but Sir William Rickhill's account of his mission to Calais to procure Thomas's political confession makes it clear that he was still alive on 8 September: he may have been murdered that night. 
On 24 September parliament found Thomas guilty of treason, and all his lands and property were forfeited to the crown. On the following day the king ordered that a confession obtained from Thomas by Sir William Rickhill, one of the king's judges, should be read in full parliament. In his confession, made to Rickhill at Calais on 8 September and written in English, Thomas admitted that he was one of those who imposed the commission of 1386 on the king, and 'along with others, took upon myself royal powers' ('RotP', 3.379). He went on to confess that, along with others, he came armed into the king's presence, discussed giving up his homage to the king, and agreed to depose him 'for two or three days' (Given-Wilson, 81), after which he was restored. He concluded by swearing that after he renewed his oath to the king in 1388 he had never been guilty of fresh treasons, and asked the king for mercy and grace. Rickhill then asked him if he had anything else to add to what he had written, and he said that he now remembered that he had told the king 'that, if he wished to be a king, he should stop begging to save the life of Simon Burley' (Given-Wilson, 83). 
The events in Calais were no doubt planned in advance by the king, with the co-operation of the earl of Nottingham. Although Richard II had arrested Thomas and prepared a charge of treason against him, he could not have been confident of obtaining a conviction had Thomas been produced to stand trial in parliament. John of Gaunt, as high steward of England, would have presided over his trial, and, whereas Gaunt seems to have had little compunction about passing the death sentence on Arundel, he would probably have been very reluctant to do so on his own brother. Furthermore, Thomas was still popular with the common people, and however effectively Sir John Bussy, the speaker, managed the Commons in parliament, there remained the risk of popular demonstrations in Thomas's favour. Thomas's murder, in the side room of a Calais house, was thus a political necessity for Richard, and his confession gave legitimacy to his conviction for treason. 
On 14 October Richard ordered the earl of Nottingham to deliver Thomas's body to Richard Maudeleyn, a royal clerk, who was instructed to hand the body over to Thomas's widow for burial in Westminster Abbey. It was buried in the chapel of St Edmund and St Thomas, well away from the burial places of Thomas's royal kindred; but his widow requested in her will that his body should be moved to the chapel of Edward the Confessor, to lie beside his mother and father, and after her death in October 1399 Henry IV carried out her instructions. Walsingham's account of Thomas's death concludes with a eulogy which perhaps encapsulates the opinion of many who did not share the king's suspicions of him. He was, says Walsingham, 'the best of men... in whom was placed the hope and solace of the whole community' ('Historia Anglicana', 2.226), and 'who always worked for the advantage of the realm and the honour and benefit of the king' ('Annales Ricardi secundi', 221). 
Following Thomas's conviction for treason the exchequer drew up an inventory of his forfeited possessions at Pleshey. The inventory survives, and provides detailed evidence for the duke's tastes and interests. Pleshey must have been a residence of some magnificence. Thomas possessed fifteen tapestries which hung in the great hall and various chambers. Their subjects were mainly scenes from romances such as the stories of Charlemagne and Godfrey de Bouillon, and the battle between Gawain and Lancelot. There were religious subjects, too, such as the nativity of Christ, the presentation and purification of the Virgin Mary, and from the 'Old Testament' the story of Judith and Holofernes. He had sixteen beds with hangings of gold and silk: one was of white satin embroidered in gold with the arms and crest of the duke. His chapel was richly equipped: one cope, valued at $60, was made of cloth of gold, lined with satin, and embroidered with various beasts and birds and the emblem of the Garter; there were also forty-two books in the chapel, including 'Bibles', missals, psalters, and antiphoners, a martyrology, and a little book of prayers covered in black and white velvet and embroidered with swans, the badge of the Bohun family. Elsewhere in the castle he had a library of eighty-four books, including a copy of the Wycliffite translation of the 'Bible' into English, made 'c'.1382. This survives, and is now BL, Egerton MS 617. Possession of a Wycliffite translation of the 'Bible' need not imply any interest in Wyclif's theology or sympathy with Lollardy: there is no evidence that Thomas's piety was anything other than conventional, and it is significant that the English 'Bible' was not listed in the inventory among the books in his chapel. Some of the devotional works belonged to his wife, and may have been inherited from her Bohun forebears. Her religious interests perhaps went deeper than those of her husband: in her will she described a crucifix as 'her favourite possession' and she left her daughter Joan a book with the psalter and other devotions, 'which book', she said, 'I have often used' (Nichols, 177). 
In his 'hall' in London, Thomas also had a number of books, but it is difficult to judge how far the books he had in London and at Pleshey genuinely represent his literary taste. In London he had, among other books, one 'written in French called 'Meistre des Istories'' ('CIM, 1392-1399', no. 372), a book of the 'Lives of the church fathers', the romance of Godfrey de Bouillon, a 'Bible' in Latin and another in French, and a copy of the 'Golden Legend'. At Pleshey he had books in English, French, and Latin; books of romances, such as the 'Romance de la rose', 'Ector de Troye', 'Le romance de Lancelot', and 'La gest de Fouke filtz Waryn', and devotional works in French such as a book of the miracles of Our Lady. He also had a book of the gospels glossed in English. He had a French translation of Livy, 'a little book called the Flour de Histories' (probably 'Flores historiarum'), and two copies of Trivet's chronicle. He owned a number of law books, including copies of the English statutes and two large books of civil law, and also a copy of Giles of Rome's 'De regimine principum', which may have been the copy that Burley forfeited in 1388. The devotional works and the romances, mainly in French, perhaps testify to his real interests, which were probably those of most of his fellow nobles at the end of the fourteenth century. Assuming that he read the books at all, he must have been bilingual in English and French, with English probably as his mother tongue, and he could probably read Latin. He is known to have written a treatise on the office of constable, which he had held since 1376 and evidently took seriously, but it is not listed among his books at Pleshey. This treatise, 'The Ordenaunce and Forme of Fightyng within Listes', exists in both an English and an Anglo-Norman version, but the earliest text of the English version exists in a late fifteenth-century manuscript (BL, Lansdowne MS 285), and it is likely that Thomas's original text was the Anglo-Norman version. 
The inventory reveals his taste in books, tapestries, plate, and vestments; but his physical appearance is less easy to establish. There is a miniature portrait of him in the book of benefactors of the abbey of St Albans (BL, Cotton MS Nero D.vii). It shows him bearded, with the Bohun swan in the background; but the manuscript is late fifteenth-century, and the portrait is probably not a likeness. Nothing but the matrices remain of the monumental brass that was once on his tomb in Westminster Abbey, though there is an engraving of it in Sandford's 'Genealogical History of the Kings of England' (1677), which shows that it was very elaborate. It had representations not just of Thomas and his wife, but of members of his royal kindred, including his father, Edward III. His pride in his royal birth is well expressed in this memorial. He and his wife had one son, Humphrey, and three daughters, Anne ('b'. 'c'.1382), Joan, who died unmarried on 16 August 1400, and Isabel ('b'. 1386), who became a nun in the Minoresses in London and took her vows on 23 April 1402, her sixteenth birthday. Humphrey was born about 1381, and was taken to Ireland by Richard II in 1399. When news of Henry Bolingbroke's landing in England reached Ireland, Richard II had him lodged in Trim Castle in the lordship of Meath. In August 1399 Bolingbroke ordered him to be returned to England, but he died on the way back, possibly in a shipwreck off Anglesey or possibly of plague at Chester. Anne thus became Thomas's sole heir. She married first Thomas, earl of Stafford, who died in 1392, and then in 1398, without royal licence, his brother Edmund, who was killed at the battle of Shrewsbury in 1403. Her third husband was Sir William Bourchier, later count of Eu. She died on 16 October 1438. Thomas's wife, Eleanor, died on 3 October 1399. Walsingham says that she died of a broken heart after suffering the loss of her husband and her only son: Shakespeare's portrayal of the grief-stricken duchess in act I of 'Richard II' may not be far from the truth. She was buried in St Edmund's Chapel in Westminster Abbey; her monumental brass, showing her in widow's dress, survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 27198


Thomas, duke of Clarence (1387-1421), prince and soldier, was the second son of Henry IV, born in London in the autumn of 1387 to Mary de Bohun ('c'.1369-1394), Henry's first wife. As children he and his brothers moved around the Lancaster and Bohun castles and after the death of their mother lived for a time in the households of John of Gaunt and Margaret, the countess marshal. He was knighted on 12 October 1399, on the eve of his father's coronation, and appointed steward of England. He became a knight of the Garter in 1400. 
The danger that Ireland would be swept into the Welsh revolt led Henry IV to appoint Thomas king's lieutenant there from 18 July 1401 with a salary of $8000 per annum, but no more than a fraction of this was effectively paid and by August 1402 he found himself reduced to impotence in Dublin. 
By November 1403, with more than a year's salary in arrears, Thomas returned to England and served briefly the following year in the relief of Coety Castle in Glamorgan. In February 1405 he replaced the indisposed earl of Somerset as admiral of the fleet to guard the sea off Dover for a quarter of a year. In March 1406 he again indented for service in Ireland for twelve years, his salary as lieutenant being now fixed at $6000 p.a. He deferred sailing for another two years until persuaded to accept a commission for three years at a salary of $4666, the first payment being allocated on specific revenues with the promise that he would be paid his arrears. He reached Dublin on 2 August 1408, arrested the earl of Kildare, and conducted a campaign in Leinster before holding a parliament at Kilkenny in January 1409. But in March his father's illness gave him the occasion to return and he remained at court with his retinue, resisting the urging of his brother Henry ['see 'Henry V] to resign his office and the refusal of the council to pay him his second year's salary unless he returned to Ireland. Thomas clung to his lieutenancy for its status and as a source of income, yet his cavalier attitude to his duties there brought reprimands from the council which, under Prince Henry, governed England in the years 1410-11. 
By 1411, despite being the king's favourite son, Thomas had still no title, few lands, and little military experience. All three came in the next two years. On 16 August 1410 he had a papal dispensation to marry Margaret Holland, the widow of the recently deceased John Beaufort, earl of Somerset, although this was obstructed by Somerset's brother, Bishop Beaufort, until May 1412. By his marriage he then gained control not only of his wife's lands to the value of $1400 p.a. but also the custody of Somerset's heirs and their inheritance. On 9 July following he himself was created earl of Aumale and duke of Clarence with an annuity of 2000 marks. Wealth and title were prerequisites for the major military command which he was now given. He had urged acceptance of the treaty of Bourges (18 May 1412) by which the duke of Orleans and other Armagnac lords offered to vest Henry IV with Aquitaine in return for military assistance against the duke of Burgundy, and when it became clear that the king could not himself lead the expedition Clarence was appointed its commander on 8 June. This was a snub to Prince Henry, who saw himself supplanted in his father's favour and his succession jeopardized. The rift between the brothers became common knowledge and a cause for alarm. Many regarded Thomas as the more kingly and warlike figure, and the army of 4000 men which he led through western France devastated the land with impunity to south of the Loire. Meanwhile the Armagnac lords had made peace with the duke of Burgundy and had to buy off the English army with a large ransom of 210,000 ecus at the treaty of Buzancais (14 November 1412). The expedition was a preliminary to Henry V's subsequent invasion and brought Clarence honour and profit. Having wintered in Bordeaux he returned in April 1413 following Prince Henry's succession to the throne. 
Whatever their previous differences Henry V now made Thomas his partner in the enterprise of war. Clarence mustered one of the largest companies (of 240 men-at-arms and 720 archers) in 1415 at Southampton where, before sailing, he presided at the trial of Cambridge, Scrope, and Grey. But at Harfleur he was among those who succumbed to dysentery and had to return to England before the march to Agincourt. He took part in the ceremonial reception of the emperor Sigismund in 1416 and briefly acted as keeper of the realm when Henry V attended the tripartite conference at Calais in September. When, on 1 August 1417, he landed at Touques with Henry V he embarked on a period of sustained campaigning which ended only with his death. He immediately displayed his mettle at the siege of Caen, where he led the scaling party and captured the Abbaye aux Hommes, saving it from destruction. His men were given leave to plunder the town, from which the inhabitants were driven, and Clarence sent to the mayor of London for English settlers, thus initiating an occupation that was to last until 1450. Moving south he took Alencon and joined the king for the winter siege of Falaise. Following its surrender in February 1418 Clarence was granted the 'vicomtes' of Auge, Orbec, and Pont Audemer for life; in his move to occupy these he reduced a series of fortresses along the line of the Risle including Harcourt and Bec-Hellouin. With reinforcements for his company brought over from England in June, he was present at the sieges of Louviers and Pont de l'Arche, and by 1 August was encamped outside Rouen at the Porte Cauchoise. In his company were his stepson Henry Beaufort, earl of Somerset, and Edward Holland, count of Mortain, both recent arrivals, in their teens, who fell victim to the disease in the encampment. Following the fall of Rouen in January 1419 the English advance carried him to Vernon and Mantes, and he was at Meulan in May and June for Henry V's fruitless negotiations with the duke of Burgundy. The seizure of Pontoise on 31 July by John Holland, earl of Huntingdon, enabled Clarence to conduct a daring 'chevauchee' to the walls of Paris which precipitated the flight of Charles VI to Troyes. 
The treaty of Troyes in May 1420 proved to be only an interlude in the continuing campaign, and from July to November Clarence was occupied in the sieges of Montereau and Melun where he was joined by his Beaufort stepsons whom his wife had brought to France in the previous year. Throughout the conquest of Normandy, Clarence had operated under the eye of Henry V in what had been predominantly a war of sieges. When the king left for England early in 1421 Clarence was given supreme command. To forestall the advance of a Franco-Scottish force into south-west Normandy, and eager to win the renown in battle which had hitherto evaded him, he led a small army into Maine and Anjou, but was intercepted at Bauge on the return from Angers. Ill-informed of the size and movements of the enemy, but hoping to win advantage by surprise, he resolved on an immediate attack, discounting the advice of his lieutenants Huntingdon and Gilbert Umfraville to consolidate his own force and position. On 22 March, in confused hand-to-hand fighting, Clarence was killed and Huntingdon and his two Beaufort stepsons were captured. His body was recovered from the field by men of Thomas Montagu, earl of Salisbury, who conducted the retreat. He was buried in Canterbury Cathedral where his widow erected a tomb with the effigies of her two husbands in St Michael's Chapel. 
Clarence was a bold and spirited commander whose reputation attracted a war retinue both numerous and distinguished. He saw soldiering in terms of personal valour and fame and had none of his brother's intellectual approach to war and politics. Almost certainly he felt overshadowed by his elder brother and denied opportunities for service. Before 1417 he had received few material rewards, for in his will of that date he provided for his debts, the wages of his retinue, and his funeral expenses to be paid from the ransom money due from the count of Angouleme of which 123,000 ecus was still outstanding. By 1421 he was almost certainly richer, both from the spoils of France and the payment of $4838 from the arrears of his annuities, but he had amassed no fortune and bought no further lands. He had no legitimate children and his French fiefs reverted to the crown. His widow died on 30 December 1439. 


@@@@@


doc= 27199


Thomas (d. 1100), archbishop of York, was of Norman descent and was archbishop from 1070 until his death in 1100. He was the son of a priest; a Durham obituary book records his parents' names as Osbertus and Muriel; such commemoration indicates his lifelong 'pietas' (devotion) towards them. Thomas received a good education. He and his brother Samson (bishop of Worcester, 1096-1112) were among the promising young clerks for whom Bishop Odo of Bayeux paid to study at Liege and other cities; his studies may have taken him as far afield as Germany and Spain. In Normandy, he may also have been a pupil of Lanfranc, the future archbishop of Canterbury. In due course, Bishop Odo appointed him treasurer of Bayeux Cathedral. Thomas also served William I in England as a royal chaplain; he may have been a ducal chaplain in Normandy before 1066. 
The northern metropolitan see of York became vacant on the death on 11 September 1069 of the last Anglo-Saxon archbishop, Ealdred. On 23 May 1070, the day before the Council of Windsor, the king named Thomas of Bayeux to succeed; but no steps towards his consecration were taken until Lanfranc was consecrated archbishop of Canterbury on 29 August 1070. Thereafter, Thomas travelled to Canterbury, but, before he would consecrate him, Lanfranc required Thomas 'after the custom of his predecessors' to give him a written profession of obedience reinforced by an oath of loyalty. Dissatisfied by the evidence that Lanfranc cited, Thomas refused on the grounds that the rights of the church of York forbade him to do otherwise; he left Canterbury without consecration. Upon hearing of these events, William I was angry. Lanfranc hastened to court, where he calmed the king's anger and won round the Normans who were present by an explanation of his case; according to the Canterbury account, the English fully supported Lanfranc. The king first cajoled and then browbeat, by threat of exile for himself and his family, a reluctant Thomas, so that, in late 1070 or early 1071, he returned to Canterbury for consecration. He made a profession of obedience to Lanfranc personally, with the reservation that he would not repeat such a profession to Lanfranc's successors until he had publicly received proof that his own predecessors had so done, and had rightly so done. His profession was probably made only verbally and not altogether according to the written formula that was prepared at Canterbury. In any case, no text of Thomas's first profession survives. Lanfranc proceeded to his consecration. (For these events, the Canterbury account in Lanfranc, 'Letters', 38-43 should be compared with the York account in Hugh the Chanter, 'History of the Church of York', 4-7.) 
In autumn 1071 Thomas travelled to Rome in company with Lanfranc and Remigius, bishop of Dorchester. During their visit, each archbishop received his pallium from Pope Alexander II. However, the York sources, especially Hugh the Chanter, were studiously silent about the visit, for which Canterbury evidence predominates. On the second day of the bishops' audience with the pope, in the course of other business, charges were made that neither Thomas nor Remigius had come canonically to the episcopate -- Thomas because he was a priest's son and Remigius because he had purchased it by services rendered to the king. Each surrendered his ring and staff and they threw themselves upon the papal mercy. When Lanfranc pleaded for them on the grounds of their learning and experience and of the king's need of them, Alexander allowed Lanfranc in his own presence to restore the bishops' insignia. During the audience Thomas advanced two claims on behalf of the church of York: first, as against Lanfranc's insistence upon the primacy of Canterbury, that the churches of Canterbury and York were equal in status to each other and that, by ordinance of Pope Gregory the Great, neither should be in any way subject to the other, save that precedence for the time being should belong to whichever archbishop was senior by consecration; and second, that the three bishops of Dorchester, Worcester, and Lichfield rightly owed obedience to York, not Canterbury. After long argument, Alexander ruled that the whole matter should be heard in England and there settled by the bishops and abbots of the whole kingdom. According to William of Malmesbury, Alexander wished to avoid offending either archbishop ('Vita Wulfstani', 25). 
The matter was duly considered at a council held at Eastertide ('c'.8 April 1072) in the king's chapel in his castle at Winchester, and again at Pentecost (27 May) in the royal vill at Windsor; on both occasions, the papal legate Hubert was present. The evidence continues to come mainly from the Canterbury side: Lanfranc's report to Pope Alexander on events up to Easter 1072, together with the concord on the primacy which was formulated at Winchester and confirmed at Windsor, and Archbishop Thomas's second profession of obedience which followed. As at Rome, so at Winchester there was a prolonged debate during which, on the issue of the primacy, Lanfranc maintained the irrelevance of the dispositions of Pope Gregory I because he referred to the churches of London and York, not Canterbury and York. Lanfranc claimed that other arguments of Thomas were thin and weak. According to Lanfranc, King William rebuked Thomas gently and patiently for the weakness of his arguments. Thomas replied that he had not hitherto appreciated the strength of the precedents and arguments that Canterbury could deploy. He suppliantly besought Lanfranc to banish from his mind any rancour that the conflict might have engendered and to agree to a settlement that offered a few gracious concessions to York; he probably had in mind those which, given his dearth of suffragans other than Durham, would permit him to function as a metropolitan. Such, in Lanfranc's report, was the genesis of the concord adopted at Winchester. 
The concord, of which Lanfranc sent the pope a copy, had the form of a judgement made with the king's agreement and in his presence by the bishops and abbots to whom the pope had referred the matter. As regards the relations of Canterbury and York, it recognized the vindication of the view that York should be subject to Canterbury and should obey the directions of its archbishop as primate of the whole of Britain in all matters relating to the Christian religion. The archbishop of York and his suffragans must obey the primate's summons to a council, wherever convened, and must also obey his lawful instructions. On the death of an archbishop of Canterbury, the archbishop of York should come to Canterbury and duly consecrate his successor, with the help of the other suffragans of the church of Canterbury, as his own primate; if the archbishop of York died, his successor should, however, come for consecration to Canterbury or to wherever the archbishop of Canterbury might direct. In one respect, Lanfranc did not get his way: as in 1070, he had pressed for what he considered the ancient right of the archbishop of Canterbury to require from the archbishop of York a public oath as well as a profession of obedience; 'out of love for the king' (probably in fact because of the king's refusal), Lanfranc waived the oath in Thomas's case but reserved the position of his own successors who might wish to exact one. As regards jurisdiction over the three disputed dioceses, this was tacitly denied to the archbishop of York; the limit of his province was set to the north of the diocese of Lichfield and mostly at the River Humber, although by compensation he was given jurisdiction northwards 'to the furthest limits of Scotland'. Thomas soon afterwards made an absolute profession of obedience to Lanfranc and his successors as archbishops of Canterbury and of due obedience to their just and canonical commands, adding the comment that when making his earlier profession he was uncertain on this matter and had promised obedience to Lanfranc unconditionally but to his successors conditionally. For Thomas's lifetime, the issue of the primacy was settled. 
So far as the authority of Canterbury is concerned, Thomas in general honoured the spirit and the letter of the settlement of 1072. Only two incidents call for notice. In perhaps 1086, according to the unsupported story of Hugh the Chanter, Lanfranc and Thomas accompanied King William to the Isle of Wight before his last crossing to Normandy. The king was told by someone unspecified of the York tradition that the concord of 1072 was a forgery of the Canterbury monks which they had fraudulently sealed. The king promised to decide the matter judicially if he returned to England. In 1093 there is an irreducible conflict of evidence about Thomas's stand when he consecrated Anselm archbishop of Canterbury. According to Hugh the Chanter, Thomas demurred to a petition that he consecrate Anselm 'primate of all Britain' and required the phrase 'metropolitan of Canterbury' to be substituted ('Hugh the Chanter', 12-15). At Canterbury, Eadmer slightly more probably has Thomas objecting to the words 'metropolitan of all Britain' with its implicit denial of York's metropolitan status but agreeing to 'primate of all Britain' ('Historia novorum', 42-3). For the rest, during Lanfranc's lifetime Thomas was present at the Council of London (1074 or 1075) which settled the precedence of the two archbishops and other prelates at church councils. In 1081, at Lanfranc's Council of Gloucester, upon the king's order and with Lanfranc's consent, Thomas consecrated William of St Calais to be bishop of Durham. Lanfranc and Thomas corresponded amicably upon pastoral matters. When the see of Canterbury was vacant from 1089 to 1093, Thomas was to the fore in consecrating bishops -- Ralph Luffa of Chichester (1091), Herbert de Losinga of Thetford (1091), and Hervey of Bangor (1092); but there is no sign of his taking advantage to press the claims of York. Hugh the Chanter cited a letter of Pope Urban II which, if genuine, probably dates from 1093 or 1094, summoning Thomas to account for his having in 1072 wrongly subjected his church to the archbishop of Canterbury ('Hugh the Chanter', 10-13); there is no record that Thomas responded. 
Thomas was only occasionally able to exercise the jurisdiction to the north which the concord of 1072 assigned to him. His best opportunity was in 1073, when Earl Paul of Orkney sent a clerk, Ralph, for episcopal consecration. Thomas arranged the ceremony at York on 3 March but required two further consecrators. Making no reference to his one suffragan of Durham, he wrote to Lanfranc with somewhat exaggerated deference, requesting the help of two bishops. He undertook to give no grounds for the suspicion once expressed by Bishop Remigius of Dorchester that he would claim a precedent for his own jurisdiction over him or his brother of Worcester. Lanfranc dispatched bishops Wulfstan of Worcester and Peter of Chester, whom he advised to keep Thomas's letter as a record of his undertaking. Hugh the Chanter claimed that, commanded by Malcolm III and Queen Margaret of Scotland, Bishop Fothad of St Andrews came to York, where he professed canonical subjection to the church and its archbishops. 
To the south, Thomas had no lasting success. Prevented in 1072 from claiming bishoprics for his province, he could still claim 'appurtenances' of his diocese that he had already sought but not secured at Rome in 1071. With support from Odo of Bayeux, he claimed twelve vills at Worcester which Archbishop Ealdred had retained after surrendering the see in 1062; but in 1072 the king's court decided against him. Bishop Remigius of Dorchester's transfer of his see to Lincoln occasioned greater difficulties, for Thomas claimed that the region of Lindsey, together with Lincoln, Stow, Louth, and Newark, belonged to his diocese. In 1092, when Remigius planned the consecration of his new cathedral, Thomas issued a prohibition, which Remigius ignored. William II, allegedly bribed by Remigius, allowed the consecration to go ahead; but when most of the bishops had assembled for it, Remigius's sudden death led to a postponement. When, on the day after his own consecration, Anselm of Canterbury was about to consecrate Remigius's successor, Robert Bloet, Thomas warned Anselm to consecrate him as bishop of Dorchester, not Lincoln. According to Hugh the Chanter, after a bribe of $3000 King William in 1094 arranged a concord to settle the matter: Thomas (it was said unwillingly) surrendered his claim to Lincoln, Lindsey, Stow, and Louth, and received in return the abbeys of Selby and St Oswald at Gloucester. 
Thomas seems to have been of exemplary loyalty to kings William I and II, but he took little known part in secular affairs. In 1088 he was at Salisbury during the trial for treason of Bishop William of St Calais; beforehand, he refused to counsel William, and during the trial he upheld the ruling of the king's court that William must do right to the king before being reinvested with his fief. But on William's deathbed in 1095, Thomas gave him the viaticum. 
Thomas appears to best advantage in ordering his diocese, which, when he arrived, had been devastated by warfare, especially the Conqueror's harrying of the north in 1069. To his clergy, he showed a liberality that his successors deemed excessive. At York itself, in 1070 he found in the ruined cathedral only three of the meagre establishment of seven canons; he recalled the fugitives and created more canons. Having re-roofed and rehabilitated the old Anglo-Saxon cathedral, he rebuilt the refectory and dormitory to provide for a common life. Perhaps in the early 1080s, he built a new cathedral. He appointed a provost and recovered and increased the endowments. Perhaps in the early 1090s, Thomas deemed that better stewardship of cathedral property would result from the establishment of separate prebends for the canons. Having already appointed a master of the schools, he proceeded to introduce, on the Norman model, a dean, precentor (chanter), and treasurer. To assist with the oversight of his vast diocese, he appointed archdeacons. 
Of Thomas's character, contemporaries were unanimous in their praise. A handsome and dignified man, he was agreeable in any company, whether engaged in serious business or honest fun; he inspired both respect and liking. He was a man of acknowledged piety and humility; and his observance of celibacy was unquestioned. He was a considerable musician who composed many hymns; he insisted that ecclesiastical chanting should be solemn and not effeminate. He was a good Latinist, who composed William the Conqueror's epitaph on his tomb at Caen. He was well versed in many branches of knowledge. His sterling reputation was widely known on the continent. Three of his kin became bishops: his brother Samson, who had also been treasurer of Bayeux and a royal chaplain, and at whose consecration Thomas assisted, became bishop of Worcester (1096-1112); Samson's sons Thomas and Richard became respectively archbishop of York (1109-14) and bishop of Bayeux ('c'.1108-1133). 
In 1100 Thomas heard at Ripon that William II had died on 2 August. He hastened to London, where he was indignant on finding that Henry I had already been crowned; since Anselm of Canterbury was abroad, he wished to implement his claim to officiate. But Thomas, who was weakened by sickness and age, was easily persuaded that the peace of the kingdom had demanded haste. He returned to the north after mid-September and on 18 November died at either York or Ripon. He was buried in York Minster near his predecessor Ealdred; Hugh the Chanter cited his epitaph ('Hugh the Chanter', 20-21). 


@@@@@


doc= 27200


Thomas (d. 1114), archbishop of York, came of a notable clerical family, being the son of Samson (d. 1112), treasurer and possibly dean of Bayeux and then bishop of Worcester from 1096 until his death, brother of Richard, bishop of Bayeux ('c'.1108-1133), and nephew of Archbishop Thomas (I) of York (1070-1100). To distinguish him from his uncle he is commonly known as Thomas (II) of York or Thomas the younger. It was to the first Archbishop Thomas that he owed his promotion as provost of the collegiate church of Beverley in 1092. He was introduced as a clerk at the king's court, where he became a royal chaplain. On 27 May 1108, six days after the death of Archbishop Gerard, Thomas was appointed archbishop of York by Henry I. According to Hugh the Chanter, the king had been intending to confer on him the vacant bishopric of London, but, at the request of Dean Hugh and other members of the York chapter who were then at court, he was appointed to York instead. It was a popular appointment with the chapter, as Thomas had been educated at York; Hugh asserts that the canons, given a free choice in 1100, would have elected him to succeed his uncle. Hugh records that Thomas's popularity with the York chapter was partly due to certain characteristics that he shared with his late uncle; almost certainly he would have been expected to be sympathetic to the stance taken by York in response to the demands of the archbishops of Canterbury that the northern archbishops make written profession of obedience to them. Indeed, Hugh states that Thomas 'knew the rights and wrongs of the case' ('Hugh the Chanter', 27). The archbishop-elect then attended Anselm's council held at London (28 May 1108) to which his predecessor had been travelling at the time of his death, and associated himself with Anselm's reforms. 
Almost immediately the question of the primacy was raised. The monks of Christ Church, Canterbury, put pressure on Archbishop Anselm (died 1109) to summon Thomas in order to receive consecration and make profession. The dean and chapter of York, however, wrote to Thomas to forbid him to go to Canterbury or to make such profession. Thomas declared that he would take the advice of the king, and journeyed to the royal court at Winchester. Henry I was inclined to support York's claims and ordered Thomas not to make profession. Anselm, however, wrote to Thomas demanding that he accept consecration and fixing a day for the ceremony; and he threatened that he would himself perform episcopal functions within the diocese of York should Thomas refuse. Thomas contrived to delay, excusing himself from the journey on the grounds that the chapter of York had forbidden him to make profession, and that his predecessor, Gerard, had so impoverished the see that he could not afford to travel. There followed an interchange of letters: from Anselm forbidding Thomas to go to Rome for his pallium; from Anselm to the pope requesting him to withhold the pallium until Thomas had been consecrated; from Thomas to Anselm explaining that his chapter had forbidden him to make profession; and from the chapter to Thomas threatening to denounce him should he do so. On Anselm's behalf the bishops of London and Rochester attempted to persuade Thomas to act as the archbishop wished. Thomas received them at Southwell, explaining that he had communicated all this to the king, who was then in Normandy. The king then wrote to Anselm ordering him to stop his demands until he should return to England. He also sent the dean of York to Rome with letters explaining the situation, and asking the pope to send a legate to England to decide the case, since Thomas was unable, for various reasons, to travel to Rome. The pope agreed, and sent Cardinal Odalric (Ulric) with the pallium and instructions concerning the dispute. 
Thomas's prevarication succeeded in postponing the matter until after the death of Archbishop Anselm, who on his deathbed still warned Thomas against exercising episcopal authority before he had been consecrated; and the king, having received the papal envoys in Normandy, sent them ahead to England. When he himself returned he was approached by the monks of Canterbury, and he ordered them to wait until Whitsun for an answer. On 13 and 14 June 1109 he received at court the various parties, including the archbishop-elect and the papal legate. But the king was no longer inclined to support York; as Hugh the Chanter realized, he had done so in the past partly in order to oppose Anselm rather than from firm conviction of the rightness of York's cause. Henry now changed his mind, and ordered Thomas to make profession. He commanded the bishops, and members of Thomas's own family, to use their influence with him, and, under pressure to resign if he did not make profession, Thomas capitulated: he made a vague profession to an unnamed archbishop of Canterbury, and was consecrated by the bishop of London on 27 June 1109 in the presence of six bishops. In response to requests by the bishops of Norwich and Durham, the king declared that the profession had been made in response to a royal command, rather than as the result of a legal sentence. 
Following his profession and consecration Thomas journeyed north with Cardinal Odalric, and received his pallium from the legate at York on 1 August. Thomas was under pressure to consecrate Turgot (died 1115) as bishop of St Andrews, without the profession of obedience that Archbishop Gerard had demanded, and this he did in York on the same day. Thomas spent three days in York before accompanying the cardinal south as far as the River Trent. As they parted the archbishop was astounded to receive a summons from the legate to the Roman curia to answer charges of having made his profession contrary to the decrees of the Roman church. However, he and others present persuaded the cardinal that the profession had been forced upon him by the king, and the summons was withdrawn. 
Thomas also consecrated, with written profession, Michael, bishop of Glasgow, and later Ralph Nowell (died 1144), bishop of Orkney, and Wimund, bishop of Man and the Isles. As archbishop he was credited with the creation of two prebends in the church of York, possibly those of Fridaythorpe and Sherburn in Elmet, and he granted the canons the vill of Helperby to hold in common. He granted to the collegiate church of Southwell the liberties enjoyed by the churches of York, Beverley, and Ripon, and aided the same church in its construction work by ordering the men of Nottinghamshire to make their Pentecostal procession to the church of Southwell rather than that of York. His period of office saw the introduction of the regular canons to the diocese of York, both to Bridlington and in 1113 to the ancient minster church of Hexham, where the hereditary priest, Eilaf, was expelled, and replaced by canons drawn from Huntingdon. Thomas allegedly tried to remove the bones of St Eata to York to compensate for York's lack of relics, but was thwarted in his attempts by a vision of the saint himself. He endowed the Augustinian priory of Hexham with a generous amount of land, rents, and allowances, as well as with books and ornaments. 
Thomas (II) was a corpulent man; Hugh the Chanter states that he was 'full-bodied and fatter than he should have been' ('Hugh the Chanter', 49), and that this explained both his lack of action and his submission over the matter of the profession of obedience: his corpulence would have prevented him tolerating the discomforts of exile. His overweight may have been a factor in his early death. Hugh notes as another characteristic of Thomas that he maintained his virginity. During his period as provost of Beverley, Thomas had suffered an illness and was allegedly told by his doctors that his life could only be saved by breaking his lifelong vow of chastity. His friends, according to William of Newburgh, attempted to persuade him to this course of action by introducing a woman secretly into his household. Thomas, however, refused both medical advice and the well-meaning assistance of his friends, and recovered after he had prayed to St John of Beverley. But the illness returned at a later date, and Thomas died at Beverley on either 19 or 24 February 1114. He was buried in York near to the tomb of his uncle. Walter Daniel, in his life of Ailred, abbot of Rievaulx, recorded that Thomas's death was seen in a vision by the young Ailred, son of Eilaf, the priest ousted from Hexham by Thomas; when he announced the event to his disbelieving family several days before news of it arrived in Hexham, his father drew laughter by commenting 'truly he has died, who lives a bad life' ('Life of Ailred', 72). 
Thomas's rule at York was a brief one, but he clearly had the affection and trust of the York canons who remembered him as a man 'agreeable both in morals and manners' despite his capitulation over his profession of obedience ('Hugh the Chanter', 27). Similar epitaphs were given by Richard of Hexham and William of Newburgh, and Symeon of Durham praised Thomas's chastity and probity. 


@@@@@


doc= 27201


Becket, Thomas (1120?-1170), archbishop of Canterbury, was a London merchant's son who rose to be royal chancellor then archbishop, only to be murdered in his cathedral church. His posthumous reputation as a saint and martyr, with enduring thaumaturgical powers, was considerable throughout western Christendom, and in England unrivalled. 
Born in Cheapside, London, on St Thomas the Apostle's day (21 December), in 1120 according to the liturgical tradition, and baptized that evening in the tiny neighbouring church of St Mary Colechurch, Thomas was, apparently, the only surviving son of Gilbert Beket and his wife Matilda. Four daughters of the marriage also survived into adulthood, of whom Agnes was eventually Gilbert's heir; and descent continued through Theobald de Helles (of Hills-Court, Kent), her son or nephew. Both Thomas's parents were Normans. Gilbert's father was a farmer or rural knight from Thierville (Eure), in the lordship of Brionne, close to the abbey of Bec; and he was a neighbour and perhaps kinsman of Theobald, abbot of Bec and archbishop of Canterbury (died 1161). Gilbert seems to have become a trader, perhaps in textiles; and his wife, who may have had the pet name of Roheise, is said to have come from Caen. By 1120, however, Gilbert was a property owner in London, living on rents. He had bought for himself a fine house on the north side of Cheapside, in the block between Ironmonger Lane and Old Jewry, an area inhabited by important citizens. At the height of his prosperity he served a term as sheriff of the City (the office of mayor had yet to be created). But later, perhaps after Thomas had grown up, he suffered heavy losses when his properties were destroyed by fire. 
Becket's cradle tongue must have been French, and this was, with Latin for official, ceremonial purposes, the language of all the societies in which he spent his life. But it may be assumed, and the early biographers possibly took it for granted, that as a Londoner he could understand and speak English. What the biographers, however, make clear is that his Latin was never first-rate, and that this was so because of the general insufficiency of his education. Moreover, in his youth he never progressed beyond the trivium and quadrivium, the basic curriculum. Law and theology he had to work up later. His schools were not to blame: they were the best that money could buy. At the age of ten he was sent to board at the Augustinian priory at Merton in Surrey, which had a good scholastic reputation. Later he was put into one of the London grammar schools, perhaps St Paul's. And finally, when he was twenty, he spent about a year in Paris. 
Becket's schooling may, however, have been intermittent. Even the hagiographers thought that in his youth he was more interested in rural sports than in his books and that his way of life was frivolous. It must have been when living at home after Merton that he became attached to an important Norman baron, Richer de l'Aigle, who, possibly because of some former territorial connection, used to lodge with the Bekets when in the city. Richer, a great-grandson of a knight killed at the battle of Hastings, and himself a soldier of considerable experience, was lord of Hastings in Sussex, an honour granted to his father by Henry I. His mother was the sister of Rotrou (II), count of Perche and Mortagne, and two of his younger brothers had served in Henry I's military household, but were lost when the 'White Ship' went down in 1120. Richer, an older man, used to take Becket on holidays into the country, presumably Sussex, where they hunted and hawked. On one of these expeditions Becket fell into a millstream, either because his horse slipped off a narrow bridge or because he plunged in to rescue his hawk; and he almost drowned. One of his biographers, Edward Grim, thought that the citizen's son learned much from the baron. Indeed, courtly manners helped him greatly in his career. He retained for life an interest in horses and hawks; and he took up soldiering when the opportunity arose. How long his intimacy with Richer lasted is not known. They would meet again at Henry II's court, and Becket may have helped him to recover the lordship of Hastings which he had lost in Stephen's reign. Richer was one of those barons who in 1164 declared the ancient customs in the royal court at Clarendon, an event that launched Becket on the road to martyrdom. 
Although as a scholar Becket would have been tonsured, there is no reason to think that his parents intended their only son for a career in the church or that he had a vocation for the priesthood and the cure of souls. While the family was rich, it was expected, no doubt, that Becket would consolidate its position in the urban aristocracy. When his father lost his money the son had to become a practising clerk. So Gilbert got him first into the banking house of his richer kinsman, Osbert Huitdeniers, one of the greatest London merchants, and then into the household of Theobald, archbishop of Canterbury. 
Becket was endowed with, or acquired, most of the qualities that make for worldly success. He is described in the Icelandic sagas, which drew on Robert of Cricklade's lost work, as tall and slender, with a fair skin and dark hair. His features were regular, though his nose was rather long and aquiline. His forehead was wide, his eyes were bright, and his expression was calm and happy. His elegance was enhanced by vivacity. Good-looking in youth, he was handsome when older. He had excellent manners and was a good talker. Clearly he had the ability and the will to please: he was a charmer. John of Salisbury says that he had very acute senses of smell and hearing and a good memory. Such endowments make a little education go a very long way. He was undoubtedly intelligent, alert, responsive. Once he realized that he had to make his own way he became extremely ambitious. But he could placate rivals as well as ingratiate himself with his masters. Until he became soured by his misfortunes as archbishop he was a very attractive man. But even his friends and champions were aware of some faults. John of Salisbury considered him something of a time-server, a rather harsh judgement on one who served a succession of very different masters with equal zeal. But all the early biographers thought that until he became archbishop (or a little later) he was guilty of frivolity, ostentation in dress, and pursuit of all the follies of the fashionable world. 
Nevertheless, they all state unequivocally that Becket always lived a celibate life. This may simply be a feature of the hagiographical legend; but it cannot be disproved. It is clear from his physical activities and achievements that his constitution was basically robust. That he had strong passions can hardly be doubted. According to William fitz Stephen, he accepted penitential discipline of scourging on his bare back even when royal chancellor. But contemporaries thought that he had a congenitally 'cold', that is to say delicate, stomach, and this seems to have made him particularly liable to stress. There is good tradition that he had a slight stammer. After 1145 he was always an outsider, making his way by his wits; and his struggle to succeed could undoubtedly exert intolerable pressure on him. Enough bouts of what seem to have been psychosomatic illnesses are recorded to suggest that stress and repression were features of his life. It may be that among the emotions he repressed was the sexual. It does not seem, however, that he was attracted to women. He was brought up among them and was close to his mother. But, although he was free to marry until ordained deacon in 1154, there is no evidence at any time of women lovers, friends, or even disciples and confidantes. On the other hand, although some men, for instance Archbishop Theobald and Henry II, found him very attractive, there is no compelling evidence that he was homosexually inclined. It could be that he lacked warmth and disliked physical intimacy. 
From early 1143 until some time in 1145 Becket kept the accounts of the London banker, Osbert Huitdeniers. He then managed to secure a place in the household of Theobald, archbishop of Canterbury -- a considerable move up into the purlieus of power. At first derided and intimidated by his much better educated and ecclesiastically orientated fellow clerks, he soon made friends and also gained the archbishop's favour. He was sent for a year to study law at Bologna and Auxerre and was even employed on missions to the papal curia. Thus he not only entered into the fellowship of men who were to be of importance in the English church but also was groomed to join them. In 1154, when Theobald secured the archbishopric of York for his archdeacon, Roger de Pont l'Eveque (died 1181), he gave the vacant archdeaconry to Becket. This formed the nucleus for a collection of benefices, including Bramfield in Hertfordshire, St Mary-le-Strand in London, Otford in Kent, prebends in London and Lincoln cathedrals, and the provostship of Beverley in Yorkshire -- mostly the gifts of promoted Canterbury clerks. Becket was becoming rich, and at the age of thirty-four was ready for greater things. 
Within a year, although he retained the archdeaconry and benefices, Becket changed his master again. He had probably been involved in the negotiations, led by Theobald, which secured the succession of the Angevin, Henry FitzEmpress, to the English throne after Stephen's death; and shortly after Henry's coronation in his twenty-second year on 19 December 1154, Becket was witnessing royal charters as chancellor. It seems that the archbishop and bishops pushed him on Henry as their agent in the royal court and as one who might restrain a youthful ruler widely suspected of being headstrong and anti-clerical. The royal chancellorship was basically only another, even if more prestigious, clerkship. But Becket, by becoming Henry II's intimate friend, was to transform it into an important office. He soon became Henry's boon companion on the 'iter' round the Angevin 'empire', mostly on the continent, sharing all his master's pastimes except, as sources affirm, the sexual. He certainly shared in the royal wealth, receiving valuable custodies and other bounties from his master. In 1164, when Henry, by then an enemy, called in his debts, he asked him to account for $30,000. His identification with royal policies, consequent on his complete dependence on royal favour, inevitably disappointed his clerical backers. With hindsight, some of the memorialists considered that this was an aberrant interlude in the martyr's career, in which he dissimulated and did his best for the church. But to all appearances Becket revelled in this period of worldly grandeur, although once again he had to overcome the contempt and envy of established servants and courtiers. The high points in his career as a royal favourite were his magnificent legation to the French king in 1158, and his participation the next year in Henry's campaign to 'recover' the county of Toulouse. In the latter he had 700 knights under his command and took an active part in the fighting. Although the archdeacon's grandeur and military exploits were not necessarily abhorrent to the English church, the 'scutage of Toulouse', the tax to pay for the war which fell heavily on the church, and for which Becket was held responsible, was never forgotten, even by his friends and apologists, such as John of Salisbury. 
On 18 April 1161 Archbishop Theobald died, his last months saddened by the refusal of the king and Becket, both busy on the continent, to visit him. The archdeacon was still on campaign, this time in the Vexin, commanding troops in a border war against Henry's overlord, the French king Louis VII ('r'. 1137-80), and, apparently, displaying outstanding courage and gallantry. Theobald, who, despite some disillusion, wanted Becket to succeed him at Canterbury, accused his protege of ingratitude. At this juncture Becket too fell ill, and, in contrast, was visited by both kings, who had made a truce. Henry took his time over Theobald's replacement. He had quickly given Becket custody of the temporalities of the archbishopric; but secrecy and procrastination had been drilled into him by his mother, he had many other things on his mind, and to get Becket elected to the see would not be plain sailing in view of his obvious unfitness for the office. All archbishops of Canterbury since the conquest, but one, had been monks; and the monks of the cathedral see, Christ Church, claimed sole right of election. They had no reason to love Becket, for he had no love for them and had abetted Theobald's repression of the convent. Also, monastic bishops were available, primarily Gilbert Foliot, bishop of Hereford (died 1187), who was later bishop of London, a pious theologian, who could be thought ideally suited. But Becket's promotion from archdeacon to archbishop would support some of Henry's ambitions. He wanted to secure his dynasty by having his eldest son, Henry, crowned king of England. He aimed at safeguarding his vast French fiefs, and even, perhaps, uniting England and France, by marrying the young Henry to Louis VII's heir, Margaret. And he would obtain Pope Alexander III's assistance for his schemes by supporting him against imperial antipopes. A capable and amenable archbishop of Canterbury could have an important role. He could crown the young Henry, act as his guardian, direct a subordinate government in England, and also put through some administrative reforms. Moreover, to have a chancellor archbishop would put Henry on a par with the great German emperor, Frederick Barbarossa ('r'. 1152-90). 
By the time the king had come to a decision, Becket himself had misgivings. He had enjoyed to the full his life at the royal court, the archbishopric would confer few worldly advantages, and he must have been conscious of some unsuitability for the office. But the papal legate overcame his reluctance; Becket conducted the young Henry to England; the royal will smothered all opposition among the electors and associated bishops; and on 23 May 1162 a royal council of bishops and notables at Westminster confirmed the election by the monks, and the young Henry, empowered by his father, duly gave the royal consent. Becket must have done homage and fealty to Henry II, presumably in April when taking leave of him in Normandy. A novelty, apparently demanded by Henry de Blois, bishop of Winchester (died 1171), at the Westminster council, was that Becket was given by those acting for the king some form of acquittance from all secular obligations, an attempt on the part of the uneasy church to get the slate wiped clean. On 2 June he was ordained priest at Canterbury and on the following day, in the presence of the young Henry, consecrated archbishop by Henry of Winchester, 'vice' London, and the other fourteen suffragan bishops. A mission to the pope secured the pallium, and on 10 August the archbishop received this token of his papal vicariate barefooted and prostrate in the cathedral. The one part of the grand scheme left uncompleted was the coronation of the Young King, perhaps because of the rivalry between Canterbury and York, in the person of Roger de Pont l'Eveque. It had to wait eight years. 
In 1162 Becket was archbishop, archdeacon, royal chancellor, and the holder of a large number of ecclesiastical benefices and royal custodies -- an arch-pluralist of transient offices and properties. He was also separated from the king, who lingered on the continent. It is clear that the tyro priest had decided to play a completely new role, which he had to learn. It was not entirely unfamiliar; but his life for some eight years had been to all appearances that of a royal courtier and knight. It took him a little time to adjust. He retained, perhaps until after the Council of Clarendon (January 1164), his light-coloured clothes, which affronted the Christ Church monks, whose respect he never obtained before his death; and he recruited a staff of secular clerks on the model of Theobald's. He took over three or four clerks, including John of Salisbury (died 1180), from his predecessor, and from the Chapel Royal went with him five or six, among whom were Herbert of Bosham and William fitz Stephen. These three wrote lives after his death. Some of the rest were recruited from the households of other bishops. He is said to have had fifty-two clerks as chancellor and to have attended the Council of Northampton in October 1164 with almost forty. Although they included those whom Herbert of Bosham called the 'eruditi' (scholars), most were chosen for their legal and administrative competence. This large clerical contingent was paralleled in his household by the secular component of knights, noble boys, and servants; and the size of his 'familia' was a feature of his grandeur. Indeed, as archbishop Becket improved on the magnificence he had displayed as chancellor. His hospitality was lavish, his alms-giving extravagant. He also, under the tuition of his chaplains and Herbert of Bosham, carried out his duties meticulously, spent time in private devotions, and studied theology. The new purpose in his life was not only to be a great archbishop but also to recover and, no doubt, extend the rights of the archbishops of Canterbury. His taking his predecessor, Anselm (1093-1109), as his model, portended a stormy tenure of his see. His receipt of the pallium seems to have triggered his renunciation of his other offices, the royal chancellorship and the archdeaconry -- the former presumably because it was now beneath his dignity. Henry was offended; and it may be that it was he who forced Becket to surrender the archdeaconry to Geoffrey Ridel (died 1189), keeper of the king's privy seal and hitherto Becket's deputy and workhorse at the chancery, who continued to perform as acting chancellor. 
Becket's arrival at Canterbury after a thirteen months' vacancy upset many vested interests. He was thought to have obtained a royal writ authorizing him to recover lands wrongfully alienated by his predecessors or usurped by laymen. Consequently he revoked all existing leases of archiepiscopal demesne and reactivated claims to several estates and services presently in the hands of some important barons. One of those he disturbed was an important royal servant, John Marshal, and this affair was to play an important part in his downfall in 1164. The king returned to England in January 1163, but, although distressed by Becket's behaviour, concealed his feelings. At the end of April Becket left, with most of the English hierarchy, for Alexander III's general council at Tours, and seems to have repeated the glory of his embassy to Louis VII in the ecclesiastical sphere. He took the opportunity to petition for Anselm's canonization; but the process was crowded out, and subsequent events prevented its completion. 
Becket returned from Tours apparently inspired to defend the liberties of the English church, especially those of Canterbury, against lay tyrants. And almost immediately, at the beginning of July, he clashed with Henry at Woodstock over the king's proposal that sheriff's aid, a traditional surcharge to the general land tax (geld), should be diverted from the sheriffs to the royal treasury. A measure which, as chancellor, he would probably have supported, he now vehemently opposed; and Henry, for the moment isolated, had to drop it. This was the point when a growing estrangement became an unbridgeable rift. Henry could not forgive the man he had raised from the dust and heaped with honours and riches for repaying him in this fashion. He aimed at Becket's humiliation and destruction. And the archbishop, a proud man and serving under a new banner, would not willingly back down. Principles were at stake. 
The battlefield turned out to be the 'evil' royal customs in the English church, particularly those concerning criminous clerks. Since the eleventh century ecclesiastical reformers in western Christendom had been attempting to free the church from improper lay control and those practices that were repugnant to canon law. In England, Archbishop Anselm had been active in the cause against William II and Henry I; and during Stephen's relatively weak reign the church had made gains that Henry II wanted to reverse. He thought that the laity was being harassed by archidiaconal and rural decanal courts, intent on punishing sins as a source of revenue. He was enraged at the church's protection of criminals in holy orders from the appropriate penalties under secular law (benefit of clergy). And he disliked the growing practice of litigants appealing from English church courts to the papal curia. None of these particular matters had caused much, if any, trouble in the past since all authorities had joined forces in the struggle against criminals and other dissidents. However, the increasing disentanglement of church and state (often symbolized as the two swords) and the renewed interest in jurisprudence sharpened the distinction between the several jurisdictions, especially royal and ecclesiastical, and made rivalry and collisions inevitable. Yet the basic common interest remained and usually prevented serious conflict. 
Several cases where the archbishop had prevented a clerk, convicted in a lay court of a felony, from suffering the appropriate lay penalty of mutilation or death, were brought to Henry's notice. On 13 October 1163 he assembled an old-fashioned national church council at Westminster to honour the translation of the body of Edward the Confessor to a new tomb in the abbey, consequent on his canonization by Alexander III on 7 February 1161 as an appropriate reward to Henry for his allegiance. After the ceremony Henry, fortified by contact with his saintly predecessor, aired some of his grievances in the assembly. And when he elicited no support, he asked the bishops if they would observe the ancient customs of the realm. This was reminiscent of demands made by William II and Henry I on Anselm; and at Westminster Becket and his colleagues echoed Anselm's reply: they could only do so 'saving their order', that is to say, excepting anything that was contrary to canon law. Next morning Henry disgraced Becket by removing the young Henry from his tutorship and depriving him of all the custodies and honours he had granted him as chancellor. Although Becket still had the nominal support of the episcopate for his attitude towards 'evil' royal customs, there was nowhere any stomach for a battle with the crown. Alexander III was of the same mind. He relied on Henry's assistance and regarded the conflict as unnecessary and inopportune. This view he was to hold until the end, yet would stand up for ecclesiastical rights when he could and never throw a principled archbishop to the wolves. As for Becket, he was to have ample time in which to produce a theological objection to the double punishment he perceived in the custom that Henry wished to confirm or revive, by which a man in holy orders, convicted in a lay court of a serious crime, was released to an ecclesiastical court to be stripped of his orders and then returned as a layman to the secular authorities to receive his punishment under secular law. 
After Westminster both king and archbishop appealed to the pope, the one to get English customs allowed, the other to get them condemned. Henry also wanted privileges for the archbishop of York which would allow his use as an alternative primate in England. Alexander prevaricated, but in November sent Philip, abbot of Aumone in Blois, to urge moderation, even dissimulation, on Becket. In the end, the archbishop, assured that Henry required only a verbal assent to the customs (like Anselm in similar circumstances in May 1095), promised Henry at Woodstock, without making any verbal reservations, that he would observe the customs of the realm. Whereupon Henry summoned a great council to meet at Woodstock towards the end of January 1164 in order to confirm and publicize his victory. Using the support of his barons and officials and taking advantage of divisions among the bishops, Henry browbeat Becket into declaring in the hearing of all that he would observe the laws and customs of the kingdom in good faith; and the rest of the bishops followed suit. The king then ordered that these customs be discovered and declared; and by the following morning a schedule of sixteen miscellaneous clauses was produced as a chirograph dated 29 January. But, although Becket and the bishops evaded sealing this document, it was accepted even by the hagiographers that Becket, and at his command all the bishops, had agreed unconditionally to observe the constitutions of Clarendon, including a clause that defined the customary method of treating criminous clerks. Becket also accepted that in so doing he had sinned. He suspended himself from priestly duties, imposed penance on himself and sent a report to the pope. But he agreed to write to Alexander asking him to confirm the English customs. The pope, typically, simply took no notice. 
Once Becket had incurred royal disgrace, his servants and friends began to abandon him and, fearing the worst, he began to negotiate with Louis VII of France for asylum, a correspondence which the royalists would have considered treasonable. After an unsuccessful attempt in the late summer to escape to France in order to consult the pope, then at Sens, he was summoned by the king to attend a council of the magnates to be held in Northampton Castle on 6 October, where he was to answer a charge made by John Marshal that he had denied him justice in his feudal court. When this charge fizzled out, Henry accused him of the embezzlement of royal revenues while serving as chancellor. And Becket knew, when the king refused an offer of 2000 marks, which Henry, bishop of Winchester, offered to find, in settlement of all claims, that he was in great peril, perhaps, he thought, of imprisonment or even death, although he probably mistook rumoured threats for serious intentions. 
On Tuesday 13 October, before the bishops could declare the court's judgment on him, Becket made a preventative appeal to the pope. Whereupon Henry decided that they should make a counter-appeal and do their best to get Alexander to depose him. Judgment would be pronounced by the barons. It was also decided to add Becket's appeal, deemed to be in breach of the constitutions of Clarendon, which he had sworn to observe, to the list of his crimes. But when the chief justiciar approached, Becket refused to hear the judgment: he had been cited only in the case of John Marshal; besides, barons were incompetent to judge an archbishop. He marched out of the room, slipped out of the castle, and the next day, before dawn, in a downpour, found a way out of the walled town and with three companions rode hard for Lincoln. Then, in disguise, he made a slow and devious way to Eastry, a Canterbury manor near Sandwich. Finally, on 2 November, he crossed the channel in a small boat, landing that afternoon near Dunkirk in the county of Flanders. 
Becket's first aim was to seek the protection of the king of France, who welcomed him at Soissons, and then secure the support of the pope, a fellow exile at Sens, despite Henry's efforts to keep these princes at least neutral. But Louis realized that he could use Becket against Henry and the pope started as he was to continue throughout Becket's exile, by avoiding the trap of having to pronounce a definitive sentence on any of the matters at issue. When Becket produced his copy of the constitutions of Clarendon and took Alexander through them clause by clause, his weary auditor eventually declared that none of the laws was good and some were directly contrary to canon law; but some others were tolerable. Since he seems not to have indicated which were which, and never put his views into writing, the matter remained satisfactorily in suspense. If Becket offered to resign his see because of his transgressions, it was refused. And it was decided that he should retire to the Cistercian abbey at Pontigny in the duchy of Burgundy, outside the French royal demesne, not too distant from Sens and the courier routes, but situated in a wilderness, out of sight. 
Dependent on charity -- mainly Louis VII's, for Henry had confiscated all his possessions and taken the archbishopric into custody -- Becket could afford to assemble no more than a basic household at Pontigny from the large pool of his family, servants, and supporters whom the king had banished from England. Robert, canon of Merton, remained his chaplain. William de Capes, his marshal, was in charge of the lay servants, including Becket's valet, Brown, and all secular matters. Herbert of Bosham seems to have been at the head of the chancery and to have had the archbishop's ear. Other important clerks were Alexander-Llywelyn, Becket's Welsh cross-bearer, Lombardo di Piacenza, John Cantor (Planeta), Henry of Houghton, and Gunter of Winchester. John of Salisbury distanced himself by living at Rheims with his old friend, Pierre de Celle, abbot of St Remi, but could always be called on for help. These clerks served Becket in three main ways. They produced the letters needed for the constant collection of intelligence and diplomacy on behalf of the archbishop's cause. They served as bearers of the letters and as diplomats, operating usually in pairs. And they formed an academy in which Becket improved his education, especially -- to John of Salisbury's regret -- in the field of law. 
Once again Becket's life had taken a sharp turn. His disgrace and reclusion were a great shock to one so outgoing and in many ways so worldly. He gave himself to private devotions and despair and had to be coaxed back to some normality by Herbert. But, although living among devout monks, he never became a monk, even, it seems, 'in petto'. He blamed his fall on the 'traitor' bishops, particularly Gilbert Foliot of London, and other evil courtiers rather than directly on the king. And some vestiges of his love for Henry persisted until the end. The exile was a souring experience. Although dependent on Louis and Alexander, he could not completely trust either; and there was dissension in his household as in all emigre societies. Becket had become a pawn in two intertwined power struggles, the rivalry of Henry and Louis and the contest between Alexander and the imperial antipope. And the great web of diplomacy he spun does not seem to have had much influence on what happened. He had to wait on events. 'Expectavi' (I have been waiting) is a word which occurs often in the 'Becket correspondence'; and the event most awaited was a death. Yet he was not passive. And his endurance, persistence and courage are remarkable. He stood at times 'contra mundum', and, after the first shock, could not be moved. 
In August 1165, when Alexander was about to venture back into Italy, he imposed a truce on Becket to last at least until Easter 1166. He would not have Henry provoked at such a time. And while the king celebrated Easter at Angers he received some of the archbishop's clerks, including John of Salisbury and Herbert of Bosham, who wished to explore the possibility of returning to England, possibly because they feared what might happen when the truce expired. Neither was offered acceptable terms. And the worst was to happen. Alexander, back in Rome, at Becket's urgent entreaty, began to arm him against his enemies. Among a portfolio of privileges and measures dated April-May was the grant of a papal legation in England, excluding only the diocese of York but not the person of the king. In anticipation of its receipt, Becket started to go on pilgrimages. In June he travelled south from Soissons to the Cluniac abbey of Vezelay, with the secret intention, hidden even from his clerks, who he feared might try to stop him, of using his legatine powers to strike against his enemies. On Whitsunday (12 June), at the invitation of the abbot, he celebrated the public mass, preached to the congregation on his wrongs and sufferings, and then launched his anathemas. He condemned the constitutions of Clarendon and those who supported and enforced them, quashed explicitly about half the clauses, and finally passed sentences of anathema and excommunication on all the royal servants who had been involved in the various measures against him, some of them by name, but not the king. In November the pope, rather grudgingly, confirmed his legate's actions. 
Henry replied to these sentences by getting both the Norman and the English bishops to appeal to the pope against them and by pressing the Cistercian order to expel Becket from Pontigny. The archbishop's clerks, if not their master, had tired of their seclusion; and in November 1166 the exiles, at the invitation of Louis, moved to the ancient Benedictine abbey of St Columba outside the north wall of the royal and archiepiscopal city of Sens. There Becket remained for four years. Edward Grim, on the authority of Becket's chaplain, Robert of Merton, and Guernes, on the testimony of the servant Brown, describe the archbishop's secret austerities behind a facade of normality. Their master participated in the monastic horarium and celebrated mass each day. He drank the best wine that money could buy, but always diluted with water, and only so as to warm his congenitally cold stomach. He ate handfuls of ginger and cloves for the same purpose. His bedchamber was furnished with a leather-bound wooden bed covered with costly sheets of the finest and whitest linen and an embroidered quilt strewn with a little straw. But his shirt and breeches were of the roughest goat's-hair; engaged in private prayer, he was hardly ever in his bed; and at least three times a day he was scourged by his chaplain on his bare back until the blood flowed. With these and other mortifications he destroyed all carnal desires. 
While Becket was at Sens it was the pope, always under threat from a rival, who was most anxious for a settlement of the quarrel, and he dispatched legates 'a latere' to this end in 1167, 1168-9, and 1170. But, since neither Henry nor Becket shifted substantially from their entrenched positions, and Alexander would not until 1170 authorize his legates to impose a solution on the parties, there was stalemate. Becket merely clarified his terms. He required the abrogation of all 'evil' customs affecting the church in England, the restoration of himself and all his fellow sufferers in the cause to all their former offices and possessions, compensation for all their losses during their exile, and the punishment of all those who had injured them in any way. Henry, however, although he was determined to keep the rights he claimed to have inherited from his ancestor Henry I, did in 1169 offer a series of important concessions: he would abandon any bad customs introduced since 1154, or 1135, and would even have them all scrutinized by learned churchmen. Also, when negotiations for a settlement began seriously in that year, he abated some of the financial claims he had made against Becket at Northampton. In fact, many of Becket's less fanatical supporters believed that the king was offering terms on which the archbishop could honourably return to Canterbury and, with Henry's co-operation, settle outstanding details. 
Becket, however, so distrusted the king that he regarded all these concessions as no more than baits to lure him into Henry's dominions where he would be arrested and the projected reforms abandoned. His fears were expressed in his reiterated demand for a kiss of peace from Henry as a pledge of his good faith. His attitude began to be regarded by many of his well-wishers as paranoid, and throughout 1169 there was growing irritation and despair at the wanton prolongation of this scandalous situation. It can be thought that the end shows how right Becket was. But his protraction of the dispute and its untidy resolution at Freteval in July 1170 contributed to the dreadful result. Between 1167 and 1170 Alexander kept Becket on a fairly tight rein. In 1167 the legates, impatient with his intransigence, allowed all those excommunicated at Vezelay to be absolved, if penitent; and many were. Becket regarded these absolutions as invalid. In the winter of 1167-8 Alexander in effect suspended Becket's legation until he and the king were reconciled or, at the latest, 5 March 1169. When the deadline expired, Becket, at Clairvaux on Palm Sunday (13 April), excommunicated ten persons, including the bishops of London (Gilbert Foliot) and Salisbury 
(Jocelin de Bohun, died 1184)
, whose offences he considered notorious, and announced that he would extend the list on Ascension day (29 May). All these sentences, at the pope's request suspended until Michaelmas (29 September), Becket reactivated on that day. 
What the principal intermediaries -- the legates 'a latere' and Louis of France -- worked to achieve was a personal reconciliation of the parties on general terms, in the hope that shelved problems and disputes would disappear in time. Once Becket had recovered Canterbury, Henry and Louis could themselves make a permanent peace treaty and together set out on a crusade to the Holy Land. Becket and Henry did meet at Montmirail on 7 January 1169, only for the archbishop, to the dismay of all except Herbert of Bosham, to add a saving clause to the agreed words of his submission to the king. They then came very close to an agreement at Montmartre in Paris on 18 November, when Becket backed out because of Henry's prevarication over a kiss of peace. After this failure Becket reactivated all sentences imposed on his enemies, threatened that unless peace was made by 2 February 1170 he would impose a general interdict on England, and sent for a new portfolio of papal bulls against his opponents in the kingdom. 
Alexander, too, had run out of patience. In letters dated 19 January 1170 he rehearsed what he believed to be an agreed 'form of peace'. This was essentially the terms laid down by Becket, but slightly modified to make them less offensive to the king. And the pope commissioned Rotrou, archbishop of Rouen, and Bernard, bishop of Nevers, to get them formally accepted by the contestants. Moreover, if Henry would not complete the major requirements within forty days of being ordered so to do, the commissioners were to subject all his continental lands to an interdict, without hindrance of appeals. But before the ultimatum, delayed by the usual expedients, expired, the conflict ended unexpectedly and fortuitously. Henry wanted, for various reasons, to have his eldest son, the young Henry, immediately crowned king; and he still had some papal bulls, obtained in 1161 when Canterbury was vacant, which allowed the archbishop of York to perform the ceremony. Becket, alerted by rumours, secured papal prohibitions of such a grave breach of Canterbury's privileges; but it is doubtful whether, in view of Henry's security measures, these were published in England. The coronation was performed on 14 June in Westminster Abbey by Roger de Pont l'Eveque assisted by some ten English and Norman bishops; and then Henry returned to Normandy to face the music. 
When Becket recovered from the shock, his anger was directed more at the bishops who had taken part in the ceremony than at the king. He also believed, erroneously, that the order of service had been revised, so that the young Henry, instead of swearing to protect the holy church of God, its liberties, and servants, was made to swear to observe the ancient customs of the kingdom (that is, the constitutions of Clarendon). He therefore sent to Alexander for bulls against all the guilty bishops and supporters of the constitutions and prepared to complete the peace negotiations with the king, so that he could wreak vengeance on his treacherous suffragans. The preliminaries were easily achieved. Henry, when presented on his arrival in Normandy about 24 June with Alexander's ultimatum, accepted from the commissioners the 'form of peace', with the only reservation of the kiss of peace, since he had sworn at Montmartre never to give it. The commissioners then persuaded Becket to attend a conference between Henry and Louis planned for 21 July near Freteval in Touraine. 
The business went through with hardly a hitch. The one obstacle, the kiss of peace, was negotiated by Henry's oath, warranted by the archbishop of Sens, that by refusing it he was not laying a trap for the archbishop, and he also gave some assurance about giving the kiss freely at some later date. This was the only concession Becket made except for a temporary postponement of the receipt of damages. On 22 July, in a long private meeting, with both men on horseback, Becket rehearsed his grievances, and Henry gave soft answers and assurances which, inevitably, were recollected differently by the parties in the following months. But at the time Becket was satisfied. Both men were deeply moved by the meeting, and there was an emotional reconciliation. It was not, however, without reservation. Henry granted his peace and their possessions to all Becket's clerks and companions. But when Becket was asked to reciprocate in respect of the king's supporters, particularly Geoffrey Ridel, he refused. His useful excuse, to be repeated on later occasions, was that the sentences of excommunication were Alexander's and only he could remove them. 
Becket, Henry of Bosham informed the pope, had won a glorious victory. But the archbishop, despite plenty of advice and warning from Alexander and many others, had not the mind to win the peace. From Freteval to the end, however much he disguised his motives by an appeal to principles, he was intent on revenge. Although Henry at Freteval urged him to rejoin the court and travel with him at the royal expense, the exile insisted on returning immediately to France and Sens to give thanks to all those who had helped him. He then refused to go to England until he was sure that the terms of the agreement, especially the return of his and the others' estates, were being implemented. He also needed money to pay off his creditors. Moreover, he was waiting for the arrival of papal sentences against the English bishops. Hence, after his one-day meeting with Henry in July, he did not see him again until the end of September in the Loire valley, when he complained about the slowness of the restoration of his estates, provoked a quarrel, and then made it up. He left Sens for England on 1 November. 
The recovery of properties after six years' alienation was no easy matter, and the senior king's absence from England did not help. So Becket and his party, still short of money, lingered in France. Further delay was caused by the unsuitability of the papal letters that arrived towards the end of October in answer to Becket's complaints about the coronation. Alexander suspended all those bishops who had taken part in the ceremony and sworn to observe the constitutions of Clarendon, and he also decreed that the bishops of London and Salisbury had lapsed into excommunication. There were also references to the improper coronation service and to Henry's crimes against the church. Even Becket could see that in the post-war period these letters were needlessly provocative, and he sent immediately to the pope for a new set with the same penalties but without the offensive passages. These could not be expected much before February 1171. However, a confirmation of Becket's legatine powers, which reached him towards the end of November in a batch of letters dated 8-13 October, after Alexander had heard of the peace, gave him the power to act, although, typically, the pope counselled mercy and magnanimity. And, about the same time, he was given cause to act, for he heard that the English bishops, together with the electors to all the sees that had fallen vacant during the exile, were preparing to cross the channel to join the king and not only take defence measures against the archbishop's threats but also, probably, elect some of those royal clerks who had been Henry's agents against their spiritual lord. Naturally Becket regarded all this as an intolerable injury to the church of Canterbury. He decided to return to England and act. He and a small party travelled to Wissant in the county of Boulogne. He sent ahead a servant in disguise to serve sentences against Roger of York, Gilbert of London, and Jocelin of Salisbury, and, probably on 30 November, crossed at night to Sandwich. 
Becket knew that his return would be perilous. But he was a brave man, a fatalist who put his trust in God, and, despite the views of some of the hagiographers, it is clear that he did not seek martyrdom: his aim was to defeat his enemies. He dealt successfully with the royal officials who met his arrival; his reception by the Christ Church monks on 2 December was at least decorous, and he gave each of them a kiss of peace. To all who asked him to remit the sentences on the bishops, he gave his standard reply, that they were the pope's -- although his legation was not completely consistent with that. While Roger of York, Gilbert of London, and Jocelin of Salisbury went to Normandy to complain to the king, Becket started a visitation of his diocese, which alarmed many, and hoped to spend Christmas with the young king at Winchester. But since it was believed that the archbishop held his coronation invalid, and rumoured that he intended to dethrone the youth, the king's guardians and advisers refused the visit and ordered him to return to Canterbury and stay there. Becket, who had a warm regard for young Henry, probably intended only to insist on his recrowning in order to remove any possible defect, and he was disappointed by his failure. The enthusiastic welcome, however, that he received from the people wherever he went, although it alarmed the regency government, buoyed him up. 
On his return to Canterbury, Becket began to discipline his monks, refusing to ordain all those, save one, who had been admitted since his departure in 1164 -- a penalty he later revoked; and he was blockaded in the city by Ranulf de Broc, a royal servant who had had custody of the temporalities during the exile and had been stripping them before handing them back. On Christmas day Becket preached to the people in the cathedral and then from the pulpit excommunicated all violators of the rights of his church and the fomenters of discord in general, and named just a few. Next he announced the sentences which had been awarded to all those prelates involved in the illegal coronation. On the following day he dispatched some of his most trusted clerks, including Herbert of Bosham and Alexander of Wales, on missions to the pope, Louis of France, and other French notables to report that the terms of the peace promised by Henry at Freteval had not been carried out, and, presumably, to ask the pope to lay an interdict on the king's continental lands. 
At Henry II's Christmas court at Bur-le-Roi, near Bayeux, the events were regarded very differently. The three visiting prelates probably voiced the general view that it was Becket who had violated the peace, particularly by suspending nearly the whole bench of bishops. It seems to have been decided that a party under William de Mandeville, earl of Essex, and the constable, Richard de Humet, should go to England, confront the archbishop with the various complaints and demands, and, in case of his defiance, arrest him. But, probably on Christmas day, Henry II in his exasperation uttered the fateful words, 'What miserable drones and traitors have I nurtured and promoted in my household who let their lord be treated with such shameful contempt by a low-born clerk!' (Robertson and Sheppard, 2.429). Four of his knights, William de Tracy, Reginald Fitzurse, Hugh de Morville, and Richard Brito (or le Bret) -- the first three barons of middling rank -- were stung to action and acted secretly within, or on the fringe of, the official mission. Bad weather in the channel, which dispersed the unit, also confused the operation. William de Mandeville did not reach Canterbury until after Becket was dead. The constable, on arrival in England, ordered the Young King's guardians to send, without informing their lord, a squadron of knights to Canterbury to arrest the archbishop. The four conspirators, however, reached by different routes their rendezvous at Saltwood Castle, held by Ranulf de Broc, at about the same time, the evening of 28 December. With Ranulf they planned to beset the cathedral complex on the following day, put direct pressure on Becket to absolve the bishops and give pledges of good behaviour, and perhaps arrest him. Local garrison troops were mobilized, and next morning the operation was mounted. Ranulf seized the gatehouse to the courtyard while the four barons, led by Reginald Fitzurse, with about a dozen knights and some other helpers, went on to corner their quarry. 
Becket, after dining in the hall of his palace at two o'clock, had retired with some of his inner circle to his chamber when the arrival of messengers from the king overseas was announced. When the visitors were ushered in, although Becket knew at least the three seniors well, for they had been his vassals when chancellor, he did not break off his conversation with a monk or eventually rise to greet them. The apparently rambling and hostile interchanges that followed, with the stock charges and countercharges, ended when others of the archbishop's household crowded in and the barons retreated to summon reinforcements. Once the clerks realized how great the danger to Becket was, they hustled him, very much against his will, by an internal route to asylum in the church, which they entered from the south cloister. When Fitzurse rushed in, after Becket had ordered that the door should not be barred, the archbishop turned and stood by a pillar in the centre of the opening to the north transept. By this time he had been deserted by all his clerks, including John of Salisbury, and had in close attendance only his chaplain, Robert of Merton, a monk, William, who left after the first blow was struck, and a visitor, Edward Grim, who was to write one of the first lives. The monks, who had been celebrating vespers in the choir, and the others watched from a safe distance. Daylight was fading, and only the main outline of the subsequent events can be trusted. 
Although Becket knew that he could hide from his assailants, he chose deliberately to face them. He trusted in God, the sanctity of the place, and his priestly order. Also he would not be browbeaten by social inferiors. When the four barons demanded that he release the bishops from their sentences, he refused. When Fitzurse tried to arrest him and hoist him onto William de Tracy's shoulders, he fought back fiercely. Insults also were traded. Finally, while Hugh de Morville kept the watchers at bay, Fitzurse and the others struck in turn. The first blow, partly deflected by Grim's protective arm, sliced off the top of the archbishop's head. Becket fell face downwards, with his head to the north and the altar of St Benedict to his right. Richard Brito delivered the 'coup de grace' and Hugh de Horsea, a subdeacon who had accompanied the soldiers, scattered his brains on the floor. Becket, as he collapsed, had commended his soul to God, the Blessed Mary, St Denis, and the patron saints of his church. 
After the soldiers had retreated to Saltwood Castle, the terrified monks began to pay some attention to the corpse. In the morning a kinsman of Ranulf de Broc returned and ordered it to be buried immediately in some obscure place; and a marble sarcophagus, already prepared for another burial and sunk into the floor of the Trinity Chapel at the eastern end of the crypt, was chosen. The body was not washed or embalmed, as was the custom, nor was there, because of the pollution of the church, any religious service. It was probably just after Becket's fiftieth birthday, and at the time many men thought that a traitor to the king had met an end he well deserved. 
Both English kings expressed their sorrow at Becket's death and protested their innocence. But they could do little against a great surge of popular horror at the murder and the demands for vengeance made by Becket's clerks to sympathizers in France and the papal court. On 25 January 1171 the archbishop of Sens, despite the objection of his fellow commissioner, the archbishop of Rouen, laid an interdict on all Henry's French fiefs. News of the death reached Alexander at Frascati in March, and on Maundy Thursday (25 March) he excommunicated generally the killers and all their supporters. Shortly afterwards he confirmed the interdict and all Becket's sentences against the English bishops, and placed a personal interdict on Henry II. But a process of reconciliation was soon in motion; and by 19 May 1172, when Henry submitted at Avranches to the papal legates Albert and Theodwin on agreed terms, almost all involved in the quarrels and murder had expressed penitence and been absolved. 
Meanwhile a cult, associated with the belief in the curative power of Becket's blood, had started spontaneously at Canterbury, and soon spread widely. The first recorded miraculous cure was in the city on 4 January 1171, and by Whitsun the miracles were proliferating. The timorous monks, cowed by royal officials, were at first hostile, and fastidious theologians looked askance at the drinking of blood other than Christ's and despised these vulgar signs of sanctity. As St Augustine had remarked, in relation to the Donatists, it is not the penalty that makes true martyrs, but the cause. But the martyrdom had a cathartic effect and the cause was largely abandoned by adherents and opponents alike. Attention was concentrated on the cult. The cathedral was reopened to the public in Easter week 1171 and on Becket's secular birthday, 21 December, it was reconciled by papal permission by bishops Bartholomew of Exeter and Richard of Chester. The crowds of pilgrims and the cures created a great stir. John of Salisbury asked members of his circle, to whom he sent a letter describing the passion, whether it would be proper to honour the martyr as a saint before a formal canonization. And Pierre de Celle, abbot of St Remi at Rheims, who had sheltered John during his exile, answered that it would. But both kept their heads. Celle reminded his old friend of how in the past they had often joked together about Becket and groaned at the impossibility of ever being able to find a shrine big enough to contain him. But now God had made a laughing-stock of them. For now everyone in both England and France was flocking to his shrine -- and he himself was intending to go. But he never did. Sceptics were simply amazed. At an assembly of the English magnates, Henry of Houghton, formerly one of Becket's clerks in exile, was approached by one of the grandees and asked a shrewd question. How was it that Becket, who, as chancellor, had been the most severe of them all against the church, now surpassed all the saints they knew in the number and magnitude of his miracles? The clerk answered that the archbishop had suffered exile and many injuries culminating in his cruel death. If St Peter and the thief on the cross could obtain God's pardon for their sins, surely Becket had more than atoned for his much less serious transgressions. 
After Becket's enemies had been reconciled to the church in 1171-2, there was, except among a few zealots, a general desire to regularize the situation. A basic measure would be the martyr's canonization. The pressure for this came from the French church and royal court, activated by Herbert of Bosham and John of Salisbury. And when the pope discovered that the chastened Henry had no strong objection and that the English hierarchy would at least acquiesce, he canonized Becket on Ash Wednesday (21 February) 1173 at Segni. On 12 July 1174 Henry II, beset by rebellions, made a pilgrimage to the tomb, humiliated himself and was scourged. In August 1179 Louis VII of France, Philippe, count of Flanders, Baudouin, count of Guines, and Henri, duke of Louvain, crossed from Wissant to visit the shrine. Henry met them at Dover and conducted them to and from Canterbury. He was demonstrating that the saint was now his and that he had deprived Louis of this valuable asset. 
Becket's shrine remained popular with pilgrims throughout the middle ages. It provided the monks of Christ Church with a considerable, and corrupting, revenue. Guardians of the shrine were soon appointed and records of the cures kept. A method of distributing the 'blood' to pilgrims in phials cast from tin or lead was devised; and these were sold for a farthing and filled with 'the water of St Thomas' from a jug. The recipients wore the phials suspended from the neck as a recognizable badge. The monks had quickly protected the sarcophagus with a stone box, pierced by four oval portholes through which pilgrims could peer and touch. When canonizing Becket, Alexander had, as was customary, ordered the monks to translate the body to a more honourable tomb. But because of various obstacles this was not done until 7 July 1220 by Archbishop Stephen Langton (died 1228) to celebrate the martyr's jubilee. 
Some of the immediate sources of the cult, such as admiration for a man who had withstood the mighty oppressors of the poor, anger at his treatment, and eagerness to participate in the gifts he bestowed after his death, soon dried up. What probably perpetuated the cult was the general acceptance of Thomas as the kingdom's patron saint. Louis VII and France had St Denis with his popular shrine outside Paris. England's St Edmund at Bury and St Edward the Confessor at Westminster were not in the same class, and St George had not yet caught on. The shrine at Canterbury met the needs of popular piety. Geoffrey Chaucer's 'Canterbury Tales' illustrates the pilgrims' way in the fourteenth century. And there is no reason to think that the destruction of the shrine in September 1538 by order of Thomas Cromwell, acting as Henry VIII's vicar-general, and the proscription of the cult, were popular. Yet, with the growth of secularism, the popularity of St Thomas has waned. The play 'Becket', written by Alfred, Lord Tennyson, which in 1884 he dedicated to the subject's successor as lord chancellor, the earl of Selborne, opens dramatically with 'Henry and Becket at chess', but found no place on the English stage. T. S. Eliot's 'Murder in the Cathedral' (1935), which has had a considerable success, is a somewhat enigmatic pageant of the archbishop's last days at Canterbury, by no means entirely sympathetic to the martyr. 
Although Thomas of Canterbury was revered for some four centuries in England and his tomb for a time rivalled that of St James of Compostela as a pilgrim shrine in western Christendom, in his lifetime and again after the Reformation he was a controversial figure. Most observers have considered that he was not a born saint. It would also seem that his brilliant, if chequered, career had a mostly harmful effect on all those connected with it. And in whatever way the causes for which he fought are regarded, the zeal with which he advanced them would appear excessive. But he must also be credited with important achievements. On the matter of the 'evil' royal customs in the church, his murder forced Henry to make important concessions to the pope in 1172-6. As regards the 'double punishment' of clerical criminals, he almost single-handedly conquered both traditional practices and the hostility of the best legal opinion. His martyrdom converted the Bolognese masters, and eventually Alexander, to his views and created a wide and irrational 'benefit of clergy' to the detriment of both church and state. Becket also reanimated the subversive element in Christianity which his predecessor and hero, Anselm, had exemplified. Stephen Langton, who displayed the martyrdom on his counterseal, Edmund Rich (died 1240), and John Pecham (died 1292) were archbishops of Canterbury in the thirteenth century who were not unmindful of the example of their awkward and determined predecessor. By defending the rights of the church against the lay powers they sometimes helped to protect the rights of those less protected against tyrannical rulers. 
Becket's contemporaries provide the best spectrum of opinions on his life and work. For Gilbert Foliot, bishop of London, a pious, learned, and conservative Benedictine monk, he was an unsuitable and untrustworthy leader who brought the English church to ruin, only to flee in disguise at night, although no one went in pursuit. For his candid clerk, John of Salisbury, he was a flawed instrument of God, spoilt by his follies in the royal court when chancellor, who, although fighting for a just cause, failed because he had given too many hostages to fortune. For Herbert of Bosham he was in all things mighty -- great in the palace, great in hall, great in the church, great in exile, great in his return, and especially great at journey's end. Herbert, who was one of Becket's longest serving clerks and probably his closest friend, was conscious of an innate and constant grandeur. 


@@@@@


doc= 27202


Brown, Thomas (d. 1180), officer of the exchequer, was possibly one of the Brown family, members of which had served as officials for Henry I. After that king's death, like others of his countrymen, Brown went to Norman Sicily. In two royal charters of Roger II, king of Sicily (1130-54), dated 1143 and 1147, he appears in a prominent position as 'magister' Thomas. He may also have been both 'capellanus regis' ('king's chaplain') and datary of royal documents, although only spurious documents now survive as evidence for his tenure of these offices, so no precise dating can be given; it was probably while Robert of Selby, his fellow countryman, was Sicilian royal chancellor in 1139-52. That he was already 'magister' in Sicily suggests some experience and seniority before his exile. The death of Selby in 1152 and the rise of Maio di Bari to be all-powerful minister under Roger II's son and successor, William I (1154-66), probably clouded Brown's prospects of further advancement. Richard fitz Nigel, the bishop of London, who knew him well, says in the 'Dialogus de Scaccario' that he had held a high place in the councils of the king of Sicily until 'a king arose who knew him not'; eventually, therefore, in response to repeated invitations from Henry II, Brown returned to England. 
For two years from 1157 Brown's nephew Ralph was paid as a royal clerk at the rate of 4died a day; Thomas Brown himself received $42 14's'. from the king in 1160 and an annual stipend of $7 12's'. 1died (5died a day) for the next twenty years while he held an important position in the royal exchequer. The king was so confident of his loyalty and discretion that Brown was made responsible for keeping a special roll on which he recorded the laws of the realm and the 'secreta' of the king. It has been supposed that there was a deliberate word play here on the Greek word 'secreton', used of the Sicilian financial office, but there is no evidence for Brown's employment in Sicily on the financial affairs of the crown -- a consideration that removes the principal reason for believing in the reciprocal influence of the Sicilian and English royal financial institutions. Although Madox conjectured that the special duties assigned to Brown were the basis of the later office of chancellor of the exchequer, Poole argued that his functions were more like those of the thirteenth-century remembrancers. Between 1164 and 1175 he was also described as the king's almoner, and during this period he has been credited with the responsibility for revising the 'Domesday' information about Herefordshire, the county from whose farm his stipend was drawn. He had property of his own in both Hereford and Winchester. He died after Easter in 1180. 


@@@@@


doc= 27203


Beverley, Thomas of (d. after 1225), abbot of Froidment and hagiographer, presumably originated at Beverley in the East Riding of Yorkshire. Following the death of his father, Hulno (who may have had Hungarian connections), he became attached to the household of Thomas Becket, most likely during the years when Becket was provost of Beverley, between 1154 and 1162. He followed Becket into exile, but parted company with the archbishop during the latter's stay at Pontigny between 1164 and 1166, choosing to make his way to the Cistercian abbey of Froidment in Picardy, where he became a monk and was later elected abbot. At Froidment Thomas wrote a life in verse and prose of his own sister Margaret, who died in 1192. Margaret followed Thomas into the Cistercian order, but before doing so she went on pilgrimage with their mother, Sibyl, to Jerusalem. Sibyl died there, but Margaret made further pilgrimages to Montserrat in Catalonia and Le Puy in central France, before taking vows at Sauve Benite. Thomas of Beverley's life of St Margaret of Jerusalem, much of which was published by Angel Manrique in his 'Annales Cisterciennes', provides a readable, almost picaresque, account of Margaret's eventful career, particularly notable for its detailed descriptions of the Holy Land. Thomas is also believed to have written a life of St Thomas of Canterbury, though his authorship of this work is contested. He evidently lived to a great age, dying some time after 1225. 


@@@@@


doc= 27204


Ely, Richard of (fl. 1177-1189), prior of Ely and historian, was a monk of Ely Cathedral priory from boyhood. Little is known of the details of his life and death, but he is commonly identified with the Richard who was sub-prior of Ely in the early 1170s and prior from 1177 until at least 1189. Richard is usually regarded as having been the author of the 'Liber Eliensis', a work in three books covering the main phases of the history of Ely. However, authorship has also been claimed for one Thomas (fl. c.1177), also a monk at Ely, on the basis of a miraculous cure recorded in the 'Liber' as wrought by St AEthelthryth 'in me myself, Thomas by name', a cure whose authenticity could not be doubted on the grounds that 'I Thomas have had it inserted on this page' ('Liber Eliensis', ed. Blake, 312, 314). The 'I myself', it is argued, was the compiler of the 'Liber', whose name was thus Thomas, and whose reference to Richard as prior shows that he was writing no earlier than 1177. Although this story has its own interest, as showing a monastic writer attempting to shame the writers of his day into making greater efforts to spread the merits of their saints by introducing an exemplary story of his own, the likelihood is that the whole episode, containing the Thomas miracle and the 'I Thomas' passages, was derived from an earlier collection, one that had no connection with the compiler of the 'Liber'. But even if Thomas's authorship be conceded, this would only affect the first two books, from AEthelthryth's foundation to the creation of the bishopric in 1109, and book 3, dealing with the acts of the first two bishops of Ely, down to 1169, is substantially Richard's work. 
As far as his training for the writing of history was concerned, Richard probably benefited from the teaching at Ely from about 1138 by the rhetorician Julian, who had taught liberal arts (his grammar being preferable to that of some of the Latin writers), philosophy, and theology in his own home town of London. Later Richard seems to have performed the duties of a cellarer, being praised for his prudent provision for the needs of each individual monk from the abbey's common substance. This probably explains why he 'alone of all' refused to accept the alienation of the manor of Stetchworth assigned to the monks' food and clothing. Conducting the subsequent appeal to Rome in 1150 with the newfangled procedure of papal judges-delegate, Richard so impressed Pope Eugenius III with his eloquence that he earned a much fuller access and colloquy than the others, which he used to air the grievances of the priory. This papal audience must have been the high point of his career, second only to his other achievement as the priory historian. 
The quality of books 1 and 2, and of the approximately 140 documents in book 3, is bound to be uneven, varying with the value of each component part, the accuracy of its transmission, and its placing in an appropriate chronological and historical context. This last was successfully achieved with the incorporation of the 'Libellus' of Bishop AEthelwold (died 984) into book 2, but not with the divers sources of the Norman conquest. The contemporary history of book 3 evoked some lively historical narrative -- including the use of Sallust's 'Bellum Catilinae', as in the description of King Stephen's 'anarchy' -- such that the later redactor of the 'Liber' was able to admire Richard 'as a man most zealous in the business of histories ['historiarum studiosissimus'], accomplished and most eloquent in discourse' ('Liber Eliensis', ed. Blake, 284). Yet he could be guilty of quite atrocious bias. The professional administrators installed by Bishop Nigel (died 1169) to administer the see of Ely during his own absences in the 1130s are pictured as a bunch of 'malefactors' bent on looting the abbey's treasures. Oppressed, however, by the sufferings (including seven deaths) inflicted by the avenging St AEthelthryth, he would have deferred a promise to name them and their punishments, but for a fear of being called a liar. But eventually, fatigued by the burden of his zeal, Richard arranged to enjoy his retirement 'thinking that, long buffeted by the waves of this great labour, he had been released from the demands of this prolix work and reached the harbour of perpetual idleness' ('Liber Eliensis', ed. Blake, 391). 


@@@@@


doc= 27205


Thomas (fl. 1170-1180), poet, was a Norman clerk, and author of a romance, 'Tristan', in which he names himself twice (as Thomas and Tumas) and whom his German imitator Gottfried von Strassburg (1210) calls 'Thomas von Britanje'. His romance survives in the form of ten fragments, drawn from six manuscripts (M. Benskin discovered an important fragment in Carlisle in 1994), and is estimated to have comprised a little over 12,000 lines in all. Its contents can be largely reconstructed from the Norse translation, the 'Tristrams Saga' (1226). Thomas was conscious of the co-existence of rival versions of the legend in the hands of a variety of story-tellers and rejected the idea of a total synthesis in favour of following his own course. This involved criticizing certain choices and showing confidence in the Welsh latimer and story-teller Breri (Bledhericus). Thomas makes powerful use of a training in dialectic and rhetoric and appears as a pessimistic, and frequently ironic, commentator on the vicissitudes of earthly love. His language is not markedly Anglo-Norman and it is likely that he settled in England from Normandy. His romance contains a eulogistic description of London. Thomas is certainly writing after Wace's 'Brut' (1155) and, arguably, after Chretien de Troyes's 'Cliges' (probably dating to the 1170s or early 1180s). His frequently posited presence at the court of Henry II and Eleanor of Aquitaine, particularly at the time of the estrangement and the revelation of Henry's adultery with Rosamund Clifford, must remain mere supposition. At all events, Thomas's 'Tristan' cannot convincingly be read as an endorsement of 'fin' amor'. 
The 


@@@@@


doc= 27206


Hibernicus, Thomas (c.1270-c.1340), theologian, was born in Ireland. He was already a master of arts in 1295, which suggests that he could have been born as early as 1265, but certainly no later than 1275. He may have studied in England for a short time, and it was certainly in England that he learned to copy books, because those examples of his handwriting that survive display many features that are distinctively English. However, he left England early in his scholarly career and studied arts in Paris, at the Sorbonne. He had graduated as master of arts by 9 June 1295, when as such he witnessed a document concerning college business. He went on to study theology and probably took the bachelor degree. His formal theological studies went no further, however, and he probably left the Sorbonne by 1306, because the earliest manuscript of his work, which dates from that period, describes him as 'one-time fellow' of the college. He may have been appointed to a benefice, and he certainly remained in Paris, closely associated with the Sorbonne, for the rest of his life. He wrote almost exclusively on matters of pastoral theology, concerns that suggest he had experienced the work of pastoral care at first hand. He may have received a benefice from Nicolas de Bar-le-Duc, bishop of Macon, for whom he made a copy of his 'Manipulus florum'. He died in Paris probably in the 1330s or 1340s, and left the Sorbonne at least seven books from his considerable library, including copies of his own works. He also bequeathed a substantial cash gift of 16 livres. 
Thomas Hibernicus's best-known and most influential work was the 'Manipulus florum', a handbook of pastoral theology and preaching material intended for the parish priest. He probably completed the text about the time he left the Sorbonne, and it was certainly in circulation by 1310. As Hibernicus explains in the prologue, the 'Manipulus' was the product of many hours of research spent in the library of his old college. It gathered together some 6000 extracts from classical and patristic sources, along with a bibliography listing over 350 different works. The work was in every sense a compilation -- Hibernicus borrowed his subject list and extracts from many existing works, including the popular 'Liber exceptionum' and the well-known collections of literary 'exempla', the 'Florilegium Anglicanum' and 'Florilegium Gallicanum'. But his organization of the extracts did represent a significant step forward. Arranged alphabetically under a comprehensive list of subject headings, and with a vast index, it was by far the most sophisticated and yet easy to use of contemporary reference works. 
Hibernicus also wrote three shorter works probably intended to complement each other, 'De tribus punctis', on the work of the secular clergy, 'De tribus hierarchiis', which expands the discussion of hierarchies included at the end of 'De tribus punctis', and 'De tribus sensibus sacre scripture', which explains the four senses of scripture. Hibernicus was notable for the extent to which he copied, reworked and edited his own works; at least two of the earliest copies of the 'Manipulus' are in his own hand. 
The 'Manipulus' exercised a vast influence on preachers, theologians, and bibliographers in late medieval Europe; almost 200 manuscripts are known to survive in English, French, and eastern European sources. It became the model for many later preaching handbooks and florilegia, and was a favourite source for late medieval sermons. It seems also to have played a practical role in the continuing work of pastoral care. In 1349 the text was incorporated into the first provincial statutes of the new archdiocese of Prague, and it continued to be a popular source-book for pastoral duties throughout the fifteenth century. Canon lawyers, such as the Englishman William Pagula (died 1332), also made extensive use of it in their compilations. The 'Manipulus' remained popular during the Renaissance, and a large number of editions were printed in the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. 




@@@@@


doc= 27207


Ashbourne, Thomas (fl. 1371-1397), prior of the Augustinian convent, London, and theologian, on the evidence of his name was born in Ashbourne, Derbyshire, though Bale says he was born in Staffordshire. He may have become an Augustinian friar at their house in Stafford. He studied at Oxford University and became a doctor of theology by 1374. Ashbourne sprang into prominence in the last three decades of the fourteenth century during the dispute over clerical taxation associated particularly with John Wyclif (died 1384). In 1370 two Augustinian friars of the London convent presented articles to parliament arguing for partial confiscation of the church's wealth. One was John Bankin, the other, who is unnamed, may have been Thomas Ashbourne. In 1374, according to the fictitious 'Eulogium historiarum', Ashbourne was one of four theologians who rejected the pope's demands for taxation of the English clergy. In 1377 John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, produced four friars, one from each order, to support royal taxation of the clergy; the Augustinian friar may have been Ashbourne. 
In 1380 Ashbourne is named in the patent rolls as prior of the London convent. In 1382 he attended the synod convened by Archbishop Courtenay at Blackfriars as one of seventeen doctors of theology, of whom sixteen were friars (four from each order); twenty-four Wycliffite propositions were condemned. It is possible that he was prior provincial of the order in 1383. In 1387 a crowd of Lollards, incited by the preaching of the apostate Augustinian friar Peter Pateshull, attacked St Christopher's Church in London and were only restrained by Ashbourne and another Augustinian friar, both men showing courage and good sense in this episode. In 1390 one document suggests he was regent of the London studium and another appoints him presiding judge in the proceedings over whether Richard Owenby, another Augustinian friar, should be permitted to proceed to his master's degree in the theology faculty. 
One nobleman buried in the London convent was Richard (III) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel, who was executed for treason in 1397. Ashbourne had been the earl's confessor, and now he heard his final confession and accompanied him to the scaffold. Arundel bequeathed Ashbourne 100 marks in his will. Although Ashbourne was a theologian, only one manuscript attributed to him survives (Oxford, University College, MS 99), which consists of transcriptions of three works in Latin. Bale attributes five original works to him, including 'Contra trialogum Wiclevi', but none has been identified in extant manuscripts. 


@@@@@


doc= 27208


Ashburne, Thomas (fl. 1384), Carmelite friar, was a member of the order in Northampton in 1384 when he wrote a short poem in English 'On Despising the World', which was given the Latin title 'De contemptu mundi'. This composition was in three parts, and described the situation of the world of his day, its twelve defects, the signs in the heavens, and the lack of religious devotion among rulers and their subjects. The poem existed in the Cotton Library, MS Vitellius F.xiii.1, but was unfortunately lost in the fire of 1731. Ashburne is probably to be identified with the Carmelite from Stamford of the same name who was licensed to hear confessions in the diocese of Lincoln on 11 February 1350. Nothing further is known about his life, and the attribution of a version of 'The Prick of Conscience' found in another Cotton manuscript, MS App.vii.1, is generally rejected. 


@@@@@


doc= 27209


Newmarket, Thomas (fl. 1371-1384), mathematician, was quite probably born and brought up in Newmarket and by 1371 was an MA and regent master at Cambridge. In 1376 he was granted leave to study for a further year at Cambridge, although it is not known in what subject. A tract 'De passione arth[r]etica' or 'De passionibus juncturarum' is ascribed (in Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1481) to Thomas Newmarket; this could suggest some medical training, but other evidence is lacking. After various ecclesiastical preferments, Newmarket was in 1384 appointed by the archdeacon of Ely to be 'master of glomery', or superintendent of the Cambridge grammar schools, a post which may give plausibility to occasional reports of grammatical or rhetorical texts by him. After 1384 he disappears from the records. 
Two mathematical or quasi-mathematical works may with fair confidence be assigned to Thomas Newmarket. The first, found in Oxford, Bodleian, MS Digby 81, is a commentary on the 'Carmen de algorismo' of the thirteenth-century French Franciscan, Alexander de Villa Dei, a didactic poem on reckoning with Hindu-Arabic numerals. The introduction to Newmarket's lengthy prose commentary ascribes the art to an Indian philosopher named Algus and includes a philosophical discussion of the ontological status of numbers. J. O. Halliwell, in his 1839 edition of Alexander's work, quoted from a different commentary, found in British Library, Royal MS 12 E.i, and ascribed it to Thomas Newmarket; he was followed in this by R. R. Steele. But the attribution appears to be groundless. It may be noted that the commentaries in both the Royal and the Digby manuscripts accompany a more complete version of Alexander's text than that found in the standard editions. 
The second work is a commentary on a 'compotus' (or computus, a work on calendrical reckoning), which Newmarket, followed by his cataloguers, regarded as being by the abbot Dionysius Exiguus ('fl'. 'c'.500), but is in fact another didactic poem by Alexander de Villa Dei, known as 'Massa compoti' (found in Cambridge, Peterhouse, MS 184, and Bodl. Oxf., MS Digby 81, and edited by Steele in 'Compotus Fratris Rogeri'). As Newmarket points out, it avoids discussion of underlying causes and aims itself at the ecclesiastic or common man, here placed together in antithesis to the mathematician or astronomer. Newmarket's introduction speaks also of the virtues of writing in verse form, and of the early history of the calendar; he includes a citation of 'Pompeyus romanus' (probably Numa Pompilius is intended) as beginning the year at the winter solstice, which Newmarket says was then on the first day of January. 
Other mathematical works are sometimes ascribed to Thomas Newmarket, but, it would seem, for little better reason than proximity in the manuscript codices. 


@@@@@


doc= 27210


Tomas ab Ieuan ap Rhys (c.1510-c.1560), poet, was the son of Ieuan ap Rhys Brydydd, and the grandson of the late fifteenth-century master poet Rhys Brydydd and a cousin to the more famous Lewis Morgannwg ('fl'. 1520-1565). He belonged to the leading family of traditional bards in the district of Tir Iarll in upper Glamorgan; however, he lived in Tythegston, not very far from Bridgend. Little is known about his life, but his earliest work undoubtedly predates the dissolution of the monasteries, and in one of his compositions he sang the praises of the abbey of Margam. Another of his 'cwndidau' (short religious songs or carols), which contain many scriptural references, is a metrical version of the parable of the sower. He states in one of his poems that he had been imprisoned in the town of Kenfig, but the circumstances surrounding his incarceration are far from clear. 
In general Tomas's work, which occasionally reflects personal and contemporary social problems, reveals that, notwithstanding his family connections and some instruction in the bardic craft, he did not have a firm grasp of the traditional bardic lore, while the poem he sang on the 'cywydd' metre to the rood in Llangynwyd shows that he did not adhere, as did the professional bards, to the conservative standards of the literary language. Nevertheless, he was anxious not to be classed with the lower-grade itinerant poetasters and minstrels, who had gained a reputation for the composition of satirical verses. When his wife, of whom nothing is known, sent him 'to gather seed-corn in the Vale', he was enjoined never to satirize under any circumstances. 
Even so, Tomas readily adopted in his poetry the style and metres of the inferior grade of bards and minstrels, and freely used colloquial and dialectal forms, which the master poets consistently eschewed. Moreover, he employed these metres not only in his 'cwndidau', but also -- and this is rather unusual -- in the panegyrics and elegies he sang to members of such leading county families as the Herberts, the Stradlings, and the Gamages. Another interesting feature of his work is the opposition it expresses to protestantism, as well as the evidence it provides for the poet's great sense of loss as a result of the destruction of the old Catholic faith and its time-honoured ceremonies. Not surprisingly, he was overjoyed at the accession of Queen Mary in 1553, whom he compared with the Blessed Virgin. 
The elegy which Tomas's friend and pupil, the gentleman-poet Hopcyn Tomas Phylip (died 1597) of Gelli'r-fid, Llandyfodwg, sang to him shows that he also instructed the younger generation of 'cwndidwyr' who came after him. It refers to his great learning, to his profound knowledge of the scriptures, to his understanding of astrology, and to his grasp of the work of the heraldic bards, who recorded the genealogies and coats of arms of the Welsh gentry. Obviously he had received much of the instruction that was imparted to the professional poets, to whose rigorous linguistic and metrical standards, nevertheless, he did not generally adhere in his own work. 
Tomas ab Ieuan ap Rhys also composed prophetic verses ('daroganau') not only in the traditional measures employed by the professional bards, but also in the metre called 'triban Morgannwg', the earliest surviving examples of which occur in his work. Indeed, it was as a vaticinator, even more than as an author of 'cwndidau', that he became renowned in Glamorgan. It was probably the reputation he had acquired in this connection that later prompted Edward Williams 
(Iolo Morganwg; 1747-1826)
to fabricate so many remarkable stories about him. 


@@@@@


doc= 27211


Thomas, Arthur Goring (1850-1892), composer, was born on 20 November 1850 at Ratton Park, Sussex, the youngest son of Freeman Thomas of Ratton Park and his wife, Amelia, eldest daughter of Colonel Thomas Frederick. As a child Thomas showed exceptional musical abilities, and at the age of ten demonstrated remarkable powers of extemporization. He was educated at Haileybury College and intended for a career in the civil service, but ill health prevented this and he decided on the serious study of music. In 1873 he went to Paris, where, on the advice of the composer Ambroise Thomas, he studied for two years with Emile Durand. In 1875 he returned to England and on 13 September 1877 began a three-year course at the Royal Academy of Music. He studied under Arthur Sullivan and Ebenezer Prout and won the Lucas composition medal in 1879 and again, with his dramatic scena 'Hero and Leander', in 1880. He also received lessons in orchestration from Max Bruch. A student composition, the anthem 'Out of the deep', for soprano, chorus, and orchestra, was performed at a concert of the academy on 19 June 1878. His first attempt at opera, 'Don Braggadocio', to a libretto by his brother, was never completed, but part of 'The Light of the Harem' was successfully performed by the academy on 7 November 1879. In 1881 his choral ode 'The Sun-Worshippers' was performed at the Norwich festival and published in London. 
These achievements led to a commission for an opera from the impresario Carl Rosa, which Thomas fulfilled with 'Esmeralda', to a libretto by Theo Marzials and Alberto Randegger based loosely on Victor Hugo's 'Notre-Dame de Paris', and dedicated to the soprano Pauline Viardot. 'Esmeralda' was first performed by the Carl Rosa company at Drury Lane on 26 March 1883 and immediately became popular. Performances of the work in German translation at Cologne (14 November 1883) and Hamburg (27 September 1884) were exceptionally well received. It was revived at Covent Garden on 12 July 1890, sung in French and with the original happy ending altered by the composer to a tragic one. 
In 1885 the Carl Rosa company produced a second opera by Thomas, 'Nadeshda', with a libretto adapted by Julian Sturgis from a Russian story. The first performance took place at Drury Lane on 16 April with Alwina Valleria in the title role, and it was performed in Dublin on 27 August of the same year. It was also given in a German version at Breslau in 1890. An orchestral 'Suite de ballet' was performed at Cambridge by the University Musical Society, for which it was composed, on 9 June 1887, and a duet for soprano and mezzo-soprano, 'The Dawn' ('Aurora is Waking'), was performed at the Birmingham festival in 1891. 
In addition, Thomas composed many songs and vocal duos, some of which were fashionable in the late 1880s and early 1890s, and three further dramatic vocal scenas. An unfinished comic opera, 'The Golden Web', was completed by S. P. Waddington and produced posthumously at the Royal Court Theatre, Liverpool (15 February 1893), and at the Lyric Theatre, London (11 March 1893). Another unfinished work, the cantata 'The Swan and the Skylark', was completed by Charles Villiers Stanford and performed at the Birmingham festival in 1894. 

'Esmeralda' and 'Nadeshda' achieved for Thomas the position of leading British musical dramatist of his day and a high reputation in Germany. His music shows predominantly French lyrical influences and a talent for elegant melody and sensitive orchestration, but it is less successful in sustaining dramatic interest throughout the complicated plots. Contemporary critics commented on the naturalness and flexibility of the recitatives, which, in contrast to his generally conservative style, were considered advanced. Shortly after Thomas's death, George Bernard Shaw assessed his position thus: 'He always seemed to be dreaming of other men's music -- mostly Frenchmen's; so that he spent his life on elaborating, with remarkable facility and elegance, what Gounod and his disciples had done before' (Shaw, 2.141). 
Thomas's character was considered charming and modest, and Maude Valerie White, a fellow pupil at the Royal Academy of Music, described him as 'quite exceptionally attractive and agreeable' (White, 138). However, his naturally fragile mental state was disturbed by the pressure of expectation to produce further works equal in effect to 'Esmeralda' and 'Nadeshda', and was further upset by a serious accident a few months before his death. Suffering from depression, Thomas committed suicide by throwing himself in front of a fast train at West Hampstead Station on 20 March 1892, and was instantly killed. He was buried in Finchley cemetery. A memorial concert was held at St James's Hall, London, on 13 July 1892. Most of the leading operatic singers of the day took part, and, as a result, the Goring Thomas scholarship was founded at the Royal Academy of Music. 


@@@@@


doc= 27212


Thomas, David (1759-1822), poet and schoolmaster, was born in Y Waunfawr, Caernarvonshire, the son of Thomas Gruffydd (1716-1781), a weaver, and his wife, Mary Humphreys (1714-1794). His early education was sketchy. In 1774 he was taught for eight months by John Morgan, the curate of Llanberis, where he met Abraham Williams 
(Bardd Du Eryri; 1755-1828)
, who introduced him to Welsh poetry and loaned him books and some of the manuscript collections he had inherited from the scholar-cleric Dafydd Ellis (1736-1795), curate at Llanberis before John Morgan. Thomas followed his father's craft for some years, later teaching in his home village and nearby areas. 
In Caernarfon, Thomas met the poet Robert Hughes 
(Robin Ddu yr Ail o Fon; died 1785)
, who had moved to the town in 1783 after having worked for twenty years in London as a legal clerk. Hughes was a co-founder of the London Gwyneddigion Society. From him Dafydd Ddu heard of the social and literary meetings enjoyed by the Welsh literati in London and he sent out his own invitation to a meeting of poets at his home in Betws Garmon. From this developed the 'school of Dafydd Ddu', whose members were popularly known as Dafydd Ddu's chicks. He won the main prize for an 'awdl' (a long poem in selected strict metres) in the St Asaph and Llanrwst eisteddfodau of 1790 and 1791, held under the auspices of the Gwyneddigion. These poems were accepted as templates for the form, and the poet's prestige as a mentor of authority was now assured, with his influence extending beyond Caernarvonshire. 
Dafydd Ddu could write fluently in the free, alliterative metres, but he was mainly concerned to refurbish the native strict metres. He emphasized correctness of language, style, and metre, with tight control of imagination, circulated his own bardic grammar among his disciples, and travelled extensively to further his aims. He would even legislate on content, such was his desire to offer clear guidance to bardic pupils. As a poet his work has outlived its appeal, but he brought valuable influence to bear at a time when knowledge of 'cerdd dafod', the unique strict-metre system, had deteriorated and there was a real need for a bardic teacher of unchallengeable authority. His work as a critic makes him an important link between his idol, Goronwy Owen (1723-1769), the leader of the eighteenth-century neo-classical revival, and the early eisteddfod poets of the nineteenth century. On 4 November 1803 he married Elinor Thomas; they had no children. A collection of his poems, including some by others, 'Corph y gaingc', was published in 1810, a second edition appearing posthumously in 1834. 
David Thomas died as the result of a riding accident, at Llanrug, where he was living, on 30 March 1822. He was buried there on 2 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 27213


Thomas, David (1813-1894), Congregational minister, was born at one of two neighbouring farms, Vatson North or Vatson South, in the parish of East Williamston, near Saundersfoot. He was one of the ten children of William Thomas (1782-1855), founder and first minister of Sardis Congregational Church, Saundersfoot. William Thomas married the elder of the two daughters of Clement Phillips of Carn Mill, in the parish of Begelly. David Thomas embarked on a career in business at Tenby, but his abilities as a lay preacher in his father's church so impressed Nun Morgan Harry and Caleb Morris, two London ministers whose roots were in Pembrokeshire, that they persuaded him to devote himself to the nonconformist ministry. Although he was already married and had a son, he became a student at Newport Pagnell Academy in 1839. He was ordained at Chesham Congregational Church in 1841 and moved to Stockwell Green Chapel, London, in 1845. He ministered there until his retirement in 1877. 
Thomas's vigorous ministry typifies the intensifying of nonconformist activism in the mid-Victorian period. He founded a working men's club and institute in 1862 and launched an insurance plan for the widows of ministers. He supported such causes as total abstinence and the abolition of the death penalty. He showed his interest in popular journalism as chairman of the National Newspaper League Company and launched 'The Dial' newspaper on 7 January 1860. It merged with the 'Morning Star' in June 1864. The freshness of his preaching and his personal charm attracted large congregations, especially from among the professional classes. He sought to improve the quality of public worship by publishing 'A Biblical Liturgy' in 1855. Each of its twenty services had a theological theme and was composed of a mosaic of biblical quotations. With the same intention he published in 1866 'The Augustine Hymn Book'. Among attenders at his services was Catherine Mumford, at whose marriage to William Booth, founder of the Salvation Army, Thomas officiated. As a child Wilson Carlile, founder of the Church Army, also attended Thomas's church, where his parents were members. 
Thomas was a prolific author, publishing during his career some fifty titles. He became a familiar name as the editor of 'The Homilist', which first appeared in March 1852 and ran eventually to fifty volumes. It contained sermons, hundreds of which were composed by the editor, together with items on moral and religious topics and expositions of biblical passages. Thomas explained that it was intended 'not to supply sermons for indolent and incompetent preachers, but stimulus and tonic for the true-hearted, hard-working and genuine teacher' ('Septem in uno', 1886, foreword). For some time before he retired from the editorship in 1881 he had been helped by his son, Urijah. The journal had a very wide readership in both Britain and America. 
Thomas's books were also much appreciated in both countries for presenting a catholic and comprehensive view of religious truth without being disloyal to the evangelical tradition. This appraisal was justified not only by his biblical commentaries but also by such works as 'The Crisis of Being' (1849) and 'The Progress of Being' (1854). On the other hand 'The Practical Philosopher: a Daily Monitor for the Business Men of England' (1873) exemplifies his constant anxiety to relate his convictions to the contemporary concerns of the secular world. His complete works were published under the title 'The Homilistic Library' (9 vols., 1882-9). 
On 30 September 1837 Thomas married Elinor, the younger daughter of David Rees JP, a landowner and shipowner, at St Peter's Church, Carmarthen. She died on 9 February 1874, aged sixty-four. They had two sons and four daughters, in order of seniority: Urijah, David, Sissie, Sidney, Ellen, and Angelene. Urijah Rees Thomas (1839-1901) became the minister of Redland Congregational Church, Bristol; David Morgan Thomas JP became a barrister and founded the 'Cambrian Daily Leader' (1861-1923), the first daily newspaper in Wales. It was published at Cardiff, as was his other newspaper, the 'Cardiff Morning Express'. David Thomas died at 3 Victoria Terrace, Ramsgate, on 30 December 1894, and was buried in Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 27214


Thomas, Edward (1813-1886), scholar of Indian history and numismatics, was born on 31 December 1813 in Brixton, Surrey, the son of Honoratus Leigh Thomas (1769-1846), surgeon, and his wife, a daughter of the anatomist William Cumberland Cruikshank. Thomas was educated at the East India College at Haileybury, and went to India in 1832 as a 'writer' in the Bengal service of the company. Illness interfered with his duties and compelled several absences in England on sick leave. When Lord Dalhousie, impressed by his abilities, offered him in 1852 the post of foreign secretary to the government of India, Thomas was reluctantly obliged to decline it on health grounds. After acting for a short time as judge at Delhi, he was appointed superintending judge of the Saugor and Nerbudda territory. He retired on a pension in 1857, and spent the rest of his life in scholarly pursuits, attending the meetings of learned societies and writing numerous essays and articles on oriental archaeology. 
By breaking ground in a dozen hitherto obscure subjects -- such as Bactrian, Indo-Scythian, and Sassanian coins, Indian metrology, Persian gems and inscriptions -- Thomas rendered important services to science. These were recognized by his election as a fellow of the Royal Society on 8 June 1871, as correspondent of the Institut de France in January 1873, and as honorary member of the Russian Academy, and by his decoration as companion of the Indian Empire. His chief published volumes were his 'Chronicles of the Pathan Kings of Delhi' (1847; 2nd enlarged edn, 1871), and his edition of James Prinsep's 'Essays on Indian Antiquities' and 'Useful Tables' (2 vols., 1858), which he enriched with valuable notes, and rendered indispensable as a work of reference for oriental archaeologists. Other noteworthy publications were 'Coins of the Kings of Ghazni' (1847-58), 'Initial Coinage of Bengal' (1866, 1873), 'Early Sassanian Inscriptions' (1868), 'Ancient Indian Weights' (1874, being part 1 of the new 'Numismata orientalia' which he edited for the publisher Nicholas Trubner), and 'The Revenue of the Mughal Empire' (1871-82). His numerous short papers in the transactions of learned societies, albeit often avowedly premature and containing tentative views which later study caused him to modify or abandon, not only bore the marks of a fine gift for palaeography, numismatics, and a wide command of archaeology, but gave impetus to further studies in these fields. Many of these papers appeared in the 'Numismatic Chronicle' between 1847 and 1883, but the greater number were contributed to the 'Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society' of which society he was a member for forty years and treasurer for twenty-five, and in which his influence and advice were deeply felt and valued. A list of his principal writings is appended to the biographical note in its annual report (May 1886). His findings in numismatics are still referred to in standard works of Indian history. Thomas died at his home, 47 Victoria Road, Kensington, London, on 10 February 1886 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 27215


Thomas, Elizabeth (1675-1731), poet, was born on 31 August 1675 and baptized at St Bride's, Fleet Street, on 1 September 1675, the only child of Emmanuel Thomas (died 1677) of the Inner Temple and Elizabeth (died 1719), daughter of William Osborne of Sittingbourne, Kent. Both parents came from respectable families, but Thomas and her mother had to contend with financial hardship after her father died when she was not yet two. Little is known about Thomas's childhood, but she received some education at home, was well read, and had a little knowledge of French and Latin. Thomas's earliest 'claim to fame' was receiving her pen-name, Corinna, from Dryden, with whom she shared a brief correspondence in the last year of his life. She had several literary and material friendships with well-known men and women of her day, including the writers Mary, Lady Chudleigh, John Norris of Bemerton, and the painter Sarah Hoadly, Bishop Hoadly's wife, to name a few. As a gentlewoman who could not always afford to live as one, Thomas used her talent as a writer to obtain patronage from friends and family, which often came in the forms of cash gifts, extended visits, and books. 
Thomas's longest correspondence was with her fiance of sixteen years, the Gloucester gentleman, Richard Gwinnett (1675-1717), which ended upon his death on 16 April 1717. Their letters make up the bulk of correspondence in 'Pylades and Corinna' (1731-2) and 'The Honourable Lovers' (1732; repr. 1736). Gwinnett was the heir to his father's encumbered estate in Shurdington, Gloucestershire. He studied law at Christ Church, Oxford, and was admitted to the Middle Temple on 22 June 1697. Due to ill health, however, he was unable to practise his profession fully, particularly in London. Their engagement was protracted because neither of them had the means to marry. Denied a union by material circumstances, they continued their engagement through correspondence and annual visits. Both of them gave up lucrative marriage opportunities during the sixteen-year interim because of their mutual devotion. Since she had rejected other suitors in favour of him, Gwinnett partially supported Thomas and her bedridden mother with gifts of money toward the end of his life. 
By 1716 Gwinnett pressed for marriage because he felt he could adequately support his bride-to-be and her mother, but Thomas postponed their union so she could nurse her mother, whose death seemed imminent. Ironically, Thomas's mother outlived Gwinnett, who died in the spring of 1717 before he and Thomas could marry. Because of Thomas's long dedication to him, Gwinnett altered his will and bequeathed $600 to her. After Gwinnett's death, however, his younger brother, George, suppressed the will and denied Thomas the money. Hence, in 1718, she initiated what turned out to be a lengthy and costly lawsuit in chancery. Of the $600 Gwinnett bequeathed her, she only received $213 and 6's'. for her litigious efforts -- not enough to pay off her debts. 
The fact that Thomas was active in London and Bath literary circles, particularly between 1696 and 1718, becomes evident from reading her letters and poems. Her reputation as a poet and a wit drew the attention of the 'Tatler' editor on several occasions. As a writer Thomas experimented with a wide range of forms and genres and had a sound knowledge of history, natural philosophy, classical literature (mostly from translations), and current issues, to which her letters, lyrics, satires, polemics, panegyrics, pastorals, and religious meditations can attest. Like contemporary women writers such as Mary Astell and Mary, Lady Chudleigh, whom she knew, much of her poetry dealt with women's issues. Although she never argued for complete equality between men and women, Thomas believed in women's inherent right to education as well as fair treatment and respect before and after marriage. 
Thomas's first known publication was the anonymous poem 'To the Memory of the Truly Honoured John Dryden, Esq' which appeared in the commemorative compilation, 'Luctus Britannici' (1700). Between 1700 and 1722 Thomas followed the long-established tradition of circulating one's poetry among friends and family and apparently did not publish anything. Due to financial problems, which were exacerbated by her disastrous lawsuit, she published 'Miscellany Poems on Several Subjects' in 1722 anonymously, which was reprinted under the title of 'Poems on Several Occasions' in 1726. During a more fortunate time of her life, she had met Alexander Pope through her acquaintance Henry Cromwell. At her request, Cromwell had given her some letters which had passed between himself and Pope from 1708 to 1711. In her impoverished state in the 1720s, Thomas realized she might profit from the sale of these letters, since Pope's literary reputation had, by that time, greatly increased. Hence in 1726 she sold them for 10 guineas to the notorious bookseller Edmund Curll, who knew their potential value and promptly published them in 'Miscellanea in Two Volumes' (1726). 
Pope took his revenge in his 1728 satire, 'The Dunciad: an Heroic Poem'. In book two, while describing a race between Curll and his rival bookseller, Bernard Lintott, Pope satirizes both Curll and Thomas ('Curll's Corinna'). Her reputation never fully recovered after this scandal, since literary historians were quick to assume the worst about her character. In addition to the Pope-Cromwell letters, Thomas seems to have sold quite a few papers to Curll in 1726 because, from that date forward, her writings and correspondence can be found scattered throughout many of Curll's publications such as 'Poetical Works of Philip Late Duke of Wharton' (1726) and 'Atterburyana' (1727). The satire attributed to Thomas, called 'Codrus, or, 'The Dunciad' Dissected', was first published in 1728. Thomas's account of Dryden's funeral appeared in the 1729 publication of the 'Memoirs of the Life, Writings, and Amours of William Congreve Esq'. This text, however, was thoroughly discredited by Edmond Malone in 'The Critical and Miscellaneous Prose Works of John Dryden' (3 vols., 1800, 1.337-419). Curll also printed her 'Metamorphosis of the Town' anonymously in 1730 (repr. 1731, 1732). The bulk of her correspondence which had been published previously by Curll was consolidated in 'Pylades and Corinna' and 'The Honourable Lovers'. 
Despite her efforts to settle her debts, especially after her lawsuit in the early 1720s Thomas's financial situation worsened. She attempted to hide from her creditors but she was discovered and thrown into Fleet prison in 1727 for three years. A warrant was issued for her release in June 1729 under an 'Act of Insolvency', but she was not released until the middle of 1730, presumably because she could not pay her gaoler's fees. She died on 3 February 1731, and was buried two days later in the churchyard of St Bride's, Fleet Street. Margaret, Lady De La Warr, the daughter-in-law of Thomas's former patron, Anne, Lady Dowager De Le Warr, paid for her burial. 
After Thomas died Curll continued to publish a scattering of her texts as he had in the late 1720s as well as reissuing both volumes of 'Pylades and Corinna' and 'The Honourable Lovers' in 1736. In 1743 the fourth and final edition of 'Metamorphosis' was printed for J. Wilford, with Thomas's name on the title-page for the first time. The inscription read 'By the late celebrated Mrs. ELIZABETH THOMAS, Who has so often obliged the Town, under the Name of CORINNA'. Thomas's works went out of print thereafter but have had brief appearances in biographical dictionaries and anthologies over the next three centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 27216


Thomas, Ernest Chester (1850-1892), bibliographer and lawyer, the eldest son of John Withiel Thomas, was born on 28 October 1850 at Birkenhead, Cheshire. He was educated at Manchester grammar school, and matriculated on 17 October 1870 from Trinity College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in June 1875. He became a student at Gray's Inn on 7 May 1874, and, having won the Bacon scholarship of the inn in May 1875, published the following year a volume on 'Leading Cases in Constitutional Law Briefly Stated'. In 1875 and 1876 Thomas studied at the universities of Jena and Bonn, and in 1877 he produced the first volume of a translation of Friedrich Lange's 'Geschichte des Materialismus', the second volume of which appeared in 1880, and the third in 1881. In 1878 he published 'Leading Statutes Summarised for the Use of Students', and in the same year became joint honorary secretary of the Library Association with Henry Richard Tedder (1850-1924), with whom he collaborated in writing the article 'Libraries' in the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1882). He held this position for twelve years (1878-1890). He also edited the 'Monthly Notes' of the Library Association for 1882 and several other volumes, contributing many articles and papers to the association's proceedings and journals. He published in January 1884 the first number of the 'Library Chronicle: a Journal of Librarianship and Bibliography', which he carried on at his own expense until 1888. Thomas's most significant work was his edition of the 'Philobiblon of Richard de Bury, Bishop of Durham, Treasurer and Chancellor of Edward III' (1888), the first really critical text, based upon the early editions and a personal examination of twenty-eight manuscripts of the work; it continues to be used by scholars. 
Thomas had at one time a small practice at the bar, but his life was chiefly devoted to literature and librarianship. He was a man of extensive reading, a brilliant talker, a keen debater, and an excellent writer. In the last two or three years of his life he took up business in the City, but his health was undermined by an attack of typhoid fever and he died at Redlands, near Tonbridge, Kent, on 5 February 1892. 


@@@@@


doc= 27217


Thomas, Francis Sheppard (1793/4-1857), secretary of the Public Record Office, was born at Kington, Herefordshire, where he was baptized on 23 February 1794, the son of Samuel Thomas and his wife, Elizabeth. He entered the State Paper Office as a clerk in 1826, and became a much valued secretary for records business to Lord Langdale, master of the rolls. From 1838 to 1857 he was secretary of the Public Record Office. After Langdale's death in 1851 Thomas's special influence, which had led to friction with the head of the office, diminished when Sir John Romilly, the new master of the rolls, preferred to deal with Treasury communications on records matters directly with the deputy keeper rather than through the secretary. 
In 1846 Thomas privately printed a compilation from public records entitled 'Notes of Materials for the History of Public Departments'. This was followed in 1848 by a short but more elaborate work on 'The ancient exchequer of England, the Treasury, and origin of the present management of the exchequer and treasury of Ireland', and in 1849 by 'A History of the State Paper Office', which expanded the account given in his earlier 'Notes'. In 1852 he wrote an explanatory preface to 'Liber munerum publicorum Hiberniae', by Rowley Lascelles. In 1853 his 'Hand-Book to the Public Records' appeared. It was a novel summary and the first of a succession of general guides by later generations of Public Record Office officials. Thomas's 'Hand-Book' appears to have been written largely in his own time; its usefulness to the department, and that of his previous 'Notes', helped to secure him an enhancement of salary in 1855. Three volumes of 'Historical Notes, 1509-1714' followed in 1856. These are mainly biographical and chronological memoranda, assembled over many years of work on the historical side of the office, set down to assist colleagues then arranging the state papers. They were published under government direction 'rather than at the wish of the compiler'. 
Thomas was married to Mary, sister of Charles Lechmere, sometime deputy keeper of state papers. They had a son, Francis Charles, who received a clerical appointment at the Public Record Office but who died aged thirty in 1870. Thomas died at his home, Broad Green, Croydon, on 27 August 1857, and was buried in the Anglican catacombs, Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 27218


Thomas, Frederick Jennings (1786-1855), naval officer, younger son of Sir John Thomas, fifth baronet (1749-1828), of Wenvoe Castle, Glamorgan, and his wife, Mary, daughter of John Parker of Hasfield Court, Gloucestershire, was born in the New Forest, Hampshire, on 19 April 1786. He entered the navy in March 1799 on the 'Boston' on the North American station, and afterwards in the West Indies. In autumn 1803 he joined the 'Prince of Wales', flagship of Sir Robert Calder, and was present in the action off Cape Finisterre on 22 July 1805. On 19 September he was appointed acting lieutenant of the 'Spartiate' (commission confirmed 14 February 1806) and was at Trafalgar. He continued in the 'Spartiate' off Rochefort, and afterwards in the Mediterranean until November 1809, when he was for a few months on the 'Antelope', flagship of Sir John Duckworth, and was then sent to Cadiz, where for the next three years he helped to defend the town against the French flotilla. He was promoted commander on 4 March 1811, and second in command of the British flotilla. Towards the close of 1813 he was acting captain of the 'San Juan' (74 guns), flagship of Rear-Admiral Samuel Hood Linzee at Gibraltar. He was posted captain on 8 December 1813 and returned to England with Linzee in the frigate 'Eurotas' in 1814. He had no further employment afloat. On 7 August 1816 he married Susannah, only daughter of Arthur Atherley of Southampton. They seem to have settled in that neighbourhood and had three sons and a daughter. In 1818 Thomas invented a lifeboat with three keels, intended to prevent it capsizing, and he proposed a pier at Brighton and a bridge across the River Arun in Sussex. He published 'England's Defence'. He accepted the retired rank of rear-admiral on 1 October 1846 and died at Hill, near Southampton, on 19 December 1855. He was buried at Millbrook, near Southampton. 


@@@@@


doc= 27219


Thomas, George (1756-1802), soldier, was born in a farm cottage at Roscrea, co. Tipperary. According to his own account he joined the British navy at Bristol in 1780, where he acquired his knowledge of gunnery. Arriving at Madras in 1781 he deserted ship and went to Kelly's grog shop (the proprietor being a fellow Tipperarian). Advised to offer his services as a mercenary, he travelled south to the Kanara Poligars, a group of armed chieftain-bandits. Thomas subsequently joined the nizam of Hyderabad's army as a private, and there learned his trade as a soldier. He gathered around him a personal bodyguard, nicknamed the Irish Pindaris, after the feared Indian mercenaries who 'issued like wild dogs from between the feet of their nominal masters... to slay, to burn, to plunder, and to disappear' (Smith, 567). Words of command were given by Thomas in Gaelic to maintain secrecy. 
Travelling north to Delhi with his troops and a 6-pounder gun, Thomas was recruited by Zeb-un-Nisa, the Begam Samru of Sardhana, widow of Walter Reinhard, a notorious European mercenary. The begam, who had become a Roman Catholic after her husband's death, appointed Thomas an officer in her army, and arranged for his marriage to her god-daughter Maria, which took place on 29 April 1787. The marriage contract, written in Portuguese, was drawn up by the begam's priest, Father Gregorius. Three sons and a daughter were born of the marriage. The begam's confidence in the wild Irishman was justified at the siege of Gokulgarh in March 1788, where the begam was supporting the Mughal emperor Shah Alam II against a rebellious local chief. Thomas gave valuable support and was rewarded with a 'jagir' (a temporary grant of land) at Tappal, from which he collected the revenue. By imposing law and order he was shortly able to double the 'jagir's' income. 
In 1792, during a foray against Sikh bandits north of Sardhana, Thomas was dismissed from the begam's service, most likely for trying to usurp her authority. He took refuge in the British garrison at Anupshahr, on the Ganges, but within the year was employed by the Maratha governor of Meerut, Appa Khande Rao, cousin to Mahadji Sindhia of Gwalior. Here he raised a battalion, whose main purpose was to collect land revenue by using coercion and terrorism. His success was rewarded by gifts and the 'jagir' of Jhajjar, 50 miles west of Delhi. This became his base and he built the fort of Georgegarh, the name being corrupted in Hindustani to Jahazgarh. By 1796 Thomas had made peace with the begam, coming to her rescue and helping to suppress a mutiny among her own troops. He left Appa Khande Rao in 1797 to join Bapu Sindhia, governor of Saharanpur, another Maratha chief, and was engaged to harass the Sikhs, then jostling for power in northern India. But in a disgraceful scene the pugnacious Thomas actually attacked his employer in front of a new common enemy, the Afghan invader Zaman Shah. Thomas escaped to the safety of Jhajjar with about 2500 of his own men, but was faced with the problem of paying and feeding them. Unusually for the time, he paid disability allowances to his wounded soldiers, and pensions to the soldiers' widows. 
In the fluid situation before the East India Company imposed its rule, and when large areas of land were left virtually ungoverned following the collapse of the Mughal empire, Thomas conceived the extraordinary idea of making himself 'King' of Lahore by conquering the Punjab. He marched his troops into Hariana in 1797 and easily captured the towns of Hissar and Hansi. He found the latter, an ancient fort, inhabited by one fakir and two lions. He stabilized an area of 120 miles by 50 miles in Hariana and repopulated Hansi, later to become the home of Colonel James Skinner (1778-1841), another soldier of fortune. At the height of his fame that year Thomas described himself as 'dictator in all the countries belonging to the Sikhs south of the Sutlej' (Smith, 567), and claimed to hold his land on behalf of the British government. 
But the necessity for money led to Thomas's re-employment as a mercenary, by the Maratha Vaman Rao against the Rajput raja of Jaipur, to collect unpaid taxes, which he succeeded in doing. His ultimate downfall was in a new alliance between the Marathas, commanded by the European mercenaries Colonel Perron, Captain Felix Smith, and Louis Bourquien, and their former enemies the Sikhs, desperate at Thomas's incursions against them. At first Thomas made a spirited resistance, lifting the siege of Georgegarh, but, as more victims of his impartial bloodletting united against him, his own men began to desert. Thomas was forced into a humiliating surrender to Bourquien, although he was honourably treated as a brave soldier, and allowed to leave India for his native Ireland with several lakhs of rupees and property. Many years of constant heavy drinking had weakened Thomas's constitution, and he died from fever at Berhampore, on his way to Calcutta, on 22 August 1802, aged forty-six. He was buried in the cantonment cemetery at Berhampore. His wife and children remained as pensioners at Sardhana until Begam Samru's death in 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 27220


Thomas, George Housman (1824-1868), painter and wood-engraver, was born in London on 17 December 1824, the son of William Thomas, a shipbroker. He was educated at Mr Lord's school in Trowbridge, Wiltshire, and later served an apprenticeship under the wood-engraver George Bonnar. In 1839 the Society of Arts awarded him with a silver palette for 'Please to Remember the Grotto', an illustration of his depicting the commencement of the oyster season. He moved to Paris with his brother-in-law Henry Harrison, a fellow pupil of Bonnar's, to set up an engraving business which employed six or seven assistants. In 1846 he went to New York with Harrison and his brother, William Luson Thomas (1830-1900), to work on illustrated newspapers, printing one 'en route' for the amusement of those on the ship. In the two years he spent in the United States he also sketched the country's slave districts and designed vignettes for American banknotes. 
On his brief return to England in 1848, due to ill health, Thomas began a long working association with the 'Illustrated London News'. As an illustrator of newspapers he was an innovator: George and Edward Dalziel noted in their 'The Brothers Dalziel: Record of Fifty Years' Work' (1901) that he was 'One of the first, if not the first, to draw on wood direct from life' (Dalziel and Dalziel, 41). He travelled to Rome later that year to draw the French siege of the city for the 'Illustrated London News'. His ambition to be recognized as an artist of note led him to consider his visit to Italy as a source for future paintings. He returned to England in 1849 to marry Ellen Harrison and to begin painting from his Italian sketches. In 1851 he exhibited 'St Anthony's Day in Rome' at the British Institution in London, which was followed by 'Garibaldi at Rome, 1849', shown at the Royal Academy in 1854. He gained the patronage of Queen Victoria, who had seen his work in the 'Illustrated London News' and on exhibition at the Royal Academy. The first commission, 'The Presentation of Crimean Medals by Queen Victoria, 18 May 1855' (exh. RA, 1858; Royal Collection), was called by the 'Art Journal' 'one of the best of the modern ceremonial pictures we have ever seen' (20, 1858, 171). Other important commissions included 'Queen Victoria and the Prince Consort at Aldershot' (exh. RA, 1866; Royal Collection) and 'The Investiture of the Sultan with the Order of the Garter, 17 July 1867' (exh. RA, 1868; Royal Collection), as well as more intimate portrait drawings of the queen. He also painted many genre scenes such as 'The Ghost Story' (exh. RA, 1866). 
As an illustrator Thomas was prolific: as well as contributing to 'Cassell's Magazine', 'The Quiver', and 'Cornhill Magazine', he illustrated Harriet Beecher Stowe's 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' in 1852 (from his American sketches), Oliver Goldsmith's 'The Vicar of Wakefield' in 1857, and Wilkie Collins's 'Armadale' in 1866 -- three of his best-known book illustrations. His influence on his brother William was immense and a very great number of illustrations by George were engraved by William. After suffering some time from the consequences of a riding accident, he died on 21 July 1868 at Boulogne, France. He left nine children and a widow who was awarded a pension. He was a popular man of energy and humour, though his career was dogged by ill health. The 'Illustrated London News' of 22 August 1868 observed his 'keen sense of humour' (177), and his brother William, in an 'In Memoriam' volume of 1869 on George, wrote: 'to all who knew him, his character cannot fail to form a model on which to mould' (Thomas, 'Drawings', 15). A retrospective exhibition of his works was held at the German Gallery, Bond Street, London, in 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 27221


Thomas, Honoratus Leigh (1769-1846), surgeon, the son of John Thomas of Hawarden, Flintshire, and his wife, Maria, sister of John Boydell, was born on 26 March 1769. On arriving in London as a young man he presented a letter of introduction to the eminent surgeon John Hunter. Hunter made an appointment with Thomas for 5 a.m. the following morning, at which time Thomas found Hunter busily engaged dissecting insects. Thomas was appointed dresser to Hunter at St George's Hospital and he also became a pupil of the anatomist William Cumberland Cruikshank (1745-1800). He obtained the diploma of the Company of Surgeons on 16 October 1794, was an original member of the Royal College of Surgeons on its incorporation in 1800, and was elected to the fellowship on its foundation in 1843. 
Thomas's early professional work was in the army and navy. He passed as first mate, third rate (navy), on 5 July 1792, and, on the recommendation of Hunter, was appointed assistant surgeon to Lord Macartney's embassy to China in the same year. In 1799 he volunteered for medical service with the duke of York's army in the Netherlands. On the surrender of the forces to the French enemy Thomas wished to remain with the wounded, who could not be moved. He was told that he could only stay as a prisoner, and he decided to remain in that capacity. As soon as his services could be dispensed with, however, he was allowed to return home. 
On 10 September 1795 Thomas had married Cruikshank's elder daughter; Edward Thomas (1813-1886) was their son. In 1800 Thomas succeeded to his father-in-law's practice in Leicester Place, where he afterwards lived for nearly fifty years. Notwithstanding his position at the Royal College of Surgeons, Thomas seems rather to have avoided surgery and was generally called in for consultation in medical cases. According to J. F. Clarke, Thomas was a poor surgeon but was a shrewd practitioner in medical cases, to which his practice was mainly limited. He also wrote that 'personally he was the beau ideal of a physician' and that 'he had a very extensive practice among licensed victuallers' (Cope, 58). 
At the Royal College of Surgeons, Thomas was a member of the court of assistants from 1818 to 1845, examiner from 1818 to 1845, vice-president in 1827, 1828, 1836, and 1837, and president in 1829 and 1838. In 1827 he delivered the Hunterian oration. In this oration there are some interesting personal reminiscences of Hunter. Thomas was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 16 January 1806. He was also a member of the Imperial Academy of St Petersburg. In addition to his Hunterian oration he published 'Description of an hermaphrodite lamb' ('London Medical and Physical Journal', 1799), 'Anatomical description of a male rhinoceros' ('PTRS', 1801), 'Case of artificial dilatation of the female urethra' ('Medico-Chirurgical Transactions', 1809), and 'Case of obstruction in the large intestines occasioned by a biliary calculus of extraordinary size' (ibid., 1845). Thomas died at Belmont, Torquay, on 26 June 1846. 


@@@@@


doc= 27222


Thomas, John (1691-1766), bishop of Salisbury, was born on 23 June 1691, the son of a drayman of Nicholson's brewery in All Hallows parish in the City of London. He attended a parish school, and was admitted, at Nicholson's expense, to Merchant Taylors' School, London, on 11 March 1702, and to St Catharine's College, Cambridge, on 22 January 1709. He graduated BA in 1713, was placed in the 'ordo senioritatis', and proceeded MA in 1717 and DD in 1728, when he was also incorporated at Oxford. He was ordained deacon on 23 May 1714, and priest on 26 February 1716. 
About 1720 Thomas accepted the post of chaplain to the English factory, the merchant community, in Hamburg. He was a popular clergyman, and his knowledge of German and publication of a German newspaper attracted the attention of George II during his visits to Hanover. The king preferred Thomas to the living of St Vedast, Foster Lane, London, in 1736, against strong ministerial objections, in order to ensure his attendance as a royal chaplain in 1737, on a similar visit to Hanover. In 1740 George II offered him the vacant deanery of Peterborough, though the duke of Newcastle had offered it to another. At Peterborough he was an active member of both the Peterborough and the Spalding societies. In 1742 he married the niece of Bishop Sherlock of London, the first of four wives about whom little is known. A year later he was nominated to the diocese of St Asaph, but when a vacancy occurred immediately afterwards at Lincoln he asked to be consecrated to that see instead as he hated the prospect of the journey from Wales to London. In 1761 he was appointed to the diocese of Salisbury. 
In spite of his easy elevation within the church as a royal favourite Thomas was a conscientious bishop. He took care in examining candidates for holy orders. He was also a celebrated preacher. Thomas's less attractive features included the entertainment he derived from teasing clergymen that he intended to promote them. He also adopted a casual approach to marriage, joking that he had driven his first three wives to their deaths by his refusal to argue with them. The motto, or posy, on the wedding ring at his fourth marriage was: 'if I survive I'll make them five' (Cassan, part 3, 315). 
Thomas was an amiable man. His tact may be judged from his ability to dine with the prince of Wales without offending the prince's estranged father, George II. Thomas's deafness and squint did not inhibit his gregariousness. He embodied the latitudinarian regard for compassion above dogma, on one occasion likening a Lutheran minister who would not bury a Calvinist to a woman parishioner of his who had complained that he had buried a man with the pox next to her husband. He is also credited with an emotional charity sermon, imploring his congregation not to let the children perish, and with devoting a tenth of his income to the repair of Lincoln Cathedral. 
Bishop Thomas died on 20 July 1766 at the bishop's place, Salisbury, and was buried in Salisbury Cathedral. 
John Thomas was also instrumental in the brief revival of support for the Moravian church in Britain in the 1740s. While in Germany he had met Daniel Jablonski, and was convinced that he was the successor to the Bohemian episcopate. In 1746 Thomas attended Count Zinzendorf's sermons in London. During the debate on the bill to give legal recognition to the Moravian church in 1748-9 Thomas argued that their episcopal orders and ordinations were valid. He also acted as an intermediary between Zinzendorf and Bishop Thomas Sherlock of London, whom he converted to a supporter of the Moravian cause. However, within four years of the passage of the 'Moravian Act' of 1749 Thomas had become disaffected to the Morvains, shocked by rumours and allegations that they regarded the Holy Spirit as female and that they blessed genitalia in marriage ceremonies. Bishop Thomas should be carefully distinguished from two of his fellow bishops of the same name, one of whom also occupied the see of Salisbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 27223


Thomas, John (1696-1781), bishop of Winchester, was born on 17 August 1696 at Westminster, the son of Stremer Thomas, a colonel in the guards, and his wife, Hester. He was educated at Charterhouse School, matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 28 March 1713, and graduated BA in 1716 before proceeding MA in 1719, BD in 1727 and DD in 1731. 
In 1720 Thomas was elected fellow of All Souls College; disappointed of church preferment through a friend of his father, he took another route to promotion by establishing a reputation as a London preacher. He began as a curate and became a prebendary of St Paul's in 1731. Two years later he married Susan (died 1778), daughter of Thomas Mulso of Twywell, Northamptonshire, and they had three daughters. Thomas gave up his All Souls fellowship on marriage, and in the same year was presented by the dean and chapter of St Paul's to the rectory of St Benet Paul's Wharf, a living he retained until 1757; in 1742 he obtained a canonry at St Paul's, which he held until 1748. More importantly he had won the favour of the prince of Wales, and, after the latter was crowned George II, Thomas became one of his chaplains. In 1742 he gave the Boyle lectures, but, as became his wont, did not publish them. He received his reward, however, in the bishopric of Peterborough to which he was consecrated on 4 October 1747. 
The peak of Thomas's public career came in 1752 when he was appointed to succeed Thomas Hayter, bishop of Norwich, as preceptor to the young prince of Wales, who was to ascend the throne in 1760. The untimely death of Frederick, the prince's father, from a blow from a tennis ball in 1751, had given a sudden urgency to George's education, and to fears of the influence of his mother. Thomas came in as preceptor under Lord Waldegrave as governor, with George Scott, later a commissioner of excise, as sub-preceptor. The sudden shift in the reversionary interest guaranteed animosity against those in charge of the young prince; but while George III in later life charitably recalled Thomas and Scott 'as men of unexceptionable characters' as distinct from 'Dr Hayter... an intriguing, unworthy man, more fitted to be a Jesuit than an English bishop', Waldegrave set them down as 'men of sense, men of learning, and worthy good men, [who]... had but little weight and influence' and were no match for the dowager princess ('Memoirs and Speeches', 52). Thomas nevertheless had his reward; in a great reshuffle of the bench contrived by George II in 1757, he succeeded John Gilbert as bishop of Salisbury and clerk of the closet (the duke of Newcastle had intended him for York). From George III, Thomas received the succession to the notorious Benjamin Hoadly as bishop of Winchester in 1761, and remained fulsome in his expressions of gratitude for royal favour. 
Thomas left almost as little trace of his activities as bishop as of his pulpit eloquence. Hurd made a snide remark about his patronage. His one visitation of the see of Winchester was the best designed of the eighteenth century, but was treated by many of the clergy with the same casualness as the replies were preserved by the bishop. He did nothing to redress the administrative laxity in his see which went back to the seventeenth century and had become deeply rooted in the time of his predecessor. Thomas died at his home, Winchester House, Chelsea, on 1 May 1781, and was buried in Winchester Cathedral. His wife died on 19 November 1778. 


@@@@@


doc= 27224


Thomas, John (bap. 1712, d. 1793), bishop of Rochester, was born in Abbey Street, St Mary's parish, Carlisle, and baptized in that parish on 7 October 1712, the eldest son of John Thomas ('c'.1684-1747), minor canon of Carlisle Cathedral and vicar of Brampton, Cumberland, from 1721 to 1747, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Richard Kelsick of Whitehaven, a captain in the merchant navy. 
Thomas, like his father, was educated at Carlisle grammar school, where he was admitted for the first time on 5 October 1719, and like his father he attended Queen's College, Oxford, where he matriculated as a commoner on 17 December 1730. He read for the BCL (1742), and the DCL (1742). During the mid-1730s he acted as assistant master at an academy in Soho Square, then became private tutor to William, the younger son of Sir William Clayton, his patron and future brother-in-law. 
Thomas was ordained deacon on 27 March 1737, then priest on 25 September 1737. He soon received the valuable rectory of Bletchingley, Surrey, and was instituted on 27 January 1738. Thomas held the benefice until his advancement to a bishopric in 1774, and was a diligent, resident parish priest. He was appointed chaplain-in-ordinary to the king on 17 January 1749, and a canon of Westminster on 19 April 1754. He was a senior member of the abbey chapter for the remainder of his life, being named subdean on 4 July 1758, then dean of Westminster and chancellor of the Order of the Bath in 1768, in succession to his main clerical patron, Bishop Zachary Pearce. It was to Pearce that Thomas in confidence intimated that 'my present business is 'to make Hay' while the Sun shines' (WAM 64447, 4 July 1762). There was every sign that he was doing so, for Archbishop Drummond of York had appointed Thomas sub-almoner on 28 December 1761, and he was admitted and instituted to the rectory of St Bride's, Fleet Street, on 7 January 1766. Thomas resigned both these last preferments on taking up the deanery, his preference before any smaller bishopric. He was chosen by Archbishop Cornwallis of Canterbury as his prolocutor to the lower house of convocation in 1768 and 1769. Thomas also followed Pearce in the bishopric of Rochester, in November 1774, holding it like his predecessor 'in commendam' with the Westminster deanery. Thomas never lost sight of what he owed to Pearce, telling the Rochester clergy in 1776 he would 'ever account it my greatest merit to follow him, as a son would a father, though with very unequal steps' ('Sermons', 2.422). 
Thomas regularly attended capitular meetings at Westminster and was active in abbey administration while successively canon steward and treasurer between 1754 and 1768. During his deanship, extensive repairs were undertaken to the deanery, the thirteenth century choir of the abbey was replaced with new fittings designed by Henry Keene, and the celebrated Handel memorial festival of 1784 was held with his encouragement. From the late 1780s illness confined him to the episcopal house at Bromley, so chapter documents were sealed without his signature. 
While his health held Thomas involved himself fully in the Rochester diocese. He preached frequently at Bromley parish church (he spent $500 on enlarging it), and regularly administered holy communion there. Episcopal visitations were undertaken in 1776 and 1780. He repaired the deanery at Rochester and between 1774 and 1776 spent $3000 on rebuilding the bishop's palace at Bromley, and laid out and adorned the parkscape. A moderate whig and orthodox churchman, he was not involved in politics beyond lending his quiet support in the House of Lords to the administrations of lords North and Pitt. Thomas voted for Roman Catholic relief in 1780 despite a confrontation with the mob in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey. 
Thomas married first, on 19 August 1742, at the Chapel Royal, Whitehall, Anne ('c'.1716-1772), sister of Sir William Clayton, and widow of Sir Charles Blackwell, second baronet. She was four years Thomas's junior; she died on 7 July 1772. He married second, on 12 January 1775, by special licence, in Westminster Abbey, Elizabeth, of St George's, Hanover Square, the daughter of Charles Baldwin of Munslow, Shropshire, and widow of Sir Joseph Yates, a judge. There were no children from either marriage. His second wife shared her husband's interest in the fine arts and had copied some of Reynolds's pictures in needlework. 
Bishop Thomas died at Bromley on 22 August 1793, after an illness lasting two days, and was buried in the vault at Bletchingley next to his first wife. A man of essentially modest ambition and unblemished life, he had carried out his clerical duties vigorously until ill health overtook him. Thomas was one of the foremost preachers in the reign of George III, and was much appreciated by the king personally. Many of his sermons and charges were published in his lifetime; a collected edition appeared in 1796. He also commanded the respect of his contemporaries on other counts, including his interest in architecture and the fine arts (he left a large collection of rare coins and medals, as well as prints and paintings). As his colleague on the Westminster chapter, Thomas Newton, put it, Thomas had 'a spirit and taste and elegance superior to most men' (Newton, 151). But it was above all for his charity that Bishop Thomas was renowned, as his bequests reveal. During his lifetime, his nephew estimated he had given out about $50,000 in benefactions since about 1743, especially to clergy in financial distress. Thomas was vice-president of the Westminster Infirmary, and a governor of the Middlesex Hospital, and he endowed two scholarships at Westminster School. 


@@@@@


doc= 27225


Thomas, John (1813-1862), architectural sculptor, was born at Chalford, Gloucestershire, and rose from modest beginnings to outstanding success. His parents are untraced. Apprenticed in 1825 to a stonemason, he was regarded as a 'prodigy of precocious genius' ('Art Journal'). In the final year of his apprenticeship, on a visit to his brother Robert, Oxford's architecture fired his ambition as a carver and draughtsman. He settled in Birmingham, where his elder brother William practised as an architect; his carving on monuments impressed Sir Charles Barry, who hired him to carve in wood and stone the coats of arms and other ornamental work for his Gothic-style King Edward VI Grammar School, Birmingham (1833-7; dem.). 
Barry, recognizing 'his sureness of hand, celerity of execution and commanding intelligence' (Scott, 79), employed Thomas in 1837 to manage the production of the carving for his new Palace of Westminster. To hone Thomas's knowledge in preparation for this challenge, Barry sent him on a drawing tour of Belgium. The office of woods ratified the arrangement in 1841 and appointed Thomas as superintendent of stone carving in 1846 at a salary of $300 p.a. ($400 from 1847 to 1850). From small drawings supplied by Barry's office, he and his team developed large-scale drawings which formed the basis of the full-size plasters from which the figures and architectural work were carved in stone. Underpinned by 'the complete practical training, with the versatile and inventive ability, displayed by Thomas' (ibid., 80), Barry's vision of a sculpture programme to commemorate British history through heraldry and figures of the kings and queens from Saxon times to Queen Victoria, together with national figures and saints associated with Britain, was carried out triumphantly. Closely overseeing Thomas, Barry estimated that the cost of this work up to 1850 totalled $32,000. 
Thomas worked on many other famous building projects of his day. For Robert Stephenson's Britannia Railway Bridge across the Menai Strait to Anglesey (opened in 1850) he carved the monumental lions weighing 80 tons; for Edward Walter's Manchester Free Trade Hall, tympana depicting 'The Continents', 'Trade', 'The Arts', 'Industry', and so on (1853-6); and for Cuthbert Brodrick's Leeds town hall (1858), a tympanum of 'Progress, Art and Commerce'. His workshop was equally adept at the Italian Renaissance palazzo style, then especially popular with banks. The sumptuous carving on the former West of England and South Wales District Bank in Bristol by W. B. Gingell and T. K. Lysaght (1854-8) and on the Langside Public Hall in Glasgow (designed as a bank by J. Gibson, 1847) illustrates the high standard that his workshop achieved. Barry went to him for both his Italian Renaissance Bridgewater House, London (1845-54), and for his alterations to Harewood House, Yorkshire (1848-50). The workshop continued to undertake Gothic-style carving, as shown in the series of figures connected with Bristol history for the Guildhall designed by R. S. Pope (1843-6). 
The variety of Thomas's output was wide: Italianate garden ornaments and layouts (for example, 'The Atlas Fountain', Castle Howard, and reliefs for the Serpentine, Hyde Park, London); church furnishings (including the font designed by Thomas Willement for Davington Priory, Kent, costing $17 8's'. in 1847, and the figure of St Michael for Sowton, Devon, 1845); and designs for the decorative arts such as the 'St George Fountain' (des.), manufactured in majolica by Minton & Co., shown at the 1862 Exhibition, London, and glass chandeliers made by Osler of Birmingham for the New Palace, Constantinople. 
Through his involvement with the new Palace of Westminster, Thomas met Sir Morton Peto, its building contractor, and his partner, Edward Ladd Betts. For both he worked as an architect. For Betts -- a generous buyer of his marble sculpture -- he built Preston Hall, Aylesford, Kent (1850), and laid out its garden. Peto commissioned him to rebuild Somerleyton Hall, Suffolk (begun 1844). Here Thomas not only created a vast Italianate/Jacobean pile in red brick with exaggeratedly large stone architectural elements, set in lavish gardens, but rebuilt the church and village too. Peto also had Thomas design the Regent's Park Chapel and carve the memorial to Sir Hugh Myddleton, the originator of the 'new river project' for Islington Green, London (1862). 
Thomas presumably met his most illustrious architectural patron, Prince Albert, through his Westminster work. The warm obituary in the 'Illustrated London News' recorded, 'The Prince Consort highly esteemed Thomas and appreciated the simplicity of his character; he found in the plain-spoken Gloucestershire artist a man of consummate ability without conceit or arrogance' ('ILN'). Among the no doubt closely supervised commissions for his royal patron were the tiled dairy in the Home Farm, Windsor, reliefs of Peace and War for the interior of Buckingham Palace, and the remodelling of the print room at Windsor. 
Thomas also worked as a fine art sculptor, exhibiting frequently at the Royal Academy between 1842 and 1861. His subjects -- 'Lear' (exh. RA, 1842); 'Musidora' (exh. RA, 1849); 'Queen Boadicea' (exh. RA, 1856); 'Una and the Lion' (exh. RA, 1861); and 'Lady Godiva' (plaster, exh. RA, 1861; Maidstone Museum, Kent) -- are typical of his time. He undertook some public monuments: for Birmingham, figures of 'Thomas Attwood', the radical (unveiled 1859, cost $900) and 'Joseph Surge', a Quaker philanthropist (unveiled 1862, cost $1000), and, presented to Maidstone, Kent, by Alexander Randal, a drinking fountain incorporating a statue of Queen Victoria under a Gothic canopy (1862). 
Thomas was twice married; in 1851 he was a widower with a six-year-old daughter, and by 1861 was married to Mary ('b'. 1825/6). He died at his home, Florentine Villa, 15 Blomfield Road, Paddington, London, on 9 April 1862 from blood poisoning -- or overwork, according to his friends who felt that his life had been shortened by the initially hostile response to the showing of his 'National Monument to Shakespeare' in the 1862 Exhibition in London. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Contemporaries admired Thomas for his prodigious energy and ambition to work as architect, fine art sculptor, and architectural carver. Barry in a letter summed up the man whose talent had enabled him to build one of the icons of the Victorian age as 'an unassuming self taught genius in his way' (priv. coll.). 


@@@@@


doc= 27226


Thomas, John (1795-1871), composer and schoolmaster, was born at Pibwr Llwyd, a farmhouse near Carmarthen. He was educated at Carmarthen, where he later kept a school for a short time. He moved to Merthyr Tudful, Glamorgan, about 1830 to follow the same occupation. Except for a short period when he was clerk to the Chartist Zephania Williams at Blaenau Gwent, Monmouthshire, his whole life was spent in keeping private schools of his own, first at Merthyr Tudful, and from 1850 at Pontypridd and Trefforest successively. He was twice married; both wives predeceased him. He died at Wood Road, Trefforest, on 30 June 1871, and was buried at Glyntaf cemetery, Pontypridd, where a monument was erected over his grave by his 'friends and pupils'. 
Thomas was one of the chief pioneers of choral training in the industrial districts of Glamorgan, and he had many eisteddfod successes with his choirs. For several years he regularly held music classes at Merthyr and Pontypridd. In 1845 he published a collection of Welsh airs entitled 'Y caniedydd Cymreig' ('The Cambrian Minstrel'). This contained forty-three pieces of his own composition and 104 old Welsh airs, half of which he obtained through oral research in Carmarthenshire and Glamorgan and which had never been previously published. Almost all these airs were published with both the Welsh and English words. Many were adopted in later collections of Welsh music. In 1849 Thomas published a poem, 'The Vale of Taff', which was followed in 1867 by a volume of poetry entitled 'Cambria upon Two Sticks', in which his disillusionment with eisteddfodau is evident. He also contributed many papers to magazines, and a prize essay of his on the Welsh harp was published in the 'Cambrian Journal' for 1855. 


